
GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH HEGEL 
Encyclopedia of the Philosophical 
Sciences in Basic Outline 
Part 1: Science of Logic 
The purpose of the Cambridge Hegel Translations is to offer trans-
lations of the best modern German editions of Hegel's work in a 
uniform format suitable for Hegel scholars, together with philoso-
phical introductions and full editorial apparatus. 
Hegel's Encycloptdia Logic constitutes the foundation of the system 
of philosophy presented in his EncycloptdiA of tht Philosophical Sci-
tncts. Together with his Scimrt of Logic, it conrains the most explicit 
formulation of his enduringly influential dialectical method and of 
the categorial system underlying his thought. It offers a more compact 
presentation of his dialectical method than is found elsewhere, and 
also incorporates changes that he would have made to the second 
edition of the Scitnu of Logic, if he had lived to do so. This vol-
ume presents it in a new translation with a helpful introduaion, an 
extended analytical index, and notes. It will be a valuable reference 
work for scholars and students of Hegel and German idealism, as 
well as for those who are interested in the post-Hegelian aspects of 
contemporary philosophy. 
KLAUS BRINKMANN is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Boston 
University. He is the author of Jtkalism Without Limits: Htgtl and tht 
Problnn ofObjtetivity (1010). 
DANIEL 0. DAHLSTROM is Professor of Philosophy at Boston 
University. His previous publications include Philosophical Ltgacin: 
Essays on Kant, Htgtl and thtir Conttmporarin (2008) and Htidtggtr's 
Conctpt of Truth (Cambridge, 2001). 

CAMBRIDGE HEGEL TRANSLATIONS 
General editor: Michael Baur 
Heidelberg Writings: journal Publications 
Edited and translated by Brady Bowman and Allen Speight 
The Science of Logic 
Edited and translated by George di Giovanni 
Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in Basic Outline Part l· Science of Logic 
Edited and translated by Klaus Brinkmann and Daniel 0. Dahlstrom 

GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH 
HEGEL 
Encyclopedia of the Philosophical 
Sciences in Basic Outline 
Part 1: Science of Logic 
TRANSLATED AND EDITED BY 
KLAUS BRINKMANN AND DANIEL 0. DAHLSTROM 
Boston University 
UCAMBRIDGE 
~ 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid. Cape Town, Singapore, 
Slo Paulo, Delhi, Dubai, Tokyo, Mexico City 
Cambridge University Press 
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge caz 8Ru, UK 
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York 
www.cambridge.org 
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780SZI8Z9144 
© Klaus Brinkmann and Daniel 0. Dahlstrom 1010 
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory aception 
and to the provisions of rdcvant collective licensing agreements, 
nu reproduction of any part may rake place without the written 
permission of Cambridge University Press. 
First published zo1o 
Printed in the United IGngdom at the University Press, Cambridge 
A r~ 
rmmJ for this pubiuation is apai/ablr fo»n th~ BritiJh Library 
Libra.ry of Congrns CataJotr.ing in PubU.ation JAu 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, •no-18}1. 
[Wissenschaft der Logik. English) 
Encyclupacdia of the philosophical sciences in basic outline. Parr 1, Science of logic I Georg Wilhelm 
Friedrich Hegel : rranslatcd and edited by Klaus Brinkmann, Daniel 0. Dahlstrom. 
p. 
em. -(Cambridge Hegd translations) 
Translarion of: Encyklo~die dcr philosophischen Wissenschafren. Teill, Wisscnschaft der !Agik. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-o-s1r-81914-4 (hardback) 
1. Logic. 
I. Brinkmann, Klaus, 1944-
II. Dahlstrom, Daniel 0. Ill. Title. 
82918.ESH37} 
1010 
160- den 
ZOI001998j 
ISBN 978-Q-S11-8l914·4 Hardback 
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or 
accuracy of URU for external or third-party Internet websitcs referred ro 
in this publication and docs not guarantee that any content on such 
websitcs is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate. 

Acknowledgmmtr 
Introduction 
Translators' nou 
Contents 
ENCYCLOPEDIA OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL SCIENCES IN BASIC 
OUTLINE, PART I: SCIENCE OP LOGIC 
Bibliography 
Glossary of translaud terms 
German to English 
English to German 
Index 
v 
pag~vi 
VII 
XVI 
307 
313 
321 

Acknowledgments 
We gratefully acknowledge the support of the series editor Michael Baur 
and that of Hilary Gaskin of Cambridge University Press in bringing this 
project to fruition. We also extend our thanks to Joanna Garbutt, Elizabeth 
Davey and the staff at Cambridge University Press for their kind assistance 
during the production process. Finally, we are grateful to Jessica Brotman 
for her help with the glossary. 
vi 

Introduction 
Hegel's Encyclopedia Logic 
Georg Friedrich Wilhelm Hegel (177~1831) is one of the great figures of 
German Idealism along with Immanuel Kant (172.4-1804), Johann Gottlieb 
Fichte (1762-1814) and Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling (1775-1854). 
Hegel's most famous publication is undoubtedly the Phmommology of 
Spirit, which appeared in 1807 just after he had left his teaching position at 
the University of}ena. In 1800 his friend Schelling, with whom he had been 
a student at TUbingen, had invited Hegel to join him in Jena, where they 
taught side by side until 1803, when Schelling left for southern Germany. 
When French troops under Napoleon entered Jena in October 1806, Hegel's 
situation became too precarious for him to stay. The university was closed, 
Hegel's position there was relatively insecure, and his salary (which Goethe 
had been able to procure for him) was too small to make ends meet. 
As much as Hegel desired to continue in an academic setting, he was 
forced to spend the next decade of his life outside the university, first 
in a temporary job as editor of the Bambn-g" aitung, a newspaper that 
appeared in Bamberg, Bavaria, and then as professor and headmaster of 
the Gymnasium in Nuremberg, Bavaria. 
The Nuremberg years (1808-16) are the gestation period of Hegel's 
mature philosophy.1 During this time, he wrote and published the Scimet 
of Logic (appearing in two volumes comprising three books, in 1812-13 and 
1816) and began to work out the contours of his comprehensive philo-
sophical system. Like his contemporaries, Hegel was convinced that any 
philosophy had to take the form of a system, i.e. it had to be a comprehen-
sive, complete body of knowledge organized around a central principle, 
such that all propositions were rigorously derived in a progressive line of 
argument and all pans methodically connected to each other. In 1807 he 
intended the PhmommoiDgy ofSpiritto be 'the first pan of the system',1 to 
be followed by a second part comprising a logic (i.e. a general ontology) 
1 Sec Nicolin (1977). 
1 Sec Sl19. 
vii 

VIII 
Introduction 
and a philosophy of nature and of spirit. While this second part of the 
system was never published in its originally intended form, the first vol-
ume of the Scimce of Ugic came out as the first instalment of the system's 
second part, but because it had grown to such dimensions Hegel decided 
to publish it separately, without the philosophies of nature and of spirit. 
Apparently, Hegel then changed his mind and abandoned the idea of 
working out the remaining parts of the system as initially planned. 3 Instead, 
he decided to develop an abbreviated version of the entire system under 
the tide of an encyclopedia. This encyclopedic version was to reAect the 
basic structure of the system itself, but it was meant to provide only the key 
concepts and major parts in outline without going into too much detail. 
So what Hegel had in mind was a compendium of the fully worked-out 
system itself: a summa philosophiae, so to speak. While the key concepts 
and parts of the system would be contained in it, the text would represent 
a slimmed-down version, organized in successively numbered sections. In 
the Nuremberg text, Hegel defines its purpose as follows: A 'philosophical 
encyclopedia is the science of the necessary connection, as determined by 
the concept, and of the philosophical genesis of the fundamental concepts 
and principles of the sciences' .4 
It seems that Hegel's decision to compose an outline of his system 
was primarily motivated by his obligations as principal of the Nuremberg 
Gymnasium: his responsibilities included teaching philosophy in lower, 
middle, and upper level courses. The guidelines he received from the 
Bavarian ministry of education for the upper-level course prescribed that 
he teach 'the topics of speculative thought' that had been taught separately 
at the lower and middle level, and that he do so in the comprehensive 
form of'a philosophical encyclopedia'., Thanks to manuscripts discpvered 
in 1975, scholars have been able to determine that Hegel taught the entire 
Encyclopedia (consisting of a logic, a philosophy of nature, and a philosophy 
of spirit) for the first time in the school years 1811-12 and 1812.-13.6 
In August r8r6 Hegel accepted the offer of an appointment as professor 
of philosophy at the University of Heidelberg, where he stayed for four 
semesters before accepting an even more prestigious position at the Uni-
versity of Berlin in 1818. Already during his first semester ac Heidelberg 
he lectured on the Encyclopedia and repeated this course twice during the 
Heidelberg years (typically, Hegel would hold his lecture courses six hours 
1 He also decided rhar rhe Phmomtnoloo ofSpirit would no longer serve as rbe first parr of the sysrem. 
Instead, irs lirsr parr would now be the Logic. 
4 WW (Glockner) 111, t69 (our uanslarion). 
s jacschke (200J. 1.19). 
6 Bonsiepcn/Grorsch (1.000, 610). 

Introduction 
IX 
per week, Monday to Saturday). Based on the drafts written in Nuremberg, 
Hegel prepared a book manuscript entitled Encyclop~dia. ofth~ Philosophical 
Scimm in Basic Out/in~ for publication. The book was supposed to serve 
as a compendium for his lectures, i.e. a resource for his students and a basic 
text to be expanded on during the oral presentation. This so-called Heidel-
berg Encyclopedia. was printed and available to the public in the summer of 
181]. 
Practically from the starr, Hegel began to emend and elaborate on the 
printed text in handwritten notes. To this end, he ordered a specially made 
personal copy of the Encyclop~dia. with blank pages inserted between the 
printed ones.7 The second edition of the Encyclop~dia, which appeared in 
1827, grew our of these revisions. As early as 1822, Hegel had expressed the 
need for a second edition, and in 1825 the first edition had in fact gone 
out of print. The second edition of the Encyclop~dia contains significant 
revisions and adds a hundred sections to the 477 of the Heidelberg version. 
The revisions chiefly concern the Introduction to the work, the Preliminary 
Conception of the Logic, the arrangement of the categories at the beginning 
of the Doctrine of Essence, and various elaborations in the Philosophy of 
Nature and the Philosophy of Spirit. By comparison, the third edition of 
che Encyclop~dia, which followed in 1830 and on which our translation of 
the Logic is based, contains few further revisions.8 In particular, beginning 
with the second edition Hegel now prefaced the main body of the text 
with a new explanation of the method, purpose and the overall structure 
of philosophy (the 'Introduction' comprising§§ 1-18 in this translation of 
the 1830 Encyclopedia.), a new introduction to the Logic (the 'Preliminary 
Conception' comprising§§ 19-78), and an explanation of the dialectic with 
an overview of the structure of che Logic (the 'More Precise Concepcion 
and Division of the Logic' comprising§§ 79-83).9 
Since the 1830 edition of the Encyclop~dia incorporates Hegel's own suc-
cessive revisions, it is natural for students and scholars of Hegel's philosophy 
to rely on this edition today. However, today's editions of the 1830 Ency-
clop~dia. are in one respect significantly different from the one published 
7 This copy survives, and the handwrinrn nores in thr S«tion on thr Philosophy of Spirit have 
b«n reproduooi in fac.simile and ttanscribtod in vol. XIII of the ~ition of H~'s collec~d works 
publishrd undrr thr aegis of the Nonhrhine-Westphalian Academy of the Sciences (i.e. thr volume 
hr~ referrrd to as Bonsiepen/Grotsch (2000)). 
. 
8 Thus, me numbtor of the sections (S77) remainrd thr same in the second and mird editions. For a 
synopsis of the changes between the firu and second rdition ser Kainz (1996, J9-40). For a list of 
thr changes from the second to the third rdirion sec thr ~irorialreport in Bonsieprn/LUCI$ (1992). 
' Wr know from Hegel's correspondrnc.- that hr struggled wid! the length of rhis innoductory text, 
trying several rimes to shorten earlier drafts of ir (see Bonsieprn/Lucas, 1989, 46J). 

X 
Introduction 
by Hegel, for they usually contain additional material deriving not only 
from Hegel himself but also from notes taken by his students during his 
lectures. This material was added to the first posthumous edition of Hegel's 
collected works published by Hegel's students in 1832 and the following 
years. The editors used material from notes taken during different lecture 
cycles, unified it in language and style, and added it to the relevant sections 
of the Encyclopedia. For the most part, this material, flagged as 'Zusatz' 
(Addition) to the section and printed in smaller type than the original 
Hegelian text (which contains the main body of the section and very often 
an indented Remark), expands on the point made in the main section by 
elaborating on the argument and offering illustrations or examples. It 'adds 
flesh to the bare bones of the original text, as it were, and thus reflects 
Hegel's oral presentation of the printed material in the classroom. While 
the text of these Additions cannot be said to be a verbatim reproduction of 
Hegel's lectures, it certainly constitutes a faithful and reliable echo of them. 
In their mostly non-technical language, the Additions are also immensely 
helpful in elucidating the main text. 
The Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in Basic Outline is the only 
form in which Hegel ever published his entire mature philosophical system. 
It is therefore an indispensable text for those who want to study Hegel's 
conception of philosophy as a whole. Whereas some parts of it, such as 
the Encyclopedia Logic (also called the Lesser Logic) and the Philosophy 
of Objective Spirit, also exist in expanded published versions, namely, the 
Science of Logic and the 1821 Philosophy of Right, or in the form of lecture 
cycles, other parts, like the Philosophy of Nature, have up till now never 
been accessible in any other form than the Encyclopedia version.10 
Hegel organizes the material of the philosophical sciences into three large 
blocks, each with a tripartite subdivision: Logic (subdivided into Being, 
Essence, and Concept), Nature (subdivided into Mechanics, Physics, and 
Organics), and Spirit (subdivided into Subjective, Objective, and Absolute 
Spirit), each of the subdivisions being further divided in tripartite fash-
ion. He thereby means to capture all fundamental aspects of reality and 
to indicate the basic concepts and principles of each. Thus, for instance, 
10 Some of the lecture cycles such as the Lectures on the Philosophy of History. the Aesthetics, the 
Philosophy of Religion and the History of Philosophy have been accessible in print since the rime 
of the first posthumous cdirion of Hegel's works in 1831-4S· However, mey consritute edited and 
consolidated versions of materials taken from different courses over a period of several years, and 
hence a uniform telft that makes it impossible to disccm the development of Hegel's views over 
the years. The edirion of the Northrhinc·Wcstphalian Academy of me Sciences {stiU in progress: 
see http://www.ruhr-uni· bochum.delphilosophy/Hegelardhomepage.hun) will make available the 
individual lectures from rhe individual semesters separately. 

Introduction 
XI 
Mechanics discusses space, time, mauer, motion, gravity; Organics treats of 
geology and meteorology, inorganic and organic nature (plant and animal 
life); Subjective Spirit deals with the nature and functions of the human 
soul and its relation to the body (under the tide of Anthropology), con-
sciousness as it relates to and begins to categorize and discern regularities 
in the world of objects, self-consciousness in its relationship to other self-
consciousnesses, and the inner workings of the mind such as memory, 
imagination, the formation oflanguage, and volition (under the title Psy-
chology); Objective Spirit represents an outline of Hegel's philosophy of 
right and his moral and political philosophy, while the Philosophy of Abso-
lute Spirit contains Hegel's philosophy of the arts, religion, and philosophy 
itself (with an account of the syllogistic structure of the entire tripartite 
system).11 
The important consideration for Hegel, however, is the unity of the 
system as a whole and its logically rigorous internal structure. Each concept 
or category of reality (also called 'thought-determination' by Hegel) must 
be methodically derived from its predecessor and together they must form a 
single, comprehensive, closed system such that his philosophy can claim to 
be an exhaustive account of the ideal structures underlying all reality. The 
fact that the account is exhaustive, that the grounding structures of reality 
are conceptual, and that the system is closed makes Hegel's philosophy 
a statement of absolute idealism. It is in part the ambitiousness of this 
programme and the fact that Hegel did in faa execute it (in the form of 
the Encycloptdia and in his lectures) that has earned him his reputation 
as one of the greatest philosophical minds ever (the other part being the 
unique style of his philosophizing and the stupendous insights growing 
out of it). 
How, then, does Hegel ensure the inner cohesion of the system? First, he 
determines the core or ground of reality to be in fact thinking or reason11 
(or, in its most highly developed form, spirit), so that reality can be said 
to be organized in terms of intelligible structures that are conceptual or 
conceptualizable. The problem that the world in its material reality is not 
itself thought is solved by referring to anything that is not thought or 
reason as othernm. However, what is other than thought is conceptual-
izable, since this otherness can be determined by thinking. Whatever is 
11 The lcaure cycles on aesrheric:s, rdigion and philosophy menrioned in rhc previous footnote offer 
lirst a systematic and then a historical account or their subjea matter with a wealrh or hisrorical 
derail. 
•• He likes to appeal to Aristodc's belief that the world is governed by ,.,.. or IUSOn: sc:c, ror instance, 
Errtytillpn/U. § 14 Addition 1. 

XII 
Introduction 
an object of thought (and in this sense opposed to, excluded from, or a 
ntgation of thought) is other than thought, but its otherness has a name 
and a conceptual content that can be specified. This, however, is only the 
first step. Merely to generate concepts or thought-determinations for what 
is other than thought would not allow thought to claim that it is itself 
the real ground of this otherness. In fact, in our ordinary understanding 
this is precisely how we look at the world- as describable and intelligible, 
even conceptualizable and predictable (for instance, through the laws of 
physics), but as something other than thought, not as the otherness of 
thought itself. Hegel's perhaps most notorious move here is to inttgratt 
this otherness (i.e. anything that is an object of thought) into thought 
itself by ntgating its otherness. Since the otherness was already determined 
as something negative, its second negation now amounts to a negation of 
the negation, i.e. an affirmation in the sense of integration into thought. 
This is Hegel's famous negation of negation, the most imponant aspect 
of his dialectic. 'J What happens is that the conceptualized otherness is 
made pan of a system of thought-determinations14 and is then shown to 
be only a partial determination of the system as a whole. Thus, new aspects 
of otherness need to be identified that have not yet been integrated into 
the complete conceptual account, until all otherness is exhausted. It is 
imponant to keep in mind, however, that conceptualized and integrated 
otherness is a determination of reality itself; hence Hegel is able to say 
that the concepts or categories represent 'objective thoughts' (Encycloptdia 
§ 24), or that they contain 'the object in its own self .'1 The concept of the 
object is equivalent to the object itself to the extent that the object is intel-
ligible, conceptualizable, or 'rational'. In this sense, thought thinks itselfin 
thinking about the thought-determinations of the real. Philosophy is the 
knowledge that the world of nature and spirit is structured in accordance 
with reason, and its highest aim is the recognition of this accord (see Ency-
cloptdia § 6). In this recognition philosophy fulfils its highest aspiration 
according to Hegel, namely the reconciliation of reason with the reality we 
live in (ibid.). Philosophical thought is self-recognition in the other, hence, 
Hegel's designation of philosophy as speculative thought (see Encycloptdia 
§ 82).16 
'' Hegel explains the dialectic, or, more precisely, the mucture of the process of thought as spch, in 
EnrycbJpNiitl §§ 79-111 (see below). The dialcaal aspea constitutes the second phase of this process 
(see EnqcbJpeditl § 8t), but it is customary to have the entire prooess in mind when speaking of 
Hegel's dialecric. 
14 Hegel speaks of a 'system of concepts' (SJIU"' Jn. Btgrijfo) in his snn.~~ ofLOf)~: see SL S4 (Miller 
translates 'system ofNotion.s'). 
'1 SL 49· 
'6 Speculative from Lat. 'speculum': mirror. 

Introduction 
X Ill 
Hegel ensures the overall unity of the system by presenting its three parts 
as three forms of a single reality called 'the idea' (see EncycbJptdia § 18). The 
idea is the ensemble of all the ideal structures that constitute reality. At the 
same time, it is the thinking that contemplates this ensemble and recognizes 
itself in it. The idea is reality as subjectivity, i.e. as a self-referential, self-
organizing, self-determining system that is capable of self-reflection to the 
extent that it is thought or reason. The Logic is the idea 'in the abstract 
element of thinking' (Encycloptdia § 19), while Nature is the idea in its 
self-externality and Spirit the idea as it realizes itself in the human spirit, 
its institutions and its achievements (e.g., political community, in the ans, 
religion, and philosophical thought). In truth, therefore, we do not have 
three pans of the system but instead three aspects of one and the same 
totality. 
However, the Logic is not only the logical core of the idea; it also 
occupies a special place within the system in that it serves as the structural 
foundation of its other parts. At its core is the concept (see Encycloptdia 
§§ 163-5),17 a complex ideal structure that is the blueprint, so to speak, for 
all self-referential, self-organizing and self-determining forms of reality. In 
traditional terms, its basic form is that of a definition by genus and specific 
difference (see Encycloptdia § 164 Remark). The thought behind this is 
that concrete reality always has the form of a panicularized universality 
instantiated in individuals. 
But why does Hegel give the name of'logic' to the first pan of the system? 
Here it should be pointed out that Hegel's idea of logic does not derive 
from the modern concept offormallogic but from the ancient Greek word 
for reason, word or language, logos. The logos means the ideal structure 
that makes sensible reality intelligible, just as the meaning of a word 
makes the mere sound of a word intelligible. More precisely, logos stands 
for the conceptual structure that captures the essentialities of things (see 
Encyclop«lia § 24). Hegel's logic should therefore be understood as a theory 
of the fundamental concepts of reality- concepts that in the philosophical 
tradition since Aristotle are referred to as 'categories'. Consequently, Hegel 
either identifies his logic with traditional metaphysics (ibid.), or he says 
that his Logic rtplam the metaphysics of the past (see Scimct of Logic 
63). His Logic can therefore also be called an ontology.18 The categorial 
structures developed in the Logic, and in particular those of the Doctrine 
l7 Hegd"s &griff, sometimes also translated as Concept or Notion. 
'8 During the Nuremberg yean, Hegel's own designation for the fim rwo pans of 1he Logic was thai 
of an 'ontological logic' and an "objective logic', whe~ the third pan enrided Doctrine of the 
Concept was called 'subjective logic': see Bonsiepen/Grotsch (zooo, 621). 

XIV 
I ntrodut:tion 
of the Concept, form the conceptual basis for the Philosophies of Nature 
and of Spirit. 
The objectives Hegel tried to achieve with his philosophy and with 
the Logic in particular are too complex to summarize in the space of a 
shon introduction. Two goals may be identified here, however. First, as 
the opening sections of the Encyclopedia Logic explain, Hegel believes that 
the primary business of philosophy is the translation of representations 
(Vorstellungtn) into thoughts (see Encyclopedia § 3 Remark, § 5), or the 
reflection on the deeper meaning of our experience by means of thinking 
things over (see Encyclopedia§ 6, § 3 Remark). What in ordinary experience 
and in the empirical sciences is understood in more or less depth and detail 
and often in isolation must be contemplated in its true meaning and in its 
inner coherence so as to understand its place within the whole of human 
knowledge. Philosophy is the attempt to comprehend things holistically, 
i.e. in their interconnectedness and their relative contribution to the self-
organizing whole. But philosophy is not only the attempt to comprehend 
the fundamental nature of the object-world. The translation of the contents 
of our experience must ultimately lead to a contemplation of the underlying 
principle of experience, namely to a contemplation of thinking itself,19 
spirit's 'loftiest inwardness' and 'unalloyed selfhood' (see Encyclopedia§ n), 
so that it may know itself, achieve complete self-transparency, and thus 
fulfil what Aristode called the desire to understand that is characteristic of 
the human spirit. Philosophy is actual knowledge of the truth, not merely 
love of wisdom (see Encyclopedia§ 25). 
But second, thinking is unable to recognize its own unalloyed self entirely 
in the object-world. The tradition of metaphysics had been to understand 
reality in terms of an objectivity existing over against the thinking subject. 
In other words, traditional metaphysics was an omology focused on sub-
stances as with Aristotle and Descartes, or on the one substance as the sum 
total of reality that is both God and nature, as with Spinoza. Although 
substance could be endowed with thought or reason like Aristotle's notts 
or Spinoza's God, the thinking that contemplated this substance contem-
plated an object: something other. than itself that is not a selffor itself and 
therefore still separated from the contemplating subject. It was only with 
Kant's Copernican turn that philosophical thought came to understand 
that subjectivity itself is at the basis of the object-world as well. Hence, 
Hegel believed that, by drawing out the consequences of the Kantian 
'' l fence Hegel specifies: 'philosophy does nothing but transform representations into thoughts, -and 
indeed, beyond that, the mere thought into the concept' (E,ryclopditt § :1.0 Remark). 

lntroduaion 
XV 
revolution (as he understood it) he was also bringing to completion the 
quest that had motivated philosophy throughout its history, namely, achiev-
ing fuJI underscanding of the world by achieving full understanding of 
thinking itself- since the world is, at its core, subjectivity itself. For this 
reason, substance had to be shown to be subject, too, and substance ontol-
ogy had to be seen ultimately to be subject ontology.10 For Hegel, this 
insight revealed the very meaning of the history of philosophy. 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL REFERENCES 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1817) Enzyklopadi~ t:kr philosophischm Wis-
smschaften im Grundriss~. Herausgegeben von W. Bonsiepen und K. Grotsch. 
In: GtSamm~lu W~rk~. Herausgegeben von der Rheinisch-Westfalischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Band XII. Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 2000 
[= Bonsiepen/Grotsch 20001. 
(182.7) Enzyklopadi~ t:kr philbsophischm Wissmschaftm im Grundriss~. Heraus-
gegeben von W. Bonsiepen und H.-C. Lucas. In: G~samm~ltt W~rk~. Her-
ausgegeben von der Rheinisch-Westfalischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 
Band XIX. Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1989 [= Bonsiepen/Lucas 1989]. 
(1830) Enzyklopiidi~ t:kr philbsophischm Wissmschaftm im Grundriss~. Heraus-
gegeben von W. Bonsiepen und H.-C. Lucas. In: G~samm~lte Wrrk~. Her· 
ausgegeben von der Rheinisch-Westf'a.lischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 
Band XX. Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1992. [= Bonsiepen/Lucas 1992.1. 
(1961) Sitmtlich~ Wtrk~. ]ubiliiumsausgab~ in 20 Biindm. Herausgegeben von 
Wilhelm Glockner. Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog [= WW (Glockner)). 
(1969) H~~l's Sdmcr of Logic. Translated by A. V. MiUer, Foreword by 
J. N. Findlay. London/New York: George Allen and Unwin/Humanities 
Press (based on second, revised edition 1831) [= SL). 
Jaeschke, Walter (2.003) Htg~I-Handbuch. L~bm - Wtrk - Schuk. Stuugart· 
Weimar: J. B. Metzler[= Jaeschke 20031. 
Kainz, Howard P. (1996). G. W. F. Htg~l. Thr Philosophical Systnn. Athens, Ohio: 
Ohio University Press [=Kainz 1996]. 
Nicolin, Friedrich h977) 'Padagogik, Propadeutik, Enzyklopadie', in: H~g~L 
Einfuhrung in s~in~ Philosoph~. Herausgegeben von Otto Poggeler. Freiburgl 
Munich: Karl Alber, 91-105 [= Nicolin 1977). 
20 This is why Htgcl entitles the rhird part of th~ Logic, the Doctrine of the Concept, '5ubjecrive logic' 
and the concept as such the 'subjective concept' (E ~ t6)), not because the concept is subjccrive but 
because the concept exhibits the logic of subjwivity. 

Translators' note 
The aim of this translation is to present Hegel's EncycltJpedia Logic faithfully 
in readable and lucid contemporary English prose. The task is daunting, 
given the technical and dated senses ofhis terminology, the idiosyncrasies of 
his style, and- above all- the sheer complexity and power of his thinking. 
A translation must be sensitive to the fact that Hegel's terminology is 
now almost two centuries old, stemming from a period when German 
philosophers - even in the wake of Kant and Herder, Mendelssohn and 
Wolff- were stiU looking for the words to express themselves. "While Hegel 
marks a high point in this development, it is also a distant memory today. 
Moreover, translators of Hegel's Logic must never lose sight of the fact that, 
while Hegel eschews neologisms for the most part, he nonetheless moulds 
terms to suit the distinctive technical aims of a philosophical science and, 
indeed, in the text at hand, the aims of a science of logic that underpins 
all other philosophical sciences. In addition, like any writer, he has a style 
all his own that, even in its quirkiness, must be respected and reflected as 
much as possible in translation. Finally and most importantly, the task of 
translating Hegel's texts must heed their philosophical import, capturing 
and conveying to their readers the force of the philosophical arguments 
that they contain. 
Our translation of Hegel's EncycltJpedia Logic has been motivated by the 
general principles just outlined. We have tried to strike a balance between 
the need to be faithful to Hegel's prose in its historical context and the 
desire to convey the force of his thinking as dearly as possible. These 
general principles guided our endeavour but, as general principles, they 
left us with several prudential decisions about the translations of specific 
words and phrases. The results of our decisions about specific terms can be 
garnered from the Glossary. However, it may prove helpful to review our 
reasons for translating some traditionally troublesome terms in the ways 
that we did. 
xvi 

Translatorr' note 
XVll 
First, however, a word about the editions on which the translation 
is based. We based the translation on the text of the 1830 edition of 
Hegel's Encyclopedia as it appears in the reissue by Eva Moldenhauer and 
Karl Markus Michel, published as vol. VIII of Werke in zwanzig Biinden 
(Stuttgart: Suhrkamp, 1970). The Moldenhauer-Michel text is based on 
the Complete Edition of Hegel's works by his students (Berlin: Duncker 
und Humblot, 1832-45). This text also contains the Additions (Zusiitze) of 
the 1840 edition of Hegel's Encyclopedia, which appeared as vol. VI of the 
Complete Edition. We found that the differences between the latter and the 
following Akademie edition were largely limited to spelling or orthography: 
Enzyk/opiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse (1830), unter 
Mitarbeit von Udo Rameil, herausgegeben von Wolfgang Bonsiepen und 
Hans-Christian Lucas, in: Gesammelte Werke, hrsg. von der Rheinisch-
Westfalischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Band XX (Hamburg: Felix 
Meiner, 1992). 
We have followed ordinary English usage and left most terms uncapi-
talized, leaving it to the reader to determine from the context whether or 
not Hegel is using terms such as 'concept' and 'idea', for example, in the 
technical senses he gives them in the Logic. On the other hand, in cases 
where it is helpful to know which term Hegel uses in the original, we often 
insert the German term in italics and brackets. 
Finding a suitable English equivalent for aufheben is perhaps the most 
formidable challenge for translators of Hegel's texts. We translate the term 
with 'sublate', 'sublating' or 'sublation'. The alternative 'supersede' would 
have had the advantage of conveying much of the technical term's central 
significance as a process of cancellation, preservation, and elevation at once. 
However, as Hegel's aufheben and Aufhebung are themselves non-ordinary 
terms of art like 'sublate', and since the translation of the Science of Logic 
appearing in this series of Hegel translations chose 'sublate' and 'sublation', 
we thought it best to opt for 'sublate' and 'sublation' as well. 
Because Moment is Hegel's technical term for integral bur distinguishable 
parts of a concept or definition, we have decided to translate it as 'moment', 
despite the obviously different normal sense of the English term. 
Hegel characterizes Dasein as 'determinate being' (bestimmtes Sein), but 
uses Dasein as the name of this category. We have translated Dasein 
as 'existence', since that is the closest English equivalent. Since Hegel 
also uses Existenz as a technical term in the Logic of Essence, we chose 
'concrete existence' for the latter to mark the difference between Dasein and 
Existenz. 

XV Ill 
Translators' note 
Similarly, we translate Wesen straightforwardly as 'essence' except for 
those cases where, in the English context, it clearly refers to a being such 
as 'the supreme being' (das hochste Wesen). 
Since Hegel employs lnhalt far more often than he employs the cognate, 
but in his use more emphatic, term Gehalt, we have reserved 'content' for 
lnhaltand translated Gehaltas 'basic content'- unless otherwise indicated, 
as, for example, in the Foreword and in § 48. In order to differ~ntiate 
Sache from Ding {'thing') and Materie ('mauer'), we have systematically 
translated Sache as 'basic matter'. 
The term wissen- as the adjectives (e.g. 'immediate' or 'absolute') chosen 
by Hegel to modify it suggest - can signify the entire gamut of knowing, 
from the most elemental knowledge to knowledge that is absolute. At one 
point (§ 81, Addition 2) Hegel uses wissen to designate knowing in general, 
while attributing erkennen to philosophy (see, however, his reference to 
philosophisches Wissen in § 88). Along these lines, erkennen signifies at times 
the mediation of a process of wissen, the specification of a more immediate 
u•issen (see § 46: 'Now to know [erkennen] means nothing other than 
knowing [wissen] an object in terms of its deunninate content'), although 
it is also used as a synonym for or in apposition to wissen (see § 225: 'The 
former is the drive of knowledge [ Wissen] to truth, kntJwing [Erkennen] 
as such'). Given the frequem lack of differentiation of the two terms and 
Hegel's far more frequent use of erkmnm than wissm, we have elected to 
translate both as 'knowing' or 'knowledge'. However, readers can assume 
that any occurrence of 'immediate knowing' translates das unmitulbare 
Wissen or unmittelbares Wissen. In any other case where wissen is in play, 
we indicate as much by citing the relevant German term. 
In two other instances where a single English term is the best translation 
for two German words, we have employed a similar strategy. Thus, we 
translate both Unterschied and Differenz as 'difference' but Rag the less 
frequent uses of Differenz (and its cognates: different, indifferent and the 
like). 
We follow a modified version of this strategy with respect to Gegenstand 
and Objekt. Both may be rendered as 'object', but Gegemtand refers typ-
ically to any object of consideration or, more technically, to an object of 
consciousness or experience; Objekt, on the other hand, refers to the logical 
concept of object and is the tide of the second chapter of the third division 
of the Logic. Before § 193, the final section before that chapter, Hegel 
employs Gegtnstand far more frequently than Objekt, while afterwards he 
employs Objekt far more frequently than Gegenstand. So, prior to § 193, all 
unRagged instances of 'object' refer to Gegenstand and we Rag all instances 

Transkltors 'nott 
xix 
of'object' as a translation of Objtltt. After§ 193, all unflagged instances of 
'object' refer to Objtltt and we flag all instances of 'object' as a translation 
of Gtgtnstand. Throughout the entire text, an unftagged 'objectivity' is a 
translation of Objtlttivitiit. 
Hegel often employs the term schtinm in its ordinary sense as an equiv-
alent to 'seem' and we have translated it accordingly. However, he also 
employs it in a technical way that draws upon two tiistinguishabk senses of 
the term, namely, that of 'shining' and '(projecting or presenting a) sem-
blance'. In contexts where this technical employment is clearly inrended (in 
panicular, in the Logic of Essence, starring with § m. and the Logic of the 
Concept at§§ 2.40 tt stq.), we have employed one of the two translations, 
depending upon the emphasis more directly germane to the passage in 
question. 
Another vexing word-play in Hegel's text is the phrase sich mit etwas 
zusammmschlitfm, here translated as 'joins itself together with something' 
or, simply, 'joins together with something' (where 'something' is often 
replaced by a specific term). This translation, while reflecting a common 
usage of the German expression, does not convey any link with another use 
of schlit/ftn, namely, 'infer' or 'syllogistically infer', precisely in the sense 
of bringing an inference or syllogism to a 'dose'. Thus, whereas schlitftn 
can mean 'inferring' or 'dosing', zusammtnschlit/ftn means 'uniting' (in 
the sense of 'dosing ranks'). Unable to find a suitable English expression 
that preserved the German word-play - 'close' and 'infer (i.e. close an 
argument)' and 'join together (i.e. close ranks)' -we chose to stay with 
the straightforward translation and simply acknowledge irs inadequateness. 
T raduttort, tradito"! 

Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences 
in Basic Outline 
Part 1: Science of Logic 

Preface to the first edition 
Preface co the second edition 
Foreword to the third edition 
Introduction §§ 1-18 
Contents 
PART I: 
SciENCE oF LOGIC §§ 19-244 
Preliminary concepcion §§ I9-83 
A. First position of thought towards objectivity: Metaph)'lics §§ 2.6-36 
B. Second position of thought towards objectivity §§ 37-60 
I. Empiricism § 37 
II. Critical philosophy § 40 
C. Third position of thought towards objtaivity: Immediate knowing 
§§ 61-78 
More detailed conception and division of rhe Logic §§ 79-83 
First subdivision of the Logic: The doctrine of being §§ 84-m 
A. Quality § 86 
a. Being§ 86 
b. Existence § 89 
c. Being-for-itself§ 96 
B. Quantity § 99 
a. Pure quantity§ 99 
b. Quantum § 101 
c. Degree § 103 
C. Measure § 107 
Second subdivision of the Logic: The doctrine of essence 
§§ 112-159 
A. The essence as ground of concrete exisrence § ns 
a. The pure determinations of reflection § 115 
pagt5 
8 
22 
28 
I09 
I25 
I}5 
I36 
136 
144 
152 
157 
157 
160 
162 
168 
173 
177 
177 

4 
Tht Encyclopedia 
a. Identity§ 115 
177 
~· Difference § 116 
179 
y. Ground § 12.1 
186 
b. Concrete existence§ 113 
190 
c. The thing§ 115 
192. 
B. Appearance § 131 
197 
a. The world of appearance§ 132. 
199 
b. Content and form § 1)3 
200 
c. The relationship § 135 
202. 
C. Actuality § 141 
2.11 
a. The relationship of substantiality § 150 
223 
b. The relationship of causality§ 153 
225 
c. Reciprocity § 155 
228 
Third subdivision of the Logic: The doctrine of the concept 
§§ 160-244 
233 
A. The subjective concept§ 163 
236 
a. The concept as such§ 163 
236 
b. The judgmem § 166 
240 
a. Qualitative judgment § 171 
246 
~. The judgment of reflection§ 174 
248 
y. Judgment of necessity § 177 
250 
5. The judgment of the concept§ 178 
252 
c. The syllogism§ 181 
253 
a. Qualitative syllogism § 183 
256 
~· Syllogism of reflection § 190 
2.61 
y. Syllogism of necessity§ 191 
263 
B. The object § 194 
268 
a. Mechanism§ 195 
270 
b. Chemism § 100 
274 
c. Teleology § 104 
276 
C. The idea § 113 
282 
a. Life § 116 
287 
b. Knowing [Das Erkmnm] § 2.13 
290 
a. Knowing § 126 
292 
~· Willing § 133 
297 
c. The absolute idea § 136 
299 

Preface to the first edition 
The need to provide my listeners with a guide to my philosophical lectures 
first prompted me to let this overview of the entire scope of the philosophy 
come to light earlier than I would have otherwise thought appropriate. 
The nature of an outline not only excludes a more exhaustive elaboration 
of the ideas in terms of their conttnt, but also restricts in particular the 
daboration of their systematic derivation, a derivation that must contain 
what is otherwise understood as a proof and that is indispensable for a 
scientific philosophy. The tide was supposed to indicate the scope of the 
whole as well as the intention to reserve the details for the oral presentation. 
In the case of an outline where the aim is to present an already pre-
supposed and familiar content in a deliberately succinct manner, more 
consideration is given simply to the txtn-na/ purpos~folnm of the ordering 
and arrangement. The present exposition is not in this position. Instead 
it sets up a new reworking of philosophy according to a method that will 
some day be recognized, I hope, as the only true method, identical with 
the content. For this reason, I would have considered it more advantageous 
for the exposition, as far as the public is concerned, if circumstances would 
have allowed me to have a more elaborate work about the other pans of 
the philosophy precede it, a work of the same son as I provided the public 
in regard to the first pan of the whole, the Logic. Moreover, although it 
was necessary in the present exposition to limit the side of the content 
that lies closer to r~pr~mtation and empirical familiarity, I believe that, in 
regard to the transitions (which can be nothing other than a mediation 
effected by means of the conc~pt), I have made this much evident: that 
the methodical character of the progression is sufficiently distinct from the 
merely ~xt~rna/ ordn that the other sciences look for, as well as from a man-
n"ism that has become customary in treating philosophical objects. This 
mannerism pr~supposes a schmuz and in the process sets up parallels among 
the materials just as externally as- and even more arbitrarily than - the first 
way does [i.e. the way of the other sciences]. Through the most peculiar 

6 
Th~ Encyclopedia 
misunderstanding, this mannerist method claims to have done justice to 
the necessity of the concept with contingent and arbitrary connections. 
We have seen the same arbitrariness also seize control of philosophy's 
content, setting out on the adventures of thought and imposing itself for 
a while on sincere and honest striving, but otherwise taken, too, to be a 
foolishness that had risen to the point of madness. Yet instead of being 
imposing or mad, its basic content more readily and more often displayed 
quite familiar trivialities, just as the fonn displayed the sheer mannerism of 
a deliberate, methodical, and easily procured witticism involving baroque 
connections and a forced eccentricity, just as generally, behind the visage 
of seriousness, it displayed deception towards itself and the public. By 
contrast, on the other side, we have seen the sort of shallowness that 
stamps its lack of thoughts as a scepticism that regards itself as clever, and 
a critical position that is modest about reason's prospects, a shallowness 
whose arrogance and vanity mount in tandem with the emptiness of its 
ideas. - For some time these two directions of the spirit have simulated 
German earnestness, wearied its deeper philosophical need and brought 
about an indifference to the science of philosophy - indeed, even a scorn 
for the latter- with the result that now a self-styled humbleness even thinks 
itself entitled to enter the discussion and pass judgment on the profoundest 
dimension of philosophy and to deny it the rational knowledge whose form 
used to be conceived in terms of proofi. 
The first of the phenomena touched on can be regarded, in pan, as the 
youthful pleasure of the new epoch that has blossomed both in the realm 
of science and in the political realm. If this pleasure greeted the dawn of 
the rejuvenated spirit giddily and went straight for the enjoyment of the 
idea without deeper work, revelling for a time in the hopes and prospects 
that the idea presented, then this pleasure reconciles us all the more easily 
with its excesses, because a strong core underlies this pleasure and the fog 
of superficiality that it poured out around that core dissipates.necessarily 
on its own. The other phenomenon is, however, more adverse [to the idea] 
since it reveals fatigue and feebleness and strives to cover them up with an 
arrogance that finds fault with the philosophical spirits of every century, 
mistaking them all, and, most of all itself. in the process. 
Yet it is all the more gratifying to perceive and to mention in conclusion 
how the philosophical interest and the earnest love of high~r knowkdg~ 
have maintained themselves, impanially and without conceit, against both 
of these orientations. If this interest now and then thrusts itself more into 
the form of an imm~diat~ knowing and fo~/ing, it attests, on the other 
hand, to the inner drive of a rational insight that goes funher and alone 

The Encyclopedia 
7 
gives human beings their dignicy, and attests to it, above all, by the fact 
that that standpoint comes about for it [that interest) only as the result of 
philosophical knowledge [ Wissen], so that what it seems to despise is at 
least recognized as a condition by it .. 
To this interest in knowing the truth I dedicate this attempt to provide an 
introduction or contribution to satisfying this interest; may such a purpose 
procure it a favourable reception. 
Heidelberg, May 1817 

Preface to the second edition 
In this new edition, the reader (if he is motivated to look for such things) 
will find several partS reworked and developed into more precise determi-
nations. I was concerned in this edition with moderating and lessening the 
formal character of the presentation by, among other things, using more 
expansive, exoteric remarks to bring the abstract concepts closer to ordinary 
understanding and a more concrete representation of them. Yet the con-
densed brevity made necessary by an oudine, in matters that are abstruse 
anyway, leaves this second edition in the same role as the first, to serve as 
a text for the lectures [Vorks~buch] in need ofthe requisite elucidation by 
the oral presentation. To be sure, the title of an mcyclop~dia ought to leave 
room for a less rigorous scientific method and for assembling items based 
upon external considerations. However, the nature of the matter entails 
that the logical connection had to remain the foundation. 
There are, it would seem, more than enough promptings and incentives 
on hand that seem to make it compulsory for me to explain the position 
of my philosophizing towards what lies beyond it, namely, the busding 
concerns of contemporary culture, some of which are full of spirit,. some 
devoid of it. This is the sort of thing that can only happen in an exoteric 
manner, as in a preface. For, although these concerns link themselves to 
philosophy, they do not engage with it scientifically and thus bar themselves 
from philosophy altogether, conducting their palaver outside of philosophy 
and remaining external to it. It is unpleasant and even awkward to enter 
ground so alien to science, for this sort of explaining and discussing does not 
advance the very understanding that can alone be the concern of genuine 
knowledge. Yet it may be useful, even necessary, to discuss some of these 
phenomena. 
In general, in my philosophical endeavours, what l have worked towards 
and continue to work towards is the scientific knowledge of the truth. It 
is the most difficult path but the only path that can be of interest and 
value for the spirit, once the latter has entered upon the path of thought 
8 

Th~ Encyclopedia 
9 
and, once it is on that path, has not fallen prey to vanity but instead has 
preserved the will and the courage for the truth. That spirit soon finds that 
the method alone can tame thought, bring it to the basic matter at hand, 
and keep it there. Inasmuch as the spirit initially strove to venture beyond 
this absolute content and placed itself above it, such a procedure proves to 
be nothing other than the restoration of that content - but a restoration 
in the most distinctive, freest element of the spirit. 
It is not yet very long ago that the innocent and, by all appearances, for-
tunate condition obtained when philosophy proceeded hand in hand with 
the sciences and with culture, when enlightenment of the understanding 
was moderate and satisfied at once with the need for insight [Ein.richt] and 
with religion, when a natural law was likewise in accord with the state 
and politics, and empirical physics bore the name of'natural philosophy'. 
The peace, however, was rather superficial and, in panicular, that insight 
stood in internal contradiction to religion just as that natural law stood in 
fact in contradiction to the state. The split then ensued, the contradiction 
developed irsel£ In philosophy, however, the spirit celebrated its reconcil-
iation with itself, so that this science is in contradiction only with that 
contradiction itself and the effort to whitewash it. It is a pernicious prej-
udice that philosophy finds itself in opposition to knowledge gained from 
sensory experience, to the rational actuality of what is right as well as to 
an innocent religion and piety. These figures are recognized, indeed even 
justified, by philosophy. Far from opposing them, the thoughtful mind 
enters deeply into their content, and learns and strengthens itself in their 
midst as in the midst of the great discernments of nature, history, and arr. 
For this solid content, insofar as it is thought, is the speculative idea itsel£ 
The collision with philosophy enters only insofar as this ground takes leave 
of its own distinctive character and its content is supposed to be grasped in 
categories and made dependent upon them, without leading the categories 
to the concept and completing them in the idea. 
The understanding of the universal, scientific culture finds itself with 
an important negative result, namely, that no mediation with the truth 
is possible on ·the path of the finite concept. This result tends to have 
a consequence that is the very opposite of what lies immediately in it. 
That conviction has nullified [au,k~hobm] the interest in the investiga-
tion of the categories and superseded, too, attentiveness and caution in 
the application of them, instead of working to eliminate finite connec-
tions from knowing. The use of categories has only become aU the more 
unabashed, devoid of consciousness, and uncritical, as in a state of despair. 
The notion that the insufficiency of finite categories for truth entails the 

10 
The Encyclopedia 
impossibility of objective knowledge is based upon a misunderstanding, 
from which the legitimacy of addressing and rejecting [matters] on the 
basis of feeling and subjective opinion is inferred. Replacing proofs are 
assurances and narratives of facts found in the consciousness that is held 
to be all the purer, the more uncritical it is. On so barren a category as 
immediacy - and without investigating it further - the highest needs of 
the spirit are to be based and to be decided by means of it. Particularly 
where religious objects are treated, one can find that philosophizing has 
been explicitly put aside, as if by this means one had banned every evil 
and attained assurance against error and deception. The investigation of 
truth is then staged on the basis of presuppositions drawn from anywhere 
and through rationalization [Rasonnemmt}, i.e. through the use of the • 
usual determinations of thought such as essence and appearance, ground 
and consequence, cause and effect, and so forth, and through the usual 
ways of inferring according to these and the other finite connections. 'Free 
of the evil one though they are, the evils remain',1 and the evil is nine 
times worse than before because trust is placed in it without any suspicion 
and critique, as if that evil held at bay, namely, philosophy, were some· 
thing other than the investigation of the truth - conscious of the nature 
and the value of the relationships in thinking that link and determine all 
content. 
Philosophy itself, meanwhile, experiences its worst fate at the hands 
of those same individuals when they make it their business to meddle 
in philosophy, construing it and judging it [on their own terms]. The 
fact [Faktum] of physical or spiritual, in particular also religious vitality, 
is distorted by a reflection incapable of grasping it. Yet, as far as it is 
concerned, this way of construing t~e fact has the sense ofinitially elevating 
it to the level of something known [ Gewujfte] and the difficulty lies in this 
transition from the basic matter to knowledge, a transition that is the work 
of deliberating on the matter. In the science itself, this difficulty is no 
longer on hand. For the fact of philosophy is knowledge that has already 
been prepared and, with this, rhe process of construing the mauer would 
be a thinking over [Nachtknkm} only in the sense of thinking that follows 
aftrr the fact [nachfolgmdes Denkm]. It is only (the act of} evaluating that 
would demand a thinking over in the usual meaning of the term. Bur that 
uncritical understanding demonstrates itself to be equally unfaithful in 
the naked construal of the idea that has been articulated in a determinate 
1 Moldenhauer-Michel: Fawt, first pan, The witches' kitchen, V. :1.509: 'Den B!>Rn sind sie los, die 
B!>Rn sind geblieben' ('They got rid of the Evil One. the evil ones ~~:main'). 

The Encyclopedia 
II 
manner; it has so little suspicion or doubt of the fixed presuppositions 
contained within it that it is even incapable of repeating the bare fact 
of the philosophical idea. Miraculously. this understanding combines the 
following double-barrelled approach [das Gedoppelte] within itself. It is 
evident to this understanding that in the idea there is a complete departure 
from and even explicit comradiction of its use of categories - and at the 
same rime no suspicion dawns on it that another way of thinking than irs 
own is present and employed and that its thinking would have to behave 
differently here than usual. In this manner it happens that the idea of 
speculative philosophy is fixed upon immediately in terms of its abstract 
definition, on the supposition that a definition would of itself necessarily 
appear clear and settled and that it would have its regulating mechanism and 
criterion in presupposed representations alone, at least without knowing 
[in der Unwissenheit] that the sense of the definition like its necessary proof 
lies solely in its development and in the way the definition proceeds from 
the latter as a result. More precisely, since the idea in general is the concrete, 
spiritual unity but the understanding consists in construing conceptual 
determinations only in abstraction and thus in their one-sidedness and 
finitude, that unity is made into an abstract identity, devoid of spirit, an 
identity in which difference is not on hand but instead evnything is one; even 
good and evil, among other things, are one and the same. Hence, the name 
'system of identity', 'philosophy of identity' has already come to be a received 
name for speculative philosophy. If someone were to make his profession 
of faith as foUows: 'I believe in God the Father, the Creator of heaven and 
earth', it would be surprising if someone else were to conclude from this 
first part that the person professing his faith believed in God, the creator 
of heaven, and thmforeconsidered the earth to be uncreated and matter to 
be eternal. The fact is correct that in his profession of faith that person has 
declared that he believes in God, the creator of heaven, and yet the fact, as 
others have construed it, is completely false; so much so that this example 
must be regarded as incredible and trivial. And yet this violent bifurcation 
takes place in the way the philosophical idea is construed, such that, in order 
to make it impossible to misunderstand how the identity (which is, we are 
assured, the principle of speculative philosophy) is constituted, the explicit 
instruction and respective refutation ensue to the effect that, for instance, 
the subject is different [verschieden] from the object [Objekt], likewise the 
finite from the infinite, and so forth, as if the concrete, spiritual unity 
were in itself devoid of any determinateness and did not in itu/fcontain the 
difference, as if someone did nor know [nicht wiijfte] that subject and object 
[ Objekt) or the infinite and the finite were differem from one another, or as 

12 
Th~ Encyclopedia 
if philosophy, immersing itself in book-learning [Schulw~ishnt], needed to 
be reminded that, outside school, there is wisdom for which that difference 
is something familiar. 
More specifically, in relation to this difference that is not supposed to be 
familiar to it, philosophy is decried for the fact that in it, because of this, 
even the distinction between good and evil falls away. As a result, some 
would happily exercise a certain fairness and magnanimity by acknowledg-
ing 'that philosophers, in their presentations, do not always develop the 
disastrous consequences that are bound up with what they assert (though 
perhaps they also do not do so because these consequences are not inherent 
in their presentations after all)'.2 Philosophy must spurn this mercifulness 
1 The words of Mr Tholuck in rhe Co/krrifln nf Blossoms from WtsttTII Mysticism (Biiitmsammlung 
aw tin mownliintiisckn Mystik) (Berlin, •hs). p. 'l· Even Tholuck. for all his profound sensibility, 
allows himself ro be misled into following the popular manner of construing philosophy. The 
undemanding, he says, can make inferences only in rhe following rwo ways: eirher there is a primal 
ground [ Urgrtmdl conditioning everyrhing, so rhar even the ultimate ground of my self [mtinn 
Stlbstllics in ir and my being and free acting are only an illusion, or I am actually a being [tin Wtsml 
differcnriared from rhe primal ground, and my acting is nor conditioned and produced by rhe primal 
ground, and consequently the primal ground is nor me absolute being. conditioning everything; 
hence, there is no infinite God bur instead a mulrirude of gods. and so fonh. All philosophus who 
mink more deeply and more incisively are supposed ro accept rhe first proposition (I would not 
know exactly why rhe fim one-sidedness should be deeper and more incisive than the second); rhe 
consequences. however, which, as mentioned above, rhe)" do nor always develop, arc 'rhar even the 
ethical standard of rhe human being is nor an absolurely true standard; instead good and evil are 
«11111/Jy (empha£is by rhe aurhor himself) alike and only diverse in renns of rhe appearance [Schtin].' 
lr would always be bcner for someone nor ro speak of philosophy ar aU as long as, for all rhe deprhs 
of one's feeling. one is still so much caught up in me one-sidedness of understanding rhar one 
knows only rhe titht~r of, on one side, a primal ground. in which rhe individual being and irs 
freedom [is] only an illusion and, on rhe other, rhe absolute self-sufficiency of individuals, and one 
has no experience of rhe ntithtr-71or of rhese rwo sons of one-sided ness of what M r Tholuck calls 
rhe 'dangerous dilemma'. On page 14 he speaks, robe sure, of such spirits- and mcse are, he claims, 
the genuine philosophers- who assume rhe second proposition (though one would think rhat rhis is 
ezacrly what is meant by rhe first proposition above) and cancel [auftubml me opposition between 
uncondiriontti and conditioned being, doing so by virrue of rhe indiffirtnt primal bring in which all 
the respective oppositions pervade one another. Bur did Mr Tholuck nor notice, in speaking this 
way, rhar rhe indifferent primal being in which rhe opposition is supposed to be suffused is enrirely 
rhe same as rhar unconditioned being. rhe one-sidc:dncss of which was supposed ro be cancelled 
[aujgrhobmJ? Did he nor see rhat in rhe same breath. as he cancels (tias Aujhtbtnl rhar one-sided 
rhoughr [Eimtitign]. he is rhus cancelling [ik1 Aujhtlmu) ir in favour of someming that has precisely 
this same one-sidedness and rhar, as a result. whar he says allows that one-sided ness to pcrsisr instead 
of cancelling ir. If one wants ro say whar spirits do, then one has ro be able ro comprehend the fact 
of me marrer and do so wirh spirit. Otherwise. the fact has become falsified in one's own hands. -
Allow me ro note, moreover. somewhat rediously. rhar what is said here and subsequently abour 
Mr Tholuck's notion of philosophy cannor and should nor be said. so to speak. intiivitiualJ..y about 
him. One reads me same thing in hundreds of books, in rhe prefaces of theologians especially. 
among or hers. I have cited M r Tholuck's presentation, in pan because it happens to be closest ar 
hand, in parr because the profound feeling (that seems to place his writings on a side completely 
different from the rheology of rhe understanding) stands closesr to something profound. For the basic 
determination of rhar profundity. rhe rtconriliation- which is nor rhe unconditioned primal being and 

The Encyclopedia 
chat some would extend to it, for it needs that mercifulness for its moral 
justification just as little as it can lack insight into the actual consequences 
of its principles and fail to make explicit their implications. I want to shed 
light briefly on that alleged implication, according to which the difference 
between good and evil is supposedly made into a mere semblance of a 
difference. I want to do so more to give an example of the hollowness of 
such a manner of construing philosophy chan to justify it. For this pur-
pose, let us simply take up Spinozism, the philosophy in which God is 
determined only as substance and not as subject and spirit. This distinction 
concerns the determination of the unity; this alone is what matters and yet 
those who tend co call the philosophy a system of identity, know [u1issen] 
nothing of this tktennination, although it is a face. They are even willing 
co say that, for this philosophy, everything is one and the same, even good 
and evil are alike- all of which are the worst som of unity. In speculative 
philosophy, there can be no talk of these sorts of unity; only a chinking 
that is still barbaric can make use of them with respect to ideas. & far 
as the claim is concerned that in that philosophy the difference between 
good and evil is not in itself or genuinely valid, it must be asked 'what does 
"genuinely" mean here?' lfir means the namre of God, it will not seriously 
be demanded that evil be placed in that nature. That substantial unity is 
the good itself; evil is only division; in that unity, chen, there is anything 
but the sameness of good and evil; to the contrary, the latter is excluded. 
Accordingly, the distinction of good and evil is just as little in God as such. 
For this distinction is only in what is divided into two, in which there is 
evil itself. Furthermore, in Spinozism one also finds the distinction: that 
the hr~man being is different from God. Theoretically, the system may not 
be satisfying from this side. For human beings and the finite in general, 
something abstract of this son- is the basic coment itself that the speculative idea is and expresses 
in thinking- a basic content that that profound sensibiliry should be least prone to fail to appreciate 
in the idea. 
But even there it happens as it .does everywhere else in Mr Tholuck's writings that he allows 
himself ro indulge in the usual palaver about par~thti.Jm, abour which I have spoken ar length in 
one of the final Remarks IS snl of rhe Er~cy(/nprJill. I note here merely rhe peculiar clumsiness 
and abour-face (Vvktlmmgl inro which Mr Tholuck falls. For while, on the one side of his alleged 
philosophical dilemma, he places the primal ground, and afterwards (pp. )), 38) characterizes this 
as pantheisric, he characterizes the other side as that of the Socinians. Pclagianisrs. and rhe so-called 
Popular Philosophers in such a way. mat on mar side there is 'no infinite God but insread a !llrgt 
numbtr of gods, namely, me number of all the beings that are difkrent &om the so-called primal 
ground and have their own btin: and acting, alongside that so-called primal ground". On chis side 
there is thus in faa not merdy a large number of gods. bur instead all thir~p (evcryrhing finite counts 
here as having its own b~in:) a" gods. By this means, Mr Tholuck in face explicitly has his omnithtilm 
(Allrsgiittmzl, his palllhtilm on this side, not on the firsr side, whose God he explicitly makes rhc OJit 
primal ground, such that, on that side, there is only mt~nothtism. 

14 
Th~ Encyclopedia 
even though reduced later to a mode, find thmzs~/v~s and are considered 
only akmgsitk the substance. Here it is, then, in human beings, that" the 
distinction exists, existing essentially as the distinction of good and evil as 
well, and it is here alone that the distinction gmuin~/y is, for only here is 
the determination peculiar to it present. If, with respect to Spinozism, one 
is looking only at the substance, then, to be sure, there is no distinction of 
good and evil in it, but because evil, like the finite and the world generally 
(see the Remark§ 50 on pp. 98-9), dots not ~xist at a// from this standpoint. 
If, however, one has one's eyes on the standpoint from which, even in this 
system, human beings and the relation of human beings to the substance 
surface and where evil alone can have irs place in contrast to the good, then 
one must have examined the pam of the Ethics [of Spinoza] which treat of 
it (of emotions, human servitude and human freedom), in order to be able 
to speak of the moral implications of the system. One will undoubtedly 
be convinced as much of the exalted purity of this moral dimension, the 
principle of which is the sheer love of God, as of the fact that this purity 
of the moral dimension is a consequence of the system. Lessing said in 
his day that people treat Spinoza the way they treat a dead dog; one can-
not say that in more recent times Spinozism, and speculative philosophy 
in general, are treated any better, particularly if one sees that those who 
report on and judge these matters do not even take the trouble to grasp 
the facts correctly and cite and ponray them correctly. This would be the 
minimum of fairness and philosophy should in any case be able to demand 
as much. 
The history of philosophy is the history of the discovery of the thoughts 
about the absolute that is their object. Thus, for example, one can say that 
Socrates discovered the determination of the purpos~ that was devdoped 
and determined by Plato and, in particular, by Aristotle. Brucker's his-
tory of philosophy3 is so uncritical, not only with respect to the external 
aspect of the historical material but with respect to the report of what was 
thought, that one finds twenty, thirty, and more sentences quoted as the 
philosophical sayings of ancient Greek philosophers, not a single one of 
which belongs to them. They are inferences that Brucker draws based on 
the bad metaphysics of his time and imputes to those philosophers as their 
claims. Inferences are of two sorts: some are merely elaborations of a prin-
ciple in further detail, others trace the principle back to deeper principles. 
The historical dimension consists precisely in derailing which individuals 
are responsible for such a further deepening of thought and for unveiling 
' Moldenhauer-Michel: Johann Jakob Brucker, HistoriA mtica phi!Jisophia~ (Leipzig. 1741-4). 

Th~ Encyclopedia 
15 
chis deepening. Bur chat procedure [of Brucker) is inappropriate nor merely 
because chose philosophers did not themselves draw the implications chat 
supposedly lie in their principles and thus merely failed to articulate those 
implications explicitly. lc is even more inappropriate because in the course 
of inferring in chis way it js immediately imputed to them that they let 
stand and make use of finite relations of thought, relations char are directly 
counter to the sense of philosophers of a speculative spirit and merely 
pollute and falsify the philosophical idea instead. In the case of ancient 
philosophers of whom only a few sentences have been conveyed to us, 
such falsification might be excused as allegedly a matter of making the 
correct inference. But that excuse falls by che wayside for a philosophy chat 
has put its idea into determinate thoughts and has explicitly investigated 
and determined che value of the categories, if, in spice of this, the idea 
is construed in a distorted way and only on~ moment (e.g., identity) is 
picked our of the presentation and put forward as the totality, and if the 
categories are introduced quite unrefleccively in the manner nearest ac hand 
in their one-sidedness and untruthfulness, just as they pervade everyday 
consciousness. An educated knowledge of the relations of thoughts is the 
first condition of construing a philosophical fact correctly. But, thanks to 
the principle of immediate knowing, the rawness of thoughts is not only 
explicitly authorized but made inro a law. Knowledge of thoughts, and 
with it the education of subjective thinking, is as little a form of immediate 
knowing as is any sort of science or art and skill. 
Religion is the manner of consciousness in which the truth exists for all 
human beings, for human beings with any education. Scientific knowledge 
of the truth, however, is a particular sort of consciousness of it, the labour 
of which not everyone, indeed only a few, undertake. Th~ contmt is th~ 
sam~. but just as Homer says that some things have two names, one in the 
language of the gods, the other in the language of the earthlings [ubtrtiigigt 
Mmschm], so there are two languages for that content, one the language 
of feeling, representation, and thinking nesting in finite categories and 
one-sided abstractions of the understanding, the other, the language of 
the concrete concept. If one also wants to discuss and evaluate philosophy 
from the vantage point of religion, more is required than merely having 
the habit of the language of earthlings. The foundation [Fundammt] of 
scientific knowledge is the inner basic content, the indwelling idea and its 
vitality vibrant in spirit, just as religion is no less a mind that has been 
worked through, a spirit awake to mindfulness, a well-developed basic 
conte.nt. In most recent times religion has more and more contracted the 
cultivated extensiveness of its content and retreated into the intensity of 

16 
The Encyclopedia 
piety or feeling. and indeed often a feeling that manifests a very meagre 
and barren content. As long as it has a Credo, a doctrine, a systematic 
theology, it has something that philosophy can treat and in which philoso-
phy as such can come to some understanding with religion. This [process 
of coming to some understanding] is, again, not to be taken in terms of 
the impoverished understanding that merely dissects things, the sort of 
understanding that has captivated modern religiosity and in accordance 
with which both philosophy and religion are represented in such a way 
that the one excludes the other, or that they are generally separable to such 
an extent that they can then only be joined together from the outside. It is 
far more the case, again based on what has been said up to this point, that 
religion can probably exist without philosophy but philosophy cannot exist 
without religion, instead encompassing religion within itself. The genuine 
religion, the religion of the spirit, must have such a Credo, a content; the 
spirit is essentially consciousness, with a content that has been rendered 
objective fgegenstiindlich]. As a feeling, it is the non-objective content itself 
(merely qua/ia-/ike [qualiert], to use an expression from Jakob Bohme) 
and only the lowest level of consciousness, indeed, in that form of the 
soul that we have in common with animals. Only thinking makes the soul 
(with which animals are also endowed) a spirit, and philosophy is only a 
consciousness of that content, the spirit and irs truth, in the shape and 
manner of its essential character that distinguishes it [the spirit] from the 
animal and makes it capable of religion. The intense [kontrakte] religiosity 
concentrating itself in the heart must make irs gnashing and contrition 
[Zmniirbung] the essential factor of its rebinh. At the same time, however, 
it would have to remember that it is dealing with the heart of a spirit, 
that the spirit is ordained with the power of the bean, and that this power 
can only exist insofar as spirit is itself reborn. This rebirth of the spirit 
from natural ignorance as well as from natural error takes place through 
instruction and the belief in the objective truth, the content, achieved by 
the testimony of the spirit. This rebirth of the spirit is, among other things, 
also immediately a rebirth of the heart from the vanity of the one-sided 
understanding, a rebirth on which it insists and through which it claims 
to know [wissm] things such as that the finite is different from the infinite, 
that philosophy must be either polytheism or, in discriminating spirits, 
pantheism, and so forth - the rebirth from such pitiful views on the basis 
of which pious humility rides high against philosophy as much as against 
theological knowledge. If religiosity persists in this intensity that is devoid 
of spirit because it lacks any expansion, then it knows [weljf], of course, 
only of the contrast of its narrow-minded and narrowing form with the 

The Encyclopedia 
17 
spiriwal expansiveness of religious as well as philosophical doctrine. 4 But 
the spirit that thinks does not restrict itself merely to being satisfied with 
the purer, innocent religiosity. By contrast, the former standpoint [the 
one that lacks such expansiveness] is in itself the result of reflection and 
rationalization [Riisonnement). With the help of a superficial understand-
ing, it has fashioned for itself this polite [vomehme] liberation from practi-
cally every doctrine and, by zealously employing the thinking (with which 
it is infected) against philosophy, it maintains itself forcibly on the thin 
peak of an abstract condition of feeling, devoid of content. I cannot refrain 
from citing excerpts from Franz von Baader's exhortation [Paranesis] over 
such a patterning of piety, from Fmnenta Cognitionis, Volume 5 (1823), 
Preface, p. ixf: 
• To come back once more ro Mr Tholuck who can be regarded as rhc enchusiastic representative of 
the pietiSiic orientation, the lack of such a tlDmi~ is quire marked in his work Th~ D«rri~ of Sin, 
second edition (Hamburg, ths). which has jun come to my auention. What cauglu my eye was 
his treatmem of the doctrine of the trinity in his work Tht Specu/4rivt Dortrint of tiN TrinilJ of,, 
i..lltt Oritnt (Berlin, 1816), for whose assiduously assembled historical notes I am sincerely gmeful. 
He calls this doctrine a schoiiiStK doctrine. Bur in any case it is much older than what one calls 
'scholastic'. He considcB it solely from the external side as supposedly a merely historical emergence, 
proceeding from speculation on biblical passages and under the influence ofPiaronic and Aristotelian 
philosophy (p. 4)). Bur in the writing about sin, he treats rhis dogma quire cavalierly, one might say, 
by declaring it to be only capable of being afi.rmtwOrk (Fachwtrk] within which the doctrines offaim 
(bur which?) might be classified (p. uo); indeed, one must also employ the rxpression fora morgana 
ro refer ro rhis dogma (p. 119), for so it appears to those standing on the shore (in rhe sands of the 
spirir?). Bur the doctrine of trinity is 'under no circumstances a foundation on which tbt foith can bt 
grm.Nitti' (hence, Mr Tholuck speaks of it as a three-legged srool; sec p. ul). Has not this doctrine, 
as rhe most holy of docuine,, from time immemorial - or at least for how long? - been me chief 
content of rhe faith itself as its CrttlD and has !his CntlD nor been the foundation of subjecri'IC faith? 
Without this doarine, how can the doctrine of reconciliation (mar Mr Tholuck in rhe work cited 
rries with so much energy to make his readers feel) have more rhan a moral or, if one will, heathen 
sense? Haw can it have a Christian sense? In rhis te:u one also finds nothing of orher, more particular 
dogmas; Mr Tholuck alwa)'J leads his readeB, for example, only up to Christ's life and death but 
neither to his resurrection and elevation ro rhe right hand of rhe Father nor to the outpouring of the 
Holy Spirit. A major determination in the doctrine of reconciliation is the punishmmr of sins; for Mr 
Tholuck (pp. 119ff.) this is rhe burdensome self-consciousness and the unblessed condition bound 
up with it, me condition of everyone who lives outsitk God, the sole source of rhe blessedness as -ll 
as holiness. As a result, sin, consciousness of gullr, and rhe unblessed condition cannot be rhough1 
without one another (here then thinking. too, comes inro play. just as on p. n.o the determinations 
are also shown to Row from God's na~JDY). This determination of the punishment of sins is what 
some have called the natural punishment of sins and (like the indifference towards rhe doctrine 
of trinity) ir i' me result and rhe reaching of reason and the Enlightenment, otherwise so severely 
decried by Mr Tboluck. - Some lime ago, in rhe upper house of the English Parliament, a bill fell 
through that concerned me Unilllrian seer. On rhis occasion an English newspaper, after reporting 
the large number of Unitarians in Europe and America, added: 'For rhe most parr, on rhe European 
continent, Proresrantism and Unitarianism are presendy synonymous.' Theologians may decide for 
thenudves whether Mr Tholuck's systematic (or dogmatic?) meology differs from che usual theory 
of rhe Enlightenment on more than one or ar mOSI two points and whether, on closer inspection, it 
even differs on these points. 

18 
The Encyclopedia 
'As long,' he says, 'as a respect grounded on free investigation and thereby 
on genuine conviction has not been procured for religion and its doctrines, 
from the side of science ... you pious and impious souls alike, with all your 
commandments and prohibitions, with all your palaver and action, will 
have no remedy for this bad situation [ Obel] and, as long as this is the 
case, religion that is not respected will also not be loved. For one can only 
love heartily and sincerely what one sees sincerely respected and what one 
knows, beyond a doubt, to be worthy of respect, just as religion can only 
be served by this sort of amor generosus [generous love] ... In other words, 
if you want the practice of religion to thrive once again, then take care that 
we attain once more a rational theory of it. Do not entirely leave the field 
to your opponents (the atheists) with the irrational and blasphemous claim 
that such a theory of religion is something impossible, something utterly 
unthinkable, and that religion is merely an affair of the heart in regard to 
which one justifiably can, indeed must, lose one's head. 's 
As for the scantiness of the content, it can also be noted that one can talk 
of this only as the way religion appears in its external circumstances at a 
particular time. Such a time would be lamentable, when there is such a need 
simply to bring forth the mere belief in God (what was so pressing tO the 
noblejacobt) and, beyond that, simply to awaken a concentrated Christian 
feeling. At the same time, the higher principles that make themselves 
known in that feeling cannot be overlooked (see the Introduction to the 
Logic, the Remark to § 64). But before the science lies the rich content 
produced by cemuries and millennia of the activity of knowing for itself. 
Moreover, it lies before science, not as though it were something historical 
that only others possessed and for us is in the past, something we concern 
ourselves with merely to become acquainted with it and to remember it and 
to develop acuity in criticizing narratives- in short, something irrelevant to 
knowledge of the spirit and interest in the truth. Religions, philosophies, 
and works of art have brought to the light of day the most sublime, 
the most profound and the innermost dimensions of things and done 
so in pure and impure, dear and clouded, often rather repugnant form. 
Mr Franz von Baader deserves our esteem for continuing, not only to recall 
I Mr Tholuck several times cites passages from Anselm streatise c .. , Dnu homu (Why God is Man) and 
on p. 117 ['The Doctrine of Sin') lauds 'the profound humiliryof r:his greatthinkd; why docs he not 
also consider and cite the following passage from the same treatise (cited on p. 167 with reference to 
§ n of the Enrylopa~dia): 'Negligentiae mihi vidnur si •.. non Studemus quod credimus, inu/Jig,.t' 
[It would seem negligent ro me if ... we did nor srudy what we Mlieve, to undmts.,Jj.- Of course, 
if the Credo is reduced ro only very few articles. lirrle material remains to M known and lirrle can 
come from such knowledge. 

The Encyclopedia 
19 
such forms but also, with a profoundly speculative spirit, to honour their 
content explicitly in a scientific way by expounding and corroborating the 
philosophical idea as it emerges from them. The profundity of Jakob Bohme 
in particular affords opportunity and forms for this. The title philosophus 
tn4tonicus [Teutonic philosopher] has been rightly accorded this powerful 
spirit. On the one hand, he has expanded the content of religion for 
itself to the universal idea, and in terms of that very content he conceived 
the highest problems of reason and sought to grasp spirit and nature in 
their more definite spheres and formations. He did so by taking as the 
foundation that the spirit of the human being and all things have been 
created according to the image of God - none other, of course, than 
the triune God - and that their life is only this, after the loss of that 
original image, to be reintegrated into it. On the other hand, moving in 
the opposite direction, he has violently employed the forms of natural 
things (sulphur, saltpetre, and so forth, the tart, the bitter, and so forth) 
as spiritual forms and forms of thought. The gnosis of Mr Baader, which 
latches on to the same sorts of formations, is a distinctive way of igniting 
and advancing philosophical interest. His approach forcefully opposes the 
tranquil resignation accompanying the empty and barren pronouncements 
of so-called Enlightenment as much as a piety that wants only to remain in 
an intensive emotional state. In all his writings Mr Baader demonstrates, 
along the way, that he is far from taking this gnosis for an exclusive manner 
of knowing. There is more than one awkward side to it: its metaphysics 
does not push itself to consider the categories themselves and to develop 
the content methodically; it suffers from the concept's inadequacy for such 
wild or ingenious forms and formations; in a similar way, it suffers generally 
from having the absolute contents as a presupposition and then explaining, 
reasoning, and refuting on the basis of it.6 
6 II is obviously quite pleasant for me ro see, in rhe conrent of se"Cral more recenr wrirings of 
Mr Baader, as well as in me explicit mentioning of many wuemeni:S from me, his agrcemenr with 
me Iauer. Regarding most or easily all of what he contests, it would nor be difficult for me ro come 
10 rerms wirh him, to show in ocher words that ir in fact docs not diverge from his views. I only 
w.mc 10 rouch on one reproach chat comes up in rhe Rm~~~rlts on Som~ Anri·rrligious Phi/Qsophica/ 
Argumrnts of our A~ (1824), p. s. cf. pp. s6fl: He speaks of a philosophical argumcnr which is 
me produce of the 'philosophy of f!aturc' school and sers up a false concept of matter, 'because it 
maintains of che transient essence of this world, containing ruination in ii:Self, mac this essence, 
having emerged from God and being emergenr from him both immrdiauly and eternally. as me 
eternal exit (cnemalization) of God, ronditions God's eternal re-entry (as spirit!'. As far as me 6m 
pan of this representation is conccmcd, on matter's ~mnti"f from God, I sec no way around me fact 
that chis proposirion is contained in che decerminarion char God is ch~ creator of rhe world (though 
ic bears noting char 'emerging' is in general a category that I do not use since ir is only a pic:rurcsque 
image, noc a caregory). ~ for rhe ocher part, namely. that the ec~rnal exit conditioN God's re-entry, 

20 
Th~ Encyclopedia 
We have mough and even roo many, one can say, of more rarefied and 
cloudier configurations of the truth - in religions and mythologies, in 
Gnostic and mystical philosophies of ancient and modern rimes. One 
can enjoy discov~ring the idea in these configurations and derive a certain 
sarisfaaion from the fact that the philosophical truth is not something 
merely solitary but char its activity has at least been present as a stirring 
fermem within them. Bur something else happens when the arrogance of 
someone immature, as was the case of an imitator of Mr Baader, tries to 
'reheat' such productions of the fermenting process. In his laziness and 
inability to think scientifically, this imitator easily elevates that gnosis into 
the exclusive manner of knowing. For it takes less effort ro indulge in 
such fictions and attach assertoric philosophical arguments to them than 
to take on the development of the concept and to submit one's thinking 
as well as one's mind to irs logical necessity. Someone with this arrogance 
is also likely to attribute to himself the discovery of what he has learned 
from others, and he believes this all the more easily if he fights them or 
puts them down or, rather, is annoyed by them because he has drawn his 
insights from them. 
Just as the urge to think announces itself, albeit distortedly, in the 
phenomena of the present time - phenomena that we have taken into 
consideration in this Preface- so, too, there exists in and for itself the need 
(this being the only reason worthy of our science) for the thought that has 
elevated itself to rhe heights of the spirit, as well as for irs time, for what 
had been earlier revealed as a mystery- but in irs revelation's more rarefied 
configurations and even more so in its cloudier ones remains something 
utterly opaque to formal thought- to be revealed for thinking itself. With 
the absolute right of the freedom proper to it, this thinking stubbornly 
insists on reconciling itself with the sound content, but only insofar as 
this content has been able to give itself the form [ Gmalt] most worthy of 
Mr Baad~r plaas ~onditioning in this position, a category that is, in and for itself, inappropriat~ and 
on~ that I u~ just as liule for this rdation. I ~call whar I not~ abov~ about uncritically ~wapping 
~r~rminarions of thought. But to di~uu matt~t's ~m~rgena, be it in an immttlia" or mNiiattti way, 
would lead m~rdy to utt~rly formal determinations. What Mr Baad~r himsdf (pp. 54ff.) d~clar~ 
about the concept of man~r don not, a< far as IKe, d~part from my own detertninarions with m~ct 
to it. Similarly, for t~ absolute ta~k of grasping th~ crarion of th~ world as a conc~pt, I do not 
undnscmd what hdp might li~ in Mr Baad~r's declaration (p. 58) that matt~r 'is not the immediate 
product of unity, bur the producr of the priMipln of it (those empowered, the EJohim) whirh tiN 
unity summon~ for this purpoK'. From the grammatical structure, th~ senK of this claim is not 
completely clear. Is the Knse that matter is the product of the principl~ or is it that matter has 
summon~ theK FJohim to itself and has In irKifbe produced by them? In eirhn caK, thOK EJohim 
or rarher this entire circle must be put toget~r inro a r~lation to God, a relation that th~ inKrtion 
of EJohim does nor illwnin~. 

Th~ Encyclopedia 
21 
it: that of the concept and of necessity, which binds everything, content 
as well as thought, and precisely therein makes it free. If the old is to be 
renewed (i.e., an old shape since the content itself is eternally young), then 
perhaps the shape of the idea given it by Plato and, much more profoundly, 
by Aristotle is infinitely more worth remembering. Moreover, it is so not 
least because to unveil it [i.e. that shape] by means of appropriating it to the 
formation of our thought is, without further ado, not only to understand 
it bur also to advance science itself. Bur understanding such forms of the 
idea does nor lie on the surface as does grasping Gnostic and cabbalistic 
phantasmagorias, and developing such forms is something that happens 
much less automatically than pointing to or indicating these echoes of the 
idea. 
It has been rightly said of the true that it is index sui ~t falsi [the sign 
of itself and the false], but that the true is not known (g~wufi't] on the 
basis of the false. So, too, the concept is the understanding of itself and 
of the form lacking a concept, but the latter does not, on the basis of 
its inner truth, understand the concept. Science understands feeling and 
faith, but science can only be judged on the basis of the concept on which 
it rests. Moreover, since science is that concept's self-development,· then 
appraisal [&uruilung] of it on the basis of the concept is not so much 
passing judgment [Uruilm] on it as progressing along with it. That kind 
of appraising judgment is, necessarily, what I also wish for the present 
vemure, as the only kind that I can respect and heed. 
Berlin, May 25, 1827 

Foreword to the third edition 
In this third edition, various improvements have been made here and there. 
Particular care has been taken to enhance the clarity and exactness of the 
exposition. However, in keeping with a course book's purpose of serving 
as a compendium, the style had to stay condensed, formal and abstract. 
The book retains its function of receiving the requisite explanations only 
through the oral presentation. 
Since the second edition, several evaluations of my philosophy have 
appeared that have for the most part shown litde aptness for such busi-
ness. Such careless responses to works that have been thought and worked 
through for many years with all the seriousness of the object and its sci-
entific requirements are unseemly and unpleasant when one sees the nasty 
passions of conceit, haughtiness, envy, mockery, and so on, that emerge 
from those responses; even less is there anything in them that might be 
instructive. Cicero says in Tusculanaedisputationts I.II [4]: 'Est philosophia 
paucis contenta judicibus, multitudinnn consulto ipsa fugiens, eique ipsi 
et invisa et suspecta; ut, si quis universam velit virupcrare, secundo id populo 
facere possit.' [Philosophy is content with but a few judges and Aees from 
the multitude deliberately, while they are themselves both suspect to and 
hatedby the multitude; so that, if someone wanted to chide it as a whole, he 
could do so with the support of the people.] The more limited the insight and 
thoroughness, the more popular it is to attack philosophy. A petty repulsive 
passion is palpable in the resonance it encounters in others, and ignorance 
accompanies it with the same sort of intelligibility. Other objects impress 
themselves upon the senses or stand before representation in all-embracing 
intuitions; one feels the need to have at least a slight degree of acquaintance 
with them in order to be able to converse about them; in addition, sound 
common sense [Mmschenvmtand] finds it easier to recall them since they 
are situated in a familiar, firm presence. But the lack of all this [i.e., all 
these features of other objects] unleashes itself unabashedly against philos-
ophy, or rather against some imaginary empty picture of it that ignorance 
2.2. 

Thr Encyclopedia 
fabricates and talks itself into. It has nothing [standing] before it towards 
which it could orient itself and thus wanders about, entirely among the 
indeterminate, empty and thus senseless. - Elsewhere, I have undenaken 
the unpleasant and sterile business of shining the spotlight on some of those 
phenomena in their utter nakedness, woven as they are out of passions and 
ignorance. 7 
Recently, it could have seemed as if the province of theology and even 
religiosity were poised to prompt a more serious study of God, divine 
things, and reason scientifically within a broader domain. 8 Alas, the very 
inception of the movement quashed such hopes. For the inducement was 
dependent upon pmonalities, and neither the pretensions of accusatory 
piety nor the attacked pretensions of free reason elevated themselves to the 
basic mattfr, much less to the consciousness that one would have to enter 
upon the terrain of philosophy in order to discuss the basic matter. That 
personal attack on the ground of very particular external aspects of the 
religion exhibited itself in the monstrous presumptuousness of wanting to 
reject the Christianity of individuals based on one's own absolute power, 
sealing them with secular and eternal damnation in the process. Dante, 
empowered by the enthusiasm of divine poetry, took it upon himself to 
wield the keys of Peter and to condemn by name many of his -albeit already 
deceased- contemporaries, even popes and emperors, to damnation in hell. 
The infamous objection has been levelled against a more recent philosophy 
that in it the human individual posits itself as God. But compared to such 
a reproach concerning a false inference, it is an actual presumptuousness of 
a completely different order to pose as the Judge of the World, to censure 
the Christian character of individuals and thus to issue the innermost 
condemnation of them. The shibboleth of this absolute power is the namr 
of thr Lord Christ and the assurancr that the Lord resides in the hearts of 
these judges. Christ says (Matt. 7: 10): 'By their fruits you shall recognize 
them', but the monstrous insolence of condemning and damning others 
is hardly good fruit. He continues: 'Not all who say unto me, "Lord. 
Lord" shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Many will say unto me on 
that day: "Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? Have we not 
in thy namr cast out devils? Have we not done many deeds in thy name?" 
7 Moldenhauer-Michcl: In fllhrlnkhtr for wiss~nKIMftlkht Kritilt (1819) Hegel announces the review 
of live works that deal wirh his philosophy. Only the rmews of twO of these works did appear. See 
vol. XX, 'Two Reviews'. 
1 Moldenhauer-Michel: A reference to the so-called quarrel of Halle between rhe Evangtliseht Kirchm-
uirung [a newspaper of the Evangelical church] and some representatives of rhe School of Theology 
at Halle in 18)0. 

Tht Encyclopedia 
Then shall I profess to them: "I never rtcogniud you, gtt away from ~. 
all of you, you tvi/doers. "' Those who give assurances of being in exclusive 
possession of Christianity and demand of others this faith in it have not 
brought maners so far as to exorcise devils. Many of them, like the believers 
in the Seer ofPrevorst,9 pride themselves far more on being on good terms 
with a riff-raff of ghosts and revering them, instead of chasing away and 
banning these lies of an anti-Christian and servile superstition. They show 
themselves to be equally inept at conveying wisdom and utterly incapable 
of performing great deeds of knowledge and science which should be their 
vocation and duty. Erudition is not yet science. While busying themselves 
at length with the mass of irrelevant externalities of faith, they remain, by 
contrast, in regard to the import and content [ Gthalt und Inhalt] of faith 
itself, all the more barrenly at a standstill with the name of the Lord Christ 
and deliberately scorn with invectives the development of the doctrine that 
is the foundation of the faith of the Christian Church. For the spiritual, let 
alone the thoughtful and scientific, expansion would interfere with, indeed 
would prohibit and erase, the self-conceit of the subjeCtive insistence on 
the obtuse fgtirtlost] assurance - barren of the good and rich only in evil 
fruits- that they are in possession of Christianity and own it exclusively 
themselves. - With a consciousness that could not be more definite, this 
spiritual expansion is distinguished in Scripture from mere faith in such a 
way that the latter becomes the tn4th only through the former. 'Rivtrs of 
living waters will flow', Christ says Oohn 7:38), 'from the body of whoever 
has faith in me.' These words are then immediately explained and specified 
in verse 39 that faith in the temporal, sensuous, present personality of 
Christ as such does nor achieve this; that he is not yet the truth as such. 
In the subsequent verse (39) faith is then funher specified [by saying) that 
Christ said this of the spirit whom those who btlievtdin him wtrt to rtctivt. 
For the Holy Spirit was not ytt thtrt, since Jesus was not ytt transfigured. 
The not-yet-transfigured shape of Christ, which is the immediate object 
of faith, is the personality that was then sensuously present in time or, 
which is the same content, that was afterwards represented as such. In that 
present moment, Christ himself revealed to his disciples orally his eternal 
nature and vocation for the reconciliation of God with himself and of 
human beings with him, the order of salvation and the ethical doetrine. 
The faith that the disciples had in him encompasses all this. Nevertheless, 
' Translarors" nore: Reference ro wmnambulisr and clairvoyant Friederike Hauffe, me subjeCt of Tht 
Stn- of Prn10m. DiKlosum About rht lnntr Lifo of Mtn 11nd rht Projmion of 11 Spiritwor/J into Ours 
(1819) by the Swabian pocr Jusrinus Kerner (sec Encyclopaedia Brirannica Online: www.search.eb. 
comleb/arriclc-904S161). 

Tht Encyclopedia 
this faith that did not lack in the strongest certainty is declared to be only 
a beginning, a conditional foundation that is as yet unfinished. Those 
who believed in this way have not yet rtctivtd the spirit. They must first 
receive it- receive the spirit [that is] the truth itself that comes later than 
the faith that leads to every truth. Those others, however, stop short at 
such certainty - a certainty that•is [only] the condition. But certainty, 
itself merely subjective, bears only the subjective fruit of formal assuranct, 
and therein that of conceit, slander and condemnation. In opposition to 
Scripture, they hold fast only in the certainty against the spirit which is the 
expansion of knowledge and only then the truth. 
This piousness shares that barrenness of basic scientific content, and 
basic spiritual content in general, with what it directly makes the object of 
its indictment and condemnation. Through its formal, abstract thinking, 
the enlightenment of the understanding has emptied religion of all content, 
just as that piousness had done by reducing faith to the shibboleth of'Lord, 
Lord.' Neither of them has the better of the O(her in this respect. And as 
they contentiously collide, there is no material on hand with respect to 
which they might come into contact with one another and could arrive at 
a common ground and possibility of bringing things to an investigation 
and, further, to knowledge and truth. Enlightened theology for its part 
has stood fast in its formalism, namely, of appealing to the frmiom of 
conscience, frttdom of thought, frudom of teaching, of appealing even to 
reason and science. Such freedom is, to be sure, the category of the infinitt 
right of spirit and the other, sptcific condition of truth in addition to the 
first condition, i.e. faith. But as for what sort of reasonable determinations 
and laws the true and free conscience might contain, what sort of conttnt-
free belief and thought might have and teach, they refrained from touching 
this material point. They have not moved beyond that formalism of the 
negative and beyond the freedom of filling out the freedom according to 
whim and opinion, such that it is altogether irrelevant what the content 
itself is. They also could not get near to any content, because the Christian 
community has to be and is still supposed to be united by the bond of 
a doctrine, a creed, whereas the generalities and abstractions of the stale, 
lifeless, rationalistic waters of the understanding do not permit what is 
specific to an intrinsically determined, developed Christian content and 
docrrine. By contrast, the others, insisting on the name 'Lord, Lord', frankly 
and freely scorn the fulfilment of faith by spirit, basic content and truth. 
Thus, to be sure, much dust has been stirred up - dust of conceit, 
spitefulness, and personality as well as empty generalities - but it is a dust 
cursed with sterility and unable to contain the basic matter itself. unable 

Th~ Encyclopedia 
to lead to the basic content and knowledge. - Philosophy could be content 
to have been left out of play. It finds itself outside the terrain of those 
presumptions - presumptions of personalities as well as those of abstract 
generalities-and, were it dragged onto such ground, it could have expected 
only things unpleasant and fruitless. 
As that deep and rich basic content disappeared from the greatest and 
absolute interest of human nature, and as religiosity, the pious together with 
the reflective, came to find the highest satisfaction in something without 
content, philosophy has become a contingent, subjective need. For both 
kinds of religiosity, those absolute interests have been set up - and, of 
course, set up by nothing other than a strictly formal mode of reasoning 
[.Rasonnemtnt] - in such a way that philosophy is no longer needed to 
satisfy them. Indeed, philosophy is deemed, and rightly so, a disturbance 
of that newly created contentment and such narrowed-down satisfaction. 
As a result, philosophy is entirely left over to the free need of the subject. 
No constraint of any kind is issued to it; rather, where this need is present, 
it has to steadfastly resist [others'] suspicions (of it) and admonitions to be 
cautious. It exists only as an inner necessity that is stronger than the subject, 
a necessity that tirelessly drives its spirit 'so that it may overcome' and may 
procure for reason's urges the satisfaction it deserves. Thus, far from being 
prompted by any son of authority, including religious authority, engaging 
in this science is instead declared superfluous and a dangerous or at least 
dubious luxury, and as a result it stands all the more freely on an interest in 
the basic matter and the truth alone. If. as Aristotle says, theory is what is 
most blesstd and the bm of the good [M~taph. XII7, 1072b 2.4), then those 
who partake of this pleasure know [wissm] what they possess in it, namely 
the satisfaction of the necessity of their spiritual nature. They can refrain 
from making demands on others regarding it and can leave them to their 
needs and the satisfactions they find for them. The pressing, yet unsolicited 
motivation to enter into the business of philosophy was considered above, 
namely how the motivation becomes noisier the less it is suited to take part 
in philosophy, so that the more fundamental, profounder participation in 
philosophy is more alone with itself and quieter towards what lies outside it. 
Vanity and superficiality are quickly finished with the business and driven 
to interrupt it in next to no time. But when a basic matter is great in itself 
and can be satisfied only through the long and arduous work of a complete 
development, seriousness about such a matter immerses itself for a long 
time in quiet preoccupation with it. 
The swift depletion of the second edition of this encyclopedic guide 
(which does not make the study of philosophy easy according to the sense 

Tht Encyclopedia 
27 
indicated above) has given me the satisfaction of seeing that, in addition 
to the clamouring of superficialicy and van icy, a quieter, more rewarding 
panicipation [in philosophy) has taken place, which I hope will now also 
be accorded this new edition. 
Berlin, 19 September 1830 

Introduction 
§ 1 
Philosophy lacks the advantage from which the other sciences benefit, 
namely the ability to pmuppost both its objtcts as immediately endorsed by 
representation of them and an acknowledged mtthod of knowing, which 
would determine its starting-point and progression. It is true that philos-
ophy initially shares its objects with religion. Both have the truth for their 
object, and more precisely the truth in the highest sense, in the sense that 
God and God alont is the truth. Moreover, both treat the sphere of finite 
things, the sphere of naturt and the h11man spirit, their relation to each 
other and to God as their truth. Philosophy thus may definitely presuppose 
a familiarity with its objects- indeed it must do so- as well as an interest in 
them from the outset, if only because chronologically speaking conscious-
ness produces for itself repmmtations of objects prior to generating conctpts 
of them. What is more, only by passing through the process of representing 
and by turning toruards it, does thinking spirit progress to knowing by way 
of thinking [dmkmdts Erkmnm] and to comprehending [Begreifm]. 
While engaged in thoughtful contemplation, however, it soon becomes 
apparent that such activity includes the requirement to demonstrate the 
ntcessity of its content, and to provt not only its being but, even more so, 
the determinations of its objects. The aforementioned familiarity with this 
content thus turns out to be insufficient, and to make or accept prtsup-
positiom or assuranm regarding it appears illegitimate. The difficulty of 
making a beginning, however, arises at once, since a beginning is somtthing 
immtdiatt and as such makes a presupposition, or rather it is itself just that. 
§2 
Generally speaking, philosophy may initially be defined as the thoughtful 
examination [denkmde Bttrachtung] of things. If, however, it is correct 
28 

TIN Encyclopedia 
2.9 
(as it probably is) that it is through thinking that human beings distinguish 
themselves from the animals, then everything human is human as a result 
of and only as a result of thinking. Now insofar as philosophy represents a 
peculiar way of thinking, in virtue of which thinking becomes knowing and 
a knowing that comprehends things [btgreiftndes Erktnnen], its thinking 
will be difftrtntfrom the thinking at work in everything human and which, 
indeed, is responsible for the humanity of all that is human, even though it 
is identical with the latter such that in itst/fthere is only one thinking. This 
distinction is tied up with the faa that the human content of consciousness 
which is grounded in thought does not at first apptar in tht form of thought, 
but rather as feeling, intuition, representation, i.e. forms that must be 
distinguished from thought as form. 
It is an old prejudice, indeed a triviality, that human beings set 
themselves apart from animals through thinking. While it may seem 
trivial to remind ourselves of such a longstanding belief, it must 
definitely seem strange that there should be a need for such a 
reminder. And yet this can be considered necessary given the 
prejudice of our time which separates fttling and thinking to such an 
extent that they are supposedly opposed or even inimical to one 
another, that feeling, in particular religious feeling, is contaminated 
and perverted, even annihilated, by thinking, and that religion and 
religiosity do not have their roots and proper place essentially in 
thinking. In this kind of separating it is forgotten that only human 
beings are capable of religion and that animals no more have religion 
than they have law and morality. 
· When the said separation of religion from thought is maintained, 
one tends to have in mind the kind of thinking that may be called 
thinking over [Nachdmktn], - rtfoctive thinking which has thoughts 
ptr st for its conttnt and brings them as such to consciousness. 
Negligence in knowing and heeding the distinction specifically 
formulated by philosophy in regard to thinking is responsible 
for generating the crudest ideas about philosophy and the 
recriminations against it. Since religion, law, and the ethical are 
properties of human beings alone, and, again, are so only because a 
human being is a thinking being, thinking has not been inactive at 
all in what is religious, right, and ethical - whether it be feeling and 
faith or representation: its activity and its products are prtsmt and 
contained therein. However, there is a difference between having such 
feelings and representations that are dtttrmintd and ptrmtated by 

30 
The Encyclopedia 
thought, and having thoughts about them. The thoughts about those 
forms of consciousness produced by thinking them over constitute 
the rubric under which reflection, formal reasoning [Rasonntmmt] 
and the like, and in the end even philosophy, are subsumed. 
In this connection, the claim has been made.- quite frequently 
under the influence of an erroneous understanding- that such 
thinking over is the condition or even the only way for us to attain a 
representation of and belief in the eternal and true. Thus, for 
instance, the mnaphysical proofi of the ~istmce of God (which are 
now somewhat obsolete) have been served up as evidence that- or as 
if- belief and conviction in the existence of God could essentially or 
even exclusively be caused only by familiarity with those proofs and 
the conviction produced by them. Assertions such as these would be 
equivalent to the contention that we would be incapable of eating, 
before we have acquired familiarity with the chemical, botanical, 
or zoological propenies of our nutrients, and that we would have 
to wait to digest, until we finished the study of anatomy and 
physiology. If this were so, the sciences in their fields, just as 
philosophy in irs own, would gain considerably in utility; indeed 
their utility would be elevated to an absolute and. universal 
indispensability; or rather. instead of being indispensable, none 
of them would exist. 
§3 
The content that fills our consciousness, of whatever kind it may be, makes 
up the tkterminacy of the feelings, intuitions, images, representations, of 
the ends, duties etc., and of the thoughts and concepts. Feeling, intuition, 
image, etc., are in this respect the forms of such content, a content which 
remains one and the same, whether it is felt, intuited, represented, willed, 
and whether it is merely felt, or felt and intuited, etc., together with an 
admixture of thoughts, or whether it is thought entirely without any such 
admixture. In any one of these forms, or as a mixture of several of them, the 
content is the object of consciousness. In this objectification, it so happens 
that the determinacies of these forms convert themselves into part of the 
content, such that with each of these forms a specific object seems to arise, 
and, what is in itself the same, can take on the look of a different comenr. 
Given that the determinacies offeeling, intuition, desire, volidon, 
etc., insofar as we are conscious of them, are usually called 
representations, it can be said quite generally that philosophy replaces 

Tht Encyclopedia 
31 
representations with thoughts and cattgorits, but more specifically 
with conctpts. Representations may generally be regarded as 
mttaphors of thoughts and concepts. By merely having 
representations, however, we are not yet familiar with the meaning 
they have for thinking, i.e. we .are not familiar with thtir thoughts 
and concepts. Conversely, it is one thing to have thoughts and 
concepts, and another to know [wissm] which representations, 
intuitions, feelings correspond to them. - One aspect of what is 
called tht uninttlligibi/ity of philosophy relates to this. In part, the 
difficulty consists in a certain inability, which is really merely a /adt 
of training, to think abstractly, i.e. to hold on w pure thoughts and 
to move among them. In our ordinary consciousness, thoughts are 
clothed in and combined with familiar sensuous and spiritual 
material, and when we think things over, reflect, or reason about 
them, we intermingle our feelings, intuitions, and representations 
with thoughts (in every sentence with a quite sensuous content -
as for instance in 'This leaf is green' -, categories such as bting, 
singularity are already part of the mix). But it is something else to 
make the unmixed thoughts themselves our object. -The other 
aspect of the unintelligibility of philosophy is due to the impatience 
of wanting to have before oneself in the form of a representation 
what exists in our consciousness in the form of a thought and a 
concept. We sometimes hear people say that they do not know 
[wissm] what they are supposed to think in connection with a 
concept they have grasped. When it comes to concepts, nothing 
further needs to be thought than the very concept itself. What those 
people mean to express, however, is the yearning for some familiar, 
cu"tnt rtprtsmtation [of things]; when deprived of its manner of 
representing, consciousness feels as if it had lost the ground in which 
it is otherwise so firmly rooted and at home. When it finds itself 
transposed into the pure region of concepts, it no longer knows 
[wtif.?] whtrt in the world it is.- As a result, those writers, preachers, 
speakers, etc., are regarded as the most inttlligibk who tell their 
readers or listeners things which they knew already by heart: things 
which are familiar to them and st/froidmt. 
§4 
In relation to our ordinary consciousness, philosophy would first have 
to explain, or even awaken, tht nttd for the manntr of knowing 

32 
Tht Encyclopedia 
[Erkmntniswtist] peculiar to it. In relation to the objects of religion, how-
ever, and truth generaJiy, it would have to prove its capacity to know them by 
irs own lights. In relation to the appearance of a diffirmce from the rtligious 
representations, it would have to justify its own diverging determinations. 
§5 
For the purpose of reaching a preliminary agreement about the difference 
mentioned above and the insight connected with it, namely, that the true 
content of our consciousness is prtstrt~td in its translation into the form 
of thought and the concept, and indeed only then placed in its proper 
light, the reader may be reminded of an old prejudict, namely that in order 
to learn what is true in objects and events, even feelings and intuitions, 
opinions, representations, etc., thinking them ovtr is required. At any rate, 
thinking them over has at least this effect, namely, that of transforming the 
feelings, representations, etc., into thoughts. 
Due to the fact that philosophy merely lays claim to thinking as 
constituting the proper form of its business, and the fact that each 
human being by nature possesses the capacity for thinking, 
abstraction is made from the difference referred to in § 3, and thus 
there comes to pass the opposite of what was mentioned above 
concerning the complaint about the unintelligibility of philosophy. 
This science frequently suffers contemptuous treatment even by 
those who have not taken the trouble to study it but fancy 
themselves capable of untkrstanding without further ado what 
philosophy is about, and of philosophizing and passing judgments 
on philosophy, simply on the basis of an ordinary education, and 
religious feelings in particular. People admit that one must study the 
other sciences in order to be f.tmiliar with them, and that one is 
entitled to pass judgment on them only by virtue of such familiarity. 
People admit that in order to manufacture a shoe one must have 
learnt and practised shoemaking, despite the fact that everyone 
possesses the requisite model for it in his own feet, as well as 
the required aptitude for the task in his own hands. Only for 
philosophizing are such study, learning, and effort supposed not to 
be a requirement. -This convenient opinion has in recent times 
received confirmation through the doctrine of immediate knowing 
[Wissm], or knowledge through intuition. 

The Encyclopedia 
§6 
On the ocher hand, it is just as important that philosophy come co under· 
stand that its content [lnhalt] is none other than the basic content [ Gehalt] 
that has originally been produced and reproduces itself in the sphere of 
the living spirit, a content turned into a worltl. namely the outer and inner 
world of consciousness, or that its content is actuality [die Wirklichkeit]. We 
call the immediate consciousness of this content experience. Any sensible 
consideration of the world discriminates between what in the broad realm 
of outer and inner existence [Dasein] is merely appearance, transitory, and 
insignificant, and what truly merits the name 'actuality'. Since philosophy 
differs only in form from the other ways of becoming conscious of this 
content that is one and the same, its agreement with actuality and experi· 
ence is a necessity. Indeed, this agreement may be regarded as at least an 
external measure of the truth of a philosophy, just as it is to be viewed as the 
highest goal of the philosophical science to bring about the reconciliation 
of the reason that is conscious of itself with the reason that exists, or with 
aaualicy, through the knowledge of this agreement. 
In the Preface to my Philosophy of Right, p. XIX, the following statement 
can be found: 
What is rational is actual, 
And what is actual. is rational. 
These simple sentences have seemed striking to some and have been 
received with hostility even by those who would not want to be 
regarded as lacking in philosophy, let alone religion. It will be 
unnecessary to turn to religion for support for these sentences, since 
its doarines of the divine governance of the world express the above 
propositions only too clearly. With regard to their philosophical 
meaning, however, we may presuppose that the reader is sufficiently 
educated to know [wissen] not only that God is actual- that he is 
what is most aaual, indeed that he alone is what is truly actual -, 
but also, insofar as the merely formal difference is concerned, that 
existence [Dasein] in general is partly appearance and only partly 
actuality. In ordinary life, we may accidentally call every idea, 
error, evil, and the like, actual, as well as every concrete existence 
[.&istmz), crippled and transitory though it may be. But even for 
someone possessing an ordinary sensitivity, a contingent concrete 
existence [.&istenz) will not be deemed to deserve the emphatic 
designation of being actual; a contingent concrete existence has no 

34 
Tht Encyclopedia 
greater value than something that is possiblt and which may just as 
well not txist as exist. But when I spoke of actuality, it should have 
been evident in what sense 1 am using this expression, since 1 
treated actuality in my more extensive Logic, too. There 1 directly 
distinguished it not only from what is contingent (which, after 
all, exists as well), but also and more specifically and precisely 
from existence [Dastin], concrete existence [Existmz], and other 
determinations. -The notion of the actuality of tht rational seems 
immediately to come up against two objections: one, that ideas and 
ideals are nothing more than chimeras and philosophy a system of 
such phantasms, and the other that, conversely, ideas and ideals are 
much too exquisite to be actual, or again too impotent to acquire for 
themselves the status of something actual. But the severance of 
actuality from the idea is popular particularly with that kind of 
understanding which takes the dreams of its abstractions for 
something true, and which insists pretentiously on the 'oughi which 
it likes to prescribe especially in the sphere of politics - as if the 
world had been waiting for this to learn how it ought to be, but is 
not. Were it as it ought to be, what would the precociousness of 
such 'ought' come to? When irs 'ought' is directed against trivial, 
superficial and transitory objects, arrangements, situations, and so 
forth (that is to say, what may perhaps be of relative importance to 
certain circles for a period of time), then this understanding may 
indeed be right to find many things that are not in accord with 
universal and correct standards. Who would not have enough good 
sense to see much around him that is indeed not as it should be? Bur 
this cleverness is in the wrong when it fancies itself to have the 
interest of the philosophical science at heart with such objects and 
their 'ought'. Philosophical science deals solely with the idea which 
is not so impotent as to demand that it merely ought to be actual 
without being so and, hence, it deals with an actuality of which 
those objects, arrangements, situations, etc., are only the superficial 
exterior. 
§7 
Insofar as the thinking ovtr of things in general contains the principle of 
philosophy (including the sense of a philosophy's starting-point), and after 
it has newly blossomed in its indeptndmct in recent times (i.e. after the 
Lutheran reformation), the name of philosophy has been given to all those 

Th~ Encyclopedia 
35 
kinds ofknowledge [Wissm) that occupy themselves with the knowledge of 
fixed measures and what is univmal [das A//g~in~J in the sea of empirical 
paniculars, and with what is n~c~ssary, such as the laws governing the 
seemingly chaotic and infinite mass of contingent things. For, contrary to 
the philosophical beginnings among the Greeks, this renewed thinking has 
not held on to what is abstract only, but from the very start has thrown itself 
equally upon the seemingly immense material of the world of appearance. 
It has thus derived its content from its own intuition and perception of 
the outer and inner world, from its immediate rapport with nature and its 
immediate rapport with the spirit and the human heart. 
The principle of exp~rimu contains the infinitely important 
determination that human beings must themselves be involv~d when 
taking up a given content and holding it to be true, more precisely 
that they must find such content to be united and in unison with th~ 
m1ainty ofth~ms~lves. They must be involved in it, whether through 
their external senses only or with their deeper spirit and the essential 
consciousness of their respective self. -This is the same principle 
that in our time has been called faith, immediate knowledge, the 
revelation coming from outside and in particular from one's own 
inner being. We designate those sciences that have been called 
philosophies as ~mpirical sciences due to their taking their point of 
departure from experience. But what in essence they aim at and 
produce are laws, gen~ral propositions, a theory, i.e. the thoughts of 
what there is. Thus N~ton's physics has been called a philosophy 
of nature, while Hugo Grotius, for instance, by cataloguing the 
historical interactions of peoples among themselves, and by relying 
on ordinary reasoning, has developed general principles, a theory 
that could be called a philosophy of imernationallaw. - Even today 
the name of philosophy retains this general connotation among the 
English, and Newton continues to enjoy the fame of being the 
greatest philosopher. Down to the very pricing tables used by 
'instruments-makers', those instruments that are not specifically 
classified under the columns of the magnetic or electric gadgets, 
such as the thermometers, barometers, etc., are called philosophical 
instruments; though, frankly, only thinking rather than some 
combination of wood, iron, etc.10 should properly be called an 
10 The journal rditrd by Thomson, too, has t~ titk 'Annals of PhilrMphy, or Magazine of G~t,is"J. 
Minmz/4o. M«hania, Nllttmz/ History, AgriaJtu", tmti t~ Am'. From this, everybody may form 
rheir own ilka of the nature of the materials that are ~re callrd philosophi(lll - Among the 

The Encyclopedia 
instrument of philosophy. In particular, the science of political 
economics, which has emerged in recent times, is also called 
philosophy, something we usually call rational state economy, or 
perhaps intelkrtual state economy. 11 
§8 
As satisfactory as this [empirical] knowledge may initially be in its sphere, 
there is, in the first place, yet another domain of objects that are not contained 
therein, namely freedom, spirit, and God. The reason why they cannot be 
found in that sphere is not that they are supposedly not a part of experience; 
they are not experienced by way of the senses, it is true, but whatever is 
present in consciousness is being experienced - this is even a tautological 
sentence. Rather, they are not found in that sphere, because in terms of 
their contmt these objects immediately present themselves as infinite. 
There is an old saying customarily attributed to Aristotk (and falsely, 
because it allegedly expresses the standpoint of his philosophy), 
namely that nihil est in inteUectu, quod non fomt in smsu; - there 
is nothing in the understanding that has not been in sensation, in 
experience. It must be considered a misunderstanding. if speculative 
philosophy were to refuse to accept this proposition. It would, 
however, just as much have to assert the opposite, namely that nihil 
est in sensu, quod non fomt in intelkctu and assert it in the quite 
general sense that nous, or, in its deeper determination, spirit, is the 
advenisemems of newly published books I ~cendy found rhe following in an English newspaper: 
'The Art of Preserving the Hair, on Philosophical Prindp/n, neady printed in post 8., price 7 sh.' -
Chemical or physiological proadures, ere., ase what is presumably meant by philosophical principles 
of preserving one's hair. 
11 The expression 'philosophical principles' is often used by English scuesmen when they refer to 
general principles of national economic.~. even in public speeches. During the 1815 session of 
Parliament (on 1 February) Brougham, while delivering rhe address in reply to the King's Speech, 
expressed himself as follows, speaking of 'the philosophical principles of free trade rhat an: worthy 
of a sr.nesman - for no doubt rhey are philosophical - on rhe acceptance of which His Majnry has 
congrarulared parliament today'. - It was not only this member of the opposition, however, who 
used such words. At the Annual Dinner of the london General Shipowners' Sociecy (which rook 
place during rhe same month), pre.sided over by the Prime Minister, the Earl of liverpool. with 
the junior minister Canning and the Paymaster General of rhe Army, Sir Charles l.ong at his side, 
Ginning, responding ro a roast drunk to him, answered rhus: 'There bas recendy begun a period 
in which rhe ministers enjoyed rhe power ro apply rhe right maxims ro the administration of rhis 
counuy based on a profound philotophy.' - In whatever way English philosophy may differ from 
German philosophy, it is always a pleasure to see the nasne of philosophy still honoured by English 
members of His Majescy's government, even while this nasne is elsewhere used merely as a nick!lame 
and as an insult or ro refer ro something hateful. 

Tht Encyclopedia 
37 
cause of the world, and more specifically (see § 2 above) in the sense 
that the feelings concerning what is right, ethical, or religious are 
feelings and, consequendy, that they are the experience of a content 
that has its roots and its seat in thinking alone. 
§9 
Stcond, however, subjective reason demands further satisfaction in terms of 
form. This form is the necessity in general (c£ § 1). Regarding the scientific 
manner mentioned above [§ 7], the universal that it contains (such as the 
genus, etc.) is on the one hand left indeterminate for itself and is not 
intrinsically connected to the particular [das Besondnt]. Instead, both are 
external and contingent in relation to each other, as are likewise the com-
bined particularities vis-a-vis each other in their reciprocal relationship. On 
the other hand, the starting-points are throughout immtdiacies, accidental 
findings, pmuppositions. In neither respect is justice being done to the form 
of necessity. The process of thinking over that is directed towards satisfying 
this need is genuinely philosophical thinking, speculativt thinking. This 
process of thinking things over is both the samt as and differmt from the 
former process of thinking them over and, as such, it possesses in addition 
to the shared forms of thinking its own peculiar forms, of which the concept 
is the general form. 
To that extent, the relationship of the speculative to the other 
sciences is merely this, namely that the former does not simply set 
aside the empirical content of the latter, but instead acknowledges 
and uses it; that it likewise acknowledges and utilizes as its own 
content the universal produced by these sciences, such as their 
laws, genera, etc.; and furthermore that it introduces into those 
categories others as well and validates them. In this respect, the 
difference between them concerns solely the said modification of 
the categories. Speculative logic contains the former logic and 
metaphysics, preserves the same forms of thought, the same laws and 
objects, but at the same time in doing so it develops them further 
and transforms them with the help of additional categories. 
The conctpt in its speculative sense must be distinguished from 
what is customarily called a 'concept'. It is only with reference to rhe 
latter one-sided sense of the term that it has been asserted again and 
again a thousand times and been made a prejudice that the infinite 
cannot be grasped by means of concepts. 

Tlu Encyclopedia 
§ 10 
The thinking operative in the philosophical manner of knowing needs to 
be understood in its necessity. Equally, its capacity to produce knowledge 
of the absolute objects needs to be justified. Such understanding, however, 
is itself a case of philosophical knowledge that can accordingly fall within 
philosophy alone. A preliminary explica£ion would thus have to be an 
unphilosophical one and could not be more than a web of presuppositions, 
assurances, and formal reasoning, a web, that is, of casual assertions against 
which the opposite could be maintained with equal right. 
It is one of the main viewpoints of the Critical philosophy that, prior 
to setting about to acquire knowledge of God, the essence of things, 
etc., the faculty of knowing itself would have to be examined first in 
order to see whether it is capable of achieving this; that one must 
first come to know the instmmmt, before one undertakes the work 
that is to be produced by means of it. For should the instrument be 
insufficient, all the effort would then have been expended in vain. -
This thought has seemed so piAusibk that it has elicited the greatest 
admiration and acclaim and drawn knowing away from its interest 
in the objects and work on them and drawn it back to itself, i.e. to 
the formal aspect. If, however, we do not delude ourselves with 
words, it is easy to see that other tools may very well be examined 
and evaluated in ways other than undertaking the actual work for 
which they are determined. But the examination of knowing cannot 
take place other than by way of knowing. With this so-called 
instrument, examining it means nothing other than acquiring 
knowledge of it. But to want to know before one knows is as 
incoherent as the Scholastic's wise resolution to learn to swim, before 
he ventured into the water. 
Reinho/d,11 who recognized the confusion that prevails in 
beginning in this way, proposed as a remedy that one make a 
preliminary start with a hypothetical and problematic kind of 
philosophizing and continue in this vein- Heaven knows how [man 
wtif/ nicht wie] -until somehow at some point along the line it 
would emerge that in this way one had arrived at the primordial 
truth. Looked at more closely, this would come down to the usual 
procedure, namely analysis of an empirical foundation or a 
provisional assumption that has been put into a definition. 
11 Mold~nhaurr-Michel: Karl Leonhard Reinhold. &itriigt zur kichrnn Obmichr tin Zusrllmin tk>' 
Philo1ophi' b'im Anfong' tin 19. jahrhundms. Hamburg. 18o1. 

The Encyclopedia 
39 
Unmistakably, it is right to declare the usual manner of working 
with presuppositions and provisional assumptions a hypothetical 
and problematic procedure. StiU, while right, this observation does 
not alter the character of such a procedure, bur ins read immediately 
articulates the insufficiency of it. 
§ 11 
What philosophy aspires to may be further specified in the following way. In 
feeling and intuiting, the spirit has sensory things for objects; it has images 
in imagining, purposes when it wills, and so forth. But, in opposition, or 
merely in contradistinction to those forms of its existence and its objects, it 
also seeks to satisfy irs loftiest inwardness, namely thinking, and to secure 
thinking as its object. In this way, spirit comes to itselfin the deepest sense 
of the word, for its principle, irs unalloyed selfhood, is thinking. Bur while 
going about irs business it so happens that thinking becomes entangled 
in contradictions. It loses itself in rhe fixed non-identity of its thoughts 
and in the process does not attain itself bur instead remains caught up 
in its opposite. The higher aspiration of chinking goes against this result 
produced by thinking satisfied with merely understanding [verstfindiges 
Denken] and is grounded in the fact that thinking does not let go of itself, 
chat even in this conscious loss of being at home with itself [Bcisichsein], it 
remains true to itself, 'so that it may overcome', and in thinking bring about 
the resolution of its own contradictions. 
The realization that the dialectic makes up the very nature of 
thinking and that as understanding it is bound to land in the 
negative of itself, i.e. in contradiction, constitutes a cardinal aspect 
of logic. Despairing over its inability to achieve by its own lights 
the resolution of the contradiction into which it has placed itself, 
thinking returns m the resolutions and appeasements chat have 
become part of the spirit in its ocher modes and forms. In the course 
of this return, however, thinking did nor need to fall into the 
misology- a phenomenon Plato had already witnessed- of acting 
polemically against itself as happens when the so-called immediate 
knowing is declared to be the exclusive form in which we may 
become conscious of the truth. 
§12 
The origin of philosophy, emerging from the aspiration mentioned above, 
takes irs point of ekparture from experience, i.e. from the immediate 

The Encyclopedia 
consciousness engaged in formal reasoning [riisonniermtks Bewuftsein]. 
Aroused by this stimulus, thinking essentially reacts by elevating itself above 
the natural, sensory, and formally reasoning consciousness and into its own 
unmixed element. In this way, it at first takes up a self-distancing, negatiw 
relationship towards that point of depanure. It rhus finds satisfaction, for 
the time being, within itself. i.e. in the idea of the universal essence of these 
appearances, an idea that may be more or less abstract (such as the absolute, 
God). Conversely, the empirical sciences provide the stimulus to conquer 
the form in which the wealth of their content presents itself as something 
merely immediate and ad hoc, a multiplicity of items placed side by silk 
one another and thus generally contingent, and to elevate this content to 
necessity. This stimulus tears thinking away from that universality and the 
implicitly [an sich] assured satisfaction and impels it to the tkvelopmmt [of 
the form and content] from out of itself. Such development consists on the 
one hand merely in taking up the content and its given determinations 
and at the same time bestowing upon them, on the other hand, the shape 
of a content that emerges purely in accordance with the necessity of the 
subject matter itself, i.e. a shape that emerges freely in the sense of original 
thinking. 
The relationship of immediacy and mediation within consciousness 
will have to be discussed explicitly and in detail below. At this 
point, it suffices to point our that, although both moments appear 
to be distinct, neither of them may be absent and they form an 
inseparable combination.- Thus, the knowledge [Wissen] of God, 
like that of anything supersensory, essentially contains an elevation 
above sensory feeling or intuiting. It accordingly entails a negative 
stance towards its initial object and therein a mediation as well. For 
mediation means to make a beginning and then to have proceeded 
to a second item, such that this second item is the way it is only 
insofar as one has arrived at it by starting with something that is an 
other over against it. This does not mean, however, that the 
knowledge [ Wissm] of God is for all that any less independent 
vis-a-vis that empirical side; to the contrary, it achieves its 
independence essentially by means of this negation and elevarion. If 
mediation is made a condition and is emphasized in this one-sided 
fashion, then one can say (although it does not say much) that 
philosophy owes its initial origin to experience (the a posterion) - for 
thinking is indeed essentially the negation of something immediately 
on hand- just as eating is indebted to food, since without the latter 

Tht' Encyclopedia 
41 
one would not be able to eat. Note, however, that in this connection 
eating is represented as ungrateful, for it consumes that to which it 
owes its being. Taken in this sense, thinking is no less ungrateful. 
However, the immt'diacy that belongs properly to thinking and 
that is reflected into itself and thus mediated in itself (i.e. the a 
prion) is univmality, its being-at-home-with-itself [Btisichsein] in 
general. In this universality, it finds satisfaction within itself. and in 
this respect the indifference against particularization, and hence 
against its development, is innate. Religion also possesses this same 
intensive kind of satisfaction and bliss, whether it be more or less 
developed or uneducated, whether it has advanced to scientific 
consciousness or been kept alive in the heart and a nai've son of 
faith. When thinking remains at a standstill with the universality of 
ideas, as is unavoidable in the case of the first philosophies (think of 
being in the Eleatic school, bt'coming in Heraclitus, etc.), then it is 
rightfully accused of formalism. Even in the case of a more developed 
philosophy it can happen that only abstract propositions or 
determinations are taken up (such as, for instance, that everything 
is one in the absolute, that there is an identity of the subjective and 
the objective), and are merely repeated when we come to the 
particulars. As f.u as the first abstract universality of thinking is 
concerned, it makes very good and sound sense to say that 
philosophy owes its developmmt to experience. On the one hand, 
the empirical sciences do not stand still with the perception of 
the details of the appearances; instead, by thinking, they have 
readied this material for philosophy by discovering its universal 
determinations, genera, and laws. In this way, they prepare this 
panicularized content so that it can be taken up into philosophy. On 
the other hand, they thus make it necessary for thinking to proceed 
to these concrete determinations by itself. The process of taking up 
this content, in which thinking sublates its mere givenness and the 
immediacy that still clings to it, is at the same time a process of 
thinking developing out of itself. Insofar as philosophy owes its 
development to the empirical sciences, it bestows upon their 
contents the most essential shape of the freedom of thought (i.e. the 
shape of the a priorz) and, instead of relying on the testimony of 
their findings and the experienced fact, provides their contents with 
the corroboration of being necmary, such that the fact becomes the 
depiction and the replication of the original and completely 
independent activity of thinking. 

Th~ Encyclopedia 
§ 13 
The origin and development of philosophy as a history of this science is 
portrayed in the peculiar shape of an ~xt~mal history. This shape bestows 
upon the developmental stages of the idea the form of contingent succession 
and mere divmity of the principles and their elaborations in philosophies 
of them. The architect of this work of millennia, however, is the one 
living spirit whose thinking nature it is to become conscious of what it 
is, and, in having rhus become an object, to be at the same time already 
elevated above it and to be in itself a higher stage. In part, the history of 
philosophy presents only one philosophy at different stages of its unfolding 
throughout the various philosophies that make their appearance. In part, 
it also shows that the specific principks each one of which formed the basis 
of a given system are merely branches of one and the same whole. The latest 
philosophy, chronologicaUy speaking, is the result of all those that precede 
it and must therefore contain the principles of all of them. This is why, if 
it is philosophy at all, it is the most developed, richest and most concrete 
philosophy. 
When dealing with what seem to be so many divm~ philosophies 
one must distinguish the univmal and the particular according 
to their proper determinations. If the universal is taken in irs 
formal aspect and set alongsitk the particular, then it, roo, 
becomes something particular. Such a procedure would strike us 
automatically as inappropriate and inept in the case of objects of 
everyday life, such as when someone were to ask for fruit and then 
rejected cherries, pears, and grapes simply because they are cherries, 
pears, and grapes, but not fruit. When it comes to philosophy, 
however, we allow ourselves to justify its rejection on the grounds 
that philosophies are so diverse and that each one of them is only one 
philosophy, not the philosophy; as if cherries were not fruit as well. 
It also happens that a philosophy whose principle is the universal is 
placed alongside one whose principle is particular, or even alongside 
doctrines that assert that there is no philosophy at all, in the sense . 
that both are merely diffirent aspects of philosophy, just as iflight 
and darkness were to be called two difforent kinds of light. 
§ 14 
The same development of thinking that is portrayed in the history of phi-
losophy is also poruayed in philosophy itself. only freed from its historical 

The Encyclopedia 
43 
externalicy, purely in the element of thinking. Free and genuine thought is 
concrete in itself, and as such it is an idea, and in its full universality the 
idea, or the absolu~. The science of the latter is essentially a systnn, since 
the true insofar as it is concrete exists only through unfolding itself in itself, 
collecting and holding itself together in a unicy, i.e. as a totality. Only by 
discerning and determining its distinctions can it be the necessity of them 
and the freedom of the whole. 
A philosophizing without a systnn can be nothing scientific. Apart 
from the fact that such philosophizing expresses by itself more of 
a subjective outlook, it is also random in terms of its content. A 
particular content is justified solely as a moment of the whole. 
When separated from it, it represents an unjustified presupposition 
or a subjective certaincy. Many philosophical writings limit 
themselves to expressing in this way merely attitudes [Gesinnuugen] 
or opinions. - By a system one wrongly understands a philosophy 
built on a narrowly circumscribed principle distinct from other such 
principles; contrary to this, however, it is a principle of any genuine 
philosophy that it contain all particular principles within itself. 
§ 15 
Each of the pam of philosophy is a philosophical whole, a circle coming to 
closure within itself, but in each of its parts the philosophical idea exists in 
a particular determinacy or element. The individual circle, simply because 
it is in itself a totality, also breaks through the boundary of its element and 
founds a further sphere. The whole thus presents itself as a circle of circles 
each of which is a necessary moment, so that the system of its distinctive 
elements makes up the idea in its entirety, which appears equally in each 
one of them. 
§ 16 
As an encyclopedia, this science will not be presented in a detailed develop-
ment ofits particular divisions [Besonderung].lt has to be limited instead to 
the starting-points and the fundamental concepts of the particular sciences. 
How much of the particular parts is required to constitute a 
particular science is indeterminate insofar as a part is not merely a 
singular moment, but must itself represent a totalicy in order to be 

44 
Th~ Encyclopedia 
· something true. Thus, the whole of philosophy constitutes truly on~ 
science, but it may also be viewed as a whole made up of several 
particular sciences. -A philosophical encyclopedia distinguishes 
itself from other, ordinary encyclopedias in that the latter are meant 
to be an aggr~gau of sciences that have been included in an ad hoc 
and empirical fashion. Some of these merely bear the name of a 
science but are in reality a mere collection of data. Because sciences 
of this kind have been taken up extraneously, the unity into which 
they are brought together in such an aggregate is itself likewise 
atraneous, i.e. -an arrangement. For this reason, such an 
arrangement must remain a provisional attnnpt and will always 
display unsuitable sides, especially since its materials are themselves 
of a contingent nature. - So in addition to the fact that a 
philosophical encyclopedia excludes (1) mere aggregates of data (as 
philology, for instance, seems at first glance to be), it likewise and a 
fortiori excludes (2) those based on mere caprice (such as, for 
instance, heraldry); sciences of the latter sort are positive through and 
through. (3) Other sciences are called positive as well. They, however, 
have a rational basis and starting-point. This part of them belongs 
to philosophy, whereas their positive side remains peculiar to them. 
The positive element of the sciences comes in several forms. First, 
what is in itself a rational starting-point passes over into something 
contingent due to the fact that they have to trace the universal back 
down to empirical singu/arity and actuality. In this field of the 
changeable and the accidental it is not the concept but only reasons 
[ Griinde] that can be appealed to. Jurisprudence, for instance, or the 
system of direct and indirect taxation, require definitive, exact 
decisions which lie outside the determinauness in-and-for-itu/f of 
·the concept. They therefore admit of a wide margin of discretion 
that may lead to one result for one reason and a different result 
for another, but is not capable of a final certain determination. 
Similarly, when pursued down to its individual details, the idea of 
nature fades away into contingencies. Thus the history of nature, 
geography. medicine, etc., end up with determinations of concrete 
existence and with species and genera that are determined by 
external coincidence and playfulness rather than by reason. History 
belongs here as well, insofar as its essence is the idea, while its 
appearance unfolds in contingency and in a field of arbitrariness. 
Second, sciences such as these are also positive, insofar as they do not 
acknowledge that their determinations are.finiu. Nor do they point 

The Encyclopedia 
45 
up where these determinations, together with their entire sphere, 
make the transition into a higher sphere. Instead, they assume those 
determinations to be unqualifiedly valid. Connected with this 
finitude of the form (the earlier point concerned the finitude of the 
maurial) is the finitude of the epistemological ground, which draws 
partly on formal reasoning, partly on feeling, belief, the authority 
of others, in general the authority of inner or outer imuition. 
Philosophies that want to base themselves on anthropology, facts 
of consciousness, inner intuition or outer experience belong in 
this group as well. To add one more thing, it may also be the case 
that only the form of the scientific presentation is empirical, but a 
meaningful imuition has ordered what is otherwise mere appearance 
in a way that it accords with the inner sequence of the concept. It 
is characteristic of such an empirical presentation that, due to the 
opposition and manifoldness of the juxtaposed phenomena, the 
extraneous and contingent circumstances of their conditions sublate 
themselves, so that the universal then comes before the mind. - In 
this way, a sensible [sinnige] experimental physics, or history, etc., 
will present the rational science of nature and of human affairs in an 
external image that mirrors the concept. 
§ 17 
As far as the beginning that philosophy has to make is concerned, in general 
it seems to start like the other sciences with a subjective presupposition, 
namely a particular object, such as space, number, etc., except that here 
thinking would have to be made the object of thinking. And yet, it is 
thinking's free act of placing itself at that standpoint where it is for itself 
and thus gmerates and provides its own object for itself Furthermore, this 
standpoint, which thus appears to be an immediate one, must transform 
itself into a result within the science itself, and indeed into its final result 
in which the science recaptures its beginning and returns to itself. In this 
way, philosophy shows itself to be a sphere that circles back into itself and 
has no beginning in the sense that other sciences do. Hence, its beginning 
has a relationship merely to the subject who resolves to philosophize, but 
not to the science as such. Or, which comes to the same thing, the concept 
of the science and hence its first concept - which because it is the first 
contains the separation whereby thinking is the object for a seemingly 
external, philosophizing subject - must be grasped by the science itself. 
This is even its sole purpose, activity. and goal, namely m attain the 

The Encyclopedia 
concept of its concept, returning to itself and attaining satisfaction in t~e 
process. 
§ 18 
Just as it is not possible to give someone a preliminary, general represen-
tation of philosophy, since only the science as a whole presents the idea, 
so also its division into parts can be comprehended only on the basis of 
this, the idea. Like the idea, the division that must be derived from it is 
something anticipated. The idea, however, proves to be the thinking that is 
utterly identical with itself. At the same time, it is the activity of opposing 
itself to itself in order to be for itself and solely by itself in this other. So 
the science falls into three pam: 
I. Logic, i.e. the science of the idea in and for itself, 
II. Philosophy of nature as the science of the idea in its otherness, 
Ill. Philosophy of spirit as the idea returning back to itself from its 
otherness. 
In§ 15 above, mention was made of the fact that the differences between the 
particular philosophical sciences are merely determinations of the idea itself 
and that it is the latter alone that presents itself in these several elements. 
What is recognized in nature is not something other than the idea. It is just 
that in nature the idea is in the form of externa/ization, just as in spirit the 
very same idea exists as being-for-itself and as coming to be in and for itself 
A determination such as this in which the idea appears is at the same time 
a fluid moment. Thus, the individual science is just as much this: to know 
its content as a positively existing [seiendJ object, as well as knowing therein 
immediately of its transition to a higher sphere. The rtpresmtation of the 
division into parts is thus incorrect insofar as it sets the particular parts or 
sciences alongside one another, as if they were merely static components 
with substantive distinctions, similar to species. 

PART I 
Science of Logic 
Preliminary conception 
§ 19 
Logic is the science of the ptm idea, i.e. the idea in the abstract element of 
thinking. 
The same proviso that holds generally for the concepts prefacing the 
philosophy - namely, that they are determinations drawn from and 
subsequent to the survey of the whole - also holds for this as well as 
other determinations contained in this preliminary conception. 
It can indeed be said that logic is the science of thinking, of its 
deumzinations and laws. However, thinking as such constitutes only 
the universal determinateness or the element in which the idea exists 
qua logical. The idea is thinking not insofar as the latter is formal, 
but insofar as it is the self-developing totality of its distinctive 
determinations and laws, which it gives itself and does not already 
have and find within itself. 
Logic is the most difficult science in that it has to do not with 
intuitions -and not even with abstract sensory representations 
as in geometry - but with pure abstractions. It requires a certain 
strength and versatility to retreat into pure thought, to hold on to it 
steadfastly and to move about in it. On the other hand, logic could 
be considered the easiest science, because its content is nothing but 
one's own thinking and its familiar determinations, and these 
are at once the simpkst and the elementary sort of determinations. 
They are also what is most familiar, namely being, nothing, etc., 
determinateness, magnitude, etc., being-in-itself, being-for-itself, 
one, many, etc. This familiarity with them, however, makes the 
study of logic even harder. On the one hand, it is readily held to be 
not worth the effort to occupy oneself with such familiar things and, 
on the other, the point is to become familiar with them in a way that 
47 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
is entirely different from, indeed even opposed to, the way one is 
already. 
The ustfolness of logic concerns the relationship to the subject, 
namely, the extent to which the subject [thereby] provides himself 
with a certain education for other purposes. His education through 
studying logic consists in acquiring practice in thinking, since this 
science is a thinking of thinking, and in getting thoughts into his 
head [precisely] as thoughts. - However, insofar as the logical 
dimension [das Logischt] constitutes rhe absolute form of the truth 
and even more than that, the pure truth itself, it is something 
completely different from anything merely useful. Bur just as the 
most excellent, the freest and the most self-reliant things are also the 
most useful, so logic, too, may be understood in this way. Seen in 
this light, its usefulness must be deemed different from the merely 
formal exercise of thinking. 
Addititm 1. The first question is, what is the object of our science? The simplest 
and most inteUigible answer to this question is that the tntth is its object. Truth 
is a grand word and an even grander thing. If someone's spirit and mind arc- still 
healthy, his heart must leap at once at the thought of this word. But then the 
'but' immediately surfaces, namely whether we are capable of knowing the truth. 
An incommensurability seems to obtain between us as imperfect humans and the 
truth as it exists in and for itself, and the question arises as to the bridge between 
the finite and the infinite. God is the truth; how are we to know him? The vinues 
of humility and modesty seem to conOict with such an undenaking. - However, 
one also asks whether the truth can be known, merely to find a justification for 
trudging on in the banality of one's finite ends. Such humility is not wonh much. 
Such language as 'How am I, a poor earthly worm, ro know the truth?' is a thing 
of the past. Its place has been taken by arrogance and smugness, and some have 
fancied themselves to be immediately in possession of the uuth. - Our yotith 
has been persuaded that they possess the truth (in religious and ethical matters) 
without further ado. In particular, it has been said in this context that all adults 
are wooden and fossilized and immersed in untruth. The dawn has appeared to 
the young people, so they say, but the older world is stuck in the muddle and 
morass of the everyday. In this context, the special sciences have been designated 
something that must indeed be acquired, but only as a means for the external 
purposes of life. Here, then, it is not modesty that holds off from knowledge and 
from the study of the truth, but instead the conviction that one already possesses 
the truth in and for itsel[ The older generation does indeed pin its hopes on the 
young, for it is they who are supposed to keep the world and science advancing. 
But this hope is conferred upon the young only insofar as they do not remain as 
they are, but take on the bitter labour of the spirit. 
There is yet another brand of modesty about the truth. This is the seeming 
nobleness [ Vornehmhrit] towards the truth that we see in Pilate facing Jesus. Pilate 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
49 
asked 'What is the truth?' in the sense of someone finished with everything, for 
whom nothing is of significance anymore - the sense in which Solomon says 'All 
is vanity'. - Here, there is nothing left but subjective vanity. 
Timidity is a further impediment to knowing the cruth. It is easy for the lethargic 
mind to say that one did nor really mean to be serious about philosophizing. One 
also hears logic lectures, it is true, but this is supposed to leave us as we are. It 
is believed that if thinking goes beyond the ordinary reach of representations it 
moves into sinister territory, that one entrusts oneself there to a sea on which one 
is tossed hither and thither by the waves of thought only to land eventually back 
again on the sandbank of this temporal finitude that one had left for nothing at all. 
The results of such views can be seen in the world. People may acquire many skills 
and grow to be knowledgeable in many ways; one may become an accomplished 
civil servant and be educated in preparation of whatever one's panicular purposes 
may be. But it is something quite different to educate one's mind for what is loftier 
and to care about that. We may hope that in our rimes a demand for something 
better has dawned on our youth and that they will not be content with the straw 
of superficial knowledge. 
AJditio11 2. Everyone is in agreement that thinking is the object of logic. StiU, 
one can have a very low and a very high opinion of thinking. Thus, on the one 
hand, it is said: this is just a thought, meaning by that that the thought is merely 
subjective, arbitrary and contingent, not the basic matter itself. not what is true 
and actual. On the other hand, one may also have a very high opinion of thoughts 
and undemand them in such a way that they alone are able to reach the highest 
truth, the nature of God, and that nothing can be known about God through 
the senses. It is said that God is spirit and wishes to be worshipped in spirit and 
in truth. But then we admit that what is felt and what is perceived by the senses 
is not what is spiri[Ual, and that thinking is instead the innermost part of spirit 
and that only spirit is able to recognize spirit. Spirit may indeed also assume the 
form of feeling, as in religion, for instance. Bur, in general, feeling as such, i.e. the 
form of feeling, is one thing, while its rontmt is quite another. Feeling as such is 
generally the form of the sensory dimension [tks Sinnlichm), something we share 
with the rest of the animals. This form may indeed appropriate a concrete content, 
and yet this content does not properly belong to this form. The form of feeling is 
the lowest form for a spiritual content. Only in thinking and as thinking is this 
content, God himself. in its rruth. In this sense, then, thought is not just ""'~ 
thought, but rather the highest and, properly viewed, the only manner in which 
it is possible to comprehend what is eternal and in and for itself [das an 1md for 
sich Seimtk). 
Jusr as one can have a high and a low opinion of thinking, so also with the 
science of thought. Anybody can think, it is believed, without the study oflogic, 
much as one can digest food without having studied physiology. And even if one 
has studied logic, one thinks just as one did before, perhaps more methodically. 
but otherwise with little difference, or so it seems. lflogic had no other business 
than to familiarize us with the activity of merely formal thinking, then it would 
indeed produce nothing one would not have otherwise been doing just as well 
all along. The earlier logic was in fact reduced to this position. Incidentally, even 

50 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
acquaintance with thinking as a merely subjective activity is honourable and of 
imerest to human beings. By knowing [u•issm] who they are and what they are 
doing, human beings distinguish themselves from animals. -On the other hand, 
however, as the science of thinking, logic occupies an eminent position, insofar 
as thought alone is capable of experiencing what is highest, namely the true. So 
when the science of logic contemplates thinking in its activity and production (for 
thinking is not an activity devoid of content, since it produces thoughts and the 
thought), its content is a fortiori the supersensory world, and to occupy oneself 
with it is to linger in this world. Mathematics deals with the abstractions of number 
and space, which are, however, still something sensory, albeit something sensory 
in an abstract sense without existence. Thought takes leave of even this ultimate 
sensory element and is freely in communion with itself. renouncing internal and 
external sensoriness, and removing all particular interests and inclinations. Insofar 
as logic stands on such a ground, we should think of it in a more dignified way 
than is usually the case. 
Addition J. The need to understand logic in a deeper sense than that of the 
science of merely formal thinking is prompted by the interest we take in religion, 
the state, the law and ethical life. In earlier times, people had no misgivings about 
thinking; they engaged in it spontaneously and with a fresh mind. They thought 
about God, nature, and the state and were convinced that it is only by means 
of thought that one is able to know the truth, not by means of the senses or 
coincidental representations and opinions. But while engaging in thinking in this 
way it turned out that the highest relationships in life are thereby compromised. 
Through thinking, the positive state of affairs was deprived of its power. State 
constitutions became casuallies of thought; religion was actacked by thought; 
firm religious representations, once held to be valid unconditionally on the basis 
of revelation, were undermined and the old faith was toppled in the minds of 
many. Thus, for example, the Greek philosophers opposed the old religion and 
destroyed the representadons of it. This is why philosophers were exiled and killed 
on the grounds that they overrhrew religion and the state, which were essentially 
connected to one another. In this way, thinking made its mark on actuality and had 
the most awe-inspiring effect. People thus became aware of the power of thinking 
and started to examine more closely its pretensions. They professed to finding 
our that it claimed too much and could not achieve what it undertook. Instead 
of coming to understand the essence of God, nature and spirit and in general 
the truth, thinking had overthrown the state and religion. Hence, the demand 
was made that thinking justify its results, and it is the examination of the nature 
of thinking, and what it is entitled to, that has in large measure constituted the 
interest of philosophy in more recent times. 
§ 20 
Taking up thinking as it presents itself most readily, it appears (a) at first 
in its usual subjective meaning as one of the spirit's activities or faculties 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
51 
alongside others such as the sensory dimension, intuiting, fantasy etc., 
desiring, willing and so on. Its product, namely the determinacy or form 
of thought, is the tmivmal, the abstract in general. Thinking as an activity 
is thus the active universal and, more precisely, the universa! that acts 
upon itst/f in so far as its accomplishment, i.e. what it produces, is the 
universal. Represented as a subjm, thinking is a thinking being, and the 
simple expression for a concretely existing [txistitrmdm] subject that thinks 
is/. 
The determinations offered here and in the following sections are 
not to be taken as assertions and as my opinions about thinking. 
Since, however, in this preliminary exposition no derivation or 
proof can be given, they may be regarded as facts such that in the 
consciousness of anyone who has and contemplates thoughts it is 
found empirically to be the case that the character of universality 
and likewise the subsequent determinations are on hand in them. 
To be sure, for the observation of the facts of one's consciousness 
and representations, it is prerequisite that one be already educated 
in the tasks of paying attention and engaging in abstraction. 
Already in such a preliminary exposition as this, the differences 
among sensory dimension, representation, and thoughts come up. 
They are crucial for grasping the nature and the types of knowing. It 
will therefore serve our elucidation well to call attention to these 
differences already at this point.- The smsory is initially explained 
by reference to its external origin, i.e. the senses or instruments of 
sensation. However, mention of the instrument does not by itself 
afford a determination of what is meant by it. The difference 
between the sensory and thought is to be located in the fact that 
the determination of the former is its individuainess, and insofar 
as the individual (taken quite abstractly as an atom) also stands 
in connection with other things, whatever is sensory is otmide-
ofsomething-tlst, the abstract forms of which are, more precisely, 
those of being side-by-side and after one another. - Representation 
has such sensory material [Stoff] for its content, but posited in the 
determination of being mint, i.e. the determination that such 
content is in me, and of universality, the relation-to-self, simplicity. -
Yet representation also contains, in addition to that sensory material, 
material that has originated from self-conscious thought, such as the 
representations of what is right, ethical, religious, or even of thought 
itself, and it is not easily noticed how the difference between such 

52 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
represmtations and the thoughts of such content is to be marked. 
Here it is the case that the content is a thought and the form of 
universality is present as well, which is inherent in a content's being 
in me and in being a representation at all. But even in this respect, 
the distinctiveness of the representation is generally to be located in 
the fact that in it such content at the same time remains isolated. 
To be sure, the right, the just, and similar determinations do not 
occupy the sensory [positions of) being-outside-of-one-another 
proper to space. They may indeed appear to be somehow successive 
in time, but their content as such is not represented as being 
encumbered by time, as transient and alterable in it. Still, even 
such intrinsically spiritual [an sirh geistige] determinations stand 
isolated on the wide terrain of the inner, abstract universality of 
representing as such. In this isolation, they are simpk; right, duty, 
God. Now either representation remains at a standstill with the 
determination that 'right is right' and 'God is God' or, if it is more 
educated, it adds determinations, for instance, that God is the 
creator of the world, all wise, omnipotent, etc. In this case, several 
isolated simple determinations are similarly strung together, 
remaining outside one another, despite the bond assigned to them 
in the subject possessing them. Representation here meets with the 
undmtandingwhich differs from the former only in that it posits 
relationships of the universal and the particular or of cause and 
effect, etc. It thus establishes relations of necessity among the 
isolated determinations of representation, while representation 
leaves them standing sitk-by-side in irs indeterminate space, 
connected only by the bare also. - The distinction between 
representation and thoughts has a special significance, because it 
can generally be said that philosophy does nothing but transform· 
representations into thoughts- and, indeed, beyond that, the mere 
thought into the concept. 
Incidentally, when it was said that the determinations of the 
sensory are those of individuality and being~outside-ofone-anothtr, 
it can also be added that the laner, too, are in turn thoughts and 
universals themselves. In the logic, it will be shown that thought and 
the universal are just this, namely to be itself as well as its other, that 
its reach extends over the other, and that nothing escapes from it. 
Given that language is the product of thought, nothing that is not 
universal can be expressed in it either. What I only mean, is mint, . 
belonging to me as this particular individual. If, however, language 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
53 
expresses only what is universal, then I cannot say what [ mean only. 
And the in4fabk, feeling, sentiment are not what is most exquisite 
and true, but instead the most insignificant and untrue. When [ say 
'the individual', 'this individual', 'here', 'now', then these are all 
universalities. Anything and tverything is an individual, a this, even 
when it is sensory, just as much as a here, now. Similarly, when I say 
'I' I mean to refer to myself as this one individual, excluding everyone 
else. But what I say (namely, 'I') is precisely each and every one, the 
I excluding everyone else. - Kant used the awkward expression that 
the- I accompanies all my representations as well as sentiments, 
desires, actions, etc. This I is the universal in and for itself. and the 
commonality is also a universal, albeit only an outer form of 
universality. All other humans have it in common with me to be an 
I, just as it is a common feature of all my sensations, representations, 
etc. to be mine. '/', however, taken abstractly and as such, is the pure 
relationship to itself in which abstraction is made from representing, 
sensing, indeed from every state as from every particularity of 
nature, talent, experience, etc. I is in this respect the concrete 
existence [.&isttnz] of the entirely abstract universality, the abstractly 
free. This is why the I is thinking as a subject, and because I am at the 
same time present in aU my sensations, representations, and states, 
etc., thought is present everywhere and permeates all these 
determinations as a category. 
AdJition. When we speak of thinking. it appears initially to be a subjective 
activity, one of several faculties possessed by us, such as memory. representation, 
volition, and the like. If thinking were a merely subjective activity and as such the 
object of logic, this science like any other would have its specific object. It could 
then appear to be arbitrary to make thinking and not also the will, imagination, 
and so forth the object of a particular science. That thinking should receive this 
honour may well be due to the fact that we grant it a certain authority and that 
we regard it as what is truly human, distinguishing humans from animals. - To 
become familiar with thinking even as a merely subjective activity is not without 
interest. Its more specific determinations would be the rules and laws with which 
one becomes acquainted through experience. Thinking viewed in this way as 
determined by laws makes up what usually otherwise constituted the content of 
logic. Aristotle is the founder of this science. He posse$sed the strength to assign 
to thinking what belongs to it per se. Our thinking is very concrete, but with 
respect to its manifold content we need to sort out what belongs to thinking 
or the abstract form of the activity. The activity of thinking. acting as a subtle 
spiritual bond, connects all this content. lt is this bond, this form itself. which 
Aristotle highlighted and defined. To this day, the logic of Aristotle represents 

54 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
the logical [sphere}, which has merely been made more elaborate, primarily by 
the Scholastics of the Middle Ages. The Scholastics did not add to the material, 
but merely developed it funher. The work of more recent times with respect to 
logic consists primarily in omining many of the logical determinations spun out 
further by Aristotle and the Scholastics, on the one hand, and in superimposing a 
lot of psychological material [on the other]. The interest in this science lies with 
becoming acquainted with the procedures of finite thinking, and the science is 
correct when it corresponds ro its presupposed object. To occupy oneself with 
this kind of formal logic is no doubt useful. It clears the head, as they say. 
One learns to concentrate, to abstract, whereas ordinary consciousness deals with 
sensory representations whic~ crisscross and get entangled. In the act of abstraction, 
however, the mind is concentrated on a single point and, by this means, the habit 
is acquired of preoccupying oneself with the interiority [of things}. One can use 
the familiarity with the forms of finite thinking as a means towards educating 
oneself in the empirical sciences that proceed in accordance with those forms. 
In this sense, logic has indeed been called 'instrumental logic'. To be sure, it is 
possible to assume a more liberal stance and claim that logic is to be studied for 
its own sake rather than for irs usefulness, since excellent things should not be 
sought out merely for their usefulness. Now in one sense, this is quite correct, 
but in another that which is excellent is likewise what is most useful, for it is 
substantive, something that stands fast for itself and is for that reason the bearer 
of the particular ends which it furthers and brings to fruition. One must not view 
the particular ends as primary, since that which is excellent promotes them as well. 
Thus, for example, religion has its absolute value in itself. At the same time, other 
ends are borne and upheld by it. Christ says: 'Seek ye first the kingdom of God, 
and all these things shall be added unto you' [Matt. 6:33]. Particular ends can be 
achieved only through attaining what is in and for itself [das Anuntlforsirhsmntk]. 
§ 21 
(~) When thinking is taken as active in relation to objects, as thinking ov~r 
something, the universal that is the product of such an activity contains 
the value of the basic matt~r [Sach~], the mentia/, the inntr, the tru~. 
In§ 5 the old belief was mentioned that whatever is truthful in 
objects, the constitutions [of things], or events is the inner, the 
essential [dimension], the basic matter on which something hinges, 
and this is not to be found imm~diately in consciousness; that it is 
not what appearances first present and what first occurs to one; that 
instead one must first think it over in order to arrive at the true 
constitution of the object and that_ this is achieved through thinking 
things over. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
55 
AddiiWn. Even chi/Jren are instructed to think things over. For instance, they 
are told to connect adjectives with substantives. Here they have to pay attention 
and differentiate, remember a rule, and adjust the panicular case to it. The rule 
is nothing but a universal, and children are asked to make the panicular conform 
to the universal. - Furthermore, in life we have ends. We think over the ways 
in which we can achieve them. The end here stands for the universal, the ruling 
principle, and we have means and instruments whose operation we determine in 
light of our end. -Thinking things over functions in a similar way in the conttxt 
of morality. To think things over here means to recall the right thing to do, one's 
duty, the universal that serves as the fixed rule in accordance with which we arc to 
orient our particular behaviour in the cases at hand. The universal determination 
ought to be recognizable and inherent in our behaviour. - We find the same thing 
in our attitude towards the phmomma of nature [Naturmcheinungm] as well. For 
instance, we take note of thunder and lightning. This phenomenon is familiar to us 
and we often perceive it. But human beings are not content with mere familiarity, 
with the mere sensory phenomenon. Rather, they want to get behind it, they want 
to know [wissm] what it is, they want to comprehend it. Hence, one thinks over 
and wants to know [wissm] the cause as something distinct from the phenomenon 
as such, the inner in its distincmess from the mere outer. The phenomenon is 
accordingly made double, broken apan into the inner and the outer, force and 
expression, cause and effect. Here, the inner, the force, is again the universal, that 
which abides, not this or that flash oflighming, this or that plant, but instead that 
which remains the same in all these things. The sensory is something individual, 
ephemeral; by thinking it over, we become acquaimed with what abides in it. 
Nature shows us an infinite amount of individual shapes and phenomena. We 
have a need to introduce unity into this manifoldness. Hence we compare and 
seek to recognize the universal in each case. Individuals are born and pass away; 
the genus is what abides in them, what recurs in all of them, and what is present 
only for [those] thinking them over. The laws belong in this context as well, such 
as, for example, the laws of motion of the celestial bodies. We see those bodies here 
today and there tomorrow. This lack of order is something inappropriate for the 
spirit, something it does not crust, for it believes in order, in a simple, constant, 
and universal determination. Guided by this belief. spirit has applied its process 
of thinking things over to the phenomena and has come to know their laws, has 
laid down the motions of the celestial bodies in a universal manner, so that every 
change of location can be determined and recognized on the basis of this law. -It 
is the same with those powers that rule human action in its infinite manifoldness. 
Here, too, human beings possess that belief in a prevailing universal. - From all 
these examples, it is to be gathered that the process of thinking things over is 
always seeking what is fixed, abiding, intrinsically determined, and governing the 
particular. This universal is not to be grasped with the senses, and it counts as 
what is essential and true. Thus, for example, duties and rights are the essence 
of actions and the truth of the laner consists in being in conformity with those 
universal determinations. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
By determining what is universal in this way, we find that it forms the opposite 
of an other, and this other is the merely immediate, external, and individual over 
against the mediated, inner, and universal. This universal does not exist concretely 
as a universal ourwardJy, i.e. the genus as such cannot be perceived, and the laws of 
motion of the celestial bodies are not inscribed in the sky. Thus, one does not hear 
the universal and one does not sec it; instead, it is only for the spirit. Religion leads 
us to a universal that encompasses everything else in itself, an absolute through 
which everything else has been generated, and this absolute is not for the senses 
but only for the spirit and for thought. 
§ 22 
(y) Through the process of thinking something over, its content is altered 
from the way it is in sensation, intuition, or representation initially. Thus, 
it is only by means of[vermittels] an alteration that the true nature of the 
object emerges in consciousness. 
Addition. The result of thinking something over is a product of our thinking. 
Thus, for instance, Solon created out ofhis head the laws that he gave the Athenians. 
On the other hand, however, we also regard the universal, the laws, as the opposite 
of something merely subjective and sec in it what is essential, true, and objective in 
things. In order to learn the true nature of things, mere attentiveness is not enough. 
Rather, our subjective activity has to be involved, reshaping what is immediately on 
hand. Now at first blush this seems to be quite misguided and contrary to the end 
at stake in knowing. Nonetheless, it can be said that it has been the conviction of 
all times that only by reworking the immediate, a reworking produced by thinking 
things over, is something substantive attained. By contrast, it is primarily in recent 
times alone that doubts have been raised and the distinction has been maintained 
berween the products of our thinking and things in and of themselves. It has been 
said that the in-itself of things is something entirely different from what we make 
of it. The standpoint in defence of this separation has been advocated particularly 
by the Critical philosophy against the conviction of the whole previous world for 
which the agreement of the basic matter and thought counted as something settled. 
The interest of modern philosophy revolves around this opposition. However, it is 
the natural belief of human beings that this opposition has no truth. In ordinary 
life we think things over without the added reflection that this is how truth comes 
about. In the firm belief in thought's agreement with the basic matter, we think 
without further ado and this belief is of the highest importance. It is the sickness 
of our rime: that has led to the desperation that our knowing is merely subjective 
and that this subjectivity is the last word. And yet, the rruth is what is objective 
and this ought to be the rule for everyone's convictions, such that an individual's 
conviction is bad if it does not conform to this rule. According to the modern 
viewpoint, by contrast, conviction as such, i.e:. the mere form of being convinced, 
is already a good thing - whatever the content, since no standard for its truth is 
on hand. - When we said earlier that it is an old belief of human beings that it 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
57 
is the vocation of the spirit to know [wirsm] the truth, it was implied that the 
objeas, the outer and the inner nature, and in general the object [ Objekt] as it 
is in itself. are just the way they are qua thought, and that thinking therefore is 
the truth of what is objective [die Wahrheit des Gtgmstiindiichm]. The business of 
philosophy consists merely in bringing explicidy to consciousness what has been 
valid for humaniry since antiquity with respect to thinking. Philosophy thus does 
not establish anything new. What we have brought out here by means of our 
reflection is everybody's immediate prejudice already. 
§ 23 
(S) Since in thinking things over their true nature emerges and since this 
thinking is just as much my activity, that true nature is equally the product of 
my spirit insofar as the latter is a thinking subject. It is mine in accordance 
with my simple universality, i.e. as an I that is entirely with itself- it is the 
product of my freedom. 
One can often hear the expression 'to think for oneself, as if 
something significant is thereby said. In fact, nobody can think for 
someone else, just as little as they can eat and drink for them. That 
expression is thus a pleonasm.- Freedom is immediately entailed 
by thinking because thinking is the activity of the universal, a 
relating of itself to itself that is accordingly abstract, a subjectively 
non-determinate being-with-itself [Beisichsein] that at the same 
time, as far as its content is concerned, is only in the basic ma~r and 
its determinations. If, therefore, there is talk of humility or modesty 
or, alternatively, haughtiness in connection with philosophizing, and 
if humility or modesty consists in ascribing to one's subjectivity 
nothing particular [nichts Besonderes] about one's qualities and 
actions, then philosophizing will at least have to be acquined of 
haughtiness. For thinking is true in terms of content only if it is 
immersed in the basic matter at hand and in terms of form only if it 
is not a particular instance of being or doing of the subject, but 
instead is consciousness conducting itself precisely as an abstract 'I', 
liberated from all the partimlarity [Partikularitiit] that attaches to 
qualities and conditions otherwise, and only enacting the universal 
through which it is identical with all individuals. -When Aristotle 
calls upon us to think of ourselves as worthy of such behaviour, then 
the worthiness which consciousness bestows upon itSelf consists 
precisely in letting go of its particular beliefs and opinions and 
letting the basic matter hold sway in itself. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
§24 
In accordance with these determinations, thoughts may be called objective 
thoughts. Also to be reckoned among them are those forms that are initially 
examined in ordinary logic and are usually taken to be only forms of 
co1zscious thought. Logic thus coincides with metaphysics, i.e. the science of 
things captured in thoughts that have counted as expressing the essentialities 
ofthingr. 
The relationship of such forms as concept, judgment, and syllogism 
to others, e.g. causality and so forth, can emerge only within logic 
itself. However, this much should be clear in a preliminary way, 
that insofar as thought tries to come up with a concept of things, 
this concept (and with that also its most immediate forms such as 
judgment and syllogism) cannot be made up of determinations and 
relationships which are alien and external to those things. Thinlcing 
things over, as has been said above, directs us to the universal in 
things, but the universal is itself one of the moments of the concept. 
The fact that there is rhyme and reason [Vmtand.. Vernunftl to the 
world conveys exactly what is contained in the expression 'objective 
thought'. To be sure, the latter expression is awkward because 
thought is habitually used for something belonging to the mind 
[Geist], i.e. to consciousness and what is objective is for the most 
part attributed m what is not mental. 
Addition I. When it is said that thought as objective thought constitutes the 
core [das lnntrl'] of the world, it may seem as if. by this, consciousness is supposed 
to be anributed to natural things. We feel a certain resistance to construing the 
inner activiry of rhings as thinking, since we say thar human beings distinguish 
themselves from all natural things through thinking. We would therefore have ro 
speak of nature as the system of unconscious thoughts, a 'peuified intelligence', as 
Schelling puts it. Instead of using the expression thoughts, it would thus be better 
to speak of thought-dntrmit~ations, in order to avoid any misunderstanding. - In 
general, from what has been said so far, the logical dimension is to be sought as a 
system of thought-determinations for which the opposition of the subjective arid 
the objective (in its ordinary sense) falls away. This meaning of thinking and its 
determinations is expressed more direcdy by the ancients when they say that voiis 
governs the world -or when we say that reason exists in the world and mean by it 
that reason is the soul of the world, residing in it, immanent in it as its ownmost, 
innermost nature, its universal. To rake a more particular example, when we talk 
about some specific animal we say that it is an animaL The animal as sue/, cannot 
be shown, only a specific animal can. Thl' animal does not exist concretely [txistiert 
niche] but is instead the universal nature ofindividual animals, and each concretely 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
59 
existing animal is much more concretely specific, something particularized. But 
to be an animal, i.e. the genus that is the universal, bclon~ to the specific animal 
and constitutes its specific essentiality. Take what it is to be an animal away from a 
dog, and we would be at a loss to say what it is. In general, things have an abiding 
inner narure as well as an external existence. They live and die, come to be and 
pass :rway. The genus is their essentialiry, their universality, and it is not to be 
construed merely as some common fearure. 
Just as thinking makes up the substance of external things, so it is also the 
universal substance of all things spiritual. Thinking is inherent in all human 
intuiting. Similarly, thinking is the universal in all representations, memories, 
and generally in every spiritual activiry, in all willing, wishing, and so forth. The 
latter are one and all merely further specifications of thinking. When we construe 
thinking in this way, it appears in a different context from when we merely say that 
among and alongside other faculties such as perception, representation, willing, 
and so on we also possess the faculry of thinking. When we consider thinking as the 
true universal in everything natural and everything spiritual as well, then it extends 
over all of this and is the foundation of everything. We can use this conception 
of thinking in its objective sense (as now) as a starting-point for explaining what 
thinking means in the subjective sense. To begin with, we say that humans think-
and yet at the same time we also say that they perceive, will, etc. Humans think, 
and to be human is to be something universal. However, they think only insofar 
as the universal exists for them. The animal, too, is in its~lf a universal, but the 
universal does not exist as such for it; it is always only the individual thing that 
docs. The animal sees something individual, e.g. its food, a human being, and so 
on. All this, however, is merely something individual for it. Similarly, sensation 
is always involved with individual things alone (this pain, this pleasant taste, and 
so forth). Nature docs not bring nous to consciousness, only humans duplicate 
themselves in such a way that the universal exists for the universal. This is already 
the case when a human being knows [w~ifll itself as '/'.When I say '/', I mean 
to refer to myself as this individual, indeed as this determinate person. Actually, 
however, I do not thereby say anything specific about myself. Everybody else is '/' 
as well, and although in denoting myself as 1' I mean myself, this individual being, 
I simultaneously utter something completely universal. 'I' is pure being-for-itself 
in which all that is particular has been negated and sublated [au_&thobm]; it is 
the ultimate, simple, and pure element of consciousness. We can say that 'I' and 
thought are the same; or more specifically, 'I' is the thinking as someone thinking 
[das Dmltm als Dmltmdn]. What I possess in my consciousness is for me. 'I' is 
this void, the receptacle for anything and everything, that for which everything 
exists and which stores everything within itself. Every human being is an entire 
world of representations buried in the night of the '1'. The 'I' is thus the universal 
in which abstraction is made from everything particular, but in which at the same 
time everything lies shrouded. h is therefore not a merely abstract universaliry, 
but a universaliry that contains everything within itself. We usc 'I' at first in a 
purely trivial way, and only through philosophical reflection docs it come ro be 
an object of consideration. In the 'I' we possess the entirely pure thought in its 

6o 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
presence. The animal cannot say 'I'; only a human can do so because a human is 
the thinking. In the 'I' there is inner and outer content of many different kinds, 
and depending on the make-up of this content, we behave as someone perceiving 
with the senses, representing, remembering, and so on. In every instance, however, 
the T is present, or rather, thinking is inherem in all of it. Thus, humans are 
always thinking, even if they are only perceiving. When they consider something, 
they always view it as something universal. If they zero in on an individual thing, 
they pick it our, thereby turning their attention away from something else, and 
take it as something abstract and universal, even if only as a universal in a formal 
sense. 
Regarding our representations, we have a twofold situation. Either the contmt 
is a thought, bur the form is not; or, conversely, the form belongs to thought, but 
the content does not. For instance, when I say 'anger', 'rose', 'hope', then all these 
things are familiar to me through sensation and feeling but I express this content 
in a general way, i.e. in the form of thought. I have left out many particulars 
and rendered only the content as something universal, but the content remains 
sensory. Conversely, when I form a representation of God, the content is indeed 
something purely thought, but the form is still sensory in the way in which I find 
it immediately present in me. In the case of representations, then, the coni:ent 
is not merely sensory, as when I look at things. Instead, the content is sensory 
while rhe form belongs to thought or vice versa. In the former case, the matter 
is given and the form belongs to thinking; in the latter thinking is the source of 
the content, but by means of the form the content becomes something given that 
thereby reaches spirit from the outside. 
Addition 2. In logic we deal with pure thought or pure thought-determinations. 
When we think of a thought in the ordinary sense, we always imagine something 
that is not just a pure thought, for by it we mean a thought whose content is 
something empirical. In logic, thoughts are considered in such a way that they 
have no other content than that which belongs to and is generated by thought 
itsel£ In this way, the thoughts are purt thoughts. Thus spirit relates purely to itself 
and is therefore free, for freedom is precisely this: to be at home with oneself in 
one's other, to be dependent upon oneself, to be the determining factor for oneself. 
In all my urges I start from something other than myself that is for me something 
external. Here, then, we speak of dependence. Freedom exists only where there is 
no other for me that I am not myself. The natural human being who is determined 
only by his urges is not at home with himself. However self-willed he may be, the 
conttnt of his willing and believing is still not his own and his freedom is merely a 
formal one. When I think, I give up my subjective panicularity, immerse myself in 
the basic matter and let thought follow irs own course; and I think badly whenever 
I add something of my own. 
If, in keeping with what has been said up to now, we look at logic as a system of 
purt thought-derermi nations, then by contrast rhe other philosophical sciences, the 
philosophy of nature and the philosophy of spirit, appear as a kind of applied logic, 
for logic is their animating soul. In this respect, these other sciences are concerned 
simply with recognizing the logical forms in the formations of nature and of spirit, 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
61 
formations that are merely a particular manner of expression of the forms of pure 
thinking. For instance, consider syllogism (not, indeed, in the meaning it has in 
the old, formal logic but in its truth). It is that determination in virtue of which 
the particular is supposed to be the middle that joins the extremes of the universal 
and the individual together. This form of syllogistic inference is a universal form 
of all things. Everything is something particular that joins irself as something 
universal with the individual. The impotence of nature, however, brings with it 
an inability to exhibit the logical forms in their purity. The magnet is an example 
of that sort of impotent exhibition of the syllogism. It joins its poles together in 
the middle, i.e. in the poim of indifference, such that they are immediately one 
in their distinctness. In physics, too, one becomes familiar with the universal, the 
essence. The difference is merely that the philosophy of nature makes us aware of 
the true forms of the concept in natural things. - Logic is thus the all-animating 
spirit of aU the sciences and the thought-determinations of logic are pure spirits. 
They are what is innermost, and yet at the same time they are the very things 
we uuer all the time and which for that reason seem to be something perfectly 
familiar. However, what is in this way familiar is usually what is most unfamiliar. 
Thus, for instance, bfing is a pure determination of thought. And yet, it never 
occurs to us to make the 'is' the object of our consideration. We typically believe 
that the absolute must lie somewhere far yonder. But it is precisely that which is 
wholly present and which we as thinking beings always carry with us and make use 
of, even if without explicit consciousness of the fact. Such thought-determinations 
are deposited first and foremost in language. Hence the instruction in grammar 
that children receive is useful for drawing their attention to distinctions in thought 
wi~out their being conscious of it. 
It is commonly said that logic deals with forms only and that it must take 
its contmt from somewhere else. However, the logical thoughts are not some 
acussory over against all this content. Rather, all this other content is merely an 
acmsory compared to the logical forms. They are the ground, existing in and for 
itself. of everything. - A higher level of education is required for directing one's 
interest at such pure determinations. The contemplation, in and for irself. of these 
determinations has, in addition, the sense that we derive these determinations from 
thinking itself and, on the basis of them, see whether they are true determinations. 
We do not pick them up in some external fashion and then define them or 
demonstrate their value and their validity by comparing them to the way in which 
they happen to surface in our consciousness. That would mean that we start from 
observation and experience and then say, for instance, that we typically use 'force' 
for this and that. We then call a definition of this kind correct, if it agrees with 
what we usually find in our ordinary consciousness of its object. 
However, in such a way a concept is not being determined as it is in and for 
itself, but determined in accordance with a presupposition that thus constitutes 
the criterion, the standard of correctness. And yet, we do not have to use such 
a standard but inS£ead let these determinations, alive in themselves, count for 
themselves. The question concerning the truth of the thought-determinations 
must appear strange to ordinary consciousness for, after all, they seem to obtain 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
their rruth only from being applied to given objects. Consequently, it would rruike 
no sense to inquire about their truth independently of such an application. This, 
however, is exactly the point at issue. To be sure, one must first know [wium] 
what is to be understood by truth here. Usually we call truth the agreement of an 
object with our representation of it. Thus we have an object as a presupposition, 
and our representation is supposed to conform to it. - In the philosophical sense, 
by contrast, truth means in general the agreement of a content with itself, to put 
it abstractly. Consequently, this is a meaning of truth entirely different from the 
one just mentioned. Incidentally, the deeper (i.e. philosophical) meaning of truth 
can already be found to some extent in the ordinary use of language. Thus, for 
instance, we speak of a tru( friend and mean by that someone whose way of acting 
conforms to the concept of friendship. Similarly, we speak of a tru( work of art. 
Untrue then means as much as bad, something in itself inadequate. In rhis sense, 
a bad state is an untrue state, and what is bad and untrue generally consists in 
the contradiction that obtains between the determination or the concept and the 
concrete existence of the object. We can form a correct representation of such a 
bad object but the content of this representation is something intrinsically untrue. 
We may have in our heads many instances of correctness of this sort that are 
simultaneously untruths. - God alone is the true agreement of the concept with 
reality. 
But all finite things have an untruth: they possess a concept and a concrete 
existence that is, however, inadequate to the concept. For this reason, they must 
perish, and by this means the inadequacy of their concept and their concrete 
existence is manifested. As an individual thing, the animal possesses its concept in 
its genus, and the genus frees itself from the individuality by means of death. 
Truth considered in the sense here explained, namely as the agreement with 
itself, constitutes the proper concern of logic. In ordinary consciousness, the 
question regarding the truth of thought-determinations does not even arise. The 
business oflogic can also be expressed by saying that in it thought-determinations 
are considered in terms of their ability to capture what is true [da.r Wahrt]. The 
question rhus aims at finding out which are the forms of the infinite and which 
of the finite. In ordinary consciousness, we do not lose sleep over finite thought-
determinations and we let them count as valid without further ado. All deception, 
however, is due to thinking and acting in accordance with finite determinations. 
Addition 3· What is true can be known krkmnm] in different ways, and the 
ways of knowing are to be considered merely as forms of doing this. Thus one may 
indeed come to know what is true through experience, but experience is only one of 
the forms. In the case of experience, it depends on the sensitivity [Sinn] with which 
one approaches actuality. Someone with a great sensitivity has great experiences 
and catches sight of what matters in the colourful play of appearances. The idea 
is on hand and actual, it is not something yonder and far away. For example, a 
great sensitivity such as that of Goethe, when looking at nature or history, has 
great experiences of them, perceiving what is due to reason and purring it into 
words. Again, what is true may also be known through reflection, in which case it 
is determined by relations berween thoughts. However, in these rwo ways what is 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
true in and for itself does nor yet exist in its proper form. The most perfect form 
of knowing is rhat in the pure form of thinking. Here a human being behaves in a 
thoroughly free manner. That the form of thinking is the absolute form and that 
the truth appears in it as it is in and for itself, this is the claim of philosophy in 
general. The proof for this first of all requires showing that those other forms of 
knowing are finite forms. The high scepticism of antiquity accomplished this with 
its demonstration that all these forms contain a contradiction within themselves. 
While this scepticism also approaches the forms of reason, it does so by first 
imputing to them something finite in order to get hold of them. In the course of 
the logical d~elopment [on the following pages), each and every form of finite 
thought will come up and, indeed, as they step forward according to the necessity 
[of that development]. Here (i.e. in the introduction) they would have to be taken 
up initially in an unscientific manner as something given. In the logical treatment 
itself not only the negative side of these forms is shown, but their positive side as 
well. 
When one compares the different forms of knowing [Erkmnm] with one 
another it can easily look as if the first of them, namely that of immediate knowl-
edge [Wisrm), were the most adequate, most beautiful, and highest. Everything 
called innocence in a moral respect falls into this form of thinking as do then reli-
gious feeling. na'ive trust, love, loyalty, and natural faith. The rwo other forms, first 
that of reflective knowing and then also of philosophical knowing, abandon this 
immediate natural unity. Insofar as they have this in common with one another, 
their manner of intending to grasp what is true, namely, through thinking, can 
easily seem to be a matter of human pride intent on knowing by one's own might 
(KraftJ what is true. As a standpoint of universal separation [where humans sep-
arate themselves from everything), this standpoint can indeed be regarded as the 
origin of all evil and malice, as the original sacrilege. It may then well appear as 
if thought and knowing are to be given up in order to manage to return [to a 
unity] and arrive at a reconciliation. As far as leaving behind the natural unity is 
concerned, this wondrous division of the spiritual within itself has been an object 
of consciousness for peoples from ancient times. In nature, such internal division 
does not take place and things in nature do nothing evil. An old representation 
of the origin and the consequences of that division was given to us in the Mosaic 
myth of the Falt·[Sum/mfo/1, i.e. the original sin]. The subject matter of this myth 
forms the basis of an essential piece of religious doctrine, namely the doctrine of 
the natural sinfulness of human beings and the necessity of a help against it. It 
seems appropriate to examine the myth of the Fall at the beginning of the Logic, 
since the latter has to do with knowing, while this myth deals with knowing and 
irs origin and significance, as well. Philosophy must not shy away from religion, 
and it must not behave as if it had to be content if religion merely tolerates it. On 
the other hand, likewise the view that myths and religious narratives such as these 
are old-fashioned is to be rejected. After all, for thousands of years they have been 
venerated among peoples. 
If we now look at the myth of the Fall more closely, we find expressed here 
the general relation of knowing to spiritual life, as was mentioned earlier. In 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
its immediacy, spiritual life first appears as innocence and na'ive trust. However, 
it is part of the essence of spirit that this immediate state be sublated, for the 
spiritual life distinguishes itself from the natural life and, more specifically, from 
the animal life, by not remaining in the state of being in itself but instead 
by being for itu/f Hence, the standpoint of division must equally be sublated, 
and spirit should return to oneness (Einigktit] by its own means. This oneness 
is a spiritual oneness, and the principle that leads back to it [elas Prinzip tin 
Zuriickfohrung] exists in thinking itsel£ It is thinking that causes the wound and 
heals it, too. - Now in our myth it is said that Adam and Eve, the first human 
beings (the human being in general), found themselves in a garden in which there 
existed a rree of life and a rree of the knowledge (Erkmntnir] of good and evil. 
It is said that God had forbidden them to eat from the fruit of the latter tree. 
There is no further mention of the tree of life at this point. By this means, it is 
declared thar human beings are not supposed to come to know but instead that 
they are supposed to remain in a state of innocence. Likewise, in other peoples 
who possess a deeper consciousness we find the firsr state of the human being 
represented as a state of innocence and oneness. This much is correct about such 
a view: we find everything human in a state of division from the outset but this 
division cannot indeed be the end of the matter. However, it is incorrect that 
the immediate, natural unity is the right one. Spirit is not merely something 
immediate; rather it contains the moment of mediation essentially within itself. 
Childlike innocence does indeed possess something attractive and touching, but 
only insofar as it reminds us of what is supposed to be brought about by spirit. 
That natural oneness that we witness in children is supposed to be the result 
of the work and education of the_ spirit. - Christ says: 'Unless you btcomt like 
children ... ', etc. [Matt. 18:2-4]. This docs not mean, however, that we should 
remain children. -Now in our Mosaic myth we find, furthermore, that the occa-
sion for stepping out of the unity came to the human being through instigation 
from the outside (through the serpent). In fact, however, the act of entering inro 
the opposition, i.e. the awakening of consciousness, is inuinsic to human beings 
themselves; it is a history that repeats itself with every human being. The serpent 
attributes godliness to knowing [wissm) what is good and evil, and it is indeed this 
knowledge that became part of human beings by virtue of the fact that they broke 
up the unity of their immediate being and enjoyed the forbidden fruit. The first 
reflection that occurred to the awakening consciousness was the realization by these 
human beings that they were naked. This is a very naive and profound feature. 
For in this feeling of shame lies the divorce of human beings from their natural, 
sensory being. The animals who do not progress to this divorce are for that reason 
shame-less. As a result, the spiritual and ethical source of clothing is to be sought 
in the human feeling of shame. Mere physical need is secondary in comparison. -
There now follows the so-called curse that God has laid upon human beings. What 
is emphasized here relates first and foremost to the opposition between human 
beings and nature. Man must work by the sweat of his brow, and woman must 
give birth in pain. As far as the work is concerned, it is just as much the result 
of the divorce as it is the divorce's overcoming. The animal finds immediately 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
whatever it requires for the satisfaction of its needs. By contrast, humans relate to 
the means of satisfying their needs as something produced and manufactured by 
them. Thus even in this external respect, human beings are self-relating. - The 
myth does not conclude with the expulsion from paradise. It says further: 'God 
spoke: "Adam has become like one of us, knowing [wirstn] good and evil."' -
Knowing is here designated as something divine, not, as before, as something that 
should not exist. In this then also lies the refutation of that idle chatter according 
to which philosophy belongs only to spirit's finitude. Philosophy is knowing, and 
only through knowing has the original calling of human beings to be an image 
of God, been realized. - When it is then said in addition that God has ousted 
humans from the garden of Eden so that they may not eat from the tree of life, it 
is thereby declared that according to their natural side human beings are indeed 
finite and mortal, and yet infinite in knowing. 
It is the well-known teaching of the Church that human beings are by nature evil, 
and this being evil by nature is called original sin [Erbsiinlk]. One must, however, 
give up the superficial idea that original sin is rooted merely in a contingent aa 
of the first human beings. It is in fact inherent in the concept of spirit that a 
human being is by nature evil, and we ought not to imagine that it could have 
been otherwise. Insofar as the human being exists as a natural being and behaves 
and comports himself [sich vtrhiilt] that way, this is a relationship [ V"hiiltnis] 
that ought not to obtain. Spirit is meant to be free and to be what it is through 
itself. Nature is for human beings only a starting-point that they are supposed to 
transform. The deep ecclesiastical teaching of the original sin stands opposed to the 
doctrine of the modern enlightenment that human beings are good by nature and 
thus should remain faithful to the laner. The process of the human being emerging 
from its natural being is the process of it distinguishing itself as a self-conscious 
and self-confident [selbstbewujft] being and from an external world. Yet, though 
the standpoint of separation is part of the concept of spirit, it is not the standpoint 
at which a human being ought to remain. The entire [array of the] finitude of 
thinking and willing falls under this standpoint of division. Here human beings 
construa ends for themselves out of themselves and take the material for their 
action out of themselves. By pushing these ends to their ultimate limit, by knowing 
[wissm] and willing only themselves in their particularity to the exclusion of the 
universal, human beings are evil, and this evilness is their subjectivity. Prima facie, 
we have two evils here, but in fact they are both the same. Insofar as human beings 
are spirit, they are not natural beings. Insofar as they behave like natural beings and 
follow the ends generated by their desires, they want this. Hence the natural evil of 
a human being is unlike the natural being of animals. Naturalness has the further 
determination that a human being naturally is an individual as such, for nature 
lies in the bonds ofindividuadon altogether. Hence, insofar as human beings will 
their naturalness, they will their respective individuality. To be sure, the law or the 
universal determination then also arises against this kind of acting from drives and 
inclinations, acting inherent in natural individuality. This law may be an external 
power or have the form of divine authority. Human beings are in the servitude of 
the law as long as they persist in their natural behaviour. It is true that among their 

66 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
inclinations and feelings, human beings also possess benevolent social inclinations, 
such as sympathy, love, ere. that reach beyond the egoistic individuality. However, 
insofar as these inclinations are immediate, their content- while in itself universal-
retains the form of subjectivity; here, selfishness and contingency always prevail. 
§ 25 
The expression 'objective thoughts' signifies the truth, which is to be the 
absolute obj~ct, not merely the goal of philosophy. And yet it also shows 
at once an opposition and, indeed, the very opposition around whose 
determination and validity the interest of the philosophical standpo~nt 
of our time turns, as does the question of truth and knowledge of the 
truth. If a fixed opposidon attaches to the thought-determinations, i.e. 
if they are of a merely finiu nature, then they are unfit for the truth 
that is absolutely in and for itself, and the truth cannot then enter into 
thinking. Thinking that produces only finiu determinations and moves 
among them is called undmtanding (in the more precise sense of the 
word). More specifically, the jinitud~ of the thought-determinations is to 
be construed in this double sense: the one, that they are merely subjecti~ 
and are in permanent opposition to the objective; the other, that due to 
their limited contmt generally they persist in opposition to each other and 
even more so to the absolute. To provide a more detailed introduction and 
in order to explicate the importance and the standpoint here given to logic 
the positions of thought towards objtctivity will now be studied. 
My Phenomenology of Spirit, which when it came out, and for the 
reason now given, had been designated the first part of the system of 
science, began with the first, simplest appearance of spirit, namely 
imm~diate consciousnm, and developed its dialectic up to the 
standpoint of the philosophical science, the necessity of which is 
shown by this progression. For the sake of this end, however, it was 
not possible to remain content with the formal aspect of mere 
consciousness, for the standpoint of philosophical knowing [Wissen] 
is in itself the most basic and concrete. Hence, emerging as [the 
development's] result, that standpoinr also presupposed the concrete 
shapes of consciousness such as morality, the ethical life, the arts, 
religion. Consequently, the development of the basic content of the 
objects of the distinctive parts of the philosophical science likewise 
falls within the development of consciousness, which at first seems 
to be restricted to a merely formal aspect. This development must so 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
to speak take place behind consciousness's back insofar as the 
content (as what is in itulfl relates to consciousness. Due to this fact, 
the presentation becomes more intricate, and what belongs to the 
concrete parts falls to some extent already within the introduction. -
The consideration (to be undenaken here) is even more awkward in 
that it can be conducted only historically and by reasoning in a 
stricdy formal way [riison~rendj. It is, however, meant to contribute 
principally to the insight that the questions one entertains and holds 
as utterly concrete in the representation of the nature of knowing, 
faith and so forth in fact lead back to simpk thought-determinations 
that receive their definitive treatment only in the Logic. 
A. FIRST POSITION OF THOUGHT TOWARDS OBJECTIVITY 
M~taphysics 
§26 
The first position is the naiv~ manner of proceeding which, still oblivious to 
the opposition of thinking within and against itself, contains the b~liefthat 
through thinking things ov~r the truth comes to b~ !mown and that what the 
objects [ Obj~kte] truly are is brought before consciousness. In this belief, 
thinking engages the objects directly, reproduces out of itself the content 
of sensations and intuitions as a content of thought, and finds satisfaction 
in the like as the truth. All philosophy in its beginnings, all the sciences, 
even the daily doings and dealings of consciousness, live in this belie£ 
§27 
Because it has no consciousness ofits opposition, it is possibk for this kind 
of thinking to be both genuine sp~culative philosophizing in terms of its 
content as well as to dwell infinite thought-determinations, i.e. the as yet 
unmolved opposition. Here in the introduction the concern can only be 
to consider this position of thinking with respect to its limitation [ Grmu] 
and, hence, to take up the latter sort of philosophizing first. - In irs most 
determinate and most recent development this kind of thinking was the 
metaphysics of the past, the way it was constituted prior to the Kantian 
philosophy. This metaphysics is something past, however, only in relation 
to the history of philosophy; of itself it is always on hand, as the pmpective 

68 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
of the undmtttnding alone on the objects of reason. Closer examination of 
its manner of proceeding and main content is of interest for this more 
immediate reason as well. 
§ 28 
This science regarded the thought-determinations as the fondttmmtttl deter-
minations of things; in virtue of this presupposition, namely that what is, by 
being thought, is known in itself, it occupied a higher place than the Iacer 
critical philosophizing. 
1. However, those determinations were taken to be valid per st in their 
abstraction and capable of being predicates of tht trut. That metaphysics 
presupposed in general that knowledge of the absolute could cake place 
by attributing predicates to ic, and investigated neither the determinations 
of the understanding with regard co their proper content and value nor 
even chis form of determining the absolute by means of the attribution of 
predicates. 
Predicates such as these are, for example, txistmct, as in the sentence 
'God posmses txistmct';finitutk or infinity, as in the question 
whether the world is finite or infinite; simple or composite, as in the 
sentence 'the soul is simple'; also 'the thing is one, a wholt', and so 
on. -There was no investigation as to whether such predicates are 
something true in and of themselves, nor whether the form of 
judgment is capable of being the form of truth. 
Addition. The presupposition made by the old metaphysics was that of the 
na"ive belief in general that thinking grasps the in-itst/f of things, that things are 
what they truly are only insofar as they are thought. Narure and the minds of 
human beings are a Proteus constandy transforming itself, and it is a very narural 
consideration that things as they present themselves immediately are not what 
they are in themselves. - The standpoint of the old metaphysics mentioned here 
is the opposite of what resulted from the Critical philosophy. It might well be said 
that according to this result human beings have to rely on chaff and husks alone. 
But if we look more closely at that old metaphysics as far as its way of pro-
ceeding is concerned, it should be noted that it did not go beyond thinking in 
terms of merely untimtanding. It took up the abstract thought-determinations 
in their immediacy and allowed them ro count as predicates of rhe true. When 
talking about thinking one must distinguish finite thinking, thinking in terms of 
merely undmtanding, from thinking that is infinite and rational. The thought-
determinations as they present themselves in an immediate and isolated way are 
finite determinations. The true, however, is what is in itself infinite, and it cannot 
be expressed or brought to consciousness by means of the finite. The expression 
inji11ite thought may appear to be eccentric, if one holds on to the notion of recent 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
times according to which thinking is always limited. In itself, however, thinking 
is in fact essentially infinite. To put it formally, that which comes to an end, that 
which (merely] is, is called finite, and it ceases where it is connected to its other 
and is thus limited by the laner. The finite therefore consists in irs relation to its 
other which is its negalion, and presents itself as its boundary. Thinking, however, 
is with itself, relates to itself, and has itself for its object. In having a thought as 
my object, I am with mysel£ I, the thinking. is accordingly infinite because in 
thinking it relates itself to an object that it is itsel£ An object is, generally speaking, 
an other, something negative opposite myself. When thinking thinks itself. it has 
an object that is also not an object, i.e. something sublated, ideal. Thinking as 
such, in its purity. thus has no barrier within itself. Thinking is finite only when 
it stops short at limited determinations that count as something ultimate for it. 
By contrast, infinite or speculative thinking is likewise determined, and yet as 
determining and limiting, it in tum sublates this deficiency. Infinity is not to be 
interpreted as an abstract yonder-and-ever-yonder as happens in the ordinary way 
of representing things, but in the simple fashion indicated above. 
The thinking of the old metaphysics was a ftnitt thinking, for it moved among 
thought-determinations whose boundaries counted for it as something fixed that 
was not negated in tum. Thus, for instance, it was asked 'Does God possess 
txistmct?', where existmct was taken to be something purely positiL•t, something 
uhimate and magnificent. We will see later, however, that existmct is in no way 
something merely positive, but instead a determination that is too lowly for the 
idea and not worthy of God. - Funhermore, the question was raised about the 
finitude or infinity of the world. Here infinity is rigidly set over against finitude, 
although it is easy to see that when both are opposed to each other the infinity, 
which is supposed ro be the whole, appears as ont sidt only and is bounded by 
the finite. A bounded infinity, however, is itself something merely finite. - In the 
same way it was asked whether the soul is simple or composite. Hence simplicity 
counted as an ultimate determination as well, capable of grasping the true. To be 
simple, however, is a determination just as poor, abstract, and one-sided as that of 
existence, a determination that we will later see to be itself untrue, to be incapable 
of grasping the true. 
The old metaphysics was thus interested in knowing whether predicates of 
the kind mentioned could be attributed to objects. However, these predicates 
are limited determinations of the understanding that express only a barrier and 
not what is true. - In this context it also needs to be specifically noted how its 
way of proceeding consisted in attributing predicates to the object to be known, 
such as God, for instance. This, however, represents an external reflection about 
the object since the determinations (the predicates) are ready-made {fortig] in my 
representation and attributed to the object in an external manner only. By contrast, 
true knowledge of an object must be of tht sort that the object determines itself 
out of itself and does nor receive its predicates from outside. Proceeding, then, in 
the manner of predication, the mind has the feeling of inexhaustibility by means 
of such predicates. Assuming this standpoint, the Orientals quite correctly call 
God a muhinominal being [or] a being with infinitely many names. The mind is 
satisfied with none of those finite determinations, and rhus the Oriental manner 

70 
Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
of knowing consists in a resdess search for such predicates. Now regarding finite 
things it is indeed the case that these must be determined by means of finite 
predicates, and here the undersranding and its activity are in their proper place. 
The understanding, being itself finite, also knows only the nature of the finite. If, 
for example, I call an action a thift, it is thereby determined with respect to its 
essemial content, and it is sufficient for the judge to recognize this. In the same 
way, finite things rdate to each other as (aust and tjfo(t, as for(t and txpmsion, and 
when they are grasped in accordance with these determinations, they are known 
in terms of their finitude. Objects of reason, however, cannot be determined by 
means of such finite predicates, and the aspiration to do so was the defect of the 
old metaphysics. 
§ 29 
Predicates such as these represent in and of themselves a limittd content 
and show themselves to be inadequate to the fullntss of tht rtpmmtation 
(of God, nature, spirit, and so forth) and in no way exhaustive. Moreover, 
by virtue of being predicates of ont subject, chey are bound up with one 
another and yec they are diverse on account of their content. As a result, 
they are taken up in opposition to ont another from tht outside [gtgentinantkr 
von aujlm]. 
The Orientals sought to overcome the first defect, in the 
determination of God, for instance, by means of the many namts. 
they attributed to him. At the same time, however, there were 
supposed to be infiniuly many of chose names. 
§30 
2. Its objtcts were totalities, to be sure, which in and of themselves belong 
tO reason, tO the thinking of the in-itself concrelt universal - sou/, WOrld, 
God. Metaphysics, however, cook them up from [the sphere of] rtpmen-
tation, laid them down as ready-made, given subjects for the application of 
the determinations of the understanding to them, and possessed in this 
representation alone the criterum of whether the predicates were adequate 
and sufficient or not. 
§ 31 
The representations of soul, world, God seem at first to offer thinking a 
firm hold. However, in addition to the fact that the character of particular 
subjectivity is blended in with them and that, on account of this, they 
can have very different meanings, they first need to receive their firm 

Tht Encyclopedia ugic 
71 
determination through thinking. This is expressed hyeverysenrence insofar 
as in it what the subject is, i.e. the inidal representation, is supposed to 
be indicated first by the prtdicatt (i.e. in philosophy by means of the 
thought-determination). 
In the sentence 'God is eternal etc.' we start with the representation 
of God, but what he is, is not yet known fgtwufi't]. The predicate firs£ 
declares what he is. In the sphere of the logical, where the content is 
determined exclusively within the form of thought, it would 
therefore not only be redundant to make these determinations into 
predicates of sentences whose subject would be God or, more 
vaguely, the absolute; it would also have the disadvantage of taking 
us back to a standard other than the nature of thought itself. - The 
form of the sentence, or, more precisely, of the judgment is in any 
case unsuitable to express that which is concrete and speculative-
and the true is concrete. A judgment is one-sided on account of its 
form and to that extent false. 
Addition. This kind of metaphysics was not a free and objective thinking, since 
it did not allow the object [ Objtlet] to determine itself freely out of itself bur 
presupposed it as something ready-made. - As concerns thinking freely, Greek 
philosophy thought freely, but not scholasticism, since the latter likewise took up 
its content as something given and, indeed, given by the Church. - We moderns, 
through our entire way of education, have been initiated into rtpmmtations [of 
things}, which it is exceptionally difficult to overcome because these representa-
tions possess the deepest content. Regarding the ancient philosophers we must 
imagine human beings who stand entirely within sensory perception and have 
no other presupposition than the heaven above and the earth around them, since 
mythological representations had been discarded. In this factual environment, 
thought is free and withdrawn into itself, free from anything material, purely with 
itself. This kind of being purely with itself is inherent in free thought, sailing off 
into the free, open space where there is nothing below or above us, and where we 
Sfand in soli rude alone with ourselves. 
§32 
3· This metaphysics became dogmatism because, due to the nature of the 
finite determinations, it had to assume that of two opposite assmions (which 
is what those sentences were) one had to be ~while the other was false. 
Addition. Dogmatism has its opposite at .first in sctptidsm. The ancient sceptics 
generally called every philosophy dogmatic to the extent that it set up definite 
doctrines [Lthmit:zt]. In this wider sense, genuinely speculative philosophy also 
counts as dogmatic for scepticism. The dogmatic element in the narrower sense, 
however, consists in holding onto one-sided determinations of the understanding 

72 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
to the exclusion of their opposites. This is in general the strict either/or and 
accordingly it is said, for instance, that the world is tithtr finite or infinite, bur 
only one of rhe two. By contrast, the true, the speculative is precisely what does 
nor possess such a one-sided determination and is nor exhausted by ir, but rather 
unitc:s within itself as a totality rhose determinations that for dogmatism count as 
something fixed and true in their separation. - Ir frequently happens in philosophy 
rhar what is one-sided puts itself up alongside the totality, with rhe claim ro· be 
something panicular, something fixed opposite ir [the totality]. In fact, however, 
what is one-sided is not something fixed and obtaining for itself but is instead 
contained as something sublated in rhe whole. The dogmatism of the metaphysics 
of the understanding consists in holding on ro one-sided thought-determinations 
in rheir isolation, whereas the idealism of the speculative philosophy, by contrast, 
has rhe principle: of totality and shows itself to reach beyond the one-sided ness of 
rhe abstract determinations of the understanding. Thus idealism will say: the soul 
is neither wholly fin ire nor wholly in fin ire; instead iris essentially the one as we// as 
the other and rhus n~ith~r the one nor rhe other; rhat is to say, such determinations 
in rheir isolation are invalid, and they are valid only qua sublared. - Even in 
our ordinary consciousness, this idealism already occurs. Thus we say of sensory 
things rhat rhey are changeable, i.e. both being and not-being accrue to them. -
We are more stubborn when it comes to the determinations of the understanding. 
Thc:se, taken as thought-determinations, count as something more rigid and fixed, 
indeed. something absolutely rigid and fixed [Ftstts]. We regard them as if they 
were separated from each other by an infinite abyss, so rhar rhe determinations 
standing opposite one another are incapable of ever reaching each other. Reason's 
battle consists in overcoming what rhe understanding has rendered rigid {fixieort]. 
§ 33 
In its wdl-ordered form, the first part of this metaphysics was constituted 
by ontology, i.e. the doctrine of rhe abstract tkterminations of essence. Due 
to their multiplicity and finite validity, a principle was lacking for these 
determinations. For this reason, rhey had to be enumerated empirically 
and contingently and rheir more precise con~nt can be based only on the 
representation, on the assurance that in thinking one associates precisely this 
particular content with a given word, or perhaps on etymology as weU. In 
all this, it can be a matter merely of the co"ectness of the analysis (agreeing 
with linguistic usage) and of empirical comple~ness, not the truth and the 
necessity of such determinations in and of themselves. 
The question whether being, existence or finitude, simplicity, 
compositeness, and so on are in and of themselves true concepts must 
seem odd to someone who believes that there can be talk only of the 
truth of a sentence, rhar the only question can be whether a concept is 
being truthfully attributed (as it is called) to a subject or not, and that 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
73 
untruth depended on the contradiction that might be found to exist 
between the subject of the representation and the concept to be 
predicated of it. But the concept as something concrete (and even 
every determinacy in general) is essentially in itself a unity of diverse 
determinations. Hence, if truth were nothing more than the lack of 
contradiction, the first thing that would have to be considered for 
every concept is whether it did not of itself contain such an internal 
contradiction. 
§34 
The second part was rational psychology or pneumatology, which concerns 
the metaphysical nature of the soul, i.e. of spirit taken as a thing. 
Immortality was located in a sphere where composition, time, 
qualitative a/uration, quantitative increase or decrease have their place. 
Addition. Psychology was called 'rational' by contrast with the empirical exami-
nation of the outward expressions of the soul. Rational psychology considered the 
soul according to its metaphysical nature, as the latter is determined by abstract 
thinking. It wanted to know the soul's inner nature, as it is in itself. as it is for 
thought. - Nowadays there is little talk about the soul in philosophy. and instead 
first and foremost about spirit. Spirit distinguishes itself from the soul, which is, 
so to speak, the middle between corporeality and spirit, or the bond between the 
two. Spirit is immersed in corporeality qua soul, and the soul is the animating 
principle of the body. 
The old metaphysics considered the soul as a thing. 'Thing', however, is a very 
ambiguous expression. By thing we understand first of all an immediate concrete 
existence [tin unmitulbar Existitrmtks], something of which we form a sensory 
representation, and the soul has been talked about in this sense. Accordingly, it 
was asked where the soul has its seat. However, by having a seat the soul is in space 
and represented in a sensory way. When it is asked whether the soul is simple or 
complex, then this is likewise a case of construing the soul as a thing. This question 
was of particular inrerest in connection with the immortality of the soul, insofar 
as the latter was considered to be dependent on the simplicity of the soul. And 
yet, abstract simplicity is in fact a determination that corresponds to the nature of 
the soul as little as that of complexity does. 
As far as the relationship between rational and empirical psychology is con-
cerned, the former takes precedence over the latter, insofar as it sets itself the task 
of knowing the spirit through thinking and also of proving what is then thought, 
while empirical psychology takes its point of departure from sense perception and 
only lists and describes what the latter presents it with. But when one wants to think 
about spirit one must not be so diffident with regard to its particularities. Spirit is 
activity in the sense in which already the Scholastics said of God that he is absolute, 

74 
Tlu Encyclopedia Logic 
pure act [AA-tuositiit]. But for spirit to be active implies that it express itsdf. Spirit 
must therefore not be regarded as an ms devoid of movement (prozefllom ens], as 
happened in the old metaphysics which separated the interiority of spirit, devoid 
of movement, from its externality. Spirit must be viewed essentially in its concrete 
actuality, in its energy, and in such a way that its expressions are recognized as 
determined by its interioriry. 
§ 35 
The third part, cosmology, dealt with the world, its contingency, necessity, 
eternity, limitedness in space and time, the formal laws and their modifi-
carions, as well as human freedom and the origin of evil. 
The following count, above all, as absolute opposites: contingency 
and necessity; external and internal necessity; efficient and final 
causes, or causality in general and purpose; essence or substance and 
appearance; form and maner; freedom and necessity; happiness and 
pain; good and evil. 
AdJih'on. Cosmology made both nature and spirit in their external complexities, 
in their appearance or, generally, existence, the epitome of the finite, iu object. 
h did not, however, consider its object as a concrete whole but only in terms 
of abstract determinations. Thus, for instance, it treated the question of whether 
contingency or necessiry reigns in the world, and the question of whether the 
world is eternal or created. Next, the establishment of so-called universal cosmo-
logical laws- such as, for example, that there are no leaps in nature- formed a 
main interest of this discipline. Leap here simply means qualitative difference and 
quantitative change, which appear to be unmediated [unvt77nittrlt], whereas the 
gradual quantitative change presents itself, by contrast, as something mediated. 
In relation to spirit as it appears in the world, it was pr~minently questions 
concerning human freedom and the origin of evil that were treated in cosmology. 
And indeed these are questions of the utmost interest. However, in order to answer 
them in a satisfactory way, it is above all required that one not cling to the abstract 
determinations of the understanding as something ultimate, in the sense as if 
each of the determinations in opposition to each other obtained on their own 
and were to be regarded as something substantial and true in their isolation. 
This was, however, the standpoint of the old metaphysics in general as well as 
in the cosmological discussions which for that reason were unable to do justice 
to their goal of comprehending the appearances of the world. Thus, for instance, 
the difference between freedom and necessiry was drawn into consideration and 
these determinations were applied to nature and spirit in such a way that one 
considered the former in its effects to be subject to necessiry but the latter to 
be free. This difference is indeed essential and is grounded in the innermost 
dimension of spirit. Yet, freedom and necessity, as standing abstractly opposed 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
7) 
to each other, pertain to finitude alone and are valid only on its soil. A freedom 
which did not have any necessity within itself and a mere necessity devoid of 
freedom - these are abstract and accordingly untrue determinations. Freedom is 
essentially concrete, determined in itself in an eternal manner, and thus equally 
necessary. When speaking of necessity one tends at first to understand by it only 
determinacy from outside, as in finite mechanics, for instance, where a body moves 
only when it is struck lgtsto}ftn] by another body, and in the direction imparted 
to it by this collision [Stofll. This, however, represents a merely external necessity, 
not the genuinely inner necessity, for the Iauer is freedom. - It is the same with 
the opposition of good and tvil, this opposition of the modern world immersed in 
itsel£ When we consider evil as something fixed, [existing] for itself, that is not 
the good, then this is correct and the opposition is to be acknowledged, insofar 
as its spuriousness and relativity must not be taken to mean that evil and good 
are one in the absolute, as has apparently been said recently, and that something 
becomes evil only by virtue of our perspective. What is wrong with this, however, 
is that one considers evil as something positive in a fixed sense, whereas evil is the 
negative that has no subsistence for itself but instead only wants to be for itself, 
and is in fact merely the absolute semblance of negativity within itself. 
§ 36 
The fourth part, natural or rational thtology, considered the concept of God 
or his possibility, the proofs of his existence and his properties. 
(a) In this kind of consideration guided by the undemanding, all 
depends primarily on which predicates are suitable or unsuitable 
with respect to how wt rtprtsent God to ourselves. The opposition 
between reality and negation is taken to be absolute here. Hence in 
the end there is nothing lefi: for the conctpt (as the understanding 
takes it) but the empty abstraction of the indeterminate essenct, 
i.e. the pure reality or positivity, the dead product of modern 
Enlightenment. (b) The activity of proving propositions as carried 
out by the finite understanding shows generally the wrongheaded 
approach in which an objective ground is supposed to be given of 
God's being which thus presents itself as something mtdiattd by an 
other. This process of constructing proofs, which takes the identity 
of the understanding as its yardstick, is caught up in the difficulty of 
making the transition from the finite to the infinite. As a result, it is 
either unable to free God from the unremittingly positive finitude of 
the existing world, such that he had to determine himself as its 
immediate substance (pantheism), -or God remains an object 
[Objtkt] over against the subject and thus somethingfinitt 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
(dualism). (c) The prop~rties that were after all supposed to be 
determinate and diverse have actually perished in the abstract 
concept of the pure reality, the indeterminate essence. And yet, 
insofar as the finite world continues to be represented as a true being 
and God over against it, there arises the representation of diverse 
relationships between the two which, when determined as 
properties, on the one hand must be (as relationships to finite states 
of affairs) of a finite nature themselves (such as just, benevolent, 
powerful, wise, etc.), while on the other hand they are supposed at 
the same time to be infinite. From this standpoint, the said 
contradiction permits only a nebulous resolution by means of 
quantitative augmentation or the sensus emintntiorum, driving the 
properties into indeterminacy. In this way, however, the property is 
in fact annihilated and left with a mere name. 
Addition. In this part of the old metaphysics the point was to find out how far 
reason was able to advance on its own in acquiring knowledge of God. Now, to 
come to know God by means of reason is certainly the highest task of science. 
To begin with, religion contains represemations of God. These representations, 
as they are put together in the Creed, are communicated to us from our youth 
onwards as the doctrines of religion and, insofar as the individual believes in these 
doctrines and insofar as they are the truth for him, he possesses what he needs as 
a Christian. Theology, however, is the science of this faith [G~ubm). If theology 
offers merely an external list and compilation of religious doctrines, then it is 
not yet science. Nor does theology achieve a scientific character through merely 
historical treatment of its subject matter, as is so popular today (when, for instance, 
it is related what this or that Church Father had to say). Achieving this scientific 
character rakes place only by advancing to thinking that comprehends the matter 
[begrtifondn Denken]. which is the business of philosophy. True theology is thus 
in essence also philosophy of religion, and this it used to be in the Middle Ages as 
well. 
As far as the rational thtolot:J of the old .:netaphysics is concerned, it was not 
a science of reason but of the undnstanding dealing with God, and irs thinking 
moved among abstract thought-determinations alone. -Insofar as the (onctpt of 
God was treated here, it was the rtpmentation of God that formed the yardstick 
of knowledge. Thinking, however, must move freely within itself, although it 
should be remarked straightaway that the result of freely thinking coincides with 
the content of the Christian religion, since the latter is the revelation of reason. 
Such an accord, however, did not come about in the case of that rational rheology. 
Insofar as it undertook to determine the representation of God by means of 
thought, the result was only the abstraction [Abstraktum) of a positivity or reality 
in general [serving] as the concept of God, with the exclusion of negativity, and 
God was correspondingly defined as tht most rta/ being. Now it can easily be seen, 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
77 
however, that this mosr real being, by having negarion excluded from it, is exacdy 
the opposite of what it is supposed ro be and what the understanding means to 
have in ir. Instead of being the richest and uuerly complete being. it is rather the 
poorest and utterly empty because of the abstract manner in which it is construed. 
The mind rightfully demands a concrete content. Such a content, however, is 
present only if it contains determinacy. i.e. negation within itself. If the concept 
of God is construed only in the sense of an abstract or supremely real being, God 
becomes for us thereby a mere beyond, and there can be no further question of 
knowledge of him. For where there is no determinateness, knowledge is also not 
possible. Pure light equals pure darkness. 
The second point of interest in this rational theology concerned the proofs 
of the existence of God. The chief point here is thar the way of constructing 
proofs as it is undertaken by the understanding concerns the dependency of 
one determination on another. With this kind of demonstration, one makes a 
presupposition, something fixed, from which something else follows. So what is 
being demonstrated here is the dependency of a determination on a presupposition. 
Now if the existence of God is supposed to be demonstrated in this way, rhen 
this means that the being of God is made to depend on other determinations so 
that the latter constitute the ground of God's being. Here one sees immediately 
that something out of kilrer is bound to result, for God is supposed to be the 
ground absolutely of everything and therefore not dependent on something else. 
In connection with this point, it has been said in more recent times that the 
existence of God cannot be proved, but that it must be known immediately. 
Reason, however, understands by proof something quite different from what the 
understanding and common sense do. To be sure, the manner of proving engaged 
in by reason equally takes something ocher than God for its point of departure, 
and yet in itS progression it does not leave this other standing as something 
immediate and as a being. Rather, by exhibiting this other as something mediated 
and posited, it leads at the same time to the result that God is to be regarded as that 
which is truly immediate, primordial, and self-subsistent, containing mediation 
as sublated within himself. - When one says 'Look at nature, it will guide you 
towards God, you will find an absolute final purpose', this does not mean that 
God is something mediated, but only that wt progress from an other to God 
in such a way that God as the consequence is at the same cime the absolme 
ground of the former. Hence, the position is reversed and what appeared as a 
consequence shows itself equally as a ground, and what p~esented iuelf at first as 
a ground is demoted to a consequence. This is just the path of proofs conducted 
by reason, too. 
Following our discussion so far let us have a look ar the procedure of this 
metaphysics in general. h turns out that it consisted in transforming the objects 
of reason into abstract, finite determinations of the understanding and in making 
abstract identity into a principle. This infinitude of the understanding, how-
ever, this pure essence, is itself merely something finite since the particularity 
is excluded from it and limits and negates it. lnsread of arriving at a concrete 
identity, this metaphysics insisted on abstract identity. And yet, its good side lay 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
in the consciousness that thought alone represents the essentiality of what is [Ilks 
St'imdm). Earlier philosophers and notably the Scholastics provided the material 
[Sto.DJ for this metaphysics. In speculative philosophy, it" is true, the understanding 
is a moment, but a moment at which we do not stop. Plato is not this kind of 
metaphysician, and Aristotle even less so, although it is usually believed that the 
opposite is the case. 
B. SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT TOWARDS OBJECTIVITY 
l Empiricism 
§ 37 
What first led to ~piricism was both the need for a concr~tt content, in 
contrast to the abstract theories of the understanding that is incapable 
of progressing from its generalities to particularization and determination 
on its own, and the need for a firm foothold against the possibility of 
bring able to prov~ ~verything on the plane of, and by the method of, 
finite determinations. Instead oflooking for the true within thought itself, 
empiricism sets out to fetch it from ccp~rimc~. the inwardly and outwardly 
present. 
Addition. Empiricism owes irs origin to the need, referred to in the preceding 
section, for a concrt'tt' content and a firm foothold, a need that the metaphysics of 
the abstract understanding is incapable of satisfying. Insofar as the concreteness 
of the content is concerned, the point is simply that the objects of consciousness 
are known lgt"WUjlt) as determinate objects in and of themselves and as unities 
of diverse determinations. Now as we have seen, this is by no means the case 
for the metaphysics of the understanding, in keeping with the principle of the 
understanding. Thinking that merely conforms to the understanding is limited to 
the form of the abstract universal and lacks the capacity to proceed to the particu-
larization of this universal. Thus, for instance, the old metaphysics undenook to 
find out through thinking what might be the essence or rhe basic determination of 
the soul, and it was then said that the soul is simplt. The simplicity thus attributed 
to the soul has the meaning of an abstract simplicity that excludes difference. The 
latter was regarded as compositeness, i.e. as the basic determination of the body 
and, funhermore, of matter in general. Abstract simplicity is, however, a rather 
poor determination, through which the wealth of the soul and that of spirit cannot 
be comprehended at all. Because abstract metaphysical thought thus proved to be 
deficient, the need was felt to take refuge in empirical psychology. The same is 
true of rational physics. When, for instance, it was said that space is infinite, that 
narwe makes no leaps, ere., then this is quire unsatisfactory in relation to ~e 
fullness and life of nature. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
79 
§38 
Metaphysics authenticates its definitions, both its presuppositions and its 
more determinate content, by appealing to the testimony of representa· 
rions, i.e. the content that derives initially from experience. Empiricism 
shares this source, on the one hand, with metaphysics. On the other hand, 
a single perception is different from experience, and empiricism raises the 
content belonging to perception, feeling, and intuition to the form of uni· 
versa/ representations, sentences, and latus, etc. This happens, however, only 
in the sense that these universal determinations (e.g. force) are to possess 
no other meaning and validity for themselves than that taken from per· 
ception, and that no connection is supposed to be legitimate unless it has 
been exhibited in the appearances. As far as the subjective side is concerned, 
empirical knowing possesses its firm foothold in the fact that in perception 
consciousness finds its otun immediate presence and certainty. 
There lies in empiricism this great principle that what is true must 
exist in actuality and be there for perception. This principle is 
opposed to the ought, with which reflection inflates itself and looks 
down on actuality and the present in the name of a beyond, which is 
supposed to have irs seat and existence in subjective understanding 
alone. Like empiricism, philosophy, too (§ 7), knows only what is; it 
does not know r weiji] what only ought to be and rhus is not th~. -
As f.u as the subjective side is concerned, the important principle of 
freedom, which is part of empiricism, must be recognized as well. 
This principle means that what a human being is supposed to let 
stand in his knowing [Wissen], he has to see himself, knowing 
(wissen] himse!fto be present in the process. However, insofar as 
empiricism, carried out consistently, limits its content to the finite, it 
refuses to acknowledge the supersensible in general, or at least the 
knowledge and determinacy of the latter, and allows thinking only 
abstraction and formal universality and identity. -The fundamental 
delusion in scientific empiricism is always that it uses the 
metaphysical categories of matter, force (not to mention those of 
the one, the many, universality, and infinity, etc.), and proceeds 
to makes inferences guided by such categories, all the while 
presupposing and applying the forms of syllogistic inference, 
ignorant that in so doing it itself contains and pursues metaphysics 
and that it uses those categories and their relationships in a 
completely uncritical and unconscious fashion. 

8o 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
Addition. From empiricism went forth the call: 'Stop rambling around in empty 
abstractions. look at your hands, grasp human beings and nature h"t, enjoy the 
now!' And it cannot be denied that this call contains an essentially legitimate 
point. The empty other-worldly reality [/tnstits], the cobweb and nebulous shapes 
of the abstract understanding, were to be exchanged for the h"t and now, for 
this world (Dimtits]. In this way then, the firm foothold, namely the infinite 
determinability missing in the old metaphysics, was achieved. The understanding 
picks out only finite determinations; these are inherently (an sich} unsupported 
and wobbly, and the building erected upon them collapses. To find an infinite 
determination had been the drive of reason generally; however, the time had not 
yet come to look for it in thinking itself. As a result, this drive took up the 
here and now, the this, which possesses the infinite form in itself. if not in irs 
true concrete existence. What is external [dar Arifl"lirht] is in i'tulf the true, for 
the true is act~ and must exist concretely (muss existi"tn]. Thus, the infinite 
determinateness that reason seeks is in the world, albeit in sensory, individual 
form [Gtstalt], not in irs truth.- More specifically, ptruption is the form in which 
matters are supposed to be comprehended {btgriffin], and this is the deficiency of 
empiricism. Perception as such is always of something individual and transitory; 
knowing, however, does not end with this but in the perceived individual seeks 
the universal, that which abides, and this is the progression from mere perception 
to experience. - In order to have experiences, empiricism principally utilizes the 
form of analysis. In perception, one possesses something concrete in multiple ways 
whose determinations one is supposed to take apart like peeling away the layers of 
an onion. This process of spliuing them up {Ztrglitdmmg] is therefore intended to 
dissolve the determinations that have grown together, breaking them up [urkgtn] 
without adding anything but the subjective activity of breaking them up. Analysis 
is, however, the progression from the immediacy of perception to thought, insofar 
as the determinations, which the object analysed contains amalgamated within 
itself, receive the form of universality by being separated. Because empiricism 
analyses objects, it is in error ifit believes that it leaves them as they are, since it in 
fact uansforms the concrete into something abstract. By this process, it happens 
at the same time that life is taken from the living, for only the concrete, or one, is 
alive. Nonetheless, this severing [Schtidung] must occur in order to comprehend, 
and spirit is itself the severing in itself. This, however, is only ont side, and the 
chief point consists in the unification of what has been severed. Insofar as analysis 
remains committed to the standpoint of separation, the word of the poet applies 
to it: 
Enchtirtsin naturat, says Chemistry now, 
Mocking itself without knowing how. 
Then they have the parts and they've lost the whole, 
For the link that's missing was the living soui.•J 
' 1 Translators' note: Goethe, Faust, Pan Ont, !r. David Luke (Oxford, 1987). 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
81 
Analysis takes its point of departure from what is concrete, and with this kind 
of material it has an enormous advantage over the abstract thinking of the old 
metaphysics. It establishes the differences, and this is of great importance. These 
differences, however, are in turn merely abstract determinations, that is, thqughts. 
Now, insofar as these thoughts count as what things are in themselves, we are back 
with the presupposition of the old metaphysics, namely that the truth of things is 
to be found in thought. 
let us now compare further the standpoint of empiricism with that of the 
old metaphysics with regard to content. As we saw earlier, the Iauer had those 
universal objects of reason such as God, the soul, and the world in general for its 
content. This content had been taken up from representation, and the business 
of philosophy consisted in guiding it back into the form of thoughts. Similarly 
with scholastic philosophy; for it, the dogmas of the Christian Church constituted 
the presupposed content, and the task consisted in further determination and 
systematization of that content by means of thought. -The presupposed content 
of empiricism is of an entirely different sort. It is the sensory content of nature and 
of finite spirit. Here, then, one sees oneselffaced with finite material, and in the old 
metaphysics with infinite material. This infinite content was then made finite by 
the finite form of the understanding. In empiricism, we have the same finitude 
of the form, and the content is finite as weU. The method, meanwhile, is the 
same for both modes of philosophizing, insofar as both start from presuppositions 
that are .regarded as something fixed. For empiricism in general, the external is 
the true, and even when the existence of something supetsensible is admitted, 
knowledge of it is not supposed to be able to occur. Instead, one is supposed to 
ding exclusively to what belongs to perception. In the execution of this principle, 
it has yielded what was later designated mattrilzlism. For this kind of materialism, 
matter as such counts as the truly o~jective. However, matter itself is already an 
abstraction [Abstraktum], something that cannot be perceived as such. One can, 
therefore, say that there is no matter, since however it exists concretely it is always 
something determinate, concrete. Nevertheless, the abstraction called matter is 
supposed to be the foundation of everything sensory, i.e. the sensory as such, 
the absolute individuation in itself, and thus what are outside one another [das 
Aujfertbuzndtrstitntk]. Now, insofar as this sensory component is and remains a 
given for empiricism, it is a doctrine of unfreedom, for freedom consists precisely 
in my having no absolutely other over against me, but depending instead only on 
a content that I am myself. Furthermore, for this standpoint reason and unreason 
are merely subjective; that is to say, we have to accept the given as it is, and we 
have no right to ask whether and in what respect it is rational in and of itself. 
§ 39 
In reflection on this principle, it was immediately and correctly observed 
that in what is called txpm~nc~ (which is to be distinguished from mere 
individual perceptions of individual facts), there are two tkmmts: the 

82 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
infinitely manifold material, [each aspect of which is] individuated for 
itself, and the form, the determinations of univmality and ntctssity. Empir-
ical observation does indeed show many, indeed coundess, perceptions 
that are alike. Still, univmality is something entirely different from a large 
amount [or set: Mmgt]. Similarly, empirical observation indeed affords us 
perceptions of changes following upon ont another, or of objects lying side-
by-side, but no connection involving necessity. Now insofar as perception is 
to remain the foundation of what is to count as the truth, universality and 
necessity appear to be something unwarranted, a subjective coincidence, a 
mere habit, and its content might just as well be as it is or otherwise. 
An important consequence of this is that in this empirical manner 
the legal and ethical determinations and laws as well as the content 
of religion appear as something contingent [Zufollig~s] and their 
objectivity and inner truth are given up. 
Incidentally, Humean scepticism, from which the preceding 
reflection chiefly proceeds, must be dearly distinguished from Greek 
scepticism. Humean scepticism makes the trrtth of the empirical, of 
feding and intuition its foundation, and from there contests the 
universal determinations and laws on the grounds that they lack 
justification through sensory perception. Ancient scepticism was so 
far removed from making feeling or intuition the principle of truth 
that to the contrary it turned first and foremost against the sensory. 
(On modern scepticism as compared to the ancient, see Schelling's 
and Hegel's Kritisch~s journal tin- Philosophie, 1802, vol. I, no. 2.) 
II. Critical philosophy 
§40 
Critical philosophy shares with empiricism the supposition that experience 
is the sole basis of knowledge, except that it lets that knowledge count, not 
for truths, but only for knowledge of appearances. 
The initial point of departure is the difference between the elements 
that result from the analysis of experience: the sensory mat~rial and its 
univmal relations. Insofar as this is combined with the reflection cited in 
the preceding section (that only the individual and only what occurs is 
contained in perception), the fact is insist~d upon at the same time that 
univmality and nec~ssity are to be found in what is called experience as 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
equally essential determinations. Now, since this element does not issue 
from the empirical as such, it belongs to the spontaneity of thinking or 
is a priori. - The thought-determinations or concepts of thr undmtanding 
constitute the objectivity of experiential knowledge. They generally contain 
relationships, hence they are instrumental in the formation of synth~tic 
judgments a priori (i.e. original relationships between opposed elements). 
The fact that the determinations of universality and necessity are 
found in knowing, is not disputed by Humean scepticism. It is also 
nothing but a presupposed fact in the Kantian philosophy. In the 
usual language of the sciences one can say that it has merely put 
forward a different explanation of that fact. 
§41 
First, the Critical philosophy subjects to scrutiny the value of the concepts of 
the undmtanding as they are employed in metaphysics (and, incidentally, 
in the other sciences and in ordinary representation as well). This critique, 
however, does not address the contmt and the specific relationship that 
these thought-determinations have vis-a-vis each other. Instead, it examines 
them with a view to the opposition of subjectiz,ity and objectivity in general. 
This opposition, as it is taken here, refers (see the preceding section) 
to the difference between the elements internal to experience. Objectivity 
here means the element of unif,rrsality and necessity, i.e. the element of 
the thought-determinations memselves - the so-called a priori. But the 
Critical philosophy expands the opposition in such a way that experience 
in its entirety, i.e. both those elements together, belongs to subjectivity and 
nothing remains opposite it but the thing-in-itself. 
The specific forms of the a priori, i.e. of thinlcing, taken as merely sub-
jective activity despite its objectivity, result as follows - a systematization 
that, by the way, rests on merely psychological-historical foundations. 
Addition r. No doubt a very important step was taken by subjecting the deter-
minations of the old metaphysics to scrutiny. Naive thinking moved innocently 
among those determinations, which produced themsdves straightaway and of their 
own accord. No thought was given to the question to what extent these determi-
nations have value and validiry for themselves. It has already been remarked earlier 
that free thinking is one thar has no presuppositions. The thinking of the old 
metaphysics was not free, because it allowed its determinations ro count without 
further ado as something pre-existing, as an a priori which reflection did nor itself 
examine. By contrast, the Critical philosophy made it its task to investigate to 
what extent the forms of thinking were capable of being of assistance in knowing 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
the truth at all. More specifically, the faculty of knowledge was now supposed to 
be investigated prior to knowing. In this there is contained the correct thought 
that the forms of thought themselves must indeed be made the object of knowing. 
However, the misunderstanding of wanting already to know prior to knowing or 
of wanting not to set foot in the water before one has learned to swim, very quickly 
creeps into the process. To be sure, the forms of thought should not be employed 
unexamined, but examining them is already itself a process of knowing. Conse-
quently, the activity of the forms of thought and their critique must be joined 
in knowing. The forms of thought must be considered in and of themselves [an 
und for sich]. They are themselves the object as well as the activity of the object. 
They themsdves examine themselves and they must determine for themselves their 
limits and point up their deficiency in themselves. This is the activity of thinking 
that will soon be specifically considered under the name of dialectic, about which 
a preliminary remark must here suffice, namely that it is to be regarded not as 
something brought to bear on thought-determinations from outside of them, but 
instead as immanent in them. 
The primary concern of the Kantian philosophy is thus that thinking is supposed 
to investigate itself, the extent to which it is capable of knowing. Nowadays, the 
Kantian philosophy has been left behind. and everybody wants to be at a point 
further on. To be further along, however, has a double meaning: both to be 
further ahead and to be further behind. Looked at in clear light, many of our 
philosophical endeavours are nothing but the method of the old metaphysics, an 
uncritical chinking along in a way everyone is capable of. 
Addition 2. Kant's examination of the thought-determinations suffers essentially 
from the defect rhat they are not being considered in and for themselves but only 
from the viewpoint of whether they are subjtctivt or objtctivt. What is understood 
by objtctivity is, following the linguistic usage of ordinary life, what is on hand 
outside of us and reaches us from the outside by means of perception. Now Kant 
denied that thought-determinations (such as cause and effect) possess objectivity 
in the sense mentioned here, i.e. that they are given in perception, and insJead 
regarded them as belonging to our thinking irsdf or to the spontaneity of thinking, 
and as subjective in this sense. This notwithstanding. Kant calls what is thought, 
and more specifically the universal and the necessary, the objective, and what is 
only sensed the subjective. The linguistic usage referred co just now thus seems 
to have been stood on its head, and Kant has for this reason been accused of 
linguistic confusion. But this is a great injustice. Looked at more closely, things 
are as follows. To the ordinary consciousness, what stands opposite it, what is 
perceivable by way of the senses - such as this animal, that star, etc. - seems 
to exist for itself, to be something independent. By contrast, thoughts count 
as something lacking independence and as being dependent on something else. 
In fact, however, what is perceivable by way of the senses is what is genuinely 
dependent and secondary, and thoughts are by contrast what is truly independent 
and primary. It was in this sense that Kant called what belongs to thought (i.e. the 
universal and the necessary) the objtctivt element, and in this he was entirely right. 
On the other hand, what is perceivable by way of the senses is indeed subjtctivt 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
insofar as it does nor have its support within itself and is as fleeting and transitory 
as thought is enduring and inwardly stable. Indeed, nowadays we find that the 
determination of the distinction mentioned here and advocated by Kant, namely, 
between the objective and the subjective, is parr of rhe linguistic usage of rhe 
more educated consciousness. Thus, for instance, one demands that the judgment 
about a work of art be objective and not subjective, and by this is meant that the 
judgment should not proceed from contingent individual sentiments and emotions 
of the moment, bur instead should take into consideration the universaJ points 
of view as they are grounded in the essence of art. By the same token, one may 
distinguish between taking an objective and a subjective interest in some scientific 
acriviry. 
To continue, however, even the Kantian objectivity of chinking itself is in 
turn onJy subjective insofar as thoughts, despite being universal and necessary 
determinations, are, according to Kant, m"~iy our thoughts and distinguished 
from what the thing is in itu/f by an insurmountable gulf. By contrast, the 
true objectivity of thinking consists in this: that thoughts are not merely our 
thoughts bur at the same rime the in its~lf of things and of rhe object-world [tks 
G~mstiintllich~nJ in general.- Obj~ctiv~ and subjtctiw are comfortable expressions 
rhat are employed effortlessly, bur whose use nonetheless easily generates confusion. 
According to the discussion so far, objectivity has a threefold meaning. In tht first 
pl4ct, it has the meaning of what is on hand externally, as distinct from what is 
pu"/y subjective, i.e. what is meant or dreamed up. Stco11d, it has the meaning 
established by Kant, i.e. the universal and the necessary, in contrast to what, as 
inherent to sensation, is contingent, particular, and subjective. And third, it has 
the meaning last mentioned above, of what is thought to be in itself. what is there, 
in contrast to what is merely thought by us and therefore still different from the 
matcer itself or in itsdf. 
§ 42 
(a) Tht thtorttica/ foct~lty, knowledge as such. -This philosophy identifies 
the original idmtity of the I in thinking (i.e. the transcendental unity of 
self~consciousness) as the specific ground of the concepts of the understand-
ing. The representations that are given by means of feeling and intuition 
constitute a manifold in terms of their content, but equally by virtue of 
their form, i.e. by virtue of the status of being outside one another as is 
characteristic of sensoriness, with its rwo forms of space and time, which 
as forms (the universal} of intuition, are themselves a priori. The I relates 
the manifold of sensing and intuiting to itself [the I] and unifies it [the 
manifold) within itself [the IJ as on~ consciousness (pure apperception) 
and, as a result, this manifold is brought to an identity, imo an original 
combination. The determinate ways of relating in the aforesaid manner 
are the pure concepts of the understanding, the cattgorits. 

86 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
It is well known that the Kantian philosophy made it very easy for 
itself in locating the categories. The /, the unity of self-consciousness, 
is quite abstract and entirely indeterminate. How is one then to 
arrive at the determinations of the I, the categories? Fortunately, the 
variow fonns ofjudgment are already listed empirically in ordinary 
logic. Now to judge is to think a determinate object. The various 
forms of judgment that had already been enumerated thus provide 
the various detmninations of thought.- It remains the Fichttan 
philosophy's profound contribution [tiefo Verdienst) to have 
reminded us that the thought-determinations must be exhibited in 
their necessity and that it is essential that they be derived. -This · 
philosophy should at least have had the effect on the method of 
doing logic that the thought-determinations in general or the usual 
logical subject matter, the kinds of concepts, judgments, and 
syllogisms, would no longer simply be taken up from observation 
and thus gathered up merely empirically, but that they be derived 
from thinking itself. If thinking is to be capable of proving anything, 
iflogic must demand that proofi be given, and if it wants to teach 
how to give proofs, then it should be capable above all of proving 
the content most proper to it and seeing its necessity. 
Addition r. It is Kant's contention, then, that the thought determinations have 
their source in the I, and that therefore the I provides the determinations of 
universality and necessity. - When we look at what is now lying before us, it is 
a manifold in general. The categories are then simple forms [Einfochkittn] to 
which this manifold refers. By comrast, the sensory dimension [das Sinnliche] 
comprises what are ourside one another, asunder, external to themselves; this is its 
proper fundamental determination. Thus, for example, the 'now' has being only in 
relation to a before and an after. Likewise, red is present only insofar as it stands in 
contrast to a yellow and a blue. This other, however, is exterior to the item sensed, 
and the Iauer exists only insofar as it is not the other, and only insofar as the other 
exists. The exact reverse of the sensory dimensions (items existing outside one 
another and external to themselves) holds for thinking or the I. The Iauer is what 
is originally identical, one with itself and existing simply with itself {schlechthin bei 
sich Seimtk]. When I say '1', this represents the abstract relation to oneself, and 
whatever is placed in this unity is being infected by it and transformed into it. 
Thus, the I is, so to speak, the melting pot and the fire by which the indifferent 
manifoldness is consumed and reduced to unity. This, then, is what Kant calls 
pure apperception to distinguish it from ordinary apperception, which takes up 
the manifold as such into itself. whereas pure apperception, in contrast m this, 
is ro be regarded as rhe activity of making things mine. - With this, the nature 
of all consciousness has, to be sure, been correcdy aniculated. Human beings' 
striving is directed generally ar knowing the world, appropriating and submitting 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
it to their will, and towards this end the reality of the world must, so to speak, 
be crushed, that is, idealized. At the same time, however, it needs ro be noted 
that it is not the subjective activity of self-consciousness that introduces absolute 
unity into the manifoldness. This identity is, rather, the absolute, the true itself. 
It is, so to speak, the benevolence of the absolute to release the individualities 
to their self-enjoyment, and this absolute drives them back into the absolute 
unity. 
· 
Addition 2. Expressions such as transcmdmta/ unity ofst/fconsciousnm look very 
difficult, as if something monstrous were hiding behind them, but the matter is 
really simpler than that. What Kant understands by transmuimtal is the result 
of how it differs from the transcnuknt. For the transcmdmt is in general what 
surpasses the determinateness of the understanding. In this sense. it first arises in 
mathematics. Thus, in geometry it is said that one must imagine the circumference 
of a circle as consisting of infinitely many infinitely small straight lines. So here 
determinations that for the understanding are completely different from one 
another (such as the straight and the curved) are explicitly posited as being identical. 
Now the self-consciousness that iJ identical with and infinite in itself (as distinct 
from the ordinary consciousness determined by finite material) is also such a 
transcendent entity. Kant, meanwhile, designates that unity of self-consciousness 
merely as transmuknta/, and by this he means that it is only subjective and does 
not also belong to objects as they are in themselves. 
Addition J. That the cattgorits should be regarded only as belonging to us, i.e. 
as subjective, must seem rather bizarre to the natural consciousness, and there is 
indeed something skewed about it. This much is, however, correct, namely that the 
categories are not contained in the immediate sensation. Consider, for instance, a 
piece of sugar. It is hard, white, sweet, and so on. But now we say that all these 
properties are united in ont object, and this unity does not exist in the sensation. 
Things are the same when we regard two events as standing in a relationship of 
cause and effect to one another. What is perceived here are the two individual 
events that foUow after one another in time. The fact, however, that one is the 
cause and the other the effect (the causal nexus between the two) is not perceived 
but instead is present only for our thinking. Now although the categories (such as, 
for example, unity, cause, and effect, and so fonh) do belong to thinking as such, 
it does not follow at all from this that they should for that reason be ours alone, 
and not also determinations of the objects themselves. This, however, is supposed 
to be the case according to Kant's outlook. His philosophy is a subj«tivt itka/ism, 
insofar as the I (the cognitive subject) supplies the form as well as the matter of 
knowing, the one qua thinking, the other qua smsing. - We in fact do not need 
to care much about the content of this subjective idealism. To be sure, one might 
somehow suppose that reality has been withdrawn from the objects by virtue 
of the fact that their unity is transferred ro the subject. Meanwhile, neither the 
objects nor we gain anything from the fact that bting accrues to them. Everything 
depends on the content, namely, whether it is something trut. That things merely 
art does not by itself help them. 1ime takes care of what is, and soon it will likewise 
not be.- One could also say that according to subjective idealism human beings 

88 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
can imagine that a lot rests on thtm. And yet, if his world is a mass of sensory 
intuitions, he has no reason to be proud of such a world. Nothing at all, therefore, 
depends on that difference between subjectivity and objectivity. Instead, it is the 
content on which everything depends, and this is equally subjective and objective. 
A crime is also objective in the sense of a mere concrete existence [.&isttnz], but it 
constitutes a concrete exiS£ence that is null and void in itself. a fact also that then 
comes to exist [zum Dastin kommt] as such in punishment. 
§43 
On the one hand, it is through the categories that mere perception is 
elevated to the level of objectivity, to the level of txptrimce; but, on the 
other hand, these concepts, taken as unities of subjective consciousness 
only, are conditioned by the given material. With respect to themselves 
[for sith], the categories are empty, having application and use only in 
experience, the other element of which, the determinations of feeling and 
intuition, are likewise something merely subjective. 
Addition. To assert of the categories thu, with respect to themselves, they are 
empty is unjustified insofar as they possess in any case coment through the fact 
that they are tkttrminatt. To be sure, the content of the categories is indeed not 
perceivable through the senses, it is not spario-remporal. And yer, this is to be 
regarded as an advantage rather than a defect of them. Recognition of this fact is 
also found even in ordinary consciousness and, indeed, in such a way that one says 
more about a book, say, or a speech being rich in content to the extent that more 
thoughts, general results, and so on, are to be found in it. Just as, conversely, one 
does not let a book or, more specifically, a novel count as being rich in contem 
simply because ir heaps up a great amount of individual occurrences, situations, 
and the like. Ordinary consciousness thus explicitly recognizes that mort belongs 
to the conttnt than the sensory material, and this mort consists in the thoughts and 
here primarily in the cattgorits. - In this connection, it should also be noted that 
the aSsertion concerning the emptiness of the categories with respect to themselves 
has indeed a correct meaning, insofar as we must not stop short at them and their 
totality (i.e. the logical Idea), but must progress to the r~ domains of nature and 
spirit. This progression, however, must not be construed as though content alien 
to the logical idea were to come to it from the outside, but instead that it is the 
logical idea's own activity of funher determining and unfolding itself as nature 
and spirit. 
§44 
The categories are therefore incapable of being determinations of the abso· 
lute, something that is not given in a perception, and, for that reason, the 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
understanding or knowledge by means of the categories is unable to know 
things in thtmstlvts. 
The thing-in-itst/f(and under thing, spirit, God are also included) 
expresses the object insofar as one abstracts from everything that 
it is for consciousness, i.e. from all determinations of sensation 
[ Gtfohlsbtstimmungtn] as well as from all determinate thoughts of 
it. It is easy to see what remains, namely the compktt abstractum, 
something entirely tmpty, determined only as a btyond; the ntgativt 
of representation, feeling, determinate thinking, and so on. Equally 
simple, however, is the reAection that this caput mortuum is itself 
merely tht product of thought, more specifically, [the product] of 
thought that has progressed to pure abstraction, [the product] of the 
empty I that makes this empty idtntity of itself into an objtct for 
itself. The ntgativt determination that this abstract identity receives 
as objtct is similarly listed among the Kantian categories and is 
something just as familiar as that empty identity.- One can only 
wonder, then, why one sees it repeated so often that one does not 
know [wissm] what the thing-in-itst/fis, when there is nothing easier 
to know than this. 
§ 45 
Now it is rtason, the faculty of the unconditiontd, that grasps the condi-
tioned character of these acquaintances with things, gathered from experi-
ence [Erfahrungsktnntnisst]. What is here called object of reason, namely 
the unconditiontd or the infinitt, is nothing but the self-same, or it is the 
above-mentioned (§ 42) original identity of the I in thinking. Rtason means 
this abstract/, or the thinking that makes this pure identity into an object 
or purpose for itself[i.e. for the thinking]. See the Remark in the preceding 
section. The acquaintances with things, gathered from experience, do not 
measure up to this identity utterly devoid of dtttrminattntss, since they are 
in any case findings of a dtttrminatt content. Insofar as such an uncon-
ditioned object is taken to be the absolute and the true object of reason 
(as the idea), acquaintances with things gathered from experience are as a 
result declared to be the untrue, to be apptarancts. 
Addition. lt is first with Kant that the difference becween the understanding 
and reason has been emphasized in a definite way and set down in such manner 
that the former has the finite and the conditioned as an object and the latter 
the infinite and the unconditioned. Ir must be acknowledged as a very imporrant 

90 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
result of the Kantian philosophy that it established the finitude of the merely 
experience-based knowledge of the understanding and designated irs content as 
app~aranc~. Still, we should not stop shon at this negative result and reduce the 
unconditioned nature of reason to the merely abstract identity with itself that 
excludes difference. Insofar as reason is regarded in this way merely as stepping 
out beyond the finite and conditioned character of the understanding, by this 
means it is in fact itself downgraded to something finite and conditioned, for the 
true infinite is not merely on the far side of the finite, but instead contains the 
finite as sublated within it. The same holds equally for the idea, which Kant, it is 
true, rehabilitated, insofar as he vindicated it for reason by distinguishing it from 
the abstract determinations of the understanding, not ro mention mere sensory 
representations- things that in ordinary life would also be called an idea. And yet, 
with respect to it [the idea) he stopped short at the negative and what merely ought 
to b~. - Furthermore, construing the objects of our immediate consciousness (i.e. 
those forming the contenr of experiential knowledge) as mere app~arances must 
in any case be regarded as a very important result of the Kantian philosophy. For 
ordinary consciousness (i.e. the sensory consciousness of the understanding), the 
objects it knows [w~if$1 coum in their individuatedness as independent and self-
grounded, and insofar as they prove to be related to one another and conditioned 
by one another, this mutual dependence on each other is regarded as something 
external to the objects chat does not belong to their essential nature. Against this, 
it must be maintained, of course, that the objects that we know [wiss~n) directly 
are mere appearances, which is to say that they do not have the ground of their 
being in themselves but in an other. However, everything depends then on how 
this other is determined. According to the Kantian philosophy, the things we know 
[u,issm) are only appearances for us, and what they are in thnns~lves remains for us 
an inaccessible world beyond this one (Jmuitr]. The untutored consciousness has 
rightly objected to such a subjective idealism for which what forms the content 
of our consciousness is something belonging mn-~ly to ourselves, something only 
posited by us. The fact of the matter is indeed this, that the things we immedi-
ately know [wissm] are mere appearances not only for us, but in thn-nulves, and 
that it is the proper determination of finite things to have the ground of their being 
not in themselves but in the universal divine idea. This interpretation of things 
is also to be designated as idealism, albeit as absolute idealism in contrast to the 
subjective idealism of the Critical philosophy. This absolute idealism, although it 
does go beyond ordinary realist consciousness, is to be regarded as anything but 
an exclusive possession of philosophy. To the contrary, it forms the foundation 
of all religious consciousness, insofar as the latter, too, regards the sum total of 
everything that is, in general the world as it exists, as created and governed by 
God. 
§46 
The need arises, however, of knowing [trkmnm] this identity or the empty 
thing-in-its~lf. Now to know means nothing other than knowing [wisun] an 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
91 
object in terms of its d~urminau content. A determinate content, however, 
contains multiple conn~ctions within itself and grounds connections with 
many other objects. For such a determination of the above infinite or 
thing-in-its~lfthis kind of reason would have nothing but the cattgories at 
its disposal. Insofar as it wants to use them for this purpose, it soars ovn-
[iib~rfli~g~ndj objects (it becomes transcendent). 
At this point, the second aspect of the critiq~ of mzson enters the 
scene, and this second aspect is as such more important than the 
first. The first is the view dealt with above, that the categori~s have 
their source in the unity of self-consciousness and that, as a result, 
knowledge by means of them does indeed contain nothing objective, 
and that the objectivity ascribed to them (cf. §§ 40, 41) is itself only 
something subjutive. If this is the issue at stake, then the Kamian 
critique is merely a subj~ctive (banal) iekalism that does not engage 
the content, focuses only on the abstract forms of subjectivity 
and, indeed, remains ensconced one-sidedly in the former, i.e. 
subjectivity, as the final, absolutely affirmative determination. When 
it comes to considering the so-called application that reason makes of 
the categories for knowledge of its objects, then the content of the 
categories is being discussed, at least for some determinations, or at 
any rate this would be an occasion at which it might be discussed. It 
is of particular interest to see how Kant assesses this application of th~ 
categori~s to the unconditioned, i.e. metaphysics. This procedure shall 
be brieRy presented and critiqued here. 
§47 
I. The first unconditioned that is considered is the soul (see above, § 34). -
In my consciousness I find myself always (a) as the ektermining subject, 
(~) as singular or abstraaly simple, (y) as one and th~ same, idmtical in aJJ 
the manifoldness of what I am conscious of. (S) as something distinguishing 
myself as thinking from all things outsiek me. 
Now the procedure of the former metaphysics is correaly described 
as substituting for these empirical determinations thought-ekurminations, 
i.e. the corresponding categori~. In this way the following four statements 
result: (a) the soul is a substana, (~) it is a simpk substanct, (y) it is 
numn-ically iekntical at different times of its existence, (S) it stands in a 
relationship to the spatial dimension [zum Riiumlichm]. 
In this substitution, a deficiency is noted, namely that two differ-
ent determinations are exchanged for one another (paralogism), namely, 

92 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
empirical determinations for categories, so that it would be illegitimate to 
inftr the latter from the former, or generally to replace the former with the 
latter. 
As can be seen, this critique expresses nothing but the Humean observa-
tion mentioned above in § 39 that the thought-determinations in general, 
namely universality and necessity, are not to be found in perception and 
that the empirical is different, in terms of content as in terms of its form, 
from the thought-determination. 
If the empirical were to constitute the authentication of thought, 
then the latter would indeed have to be precisely demonstrated in 
perception. - Substantiality, simplicity, identity with itself and an 
independence that maintains itself while being in community with 
the material world cannot be assened of the soul. The Kamian 
critique of metaphysical psychology attributes this exclusively to the 
fact that the determinations that consciousness lets us experimce of 
the soul are not exacdy the same as those that thinking produces in 
this connection. According to the presentation above, however, even 
Kane has knowing, indeed even cperiencing, consist in the fact that 
perceptions are thought; that is to say, the determinations belonging 
at first to perception are transformed into determinations of 
thought. - In any case, it should be deemed a good result of the 
Kantian critique that philosophizing about spirit has been freed 
from the soul-thing, from the categories and thus from the questions 
concerning the simplicity or compositenm, the materiality, and so 
fonh, of the soul. - However, the true viewpoint regarding the 
illegitimacy of such forms, even for ordinary human understanding, 
will surely not be that they are thoughts, but that such thoughts in 
and of themselves hold no truth. - If thought and appearance do not 
correspond to each other completely, one initially has the choice of 
regarding the one or the other as deficient. In Kantian idealism, 
insofar as it concerns what belongs to reason, the deficiency is 
blamed on the thoughts, such that they are held to be insufficient, 
because they do not adequately correspond to what is perceived and 
to a consciousness that restricts itself to the scope of perception, a 
consciousness in which the thoughts are not to be found. The 
content of thought in and of itself goes unmentioned here. 
Addition. Generally speaking, paralogisms are faulty syllogisms whose mistake 
consists precisely in using one: and the same word in a different sense in both 
premises. According to Kant, the: procedure of the old metaphysics in rational 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
93 
psychology is based on such paralogisms, insofar as merely empirical determina-
tions of the soul arc: here regarded as belonging to it in and of itself. - It is quite 
correct, moreover, that predicates such as simplicity, immutability, and so on, are 
not to be attributed to the soul, yet not for the reason given by Kant, namely that 
reason would then overstep the limit set for it, but because abstract determina-
tions of the understanding such as these are too poor for the soul and because it is 
something quite different from what is simple, immutable, and so on. Thus, for 
instance, the soul is indeed simple identity with itself, but qua active it is at the 
same time distinguishing itself from itself within itself. By contrast, the ~uly, 
i.e. the absuacdy simple, precisely as such, is at the same rime something dead. -
The fact that Kanr, through his polemic against the old metaphysics, removed 
those predicates from the soul and from spirit is to be regarded as a great result. 
Howe-ver, he completely misses why it is. 
§ 48 
2.. In reason's attempt to know the second unconditioned object(§ 35), the 
world, it falls into antinomi~. i.e. the affirmation of two opposite sentences 
about the same object and, indeed, in such a way that each of these sen-
tences must be affirmed with equal necessity. From this it follows that the 
worldly content, whose determinations incur such a contradiction, can-
not be something in itself, but only appearance. The resolution is that the 
contradiction does not apply to the object in and of itself. but pertains 
solely to reason engaged in trying to know [aUein der erkmnmden Vernunfi 
zukommt]. 
This is where it is brought up that it is the content itself. namely the 
categories themselves, that bring about the contradiction. This 
thought that the contradiction posited in the realm of reason [am 
Vernunfiigen] by the determinations of the understanding is essential 
and necessary must be regarded as one of the most important and 
profound advances in the philosophy of recent times. The resolution 
is as trivial as the view is profound. It consists merely in a tenderness 
for worldly things. It is not supposed to be the worldly essence that 
bears the blemish of contradiction, but it is supposed to fall to 
thinking reason alo~. the ~sence of spirit. Now probably nobody is 
going to object to the claim that the world as it appears displays 
contradictions to the spirit beholding it - for the world as it appears 
is the world for the subjective spirit, i.e. for sensoriness and 
understanding. But now if the worldly essence is compared with the 
spiritual essence, one can marvel at the naivete with which the 

94 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
humble claim has been put forth and repeated that it is not the 
worldly essence, but instead the thinking essence, i.e. reason, that 
is in itself contradictory. To use the expression that reason incurs 
contradiction only because of the application of the categories is of no 
help. For it is claimed in the process that this application is nemsary 
and that reason possesses no other determinations for knowing than 
the categories. Knowing is indeed determining and dettrminate 
thinking. If reason is merely empty, indeterminate thinking, it 
thinks nothing. If reason is ultimately reduced to that empty idtntity 
(see the following section), then it is in the end happily freed from 
the above contradiaion by the easy sacrifice of all content and 
import [Inhalt tmd Gthalt]. 
It can further be noted that the neglect of a deeper consideration 
of the antinomies initially led to Kant listing only four antinomies. 
He arrived at these four, because as with the so-called paralogisms 
he presupposed the table of categories and in so doing followed the 
manner that has since become so popular, namely to place the 
determination of an object under an otherwise ready-made schema, 
instead of deriving them from the concept. Further dtsidtrata 
concerning the execution of the antinomies I have on occasion 
pointed out in my Science of Logic. -The main thing to be noted is 
that the antinomy occurs not only in the four specific objects taken 
from cosmology but instead in all objects of all genera, in all 
representations, concepts, and ideas. To know [wissen] this and to 
gain knowledge of objects thus characterized belongs to the essence 
of a philosophical consideration. This characteristic constitutes what 
determines itself further on as the dialectical moment of the logical. 
Addition. From the standpoint of the old metaphysics it was assumed that, if 
knowing falls into contradictions, this would be only an accidental aberration 
and rest on a subjective mistake in making inferences and in formal reasoning 
[rasonnitrtn]. According to Kant, however, it is inherent in the nature of thinking 
itself to lapse into contradictions (antinomies) when it wants to gain knowledge of 
the infinite. Now, as mentioned in the Remark to the above section, pointing out 
the antinomies is to be regarded as a very important advancement of philosophical 
knowing insofar as, by this means, the rigid dogmatism of the metaphysics of the 
understanding was done away with and the dialectical movement of thought was 
indicated. Nonetheless, at the same time, despite this advancement, note must be 
taken of the fact that here, too, Kant stopped short at the merely negative result 
of the unknowabiliry of the in-itself of things and did not press on to the true 
and positive significance of the antinomies. The true and positive significance of 
the antinomies consists in general in this: that everything actual contains within 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
95 
itself opposite determinations, and that therefore knowing and, more specifically, 
comprehending [Begreifml an object means nothing more or less than becoming 
conscious of it as a unity of opposite determinations. Now while, as pointed out 
earlier, in the consideration of objects the metaphysical knowledge of which was 
at issue, the old metaphysics went to work by applying abstract determinations of 
the understanding to the exclusion of their opposites, Kant sought, by comrast, 
to show how, for claims generated in this \vay, contrasting claims with an opposite 
content are to be posited with equal justification and equal necessity opposite 
them. In pointing out these antinomies, Kant restricted himself to the cosmology 
of the old metaphysics, and in his polemic against it he managed to produce four 
antinomies by presupposing the schema of the categories. The fim concerns the 
question of whether the world is to be considered limited or not according to space 
and time. The second deals with the dilemma of whether matter is to be considered 
divisible ad infinitum or consisting of atoms. The third antinomy refers to the 
opposition between freedom and necessity, in the sense, namely. that the question 
is posed whether everything in the world must be considered to be conditioned 
by the causal nexus or whether free beings, i.e. absolute starting-points of action 
in the world, are to be assumed as well. To this is added finally, as the fourth 
antinomy, the dilemma of whether the world in general has a cause or not. - The 
method that Kant follows in his discussion of these antinomies is as follows. He 
juxtaposes the opposite determinations contained in them as thesis and antithesis 
and tries t~ prove both of them, i.e. to exhibit both of them as the necessary results 
of thinking them through. In the process he explicitly defends himself against the 
charge that he sought smoke and mirrors in order to perform a spurious lawyer's 
proof. However, the proofs that Kant proposes for his theses and antitheses must 
indeed be regarded as mere pseudo-proofs, since what is supposed to be proved is 
always already contained in the presuppositions that form the starting-point and 
only through the long-winded, apagogic process is the semblance of mediation 
produced. Nonetheless, the construction of these antinomies will always remain a 
very important and praiseworthy result of the Critical philosophy, insofar as the 
actual unity of those determinations that are kept apart by the understanding is 
thereby articulated, even if at first only in a subjective and immediate way. Thus, 
for example, the first of the aforementioned cosmological antinomies contains the 
notion that space and time are to be regarded not only as continuous but also 
as discrete, whereas in the old metaphysics one stopped short at mere continuity 
and, in keeping with this, the world was considered unlimited in terms of space 
and lime. It is entirely correct to say that we can go beyond any given dturminatt 
space as well as any tkttrminau time; but it is no less correct to say that space 
and time are actual only through their determinateness, i.e. as here and now, and 
that this determinateness is inherent in the concept of them. The same is uue of 
the rest of the remaining antinomies listed earlier, for instance, the antinomy of 
freedom and necessity with which, looked at more closely, things stand as follows: 
what the understanding understands by freedom and necessity indeed concerns 
only the ideal moments of true freedom and uue necessity, and the two in their 
separation amount to nothing rrue. 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
§ 49 
3· The third object of reason is God (§ 36), who is supposed to be known 
krkannt], i.e. ddmnin~d through thinking. For the understanding, all deter-
mination is only a limitation [Schrank~] of the simple idmtity, a negation 
as such. Thus all reality must be taken to be limitless, i.e. indet~inat~. 
and God as the sum total of all realities or as the most real being [W~sm] 
becomes the simple abstractum, and for the determination [of God] there 
is left only the equally completely abstract determinateness, namely, b~ing. 
Abstract idmtity (which is also called the concept here) and bring are the 
two moments whose unification is what reason seeks. It is the ideal of 
reason. 
§50 
There are two possible paths or forms to this unification: one can begin 
from b~ingand from there make the transition to the abstractum of thinking 
or, conversely, the transition can be effected from the abstractr~m to being. 
As far as the beginning with being is concerned, being, as the immediate, 
presents itself as a being with an infinite variety of determinations, a 
world completely full. It can be further determined as a collection of 
infinitely many contingencies in general (as in the cosmological prooO. 
or as a collection of infinitely many purpom and relationships adapted 
to purposes (as in the physico-ul~ological proofs). -To think this fullness 
of being [dims n:follu s~in] means to divest its form of individual and 
contingent [features] and to grasp it as a universal being, different from 
that first [fullness of being], to grasp it as necessary in and for itself, active 
and determining itself in accordance with universal purposes - in short, to 
grasp it as God.- The chief sense of the critique of this path is that it is an act 
of inferring, a transition. For insofar as p~rceptions and their aggregate, the 
world, do not as such exhibit the universality that thinking produces by its 
purification of that content, this universality is not justified in this way, it is 
argued, by that empirical representation of the world. Opposed accordingly 
to this process of thought ascending from the empirical representation of 
the world to God is the Hum~an standpoint (as with the paralogisms, see 
§ 47), the standpoint that declares it illicit to think the perceptions, i.e. to 
lift the universal and necessary out from them. 
Since it is the nature of a human being to think, neither healthy 
common sense nor philosophy will ever allow itself to be kept from 
devating itself from and out of the empirical view of the world 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
97 
[ Wtltanschauung] to God. This elevating has nothing else for its 
foundation than thoughtful [denktndt], not merely sensory or 
animalistic observation [&trachnmg] of the world. The tssenct, the 
substanct, the univmal powtr and purposivt determination of the 
world exist for thought and only for thought. The so-called proofs 
of the existence of God should be viewed merely as descriptions and 
analyses of tht inntr route of tht spirit who is a thinking spirit and 
who thinks the sensory [world]. The tkvating of spirit above the 
sensory, its proem of going btyOnd the finite towards the infinite, 
the leap that is made into the infinite by breaking off the series of 
sensory [events], all this is thinking itself, this transitioning is 
nothing but thinking. If such a transition is not supposed to be made, 
this means that thinking is nor supposed to happen. Indeed, the 
animals do not make such a transition, thty stop short at sensory 
sensation and intuition, and for this reason they have no religion. 
Two remarks are in order here about the critique of this elevating of 
thought, both in general and in particular. Pint, if it is put into the 
form of syllogisms (so-called proofi of the existence of God), the point 
of departurt is indeed the view of the world that is determined in one 
way or another as an aggregate of contingencies or purposes and 
purposive relationships. In thinking, insofar as it syltogisn, this point 
of departure can appear to rmrain and bt J4i as a jixtd foundation 
and just as empirical as this material at first is. The relationship 
of the point of departure to the end-point towards which one 
progresses is rhus represented as purely affirmativt, as an inferring 
from ont thing that supposedly is and rnnains to somtthing tlu that 
supposedly is as wtll. Still, it is a grave error to want to recognize the 
nature of thinking only in the form it takes as understanding. To 
think the empirical world means, much more essentially, to modify 
its empirical form and to transform it into a universal. At the same 
time thinking applies a ntgativt activity to that foundation. When 
determined by universality, the perceived material dots not maintain 
its initial empirical form. Through elimination and negation of the 
crust (cf. §§ 13 and 2.3} the inner basic contmt [ Gthalt] of what is 
perceived is brought our. The metaphysical proofs of the existence 
of God are insufficient explanations and descriptions of the elevation 
of spirit from the world to God for this reason because they do not 
express or rather bring out the moment of ntgation that is contained 
in this elevation. For it is inherent in the fact that the world is 
contingtnt [.zufiillig] that it is merely something incidmtal 
[Fallendts], something apparent, something that in and for itself is 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
not [tin Nichtigts]. The sense of the elevation of spirit is that, while 
being belongs to the world, this being is merely a semblance 
[Schtin], not the true being, not absolute truth, and that this 
[truth] is instead beyond that appearance in God alone, that God 
aJone truly exists. Insofar as this elevation is transition and 
mtdiation, it is equally a sublating of the transition and the 
mediation. For that through which God could seem to be mediated, 
i.e. the world, is instead declared to be what is not [das Nichtigt]. 
Only the world's bting in this manner of not being [Nichtigktit] 
forms the bond of the elevation, such that what exists as the 
mediating element disappears and, by this means, the mediation is 
sublated in this mediation itself. - It is chiefly this relationship, 
conceived merely as affirmative and as a relationship between two 
beings, to which jacobi clings, while he combats the constructing of 
proofs by the understanding. Against it, he rightly objects that 
conditions (i.e. the world) are thereby sought for the unconditiontd, 
that the in.finitt (i.e. God) is in this way represented as grounded and 
deptndent. And yet, that elevation as it occurs in spirit by itself 
corrects this semblance [Schtin]; indeed, its entire basic content is 
the correction of this semblance. But this true nature of essential 
thinking, to sublate the mediation in the mediation itself, Jacobi 
failed to recognize. As a consequence, he erroneously mistook the 
correct objection that he levels against the merely reflective 
understanding for one that applies co thinking in general and thus 
also to the thinking based on reason. 
As a means of elucidating how the ntgativt moment is 
overlooked, we can cite as an example the objection made against 
Spinozism, namely that it is pantheism and atheism. To be sure, the 
absolutt substanct of Spinoza is not yet the absolute spirit, and it is 
rightly demanded that God must be determined as absolute spirit. 
If, however, Spinoza's determination is represented in such a way 
that he merges God with nature, i.e. with the finite world, and turns 
the world into God, it is thereby presupposed that the finite world 
possesses true actuality, affirmativt rtality. With this presupposition, 
to be sure, through the unity of God with the world, God is made 
utterly finite and downgraded co the merely finite, external 
manifoldness of existence. Apart from the fact that Spinoza does not 
define God as the unity of God and the world, but instead as the 
unity of thinking and extension (the material world), it lies already 
in this unity, even if taken in chis initial, quite awkward way, that in 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
99 
the Spinozistic system the world is in fact determined as a mere 
phenomenon to which true reaJity does not pertain, so that this 
system is to be regarded much more as acosmism. A philosophy that 
claims that God and only God exists should at least not be passed 
off as atheism. Even tribes who worship the monkey, the cow, or 
stone and iron statues, and so forth as God are being credited 
with having religion. But representation is even more averse to 
surrendering its own presupposition that its aggregate of finitude 
called world actually has reality. That there is no world, as 
representation might express itself, such an assumption is easily 
held to be completely impossible, or at least to be much less possible 
than the assumption that might come into one's head that there is 
no God. One believes, and not exacdy to one's credit, much more 
easily that a system denies God than that it denies the world; one 
finds it far more conceivable that God is denied than that the 
world is. 
The second remark concerns the critique of the basic content that 
the thinking elevation {mentioned above] first acquires. This basic 
content is, of course, not adequate to what is or ought to be 
understood by God if it consists only in determinations such as the 
substance of the world, its necessary essence, a cause ort:kring and 
directing in a purposefol manner, and so forth. But setting aside the 
practice of presupposing some representation of God and judging a 
result according to such a presupposition, the above determinations 
are indeed of great value and necessary moments of the idea of God. 
In order to bring the basic content in its true determination, the true 
idea of God, before thinking in this manner, the point of deparrure 
must, of course, not be taken from subordinate content. The merely 
contingent things of the world are a very abstract determination. 
The organic creations and determinations of their purposes belong 
to a higher circle, lift. However, apart from the fact that the 
contemplation of living nature and of the rest of the relationships 
of things on hand to purposes can be tarnished by the triviality of 
purposes, or even by childish ways of citing purposes and their 
relations, nature that is merely alive is indeed itself not yet that from 
which the true t:ktermination of the idea of God can be grasped. God 
is more than living, he is spirit. The spiritual nature alone is the most 
dignified and the truest point of departure for thinking the absolute, 
insofar as thinking takes for itself a point of departure and wants to 
choose the nearest at hand. 

100 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
§51 
The other path of th~ unification through which the idtal is supposed to 
come about starts from the abstractum of thought and proceeds to the deter-
mination for which only b~ing remains- the ontological proof of the ~istenu 
of God. The opposition that occurs here is that of thinking and b~ing, since 
on the first path being is common to both sides and the opposition con-
cerns merely the difference between the individual instance [ V~reinultm] 
and the universal. What the understanding sets down in opposition to this 
second path is in itself the same as what was just mentioned, namely, that 
just as the universal cannot be found in the empirical, so also conversely 
the determinate is not contained in the universal, and the determinate 
here is being. Or, being supposedly cannot be derived from the concept or 
retrieved through analysis of it. 
The Kantian critique of the ontological proof has no doubt found 
such unqualifiedly favourable attention and acceptance because of 
the example he used. In order to clarify what the difference is 
between thinking and being, he used the example of the hundred 
dollars that would be equal to a hundred, whether they be merely 
possible or real, as far as the concrpt of them is concerned and yet this 
would make an essential difference to the state of my resources.-
Nothing can be so plain as the fact that what I think or imagine 
is for all that not yet actua~ or so obvious as the thought that 
representation or even the concept are insufficient to reach being. 
Ignoring the fact that calling something like a hundred dollars a · 
concept could be justly labelled barbaric, those who repeat again 
and again against the philosophical idea that thinking and ~ing are 
· diffirent should at long last accept that this is likewise familiar to 
philosophers. For, is there anything that one is familiar with 
[Kenntnis] that could indeed be more trivial than that? Next, 
however, it ought to be considered that when God is under 
discussion, this is an object of a different kind from a hundred 
dollars and from any sort of panicular concept, representation, or 
whatever one wants to call it. Indeed, everythingfiniu is like this and 
this a/on~. that the ~xistenc~ of it diffirs from its conctpt. God, on the 
other hand, is explicitly supposed to be what can only be 'thought as 
~isting, where the concept includes being. This unity of concept 
and being is what constitutes the concept of God. -To be sure, this 
is as yet only a formal determination of God, which for this reason 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
101 
contains indeed merely the nature of the conctpt itself. However, that 
the latter, even in its entirely abstract sense, already includes being is 
easy to see. For the concept, however else it may be determined, is at 
the very least the relation emerging from sublating the mediation 
and rhus the imm~diate rtlationship to itself; being, however, is 
nothing other than this.- One· might weU say that it would have to 
be very strange, if the innermost core of spirit (the concept) or if the 
I, not to mention the concrete totality that is God, were not even so 
rich as to contain within itself so impoverished a determination 
as being, which is, after all, the poorest and most abstract 
determination. In terms of the basic content, there can be nothing 
more trivial [ Gering~r~s] for thought than being. Only this much 
may be even more trivial, namely, what one first imagines somehow 
with respect to being, such as an external sensory existence like that 
of the paper here in front of me. But, after all, no one will want to 
talk about the sensory existence of a limited, transient thing. -
Incidentally, the trivial remark of the Critiq~. that thought and 
being are different, is able at most to sidetrack but not put an end to 
the human spirit's progression from the thought of God to the 
certainty that he exists. It is this transition, too, the inseparability of 
the thought of God from his being, that has been re-established in 
its rightful position in the perspective of immediate knoruing or 
beli4', of which more will be said later. 
§52 
Deurminateness remains something external for thinking in this way at its 
highest point; it continues to be an entirely abstract thinking that is called 
reason here throughout. Hence, the result is that the latter contributes 
nothing but the formal unity for the simplification and systematization of 
experiences. It is a canon, not an organon of truth, and is able to deliver 
not a doctrine of the infinite, but merely a critique of knowledge. In the 
final analysis, this critique consists in the assurance that thinking is in itself 
merely an indeterminate unity and the activity of this indeterminate unity. 
Addition. h is true that Kant construed reason as the faculty of the uncondi-
tioned. However, if reason is reduced merely to an abstract identity, this at the 
same time entails renouncing irs unconditioned status, and then reason is indeed 
nothing but empty understanding. Reason is unconditioned only in virtue of the 
fact that it is not determined from outside by some content alien to it, but instead 
determines itself and is by this means at home with itself in its content. Now, 

102 
Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
according to Kant, the activity of reason explicitly consists merely in systematizing 
the material conveyed by perception and doing so through the application of the 
categories, that is to say, putting it into some external order, and its principle 
thereby is merely that of the absence of contradiaion. 
§53 
(b) Practical rtason is conceived as the will determining itself and, indeed, 
in a univmal manntr, i.e. as a thinking will. It is supposed to furnish imper-
ative, objective laws of freedom, i.e. laws that state what ought to happen. 
The legitimacy of assuming that thinking is an objectivt/y dettrmining 
activity (i.e. indeed a form of rtason), is located in the fact that practical 
freedom is provm through exptrimct, i.e. that it can be demonstrated in 
the appearance of self-consciousness. This experience in consciousness is 
countered by everything that determinism, equally based on experience, 
brings forward against it, especially the sceptical (also Humtan) induction 
of the infinite dir,mity of what counts as right and duty among human 
beings, i.e. as the laws of freedom that are supposed to be objective. 
§54 
As for what practical thought is supposed to make into a law for itself. 
i.e. the criterion for tktermining itself within itself. once again nothing is 
available but the same abstract idmtity of the understanding, namely, that 
no contradiction occur in the act of determining. Thus, practical reason 
does not advance beyond the formalism that is supposed to be the ultimate 
standpoint of thtorttical reason. 
Bur this practical reason does not merely posit within itst/fthe universal 
determination, namely the good. Instead it is genuinely practical only in its 
demand that the good have worldly existence and external objectivity, i.e. 
that the thought should be not merely subjtctivt, but altogether objective. 
More about this postulate of practical reason later. 
Ad4ition. What Kant had denied theoretical reason, namely free self-
determination, he explicitly vindicated for practical reason. It is principally this 
side of the Kantian philosophy that has won it great favour, and rightly so. In 
order to recognize the value of our debt to Kant in this respect, we need first 
to call to mind that shape of the practical philosophy and specifically the moral 
philosophy that he encountered as the dominant one. This was generally speaking 
the system of eudaemonism. In reply to the question concerning the vocation of 
human beings, it answered that they had to aim for happiness as their goal. Now 
insofar as one understood by happiness the satisfaaion ofhuman beings' panicular 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
103 
inclinations, wishes, needs, etc., the contingent and the particular were thereby 
made into the principle of the will and its activity. Kant placed practical reason in 
opposition to this eudaemonism that dispenses with any firm hold within itself and 
opens the door to every whim and passing mood, and he enunciated in this way 
the requirement of a universal determination of the will that was equally binding 
on everybody. According to Kant, as has been noted in the preceding sections, 
theoretical reason is supposed to be onty the negative faculty of the infinite and, 
without any positive content of its own, it is supposed to be limited to recognizing 
the finitude of knowledge of experience. But he explicitly recognized, by contrast, 
the positive infinity of practical reason and, indeed, in such a way that he ascribes 
to the wiD the capacity for determining itself in a universal manner, that is to say, 
in thinking. The will surely possesses this capacity and it is of enormous impor-
tance to know [wissm) that human beings are free only insofar as they possess 
this capacity and make use of it in their acrions. But with this acknowledgment, 
the question concerning the content of the will or of praCtical reason is still not 
answered. When it is then said that human beings ought to make the good the 
content of their willing, the question of the content, that is to say, the question of 
the determinateness of this content, immediately recurs, and one does not advance 
a single step with the mere principle of the agreement of the will with itself or 
with the requirement to do one's duty for duty's sake. 
§55 
(c) The powrr of rtjkctive judgment is credited with the principle of an 
intuiting understanding, in which the particz1lar, which is supposed to be 
contingent with respect to the univmal (i.e. the abstract identity) and not 
to be derivable from it, is determined by this very universal - something 
that is said to be experienced in the products of art and of organic nature. 
The Critique of the Powrr of judgment is distinguished by the fact 
that in it Kant has articulated the representation, indeed, the 
thought, of the Uka. The representation of an intuitive 
understanding, of inner purposiveness, etc., is the universal 
simultaneously thought as concreu in itself. Thus, it is only in these 
kinds of representations that the Kanrian philosophy shows itself 
to be speculative. Many, notably Schil/rr, have found in the idea of 
fine art [eks Kunstschonen], i.e. of the concrete unity of thought and 
sensory representation, the way out from the abstractions of an 
understanding that separates, while others have found it in 
the intuition and the consciousness of the state of being alive 
[Lebendigkeit] in general, be it natural or intellectual life. - To be 
sure, the product of art and the living individuality are limited in 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
their content. But in the postulated harmony of nature or necessity 
with the purpose of freedom, i.e. in the conception of the realization 
of the ultimate purpose of the world, Kant puts forth the idea that 
is all-encompassing in terms of content as well. And yet, with this 
highest idea, the laziness of thought, as it may be called, finds in the 
ought too easy a way out, by holding on to the separation of concept 
and reality against the actual realization of the ultimate purpose. By 
contrast, the presence of the living organizations and of the beautiful 
in the arts demonstrates the actuality of the ideal even for the senses 
and intuition. The Kantian reflections on these objects would have 
been particularly suited for introducing consciousness to the process 
of grasping and thinking the concrete idea. 
§56 
Here the thought of a relationship of the universal of the undemanding 
to the particular of intuition is put forward, one that is different from the 
relationship that underlies the doctrine of theoretical and practical reason. 
But no connection is made with the insight that the former relationship 
is the trut one, indeed that it is the truth itself. Instead, this unity is only 
taken up as it comes to exist in finite appearances and is displayed in 
experience. Within the subject, such experience is afforded in part by genius, 
the capacity to produce aesthetic ideas. The latter are representations of 
the free power of imagination that serve an idea and offer material for 
thought without expressing that content in a concept or allowing it to be 
expressed in one. The experience is also afforded by the judgment of taste, 
the feeling of the hannony of the intuitions' or representations' freedom 
with the understanding in its conformity to laws. 
§57 
Furthermore, the principle of the reflective power of judgment in relation 
to the living products of nature is determined as the purpose, the active 
concept, the universal that is determined and determining in itself. At the 
same time the idea of an extrinsic or finite purposiveness is removed, i.e. 
the purposiveness in which the purpose is merely an external form for .the 
means and the material in which it realizes itself. In contrast to this sort of 
purposiveness, the purpose in living things is a determination and activity 
immanent in the matter, and all the members exist equally and mutually 
as means and end [Zweck] for each other. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
lOS 
§58 
Now the relationship posited by the understanding between means and 
end, subjectivity and objectivity is sublated in such an idea. Never-
theless and in contradiction again of this fact, the purpose is still 
declared to be a cause that exists and is active only as a reprtsmta-
tion, i.e. as something subjective. Thus, the determination of the purpose 
is also declared to be a principle of judgment, belonging only to our 
understanding. 
Since it is the result of the Critical philosophy anyway that reason 
can know only appearances, one should still at least have had a 
choice between two equally subjective ways of thinking about living 
nature and, in keeping with the Kantian presentation, even an 
obligation to come to know the products of nature not only 
according to the categories of quality, cause, and effect, composition, 
elements, and so forth. If the principle of internal purposiveness had 
been held on to and developed in its scientific application, it would 
have yielded an entirely different, higher mode of consideration of 
the products of nature. 
§59 
In keeping with this principle, the idea in its utter unlimitedness would be 
that the universality determined by reason, the absolute, ultimate purpose, 
the good, would be realized in the world and, indeed, through a third 
factor, the power positing this ultimate purpose and realizing it, namely 
God, in whom (as the absolute truth) those oppositions of universality and 
individuality, subjectivity and objectivity are resolved and declared to be 
not self-standing and to be untrue. 
§60 
However, rhe good in which the ultimate purpose of the world is located 
is determined from the start only as our good, as the moral law of our 
practical reason. As a result, the unity does not extend beyond the agree-
ment of the state of the world and of world events with our morality.14 
14 In Kant's CritUJw of tN Pown- D/}wlpmt's own words (1st edition), p. 417 (§ 88]: 'Final purpose 
[Endzwtck) is merely a concept of our practic.al reason and cannor be deduced from 411] data Df 
txptrimu for making judgments abour narure, nor can ir be related to [any) knowled~ abou< ir. 

106 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
Moreover, even with this limitation the ultimat~ purpos~. the good, is an 
undetermined abstractum, as is what duty is supposed to be. More speci6-
ca1ly, the opposition, posited as untrue in the harmony's content, is again 
revived and maintained against this harmony, with the result that the har-
mony is determined as something merely subjtctiv~. something that merely 
ought to be, that do~s not possess r~ality, i.e. as something b~li~~d. to which 
only subjective certainty applies, not truth, i.e. not the objectivity that 
corresponds to the idea. -If this contradiction seems to be conceaJed by 
virtue of the fact that the reaJization of the idea plays out in tim~. i.e. in a 
future in which the idea supposedly also exists, then such a sensory con-
dition as time is rather the opposite of a resolution of the contradiction, 
and the corresponding representation of the understanding, namely the 
infinit~ progr~ssion, is at once nothing but the contradiction itself posited 
as perenniaJiy recurring. 
A general remark may be added about the outcome that has resulted 
from the criticaJ philosophy with regard to the nature of knowing 
[tks Erkmn~ns] and that has gained the status of one of the 
prejudices, i.e. one of the generaJ assumptions of the age. In every 
duaJistic system, and especiaJiy in the Kantian system, its basic flaw 
reveaJs itself through the inconsistency of combining [v~r~inm] what 
a moment ago has been declared to be independent and thus 
incompatibk [unv~r~inbar]. While what had been combined was just 
declared to be true, so now instead it is declared to be true that the 
two mommts, whose separate existence on their own has been denied 
to them in the combination which was to be their truth, possess 
truth and actua1ity only insofar as they exist in separation. Such 
philosophizing as this lacks the simple consciousness that in going 
back and forth in this way each of these individua1 determinations 
is declared to be unsatisfactory, and the flaw consists in the simple 
inability to bring together two thoughts (and in point of form 
there are only two of them present). It is therefore the greatest 
inconsistency to admit, on the one hand, that the understanding 
acquires knowledge of appearances only, while maintaining, on the 
other, that this kind of knowledge is something absolute by saying 
that knowing cannot go further, that this is the natural, absolute 
barri~r [Schrank~] for human knowledge [Wissm]. Natural things are 
No usc of this concept is possible, except by praaical reason in accordance with moral laws; and the 
fifltzl purpo1~ ufcrtatian is that conSiitution [Rnchtzffmheit) of the world that agrees with what we 
can definitely say based simply on laws. namely [co the extent rhar it agrees with) the final purpose 
af tJUT purt prartiralrTtZJUit, and indeed insofar as it is supposed to be practical.' 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
107 
limited [beschrankt], and they ace merely natural things, insofar as 
they know [wissm] nothing of their universal barrier, insofar as their 
determinacy is a barrier only for us, not for them. Something can 
be known fgewujlt], even felt to be a barrier, a lack only insofar as 
one has at the same time gone beyond it. Living things have the 
prerogative over lifeless things of feeling pain. For the former, an 
individual determinateness becomes the sensation of something 
negative, because, qua alive, they carry within themselves the 
universality of the living nature that is beyond the individual, they 
maintain themselves even in the negative of merely themselves, 
and feel this contradiction as it exists within themselves. This 
contradiction is in them only insofar as both exist in the one subject, 
namely the universality of its feeling for life [l..ebmsgefoh~ and the 
negative individuality opposed to this. A barrier, a lack of knowing 
is determined precisely to be a barrier or lack only through a 
comparison with the existing idea of the universal, of what is whole 
and complete. Therefore, it is merely a lack of consciousness not to 
realize that the designation of something as finite or limited contains 
the proof of the actual presmce of the infinite, the unlimited, that 
the knowledge ( Wissen] of a boundary can exist only insofar as the 
unbounded exists on this side, in consciousness. 
This forther remark may be added about the result concerning 
knowing, namely that the Kantian philosophy could not have had 
an inRuence on the treatment of the sciences. It leaves the categories 
and the method of ordinary knowing completely unchallenged. In 
scientific writings of the time, when they now and then start with 
sentences of the Kantian philosophy, the treatise shows in the sequel 
that those sentences were merely a superRuous embellishment, and 
that the same empirical contents would have appeared, if those 
several initial pages had been dropped.1s 
As far as the closer comparison of the Kamian philosophy with 
~taphysicising empiricism is concerned, naive empiricism, it is true, 
takes its bearings from sensory perception, but it also allows for a 
spiritual actuality, a supersensible world, whatever its content may 
be, whether it stems from thought or fantasy, and so forth. In terms 
•s Even in the Handboolt of Mttm by Hermann (Gottfried Hermann, Hafllibu,h tkt- M~trilt (Leipzig. 
1799)) the beginning is made with pvagraphs of the Kantian philosophy. Indeed, in § 8 it is 
concluded that the law of rhythm must be (I) obj«riw, (1) fom111/, (3) a law dnmninwi a priori. 
The rnder ought to compare with rhese requirements and the su~uent principles of causaliry 
and reciprocity rhe rreatmem of the metres themselves, on which those formal principles have no 
inRuence at all. 

108 
Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
ofjimn, this content has its warrant in spiritual authority, just as 
the different content of empirical knowledge [Wisstn] has it in the 
authority of outer perception. However, rtfoctivt tmpiricism, making 
consistmcy irs principle, fights such dualism of the ultimate, highest 
content and negates the self-sufficiency of the thinking principle and 
of a spiritual world unfolding in it. Mattrialism, naturalism is the 
consisttnt system of empiricism.- The Kanrian philosophy opposes 
this empiricism with the principle of thought and that of freedom 
in general, and sides with the first empiricism without in the least 
stepping outside its [that first empiricism's] general principles. 
The world of perception and of the understanding reflecting on it 
continues to exist on one side of its [the Kantian philosophy's] 
dualism. True, this world is put forward as a world of appearances. 
However, this is a mere label, a merely formal determination, for 
the source, substantive content, and manner of examination remain 
entirely the same. By contrast, on the other side there is the 
self-sufficiency of thinking that grasps itself, the principle of freedom 
that it shares with the former, usual metaphysics, but emptied of all 
content, unable to procure any other for it. This kind of thinking, 
called rtason here, is stripped of all authority by being robbed of 
every determination. The chief effect that the Kant ian philosophy 
has had is to have awakened consciousness of this absolute 
interiority. The Iauer, although unable to develop anything our 
of itself or to generate any determinations in the way either of 
knowledge or of moral laws due to its abstraction, nonetheless 
refuses categorically to acknowledge as valid or let take effect in it 
anything that has the character of something exttrnal. The principle 
of the indtptndmct of rtason, of its absolute self-sufficiency within 
itself, must from now on be regarded as a universal principle of 
philosophy and equally as one of the prejudices of our time. 
Adtlition I. The Critical philosophy deserves great negative credit for promoting 
and validating the conviction that the determinations of the understanding belong 
to finitude and that a knowing that moves within these limits does not arrive at the 
rruth. And yet, the one-sidedness of this philosophy consists in that the finitude 
of those determinations of the understanding is attributed to the fact that they 
pertain to our subjective thinking only, for which the thing-in-itself is supposed to 
remain an absolute beyond. In faa, however, the finitude of the determinations of 
the undemanding does not lie in their subjectivity. Rather they are in themselves 
finite, and their finitude needs to be demonstrated in them themselves. According 
to Kant, however, what we think is false because Wt think it. -It is to be considered 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
109 
a further deficiency of this philosophy that it offers only a historical description of 
thinking and a mere list of the moments of consciousness. To be sure, this list is 
mainly correct, and yet there is no mention of the necessity of what has thus been 
empirically gathered together. As a result of the reflections about the various levels 
of consciousness it is then said that the contenc of what we know [wisstn] is only 
appearance:. With this result one must concur, insofar as finite thinking has to do, 
indeed, only with appearances. Still, this level of appearances is not the end of it; 
rather there exists a yet higher terrain, which, however, remains an inaccessible 
beyond for the Kantian philosophy. 
Adtlition 2. While in the Kamian philosophy the principle according to which 
thinking determines itself out of itself has been established first in a merely formal 
way, whereas the how and in what respect of this self-determination of thinking 
has not yet been demonstrated by Kant, it is Fichtt who by contrast recognized 
this defect and who, while expressing the requiremenc for a deduction of the 
categories, ar the same time undertook the anempt actually to deliver one. The 
Fichtean philosophy makes the I the point of departure for the philosophical 
development, and the categories are to emerge as the result of its activity. And 
yet, the I does not truly appear as a free, spontaneous aclivity here, since it is 
considered to be aroused first by a check [Anstofi1 from outside itself. The I is then 
supposed to react against this check, and only through this reaction is it supposed 
to acquire a consciousness of irsel£ - Wirh this, the nature of the check remains 
an unknown outside, and the I continues to be something conditioned having 
an other over against itself. Consequently, Fichte, too, stands pat with the result 
of the Kantian philosophy that only the finite can be known, while the infinite 
passes beyond [the realm of] thinking. What is called 'the thing-in-itself in Kant 
is, in Fichte, the check from outside the I, this absrractum of something other 
than the I that has no other determination than being the negative or the not-I 
in general. The I is considered here as standing in relation to the not-I through 
which its self-determining activity is first aroused, and this in such a way that the I 
is only the continuous activity of freeing itself from the check, without, however, 
the actual liberation taking place. For with the cessation of the check the I itself, 
whose being is solely its activity, would cease to exist. Moreover, the content that 
the activity of the I produces is nothing bur the ordinary content of experience, 
only with the addition that this content is only an appearance. 
C. THIRD POSITION OF THOUGHT TOWARDS OBJECTIVITY 
Imm~diat~ knowing 
§ 61 
In the Critical philosophy, thinking is construed in such a way that it is 
subjective and its uitimat~. insuperable determination is abstract universality, 
i.e. formal identity. Thinking is thus placed in opposition to truth as the 

110 
Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
universality that is in itself concrete. In this highest determination of 
thinking which is supposed to be reason, the categories do not come into 
consideration. - The opposite standpoint is to construe thinking as the 
activity only of tht particular, and in this way likewise declare it to be 
incapable of grasping the truth. 
§62 
As the activity of the particular, thinking has only the cattgorits for its 
product and content. In the way in which the understanding holds on 
to them, they are limiud determinations, forms of what is conditioned, 
dtptndmt, mediaud. The infinite, the true does not exist for the thinking 
limited to these determinations. It is incapable of making any transition 
to the infinite and true (pare the proofs of the existence of God). These 
determinations of thinking are also called concepts, and to conceptualize 
an object means nothing but to grasp it under the form of something 
conditioned and mtdiattd. As a result, insofar as the object is the true, 
the infinite, the unconditioned, to conceptualize it is to transform it into 
something conditioned and mediated, and in this way, instead of grasping 
the true through thinking, to pervert it into something untrue. 
This is the sole and simple polemic brought forward by that 
standpoint which affirms only immediate knowledge of God and 
of the true. Previously, all kinds of so-called anthropopathic 
representations were removed from God for being finite and thus 
unworthy of the infinite, and God grew into a considerably empty 
entity in the process. However, the determinations of thinking were 
generally not yet subsumed under the rubric of the anthropopathic. 
Rather, thinking was held to be such as to strip away the finitude 
from representations of the absolute- in accordance with the 
universal prejudice, mentioned above[§ 5], that one arrives at 
the truth only through thinking things over. Now, finally, the 
determinations of thinking have also been declared generally to 
be a kind of anthropopathism and thinking the activity of mtrely 
finitizing. -In Appendix VII of the Lttten on Spinoza,]acobi16 
presented this polemic in the most determinate manner, a polemic 
he derived from Spinoza's philosophy itself and applied to 
16 Moldcnhaucr-Michcl: Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, Ob" di~ LAr~ tin Spinou in Briifm an tim HtrnJ 
Mom Mmdrlssohn (•78s). new augmented edicion 1789. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
III 
combating knowing in general. This polemic construes knowing 
to be of the finite only, as a serial progression in thought, from 
something conditioned to something else conditioned, in which 
everything that is a condition is in turn itself only something 
conditioned - [in other words, a progression] through conditioned 
conditions. According to this view, explaining and conceptualizing 
means showing that something is mediaud by an other. Thus, all 
content is only particular, tkpendmt, and finite. The infinite, the 
true, God lies outside the mechanism of such a connection to which 
knowing is allegedly restricted. - It is an important point that, while 
the Kantian philosophy had principally placed the finitude of the 
categories merely in the formal determination of their subjectivity, 
in this polemic the categories are discussed with a view to their 
determinateness and the category as such is recognized as finite.-
Jacobi focused in particular on the dazzling successes of the sciences 
that relate to nature (the sciences exactes), in knowing natural forces 
and laws. And of course the infinite cannot be found immanently on 
this plain of the finite; as Lalande [the French astronomer, 
1732-1807] said, he searched the entire heaven but did not find God 
(cf. note in§ 6o). On this plain, what emerged as the final result was 
the universal as an indeterminate aggregate of external finite things, 
i.e. mamr. And Jacobi rightly saw no other way out on the path of 
the mere progression through mediations. 
§63 
At the same time it is maintained that the truth is for the spirit, so much 
so that it is through reason alone that a human being exists [besteht] and 
that reason is the knowkdge [Wissen] of God. However, because mediated 
knowledge is supposed to be restricted to finite content alone, reason is 
immediate knowing, faith [ Glaube]. 
Knowing [Wissen], be/kving [Glauben], thinking, intuiting are the 
categories that obtain for this standpoint, and since they are 
presupposed as familiar they are simply too often employed 
arbitrarily, based on mere psychological representations and 
distinctions. What their nature and concept are, i.e. the only thing 
that might matter, is not investigated. Thus one finds knowing 
ordinarily opposed to believing, while believing is at the same time 
specified as immediate knowing and thus recognized at once as also 

112 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
a kind of knowing [Wisstn]. Similarly, it will no doubt be found to 
be an empirical fact that what one believes is in consciousness, so 
that at least one knows of it; equally. that what one believes is in 
consciousness as something «rtain, so that one therefore knows it. -
Moreover, thinking is primarily set in opposition to immediate 
knowing and believing, and in particular to intuiting. If the 
intuidng is determined to be inttllectual, this can mean nothing but 
an intuiting that is thinking, unless by 'intellectual' here, where God 
is rhe object, one wants to understand fantasies and images as well. 
In the language of this philosophizing it so happens rhar believing is 
also said in reference to the sensory presence of ordinary things. We 
btl~vt, says Jacobi, that we have a body, we believe in the concrru 
txistmct of stnsory thing.r. But if the talk is of belief in the true and 
the eternal, of rhe fact that God is revealed, given in the immediate 
knowing, in intuiting, then these are nor sensory rhings but rather 
a content that is in itst/f unittmal, objects only for the spirit that 
thinks. Again, since what is understood is the I in its singularity, 
rhe pmonality, and to rhar extent not an tmpirical I or a particular 
personality, above all since the personality of God is before 
consciousness, we are talking about a purr personality, i.e. a 
personality that is in its~lf univtrsal, and something of this son is a 
thought and belongs only to thinking. - Pure intuiting, moreover, 
is altogether the same as pure thinking. Initially, 'intuiting' and 
'believing' express the specific representations that we connect with 
these words in ordinary consciousness. In this respect they differ, of 
course, from thinking, and this difference is intelligible to just 
about everybody. But believing and intuiting are now supposed to be 
taken in a higher sense as well, as believing in God, as intellectually 
· intuiting God; in other words, we are supposed to abstract precisely 
from what constitutes the difference of thinking from intuiting, 
from believing. It is impossible to say how believing and intuiting, 
transposed into this higher region, may stiU differ from thinking. 
With such differences that have become devoid of meaning, one 
alleges that one has said and maintained something very important 
and disputed determinations that are [in fact] the same as those that 
one has maintained.- The expression 'believing', however, has the 
particular advantage of reminding us of the Christian, r~ligious faith. 
It seems to include or even to be practically the same as the latter, so 
that this faith-based philosophizing appears essentially pious, and 
pious in a Christian sense, and against the background of this piety 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
113 
allows itself the freedom to offer its random assurances with 
pretentiousness and authority. One must, however, not let oneself 
be deceived by the semblance that can sneak in through the mere 
similarity of the words, bur instead hold firmly on co che difference. 
Christian faith includes within ic the authority of the Church; by 
contrast, the faith of chat philosophizing standpoint has only the 
authority of one's own subjective revelation. Funhermore, that 
Christian faith is an objective content, rich in itself. a system of. 
doctrine and knowledge. The content of this faith, however, is so 
indeterminate in itself that, while it will, to be sure, countenance 
that concent in some way, it encompasses just as much the belief that 
the Dalai Lama, the bull, the monkey, and so forth, is God, and for 
its own pan it restricts itself to the idea of a God in general, a supreme 
being. The faith in that would-be philosophical sense is itself 
nothing but the dry abstractum of immediate knowing, a completely 
formal determination, not to be confused with or mistaken for the 
spiritual fullness of the Christian faith, either from the side of the 
believing heart and the Holy Spirit dwelling within it or from the 
side of a doctrine abounding in content. 
Moreover, what is here called believing and immediate knowing 
is exactly the same as what has also been called inspiration, 
revelation of the heart, a content implanted by nature in a human 
being; in particular it is also called sound human understanding, 
common sense or common sensibility [Gtmeinsinn]. In the same way, 
all these forms make immediacy (the way a content is found in 
consciousness, the way it is a fact in consciousness) their principle. 
§64 
What this immediate knowing knows is that the infinite, the eternal, the 
God in our representation also is- that immediately and inseparably bound 
up with this representation in consciousness is the certainty of its being. 
There can be nothing less sensible for philosophy than to want to 
contradict these propositions of immediate knowing. It could 
instead congratulate itself on the fact that these, its oUJn old 
propositions which indeed express its entire universal content, have 
in any case become to a certain extent the universal philosophical 
prejudices of our time, even if in such a non-philosophical manner. 
Rather, one wonders how it could be alleged that these propositions 

Il4 
Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
are contrary to philosophy- the propositions that what is held to be 
true is immanent in spirit (§ 63) and that truth exists for the spirit 
(ibid.). In a formal respect, the proposition is particularly interesting 
that God's bting is immediately and inseparably bound up with the 
thoz~ght of God and that objectivity is similarly bound up with the 
subjtctivity that attaches at first to thought. Indeed, in its abstraction 
the philosophy of immediate knowing goes so far as to claim that 
not only with the thought of God but even in intuition with the 
representation of my body and of exttrna/ things the determination 
of their concrete existence is likewise inseparably conjoined. - If 
philosophy is intent on proving this unity, i.e. on showing that it is 
part of the nature of thought or subjectivity itself to be inseparable 
from being or objectivity, then whatever the standing of such proofs, 
philosophy must in any case be quite content that it is asserted and 
shown that its propositions are also facts of consciousness and therefore 
agree with txptrience. - The difference berween the assertions of 
immediate knowing and those of philosophy comes down simply 
to the fact that immediate knowing assumes an ccclusive posture, 
or that it places itself in opposition to philosophizing. -The 
proposition, Cogito, trgo sum, around which, as can be said, all the 
interest of modern philosophy turns, was also articulated in the form 
of immediacy by its author. In order to take that proposition for a 
syllogism, one need not know much more about the nature of the 
syllogism than thar 'ergo' occurs in a syllogism. Where would the 
mtdius terminus be? It is, after all, far more essential to a syllogism 
than the word 'ergo' is. If, however, to justifY the name, one wants 
to call that combi.nation in Descartes an immediate syllogism, then 
this superfluous form means nothing but a conntction of distinct 
determinations, that is mediated by nothing. But then the connection 
of being with our representations, expressed by the proposition of 
immediate knowing, is no more and no less a syllogism. - From 
Mr Hotho's 1826 dissertation on the Cartesian philosophy, I extract 
the quotes in which Descartes himself declares explicitly that the 
proposition cogito, ergo sum is not a syllogism. The passages come 
from Respons. ad sec. Obitct. [Mtditationts}; Dt Methodo IV; Epistolat 
/, rr8. From the first passage I cite rhe more precise expressions. 
Descartes says first that the fact that we are thinking beings is a 
'prima quaedam notio quae ex nullo syllogismo concluditur', {'a 
certain basic notion that is not deduced from any syllogism'); and he 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
continues: 'neque cum quis dicit: ego cogito, ergo sum sive existo, 
txistentiam ex cogitatione per syUogismum deducit' ['if somebody 
says: "I think, therefore I am or exist", he does not deduce concrete 
existence from the thought by means of a syllogism']. Since Descartes 
knows what is needed for a syUogism, he adds that if 
there were supposed to be a deduction by means of a syllogism in 
the case of that proposition, then there would have to be in addition 
the major premise: 'illud omne, quod cogitat, est sive existit' 
['everything that thinks is or exists']. This last proposition, however, 
is one that could only be derived from that first one. 
Descartes's pronouncements about the proposition of the 
inseparability of myself as a thinking thing from being, that this 
connection is contained and given in che simple intuition of 
consciousness, that this connection is absolutely first, a principle, 
the most certain and the most evident, such that no scepticism 
can be imagined to be so enormous as to disallow it - these 
pronouncements are so telling and specific that the modern 
propositions of Jacobi and others about this immediate connection 
can count only as superfluous iterations of them. 
§ 65 
This standpoint is not content with having shown the insufficiency of 
mediated knowledge [ Wissen], taken in isolation, for the truth. Its distinc-
tiveness consists in supposing that immediate knowing has the truth for irs 
content only taken in isolation, to the exclusion of mediation.- In those 
very exclusions the identified standpoint immediately reveals itself to be a 
relapse into metaphysical understanding, into its either-or, and thus in fact 
a relapse even into the relationship of an external mediation based on hold-
ing fast to the finite, i.e. to one-sided determinations - the determinations 
that the view falsely believes that it has placed itself above and beyond. But 
let us leave this point without developing it further. Exclusively immediate 
knowing is maintained merely as a [11Ct, and here in the Introduction it 
only needs to be taken up in accordance with this external reflection. What 
matters in itself is the logical dimension of the opposition of immediacy 
and mediation. However, the above standpoint declines to consider the 
narure of the basic matter, i.e. the concept, because such a consideration 
leads to mediation and even to knowledge. The true consideration, that of 
the logical dimension, has to find its place within the science itself. 

116 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
The entire second part of the Logic, i.e. the doctrine of essence, deals 
with the essential, self-positing unity of immediacy and mediation. 
§66 
That said, we continue to stand by the position that immediate knowing 
is to be taken as a fact. With this, however, the consideration is directed 
towards the field of experience, to a psychological phenomenon. - In this 
respect, it should be noted that it is one of the most common experiences 
that truths (which one knows very well to be the result of the most intricate 
and highly mediated considerations) present themselves immediately in the 
consciousness of someone conversant with such knowledge. Like everybody 
else who has been trained in a science, the mathematician immediately has 
at his fingertips solutions to which a very complicated analysis has led. 
Every educated person has immediately present in his or her knowing 
[ Wissm] a host of universal viewpoints and principles that have resulted 
only from repeated reflection and long life experience. The facility we have 
achieved in any sphere of knowing l Wissen], also in fine art, in technical 
dexterity, consists precisely in having those sorts of familiarity, those kinds 
of activity immediately present in one's consciousness in the case at hand, 
indeed, even in an activity directed outwards and in one's limbs. - In 
all these cases the immediacy of knowing does not only not exclude its 
mediation; to rhe contrary, they are so connected that immediate knowing 
is even the product and result of knowing [ Wissm] that has been mediated. 
An equally trivial insight is the connection of immediate concrete 
existence with its mediation. Seeds, parents are an immediate 
concrete existence that also initiates existence with respect to their 
children, etc., who are the ones generated. But the seeds or parents, 
even though they are immediate in general as concretely existing 
beings, are likewise generated entities, and the children, etc., despite 
their concrete existence being mediated, are now immediate, because 
they art. The fact that I am in Berlin, this my immediate presence, 
is mediated by the journey undertaken to get here, etc. 
§67 
However, as far as immediately knowing God, legality, and the ethical is con-
cerned (including the other determinations of instinct, implanted, innate 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
117 
ideas, common sense, natural reason, etc.), and whatever form one gives 
to an original dimension of this sort, it is a universal experience that (even 
for Platonic recollection) education, development is an essential requirement 
for bringing to consciousness what is contained therein (Christian baptism 
itself, although a sacrament, contains the further obligation of a Christian 
education). This means that as much as religion, ethical life are instances of 
be/iif, immediate knowing, they are absolutely conditioned by a mediation 
that is called variously 'development', 'education', 'formation'. 
In the case of the claims on behalf of innatt ideas and the objections 
against them, an opposition of mutually exclusive determinations 
prevailed that was similar to the one under consideration here. The 
opposition was, namely, that between -as it may be expressed - the 
essentially immediate connection of certain general determinations 
with the soul and another sort of connection that w·ould occur in 
an external manner mediated by given objects and representations. 
Against claims for innate itkas, the empirical objection was made 
that every human being would have to have these ideas, such as the 
principle of non-contradiction, in their consciousness and would 
have to know [wissen] them, since this proposition along with others 
of the same sorr was counted among innate ideas. This objection can 
be said to involve a misunderstanding since the determinations that 
were meant, while innate, need not for that reason already possess 
the form of ideas or representations of something known. But 
against immediate knowing this objection is quire fitting, for this 
knowing maintains its determinations explidcly insofar as they are 
supposed to be in consciousness. - When the standpoint of 
immediate knowing admits that, for religious faith in panicular, a 
development and a Christian or religious education are necessary, 
then it is mere arbitrariness to want to ignore this again when it 
comes to talking about believing. Or else, it is thoughtlessness not 
to know that to admit the necessity of an education is precisely 
to express the essentialness of mediation. 
Addition. When it is said in the Platonic philosophy that we rtcollm the ideas, 
this means that the ideas are undeveloped [an sich] in human beings and not (as the 
Sophists maintained) something foreign to human beings that comes to them from 
the outside. Yet through this construal of knowing as recollection the development 
of what is undeveloptd in human beings is not ruled out, and this development 
is nothing but mediation. It is the same with the inna~ ideas that come up in 
Descartes and the Scottish philosophers. They are equally to be regarded as being 

n8 
Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
initially presem only flS untkv~lopul and in the manner of a disposidon in human 
beings. 
§68 
In the experiences mentioned, appeal is made to what shows itself to be 
bound up with immediate knowing. If this bond is taken at first to be only 
an txternal or empirical connection, it nonetheless proves to be essential 
and inseparable even for the empirical consideration, because it is invari-
able. But furthermore, when in accordance with experience this immediate 
knowing is taken on its own terms ffiir sich], insofar as it is knowledge 
[Wissm] of God and the divine, this sort of consciousness is generally 
described as an elevation abovt the sensory and finite as well as above the 
immediate desires and inclinations of the natural heart - an elevation that 
passes over into faith in God and the divine and terminates in them, so 
that this faith is an immediate knowing and believing [Furwahrha/tm] but 
nonetheless has taken the route of mediation as its presupposition and 
condition. 
It has already been nored that the so-called proofs of the existence 
of God that stan with finite being express this elevation. They are 
not the inventions of an artificial reflection bur the spirit's own, 
necessary mediations, even if they do not find their complete and 
correct expression in the ordinary form of those proofs. 
§69 
The transition (designated in § 64) from the subjective idea to being con-
stitutes the main interest from the standpoint of immediate knowing, and 
rhe claim is made that this transition is essentially an original connection, 
devoid of mediation. Without paying any regard to seemingly empirical 
bonds, this central point exhibits the mediation in it [i.e. in that stand-
point] itself and, indeed, in that mediation's true determination, not as a 
mediation with and through something external, but as establishing itself 
in itself [sich in sich st/bst besch/ief!mdj. 
§70 
The claim made from this standpoint is that neither the idta as a merely 
subjtctive thought nor a being solely for itself is what is true [das Wahre]. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
ll9 
The being that is solely for itself, a being that is not that of the idea, is 
the sensory, finite being of the world. In this way, then, it is immediately 
claimed that only the idea mediatedby being and, conversely, only the being 
mediated by the idea is the true. The proposition of immediate knowing 
righdy seeks not the indeterminate, empty immediacy, the abstract being 
or pure unity for itself, but instead ·the unity of the idea with being. But 
it is thoughtless not to see that the unity of distinct determinations is not 
just a purely immediate, i.e. completely indeterminate and empty unity, 
but instead that precisely in that unity it is posited that one determination 
possesses truth only by vinue of being mediated by the other or, if you 
like, that each is mediated with the truth only through the other. - By this 
means, it is thus shown to be afoct that the determination of a mediation is 
contained in that immediacy itself and the understanding, in keeping with 
its own principles of immediate knowing, should have nothing to object 
to this fact. It is only the ordinary abstract understanding that regards the 
determinations of immediacy and mediation each for itself as absolute and 
supposes itself to have a firm distinction in them. Thus it generates for 
itself the insuperable difficulty of uniting them, a difficulty that, as has 
been shown, is not on hand in the fact and, to the same extent, disappears 
in the speculative concept. 
§ 71 
The one-sidedness of this standpoint brings with it determinations and 
consequences and, following the discussion of the foundation, the task 
remains of drawing attention to their main features. First, because the 
fact of consciousness rather than the nature of the content is set up as the 
criterion of truth, the basis for what is alleged be true is subjective knowing 
[ Wissm] and the asmrance that I find a certain content in my consciousness. 
What I find in my consciousness is thereby inflated to mean what is found 
in roeryone's consciousness and alleged to be the nature of consciousness 
itself. 
In previous times, the consensus gentium [the consensus of peoples], 
to which Cicero already appealed, was listed among the so-called 
proofs of the existence of God. The consensus gentium is a 
considerable authority, and the transition from saying that some 
content is found in roeryone's consciousness to saying that it is part 
of the nature of consciousness itself and a necessary pan of it is not 
far-fetched. Inherent in this category of universal agreement was the 

120 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
essential consciousness, not escaping even the most uncultivated 
human sensibility, that the consciousness of the individual is at the 
same time something particular, contingent. If the nature of this 
consciousness is not itself investigated, i.e. if the particular and 
the contingent are not set apart from it (a laborious operation of 
thinking things through and the only means of finding out what 
is in and of itself universal in it), then only n.'"JOn~'s agreement 
about a given content can ground a respectable prejudice to the 
effect that that content is part of the nature of consciousness itself. 
To be sure, thinking needs to know [wissm] that what shows itself to 
be uniz,trsally on hand is n~cessary, and the consmsus communis does 
not suffice for this. But even within the limits of the assumption that 
the universality of the fact would be a satisfactory proof, it has been 
abandoned as a proof of this belief. because of the experience that 
there are individuals and peoples in whom belief in God is not 
found.'7 But nothing is quicker and more convenient than to 
have given the mere assurance that I find some content in my 
consciousness together with the certainty of its truth, and that 
therefore this cenainty is inherent, not in me as a particular subject, 
but in the nature of spirit itself. 
11 Finding atheism and belief in God ro be more or less widespread in experience depends on whether 
one is content wirh rhe determination of a God in gtn"al or whether a more specific knowledge 
of God is required. In rhe Christian world, it will nor be ad mined rhar the Chinese and Indian 
idols, ere. arc God, nor will ir be admined regarding rhc African fetishes or tven rhc Greek gods 
rhar such idols are God. Whoever believes in them rhus docs nor believe in God. If, by contrast, ir 
is considered rhar inherent in such belief in idols is nonetheless as n«h [an sieh) a belief in God in 
tmtral (jusr as rhc genus is in rhe particular individual), then rhc veneration of idols also counts as 
a belief, nor only in an idol, but in God. Conversely, the Athenians rrcared as arheim the poer.s and 
philosophers who took Zeus, ere. robe just clouds, ere. and who maintained the existence of a God 
in gtn"al only. - lr docs nor depend on what is contained in an objea as surh [an sieh], bur what 
has been rxrracttd from rhis for consciousness. If one lers the confusion of these determinations 
srand, any human intuition, even rhe mosr ordinary sensory one, would be religion. For, robe sure, 
in any such intuition, in tvery spiritual phenomenon [in jttltm Gtisti,rtm] there is contained as 
surh rhe principle rhat, if developed and purified, expands inro religion. But it is one rhing to bt 
rapablt of religion (and the as surh [An sirh) above expresses capability and possibility), and another 
to haw religion.- Thus in recent limes travellers (such as Captains RDII [Sir John Ross, 1777-18S6, 
A Voya,rt of DisrDIItry . .. for tht PurpoSt of &plorin,r Baffin i Bay] and Parry [Sir William Edward 
Parry, 17~r8ss)) have found peoples (e.g. rhe Eskimos) who in their judgment had no religion, 
nor even the sorr of religion one might still find in the African m.zgirians (the pitts of Herodotus). 
To mention an emirely different aspect, an Englishman who passed rhc first months of the lasr 
jubilee year in Rome says in his travel reports about roday's Romans rhar rhe ordinary people are 
bigored, bur rhar those who know how ro read and write are one and all arhcisrs. -lncidenrally, rhe 
accusation of atheism has become rarer in recent times, primarily, ir would seem, because rhe basic 
content and requirements of religion have been reduced ro a minimum (see§ 73). 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
12.1 
§72 
Second, from the fact that immediate /mowing is supposed to be the criterion 
of truth, it follows that aJI kinds of superstition and idolatry are declared to 
be true, and the most unjust and the most unethical content of the will is 
justified. The cow, the monkey, or the Brahman or Lama do not counr as 
God for the Indian thanks to so-called mediated knowledge, reasoning, and 
syllogism; instead he believes it. However, natural desires and inclinations 
of themselves infuse consciousness with their interests, and the immoral 
purposes are present in it in a completely immediate way. The good or 
evil character would express the detn7ninate being [da.s bestimmte Sein] of 
the will, which may be recognized in the [corresponding] interests and 
purposes, and recognized, to be sure, in the most immediate way. 
§ 73 
Finally, immediate knowledge of God is supposed to extend only to the 
fact that God exists, not what God is, for the latter would be a process 
of knowing [Erkrnntnis] and would lead to mediated knowledge [Wissm]. 
By this means, God as the object of religion is explicitly limited to God in 
general, to the indeterminate supersensory domain, and religion's content 
is reduced to a minimum. 
If it were actually necessary to effect only this much, namely, 
preserving the belief that there is a God or even establishing such a 
belief, one would still have to be amazed at the poverty of the age, 
willing as it is to count the most impoverished religious knowledge 
as a gain and having reached the point of returning in its church to 
the altar that had long since existed in Athens- dedicated to the 
unknown God! 
§74 
The general nature of. the form of immediacy remains to be indicated 
briefly. For it is this very form which, because it is one-sided, renders irs 
content one-sided as well and thus finite. To the universal it gives the 
one-sidedness of an abstraction, so that God becomes an essence devoid 
of any determination. But God can be called spirit only insofar as he is 
known [gewufi't] as mediating himselfin his very self with himse/fTsich in sich 
selbst mit sich vermittelndj. Only in this way is he concrete, alive, and spirit. 

122 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
For this reason, knowing [wissm] God as spirit contains mediation within 
itself. - The form of immediacy confers on the particular the determina-
tion to be, or to relate itself to itself. The particular, however, is precisely the 
relating of itself to an other outside it. Through that form [of immediacy], 
the finitt is posited as absolute. Since, as uuerly abstract, it is indiffirmt to 
an_y content and for that very reason receptive to any content, it is just as 
capable of sanctioning an idolatrous and immoral content as the opposite. 
Only the insight into that content, namely that it is not self-sufficient but 
mediated by an other, relegates it to its finitude and untruth. Since the 
content carries mediation with it, this sort of insight is a way of knowing 
[ Wissm] that contains mediation. A content can be recognized as genuinely 
true [dar Walm] only insofar as it is not mediated by an other, is not finite, 
and thus mediates itself with itself and so is mediation and immediate rela-
tion to itself in one. -The understanding that supposes it has freed itself 
from finite knowing [Wissm], from the identity of the undmtandingcharac-
teristic of metaphysics and the Enlightenment, immediately re-makes this 
immediacy, i.e. the abstract relation to itself, the abstract identity, into the 
principle and criterion of truth. Abstract thinking (the form of reflective 
metaphysics) and abstract intuiting (the form of immediate knowing)·are 
one and the same. 
Addition. Because it is firmly maintained in opposition to the form of media-
tion, the form of immediacy is accordingly one-sided, and this one-sidedness is 
communicated to any content that is merely reduced to this form. Immediacy is 
in general an abstract relation to itself and thus at the same time abstract identity, 
abstract universality. If what is universal in and of itself is taken only in the form 
of immediacy, it is then merely the abstract universal and, from this standpoint, 
God acquires the significance of a completely indeterminate essence. If one then 
still speaks of God as spirit, this is only an empty word, for in any case spirit as 
consciousness and self-consciousness is a process of distinguishing itself from itself 
and from an other, and rhus at the same time a mediation. 
§ 75 
The assessment of this third position auributed to thinking in relation to 
truth could only be undertaken in a manner that this standpoint immedi-
ately refers to and acknowledges in itself. It has been shown to be factually 
lfaktisch] wrong that there is an immediate knowing, a knowing that is 
without mediation, whether it be with an other or with itself in it [that 
knowing] itself. It has been likewise explained to be factually untrue that 
thinking progresses exclusively through determinations mediated by some-
thing else, i.e. finite and conditioned ones, and that this mediation does not 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
123 
just as much sublate itself in the mediation. But the Logic and the mti" 
philosophy exemplify the fact that there is a kind of knowing that proceeds 
neither in one-sided immediacy nor in one-sided mediation. 
§ 76 
If the principle of immediate knowing is considered in relafion to the 
point of departure (the earlier so-caJied naiil~ metaphysics), the result of 
the comparison is the same principle's return to the beginning that this 
metaphysics made in modern times as the Carwian philosophy. Both 
maintain: 
1. The plain inseparability of thinking and the being of the thinker -
cogito ergo sum is completely the same as [the fact] that the being, 
reality, concrete existence of the I are immediately revealed to me in 
consciousness (in Principia philosophiae I, 9, Descartes explicitly declares 
at once that by thinking he understands consciousnm in general and as 
such), and that this inseparability is the absolutely first (not mediated, 
not proven) and most certain knowledge. 
2. Similarly, the inseparability of the representation of God and his concr~te 
existmce, so that the latter is comained in the very representation of God 
and there is absolutely no such representation without rhe determination 
of concrete existence, which is thus a necessary and eternal one. '8 
3. As far as the equally immediate consciousness of the concrete exis-
tence of external things is concerned, this means nothing bur sensory 
'8 Descartes, Principitl philos~iat I. •s: 'Magis hoc: (ens sum me perfeaum cxi•tere) crttkr, si ancndat, 
nullius alterius ~i ideam apud se inveniri, in qua eodem modo necessariam exisfentiam contineri 
anim.tdvertat; intdliger, illam ideam cxhiberc veram et immurabilem naturam, quaequc non po14t 
non ncist=, cum necessaria existenria in ta contintatur.' [He will be all rhe more convinced (namely, 
rhar a mosr perfect being exisrs), when he noric:es rhar necessary existence is contained in no 
other of his ideas in the same manner; for he will recognize thar this idea only represcnrs a uue 
and unchangeable narure char must exisr, because necessary existence is ronf4intd in ir. - rr. A 
Buchenau.j A subsequenr phrase thar sounds like a mediation or proof does nor derracr from rhis 
first foundation. -With Spinoza, ir is qui1e the same. namely, that God's tsltnu, i.e. rhe abstract 
representation, includes his exisrence. The first definition by Spinoza is char of ~ausa n~i, namdy, 
thai ir is such a thing 'cuiw nt~ntid involvir rxisrenriam; sive id, cuius na111ra no11 pottsl rrmcipi, 
nisi aisrens' [whose essence includes existence. or that whose narure cannot conceived except as 
existing, Ethia I, def. 1. lt. (into German) C. Gebhardr); - the inseparability of the concepr from 
being is rhe fundamental derermina1ion and the presupposirion. Bur which concept is ir ro which 
this inseparability from being pertains? Nor mat of finirt rhi1fll. for these arc precisely those whose 
existence is a ronlingmt and crearcd one. - Tha1 for Spinoza the devenrh proposi1ion (according 
ro which God aisrs n~sarily) is followed by a proof and, similarly, rhe rwenrierh that God's 
existence and his essence are one and the same, 1his is a superfluous formalism of giving proofs. 
God is substance, and rhe only one ar rhat; subs1ance, however. is causa sui, thtriforr God exists 
necessarily - this means nothing bur that God is thar whose concept and being are inseparable. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
consciousness. That we possess such a consciousness is the slightest 
instance of knowledge. The only thing of interest here is knowing that 
this manner of immediately knowing the being of external things' is 
deception and error, and that in the sensory realm as such there is no 
truth; rather, the being of these external things is purely contingent, 
transitory, a semblance, i.e. that they are essentially such as to have a 
concrete existence that is separable from their concept, their essence. 
§77 
The two standpoints are nonetheless different: 
1. From these unproven presuppositions, assumed to be unprovable, the 
Cartesian philosophy moves on to forther, developed knowledge and by 
doing so has provided the origin for the sciences of the new era. By 
contrast, the modern standpoint has arrived at the result, important in 
irs own right (for sich] (§ 62), that knowing which proceeds alongfinite 
mediations knows only the finite and contains no truth, and it demands 
that the consciousness of God stand pat with the above-mentioned quite 
abstract faith.'9 
2. On the one hand, in this process the modern standpoint does not 
change anything in the method, introduced by Descartes, of ordinary 
scientific knowing, and it continues entirely in the same way to pursue 
those sciences of the empirical and the finite that originated from that 
method. On the other hand, however, this standpoint discards this 
method and in the process, since it has no inlding of any other method, 
it discards all methods for knowing [ Wissen] what is, in terms ofits basic 
content, infinite. As a result. it gives itself over to the wild arbitrariness 
of imaginings and assurances, to moral self-conceit and the arrogance of 
sentiments or to an opining and rationalizing lacking any measure, while 
declaring itself most vehemently against philosophy and philosophical 
claims. For philosophy permits neither a mere offering of assurances, 
nor imaginings, nor the arbitrary back-and-forth thinking characteristic 
of rationalization [Ra:ronnmzent]. 
'' By connasr, AnsJm says: 'N~igmtia mihi uidmtr, si posrquam conlirmari sumus in fide. non 
studnnus, quod cr~dimus, inuOign-t' ( Tracuu. Cur Dnu homo (1, 1 - 'so it seems ro me 10 be 
ncgli~nce, if. after having become 6rm in our faith, we do not make an effon to undersrand 
whar WI: believe', tl. (imo German) F. S. Schmin)). - Anselm thus has, in the concrete contem of 
Chrisrian doctrine, a much more difficult task for knowing. completely different from whar the 
modern faith mentioned above contains. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
125 
§ 78 
The opposition between a self-standing immediacy of content or knowing 
and a mediation that is equally self-standing but incompatible with the 
former must be set aside, for one thing because it is a mere presupposition 
and an arbitrary assurance. Similarly, all other presuppositions or prejudices 
must be surrendered at the entry to science, whether they be taken from 
representation or from thought. For it is in science th_at all such determina-
tions must first be examined and the status of them and their oppositions 
recognized. 
Scepticism, as a negative science applied to all forms of knowing, 
would present itself as an inrroduction in which the vacuousness 
[Nichtigkeit] of such presuppositions would be exposed. But this 
path would be not only unpleasant but also superfluous since the 
dialectical element is irself an essential moment of the affirmative 
science, as will be noted in a moment. Moreover, scepticism would 
have to find the finite forms in a merely empirical and unscientific 
way and take them up as a given. The demand for such a 
consummate scepticism is the same as the demand that science ought 
to be preceded by doubting everything, i.e. by the complete absence of 
any presupposition. This demand is actually fulfilled in the resolve to 
engage in pure thinking and through the freedom that abstracts from 
everything and grasps its pure abstraction, the simplicity of 
thinking. 
MORE DETAILED CONCEPTION AND DIVISION OF THE LOGIC 
§79 
In terms of form, the logical domain has three sides: (ex) the abstract side 
or that of the understanding, (f3) the dialectical or negatively rational side, 
(y) the speculatir'e or positively rational side. 
These three sides do not constitute three parts of logic, but are 
moments of every properly logical content [Momente jedes 
Logisch-Ree/len], that is to say, of every concept or everything true in 
general. They can all be brought under the first moment, i.e. that 
of the undnstanding, and thus separated and kept apart, but in this 
way they are not considered in their truth. - Like the division, the 

126 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
statemem made here about the determinations of the logical is at 
this point only anticipatory and historical. 
§ 80 
(a) Thinking as undmtanding does not budge beyond the firm determi-
nateness [of what is entertained] and its distinctness over against others. A 
limited abstraction of this sort counts for it as self-standing and [as having] 
being [als for sich bestehmd und uimdj. 
Addition. When one speaks of thinking in general or more specifically of com-
prehending [Bt>greijtn), one often tends to have in mind only the activiry of the 
undemanding. Now, adminedly, thinking is at first a thinking by way of under-
standing. However, it does not stand still with this, and the concept [&gri.DJ is not 
a mere determination of the understanding. -The understanding's activiry gener-
ally consists in imparting the form of universality to its conrems. More precisely, 
the universal posited by the undemanding is an abstract universal which, as such, 
is maintained in opposition to the particular and by that very fact is determined 
at the same time to be itself a panicular in turn. By rdating to its objects by 
separating and abstracting [them), the understanding is the opposite of immediate 
intuition and sensation which as such deal with the concrete throughout and do 
not budge beyond it. 
Those oft-repeated reproaches that generally tend to be made against thinking 
refer to this opposition between the understanding and sensation, reproaches that 
come down to saying that thinking is rigid and one-sided and, as a consequence, 
leads to pernicious and destructive results. Insofar as those reproaches are justified 
in terms of their contents, the response to them has to be first that it is not thinking 
in general, and more specifically rational thought, that is subject to them, but only 
the thinking of the understanding. funhermore, the thinking that is performed 
merely by the understanding must above all be accorded its rights and its merits. 
These consist in the fact that neither in the theoretical nor in the practical field is it 
possible to arrive at any firmness and determinateness without the undemanding. 
First, as far as knowing is concerned, it starts by apprehending the objects on 
hand in terms of their determinate differences. Thus, in the contemplation of 
nature, for instance, matters, forces, genera, etc. are distinguished and fixed as 
such (fUr sich) in this their isolation. Thinking proceeds here as understanding, 
and its principle is identiry, the simple relation to itself. This identity then also 
conditions the further progression from one determination to another in knowing. 
Thus notably in mathematics magnitude is the determination along which one 
proceeds while leaving all others out. Accordingly, in geometry one compares 
figures with each other by emphasizing what is identical between them. In other 
domains of knowing, too, such as in jurisprudence, one proceeds in accordance 
with identity at first. Here, inferring one determination from another is nothing 
but a progression in accordance with the principle of identity.- In the practical 
sphere no less than in the theoretical sphere, the understanding is indispensable. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
127 
Action essentially requires charaaer, and a person [Mmsch] of character is a 
human being who understands and, as such, eyes determinate purposes and firmly 
pursues them. Someone who wants to do something great must know, as Goethe 
says, how to limit himself. By contrast, someone who wants everything in fact 
wants nothing and accomplishes nothing. There are a lot of interesting things in 
the world: Spanish poetry, chemistry, politics, music. All of that is very interesting, 
and one cannot blame anybody who takes an interest in them. However, if as 
an individual one wants to achieve something in a particular situation, one must 
stick to something determinate and not split up one's power in various directions. 
Similarly, in every profession the point is to pursue it with understanding. Thus, 
a judge, for instance, must adhere to the law, pass judgment in accordance with it, 
avoid being distracted by this and that, refuse to accept any excuses, and act without 
looking right or left. - Furthermore, the understanding generally represents an 
essential aspect of education [Bildung). An educated person is not satisfied with 
nebulous and vague things; instead, he grasps the objects in their firm determinacy, 
whereas the uneducated vacillate back and forth with uncertainty, and it often takes 
a great deal of effort to reach an agreement with such a person about the topic 
of the discussion and bring him to keep his eyes unerringly on the specific point 
dealt with. 
Now furthermore, and foUowing our earlier examination, since the logical 
sphere in general is to be construed not merely as a subjective activity, but instead as 
absolutely universal and therefore at the same time as objective, this is to be applied 
to the understanding as the first form of the logical as well. The understanding 
is thus to be regarded as analogous to what one calls the loving ltindnm f Gute] 
of God, insofar as we understand by this that finite things are, that they have 
a standing. Thus, for instance, in narure one recognizes the loving kindness of 
God in that the diverse classes and genera of both animals and plants have been 
endowed with everything they need in order to preserve themselves and flourish. 
It is the same with human beings, too, with individuals and entire peoples, who 
also partly find what is necessary for their continued existence and development as 
something immediately on hand (such as, for instance, the climate, composition, 
and products of the land) and partly possess it in the form of disposition and 
talent. Construed in this way, the understanding shows itself in every domain of 
the objective [gegmst.indlich) world, and it belongs essentially to the perfection of 
an object that the principle of the understanding receive its due in it. Thus, for 
instance, the state is imperfect if a specific differentiation of estates and professions 
has not yet emerged in it, and if the political and governmental functions that 
differ in accordance with the concept have not yet been formed into specific organs 
in the same way as is the case in the developed animal organism with its differem 
functions of sensation, movement, digestion, etc. - From the discussion so far 
we learn, furthermore, that even in such domains and spheres of activity that, 
according to the ordinary representation of things, seem to be furthest removed 
from the understanding, the latter must nonetheless not be absent, and that to 
the extent that this is the case, it must be regarded as a defect. This is notably true 
of an, religion, and philosophy. Thus, for instance, in art the understanding is 

128 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
evident in the way that the forms of the beautiful, differing conceptually as they 
do, are also maintained and exhibited in terms of this difference of theirs. The 
same is true of individual works of art. Thus it is characteristic of the beauty and 
perfection of a drama that the charaaers of the different personae arc portrayed in 
their purity and determinacy, and also that the several goals and interests that are 
at play are presented clearly and decisively. - Next, insofar as the domain of the 
religious is concerned, the advantage of Greek over Nordic mythology, for example 
(apart from the diversity otherwise of content and conception), consists essentially 
in that in the former the figures of the individual gods are developed to the point 
of having a sculpted determinacy (plastische BtStimmtheit], whereas in the laner 
they merge together in the fog of a murky indeterminacy. - Finally, given what 
has been discussed up to this point, the fact that philosophy also cannot dispense 
with the understanding scarcely needs any particular mention. To do philosophy, 
it is above all required that each thought be grasped in its full precision and that 
one is not content with vagueness and indeterminacy. 
It also, however, tends to be said that the understanding must not go too far. This 
is correct, insofar as the point of view of the understanding [das Verstandige} is not 
something ultimate but far more something finite instead, and, more specifically, 
something of the sort that, pushed to the extreme, turns over into its opposite. 
It is the way of youth to relish abstractions, whereas a person with the experi-
ence of life does not indulge in the abstract tither-or, clinging instead to what is 
concrete. 
§ 81 
(f') The dialectical moment is the self-sublation of such finite determina-
tions by themselves and their transition into their opposites. 
r. The dialectical, when taken in isolation by the understanding, 
constitutes scepticism, particularly when displayed in scientific 
concepts. It contains mere negation as the result of the dialectical. 
2. The dialectic is usually regarded as an extraneous art that arbitrarlly 
generates confusion among certain concepts and a mere snnblanct of 
contradictions among them, such that not these determinations but 
instead this semblance is supposedly something null and void and, 
in contrast to it, what belongs to the understanding is supposedly 
what is true. Furthermore, the dialectic is often nothing more 
than a subjective seesaw system of back-and-forth rationalizing, 
where the basic content is missing and this paucity is concealed by 
the astuteness that generates such rationalizing. - In its distinctive 
determinateness, the dialectic is far more the proper, true nature of 
the determinations of the understanding, of things, and of the finite 

Th( Encyclopedia Logic 
119 
in general. Reflexion is at first a process of going beyond the 
isolated determinacy, i.e. a relating of it, whereby it is brought into 
a relationship, despite its being maintained in irs isolated valid icy. 
The dialectic is, by contrast, this immanmt process of going 
beyond [such determinacy] wherein the one-sided and limited 
character of the determinations of the understanding presents 
itself as what it is, namely as their negation. Everything finite is 
this, the sublating of itself. Thus, the dialectical moment constitutes 
the moving soul of the scientific progression and is the principle 
through which alone an immanmt conn(ction and necmity enters 
into the content of science, just as in general the true, as opposed 
to an external, elevation above the finite resides in this principle. 
Addition r. Properly construing and recognizing the dialectical dimension is of 
the highest importance. It is in general the principle of all movement, all life, and all 
actual activity. The dialectical is equally the soul of all truly scientific knowing. In 
our ordinary consciousness, not stopping short at the abstract determinations of the 
understanding appears to be only fair, in keeping with the adage 'Live and let live', 
such that one thing is valid, but so, too, is tht othn-. Looked at more closely, however, 
the finite is not limited merely from the outside but, by virtue of its own nature, 
sublates itself and changes into its opposite on account ofitself. Thus, for example, 
it is said that human beings are monal, and dying is then regarded as something that 
has its cause in extraneous circumstances only. According to this way of viewing 
the matter, a human being ha$ two particular properties, thar of being alive and 
also that of being mortal. The true way to construe the matter, however, is that 
life as such carries within itself the germ of death and that, generally speaking, the 
finite contradicts itself in itself and fOr that reason sublates itself. - Furthermore, 
the dialectic must not be confused with mere sophistic technique, the essence of 
which consists precisely in upholding one-sided and abstract determinations in 
isolation from one another, depending on the individual's respective interests and 
particular situation. Thus, for example, in regard to action, it is essential that I 
exist and have the means to exist. But if I then lay emphasis exclusively on this 
side, this principle of my wellbeing, and derive from it the conclusion that I am 
therefore allowed to steal or betray my fatherland, this is sophistry. - Similarly in 
my actions my subjective freedom is an essential principle in the sense that I am 
engaged with insight and conviction in what I do. However, if I reason on the 
basis of this principle alone, then this is likewise sophistry and all principles of 
ethical life are thereby thrown overboard. - The dialectic differs essentially from 
such behaviour, for it aims precisely at contemplating things as they are in and for 
themselves, and from this emerges the finirude of the one-sided determinations 
of the understanding. - Incidentally, the dialectic is nothing new in philosophy. 
Among the ancients, Plato is called the inventor of the dialectic, and rightfully so, 
insofar as in the Platonic philosophy the dialectic occurs fOr the first time in its free, 
scientific and thus at the same time objective form. With Socrates, the dialectical 

130 
Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
stiU has a predominantly subjective shape, namely that of irony, in keeping with 
the general character of his philosophizing. Socrates directed his dialectic against 
the ordinary consciousness in general and then against the Sophists in panicular. 
In his conversations, he would assume the guise of someone who wanted to be 
instructed further about the matter under discussion. In this context he raised 
all sons of questions and led those with whom he conversed to the opposite of 
what at first had seemed to them to be right. When, for instance, the Sophists 
called themselves teachers, Socrates would, through a series of questions, get the 
sophist Prmagoras to admit that all learning is merely recollection. - In Plato's 
rigorous, scientific dialogues, by means of the dialectical treatment, he shows the 
finitude of all fixed determinations of the understanding in general. Thus, in the 
Parmmitks, for instance, he derives the One from the Many and, in spite of this, 
shows how the Many is just this, namely to determine itself as the One. Plato 
treated the dialectic in this grand manner.- In more recent times, it was primarily 
Kant who brought back to memory the dialectic and reinstated it in its position 
of honour. He did this by elaborating the so-called antinomies of reason that we 
have already discussed (§ 48). In their case, in no way is it a matter of merely going 
back and forth between reasons and of a merely subjective activity. It is rather a 
matter of showing how each abstract determination of the understanding, taken 
merely in the way it presents itself, immediately turns over into its opposite. -
Now however much the understanding is prone to resist the dialectic, the latter is 
by no means to be regarded as present only for the philosophical consciousness. 
Instead, what is in play here is already found in all other forms of consciousness 
and is found universally in experience. Everything that surrounds us can be viewed 
as an example of the dialectic. We know that all finite things, instead of being 
something fixed and ultimate, are really changeable and perishable, and this is 
nothing but the dialectic of the finite. By vinue of this dialectic, the same thing 
(as in itself the other of itseiO is driven beyond what it immediately is and turns 
over into its opposite. Whereas earlier(§ 8o) it was said the understanding should 
be regarded as what is contained in the representation ofGodsgoodntss, so now it 
should be noted in the same (objective) sense about the dialectic that its principle 
corresponds to the representation of God's powrr. We say that all things (i.e. 
everything finite as such) come to judgment, and with this we have a view of the 
dialectic as the universal, irresistible power which nothing, however secure and 
firm it may feel itself to be, can withstand. To be sure, the depth of the divine 
being. God's concept, is not yet exhausted by this determination. Still, it forms an 
essential moment in all religious conM:iousness. -Furthermore, the dialectic also 
establishes itself in all the particular domains and formations of the natural and the 
spiritual world as, for instance, in the movement of the cdestial bodies. A planet 
stands now in this location, but it is in itself such as to be in a different location as 
well, and it brings its otherness into existence by undergoing movement. Similarly, 
the physical elements prove to be dialectical, and the metereological process is 
the manifestation of their dialectic. It is the same principle that forms the basis 
of all other processes in nature and through which nature is at the same time 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
driven beyond itself. As far as the occurrence of the dialectic in the spiritual world, 
and more specifically in the legal and rhe ethical domain is concerned, one need 
only be reminded of how, as follows from experience universally, the extremes of 
a stare or an action rend ro change into their opposite, a dialectic that proverbs 
acknowledge in multiple ways. Thus, for instance, it is said thar summum ius 
sum11UI iniurill ['urmost justice is the utmost injustice'] as a means of expressing 
that abstract ju$tice, driven to the extreme, changes over into injustice. So, roo, it 
is well known how in the area of politics the extremes of anarchy and despotism 
tend to provoke one another reciprocally. We find consciousness of the dialectic 
in the ethical domain, as far as its individual form is concerned, in the well-
known proverbs: 'Pride goes before a faU', Too much wit outwits itself', etc.-
Even feelings, bodily as well as mental, possess a dialectic of their own. It is well 
known how the extremes of pain and joy turn into one another; the heart filled 
with joy relieves itself through tears, and in some circumstances the most poignant 
melancholy tends to announce itself with a smile. 
Addition 2. Scepticism must not be regarded merely as a doctrine of doubt. 
Rather, it is absolutely certain of the matter it is concerned with, namely the 
nothingness of all things finite. The person who is still doubting continues to 
harbour the hope that his doubt can be lifted and that one or rhe other of the 
determinate points between which he is vacillating will tum our to be firm and 
true. By contrast, scepticism proper is the complete despair of anyrhing solid in 
understanding and the attitude that results from it is an unshakeable mind that 
rests in itself. This is the high-minded ancient scepticism as we find it presented 
notably in Sextus Empiricus and as it developed as a complement to the dogmatic 
systems of the Stoics and Epicureans during the later Roman period. We must not 
confuse this high-minded ancient scepticism with the modern scepticism already 
mentioned earlier (§ 39) that partly preceded and partly developed out of the 
Critical philosophy. This modern scepticism consists simply in denying the truth 
and certainty of the supersensory domain and in designating the sensory and what 
is on hand in immediate sensation as what we have to cling to. 
Incidenrally, if scepticism is often regarded even today as an irresistible enemy 
of all positive knowing [ Wirstn] whatsoever and thus also of philosophy, insofar 
as the latter deals with positive knowledge [Erktnntnis), then it needs to be said 
in response that it is in fact only the finite, abstract thinking of the understand-
ing that has to fear scepticism and cannot withstand it, whereas philosophy, by 
contrast, contains the sceptical within itself as one of its momenrs, namely as the 
dialectical. But then philosophy does not rest with the merely negative result of the 
dialectical as is the case with scepticism. The Iauer misjudges its result by clinging 
to it as a mere (i.e. abstract) negation. Because the dialectic has the negative as a 
result, the negative is equally positive, precisely as a result, for it contains within 
itself that from which it results, containing the latter as something it has sublated, 
and is not without what it has sublated. This, however, is the fundamental deter-
mination of the third form of the logical, namely of the sprculativt or positively 
rational. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
§ 82 
(y) The speculative or the positively rational grasps the unity of the deter-
minations in their opposition, the afjinnative that is contained in their 
dissolution and their passing over imo something else. 
I. The dialectic has a positive result, because it has a detenninate 
content or because its result is in truth not an empty. abstract nothing, 
but instead the negation of definite detenninations chat are contained 
in the result precisely because it is not an immediate nothing, but a 
result instead. 2. Therefore, although it is something thought, even 
abstract, the rational is at the same time something concrete, because 
it is not a simpk, fonnal unity, but a unity of distinct detenninations. 
For this reason, philosophy does not deal at all with mere 
abstractions or formal thoughts, but exclusively with concrete 
thoughts. 3· The mere logic of the understanding is contained in the 
speculative logic and can instantly be extracted from it. Nothing 
more is needed for this than to remove the dialeCtical and the 
rational from it. In this way, it becomes what the ordinary logic is, 
namely a historical record of diverse, juxtaposed determinations of 
thought that in their finitude count as something infinite. 
AdJition. In terms of conunt, the rationaJ is so far from being the possession 
merely of philosophy that it must be said instead that it is available to all human 
beings at whichever level of education and mental development they may find 
themselves. In this sense, human beings have, since ancient times, righdy been 
designated as rational beings [Wtsen]. The general empirical manner in which 
the rational is known [wissen) is at first that of prejudice and presupposition and, 
according to our previous discussion(§ 45), the nature of the rational is generally 
to be something unconditioned which for that reason contains its determinateness 
within itself. In this sense, human beings know about the rational first and foremost 
insofar as they know of God and know him as determined by himself alone. 
Following that, a citizen's knowledge of his fatherland and irs laws is similarly 
a knowledge of what is rational, insofar as this counts for him as something 
unconditioned and at the same time as something universal to which he has to 
submit his individual will. In the same sense, even the knowledge and volition of 
a child is already rational, insofar as it knows and embraces the will of its parents. 
Furthermore, the sptcu!A.tivt is nothing else than the rational (the positively 
rational, that is) insofar as it is thought. In ordinary life, the expression sptctiUttioll 
tends to be used in a very vague and at the same time subordinate sense, as, 
for instance, when one speaks of speculations concerning marriage or commerce. 
What is understood by such 'speculation', then, is merely the fact that, on the one 
hand, one should go beyond what is immediately on hand and, on the other, what 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
forms the content of such speculations is initially merely something subjective but 
should not remain so but instead be realized or translated into objectivity. 
What was remarked earlier about the idea holds likewise for this ordinary use 
of language concerning speculation, to which may be added the further remark 
that those who count themselves among the more educated also often speak 
of speculation as something m"ely subjective. They say, namely, that a certain 
construal of natural or spiritual conditions and circumstances may be very well 
and good when taken in a merely speculative manner, but that experience does 
not agree with it and nothing like it can be countenanced in actuality. Against this 
position it must be said that, as far as its uue meaning is concerned, the speculative 
is neither provisionally nor even definitively something merely subjective. Instead, 
it is explicitly what contains those oppositions at which the understanding stops 
short (thus including the opposition of the subjective and the objective) and 
contains them as something sublated within itself and precisely by this means 
proves itself to be concrete and a totality. For this reason, a speculative content can 
also not be expressed in a one-sided sentence. If we say, for instance, 'the absolute 
is the unity of the subjective and the objective', this is, to be sure, correct but 
one-sided insofar as only the unity is expressed here and emphasis is placed on it 
alone, whereas in fact the subjective and the objective are indeed not only identical 
but also distinct. 
As regards the significance of the speculative, it bears mentioning here that the 
same thing is to be understood by it as formerly used to be called the mystica~ 
especially when referring to religious consciousness and its content. When one 
speaks of the mystical today, it is normally taken to be synonymous with the 
mysterious and the incomprehensible, and the mysterious and incomprehensible 
are then - depending on the respective educational background and mindset -
regarded by some as something genuine and true, but by others as belonging to 
superstition and deception. In this regard, it should be noted first that the mystical 
is indeed something mysterious, but only for the understanding, simply because 
abstract identity is the principle of the understanding, whereas the mystical (taken 
as synonymous with the speculative) is the concrete unity of those determinations 
that count as rrue for the understanding only in their separation and opposition. 
So when those who recognize the mystical as the true are likewise happy to 
call it the absolutely mysterious and leave it at that, they express that, as far 
as they are concerned, thinking likewise has the significance solely of positing 
abstract identities, and that in order to attain to the truth one must renounce 
thinking or, as also tends to be said, that one must rake reason captive. But as 
we have seen, the abstract thinking of the understanding is so far from being 
something firm and ultimate that, to the contrary, it turns out to be constantly 
sublating itself and changing over into its opposite, whereas the rational as such 
consists precisely in containing the opposite$ as ideal moments within itself. Thus, 
everything rational is to be called at the same time 'mystical', by which. however, 
nothing more or less is said than that it goes beyond the understanding and 
in no way that it is to be regarded generally as inaccessible to thinking and as 
incomprehensible. 

134 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
The Logic falls into three pans: 
I. The doctrine of being. 
2. The doctrine of essence. 
§83 
3· The doctrine of the concept and the idea. 
That is, into the doctrine of thought 
I. In its immediacy- the concept-in-itself, 
2. In its reflection and mediation- the being-for-itselfand the shining [Schein] 
of the concept. 
3· In its having returned back into itself and in its developed being-with-
itself- the concept in-and-for-itself 
Addition. The division of the Logic here given, as well as the entire discussion 
of thinking up to this point, is to be regarded as a mere anticipation, and the 
justification or proof of it can only result from the completed treatment of thinking 
itself. For in philosophy, demonstrating [~weiren] is equivalent to showing how the 
object makes itself- through and out of itself- into what it is.- The relationship 
in which the above-mentioned three major stages of thought or of the logical idea 
stand to each other is generally to be construed in such a way that only the concept 
is what is true [das Wahrt] and. more precisely, the truth of bting and of mmct, 
both of which, held fast for themselves in their isolation, are to be regarded at 
the same time as untrue: being because it is at first only what is immediate, and 
tssenct because it is at first only what is mediated. One might raise the question, 
then, why, if this is so, we begin with the untrue and not right away with the true. 
The answer to this is that the uuth has to prove [bewiihren] itself precisely to be 
the truth, and here, within the logical sphere, the proof consists in the concept 
demonsuating itself to be mediated through and with itself and thereby also as 
what is truly immediate. The aforementioned reladonship of the three stages of 
the logical idea displays irs concrete and real shape in the way that we know God 
(who is the truth) in his truth, i.e. as absolute spirit, only insofar as we recognize 
at the same time that the world created by him, i.e. nature and finite spirit, are, in 
their difference from God, untrue. 

First subdivision of the Logic: 
The doctrine of being 
§84 
Being is the concept only as it is in itself Its determinations have b~ing, i.e. 
in their difference they are others opposite one another, and their further 
determination (the form of the dialectical) is a proem of passing over into 
an other. This progressive determination is at once a matter of settingforth 
and thereby unfolding the concept, as it is in itself, and at the same time 
the process of being mtering into itself, a deepening of it within itsel£ The 
explication of the concept in the sphere of being becomes the totality of 
being, precisely to the extent that the immediacy of being or the form of 
being as such is sublated in the process. 
§ 85 
Being itself as well as the subsequent determinations, not only those of 
being but also the logical determinations in general, can be regarded as 
the definitions of the absolute, as metaphysical tkfinitions of God. More 
specifically, only the first simple determination within a given sphere, and 
then the third, which is the return from a difference to the simple relation to 
itself, can always be regarded in this way. For, to define God metaphysically 
means co express his nature in thrmghts as such. But logic comprises all 
thoughts as they are while still in the form of thoughts. By contrast, the 
second determinations, making up a given sphere in its diffi"nce [Dijfermz], 
are the definitions of the finite. But if the form of definitions were used, 
this would entail envisaging a representational substratum. For even the 
absolute, what is supposed to express God in the sense and in the form 
of thought, remains merely an intended thought, i.e. a substratum that as 
such is indeterminate, relative to its predicate as the determinate and actual 
expression in thought. Because the thought, the basic matter solely at issue 
here, is contained only in the predicate, the form of a proposition, like that 
135 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
subject, is something completely superfluous (cf. § 31 and the chapter on 
the judgment below [§§ 166 ~t uq.J). 
Addition. Each sphere of the logical idea proves to be a rotaliry of determinations 
and a presentation of the absolute, and so roo does being, which includes within 
itself the three stages of quality, quantity, and measure. Quality is, to begin with, 
the determinacy that is idemicaJ with being in the sense that something ceases 
to be what it is when it loses its qualiry. By contrast, quantity is the determinacy 
that is external to being and indifferent in relation to it. Thus, for instance, a 
house remains what it is, whether it is bigger or smaller, and red remains red, be it 
brighter or darker. The third stage of being, measure: is the uniry of the first two, 
qualitative quantity. All things have their measure: that is, they are quantitatively 
determined, and their being either this big or bigger is indifferent to them. At 
the same time, however. this indifference has its limits, and if those limits are 
overstepped by an additional more or less, things cease to be what they were. From 
measure there then results the progression to the second main sphere of the idea, 
namely nsence. 
The three forms of being mentioned here are also the poorest, that is to say, rhe 
most absuact, just because they are the first. The immediate sensory consciousness, 
insofar as its behaviour involves thinking, is chiefly limited to the abstract deter-
minations of qualiry and quanriry. This sensory consciousness is usually regarded 
as the most concrete and rhus also the richest. Ir is so, however, only in terms of 
its material, whereas it is in fact the poorest and most abstract consciousness with 
respect to the content of irs thoughts. 
A. QUALITY 
a. Bting 
§ 86 
Pur~ b~ing constitutes the beginning, because it is pure thought as well as 
the undetermined, simple immediate, and the first beginning cannot be 
anything mediated and further determined. 
All the doubts and reminders that might be raised against beginning 
the science with abstract, empty b~ing take care of themselves 
through the simple consciousness of what is implied by the nature 
of a beginning. Being can be determined as 'I= 1', as the absolut~ 
indiffirmct or idmtity, etc. In the need to begin with something 
absolutely ctrtain, i.e. the certainty of oneself, or with a definition or 
intuition of the abso/utt/y tru~. these and other similar forms can be 
regarded as what must be the first. However, insofar as m~diation is 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
137 
• 
already present within each of these forms, they are not truly the 
first. Mediation means to have gone from a first to a second 
and to emerge from something differentiated [Heroorgehm aus 
Untmchiedtntn]. If'I = I' or even the intellectual imuition is 
genuinely taken as simply the first, then in this pure immediacy it 
is nothing else but being, just as, conversely, pure being, insofar as it 
is no longer this abstract being, but being that contains mediation 
within itself, is pure thinking or intuiting. 
When being is expressed as a predicate of the absolute, this 
provides the first definition of the latter: the absolute is bting. This 
is (in the thought) the absolutely first, most abstract, and most 
impoverished definition. It is the definition of the Eleatics, but at the 
same time also the familiar one that God is the sum total [Inbegrifff of 
all realities. The point is that one is supposed to abstract from the 
limitedness inherent in every reality, so that God is nothing but the 
real in all reality, the supremely real. Insofar as reality already comains 
a reflection, this idea is expressed more immediately in what Jacobi 
says about the God of Spinoza, namely chat he is the principium of 
being in all existence. 
Addition r. When beginning with thinking, we have nothing but thought in 
the sheer absence of any determination of it [in sein" reinen 8t'Stimmung.sbJsigkeit), 
since for a determination one and an other are required. In the beginning, however, 
we have as yet no other. The indeterminate [Btstimmungs/ost), as we have it here, 
is the immediate, not the mediated absence of determination, not the sublation of 
all determinacy, but the immediacy of the absence of determination, the absence 
of determinacion prior to all determinacy, the indeterminate as the very first. But 
this is what we call 'being'. It is not to be sensed, intuited, or represented; instead 
it is the pure thought, and as such it constitutes the beginning. Essence, too, is 
something indeterminate, but the indeterminate chat, having gone through the 
mediation, contains within itself the determinacy as already sublated. 
Addition 2. We find the various stages of the logical idea in the history of 
philosophy, in the shape of philosophical systems that have successively emerged, 
each of which has a particular definition of the absolute as its foundation. Now 
just as the unfolding of the logical idea proves to be a progression from the 
abstract to the concrete, so, coo, the earliest systems in the history of philosophy 
are the most abstract and thus at the same time also the most impoverished. The 
relationship of the earlier to the later philosophical systems is, generally speaking, 
the same as the relationship of the earlier to the later stages of the logical idea 
and, to be sure, in such a way that the later ones contain within them the earlier 
ones as sublaced. This is the true meaning of the refutation of one philosophical 
system by another, and more specifically of the earlier by the later system, a 
common occurrence in the history of philosophy that is so often misunderstood. 

Th~ Encyclopedia ugic 
When the refutation of a philosophy is discussed, this tends at first ro be taken 
merely in an abstractly negative sense, such that the refuted philosophy has no 
validity whatsoever anymore, that it has been discarded and done away with. If 
this were so, the study of the history of philosophy would have ro be regarded as an 
altogether sad business, since study of it teaches how all philosophical systems that 
have appeared over time have been refuted. However, just as one must admit that 
all philosophies have been refuted, it must also be maintained that no philosophy 
has ever been refuted or is even capable of being refuted. The laner is the case 
in two connections, on the one hand, inasmuch as every philosophy worthy of 
the name has the idea as such for its content, and on the other, inasmuch as· 
each philosophical system has to be regarded as the presentation of a particular 
moment, or a particular stage in the process of the development of the idea. He!'ce, 
refuting a philosophy merely means that its limitation has been transcended and 
irs particular principle downgraded to an ideal moment. Accordingly, as far as its 
essential content is concerned, the history of philosophy deals not with the past, 
but with what is eternal and absolutely present, and its result must be compared 
not to a gallery of errors of the human spirit, but rather to a pantheon of divine 
figures [GotttJXtStaltm]. These divine figures are the various stages of the idea as 
they emerged successively in the dialectical development. Now it is left to the 
history of philosophy to demonstrate in greater derail the extent to which the 
unfolding of its contents that takes place in it agrees with the dialectical unfolding 
of the pure, logical Idea, on the one hand, and diverges from it, on the other. All 
that needs to be mentioned here is that the beginning of the logic is the same 
as the beginning of the history of philosophy proper. We find this beginning in 
the Eleatic philosophy, and more specifically in that of Parmenides who construes 
the absolute as being when he says that 'only being is, and nothing is not'. This 
is to be regarded as the proper beginning of philosophy because philosophy is, 
generally speaking, a process of knowing by way of thinking [dmkmdts Erkmnm], 
but here for the first time pure thinking has been taken hold of and become an 
object (gtgmstiindlich] for itsel£ 
Human beings have thought from the beginning, to be sure, since they di~tin­
guish themselves from animals only through thinking. And yet it took thousands 
of years before it carne to grasping thought in its purity and at the same time as 
absolutely objective. The Eleatics are famous for being bold thinkers. However, 
this abstract admiration is often accompanied by the remark that these philoso-
phers nonetheless went too far by reeognizing being alone as the true and denying 
the truth of everything else that forms the object of our consciousness. Now it 
is indeed perfectly correct to say that one must not stop at mere being. Still, it 
is thoughtless to regard the remaining contents of our consciousness as existing 
so to speak alongsidt and outsidt of being or as something that is there merely in 
addition to it. By contrast, the true relationship here is that being as such is not 
something fixed and ultimate but, rather, that it changes over dialectically into its 
opposite, which, likewise taken immediately, is nothing. Thus it remains true in 
the end that being is the first pure thought, and that whatever else may be made 
the beginning (whether the 'I = 1', the absolute indifference, or God himself), 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
139 
it is at first only something represented and not something thought, and that in 
terms of its thought contents it is only being after all. 
§ 87 
Now this pure being is a pure abstraction and thus the absolutely negative 
which, when likewise taken immediately, is nothing. 
1. The second definition of the absolute, namely that it is nothing, 
followed from this. This conclusion is, indeed, entailed by saying 
that the thing-in-itself is the undetermined, utterly devoid of form 
and therefore of content. So, too, if it is said that God is simply the 
supreme being and nothing else, then he is being declared, as 
such, to be the very same negativity. The nothing that Buddhists 
make the principle of everything and the ultimate end and goal of 
everything is the same abstraction. - 2. When the opposition is 
expressed in this immediate way as one of being and nothing, it 
seems all too evident that it is null and void for one not to try to fix 
[upon some determinate sense of] being and to save it from this 
transition. In this respect, thinking the matter over is bound to fall 
prey to looking for a fixed determination for being through 
which it would be differentiated from nothing. For instance, one 
may take it to be what persists in all change, the infinitely 
determinable matter and so forth, or again, without thinking it 
through, to be any given individual concrete existence [einzelne 
Existenz], the next best sensory or spiritual entity. However, none 
of these further and more concrete determinations leave being as 
pure being, as it is here immediately in the beginning. It is nothing 
only in and because of this pure indeterminacy, something 
inexpressible; its difference from nothing is a mere opinion [eine 
bwfe Meinung].- We are concerned here exclusively with the 
consciousness of these beginnings, namely that they are nothing 
but these empty abstractions and that each of them is as empty as 
the other. The drive to find in being or in both a fixed meaning is 
the very necessity that expands [weiterfohrt] being and nothing and 
gives them a true, i.e. concrete meaning. This development is the 
logical elaboration and the progression presented in what follows. 
The process of thinking them over that finds deeper determinations 
for them is the logical thinking by means of which these 
determinations produce themselves, not in a contingent but in 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
a necessary manner. - Each subsequent meaning they receive is 
therefore to be regarded only as a more specific tktumination and a 
tnltr definition of the absolute. Such a definition will then no longer 
be an empty abstraction like being and nothing, but rather 
something concrete in which both being and nothing are 
moments. - The highest form of nothingness for itself would be 
freedom, but freedom is the negativity that deepens itself within itself 
to the point of the utmost intensity and is itself affirmation, and 
absolute affirmation at that. 
Adtiition. Being and nothing are at first only suppoud to be distinguished, 
i.e. their difference is at first only in itu/f. but not yet positfd. If we talk about 
a difference at all, then we have two and in each case a determination not to 
be found in the one applies to the other. Bur being is absolutely devoid of all 
determination, and nothing is the very same lack of determination. The difference 
between these two is therefore only intended - the totally abstract difference that 
is at the same time no difference. In all other cases of distinguishing we always also 
have something common that subsumes rhe distinct items under it. For instance, 
when we speak of two different genera, then the genus is what is common to 
both. Similarly, we say there are natural and spiritual essences. Here, the essence 
is something that belongs to both. In the case of being and nothing. however, 
the difference is bottomless, and precisely for that reason there is none, for both 
determinations represent the same bottomlessness. Suppose one wanted to say, 
for instance, that both are after all thoughts, and hence thought is common to 
both. One would then overlook the fact that being is not a specific, determinate 
thought bur rather the as yet entirely undetermined thought, and for that very 
reason indistinguishable from nothing. -Again, being may also be represented as 
absolutely rich and nothing as absolutely poor. But when we regard the entire world 
and say of it that everything is and nothing further, we leave all determinateness 
aside and instead of absolute fullness we only retain absolute emptiness. The same 
comment can be made about its application to the definition of God as mere 
being. Standing over and against this definition with equal justification is the 
Buddhist definition that God is nothingness, with its implication that a human 
being becomes God through self-annihilation. 
§ 88 
Conversely, nothing, as this immediate, self-same [category], is likewise the 
same as being. The truth of being as well as of nothing is therefore the unity 
of both; this unity is becoming. 
1. The proposition 'Being and nothing are the same' appears to be ·such 
a paradoxical proposition for the representation or the understanding 
that one perhaps believes that it is not meant seriously. And indeed it 
is one of the hardest thoughts that thinking imposes upon itself, for 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
being and nothing are the opposite in its complete imTMdiacy, that is to 
say, without there already beingposiud in one of them a determination 
that would contain its relation to the other: And yet, they do contain this 
determination, as has been demonsrrated in the previous section, namely, 
the determination that is the same in both. The deduction of their unity 
is rhus entirely analytical, just as in general rhe whole progression in 
philosophizing (insofar as it is a methodical, i.e. a necmary progression) 
is nothing other than merely the positing of what is already contained 
in a concept. - But as correct as the unity of being and nothing is, so 
it is also correct that thry art absoluuly difformt, i.e. that the one is not 
what the other is. However, since at this point the difference has not yet 
become determinate (for being and nothing are still what is immediate), 
how it bears on them is something that cannot bt said, it is something 
merely meant [dit blojft Mtinung]. 
2. It does nor require a great deal of wit to ridicule the proposition that 
being and nothing are the same, or rather to bring up absurdities with 
the false assurance that they are the consequences and applications of 
it; for example, that according to that proposition it would be the same 
whether my house, my assets, the air we breathe, this city, the sun, 
right, spirit, God are or not. For one thing, in examples such as these, 
particular purpom or the utility something has for me are surreptitiously 
introduced, and it is asked whether it makes no difference to me, if the 
useful thing exists or not. Philosophy is indeed just the doctrine that is 
meant to liberate man from an infinite number of finite purposes and 
goals, and to make him indifferent to them such that it is indeed all 
the same to him whether such things are or not. But generally speaking, 
as soon as we are talking about some contents, a connection is thereby 
posited with other concretely existing things, purposes, etc. that are prt-
suppostd as valid, and it is then made dependent on such presuppositions, 
whether the being or not-being of a determinate contmt is the same or 
not. A difference foil of contmt is surreptitiously substituted for the 
empty difference between being and nothing. - But for another thing, 
purposes that are in themselves essential, absolute concrete existences 
[absolute ExistenzenJ and ideas are placed under the determination of 
being or not-being. Such concrete objects are something quire differ-
ent from mere beings or not-beings; poor abstractions such as being and 
nothing (which are the poorest of all just because they are the determi-
nations only of the beginning) are completely inadequate to the nature 
of those objects; a genuine content has long since transcended these 
abstractions themselves and their opposition. - In general, if something 
concrete is surreptitiously substituted for being and nothing, the usual 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
thing happens to this thoughtlessness, namely it entertains and talks 
about something quite different from what is at issue. And what is at 
issue here is merely abstract being and nothing. 
3· It can easily be said that one does not compr~htnd the unity of being and 
nothing. The concept ofit, however, was stated in the preceding sections, 
and it is nothing over and above what has been stated. Comprehending 
it means nothing other than apprehending this. But by 'comprehend-
ing', something broader than the concept proper is understood. A more 
manifold, richer consciousness, a representation is demanded, with the 
result that a concept of this sort is put forward as a concrete case with 
which thinking in its ordinary routine would be more familiar. To the 
extent that the inability to comprehend expresses only that one is unac-
customed to holding onto abstract thoughts without any sensory input 
and to grasping speculative sentences, there is nothing further to be said 
than this, namely that philosophical knowledge [Wisun] is indeed of 
a different sort from the kind of knowledge one is accustomed to in 
ordinary life, as it also is from what reigns in other sciences. If, however, 
the inability to comprehend means only that one is unable to r~r~­
stnt this unity of being and nothing to oneself, then this is in fact so 
little the case that to the contrary everybody possesses infinitely many 
representations of this unity. That one does not possess such represen-
tations can mean only that one fails to recognize the concept under 
discussion in any of those representations and that one does not know 
that they are examples of it. The example that comes most readily to 
mind is that of b~coming. Everybody has a representation of becoming 
and will equally admit that it is on~ representation; further, that when 
one analyses it the determination of b~ing, but also that of its absqlute 
other, nothing, is contained therein; furthermore, that these two deter-
minations exist undivided in this on~ representation, so that becoming 
is thereby the unity of being and nothing. - Another example equally 
ready to hand is that of the b~ginning. The basic matter is not y~t in 
its beginning, but the beginning is not merely its nothing either; rather 
b~ing is already contained therein. The beginning is itself also a becom-
ing, but it already expresses the relation to the further progression. -
If one wanted to follow the usual procedure of the sciences, one might 
start the Logic with the representation of the beginning thought in its 
purity, i.e. with the beginning qua beginning, and to analyse this rep-
resentation. Perhaps one would then more easily accept as the result of 
this analysis that being and nothing show themselves as undivided in a 
single thought [in Ein~ ung~trtnnt]. 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
143 
4· In addition, we must further note thar the expressions 'Being and noth-
ing are th~ samt' or 'th~ unity of being and nothing' and similarly all 
other such uniti~s (e.g. that of subject and object [Obj~kt], and so on) 
are rightly objectionable. The awkwardness and incorrectness lies in 
the fact that the unity is emphasized, and while the difference [ v~r­
schi~eknh~it] is indeed contained in it (because the unity posited is one 
of being and nothing, for instance), this difference is not simultaneously 
stated and acknowledged. Instead, it seems that one is merely abstract-
ing illegitimately from it and not taking it into consideration. Indeed, a 
speculative determination cannot properly be expressed in the form of 
· such a proposition: unity is supposed to be articulated in the difference 
that is simultaneously pmmt and posiud. As their unity, b~coming is 
the true expression of the result of being and nothing. It is not only 
the unity of being and nothing, but the unmt in itself- the unity that 
as relation to itself is not merely immobile, but is within itself against 
itself on account of the difference of being and nothing contained in 
it. - Existmu [Das~in] is, by contrast, this unity, or becoming in this 
form of unity; this is why existence is on~-siekd and finit~. It is as if the 
opposition had disappeared. It is contained in the unity only in its~lf, 
but not posit~d in the unity. 
5. Standing in contrast to the proposition that being is the transitioning 
into nothing and nothing the transitioning into being (this being the 
principle of b~coming) is the proposition that 'Nothing com~s from noth-
ing' or 'something can only come from something', i.e. the proposition 
of the eternity of matter, pantheism. The ancients made the simple 
refiection that the proposition 'something comes from something' or 
'nothing comes from nothing' does indeed sublate becoming. For that 
out of which something comes to be and that which comes to be are one 
and the same. There is nothing here but a proposition of the identity 
of the abstract understanding. It must strike one as curious, however, to 
see the propositions 'nothing comes from nothing' or 'something comes 
only from something' put forward quite na'ively even in our times with 
neither any awareness that they are the foundation of pantheism, nor any 
familiarity with the fact that the ancients considered these propositions 
quite exhaustively. 
Addition. Becoming is the first concrete thought and thus the first concept, 
whereas being and nothing are empty abstractions. When we talk about the 
concept of being, the latter can consist only in becoming, since as being it is the 
empty nothing and as such the empty being. In being, then, we have nothing and 
in it being. This being, however, that persists in being with itself in nothing is 

144 
Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
becoming. In the unity of becoming, the difference [ Untmchitdj must not be left 
out, for without it one would return to abstract being. Becoming is merely the 
positedness [tkr Gtsttztrtin) of what being truly is. 
One very often hears the claim that thinking is opposed to being. In the face of 
such an affirmation, however, it should first be asked what we are to understand 
by being. When we take up being as it is determined by reflection, the only thing 
we can say about it is that it is the absolutely identical and affirmative. If we then 
consider thinking, it cannot escape us that at the very least it is likewise absolutely 
identical to itself. To both being and thinking, then, the same determination 
applies. This identity of being and thinking must, however, not be taken in a 
concrete sense, and hence one is not to say that a stone dtat has being is the 
same as a thinking human being. Something concrete is quite different from the 
abstract determination as such. But in the case ofbeing, there is no talk of anything 
concrete, for being is precisely what is entirely abstract. Accordingly, the question 
concerning the being of God who is in himself infinitely concrete, is also of little 
interest. 
As the first concrete determination of thought, becoming is also at the same time 
the first true determination of thought. In the history of philosophy, it is the system 
of Heraclitus that corresponds to this stage of the logical Idea. When Heraclitus 
says 'Everything is in flux' (mwra pei), becoming is thereby pronounced to be 
the fundamental determination of all there is, whereas the Eleatics by contrast, as 
mentioned earlier, construed being alone - rigid being, devoid of any process- as 
true. With reference to the principle of the Eleatics Democritus later comments: 
'Being is no more than not-being' (ov5ev JJ<lMov 10 ov •oO J.ITJ ovros ~CTI). 
He thereby expresses the negativity of abstract being and its identity, posited in 
becoming, with a nothing that is equally untenable in its abstraction. - At the 
same rime we have here an example of the true refuration of one philosophical 
system by another, a refutation that consists precisely in exhibiting the dialectic 
of the principle of the refuted philosophy and in downgrading this principle to 
an ideal moment in a higher, more concrete form of the idea. - But furthermore, 
becoming, too, is in and for itself as yet a supremely impoverished determination 
that has to further deepen and fulfil itself in itself. We have such a deepening 
of becoming within itself in, fOr instance, lift. The latter is a becoming, but its 
concept is not exhausted by this. We find becoming in an even higher form in 
spirit. Spirit is likewise a becoming, but a more intensive, richer one than the 
merely logical becoming. The momentS whose unity is spirit are not the mere 
absttactions of being and norhing, but the system of the logical idea and nature. 
b. Existenrt 
§ 89 
The being in becoming, as one with nothing, and the nothing that is 
likewise one with being are only vanishing [moments]. Due to its inner 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
145 
contradiction, becoming collapses into fhe unity in which both are sub-
fated. Its mult is therefore ccistmct. 
In connection with this initial example, we are once and for all 
to be reminded of what was stated in § 82 and in the Remark. What 
alone can ground [begriindmJ a progression and a development in 
knowing [ Wissm] is to hold on to the results in their truth. Suppose 
a contradiction is pointed up in any son of object or concept (and 
there is simply nothing anywhere in which a contradiction, i.e. 
opposite determinations, could not and would not have to be 
pointed out, for the understanding's process of abstracting violently 
holds on to one determinacy, while striving to obscure and eliminate 
the consciousness of the other determinacy that is contained in it). 
When such a contradiction is recognized, the conclusion is usually 
drawn that 'Therefore, the object is nothing', just as Zeno first 
demonstrated with regard to movement, namely that it contradicts 
itself and that therefore it does not exist, or as the ancients 
recognized the two kinds of becoming, namely coming-to-be and 
passing away, to be untrue determinations by stating that the One, 
i.e. the absolute, neither comes into being nor passes away. This 
kind of dialectic thus merely stops at the negative side of the result 
and abstracts from what is at the same time actually on hand, 
namely a determinate result, here a pure nothing, but a nothing that 
contains being and likewise a being that contains nothing within 
itself. Thus, existence is (I) the unity of being and nothing in 
which the immediacy of these determinations has disappeared and 
with it the contradiction in their relationship, - a unity in which 
they are now only moments. (2) Since the result is the sublated 
contradiction, it is in the form of a simpk unity with itself or itself as 
being, but a being with negation or determinateness. It is becoming 
posited in the form of one of its moments, that of being. 
Atldition. It is also contained in our representation that when there is becom· 
ing, something comes out of it and that therefore becoming has a result. But 
there then arises the question how becoming manages not to remain mere becom-
ing but to have a result. The answer to this question derives from what above 
has shown irself to us as becoming. For becoming contains within irself being 
and nothing, and in such a way that these two change over into one another 
absolutely and mutually sublate each other. In this way, becoming proves irself 
to be what is restless through and through, yet unable to preserve irself in this 
abstract resdessness. For because being and nothing disappear in becoming and 
its concept consists in this alone, becoming is thus itself something vanishing, 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
like a fire that extinguishes itself by consuming its material. The result of this 
process, however, is not empty nothing but being that is identical with negation -
something we call aistmu and whose meaning for now proves to be this: to have 
b~com~. 
§90 
(a) Existmct [Dastin] is being with a daerminacy that is immediate or 
that simply is, i.e. quality. Existence qua reflected into itself in this its 
determinacy is an txistmt [Dastitndes]. somtthing [Etwas).- The categories 
that develop in connection with existence need to be specified in a summary 
fashion only. 
AJtlition. Generally speaking, quality is the determinacy that is identical with 
being and immediate, in contrast with quantity that is to be considered next. 
Quantity is, to be sure, likewise a determinacy of being, but one that is no longer 
identical with it. Quantity is instead a determination indifferent to being and 
external to it. - Something is what it is by virtue of its quality, and when it loses 
its quality it stops being what it is. Moreover, quality is essentially a category 
merely of the finite. For this reason, it has its proper place only in nature, not 
in the spiritual world. Thus, for instance, in nature the so-called simple types of 
matter, e.g. oxygen, nitrogen, etc., are to be considered concretely existing qualities 
[ncisrin-mtk Qualitiitm]. By contrast, in the sphere of spirit quality occurs only 
in a subordinate manner and not in such a way that any given determinate shape 
of spirit would be exhaustively characterized by means of it. For instance, when 
we consider subjective spirit, the object of psychology, it is indeed possible to say 
that the logical meaning of what one calls charamr is that of quality. But this 
is not to be understood as though character were a determinacy that peneuates 
the soul and is immediately identical with it as is the case with the simple types 
of matter in nature mentioned above. Quality, however, shows itself in a more 
determinate manner even in connection with spirit to the extent that the latter is 
in an unfree, sick condition. This is notoriously the case with the state of passion 
and with passion that has escalated to madness. h can fittingly be said of a mad 
person whose consciousness is completely pervaded by jealousy, fear, etc., that his 
consciousness is determined as a quality. 
§ 91 
As a determinacy that simply is [uitndt Btstimmthtit] over against the ntga· 
tion that is contained in it but distinct from it, quality is rtality [Rtalitat]. 
Negation, no longer as the abstract nothing but as an existent and somt-
thing, is only the form in the latter, it is as bting·othtr. Because this being-
other is its own determination, but at first distinct from it, quality is 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
147 
bting-for~anothtr- a breadth of existen~. of something. The btingof qual~ 
ity as such, as opposed to this relation to something other, is bting~in~itst/f. 
Addition. The foundation for every determinacy is negation (omnis dttn7ninatio 
tst ntgaiW [all determination is negation], as Spinoza says). Thoughtless opining 
regards determinate individual things alone as positive and fastens on to them 
under the form of being. Nothing much is accomplished, however, with mere 
being, for as we saw earlier it is what is absolutely empty and insubstantial. 
Incidentally, this much is correa concerning the confusion mentioned here of 
existence as being that is determined [Dastin als btstimmtts Sein] with abstract 
being, namely that the moment of negation is, indeed, still contained merely in 
a veiled state, as it were, in existence, while the moment of negation emerges 
freely only in being~for-itself and there assumes its rightful position. - If now 
we consider existence also as a determinacy that simply is, we then have what is 
understood by rtality. In this way one talks of the reality of a plan, for instance, 
or of an intention, and understands by it that such things are no longer merely 
something inner, subjective, but instead have emerged into existence. In the same 
sense, the body may then be: called the reality of the soul, and this particular right 
the reality of freedom or, quite generally, the: world may be called the reality of the 
divine concept. In addition, however, there is also ralk of reality in still another 
sense, where what is understood by it is rhat something behaves in accordance 
with its essential determination or its concept. This happens, for instance, when 
it is said 'this is a real (m/~ occupation' or 'rhis is a real [mm human being'. In 
these cases it is a matter not of rhe immediate, external existence, bur instead of 
the agreement of an existent [tints Dastiendtn] with irs concept. So construed, 
however, reality is not that different from ideality, which we will initially come to 
know as being-for-itself. 
§92 
(~) The being that is fastened onto as distinct from determinacy, i.e. the 
bting~in-itst/f, would be merely the empty abstraction ofbeing. In existence, 
determinacy is one with being, and at the same time posited as negation, 
i.e. limit, barritr. Being other is thus not something indifferent outside of 
it but instead its own moment. By virtue of its quality, something is, first, 
ftnitt and, second, a/~rablt, so that finitude and alterability belong to its 
being. 
Addition. In existence, negation is still immediately identical with being, and it 
is negation that we call a limit. Something is what it is only within irs limit and 
due to its limit. Hence one must not regard the limit as something that is merely 
external to existence; rather it permeates existence as a whole. The construal of the 
limit as a merely external determination of existence is due to the conflation of 
the quantitative with the qualitative limit. At issue here is for now the qualitative 
limit. If we: consider, for instance, a plot of land that is three acres, this is then 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
its quantitative limit. In addition, however, this plot of land is also a meadow 
and not a forest or a pond, and this is its qualitative limit. - Insofar as human 
beings want to be actual, they must exist [mu.fl tlarrin] and to this end they must 
limit themselves. Those who are too dismayed at the finite do not accomplish 
anything actual, but instead remain trapped in the abstract and fade away into 
themselves. 
When we now consider more closely what we have here in the case of the 
limit, we find that it contains in itself a contradiction and thus proves itself to 
be dialectical. For, on the one hand, the limit constitutes the real icy of existence, 
but on the other hand it is the negation of the latter. Moreover, however, as the 
negation of [the] something the limit is not an altogether abstract nothing, but a 
nothing that is (rin srirndrs Nichts] or what we call an other. When thinking of 
the something, the [concept of the] other immediately comes to mind, and· we 
know that there is not only something but also an other as well. But the other 
is not just something that we simply find such that the something could also 
be thought without it. Rather, something is in itself the other of itself, and in 
the other the limit of the something becomes objective for it. When we now ask 
about the distinction between the something and the other, it is evident that both 
are the same, an identiry that is expressed in Latin by the designation of both 
as a/iud - a/iud. The other opposed to the something is itself a something, and 
accordingly we say 'somrthing else' [t'twas Anderes: lit. 'something other']. So, too, 
the first something is in turn itself an other vis-a-vis the other that is likewise 
determined as a something. When we say 'something else', we at first imagine that 
the something, taken by itself, is only something and the determination of being 
an other accrues to it on account of an external consideration alone. Thus, for 
instance, we think that the moon, which is something other than the sun, could 
also exist even if the sun did not. In fact, however, the moon (as a something) has 
its other in and of itself [an ihm sr/bst] and this constitutes its finitude. Plato says: 
'God made the world from the nature of the One and the Other (ToO hepov); 
these he brought together and out of them fashioned a third which is of the nature 
of the One and the Other' .10 - With this, the nature of the finite is being expressed 
as such, which qua something does not stand over against the other indifferendy, 
but is in itself the other of itself and in this way alters itself. In the alteration 
the inner contradiction shows itself with which existence is intrinsically beset and 
which drives it beyond itself. Existence at first appears to the representation as 
simply positive and at the same time as remaining tranquilly within its boundary. 
To be sure, we also know that all finite things (and such is existence) are subject to 
alteration, but this alterabiliry of existence appears to the representation as a mere 
possibiliry, the realization of which is not grounded in itself. In fact, however, 
it is part of the concept of existence to alter itself, and alteration is merely the 
manifestation of what existence is in itself. Living things die, and they do so 
simply because they carry the germ of death in themselves. 
'9 Translarors' nore: sec rhe rwo elemenrs of rhe indivisible and rhe divisible in TimlltuS 34-5. 

TM Encyclopedia Logic 
149 
§93 
Something becomes an other, but the other is itself a something. hence it 
likewise becomes an other, and so ~n and so forth ad infinitum. 
§94 
This infinity is the bllli or n~ativ~ infinity in that it is nothing but the 
negation of the finite, which, however, re-emerges afresh and thus is just 
as much not sublated. In other words, this infinity expresses only that 
the finite ought to be sublated. The progression to infinity stops short at 
expressing the contradiction that is contained in the finite, namely that 
it is som~thing as well as its othtr and that it is the perpetual continuance 
of the alternation of these determinations each of which brings about the 
other. 
AJJition. When we let the moments of existence, namely something and the 
other, fall apart, we have the following: something becomes an other, and this 
other is itself a something that then as such likewise alters itself, and so on ad 
infinitum. Reflection believes it has reached something very lofty here, indeed 
even the loftiest [thought]. This progression to the infinite is, however, nor the 
true infinite. The latter consists, rather, in being with itself in its other, or, put in 
terms of a process, to come to itself in its other. It is of great importance to grasp 
rhe concept of the true infinity properly and nor merely ro srop short at the bad 
infinity of the infinite progression. When the infinity of space and time is under 
discussion, it is at first the infinite progression that one tends to focus on. Thus 
one says, for instance, 'this time', 'now', and this boundary is then continuously 
surpassed, backwards and forwards. It is the same with space about whose infinity 
edifying astronomers put forth many empty declamations. It is then also typically 
asserted that thinking must give up when it starts to contemplate this infinity. This 
much is indeed correct, namely that we eventually abandon proceeding further 
and further in such contemplation, but on account of the tediousness, nor rhe 
sublimity, of the task. Engaging in the contemplation of this infinite progression 
is tedious because the same thing is incessantly repeated here. A limit is posited, 
it is surpassed, then again a limit, and so on endlessly. So there is nothing here 
but a superficial alternation that remains stuck in the finite. If it is thought that 
through stepping forth into that infinity one liberates oneself from the finite, then 
this is indeed merely the liberation of fleeing. The one who Aces, however, is not 
yet free, for in fleeing he is still dependent on what he Aces. If it is then further said 
that the infinite cannot be reached, then this is quite right, but only because rhe 
determination of being something abstractly negative is read into it. Philosophy 
does not waste its time with such empty and merely transcendent Umstitigtn) 
things. What philosophy deals with is always something concrete and absolutely 
present. - The task of philosophy has occasionally been framed by saying that it 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
must answer the question of how the infinite resolves to move beyond itself. To 
this question, which is predicated on the fixed opposition between the infinite and 
the finite, one can only answer that this opposition is something untrue and that 
the infinite is indeed eternally beyond itself and also eternally not beyond itself.-
Moreover, when we say the infinite is the not-finite, we have thereby indeed 
already unered the truth, for since rhe finite is the first negative, the nor-finite is 
the negative of negation, i.e. the negation that is identical with itself and thus at 
the same time true affirmation. 
The infinity of reflection here under discussion is merely the anempt to reach the 
true infinity; [in other words, it is] a hapless hybrid. Generally speaking, this is the 
standpoint of philosophy that has been maintained and upheld (g~luntl g~macht] 
in Germany in recent rimes. The finite here merely ought to be sublated, and the 
infinite ought to be not merely something negative, but something positive as well. 
This ought always carries within itself the impotence of recognizing something 
as legitimate that nonetheless cannot maintain and uphold itself. With respect 
to ethics, the Kantian and the Fichtean philosophy have stopped short at this 
standpoint of the ought. The perennial approximation to the law of reason is the 
utmost that can be achieved on this path. The immorraliry of the soul was then 
also based on this postulate. 
§ 95 
(y) What is in fact the case is that something becomes an other and 
rhe other generally becomes something other. In the relation to an other, 
something is itself already an other opposite it. Hence, since that into 
which it makes the transition is entirely the same as that which makes the 
transition (both have no further determination than this, which is one and 
rhe same, the determination to be an othn-), something comes together 
only with its~lfin its transition into something orher, and this relation to 
itself in its transition and in the other is the tru~ infinity. Or, considered 
negatively, what is altered [vmzndert) is the oth~r [das Ander~]; it becomes 
the oth~r of the oth~r. In this way, being- but as negation of negation- is 
re-established and is b~ing-for-its~IJ 
The dualism that makes the opposition of the finite and the infinite 
insuperable fails to make the simple observation that in this manner 
rhe infinite is at once only oM of th~ two, that it is thus made into 
merely one particular for which the finite is the other particular. 
Such an infinite that is only a particular, n~xt to the finite which 
makes up its boundary and limit, is not what it is supposed to be; 
not the infinite, but merely finit~. - In such a relationship, where the 
finite is hithtr, the infinite thith~r. the one placed on this sirk, the 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
other on the other side, the finite is accorded the same honour of 
subsisting and being self~standing [Bmehen und Selbstiindigkeit] that 
the infinite is. The being of the finite is made into an absolute being. 
In such a dualism, it stands firmly for itsel£ If it were touched by the 
infinite, so to speak, it would be annihilated. But it is supposed to be 
untouchable by the infinite. There is supposedly an abyss, an 
insurmountable chasm between the two, with the infinite remaining 
absolutely on the other side and the finite on this side. While one 
may believe that the assertion that the finite persists steadfastly 
opposite the infinite gets one beyond all metaphysics, it in fact 
stands squarely on the grounds of the most ordinary metaphysics of 
the understanding. The same thing happens here which is expressed 
by the infinite progression. At one moment, it is admitted that the 
finite do~s not ccist in and for itself, that it is not a self-standing 
actuality, not an absolut~ being, that it is only transitory. The next 
moment, this is immediately forgotten and the finite is represented 
as existing entirely over against the infinite, absolutely separated from 
it and exempted from annihilation, as self~standing and persisting 
for itself. - While such thinking believes that it is elevating itself to 
the infinite in this manner, the opposite happens to it- it arrives 
at an infinite that is merely finite, and, instead of leaving the 
finite behind, permanently holds onto it, making it into an 
absolute. 
Based on these considerations concerning the emptiness 
[NichtigkeitJ of the understanding's opposition of the finite and the 
infinite (one may benefit from comparing Plato's Philebus with it), 
it is easy to lapse into the expression that therefore the infinite and 
the finite are one, that the true, i.e. true infinity, is determined and 
declared to be the unity of the infinite and the finite. It is true that 
phrasing the matter in such a way is in some sense correct, but it is 
equally skewed and false (as was mentioned earlier with regard to 
the unity of being and nothing). Furthermore, it invites the just 
reproach of having finitized the infinite, the reproach of a finite 
infinite. For in the above phrasing the finite appears as if untouched, 
i.e. it is not explicitly stated that the finite has been sublat~d. - Or, 
when one reflects that the finite, in being posited as one with the 
infinite, could not indeed remain what it was outside this unity. and 
that it would suffer at least some modification in its determination 
(just as an alkali combined with acid loses some of its properties), 
then the same thing should happen to the infinite, which, as the 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
negative, should have to be blunted by the other equally in turn. 
And this is indeed what happens to the abstract, one-sided infinite 
of the understanding. However, the true infinite does not behave 
merely like the one-sided acid, but instead preserves itsel£ Negation 
of negation is not a neutralization. The infinite is the affirmative, 
and only the finite is what is sublated. 
In being-for-itself, the determination of id~ality has made its 
entry. Exisunct, construed at first only in terms of its being or its 
affirmative nature, has r~ality (§ 91). Thus, too, finitude is at first 
determined in terms of reality. But the truth of the finite is rather its 
ideality. Likewise, the infinite of the understanding, which posited 
next to the finite is itself merely one of the two finites, is something 
untrue, something ideal [idt~/ks]. This ideality of the finite is the 
chief proposition of philosophy, and every true philosophy is for 
that reason id~alism. The only thing that matters is not to take as the 
infinite what is at once made into something particular and finite 
in the determination of it. - This is why we have drawn attention 
to this distinction here at some length. The fundamental concept 
of philosophy, the true infinite, depends on this. This distinction 
is taken care of by the very simple, and therefore perhaps 
unremarkable, but irrefutable reflections contained in this 
section. 
c. B~ing-for-its~lf 
§96 
(a) Being-for-itself as relation to irself is imm~diacy, and as the relation 
of the negative to itself it is a being that is for itself [Fiirsichuimd~sJ, the 
On~- what is in itself devoid of any distinction, hence, what excludes the 
oth" from itself [dar Antkr~ aus sich Ausschlitjfmde]. 
Addition. Being-for-itself is perfected quality and as such contains being and 
existence as its ideal moments within itself. Qua bting, being-for-itself is the simple 
relation to itself, and qua existence it is determined. This determinacy, however, 
is no longer the finite determinacy of something in irs difference from the other, 
but the infinite determinacy that contains in itself me difference as sublated. 
We have the most obvious example of being-for-itself in the /. To begin with, 
qua existing we know ourselves to be distinct from other existents and related to 
them. Furthermore, we know this expanse of existence to be at the same time 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
153 
sharpened, so to speak. into the simple form of being-for-itself. Saying T is the 
expression of an infinite and at the sa111e time a negative relation to oneself. It 
can be said that human beings distinguish themselves from animals and hence 
from nature generally by knowing themselves [in each case) as an I. At the same 
time, by this means, one expresses that natural things do not attain [the status 
of] free being-for-itself. Instead, by being confined to exisrence they are forever 
merely being-for-another. - In addition, being-for-itself must be construed as 
iekality generally, whereas existence, by contrast, was previously designated as 
ua/ity. R~ality and idtality are often regarded as a pair of determinations standing 
over and against one another, each with the same self-standing character, and it is 
accordingly said that apart from reality there is also an ideality. However, ideality is 
not something that there is apart from and alongside reality. Rather, the concept of 
ideality consists expressly in being the truth of reality; that is to say, reality posited 
as what it is in itself proves to be ideality. Hence, one must not believe that one 
has accorded ideality the proper honour if one merely concedes that reality alone 
does nor suffice and that one must also acknowledge an ideality apan from reality. 
An ideality such as this, along with or even above reality, would indeed be only an 
empty name. Ideality has content only by being the ideality of something. This 
something, however, is not merely an indeterminate this or that, but an exisrence 
that is determined as reality and which possesses no truth, if taken in isolation. 
It is not without reason that the difference between nature and spirit has been 
construed in such a way that the former should be traced back to reality and 
the latter to ideality as their fundamental determinations. Now nature is indeed 
not something fixed and finished for itself, something that could therefore subsist 
without spirit. Rather, nature achieves its end and truth only in spirir, and spirit 
for its part is similarly not just an abstract beyond of nature; rather, it txists and 
validates itself as spirit only insofar as it conains in itself narurc as sublated. We 
arc to be reminded here of the dual meaning of our German expression 'aufh~bm' 
[to sublate]. By 'aufh~btn' we understand on the one hand something like clearing 
out of the way or negating, and we accordingly speak of a law, for instance, or 
an insrirurion as having been 'aufg~hobm'. On the other hand, however, aufh~bm 
also means something like prtstrving, and in this sense we say that something is 
well taken care of [gut aufgthobm, taken out of harm's way and pur in a safe place]. 
This dual sense in linguistic usage according to which one and the same word has 
a negative as well as a positive meaning must nor be regarded as a coincidence or 
even made the object of reproach to the language as causing confusion. Rather, in 
it we should recognize the speculative spirit of our language that transcends the 
either/or of mere understanding. 
§ 97 
(~)The relationship of the negative to itselfis a negative relationship, hence 
the distinguishing of the One from itself, the rtpulsion of the One, i.e. a 

154 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
positing of many Ones. In accordance with the immediacy of that which 
is a being-for-itself, these many are beings, and the repulsion of the Ones 
that have being becomes in this respect their repulsion against each other 
insofar as they are on hand, or a mutual excluding. 
Addition. When we talk about dte One, dte first thing that tends to occur to us is 
the Many. The question then arises where the Many come from. In representational 
rhought no answer is to be found to this question, since it considers dte Many to be 
immediately on hand, and since dte One counts simply as one among the Many. 
In terms of the concept, however, the One constitutes the presupposition for the 
Many, and it is inherent in the dtought of the One to posit itself as dte Many. For 
unlike being, the One as being-for-itself as such does not lack relatedness; ramer, 
it is a relation just as existence is. However, it does not relate as something does to 
an other but instead, as the unity of somedting and an odter, it is relation-to-itself, 
and, furdtermore, this relation is negative relation. Widt dtis, the One proves to 
be what is absolutely incompatible with itself, what repels itself from itself. and 
what it posits itself as is dte Many. We may designate dtis side in dte process of 
being-for-itself with dte figurative expression r~pulsion. One speaks of repulsion 
first and foremost in considering matter, and one understands by it dtat, as a 
Many in each one of these many Ones, matter behaves by excluding all dte others. 
Moreover, the process of repulsion must not be construed in such a way that the 
One does the rtptlling and the Many are what is rtptlkd. Rather, as was mentioned 
earlier, the One is precisely just this, namely to exclude itself from itself and to 
posit itself as the Many. Each of the Many, however, is itself a One and, because it 
behaves as such, this ubiquitous repulsion changes over into its opposite, namely 
attraction. 
§ 98 
(y) Of the Many, however, one is what the others are; each is a One as 
well as one of the Many. They are therefore one and the same. Or, con-
sidered in itself, repulsion as the negative behaviour of the many Ones 
to each other is equally essentially their relation to each other. And since 
those to which the One relates in its repelling are Ones, it relates to 
itself in them. Thus repulsion is equally essentially attraction, and the 
excluding One or being-for-itself sublates itself. The qualitative deter-
minacy that has reached in the One its determinacy in-and-for-itself 
has thus passed over into determinacy qua mblated, i.e. into being as 
quantity. 
The atomistic philosophy is the standpoint on which the absolute 
determines itself as being-for-itself, as One, and as many Ones. 
Repulsion, which shows itself in the concept of the One, has also 

Tk Encyclopedia Logic 
155 
been assumed to be its fundamental force. Not, however, attraction 
but coincidence, i.e. something thoughtless, is supposed to bring 
them together. If one is fixated on the One as One, its coming 
together with others must indeed be regarded as something quite 
extrinsic. - The r'oid that is adopted as the other principle in 
addition to the atoms is repulsion itself, represented as the existing 
nothing in between the atoms. - The more recent atomism (and 
physics continues to hold on to this principle) has given up atoms 
insofar as it focuses on small particles, the molecules. In this, it has 
drawn closer to sensory representation and abandoned thoughtful 
determination. - Moreover, insofar as a force of attraction is set 
alongside the force of repulsion, the opposition has, it is true, been 
made complete, and the discovery of this so-called force of nature has 
been touted a lot. But the relationship of both to one another that 
constitutes what is concrete and true about them would need ro be 
rescued from the state of cloudy confusion in which it has been left 
even in Kant's Metaphysical Foundations of the Natural Sciences.-
In recent times, the atomistic approach has become even more 
important in the political than in the physical sphere. According to 
this view, the will of the individual as such is the principle of the 
state. The attractive force is the particularity of the needs and 
inclinations, and the universal, the state itself, is [based on] the 
external relationship of the contr~t. 
Addition r. The atomistic philosophy constitutes an essential stage in the his-
torical development of the idea, and the principle of this philosophy generally is 
being-for-itself in the shape of the Many. If today the atomistic doctrine is held in 
high esteem even by rhose physicisrs who shun metaphysics, one should remember 
here chat one does nor escape metaphysics, and more specifically the reduction of 
narure ro thoughts. by throwing oneself into che arms of atomism. For the atom 
is indeed itself a thought, and hence the interpretation of matter as consisting of 
atoms is a metaphysical interpretation. It is true that Newton explicitly warned 
physics to guard against metaphysics. But to his credit it must be said that he 
did nor himself act by any means in accordance with chis warning. Indeed, only 
the animals are pure, unadulterated physicists, since they do nor think, whereas 
a human being as a chinking being is a born metaphysician. The only thing chat 
matters, therefore, is whether the metaphysics one applies is of rhe right kind, 
namely whether, instead of the concrete logical idea, it is one-sided thought deter-
minations fixed by the understanding that one holds on ro and that form the 
basis of our theoretical as well as practical activities. This is rhe objection that 
applies to the philosophy of atomism. As is often the case even roday, the ancient 
atomists regarded everything as a Many, and coincidence was rhen supposed ro 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
bring together the atoms that floated around in the void. But the relationship of 
the Many to each other is by no means merely accidental; this relationship has 
its ground instead, as previously mentioned, in the Many themselves. h is Kant 
who deserves the credit for having brought the way matter is construed t~ comple-
tion, by regarding it as the unity of repulsion and attraction. What this view gets 
right is the fact that attraction must indeed be recognized as the other moment 
contained in the concept of being-for-itself and that, as a consequence, attraction 
belongs to matter just as essentially as repulsion does. But this so-called dynamic 
construction of maner suffers from the defect that repulsion and attraction are 
postulated as being on hand without funher ado and are not deduced. From this 
deducdon the how and why of their merely alleged unity would have followed. By 
the way, Kant explicitly insisted that one must regard matter not as on hand for 
itself and equipped in passing, so to speak, with the rwo forces mentioned here, 
bur as obtaining instead only in their unity, and for a time German physicists went 
along with this pure dynamics. In more recent times, and against the warning 
of their colleague, the late Kastner, the majority of these physicists has found it 
more comfortable to return to the atomistic standpoint and to regard matter as 
consisting of infinitely small things called 'atoms'. These atoms are then supposed 
to be set in relation to each other due to the play of the anractive, repulsive, and 
whatever other forces that anach to them. This is then likewise a metaphysics and 
one has, to be sure, quite sufficient reason to guard against it, given the lack of 
thought in it. 
Adtlition 2. The transition from quality ro quantity indicated in the preced-
ing section is not to be found in our ordinary consciousness. The latter takes 
quality and quantity to be a pair of self-standing determinations existing side 
by side and it is accordingly said that things are not only qualitatively but 11/so 
quantitatively determined. Where these determinations come from and how they 
relate to each other, these questions are not raised here. But quantity is noth-
ing other than quality sublated, and it is the dialectic of quality studied here by 
virtue of which this sublation comes to pass. At first, we had b~i11g, and becoming 
resulted as its truth. This formed the transition to existence whose truth we· saw 
to be alteration. Alteration, in turn, showed itself in its result to be being-for-
itself that was exempt from the relation to an other and from irs transition into 
it. And, finally, being-for-itself proved to be the sublating of itself. and thus of 
quality in general, in the totality of its moments on both sides of its process. 
Now this sublated quality is neither an abstract nothing nor the equally abstract 
and indeterminate being, but rather being that is indifferent to determinacy. It 
is this shape of being that also surfaces in our ordinary representation as quan-
tity. Accordingly, we consider things first from the viewpoint of their quality, 
and rhe latter we take to be the determinacy that is identical with the being of 
the thing. As we proceed next to considering quantity, it offers us at once the 
representation of an indifferent, external determinacy in the sense that, even if a 
thing's quantity changes and it becomes greater or smaller, it still remains what 
it is. 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
157 
B. QUANTITY 
a. Pur~ qumztity 
§99 
Quantity is pure being in which determinacy is posited as no longer one 
with being itself, but as sublated or indifferent. 
1. The expression magnitude is unsuitable for quantity, insofar as it 
signifies first and foremost ektaminat~ quantity. 2. Mathematics 
usually defines magnitude as what can be increased or decreas~d. As 
faulty as this definition is (inasmuch as it repeats what is to be 
defined [Dp,itum]), it still conveys this much, namely, that the 
determination of magnitude is such that it is posited as a/terabk and 
indifferent. Hence, apart from any alteration of it, e.g. an increase in 
extension or imensity, the basic matter, for instance, a house or red, 
does not cease to be a house or red. 3· The absolute is pure quantity. 
This standpoint generally coincides with determining the absolute as 
matter in which the form is indeed on hand, but as an indifferent 
determination. Quantity also constitutes the basic determination 
of the absolute, when it is grasped in such a way that in it (as the 
absolutely indifferent) every distinction is only quantitative. - Pure 
space, time, etc. may equally be taken as examples of quantity, 
insofar as one is supposed to construe the real as an indifferent filler 
of space or time. 
Additi011. At first glance mathematics' cus£Omary definition of magnitude as 
what can be increased or decreased seems to be more illuminating and plausible 
than the conceptual determination contained in the above section. Looked at more 
closely, however, it contains in the form of a presupposition and representation the 
same [determination) as the concept of quantity that was the result of the logical 
devdopment. For, if it is said of magnitude that its concept consists in being able 
to be increased or decreased, then it is stated precisely with this that magnitude 
(or, more correctly, quantity, as distinct from quality) is a determination of the sort 
that the specific basic matter behaves indifferently towards its alteration. As for 
the earlier criticized deficiency in the customary definition of quantity, it consists 
more specifically in the notion that increasing and decreasing mean nothing other 
than determining a magnitude in different ways. But if this were the case, quantity 
would then be merely something alterable in general. But quality is alterable, too, 
and the previously mentioned difference between quantity and quality is then 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
expressed as a matter of increasing or decreasing. This implies that the basic mat-
ter remains what it is, regardless of the direction in which the determination of 
magnitude is changed. - At this point, it should also be noted that in philosophy 
we are not at all concerned merely with correct definitions. much less with merely 
plausible definitions, i.e. definitions whose correctness is immediately obvious to 
representational consciousness. Rather, we are concerned with definitions that 
have a pror•m r~,·ord, i.e. definitions whose content has not merely been taken up 
as something found, but one that is known to be grounded in free thinking and 
thus at the same time known to be grounded in itself. This finds irs application 
in the current case in such a way that, however correct and immediately obvious 
mathematics' customary definition of quantity might be, this would still not satisfy 
the requirement of knowing to what extent this parcicular thought is grounded in 
universal thinking and therefore necessary. There is a further consideration that is 
linked to this point here. When quantity is taken up directly from representation 
without being mediated by thinking, it easily happens that quantity is overesti-
mated with respect to its scope and even raised to an absolute category. This is 
indeed the case when only those sciences whose objecrs can be submitted to a 
mathematical calculus are recognized as exact sciences. Here that bad metaphysics 
mentioned earlier (§ 98 Addition) shows itself again, replacing the concrete idea 
with one-sided and abstract determinations of the understanding. Our knowing 
would indeed be in bad shape, if, renouncing exact knowledge, we generally had 
to be satisfied merely with a vague representation of such objects as freedom, 
law, the ethical life, even God himself. merely because they cannot be measured 
and calculated or expressed in a mathematical formula; and if, when it comes to 
the more specific or particular details of those matters, it would then be left to 
each individual's whim to make of it what they want. - It is immediately obvious 
what kind of pernicious practical consequences result from such a view. Looked at 
more closely, the exclusively mathematical standpoint mentioned here (for which 
quantity, this specific stage of the logical idea, becomes identical with the logical 
idea_ itself) is none other than matmalism. Indeed, this is fully confirmed in the 
history of scientific consciousness, notably in France since the middle of the last 
century. The abstractness of matter is precisely this: that the form is indeed on 
hand in it, but merely as an indifferent and external determination. - Inciden-
taUy, the remarks added here would be greatly misunderstood, if one intended to 
construe them as detracting in any way from the dignity of mathematics, or as if 
by designating quantitative determination as merely external and indifferem, they 
were supposed to encourage lethargy and superficiality, as though one could set the 
quantitative determinations aside or at least that it was thus not necessary to take 
them seriously. Quantity is in any case a stage of the idea to which justice must be 
done, initially as a logical category, but then also in the objective [g~mstiindlich] 
world, the nacural as well as the spiritual world. But here the difference between 
them also becomes at once apparent, namely that the determination of magnitude 
.is not of equal importance with respect to the objecrs of the natural and the spir-
itual world. For in nature, taken as the idea in the form of otherness and at the 
same time of being-outside-itself, quantity is- precisely for that reason- of greater 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
159 
imponance man in the world of spirit, which is the world offree interiority. To be 
sure, we consider rhe spiritual content from the quantitative viewpoint as well, but 
it is immediately obvious that when we contemplate God as a trinity the number 
thrtt has a much more subordinate significance than if we were to contemplate 
the three dimensions of space, nor to mention me three sides of a triangle whose 
basic determination is just this, namely to be a surface delimited by three sides. 
Furthermore, the difference mentioned between a greater and lesser importance 
of the quantitative determination i~ also found in nature and, indeed, in the sense 
that quantity plays, so to speak, a more imponant role in inorganic nature than 
in organic nature. If then within inorganic nature we also distinguish rhe sphere 
of mechanics from mat of physics and chemistry in the narrower sense, the same 
difference presents itself again. As is commonly acknowledged, mechanics is the 
scientific discipline least capable of forgoing the assistance of mathematics; indeed 
hardly a single step can be taken in mechanics without it, and for that reason 
mechanics is also usually regarded, next to mathematics itself, as the exact sci-
ence par exullnut. In this connection, though, it is necessary to recall again the 
above comment concerning the coincidence of the materialist and the exclusively 
mathematical standpoints. - Incidentally, after all that has been detailed here, it 
must be called one of the most disruptive prejudices, precisely for knowledge of 
an exact and thorough sort, if, as often happens, all difference and all determinacy 
in the domain of the objective [tks Gtgtnstiind/ichm] are sought in what is merely 
quantitative. To be sure, there is more to spirit than to nature: for instance, more 
to rhe animal than to the plant. But one also knows very little about these objects 
and their difference, if one merely stops short at this kind of a more or less and 
does not proceed to construe them in the determinacy that is peculiar to them, a 
determinacy that is here initially qualitative. 
§ 100 
Quantity, posited at first in its immediate relation to itself or in the deter-
mination of equality [ Gleichheit] with itself as posited by attraction, is 
continuous. According to the other determination contained in it, namely 
that of the One, it is a discrete magnitutk. The former quantity, however, is 
equally discrete, since it is merely the continuity of the Many. The latter is 
equally continuous, for its continuity is the One as the same in the many 
Ones, i.e. the unity [of a mathematical unit]. 
I. Continuous and discrete magnitudes thus must not be regarded 
as species, as though the determination of the one did not belong to 
the other. Rather, they differ only in virtue of the fact that the same 
whole is posited now under one and now under the other of its 
determinations. 2. The antinomy of space, time, or matter (with 
respect to their divisibility ad infinitum or their being composed of 

160 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
indivisibles) is nothing but the assertion that quantity is now 
continuous, now discrete. When space, time, etc. are posited only 
with the determination of continuous quantity, they are divisible ad 
infinitum; but with the determination of a discrete magnitude they 
are in themselves divided and consist of indivisible ones. The one 
is as one-sided as the other. 
Addition. As the next result of being-for-itself, quantity contains the two sides 
of its process, repulsion and attraction, as ideal moments within itself, and con-
sequendy it is both continuous and discrete. Each of these two moments equally 
contains the other within itself, and hence there is neither a solely continuous nor 
a solely discrete magnitude. If in spite of this one speaks of both as two particular. 
mutually opposed species of magnitude, this is merely the result of our abstracting 
reflection that in contemplating specific magnitudes ignores now the one and now 
the other moment of the two contained in inseparable unity in the concept of 
quantity. Thus it is said, for instance, that the space that this room occupies is 
a continuous magnitude, and that these one hundred people who are gathered 
together in it form a discrete magnitude. But space is continuous and discrete at 
the same time, and we accordingly speak of points in space and then also divide 
space; for instance, we divide a given extension into so many feet, inches, etc. This 
can happen only under the supposition that space is in itself disctete as well. On 
the other hand, the discrete magnitude consisting of a hundred people is simulta-
neously continuous as well, and what they have in common, namely the human 
species that permeates all the individuals and connects them to each other, is that 
in which the continuity of this magnitude is grounded. 
b. Quantum 
§ 101 
Quantity, posited essentially with the exclusive detenninacy that is con-
tained in it, is quantum, limited quantity. 
Addition. Quantum is the ceistmce of quantity, whereas pure quantity corre-
sponds to being and degree (to be considered shortly) to bringfor-itself- As far 
as the detail of the progression from pure quantity to quantum is concerned, this 
progression is grounded in the fact that while in pure quantity the difference, as 
a difference between continuity and discreteness, is at fim on hand only in itself, 
in the quantum, by contrast, this difference is posited, and indeed in such a way 
that quantity now generally appears to be distinct or limited. As a result, however, 
quantum simultaneously falls apan into an indeterminate assortment of quanta or 
determinate magnitudes as well. Each of these determinate magnitudes, as distinct 
from the others, forms a unity [the unity of a mathematical unit], while on the 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
161 
other hand, when considered in itself it is a Many. In this way, however, quantum 
is determined as number. 
§ 102 
Quantum has its development and complete determinacy in numbtr, which 
contains the One as its element within itself and, as its qualitative moment, 
the amount [Anzahlj, which is the moment of discreteness, and the unity 
[of a mathematical unit], which is the moment of continuiry. 
In arithmetic, the ltinds of calculation are usually listed as contingent 
ways of treating numbers. If there is to be any necessiry and thus 
some rhyme and reason to them, it must lie in a principle, and that 
principle can lie only in the determinations that are contained in 
number itself. This principle shall be briefly expounded here. -The 
determinations of the concept of number are the amount [An.zahlj 
and the unity [of the mathematical unil], and number is the uniry 
of both. But the uniry [of the mathematical unit], when applied 
to empirical numbers, is merely the tquality of them. Hence the 
principle of the kinds of calculation must be to put numbers into 
the relationship of the amount and the uniry [of the mathematical 
unit], and to produce the equaliry of these determinations. 
Since the Ones or numbers are themselves indifferent cowards 
each other, the unity into which they are placed appears generally 
to be an extraneous gathering together. For this reason, to calculate 
generally means to count, and the difference between the kinds 
of calculating resides exclusively in the qualitative make-up 
[Btschaffinhtit] of the numbers that are being added together, and 
the determination of the unity [of the mathematical unit], and the 
amount is the principle of their qualitative make-up. 
To numbtr or to generate number in gmtral comes first, a matter 
of taking arbitrarily many Onts together. - But calculation of a 
particular sort is a matter of counting together items that are already 
numbers, not the mere One. 
Numbers are immtdiattly and at first quite undetermined 
numbers in general and, hence, unequal in general. Taking them 
together or counting them is adding. 
The ntxt determination is that numbers are in general tqua/. Thus 
they constitute a unity [i.e. a mathematical unit] and there exists a 
certain amount [Anzahlj of them. To count numbers such as these is 

162 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
to multiply, in which case it does not matter how the determinations 
of the amount and the unity [the mathematical unit] are distributed 
to the two numbers or factors, i.e. which is taken to be the amount 
and which the unity [the mathematical unit]. 
The third determinacy, finally, is the equality of amount and 
unity [the mathematical unit]. Counting together the numbers 
determined in this way is the raising of the power, and first of 
all squaring. -The further raising of the power is the formal 
continuation of the multiplication of number with itself, a 
continuacion that leads again to the indeterminate amount 
[Anzah~.- Since perfect equality of the only difference on hand, 
that of the amount and their unity, is attained in this third 
determination, there cannot be more than these three kinds of 
calculation. -To each of these ways of counting together there 
corresponds the dissolution of numbers in accordance with the same 
determinacies. Consequendy, besides the three kinds listed, which 
in that regard could be called positive, there also exist three negative 
ones. 
Addition. Because number in general is the quantum in ils complete determi-
nacy, we use rhe quantum ro determine not only so-called discrete magnitudes 
bur also so-called continuous magnitudes. For this reason, number must al59 be 
utilized in geometry where rhe task is to indicate specific configurations of space 
and their relationships. 
c. Degree 
§ 103 
The limit is identical to the whole of quantum itself. Insofar as it is, in 
itself, manifold [vieifach], it is the extmsive magnitude, but insofar as it is, 
in itself, a simple determinateness, it is intensive magnitude, or degree. 
The difference between the continuous and discrete magnitudes and 
the extensive and intensive ones consists in the fact that the former 
apply to quantity in general, while the lacter apply w the limit or 
its determinacy as such.- Extensive and intensive magnitudes are 
likewise not two species, each of which would contain a determinacy 
that the other lacked. What is extensive magnitude is just as much 
intensive magnitude, and vice versa. 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
Addition. lntmsive m4gnitutk or degree differs conceptually from extensive m4g· 
nitude or qutzntum. It must therefore be called illegitimate when, as often happens, 
this distinction is not acknowledged and both forms of magnitude are identified 
without further ado. This is notably the case in physics, for instance, when the 
difference in specific weight is explained by saying that a body whose specific 
weight is double that of another contains within the same space twice as many 
material panicles (atoms) as the other. The same goes for heat and light when the 
different degrees of temperature and luminosity are supposed to be explained by a 
greater or lesser amount of heat or light particles (or molecules). When confronted 
with the illegitimacy of such explanations, physicists who avail themselves of them 
tend to offer as an excuse that the in-itself of such phenomena (which as we know 
is unknowable) is not supposed to be decided at all thereby. and that they avail 
themselves of the expressions mentioned merely for the sake of their greater conve-
nience. But first, as far as the greater convenience is concerned, this is supposed to 
be related to the easier application of the calculus. But it is by no means obvious 
why intensive magnitudes, which find their determinate expression in number as 
well, should not be as conveniently calculable as extensive magnitudes. It would 
indeed be even more convenient to abandon all calculation as well as thinking 
itself entirely. Further, against the excuse mentioned it must be remarked that by 
engaging in these kinds of explanations one certainly goes beyond the domain of 
perception and experience and enters the domain of metaphysics and speculation 
(something that is otherwise declared to be idle or even pernicious). Experience 
will indeed show that, if one of twO purses filled with dollars is twice as heavy as 
the other, then this is so because one of the purses contains two hundred and the 
other only one hundred dollars. One can see these coins and altogether perceive 
them with one's senses. By contrast, atoms, molecules, and things of this son lie 
outside the realm of sensory perception, and it is up to thinking to decide on 
their admissibility and significance. But as mentioned earlier (§ 98, Addition), ir 
is the abstract understanding that fixes on the moment of the Many (contained 
in the concept of being-for-itself) and does so in the shape of atoms, holding fast 
ro this moment as something ultimate. And it is the same abstract understanding 
that in the case at hand again considers extensive magnitude to be the only form 
of quantity, something that contradicts the untutored intuition just as much as 
it does truly concrete thinking. Where intensive magnitudes present themselves 
it does not acknowledge them in their characteristic determinacy, bm instead, 
relying on a hypothesis that is in itself untenable, tries to reduce them by force 
to extensive magnitudes. Among the reproaches that have been brought against 
recent philosophy, this one has been heard particularly frequently, namely that 
it reduces everything to identity (and thus it has been mockingly called 'identity 
philosophy'). From the discussion conducted here, it may be concluded that it 
is precisely philosophy that presses for discriminating what is diverse in terms of 
the concept as well as the experience of it, whereas it is professional empiricists 
who elevate abstract identity to the highest principle of knowing and whose phi-
losophy for that reason should be more fittingly designated 'identity philosophy'. 
Incidentally, it is quite right that just as littk as there are magnitudes that are 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
exclusively continuous or discrete, so also there are no exclusively intensive or 
extensive magnitudes, and that therefore the two determinations of quantity do 
not stand opposite one another as self-standing species. Every intensive magnitude 
is likewise extensive, and the same holds conversely. Thus, for instance, a certain 
degree of temperature is an intensive magnitude to which as such an utterly simple 
sensation also corresponds. If we then go and look at the thermometer, we find 
how a certain expansion of the mercury column corresponds to this degree of 
temperature and how that extensive magnitude changes in accordance with the 
temperature as the intensive magnitude. It is the same with the domain of spirit: a 
more intensive character reaches farther with its impact than a less intensive one. 
§ I04 
In the [concept of] degree, the conupt of quantum is posit~d. It is the 
magnitude as indifferently for its~lf and simple, but in such a way tha~ 
it has the determinacy through which it is quantum entirely outside itulf 
in other magnitudes. With this contradiction, namely that the indifferent 
limit that is for its~lfis the absolute ~xurna/ity, the infiniu quantitative 
progmsion is posited, - an imm~diacy that immediately changes over into 
its opposite, i.e. into being mediated (i.e. transcending the quantum just 
posited) and vice versa. 
Numb" is thought, but thought as a being that is unerly external 
to itsel£ It does not belong to intuition because it is thought, but 
it is the thought that has the externaliry of intuition for its 
determination. - For this reason, not only can quantum be increased 
or decreased to infiniry, it is through its concept this prop~//ing 
[Hinausschickm] ofitselfbeyond itsel£ The infinite quantitative 
progression is likewise the thoughtless repetition of the same 
contradiction that quantum is in general and, when quantum is 
posited in its determinacy, of the same contradiction that degree is. 
Regarding the redundancy of expressing this contradiction in the 
form of an infinite progression, Zmo rightly says in Aristotle: 'it is 
the same thing to say something onu and to be saying it a/ways.'11 
Addition r. When in mathematics, following the usual definition mentioned 
earlier(§ 99), magnitude is designated as what can be increased or decreased-
and there is nothing objectionable about the underlying intuition here - the 
question nevertheless still remains of how we come to assume something that is 
capabk ofbting incrtastd and dtcrtastd. If one were to appeal simply to experience 
to answer this question, this would not be sufficient, since it might prove to be 
•• Transla1ors' no1e: See Hermann Diels and Wallher Kranz, Di~ Fragmmu tlrr Vorwltratilt" 19 
(Zenon) B1, Weidmann'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1991. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
only one possibility (of being increased and decreased) and the insight into the 
necessity of behaving in this way would be missing, quite apart from the fact that 
in that case we would merely possess the representation and not the thought of 
magnitude. By contrast, in the course of our logical development, not only has 
quantity resulted as one stage of self-determining thinking, but it has also been 
shown that it is inherent in the conupt of quantity simply to propel itself beyond 
itself and that therefore we are here dealing not merely with something possible, 
but with something necessary. 
Addition 2. When reflective understanding is concerned with the infinite in 
general, it tends to ding to the quantitative infinite progression above all. Now the 
same thing that was mentioned earlier regarding the qualitative infinite progres-
sion holds good for this form of infinite progression as well, namely, that it is the 
expression not of the true, but of the bad infinity that does not advance beyond 
the mere ought and therefore in fact remains at a standstill in the finite. More 
specifically, as f.u as the quantitative form of this finite progression is concerned -
something Spinoza righdy designates a merely imagined infinite (infinitum imag-
inationis) - even poets (notably Haller and Klopstock) have frequendy made use 
of this representation in order to illustrate by means of it not only the infinity 
of nature but also that of God himself. In Haller, for instance, we find a famous 
description of God's infinity, which reads: 
I amass colossal numbers, 
Millions of mountains, 
I pile time upon time 
And world upon worlds galore, 
And when from this terrifying height 
With vertigo I look to you again: 
If all the mighty numbers 
Were increased thousand-fold, 
They would not even be a part of you. 
So here we have, first, that constant propelling of quantity and, more specifi-
cally. of number beyond itself that Kant describes as horrifying, although the 
actual horror is perhaps only the boredom of a limit constandy being set and 
then sublated so that, as a result, one does not make any headway. But, further-
more, the poet mentioned aptly adds to this description of the bad infinity the 
conclusion: 
I remove them, and you lie before me entire 
-thereby making it explicit that the true infinite is not to be regarded as something 
merely beyond the finite and that, to attain consciousness of it, we must renounce 
that progrtssus in infinitum. 
Addition J. As is well known, Pythagoras philosophized in numbers and took 
number to be the fundamental determination of things. At first glance, this way 
of construing things necessarily appears quite paradoxical, even crazy to ordinary 
consciousness, and the question therefore arises what is to be made of it. To 
answer this question it must be remembered first that the task of philosophy 

J66 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
generally consists in tracing things back to thoughts, and specifically to determinate 
thoughts. Now number is, of course, a thought and, indeed, the thought that stands 
closest to the sensory (sphere] or, put more precisely, the thought of the sensory 
itself. insofar as we understand by it in general the [way things are] ouuide of one 
another and a multiplicity. In the artempt to construe the universe as number we 
thus recognize the first step towards metaphysics. Pythagoras stands in the history 
of philosophy, as is known, midway between the Ionian philosophers and the 
Elearics. Now while the former did not budge, as Aristotle has already remarked, 
from regarding the essence of things as something material (as a hyle), and the latter, 
Parmenides in particular, advanced to pure thinking in the form of being, it is the 
Pythagorean philosophy whose principle forms rhe bridge, so to speak, between 
the sensory and the supersensory. From this it follows what one should think 
about the view of those who believe that Pythagoras obviously went too for since 
he construed the essence of things as mere numbers, and then noted that one may 
indeed count things (there being nothing objectionable about that) but that things 
are after all more than mere numbers. Now as far as the 'morl is concerned ·that 
is attributed to things, ir may be readily admitted that things are more than mere 
numbers, bur what matters is what is to be understood by this 'more: In keeping 
with irs standpoint, the ordinary sensory consciousness will not hesitate to answer 
the question raised here by pointing to sensible perception and to note accordingly 
that things are not just countable but beyond rhar also visible, capable of being 
smdr, felt, ere. Expressed in our modem terms, the reproach made against the 
Pythagorean philosophy would thus be reducible ro saying that it is too idealistic. 
Bur it in fact behaves in exactly the opposite way, as can already be gleaned from 
what was noted earlier about the historical position of the Pythagorean philosophy. 
For if it must be admitred that things are more than mere numbers, this is to be 
understood in such a way that the mere thought of number does not yet suffice to 
express the specific essence or the concept of things. Instead of claiming, therefore, 
that Pythagoras went too for with his philosophy of numbers one should say, on 
the contrary, that he did not go j.tr enough, and rhe Eleatics had already made 
the next step towards pure thinking. - Furthermore, there are, if not things, at 
least stares of things and natural phenomena in general whose determinacy rests 
essentially on specific numbers and proportions of numbers. This is notably the 
case with the difference between sounds and their harmonic accord. The familiar 
story is told that the perception of this phenomenon motivated Pythagoras to 
interpret the essence of things as number. Now although in the interest of science 
it is crucial to trace rhose appearances that are based on specific numbers back to 
them, it is in no way legitimate to regard the determinacy of thought generally 
as a merely numerical determinacy. To be sure, one may be induced initially to 
connect the most general thought-determinations to the firsr numbers and rhus to 
say that one is the simple and immediate, two the difference and mediation, and 
th"e the unity of both. These combinations are, however, quire external, and it 
is nor inherent in the numbers riamed, as such, to be the expression of just these 
determinate thoughts. Moreover, the further one progresses in this manner, the 
more the sheer arbitrariness of combining specific numbers with specific thoughts 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
becomes apparent. Thus, for instance, one might regard 4 as the unity of r and } 
and the rhoughcs connected with them. Bur 4 is jwr as much the doubling of 2, 
and in the same vein 9 is not only the square of} but also the sum of 8 and 1, of 
7 and 2, and so on. If even today certain secret societies place such a great weight 
on all kinds of numbers and figures, this is ro be regarded on rhe one hand as a 
harmless game, but on the other hand as a sign of ineptness in thinking. True, one 
likes to say that a deeper meaning lies hidden behind such things and that one can 
think much to oneself thereby. However, what matters in philosophy is not that 
one can think something, bur that one actually thinks, and the true element of 
thought must be sought not in arbitrarily chosen symbols but only in the thinking 
itself. 
§ 105 
Quantum's b~ing extmuzl to itself in the determinacy of its being-for-itself 
constitutes its quality. In being external, it is precisely itself and related 
to itsel£ The externality, i.e. the quantitative, and the being-for-itself, i.e. 
the qualitative, are united therein. - Posited thus in itself[an ihm s~lbst], 
quantum is quantitative proportion [ Verhiiltnis] -a determinacy that is just 
as much an imm~diate quantum - i.e. the exponent - as it is mediation, 
i.e. the relation (Beziehung] of a given quantum to another, these being the 
two sides of the proportion that at rhe same time are not to be raken in 
their immediate value, but whose value lies exclusively in this relation. 
Atidition. The quantitative infinite progression initially appears to be an inces-
sant propelling of number beyond itself. Looked at more closely, however, the 
quantity proves to be recursive [zu sich se/bst zuriickkthrendl in this progression, 
for what is contained therein in terms of thought is that number is determined 
generally by number, and chis yields the quantitative proportion. When we say, 
for instance, 2 in relation to 4, we have two magnitudes that are not to be taken 
to be valid in their immediacy as such, but for which the relation to each other 
is alone at issue. This relation, however, i.e. the exponent of the proportion [i.e. 
2 in this case] is itself a magnitude that distinguishes itself from the magnitudes 
that are related to each other in that the proportion changes when they change. 
By contrast, the proportion is indifferent to rhe change of both of irs sides and 
remains the same as long as the exponent does not change. This is why instead 
of 2:4 we can also put 3:6 in its place without altering rhe proportion, since the 
exponent '2' remains the same in both cases. 
§ 106 
The sides of the proportion are still immediate quanta and rhe qualitative 
and quantitative determinations are still external to each other. But as 
for what they truly are, that the quantitative in its externality is itself 

168 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
the relation to itself, or that being-for-itself and the indifference of the 
determinacy are united, this is measure. 
Addition. Due to the dialectical movement through its moments considered 
so far, quantity has proven to be the return ro quality. The concept of quantity 
was initially that of sublared quality, i.e. the determinacy that was not identical 
with being, but instead indifferent, merely external to it. It is this concept that 
also underlies mathematics' customary definition of magnitude, as mentioned 
earlier, namely to be what can be increased and decreased. Now, according to this 
definition it can seem at first as if magnitude were merely that which is alterable in 
general (for to increase as well as to decrease just means to determine a magnitude 
differently). But if that is the case, then magnitude would not be distinct from 
mstmct (i.e. the second stage of quality) since according to its concept it is equally 
alterable and the content of that definition would then have to be made complete 
in such a way that in quantity we have something alterable that despite irs alteration 
remains the same. The concept of quantity thus proves to contain a contradiction 
within itself, and it is this contradiction that constitutes the dialectic of quantity. 
But the result of this dialectic is by no means a mere return to quality, as if the 
latter was rhe true and quantitf1 by contrast the untrue. The result is instead. the 
unity and truth of tt.ese rwo, qualitative quantity, or measu". -In this context, 
it should be noted that when we are operating with quantitative determinations 
in our examination of the objective fgtgmstiindlich] world it is indeed always 
already measure that we have in view as the goal of such an examination. This is 
indicated, moreover, in our language by the fact that rhe process of ascenaining 
quantitative determinations and relationships is something that we designate as 
measuring. Thus, for instance, one measures the lengths of various strings that are 
made to vibrate with a view to the qualitative difference of the sounds produced 
by the vibrarion, insofar as that difference corresponds to the difference in length. 
Similarly, in chemistry the quantity of substances [Stoffi] that are combined with 
one another is ascertained in order to come to know the measurements that 
condition these combinations, i.e. those quantities that underlie specific qualities. 
In statistics, roo, one deals with numbers but they are of interest only becau$e of 
the qualitative results conditioned by them. By contrast, the mere ascert:Uning of 
numbers as such (without the guiding perspective specified here) rightly counts as 
an empty curiosity that is unable to satisfy either any theoretical or any practical 
interest. 
C. MEASURE 
§ 107 
Measure is the qualitative quanrum, at first in the immediate sense as a 
quantum with which an existence or a quality is bound up. 
11 Translators· note: Taking Qu.Jilllt here to be a miscue and that Quantilllt is meant. 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
Adtlition. Measure as the unity of quality and quantity is thus at the same time 
completed being. When we speak of being. it appears at first to be entirely abstract 
and without determination. But being is essentially this, namely to determine 
itself. and it attains its complete determinacy in measure. Measure can also be 
regarded as a definition of the absolute, and it has been said accordingly that 
God is the measure of all things. IE is also this intuition that forms the basic tone 
of so many ancient Hebraic songs in which the glorification of God essentially 
amounts to the fact that he sets the limit for all things, for the sea and the land, the 
rivers and mountains, and likewise for the various species of plants and animals. -
In the religious consciousness of the Greeks we find the divinity of measure in 
closer connection to the ethical and represented as nm~tsis. This representation 
contains the notion in general that everything human - wealth, honour, power, 
and likewise joy, pain, etc. - has its specific measure that, if overstepped, leads 
to ruin and demise. - Now as far as the occurrence of measure in the objec-
tive fgtgmstiirullich] world is concerned, we find in nature initially concrete exis-
tences [.&istmzm] whose essential content is formed by measure. This is notably 
the case with the solar system that we are generally to regard as the realm of 
free measures. Proceeding funher in the contemplation of inorganic nature, mea-
sure recedes into the background, so to speak, insofar as the qualitative and quan-
titative determinations on hand here prove to be ind.ilferenr towards each other in 
multiple ways. Thus, for instance, the quality of a rock or a river is not tied to a 
specific magnitude. Looked at more closely, however, we find that even objects like 
those mentioned are not absolutely measureless, for in a chemical analysis the water 
in a river and the several components of a rock turn out to be qualities that are 
again conditioned by quantitative proportions of the substances [Stoffi] contained 
in them. But measure becomes decidedly more prominent again for immediate 
intuition with organic nature. The various genera of plants and animals possess a 
certain measure both overall and in their individual parts. Note should be taken, 
moreover, of the circumstance that the less perfect organic forms that are closer 
to inorganic nature distinguish themselves from the higher ones in pan by me 
greater indeterminacy of their measure. Thus, for example, among the petrifacts 
we find so-called Ammon horns that are recognizable only in a microscope and 
others that can be as large as a carriage wheel. The same indeterminacy of measure 
also shows itself in many plants that are at a low levd of organic development, as 
is the case, for instance, with ferns. 
§ 108 
Insofar as quality and quantity only exist in imm~diau unity in measure, 
their difference emerges in them in an equally immediate manner. Insofar 
as this is the case, the specific quantum is in pan mere quantum, and 
existence is capable of increase and decrease without the measure being 
sublated thereby (the measure is in this respect a rule). In part, however, 
the alreration of the quantum is likewise an alteration of quality. 

170 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
Addition. The identity of quality and quantity present in measure is initially only 
in itselfbur nor yet posited. On account of this, these two determinations whose 
unity is measure can render them each valid for itself such that, on the one hand, 
the quantitative determinations of existence can be altered without its quality 
being thereby affected but that, on the other hand, this process of indiscriminately 
increasing and decreasing has its limits and the quality is altered by overstepping 
those limits. Thus, for instance, the degree of the temperature of water is initially 
irrelevant to its drop-forming fluidity. But in rhe course of increasing or decreasing 
rhe temperature of water in its fluid, drop-forming stare, a point is reached where 
this stare of cohesiveness changes qualitatively and water is transformed into vapour 
on the one hand and ice on the other. When a quantitative change occurs, it appears 
at first as something quire innocuous, and yet there is still something else hidden 
behind it and this seemingly innocuous alteration of rhe quantitative is so to speak 
a ruse [List] through which the qualitative is captured. The antinomy of measure 
contained herein is something that the Greeks have already illustrated in many 
different guises, such as, for example, in the question of whether one grain of wheat 
makes a heap of wheat or in that other question of whether plucking one hair from 
the tail of a horse makes a bald rail. While one may be initially inclined to respond 
negatively to these questions in view of the nature of quantity as an indifferent 
and external determinacy of being, one will nonetheless quickly have to admit that 
such indifferent increasing and decreasing also has its limits and that there finally 
comes a point where the result of the continued addirion of only o~ grain at a 
rime is a heap of wheat and the result of the continued plucking of o~ hair at a 
rime is a bald rail. Similar to these examples is that tale of a peasant who continued 
to increase by onr ounce at a time the load of his donkey that was trotting along 
cheerfully until it eventually collapsed under what had become an unbearable 
burden. One would be very wrong if one were to declare such things to be merely 
idle grammar school chatter, for they have in fact to do with thoughts with which 
it is of great importance to be familiar also in a practical and more specifically in 
an ethical connection. Thus, for instance, in connection with the expenditures we 
make there is at first a certain latitude within which a more or less does not maner. 
If, however, a certain measure, which is determined by the respective individual 
situation, is overstepped, the qualitative nature of measure makes itself felt (in the 
same way as in the previously mentioned example of the different temperatures 
of water); and what just now had to be regarded as good budgeting turns into 
stinginess or squandering. - The same point finds irs application to politics as 
well and, indeed, in the sense that the constitution of a stare must be regarded as 
both independent of and dependent on the extent of its territory, the number of 
its inhabitants, and other such quantitative determinations. For instance, looking 
at a state with a territory of one thousand square miles and a population of four 
million inhabitants one will at first have to admit without hesitation that a few 
square miles of territory or a few thousand inhabitants more or less cannot have a 
significant influence on the constitution of such a stare. Bur in contrast to this, it 
is no less unmistakable that in the continued enlargement or shrinking of a state 
there finally comes a point when because of this quantitative alteration, apart from 
all other circumstances, the qualitative [aspect] of the constitution cannot remain 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
171 
unchanged anymore. The constitution of a small Swiss canton does not fit a great 
empire, and equally unsuitable was the constitution of the Roman Republic when 
transferred to small German cities of the [Holy Roman] Empire. 
§ 109 
The measureless is initially this process of a measure, by virtue of its quan-
titative nature, of passing beyond its qualitative determinacy. However, 
since the other quantitative relationship, [namely,] the measurelessness of 
the first, is equally qualitative, the measureless is likewise a measure. Both 
transitions, from qualiry to quantum and from the latter to the former, can 
be represented again as an infinite progmsion- as the suspending [Aujhebm] 
and re-establishing of the measure in the measureless. 
Addition. As we have seen, quanrity is not only capabk of alteration, i.e. of 
increase and decrease; instead ir is as such rhe process of stepping out [das Hil'lllus-
schrtiten] beyond itself in general Quantity confirms this- its nature- in measure 
as weU. But as the quantity on hand in measure oversteps a cenain limit, the qual-
ity corresponding ro it is thereby likewise sublated. With this, however, it is not 
quality in general that is negated, but only this specific quality whose posicion is 
immediately re-occupied by another quality. This process of the measure proves to 
be alternately the mere alteration of quantity and then a tipping over [ Umschlagm] 
of quantity into quality as well. One can make this process inruirively dear by using 
the image of a knotted line. We first find knotted lines such as these in nature under 
many different forms. Earlier we considered the qualitatively different stares of the 
aggregation of water that are dependent on increase and decrease. It is similar with 
the differem stages of the oxidation of metals. The differences between sounds 
can also be regarded as an example of transforming what is at first merely quan-
titative imo a qualitative alteration, a transforming that occurs in the process of 
measure. 
§ 110 
What in fact happens here is that the immediacy, which still belongs to 
the measure as such, is sublated. Qualiry and quantiry themselves are first 
in the measure as immediate, and it is merely their relative identity. Yet 
measure turns out to sublate itself in the measureless. The latter, while it 
is the negation of measure, is nonetheless itself the uniry of quantiry and 
qualiry, and hence displays itself just as much as simply coming together 
with itself 
§ 111 
The infinite, the affirmation as negation of negation, now has for its 
sides qualiry and quantiry instead of the more abstract sides of being and 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
nothing, something and an other, and so on. Those [sides of the infinite] 
have matle tht transition (a) first of quality into quantity (§ 98) and of 
quantity into quality (§ 105) and been demonstrated by this means to be 
ntgations. (~) But in their unity (i.e. measure) they are at first distinct and 
one is only by bting mtdiattd by the other. And (y), after the immediacy of 
this unity has proved to be self-sublating, this unity is now posittd as what 
it is in itst/f, as simple relation-to-itself that contains being in general and 
its sublated forms within itself. - Being or the immediacy that is mediation 
with itst/f and relation to itself through the negation of itself, and thus 
equally mediation that sublates itself towards relation to itself. i.e. towards 
immediacy, is tsstnct. 
Ae/Jition. The process of measure is not merely the bad infinity of the infinite 
progression in the form of a process of constantly changing over from quality rnto 
quantity and from quantity into quality. but at the same time the true infinity of 
coming together with itself in its other. In measure, quality and quantity stand 
opposite one another at first as something and an other. Quality, however, is in its~lf 
quantity, and conversely, quantity is equally in its~lf quality. By thus passing over 
into each other in the process of measure, each one of these two determinations 
merely becomes what it already is in itself. and we now obtain being that is negated 
in its determinations, or being that is altogether sublated and thus is mmu. In 
measure, essence was already present in itself. and its process consists merely in 
positing itself as what it is in itself. - Ordinary consciousness takes things up 
as simply being [s~imek] and regards them in terms of quality, quantity, and 
measure. But these immediate determinations then show themselves not as fixed 
but as passing over, and essence is the result of their dialectic. In essence, no 
passing over occurs any more, only a relation. Initially, i.e. in being. the form of 
relation is merely our reftection. By contrast, in essence relation is its [essence's] 
own determination. When (in the sphere of being) something becomes an other, 
the something has thereby disappeared. Not so with essence. Here we hav" no 
true other but only difference, the relation of one to its other. The passing over 
of essence is thus at the same time no passing over, for in the passing over of the 
different into the different, the different does not disappear; instead the differences 
remain in their relation. When, for example, we say b~ing and nothing, being is 
for itself and so, roo, is nothing for itself. It is quite different with the positiv~ 
and the n~ativ~. To be sure, these have the determinations of being and nothing. 
but the positive makes no sense taken by itself; rather, it is completely related to 
the negative. It is the same with the negative. In the sphere of being, relatedness 
is only in i~lfi by contrast, in essence it is posited. This is then in general the 
difference between the forms of being and those of essence. In being, everything 
is immediate; in essence, by contrast, everything is relative. 

Second subdivision of the Logic: 
The doctrine of essence 
§ 112 
The essence is the concept insofar as it is simply posit~d; in the essence, the 
determinations are only r~lativ~. they are not yet fully reRected in them-
selves. For this reason, the concept is not yet for its~ If As being that mediates 
itself with itself in virtue of its negativity, essence is .relation to itself only 
insofar as it is relation to an other that is, however, not immediately a being, 
but somethingposit~d and m~diat~d.- Being has not disappeared; instead, 
in the first place, the essence, as a simple relation to itself, is being; in the 
second place, moreover, in keeping with being's one-sided determination 
as som~thing imm~diat~. being has been demoted to something merely neg-
ative, to a shine [Sch~ine].- The essence is accordingly being as shining in 
itself [Scheinen in sich s~lbst]. 
The absolute is essence. -This definition is the same as the definition 
that it is being, insofar as being is also the simple relation to itself, 
but at the same time it is higher since the essence is being that has 
gone into its~lf, that is to say, its simple relation to itself is this 
relation, posited as the negation of the negative, as mediation 
of itself in itself with itsd£ - However, when the absolute is 
determined as essenc~. negativity is frequently taken only in the 
sense of an abstraction from all determinate predicates. This 
negative act, the abstracting, then falls outside of the essence and 
the essence itself is thus only a result without these, its premises, the 
caput mortuum of abstraction. But since this negativity is not external 
to being, but instead is its own dialectic, then its truth, the essence, 
is the being that has gone into itself or is in itself, that refoction, its 
process of shining in itself. constitutes its difference from immediate 
being and is the distinctive determination of the essence itsel£ 
173 

174 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
Addition. Any talk of essence entails distinguishing it from being as immedi-
ate and considering the latter as a mere snnblanu in regard to rhe essence. This 
semblance, however, is not by any means denied; it is nor nothing, but is instead 
being as sublated. - In general, the standpoint of the essence is that of reflection. 
The expression 'reflection' is initially used of light insofar as, in its rectilinear 
progression, it hits upon a mirroring surface that casts it back. We have here, 
accordingly, two things: first, something immediate, a being [Stimdes], and then, 
second, the same being as something mediated or posited. But now this is pre-
cisely the case when we reflect on an object or (as one would also say) think it 
ovn- [nachdmltm]. For what matters here is not the object in its immediacy; we 
want instead to know [wissm] it as mediated. Indeed, according to the common 
consuual of the rask or purpose of philosophy, it is supposed to come to know 
the essence of things and that simply means that things arc not supposed to be 
left in their immediacy but instead demonstrated to be mediated or justified by 
something else. The immediate being of things is represented here, as it were, as 
a crust or as a curtain behind which the essence is hidden.- The funhcr claim 
that 'all things have an essence' is a way of declaring that they are not uuly 
what they immediately show themselves to be. It then is also not enough merely 
to uaipse from one quality to another and merely proceed from the qualitative 
to the quantitative and vice versa; instead, there is something enduring in things 
and this primarily is the essence. As far as the remaining meaning and the use of 
the category of essence are concerned, it may be fim recalled how, in German, 
we make use of Wtstn [the German word for 'essence'] for the auxiliary verb 
sein ['to be'] to designate the past of the expression, by designating being that 
has elapsed as gtwtsm ['having been'). Underlying this irregularity of the use of 
language is a proper view of the connection of being to essence, insofar as we 
are able to consider the essence as being that has elapsed, whereby it needs to 
be noted that what is past is, therefore, not abstracdy negated but instead only 
sublated and accordingly conserved at the same time. If we say, for c:xamplc, 
'Caesar has bun in Gaul [ist in Ga//im gtwtsm]', only the immediacy of what is 
assened here of Caesar is thereby negated, but not his sojourn in Gaul altogether. 
For it is, indeed, precisely this that forms the content of this asscnion, content 
that is here represented as lifted up [au.fKeo!Jobm] into another dimension. - Talk 
of essence in common life frequendy has only the meaning of a group or a sum. 
Accordingly, one speaks, for example, of the 'press' [Zritungswtsm], the 'post office' 
[Postwtsen], or 'revenue service' [Stt'Un'Wesna], and so fonh. What is understood 
by these expressions is simply that these things are nor to be taken in their imme-
diacy, as single items, but instead as a complex, and then further in their diverse 
relations as well. Such use of language contains only in this approximate fash-
ion what essence has come to mean for us. - One speaks also of finitt essences 
and names human beings finite essences [i.e. finite beings]. But in speaking of 
essences, one is actually beyond finitude and this designation of the human being 
is to that extent imprecise. If it is said further that there is [ts gibt] a highest 
essence [i.e. supreme being) and God is supposed to be designated by this, then 
two sorts of things need to be noted about this. First, the expression for 'there is' 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
175 
[the giving, g~bm of 'es gibt') is the sort of expression that points to something 
finite; we say, for example, 'there are so and so many planets' or 'there are plants of 
such and such constitution'. What there is in this way, is accordingly something 
outside of and next to which there is still something else. But now God, as the 
unqualifiedly infinite, is not the son of entity that there simply is and outside of 
and next to which there are also stiU other essences [i.e. beings). Whatever there 
otherwise is oU£side of God, nothing essential accrues to it in its separation from 
God; in this isolation it is to be considered far more to be something devoid of 
support and essence, a mere semblance. For this reason then, smmJ, talk of God 
as the highm essence [i.e. supreme being] must be deemed inadequate. Indeed, the 
category of quantity applied here has place only in the realm of the finite. Thus 
we say, for example, 'this is the highest mountain on earth' and thereby entertain 
the represenration that, outside this highest mountain, there are also still other, 
sir:nilarly high mountains. The same sort of thing obtains when we say of someone 
that he is the richest or most learned man in his country. But God is not simply ont 
and also not simply the highest; God is instead far more tht essence, whereby then, 
however, the following must also be immediately noted. Although this conception 
of God forms an important and necessary step in the development of religious con-
sciousness, by no means does it exhaust the depths of the Christian representation 
of God. If we consider God only as the essence without qualification and remain 
with this, then we know [wirsm) him only as the universal power that cannot be 
withstood or, otherwise expressed, as the Lord. Now fear of the lord is, indeed, 
the beginning, but only the beginning of wisdom. - h is first the Jewish and then, 
further, the Moslem religion in which God is construed as the Lord and essentially 
only as the Lord. The deficiency of these religions consists in general in the fact 
that here the finite does not get its due; maintaining this finitude for itself (be it as 
something natural or as a finite character of the spirit) constitutes a characteristic 
of pagan and hereby, at the same time, polytheistic religions. - Furthermore, the 
claim has also frequently been made that God, as the highest essence, cannot be 
known. This is generally the standpoint of the modem F.nlightenment and, more 
precisely, of the abstract understanding that is satisfied with saying 'il y a un hrt 
suprbnt', and then lets it go at that. If said in this way and if God is considered as 
the highest, other-worldly essence, then one has the world before oneself as some-
thing solid, something positive, and thereby forgets that the essence is precisely 
what sublates everything immediate. As the abstract, other-worldly essence whose 
difference and determinacy thus fall outside itself. God is in fact a .mere name, 
a mere (aput mortuum of the abstracting understanding. The true knowledge of 
God begins with knowing [wium] that things in their immediate being have no 
truth. 
Not only in relation to God but also in relation to other things, it often happens 
that one makes use of the category of essence in an absuact manner and then, in the 
course of considering things, fixes their essence as something obtaining for itself 
and indifferent to the determinate content of their appearance. For example, it is 
customarily said that what matters in human beings is their essence and not their 
action and deportment. What is right about this resides, to be sure, in the fact that 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
what a human being does should be considered, not in its immediacy, but only as 
mediated by his inner make-up and as a manifestation of his inner make-up. Only 
it should not be overlooked thereby that the essence and then, further, the inner 
make-up confirm themselves as such only by virtue of the fact that they make 
their appearance. In contrast to this, underlying that appeal of human beings to 
their essence, as distinct from the content of their action, is merely the intention 
of validating their sheer subjectivity and evading what is valid in and for itsel£ 
§ 113 
The relation-to-itself within the essence is the form of identity, of the 
reflection-in-itself, this has taken the place of immediacy here; both are the 
same abstractions of the relation-to-itself. 
Sensoriness's thoughtlessness, i.e. of taking everything limited 
and finite to be a being, passes over into the understanding's 
stubbornness, i.e. of grasping it as something identical with itself, 
something not contradicting itself in itself. 
§ 114 
Originating from being, this identity seems at first to be beset only with 
determinations of being and related to it as something external. If being 
is taken as thus detached from the essence, it is called the inessential. But 
the essence is being-in-itself, it is essential only insofar as it possesses within 
itself the negative of itself, the relation-to-another, the mediation. It thus 
has in itself the inessential as its own shine [seinen eignen Schein]. But since 
the differentiating is contained in the shining [Scheinm] or mediating 
and since what is differentiated acquires the form of identity due to its 
difference from the identity from which it emerges and in which it is not 
or in which it lies only as a shine- because of this, what is differentiated is 
in the manner of the immediacy that relates to itself, or of being. By this 
route, the sphere of the essence becomes a still imperfect combination of 
immediacy and mediation. Everything is so posited in the sphere of essence 
that it refers to itself and at the same time has passed beyond it- as a being 
of reflection, a being in which an other shines and which in turn shines in 
an other. - It is thus also the sphere of the posited contradiction (gesetzter 
Widerspruch] that is only in itselfin the sphere of being. 
Because the one concept is the substantial element [das Substantielk] 
in everything, the same determinations surface in the development 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
of the essence as in the development of being, but in rejkcttd form. 
Hence, instead of being and nothing, the forms of the positive and 
the negative now enter in, the former initially corresponding to the 
opposition-less being as identity, the Iauer (shining in itself) 
developed as the difference; - then, further, in the same way. 
becoming as ground itself of existence [Dasein] that, as reflected onto 
the ground, is concrete existence [&istenz], and so fonh.- This (the 
most difficult) part oflogic contains pre-eminently the categories of 
metaphysics and the sciences in general- [containing them] as 
products of the understanding insofar as it reflects, assuming the 
differences to be self-standing and at the same time also positing their 
relativity, but merely combining both aspects as next to and after 
one another through an 'also', without bringing these thoughts 
together and unifying them into a concept. 
A. THE ESSENCE AS GROUND OF CONCRETE EXISTENCE 
a. The pure determinations of reflection 
a. Identity 
§ 115 
The essence shines within itself or is pure reflection and, as such, it 
is only a relation to itself, not as immediate bur instead as reflected -
identity with itself 
Formal identity or identity of the understanding is this identity insofar 
as one fastens on it and abstracts from the difference. Or the 
abstraction is rather the positing of this formal identity, the 
transformation of something in itself concrete into this form of 
simplicity- be it that a pan of the manifold on hand in what is 
concrete is omitted (through so-called analysing) and only one of the 
manifold parts is taken up or that, with the omission of its diversity, 
the manifold determinations are pulled together into one. 
If identity is combined with the absolute as the subject of a 
sentence, the sentence reads as follows: 'The absolute is what is 
identical with itself. As true as this sentence is, it is ambiguous 
whether it is intended in its true significance. The expression of it at 
least is incomplete for this reason. For it is left undecided whether 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
the abstract idmtity of the understanding, i.e. in contrast to the 
other determinations of the essence, is meant or whether the identity" 
is meant as in itself concrete; in the latter sense it is, as will become 
evident, first the ground and then at a higher level of truth the 
concept.- Even the word 'absolutl has itself frequently no further 
meaning than that of'abstrad; thw, absolute space, absolute time 
means nothing further than abstract space and abstract time. 
The determinations of essence, taken as essential determinations, 
become predicates of a presupposed subject that is everything because 
those determinations are essential. The semences that arise thereby 
have been pronounced the rmiversallaws of thinking. The principle of 
identity [Satz tier Identitiit] accordingly reads: 'Everything is identical 
with itself, A = A'; and negativdy: 'A cannot be A and not A at the 
same time.'- This principle, instead of being a true law of thinking, 
is nothing but the law of the abstract umkrstanding. The form of the 
sentence [Form des Satzes] already comradicts it itself since a sentence 
also promises a difference between subject and predicate, but this 
sentence does not accomplish what its form requires. But it will 
be sublated in particular by the subsequent so-called laws of 
thinking that make into laws the opposite of this law. - If one 
maintains that this sentence cannot be proven but that each 
consciousness proceeds in accord with it and experientially concurs 
with it as soon as it hears it, then it is necessary to note, in 
opposition to this alleged experience of the school, the general 
experience that no consciousness thinks, has representations, and so 
forth, or speaks according to this law, that no concrete existence of 
.any sort exists according to this law. Speaking according to this 
alleged [seinsollenden] law of truth ('a planet is- a planet', 
'magnetism is- magnetism', 'the spirit is - a spirit') is considered, 
quite correctly, to be silly; this is presumably a universal experience. 
The school in which alone such laws are valid has, along with its 
logic which seriously propounds them, long since been discredited 
in the eyes of healthy common sense and in the eyes of reason. 
Addition. ldemity is, first, again the same as what we earlier had as being, 
but as having become [what it is] through sublation of the immediate determi-
nacy. - It is accordingly being as ideality. It is enormously imporrant to come 
to a proper understanding of the true meaning of idenrity. What penains, above 
all things, to this is that it be construed not merely as abstract identity, i.e. 
not as identity to the exclusion of difference. This is the point by means of 
which all bad philosophy distinguishes itself from what alone deserves the name 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
179 
of philosophy. The identity in its truth, as ideality of what immediately is, is an 
eminent determination as much for our religious consciousness as for all other 
thinking and consciousness generally. One can say that true knowledge ( Wissm) 
of God begins with knowing [wisstn] him a~ identity- as absolute identity, in 
which at the same time it lies that all power and all splendour of the world sinks 
away in the face of God and can only obtain as the shining [Schtintn) of his power 
and his splendour. - It is the same, too, for the identity that is the conscious-
ness of itself, through which human beings distinguish themselves from nature 
in general and from animals in particular (since an animal does not manage to 
grasp itself as an I, i.e. as pure unity of itself in itself). As for what further con-
cerns the meaning of identity in relation to thinking, it is a maner here, above all 
things, of not confusing the true identity (the identity containing in itself being 
and its determinations as sublated) with the abstract, merely formal identity. AJI 
those reproaches so frequendy made against thinking, namely, from the stand-
point of semiment and immediate intuition, reproaches of one-sidedness, rigidity, 
emptiness, and so forth are grounded in the perverted presupposition that the 
activity of thinking is only that of abstractly positing idemity, ·and it is formal 
logic itself that confirms this presupposition by setting up the allegedly highest 
law of thinking, illumined in the above section. If thinking were nothing more 
than that abstract identity, then it would have to be declared the most superfluous 
and most boring business. To be sure, the concept and, further, the idea are self-
identical, but only insofar as they contain the difference in themselves at the same 
ume. 
{3. Diffirmc~ 
§ J16 
The essence is pure idencity and shine [Sch~ilz] within itself only insofar 
as it is the negativity that relates itself to itself, thus the repelling of itself 
from itself. Hence, it essentiaJiy contains the determination of diffirmce. 
Being other is here no longer the qualitative [sense of being other}, 
the determinacy, the limit but instead, in the essence as relating itself 
to itself, negation is at the same time relation, difforence, posit~dnm, 
being-mediated. 
Additifm. If someone asks: 'How does identity come to difference?', he pre-
supposes that the identity, as mere, i.e. abstract identity, is something fur itself, 
and that difference then is also something else, equally for itself. By means of this 
presupposition, meanwhile, answering the proposed question is rendered impos-
sible, for if the identity is regarded as distinct from the difference, then one has 
in fact thereby merely the difference and, for that reason, the progression to the 

ISO 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
difference cannot be demonstrated since the point of departure for it is not on 
hand for anyone who inquires into the manner of the progression. On closer 
inspection, this question proves to be quite thoughtless and anyone who proposes 
it should first be confronted with the other question, namely, what he understands 
by identiry, in which case it would turn out that he understands precisely nothing 
in this connection by it and that identity for him is simply an empry name. In 
addition, to be sure, identity is something negative, as we have seen; nevertheless, 
it is not the abstract, empry nothing in general but instead the negation of being 
and its determinations. As such, identity is at the same lime relation, and indeed 
negative relation, to itself or the distinguishing of itself from itself. 
§ 117 
Difference is (1) immtdiatt difference, the diversity in which each of what 
is differentiated iJ for itself what it is and indifferent to its relation to the 
other which is thus a relation external to it. Because of the indifference of 
the diverse [things] to their difference, that difference falls outside them 
into a third [thing], which does the comparing. As the identity of the related 
[things], this external difference is [their] likeness; as their non-identity, it 
is their unlikeness. 
The understanding allows these determinations themselves to be 
so separate from one another that, although the comparison has one 
and the same substrate for likeness and unlikeness, these are 
supposed to be diverse sitks and respects in the same [substrate]. But 
likeness is for itself simply the foregoing, the identity, and unlikeness 
. is for itself the difference. 
Diversity has likewise been transformed into a sentence, the 
. 
principle that evtrything is diverse or that there are no tzuo things that 
are compktely like one another. Here 'everything is provided with a 
predicate that is the opposite of the identity attributed to it in the 
first principle; thus, a law contradicting the first [law of thinking] 
is given. Yet, insofar as diversity pertains only to the external 
comparison, something is sttppostd to be only identical with itself for 
itself and thus this second principle is supposed not to contradict 
the first. But then, too, diversity does not P"tain to something or 
everything; it does not constitute any essential determination of this 
subject; thus, the second principle cannot be stated in this way at all. 
- If, however, something is itself diverse, according to the principle, 
then it is so through its own determinacy; but with this then it is no 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
J8t 
longer diversiry as such that is meant but the determinate difference 
instead. - This is also the sense of the Leibnizian principle. 
Additio11. In committing itself to th~ consideration ofidemity, the understand-
ing is in fact already beyond that and what it has before it is difference in the form 
of mere diversity. If, for example, following the so-called principle of identity, we 
say 'the sea is the sea', 'the air is the air', 'the moon is the moon', and so forth, 
then these objects hold for us in the sense of being indifferent to one another and, 
in this way, it is not the identity, but instead the difference that we have before us. 
But then we also do not stand pat, regarding the things merely as diverse. Instead 
we compare them with one another and by this means acquire the determinations 
of likeness and unlikeness. A large part of the business of the finite sciences con-
sists in the application of these determinations and nowadays, in speaking of a 
scientific treatment, one would be inclined to undemand by this primarily the 
procedure that aims at comparing with one another the objects that have been 
taken into consideration. There can be no mistake that, by foJiowing this path, 
one has arrived at several, very important results and, in this connection, the enor-
mous achievements of modem times deserve to be called to mind, particularly 
in the domains of comparative anatomy and the comparative study of language. 
Nevertheless, by the same token, it should not only be noted that one goes too 
far if one thinks that this comparative procedure is to be applied to all domains 
of knowing with the same success, but beyond that it should also be particularly 
emphasized that the mere comparing still cannot ultimately satisfy the scientific 
need and that results of the previously mentioned sort are to be considered merely 
as (to be sure, indispensable) preliminary labours for the sort of knowing that truly 
comprehends matters. - Insofar, moreover, as the poim of comparing is to trace 
differences on hand back to identity, mathematics must be regarded as the science 
in which this goal is most perfectly attained and, to be sure, by reason of the fact 
that the quantitative difference is merely the entirely external difference. Thus, 
for example, in geometry a triangle and a rectangle, while qualitatively diverse, 
are equated with one another with respect to their size, in abstraction from that 
qualitative difference. Memion has already been made earlier (§ 99 Addition) of 
the fact that mathematics is not to be envied on account of this advantage, either 
from the side of the empirical sciences or from the side of philosophy; moreover, 
it also follows from what was previously noted about the mere identity of the 
understanding. - The story is told that, as Leibniz propounded the principle of 
diversity [i.e. the identity of indiscemibles] at court one day, gentlemen and ladies 
of the court, walking around in the garden, attempted to find two leaves indis-
tinguishable from one another, in order to refute the philosopher's principle by 
displaying them. This is without doubt a convenient, and still popular manner of 
occupying oneself with metaphysics even today. Nevertheless, with regard to the 
Leibnizian principle, it should be noted that the difference is precisely not to be 
construed merely as the external and indifferent diversity, but is to be construed 
instead as difference in iuelf and that it is inherem in the things in themselves to 
be different. 

The Encyclopedia i..tJgic 
§ 118 
Likeness is an identity only of such as are not the same, not identical to one 
another, and unlikeness is a relation of what is not alike. Hence, neither 
falls indifferently outside the other into diverse sides or aspects; instead, 
each is a shining into the other [ein Scheinen in die andere]. Diversity is 
thus difference of reflection or difference in itself, determinate difference. 
Aeblition. While mere diversities prove to be indifferent to one another, likeness 
and unlikeness arc, by contrast, a pair of determinations that refer straightfor-
wardly to one another, neither of which can be thought without the other. This 
movement from mere diversity to opposition can also already be found in ordinaty 
consciousness to the extent that we grant that comparing makes sense only on the 
supposition that some difference is present and, conversely, that distinguishing 
makes sense only on the supposition that some likeness is present. Accordingly, 
when the task of indicating a difference is posed, no great acuity is ascribed to 
someone who merely distinguishes objects whose difference is immediately evi-
dent (as, for example, a pen and a camel). By the same token, someone who only 
knows [weifJ] how to compare what lies close to one another- a beech with an 
oak, a temple with a church - will not be said to have made much progress in 
comparing. We accordingly require identity together with the difference and the 
difference together with the identity. Nevcnhdcss, it happens quite frequently 
in the domain of the empirical sciences that one of these two determinations is 
forgotten over the other and that scientific interest is at one time only set on 
tracing differences on hand back to some identity and, at another time, is just as 
one-sidedly set on finding new differences. This is notably the case in the natural 
sciences. Here one first makes it one's business to discover new and more and more 
new materials, forces, genera, species, and so forrh ~r. in a different turn, to prove 
that bodies, previously held to be simple, are composite. Modern physicists and 
chemists smile bemusedly at the ancients who were satisfied only with four (and 
not even simple) clements. But then, on the other side, people have their eyes set on 
the mere idemity. Accordingly, for example, not only arc electricity and chemical 
transformations regarded as cssemially the same, but even the organic processes 
of digestion and assimilation arc regarded as a merely chemical process. It was 
already noted earlier (§ 103 AddititJn) that, if more reccm philosophy is frequently 
mocked as a 'philosophy of identity', it is precisely philosophy and, indeed, in 
the first place, the speculative logic that points up the nullity [Nichtigkeit] of the 
mere identity of understanding, abstracting as it does from difference, and that 
also urges just as much for not leaving things with the mere diversity but instead 
for knowing the inner unity of everything that is there. 
§ 119 
(2} Difference in itse/fis essmtial difference, [the difference between] the 
positive and the negative, such that the former is the identical relation 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
to itself in such a way that it is not the negative and the latter is the 
differentiated for itself in such a way that it is not the positive. Because 
each is for itself insofar as it is not th~ otmr, each shin~s in the other and 
is only insofar as the other is. The difference of the essence is thus the 
opposition according to which what is differentiated does not have an oth~r 
in g~a/ but instead has its other opposite it. That is to say, each has its 
own determination only in its relation to the other, is only reflected in itself 
insofar as it is reflected in the other and the same holds for the other. Each 
is thus the other's own other. 
Difference in itself yields the principle: 'Everything is something 
essentially differentiated' - or, as it has also been expressed, 'Only on~ 
of two opposi~ p"dica~s ~rtain to a particular som~thing and th"' is 
no third. '-This principle of the opposition contradicts the principle 
of identity in the most explicit way, since something. according to 
the one principle, is supposed to be merely the "lation to its~lf, but 
according to the other, is something opposit~. th~ r~/ation to anoth~r. 
It is the peculiar thoughtlessness of abstraction to place two such 
contradictory principles as laws next to one another without even so 
much as comparing them. - The principle of th~ exc/utkd third is the 
principle of the determinate understanding that wants to refrain 
from contradiction and, in doing so, contradicts itself. A is supposed 
to be +A or -A; but the third, the A, is thereby aniculated, 
something which is Mitmr + nor- and that is posited just as much 
as +A and as -A are. If+ W 6 means 6 miles in a westerly direction 
and - W 6 means 6 miles in an easterly direction, and + and -
cancel one another [sich aufo~bm], then the 6 miles of the way or 
space remain what they were with and without the opposition. Even 
the mere plus and minus of the number or the abstraa direction 
have, if one will, zero [di~ Nu/IJ as their third. But it should not be 
denied that the empty opposition of the understanding. signalled by 
+ and -, also has its place in the case of such abstractions as number, 
direction, and so fonh. 
In the doctrine of contradictory concepts one concept means, for 
example, 'blue' (since even something like the sensory presentation 
of a colour is named a concept in such a doctrine), the other 
'not-blue' so that this other would not be something affirmative, 
such as ~/Ulw, but instead would be fixed upon merely [as] 
something negative in an abstraa sense. - That the negative in itself 
is just as much positive, see the following seaion; this also lies 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
already in the determination that something opposed to another 
is its other. -The emptiness of the opposition of so-called 
contradictory concepts was completely displayed in the, as it were, 
grandiose expression of a universal law that one of tvtry such 
opposite predicate and not the other pertains to tach thing, such 
that [for example,] the spirit is either white or not-white, yellow or 
not yellow, and so on ad infinitum. 
Because it is forgotten that idemicy and opposition are themselves 
opposed, the principle of opposition is also taken for that of idemicy 
in the form of the principle of contradiction, and a conctpt to which 
none or both of two mutually contradictory characteristics apply 
is declared logicaJly false such as, for example, a circle with four 
corners. Now, although a circle with multiple comers and a 
rectilinear arc equally contradict this principle, geometers have no 
reservations about considering and treating the circle as a polygon 
with rectilinear sides. But something like a circle (its mere 
determinacy) is still no concept; in the concept of the circle, centre 
and periphery are equally essential and yet periphery and centre are 
opposed and contradictory to one another. 
The notion of polarity that is so prominent in physics contains 
within itself the more correct determination of opposition; but if 
physics, in regard to its thoughts, holds itself to the ordinary logic, 
then it would easily be aghast, were it to unfold [the concept of] 
polaricy for itself and arrive at the thoughts that lie within it. 
Adtiition r. The positive is the identity again but in its higher truth as the 
identical relation to itself and, at the same time, such that it is not the negative. 
The negative for itself is nothing other than the difference itsel£ The identical 
as such is, in the first place, devoid of determination; the positive, by contrast, 
is identical with itself but is determined as opposite an other and the negative 
is the difference as such in the determination of not being identity. This is the 
difference of the difference in itself. - With the positive and the negative, one 
thinks that one has an absolute difference. Both, however, are in themselves the 
same and one could, for that reason, name the positive also the negative and, 
vice versa, the negative the positive. In this way, too, assets and debts are not two 
particular types of assets, obtaining for themselves. The same thing that in the 
case of the one, as debtor, is something negative is, in the case of the other, the 
creditor, something positive. Something similar holds for a path to the east that 
is at the same time a path to the west. Positive and negative are thus essentially 
conditioned by one another and only are (what they are] in their relation to one 
another. The north pole on a magnet cannot be without the south pole and the 
south pole cannot be without the north pole. If one cuts a magnet in half, one 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
docs not have the north pole in the one piece and the south pole in the other. So, 
too, in the case of electricity, the positive and the negative electricity are not two 
diverse flows, each obtaining for itself. In the opposition, what is differentiated has 
not only an other but its other opposite it. Ordinary consciousness regards what is 
differentiated as indifferent to one another. Thus, one says: I am a human being, 
and around me are air, water, animals, and other things generally. Here, everything 
falls apart. The aim of philosophy, by contrast, is to ban the indifference and come 
to know the necessity of things so that the other appears standing opposite it 
as its other. Thus, for example, inorganic nature is to be considered, not merely 
as something other than the organic, but instead as the necessary other of the 
latter. Both are in essential relation to one another, and one of the rwo is only 
to the extent that it excludes the other from itself and, precisely by this means, 
relates itself to the other. In a similar way nature, too, is not without the spirit 
and the latter not without nature. It is generally an important srep if, in thinking, 
one has got away from saying: 'Now, something else is still possible, too.' For 
by speaking in this manner, one is still burdened by the contingenr, in contrast 
to which, as was previously noted, true thinking is a thinking of necessity. - If. 
in more recent natural science, one has come to recognize as a universal law of 
nature the opposition first perceived in magnetism as polarity and to recognize this 
opposition as running through nature in its entirety, then this is to be regarded 
without doubt as an essential progress of science. Except that in this case it should 
be a prime concern not tO let mere diversity stand, without funher ado, alongside 
the opposition. Thus, for example, while on the one hand one at first correctly 
considers colours as standing opposite each other in polar opposition (as so-called 
'complementary colours'), on the other hand one then rums around and considers 
them as the indifferent and merely quantitative difference of red, yellow, green, 
and so forth. 
Ae/Jition 2. Instead of speaking in terms of the principle of excluded middle (the 
principle of abstract understanding), one should rather say: everything is opposed. 
Indeed, neither in heaven nor on earth, neither in the spiritual nor in the natural 
world, is there any such abstract either/or of the sort that the understanding 
maintains. Everything that is some sort of thing is something concrete, something 
that is in itself thereby differentiated and opposed. The finitude of things consists 
then in the fact that their immediate existence [Dauin] does not correspond to 
what they are in themselves. Thus, for example, in inorganic nature, an acid is in 
itself at the same rime a base, that is to say, its being is simply only this, to be related 
to its other. With this, however, an acid is also not something quietly perduring in 
opposition but instead is striving ro posit itself as what it is in itself. Contradiction is 
what moves the world in general and it is ridiculous to say that contradiction cannot 
be thought. What is right about this claim is merely this: that the matter does nor 
end there in the contradiction and that the contradiction sublares itself through 
itself. The sublared contradiction is then, however, not the abstract identity, for 
this is itself only the one side of the opposition. The most immediate result of 
the opposition posited as a contradiction is the ground, which contains in itself 

186 
Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
both the identity and the difference as sublated and set down as merely ideal 
moments. 
§ 120 
The positit1e is that divmt [aspect] that is supposed to be for itself and 
at the same time not indifferent to its relation to its othtr. The ntgative is 
supposed to bt equaUy self-standing, the negative relation to itst/f, for itst/f, 
but at the same time, as simply negative, is supposed to have this its relation 
to itself. its positive [aspect], only in the other. Both are, accordingly, the 
posited contradiction; both are in thanstlvts the same. Both are so also 
for thtmstlvts since each is the sublating of the other and of itself. With 
this they collapse, falling to the ground. - Or the essential difference, 
as difference in and for itself, immediately is only the difference of itself 
from itself and hence contains the identical. Hence, identity belongs just as 
inherently as difference itself to difference in and for itself and as a whole. -
As st/freferring, difference is likewise already declared to be idmtical with 
itself and the opposed is in general what contains tht one and its other, itst/f, 
and its oppositt, in itself. Essence's being-in-itself, so determined, is the 
ground. 
y. Ground 
§ 121 
The ground is the unity of identity and difference; the truth of what the 
difference and the identity have turned out to be - the reflection-in-itself 
that is just as much reflection-in-another and vice versa. It is tht tssmu 
posited as totality. 
The principle of the ground [Satz vom Grund] reads: 'Everything has 
its sufficient ground (or rtason)'; that is to say, the true essence [wahrt 
Wesenheit] of anything is not the determination of it as identical 
with itself or as diverse or as merely positive or merely negative. 
It is instead the fact that it has its being in an other that, as its 
identity-with-itself, is its essence. The latter is equally not an abstract 
reflection in itst/fbut in an other instead. The ground is the essence 
being in itself and this is essentially ground and it is ground only 
insofar as it is ground of something, of an other. 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
Addition. If it is said of the ground 'it is the unity of identity and difference', 
then by this unity is not to be understood the abstract identity, since we would 
then have merely another name and, as far as the thought is concerned, we would 
merely have once again the identity of the understanding itself that has been 
recognized to be untrue. For this reason, in order to avoid that misunderstanding. 
one can also say that the ground is not merely the unity, but just as much the 
difference of the identity and the difference. By this means, the ground, which fim 
presented itself to us as the sublation of the contradiction, thus appears as a new 
contradiction. But as such it is not something persisting [BtiJa,mrdt] peacefully 
in itself but rather the repelling [Abstojl'm) of itself from itself. The ground is 
only ground insofar as it grounds [btgriintkt]. However, what has emerged from 
the ground is itself and therein lies the formalism of the ground. The grounded 
and ground are one and the same content and the difference between both is the 
mere difference of form between the simple relation to itself and the mediation or 
state of being posited. If we ask for the grounds of things, then this is generally 
the already earlier mentioned (§n2 AdJjtion) standpoint of reflection. We want to 
see the basic matter then, as it were, doubled, first in its immediacy and second 
in its ground where it is no longer immediate. This is then also the simple sense 
of the so-called principle [Dmkgtsttz] of sufficient reason, by means of which it is 
simply expressed that things must be considered essentially as mediated. Formal 
logic, incidentally, provides the other sciences with a bad example, inasmuch as 
it demands that the sciences not allow their content to be immediately valid, 
and nonetheless sets up this principle without deriving it and pointing out its 
mediation. With the same reason that the logician maintains that our capacity of 
thinking is simply so constituted that we have to ask for a ground in every case, 
the physician, asked why someone who falls into the water drowns, could also 
answer that human beings are simply so constructed not ro be able to live under 
water. So, too, a judge, if asked why a criminal is punished, could answer that civil 
society is simply so constituted that criminals are not allowed to go unpunished. 
But even if one is to set aside the demand addressed to the logic for a justification 
of the principle of the ground, then logic must at least answer the queslion of 
what one is to understand by the 'ground'. The usual explanation, namely that 
the ground is what has a consequence [Fo~t], seems at first glance to be more 
illuminating and comprehensible than the determinacion of the concept given 
above. If, however, one asks further, what 'consequence' is, and receives the answer, 
the consequence is what has a ground, then it becomes apparent that the ease of 
comprehending this explanation consists merely in the fact that in it is presupposed 
what emerged for us as the result of a foregoing movement of thought. But, now, 
the business of logic is precisely this alone, to point up the merely represented 
and, as such, uncomprehended and unproven thoughts as stages of thinking that 
determines itself, so that they can then be at the same time comprehended and 
proven. - In ordinary life and equally in the finite sciences one quite frequently 
avails oneself of this form of reflection with the intention, by applying it, of getting 
to the bottom of how matters actually stand with the objeCts under consideration. 
Now, there is nothing objectionable about this manner of consideration insofar 

188 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
as it merely concerns the immediate, everyday need [Hausb(darfl of knowing, 
so to speak. Nevertheless, at the same time it must be noted that this manner 
of consideration can guarantee a definitive satisfaction neither in a theoretical 
nor in a practical respect and, indeed, cannot because the ground still has no 
content, determinate in and for itself, and by considering something as grounded, 
we accordingly preserve the merely formal difference between immediacy and 
mediation. One thus sees, for example, an electrical phenomenon, and asks for 
the ground of it; if we receive the answer, the electricity is the ground of this 
phenomenon, then this is the same content that we had immediately before us, 
merdy translated into the form of something internal. - Furthermore, however, 
the gr-ound is not merely what is simply identical with itself, bur also different 
from itself and, for this reason, diverse grounds can be put forward for one and 
the same content, a diversity of grounds that proceeds according to the concept of 
difference, then further to opposition in the form of grounds for and against the 
same content. - If, for example, we consider an action, more specifically a theft, 
then this is a cohtenr relative to which several sides can be distinguished. By means 
of it, property has been violated; bur by means of it as well rhe thief who was in 
need obtained the means to satisfy his needs; and it can also be the case that the 
person from whom he stole did not make good use of his property. Now, to be sure, 
it is right that the violation of property that has taken place here constitutes the 
decisive point of view; other points of view must withdraw into the background 
relative to it. But this decision does not lie in the principle of the ground. To be 
sure, according to the ordinary construal of this principle, one speaks not merely 
of the ground but of the sufficimt ground and, hence, one might think that, in the 
case of the aaion mentioned as an example, viewpoints other than the violation of 
property that were also mentioned might well be grounds, but th3[ these grounds 
are not sufficient. In this regard it should be noted, however, that if one speaks of 
the sufficient ground, this predicate is either pointless or of the sort that, by means 
of it, one has already passed beyond the category of ground as such. The predicate 
thought of here is poindess and tautological if it is merely supposed to express the 
capacity of grounding [bwundm] at all, since the ground is only ground to the 
extent that it expresses this capacity. If a soldier runs away from a battle in order to 
save his life, then he aets in a manner that is contrary to his duty, but it must not 
be maintained that the ground that determined him to act in this manner was not 
sufficient, for otherwise he would have remained at his post. Furthermore, it must 
then also be said that just as, on the one hand, all grounds suffice, so, on the other 
hand, no ground as such suffices and, indeed, precisely because, as already noted 
above, the ground still has no content determinate in and for itself and, hence, 
is not aaive on its own and productive. It is the concept that will subsequendy 
present itself to us as content that is determinate in and for itself and thereby active 
on its own, and it is this that matters for Leibniz when he speaks of the sufficient 
ground and urges that things be considered from this viewpoinr. 
Here Leibniz has in mind a merely mechanical manner of construing things that 
many still cherish even today and that he rightly declares insufficient. Thus it is, for 
example, a merely mechanical construal of the organic process of the circulation 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
of blood if it is reduced simply to the contraction of the heart. Equally mechanical 
are those theories of punishment that consider the purpose of punishment to 
be neutralization, deterrence, or other external grounds of that son. One does 
Leibniz an injustice if one thinks that he. was satisfied with something so scanty as 
the formal principle of the ground is. The manner of considering things that he 
advocates is precisely the opposite of that formalism that, where it is a matter of 
knowing conceptually, lets mere grounds suffice. In this respect Leibniz contrasts 
causas 4firimus and causas ftnaln with one another and makes the demand that 
one not stand pat with the former, but press on to the latter. According to this 
distincdon, for example, light, warmth, moismess are, of course, m be considered 
as causat tjficimtts bur not as the causa ftnalis of the plant's growth, the causa 
ftnalis being, of course, nothing other than the concept of the plant itself. - Here 
it can be noted that standing pat with mere grounds, precisely in the domain of 
the juridical and the ethical, is generally the standpoint and the principle of the 
Sophists. When one speaks of sophism, one frequently understands it to be merely 
the son of consideration that is concerned with twisting what is right and what 
is true and presenting things generally in a false light. This tendency, however, 
does not lie immediately in sophism, the standpoint of which is nothing other 
than that of rationalization [Riisonntmtnt}. The Sophists made their appearance 
among the Greeks at a time when mere authority and tradition no longer sufficed 
for them in religious and ethical domains, and they felt the need to be aware of 
what was supposed to hold for them and aware of it as a content mediated by 
thinking. The Sophists met this demand by giving directions for looking for the 
various viewpoints from which things might be considered, various viewpoints 
that then are precisely nothing other than grounds. Since, as was previously noted, 
the ground still has no content, determinate in and for itself, and grounds are to 
be found for the unlawful and unjust no less than for the ethical and lawful, the 
decision about what grounds are supposed to hold falls to the subject and it is a 
matter of the subject's individual disposition and intentions, which grounds it will 
settle for. By this means, then, the objective basis of what is valid in and for itself, 
recognized by everyone, is undermined and it is this negative side of sophism that 
has deservedly given it the previously mentioned, bad reputation. As is well known, 
Socrates battled the Sophists everywere, not indeed by simply opposing their 
rationalization with authority and tradition, but rather by dialectically pointing out 
the untenability of mere grounds and by urging, to the contrary, the consideration 
of the just and the good, in general the universal and the concept of willing. When 
one often prefers nowadays not only in discussions about worldly things but even 
in sermons to go to work in a rationalizing manner and, for example, all possible 
grounds are given for gratitude to God, then Socrates and even Plato would not 
have hesitated to declare this as sophistry. For, as I have said, in this case it has to 
do, not with the content, which can even be the true content, but with the form of 
the grounds through which everything can be defended, but also attacked. In our 
rationalizing time, so rich in reflection, one need not have advanced very far in 
order to know [wtij$1 how to produce a good ground for everything, even for the 
worsr and most pervened position. Everything that has been ruined in the world 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
has been ruined on good grounds. If one is confronted with specific grounds, on¢ 
is initially inclined to step back in the face of this; but if one has had the experience 
of how this works, then one becomes hard of hearing towards this and does not 
let oneself be further impressed by it. 
§ 122 
The essence is at first shining [Scheinm] and mediation within itself Now, 
as the totality of the mediation, its unity with itself is posited as the self-
sublating [Sichaufheben] of the difference and thereby of the mediation. 
This is therefore the re-establishment of immediacy or being, but of being 
insofar as it is mediated by the sublating of mediation - concrete existmce 
[Existenz]. 
The ground has as yet no contmt that is determinate in and for itself; 
neither is it a purpose, thus it is not active, nor is it productive; instead 
a concrete existence merely emerges from the ground. For that 
reason, the determinate ground is something formal; it is any son of 
a determinacy, insofar as it is related to itself, posited as affirmation, 
in relation to the immediate concrete existence connected with it. 
Precisely by the fact that it is ground, it is also a good ground, since 
'good' quite abstractly also means nothing more than something 
affirmative and each determinacy is good that can be aniculated in 
any way as something affirmative that is granted. Thus, a ground 
can be found and given for everything, and a good ground (e.g. a 
good ground of motivation for acting) can effect something or not, 
can have a consequence or not. A ground of motivation that effects 
something comes about, for example, through its assumption into 
a will that first makes it into something active and a cause. 
b. Concrete existence 
§ 123 
Concrete existence [Existenz] is the immediate unity of reflection-in-itself 
and reflection-in-another. It is thus the indeterminate set of concretely 
existing entities [Existierendm] as reflected-in-themselves that are at the 
same time just as much a shining-in-another [in-Andem-scheinen], i.e. 
are relative, and form a world of reciprocal dependency and an infinite 

T'" Encyclopedia Logic 
connection of grounds and grounded entities. The grounds are themselves 
concrete existences and the concretely existing entities are from multiple 
sides just as much grounds as they are grounded. 
AJJitiiJn. The expression 'existence'· (derived from aistut) points to a having-
gone-forth [Hervorgtgangtnstin] and the concrete existence (.Existmz] is the being 
that has gone forth &om the ground, the being re-established through the sublation 
of the mediation. The essence, as the sublated being, has demonstrated irself to us 
first as a shining in itself and the determinations of this shining are rhe identity, 
the difference, and the ground. This [the ground] is the unity of the identity and 
the difference and, as such, at the same rime the differentiating ofirselffrom itself. 
But now, as what is differentiated &om ground it is just as little the mere difference 
as it is itself the abstract identity. The ground is the sublating of itself and that in 
relation to which it sublates itself, the result of its negation, is concrete existence. 
As what has gone fonh from the ground, this [concrete existence] contains the 
same [the ground] in itself and the ground does not remain back behind concrete 
existence; instead it is precisely and merely this, to sublate itself and translate itself 
into concrete existence. This can also be found then in ordinary consciousness 
to the extent that, when we consider the ground of something, this ground is 
not something abstractly internal but instead itself in turn something existing 
concretely [Existitrtntks]. Thus, for example, we consider a bolt of lightning that 
has set a building on fire to be the ground of a blaze and, equally, a people's 
customs and vital connections to be the ground of its constitution. This is now 
generally the form under which the concretely existing world first presents itself 
to reflection, as an indeterminate set of concretely existing entities that, as at once 
reflected in themselves and the other, behave towards one another reciprocally as 
ground and grounded. In this colourful play of the world as the sum of concretely 
existing things, a firm foothold nowhere presents itself, everything appearing 
here merely as relative, conditioned by another and equally conditioning the 
other. The reflecting understanding makes it its business to investigate and pursue 
these ubiquitous relations; but the question concerning the final purpose remains 
unanswered in the process and, hence, with the further development of the logical 
idea, reason's need to grasp matters conceptually passes beyond this standpoint of 
mere relativity. 
§ 124 
The re.8ection-in-another of what exists concretely [tin Existiermden] is, 
however, not separate from the reflection-in-itself; the ground is their 
unity, from which the concrete existence has gone forth. What exists thus 
concretely contains in itself relativity and its multiple connection with 
other entities existing concretely. Thus, too, it is reflected in itself as grotmd. 
As such, what exists concretely [das Existitrende] is a thing. 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
The thing-in-itst/fthat has come to be so famous in Kantian 
philosophy shows itself here in its origin, namely, as the abstract 
reflection-in-itself that is held on to in its opposition to the 
reflection-in-another and the differentiated determinations in 
general as their empty foundation [ Gnmdlagt]. 
Adtlition. When the claim is made that the thing-in-itst/fis unknowable, this is to 
be conceded insofar as, by 'knowing', one is supposed to understand apprehending 
an object in its concrete determinacy; but the thing-in-itself is nothing other than 
the completely abstract and indeterminate thing in general. Moreover, just as one 
speaks of the thing-in-itstlf, one might by the same right also speak of the quality· 
in-itself. the quantity-in-itself. and equally of all the remaining categories, whereby 
these categories would have to be understood in their abstract immediacy, that 
is to say, apart from their development and inner determinacy. To this extent, it 
must be considered an arbitrary act of the understanding to fix precisely upon the 
in-itself of the thing alone. Furthermore, the in-itselfis also customarily employed 
for the content of the natural as much as the spiritual world; thus, one speaks of 
electricity in itu/f or the plant in itstlf, for example, and equally of the human 
being or the state in itst/f, What is understood by the 'in-itself of these objects is 
what righdy and properly pertains to them. The case is here no different from that 
of the thing-in-itself in general. More specifically, if one stands pat with the mere 
in-itself of the objects, they arc construed, not in terms of the truth about them, 
but in the one-sided form of mere abstraction. Thus, for example, the human 
being-in-itself is the child whose task consists, not in obdurately persisting in this 
abstract and undeveloped in-itselfncss, but in becoming also for itst/f what it is 
initially in itst/f- namely, a free and rational being. Similarly, the state-in-itself 
is the still undeveloped, patriarchal state in which the various political functions 
residing in the concept of the state have not yet attained their constitutional form 
in keeping with the concept of them. In the same sense the seed can also be 
regarded as the plant-in-itself. What should be taken from these examples is-that 
one finds oneself very much in error if one thinks that the in-itself of things or the 
thing-in-itself in general is something inaccessible for our cognizing. All things 
are initially in thtmstlvts but they arc not thereby left at that, and just as the seed 
which is the plant in itself is only this, to develop itself, so too the thing in general 
advances beyond its mere in-itself as the abstract rc8ection-in-itself. proving itself 
to be reflection-in-another as well, and thus it has properties. 
c. Thtthing 
§ 125 
The thing is the totality as the development, posited in one, of the deter-
minations of the ground and concrete existence [E~stmz]. According to 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
193 
one of its moments, the r4fection-in-anothtr, it has the differences in it, 
and, in keeping with those differences, it is a tktnminatt and concrete 
thing. (a) These determinations are diverse from on~ anoth"i they have 
their reflection-in-itself in the thing, not in themselves. They are properties 
of the thing and their relation to it is one of having. 
Having enters as relation in place of bting [&in]. So~thing, to be 
sure, also has qualities in it, but this transposition of having onto 
beings [das &imtk] is imprecise because the determinacy as quality 
is immediately one with the something [that has the quality], and 
something ctasts to b~ if it loses its quality. But, the thing is the 
reflection-in-itself as the identity that is also different from the 
difference, its determinations. - Having is used in many languages to 
designate the past- rightly so, since the past is the subla~d being and 
the spirit its reflection-in-itself, the spirit in which it alone still 
obtains, but which also distinguishes this being, sublated in it, from 
itself. 
Atldilion. All the determinations of reflection recur, as concretely existing, in 
the thing. Thus, the thing, initially as thing-in-itself, is what is identical with 
itself. However, the identity is, as we have: sc:c:n, not devoid of difference, and 
the properties the thing has are the concretely existing difference in the form of 
diversity. While: the diverse: [aspects] earlier proved to be: indifferent to one another, 
and their relation to one: another was posited merely by the comparison external to 
them, we now have in the: thing a bond which links the diverse: properties to one: 
another. The property, moreover, is not to be confused with the quality. To be sure, 
one also says that something has qualities. Yet this designation is inappropriate 
insofar as 'having' suggests a self-standing status that does not yet pertain to 
something immediately identical with its quality. Something is what it is, thanks 
to its quality alone; by contrast, the thing, while also existing concretely only 
insofar as it has properties, is nevertheless not bound to this or that determinate: 
property and rhus can even lose that very property without ceasing for that reason 
to be: what it is. 
§ 126 
(~) But in the ground, the reflection-in-another is also in itself immediately 
the reflection-in-itself. Thus, the propenies are just as much identical with 
themselves, stlfstanding, and freed from their being-bound to the thing. 
However, because they are the thing's determinacies, diffortnt from ont 
another as reflected-in-themselves, they are not themselves things which 

194 
Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
are concrete, but instead concrete existences, reflected in themselves as 
abstract determinacies, sorts of matttr [Mattritn]. 
The sorts of matter, e.g. magnetic, electric sorts of matter, are also 
not called things. - They are the genuine qualities, one with their 
being, the determinacy that has anained immediacy, but a being that 
is a reAected [being], concrete existence. 
AtlJition. Making the properties which the thing has into self-sufficient sorts of 
matter or stuff of which it consists is grounded, to be sure, in the concept of the 
thing and, for that reason, is also found in experience. However, it runs counter to 
thought as well as experience to infer from the fact that certain properties of a thing 
(for example, the colour, the odour, and so forth) can be exhibited as particular 
colour-stuff. stuff-for-smelling, and so forth, that by this means everything is 
accomplished and that, in order to get to the bottom of how things actually are, 
one has nothing further to do than to analyse things into the sorts of stuff out 
of which those things are composed. This analysis into self-standing stuff has 
its proper place only in inorganic nature and it is the chemist's right to analyse 
cooking salts or gypsum, for example, into the stuff they consist of and then to 
say that the former consists of hydrochloric acid and sodium bicarbonate and 
the latter of sulphuric acid and calcium. Similarly, it is right for the geologist to 
regard granite to be composed of quartz, feldspar, and mica. The sorts of stuff, of 
which the thing consists, are then in turn themselves partially things that can be 
again analysed into more abstract sorts of stuff as, for example, sulphuric acid that 
consists of sulphur and oxygen. Now, while these sorts of stuff or matter can in 
fact be exhibited as subsisting for themselves, it also &equendy happens that other 
properties of things are similarly regarded as particular materials which, however, 
are not self-standing in this way. One speaks, for example, of warmth-stuff. of 
electrical and magnetic matter, sons of stuff and matter, meanwhile, that are to 
be c6nsidered mere fictions of the understanding. This is generally the martner 
of abstract reflection by the understanding, arbitrarily seizing upon individual 
categories that have validity only as determinate stages of development of the idea 
and then, as it is said, for the purposes of explanation, albeit in contradiction with 
the unprejudiced observation and experience, wielding these categories in such a 
way that every object considered is reduced to them. In this manner, then, the way 
a thing consists of self-standing stuff is also applied in multiple ways to the sorts of 
domains where it is no longer valid. Even within nature, in the case of organic life, 
this category proves to be insufficient. One says, indeed, that this animal consists 
of bones, muscles, nerves, and so forth, but it is immediately apparent thar the 
context here is different from the piece of granite consisting of the aforementioned 
sorts of matter. These sorts of matter behave in a manner utterly indifferent to 
their unification and can just as well subsist without the latter. By contrast, the 
diverse parts and members of the organic body subsist only in their unification 
and, separate from one another, they cease to exist concretely as such. 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
195 
§ 127 
Matt~r is thus the abstract or indeterminate reflection-in-another or the 
reflection-in-itself as tkurminau at the same time; it is thus aisting thingness 
[das~imt:k Dingh~it], the subsisting of the thing. In this way, the thing has, 
in the sorts of matter, its reflection-in-itself (the opposite of§ 125); it does 
not subsist in itself, but consists ofsorts of matter and is only their superficial 
combination, an external linkage of them. 
§ 128 
(y) As the im~diat~ unity of concrete existence with itself, matter is also 
indifferent to the determinacy; the many diverse sons of matter thus go 
together into the on~ matter, the concrete existence in the determination-of-
reflection of identity, in contrast to which these differentiated determinacies 
and their external r~lation, which they have to one another in the thing, are 
the form - the determination-of-reflection of the diffirmu, but as existing 
concretely and as the totality. 
This one matter, devoid of determination, is also the same as the 
thing-in-itself, only the latter is in itself completely abstract, the 
former is in itself also for-another, initially a being for the form. 
Adtiition. The diverse sorts of matter of which the thing consists are in thnns~lvtr 
the same as one another. By this means we get the on~ mauer in general [di~ ~in~ 
Matn-i~ iibn-haupt} in which the difference is posited as external to it, that is to 
say, as mere form. The construal of things as having altogether one and the same 
matter and as being diverse merely externally, i.e. in terms of their form, is quite 
customary for the reflecting consciousness. Maner in this connection is held to 
be utterly indeterminate in itself yet capable of every determination and, at the 
same time, absolutely permanent and remaining self-same in every change and 
every alteration. This indifference of matter to determinate forms is to be found 
in finite things, to be sure; thus, for example, it is indifferent to a block of marble 
whether it is given the form of this or that statue or even a pillar. Yet in this 
connection it should not be overlooked that such matter as a block of marble is 
only relatively (in relation to the sculptor) indifferent to the form and that it is 
in no way altogether formless. The mineralogist accordingly considers the merely 
relatively formless marble as a determinate rock formation in its difference from 
other, equally determinate formations as, for example, sandstone, porphyry, and 
the like. Thus, it is merely the abstracting understanding that fixes the matter 
in isolation and as formless in itself. By contrast, the thought of the matter docs 
indeed contain in itself the principle of the form and, for that reason, too, a 
formless matter does not occur anywhere, as concretely existing. in experience. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
Incidentally, the construal of matter as originally on hand and as in itself formless 
is quite ancient, and we meet it already among the Greeks, first in the mythical 
form of the chaos which is represented as the formless foundation of the concretely 
existing world. A$ a consequence of this representation, God is regarded not as 
the creator of the world but rather as the mere sculptor of the world, as the 
demiurge. The deeper intuition, by contrast, is this: that God created the world 
out of nothing. This is a means of generally articulating that, on the one hand, 
matter as such is not self-standing and, on the other hand, that the form does not 
reach the matter from the outside but instead, as a totality, bears within itself the 
principle of matter, the free and infinite form that will shordy turn out for us to 
be the conapt. 
§ 129 
The thing thus breaks down into matter and form, each of which is the 
totality of thinghood and self-standing for itself. But the matter, which is 
supposed to be the positive, indeterminate concrete existence [.&isten.z), 
contains as concrete existence just as much the reflection-in-another as 
being-in-itself. As the unity of these determinations, it is itself the total-
ity of the form. However, as the totality of the determinations, the form 
already contains the reflection-in-itself or, as self-referring form, it has what 
is supposed to make up the determination of matter. Both are in them-
selves the same. This unity of them, qua posited, is in general the rela-
tion of matter and form that are just as much distinguished [from one 
another]. 
§ 130 
The thing as this totality is the contradiction of being (in keeping with 
its negative unity) the form in which the matter is determined and rel-
egated to propenies (§ 125), and at the same time of consisting of sorts of 
matter that, in the reflection-in-itself of the thing, are at once both self-
standing and negated. The thing, being thus the essential concrete exis-
tence as one that sublates itself in itself[eine sich in sich selbst aufhebende], is 
appearance. 
The negation as well as the independence of the sorts of matter 
posited in the thing surface in physics as porosity. Each of the many 
sorts of matter (colour-matter, odorous matter, and other sorts of 
matter; according to some also sonorous matter, then caloric matter, 
electrical matter, and so forth) is also negated and in this, their 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
197 
negarion, their pores, are the many other self-standing sons of 
matter that are likewise porous and allow the others to concretely 
exist thus reciprocally in themselves. The pores are nothing nnpirical 
but instead contrivances of the understanding that represents the 
aspect of the negation of the self-standing sorts of matter in this 
way and covers the further development of the contradictions with 
that nebulous confusion in which everything is self-standing and 
everything is likewise negated in one another. - If in the same way in 
the spirit the faculties or activities are hypostasized, then their living 
unity likewise becomes the confusion of the acting of one on the 
other. 
(We are talking here, not of the pores in the organic, those of 
wood, skin, and so on, but instead of pores in the so-called sons 
of matter, as in the colour-matter, caloric-matter, and so fonh, or 
in metals, crystals, and the like.) Just as there is no verification of 
the pores in observation, so also matter itself is a product of the 
reflective understanding as is a form separated from the matter, the 
thing and its consisting of sorts of matter or that it itself subsists and 
has only properties. All are products of the reflective understanding 
that, while observing and alleging to present what it observes, 
generates instead a metaphysics that is from all sides a contradiction, 
albeit a contradiction that remains hidden from it. 
B. APPEARANCE 
§ 131 
The essence must appear [erscheinen]. Its shining within itself[sein Scheinen 
in ihm] is the sublating itself and becoming an immediacy which, as 
reflection-in-itself, is as much a subsisting [Bestehen] (matter) as it is form, 
reflection-in-another, subsisting in the process of sublating itself Its shin-
ing is the determination through which the essence is not being but 
essence, and the shining, once developed, is the appearance. The essence 
is thus not behind or beyond the appearance; instead, by vinue of the 
fact that it is the essence that exists concretely, concrete existence is 
appearance. 
AdditWn. Concrete existence [.&istmz], posited in its contradiction, is the 
appearance [Erscheinung). The latter is not to be confused with the mere semblance 
[bloflen Schein). The shine [Schein) is the proximate [nachste] truth of being or 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
immediacy. The immediate is not what we think we have in it, it is not something 
self-sufficient and resting on itself, but instead merely semblance [Schein] and, as 
such, it is gathered together [zusammmgifajlt] into the simplicity of the essence 
that is in itself. This is initially the totality of the shining within itself, but then 
does not stand pat with this interiority, having emerged instead as ground into 
concrete existence which, having its ground not in itself, but in an other instead, 
is precisely mere appearance. When we speak of an appearance, we associate 
with it the representation of an indeterminate multiplicity of concretely existing 
things whose being is simply mediation alone and which accordingly do not r:est 
on themselves, but instead have validity only as moments. At the same time, 
however, it also lies herein that the essence does not remain behind or beyond the 
appearance but instead is, as it were, the infinite goodness [ GUu) of releasing its 
shine into immediacy and granting it the joy of existing [Dastins]. The appearance 
posited in this way does not stand on its own feet and does not have its being in 
itself but in an other. Just as God as the essence is goodness by lending concrete 
existence co the moments of his shining in himself in order to create a world, so, 
too, God as the essence proves himself to be, at the same time, the power over 
it and the righteousness that makes manifest that the content of this concretely 
existing world is mere appearance, insofar as it wants to exist concretely for 
itself. 
The appearance is in general a very important stage of the logical idea and 
one can say that philosophy distinguishes itself from ordinary consciousness by 
the fact that it regards as mere appearance what holds for the laner as a being 
[Sritndes) and as self-sufficient. However, what matters is that the meaning of 
appearance is construed properly. If, for example, it is said of something that it is 
merely an appearance, then this can be misunderstood as though, when compared 
with this mere appearance, a being or the immediate is of a higher order. In fact, 
precisely the reverse holds, namely, such that the appearance is something higher 
than a mere being. The appearance is in general the uuth of being [Sein) and a 
richer determination than the latter insofar as appearance contains united in itself 
the moments of reflection-in-itself and reflection-in-another. In contrast to this, 
being or immediacy is still the one-sided absence of relation [BtZiehungslost] and 
(seemingly) resting only on itself. But furthermore, this 'only' of the appearance 
points, of course, to a deficiency, a deficiency consisting in the fact that the 
appearance is as yet what is in itself broken, not having its footing in itself. What 
is higher than the mere appearance is first the actuality, which, as the third stage of 
the essence, will be treated later. - In the history of modern philosophy, it is Kant 
who deserves the credit of first rehabilitating the previously mentioned difference 
between ordinary and philosophical consciousness. Kant, meanwhile, stalled at 
the halfway point insofar as he construed the appearance merely in a subjective 
sense and, outside of it, established the absuact essence as the thing in itself, 
inaccessible to our cognition. To be appearance alone, this is the proper narure of 
the immediately objective [gtgenstiind/ic~) world itself and, insofar as we know 
[wissm) the laner as such, we there recognize at the same time the essence which 
does not remain behind or beyond the appearance but instead manifests itself as the 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
199 
essence insofar as it lowers the world to the level of mere appearance. - Moreover, 
the na'ive consciousness, with its demand for a totality, is not to be blamed if it is 
reluCtant to content itself with subjective idealism's claim that we simply have to 
do with appearances alone. Only it easily occurs to this niive consciousness, bent 
on saving the objectivity of knowing, to return to abstract immediacy and, without 
further ado, to hold fast to it as the true and actual. In a small work with the tide, 
A Crysuzl Cl~ar RqJort to th~ Gmn-al Public Concerning th~ Actru~l Essmc~ of th~ 
Nno~st Phiwsophy: An Attnnpt to Fore~ t~ R~adn- to Undmtand [Berlin J80I)!J 
Fichte treated in a popular format the contrast between subjective idealism and 
immediate consciousness in the form of a dialogue between author and reader. 
He endeavoured to demonstrate the legitimacy of the standpoint of subjeaive 
idealism. In this dialogue the reader complains to the author of his distress that he 
simply would not succeed in transporting himself to that standpoint and expresses 
how disconsolate he is about the notion that the things surrounding him are 
supposed to be not actual things but mere appearances. The reader is, of course, 
not to be blamed for this grievance insofar as he is supposed to regard himself 
as encapsulated in an impenetrable sphere of merely subjective representations. 
Moreover, apart from the merely subjective construal of appearance, it must be 
said, meanwhile, that we have plenty of reasons to be satisfied with the fact that, in 
regard to the things surrounding us, we have to do merely with appearances and 
not with solid and self-sufficient concrete existences, since in this case we would 
soon die of hunger, bodily as well as spiritually. 
a. Th~ world of appearance 
§ 132 
What appears concretely exists in such a way that its subsisting is immedi-
ately sublated; it is only on~ moment of the form itsd£ The form encom-
passes in itself the subsisting or the matter as one of its determinations. 
What appears thus has its ground in the form as its essence, its reflection-
in-itself as opposed to its immediacy, but thereby has it only in another 
determinacy of the form. This, its ground, is just as much something 
appearing, and thus the appearance continues on to an infinite mediation 
of the subsisting through the form and thus equally through not subsisting. 
This infinite mediation is at once a unity of relation-to-itself, and concrete 
existence develops into a totality and world of appearance, of reflected 
finitude. 
•J Translators' note: Transl. John Botterman and William Rash, in Philosophy ofGmn;zn Jdeali11n, ed. 
Ernst Behler (New York, 1987). 

200 
Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
b. Contmt and form 
§ 133 
The manner ofbeing-outside-one-anorher that is characteristic of the world 
of appearances is a totality and completely contained in its rtlation-to-itstlf. 
The relation of the appearance to itself is thus completely determined, has 
the form in itself and because [it is] in this identity, has that form as its 
essential subsistence. Thus the form is contmt and, in keeping with its 
developed determinacy, it is the law of the appearance. The negative side 
of the appearance, what is alterable and not self-sufficient, falls to the form 
as not rdJtcttd in itst/f- it is the indifferent, natrnal form. 
For the contrast of form and content, it is essential to keep in 
mind that the content is not formless but instead has the form within 
itst/fjust as much as it [the form] is something txttrnal to it. A 
doubling of the form presents itself; at one time, insofar as it is 
reflected in itself, it is the content and, at another time, as not 
reflected in itself, it is the external concrete existence, indifferent to 
the content. What presents itself here in itstlfis the absolute relation 
of content and ofform, namely, their turning over [Umschlagm] and 
into one another, so that tht contmt is nothing but tht form turning 
into content and the form nothing other than tht contmt turning 
into the form. This 'turning over' is one of the most important 
determinations. It is posittd, however, only in the absolutt 
rtlatilmship. 
Addition. The reRecting understanding quite frequently makes use of form 
and content as a pair of determinations, and indeed above all by considering the 
content essential and self-sufficient, and the form, by contrast, as inessential and 
not self-sufficient. Against this use, however, it should be noted that both are in 
fact equally essential and that, while there is no more a formless content than there 
is a formless stuff, these rwo (content and stuff-or-matter) are different from one 
another precisely by virtue of the fact that the laner, although in itself not devoid 
ofform, nevertheless demonstrates itself in its existence [Dastin] to be indifferent 
to the form, whereas the content as such, in contrast to this, is what it is only 
by vinue of the fact that it contains the developed form in icsel£ In addition, 
however, we then find the form also as a concrete existence [Exisunz] indifferent 
to the content and external to it, and this is the case because the appearance in 
general is still beset with externality. If we consider a book, for example, then as 
far as its content is concerned, it is, of course, irrelevant whether it is written or 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
201 
printed, whether it is bound in paper or leather. But then, by this means, it is in 
no way said that, apart from the external and irrelevant form, the content of the 
book itself is devoid of form. There are, robe sure, enough books that should 
rightly be designated formless in relation to the content as well. Yet in this relation 
to the content, formlessness means the same as informality [Unfonnlichluit], by 
which is understood not the absence of form altogether, but only the absence 
of the proptr form. But the proper form is so far from being indifferent to the 
content that it is much more the content itself. A work of art lacking the proper 
form is, precisely for this reason, not proper. that is to say, not truly a work of 
art, and it is a poor excuse for an artist as such if it is said that the contents of 
his works is good, ro be sure (indeed, even splendid), but they lack the proper 
form. Genuine works of art are precisely those whose content and form prove to 
be thoroughly identical. One can say of the Iliad that its content is the Trojan war 
or, more specifically, Achilles' wrath; in this way we have everything and yet only 
very little since what makes rhe Iliad the Iliad is the poetic form that that content 
has been shaped into. So, too, the content of Romto anJ julitt is the demise of 
two lovers, a demise brought about by the dash of their families; but this hardly 
does justice to Shakespeare's immortal tragedy. - Further, in regard to the relation 
of content and form in the scientific domain, it is necessary in this connection to 
recall the difference between philosophy and the other sciences. The finitude of the 
latter generally consists in rhe fact that thinking here, as a merely formal accivitiy, 
takes up its content as something given from outside it. Moreover, the content 
is nor known fgtwujft] as determined from within by the thought underlying it, 
with the result that form and content do not completely pervade one another. In 
philosophy, by contrast, this separation falls away, and philosophy, for this reason, 
should be designated infinite knowing. Nevertheless, philosophical thinking is also 
quite frequently regarded as a merely formal activity and its contentlessness holds 
as a settled matter, especially when it comes to logic, which, it must be conceded, 
deals only with thoughts as such. If by 'content' one understands merely what 
is tangible in general, what can be perceived via the senses, then, of course, it 
will be willingly acknowledged that philosophy in general and logic in particular 
have no such content, i.e. no content perceivable by the senses. But, then, with 
respect to what is understood by 'content', even ordinary consciousness and the 
general use of language by no means stops shon at what is merely perceivable 
via the senses or even at mere existence in general. When one speaks of a book 
devoid of content, whar one understands by that is, as is well known, not merely 
a book with empty pages but rather rhe sort of book whose content is as good 
as no content. On closer inspection, it will turn out, in the last analysis, that 
whar is initially designated as content has, for a cultivated consciousness, no other 
meaning than that of having the form of thought [Gttlankmmiijfigktit]. With 
that, however, it is then also admitted that the thoughts arc not to be regarded 
as indifferent to the content and as empty forms in themselves, and that, as in 
art, so too in every other domain, the truth and soundness [Gtditgmhtit] of the 
content rests essentially upon the fact that it demonstrates itself to be identical to 
the form. 

202 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
§ 134 
The immediate concrete existence, however, is the determinacy of the 
subsisting itself as well as of the form; it is thus just as much external to 
the determinacy of the content as this externality, which it has through 
the element of its subsisting, is essential to it. The appearance, so posited, 
is the relationship such that one and the same, [namely] the content, is 
as the developed form, as the externality and opposition of self-standing 
concrete existences and their identical relation, the relation in which alone 
the differentiated elements are what they are. 
c. The relationship 
§ 135 
(a) The immediate relationship is that of the whole and the parts: the 
content is the whole and consists ofthe parts (the form), the opposite o~it. 
The parts are diverse from one another and are what is self-standing. But 
they are only parts in their identical relation to one another or insofar as, 
taken together, they make up the whole. But that 'together' is the opposite 
and negation of the part. 
Addition. The essential relationship is the determinate, completely general man-
ner of appearing. Everything that exists concretely stands in relationship and this 
relationship is what is truthful in each concrete existence. What exists concretely 
is thereby not abstractly for itself but only in an other, but in this other it is the 
relation to itself and the relationship is the unity of the relation to itself and the 
relation to an other. 
The relationship of the whole and the pans is untrut insofar as its concept 
and reality do not correspond to one another. The concept of the whole is that of 
containing parts [ Ttik); if then, however, the whole is posited as what it is in terms 
of its concept, if it is partitioned fgtttilt], then it thereby ceases to be a whole. 
Now, to be sure, there are things that correspond to this relationship, but these 
are also, precisely for that reason, merely low-level and untrue concrete existences 
l.&istmzm]. In this connection generally, it should be remembered that, if one 
speaks of the untrue in a philosophical discussion, this should not be understood 
as though nothing of this sort concretely exists. A bad state or a sick body may, 
nonetheless, exist concretely; but these objects are untrue for their concept and 
their reality do not correspond to one another. - The relationship of the whole 
and the parts, as the immediate relationship, is generally the sort of relationship 
that very readily suggests itself to the reflecting understanding and that it thus 
frequendy makes do with, even when much more profound relarionships are in 
fact at issue. Hence, for example, the members and organs of a living body are 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
203 
not to be considered merely as its pans, since chey are what they arc only in their 
unity, and by no means do they behave indifferently towards this unity. These 
members and organs first become mere pam in che hands of che anatomist who 
has to deal no longer with living bodies but with cadavers. This is not ro say that 
such dissection should not take place at all, but that the external and mechanical 
relationship of the whole and the parts does nor suffice ro know organic life 
in its truth. - This is the case to a much higher degree in the application of this 
relationship to the spirit and the formations of the spiritual world. Ifin psychology 
one does not speak explicitly of parts of che soul or the spirit, the representation of 
that finite relationship nevertheless underlies che treatment of this discipline by the 
understanding, insofar as the diverse forms of the spiritual activity arc enumerated 
and described, one after another, solely in isolation as so-called particular powers 
and faculties. 
§ 136 
(~) What is one and the same in this relationship (the relation to itself that 
is on hand in it) is thus an immediately n~gativ~ relation to itself and, to be 
sure, as the mediation to the effect that one and the same is indijfirmt to 
the difference, and that it is the ~gativt relation to its~lf chat repels itself, 
as reflection~in-icsdf, towards the difference, and posies itself, concretely 
existing as reflection-into~another and, in reverse direction, conducts this 
reflection-into-another back co the relation to itself and to the indifference-
the foru and its expmsion. 
The r~lationship oftht whole and th~ parts is the immediate 
relationship; hence, the thoughtless relationship and the process of 
the identity~with-itself turning over into diversity. There is a passage 
from the whole to the parts and from the parts to the whole, and 
in the one [the whole or the part] the opposition to the other is 
forgotten since each is taken as a self-standing concrete existence, the 
one time the whole, the other time the parts. Or since the pans are 
supposed to subsist in [besuhen in] the whole and the whole to 
consist of[b~stthen aus] the pans, one time the one, the other time 
the other is the subsisting [Bm~hende] and the other is each time 
the unessential. The m~chanical relationship, in its superficial form, 
consists generally in the fact that the parts are taken as self-sufficient 
opposite one another and opposite the whole. 
The infinitt progression that concerns the divisibility of matttr can 
avail itself of this relationship too, and then it is the thoughtless 
oscillation of both sides of the relationship. A thing is taken one 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
time as a whole, then there is a passage to the tktmnination of it fl! a 
part; this determination is then forgotten and what was a part is 
regarded as a whole; the determination of it as a part resurfaces and 
so on, ad infinitum. Taken as the negative that it is, however, this 
infinity is the negative relation of the relationship to itself. the force, 
the whole that is identical with itself as being-in-itself [lnsichsein),-
and as this being-in-itself sublating itself and expressing itself and, 
conversely, the expression that disappears and goes back into the 
force. 
This infinity notwithstanding, the force is also finite. For the 
content, the one and the same that the force and the expression are, is 
initially this identity only in itself The two sides of the relationship 
are not yet themselves, each for itself its concrete identity, not yet the 
totality. In relation to one another, they are thus diverse and the 
relationship is a finite one. The force is thus in need of solicitation 
from without; it acts blindly, and, thanks to this deficiency of the 
form, the content is also limited and contingent. It is not yet truly 
identical with the form, is not yet the concept and purpose that is 
the determinate in and for itself. - This difference is supremely 
essential, but not easy to grasp; it has to be determined more 
precisely and only in terms of the concept of purpose. If it is 
overlooked, this leads to the confusion of construi,ng God as force, 
a confusion from which Herder's God suffers especially. 
It is usually said that the nature of force itselfis unknown 
[unbekannt) and only its expression is known. On the one hand, the 
entire determination of the content of force is just the same as that of 
the expression; on account of this, the explanation of a phenomenon 
on the basis of a force is an empty tautology. What is supposed to 
remain unknown is therefore in fact nothing but the empty form 
of the reflection-in-itself, by means of which alone the force is 
distinguished from the expression, - a form that is equally 
something well known [Wohlbekanntts). This form adds nothing 
in the slightest to the content and to the law, which are supposed 
to be known simply on the basis of the phenomenon alone. 
Assurances are also given everywhere that, with this, nothing is 
supposed to be claimed about the force; as a result, it is impossible to 
see why the form of force has been introduced into the sciences. -
But, on the other hand, the nature of force is, of course, something 
unknown since the necessity of the connection of its content is still 
lacking, not only in itself but also and equally insofar as it is for itself 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
limited and thus acquires its determinacy by means of an other 
outside it. 
Addition 1. In comparison with the immediate relationship of the whale and 
parts, the relationship of force and its expression should be regarded as infinite 
since in it the identity of both sides is posited, whereas in the former it was on 
hand only in itself. The whole, although in itself consisting of parts, nonetheless 
ceases to be a whole by being partitioned; by contrast, the force preserves itself 
as force only by expressing itself and, in its expression, returning to itself since 
the expression is itselfforce in turn. Furthermore, however, this relationship, too, 
is in turn finite, and its finitude consists in general in this mediatedness just as, 
conversely, the relationship of the whole and the parts has demonstrated itself to 
be finite on account of its immediacy. The finitude of the mediated relationship 
of the force and its expression exhibits itself first in the faa that each force is 
conditioned and, in order to subsist, needs something other than itself. Thus, 
for example, magnetic force, as is well known, is borne especially by iron who~ 
other properties (colour, specific weight, relationship to acids, and so forth) are 
independent of this relation to magnetism. Something similar is the case for all 
other forces that prove themselves to be thoroughly conditioned and mediated by 
something other than themselves.- The force's finitude shows itself further in the 
fact that, in order to express itself, it is in need of solicitation. That by means of 
which the force is solicitated is itself in turn the expression of a force that must 
likewise be solicited in order to express itself. In this way, we get either the infinite 
progress again or the reciprocity of soliciting and being solicited, whereby then, 
however, an absolute beginning of the movement is still missing. The force is not 
yet the purpose, what determines itself in itself; the content is a specifically given 
content and by expressing itself, the force is accordingly, as one would say, blind in 
its effect, by which, then, precisely the difference between an abstract expression 
of force and purposive activity is to be understood. 
Addition 2. The claim, repeated so often, that only the expression of forces, 
not forces themselves, are to be known, must be rejected as unfounded since 
the force is precisely this alone, to express itself. and we accordingly recognize at 
the same time the force itself in the totality of the appearance, construed as law. 
Nevertheless, it must not be overlooked thereby that a correct intimation of the 
finitude of this relationship is contained in this claim about the unknowability of 
the forces in themselves. The individual expressions of a force initially confront 
us in an indeterminate multiplicity and in their instantiation [Vm"in.ulung] as 
contingent. We then reduce this multiplicity to its inner unity which we designate 
as force and become aware of the seemingly contingenr as something necessary, in 
rhat we recognize the law reigning therein. But, now, the diverse forces themselves 
are in turn a manifold and appear, merely next to one another, as contingent. One 
speaks accordingly in empirical physics of forces of weight, magnetism, electricity, 
and so forth; so, too, in empirical psychology one speaks of the power of memory, 
the power of imagining, the power of the will, and all sorts of other powers of 
the soul. Here, then, the need recurs of attending to these diverse forces likewise 

206 
T!J~ Encyclopedia Logic 
as a unified whole, and this need would not be satisfied by reducing the diverse 
forces somehow to one primal force [ Urkraftl common to them. In such a primal 
force we would in fact have simply an empty abstraction as devoid of content as 
the abstract thing in itself. In addition, the relationship of force and irs expression 
is essentially the mediated relationship and so it contradicts the concept of force, 
if torce is construed as original or resting on itsdf. - Given the way things stand 
with the nature of force, we readily tolerate those who say that the concretely 
existing world is an expression of divine forces, but we will take exception to 
regarding God himself as a mere force, since force is still a subordinate and finite 
determination. When people, with the reawakening of rhe sciences, proceeded to 
reduce the individual appearances of nature to forces underlying them, it was in 
this sense that the Church also condemned this undenaking as godless since, if the 
forces of gravitation, vegetation, and so forth should occasion the movement of 
the celestial bodies, the growth of plants, and so forth, then nothing would remain 
for the divine governance of the world to do, and God would thus be diminished 
to an idle spectator in such a play of forces. Now, to be sure, researchers of nature 
and especially Newton, while availing themselves of the form of reflection of force 
for the explanation of natural phenomena, initially recommend explicitly that, 
in doing so, there should be no breach to the honour of God as the creator and 
ruler of the world. But it is one of the consequences of explaining things on 
the basis of forces that understanding by way of rationalizing progresses to the 
point of establishing the individual forces, each for itself. and clinging to them 
in this finitude as ultimate, such that, over against the finitized world of self-
sufficient forces and stuffs, what remains for rhe determination of Go(t is only 
the abstract infinity of an unknowable, supreme, other-worldly being. This is 
then the standpoint of materialism and the modern Enlightenment which, having 
renounced any claim to know [wissm] what God is, reduces its knowledge of God 
to the mere fact that God is. Now, the finite forms of understanding by no means 
suffice for knowing either nature or the formations of the spiritual world as they 
truly are and, insofar as they do nor suffice, it must be admitted that the Church 
and religious consciousness are right in the polemic mentioned here. Nevertheless, 
on the other hand the formal legitimacy, first, of the empirical sciences must riot 
be overlooked, a legitimacy that generally consists in vindicating the world on 
hand in the determinacy of its content for the thoughtful knowledge of it and not 
leaving matters merely with the abstract belief in God's creation and governance 
of the world. If our religious consciousness, supponed by the authority of the 
Church, teaches us that it is God who created the world through his almighty will 
and that it is he who guides the stars on their paths and lends every creature its 
subsistence and flourishing, the Why? still remains to be answered and it is above 
all the answer to this question that forms the common task of science, empirical 
as well as philosophical. When religious consciousness, not recognizing this task 
and the right contained in it, appeals to the inscrutability of the ways of God, 
it itself rakes up in this way the previously mentioned standpoint of the mere 
Enlighrenmem of the understanding. Such an appeal must be considered no more 
than an arbitrary assurance that contradicts the explicit command of the Christian 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
207 
religion to know God in spirit and in truth and that derives from a humility that 
is in no way Christian but instead conceited and fanatical. 
§ 137 
As the whole that is, in its very self, the negative relation to itself, force 
is this: the process of repelling itself from itself and txpmsing itself. But 
since this reflection-in-another, the difference of the parts, is just as much 
a reflection-in-itself, the expression is the mediation by means of which the 
force that returns into itself is force. Its expression is itself the sublating of 
the diversity on both sides, which is on hand in this relationship, and the 
positing of the identity that in itst/f makes up the content. Its truth is, for 
that reason, the relationship, the two sides of which are distinguished only 
as inner and DU~r. 
§ 138 
(y) The inner is the ground as the mere form of the one sitk of the 
appearance and the relationship, the empty form of the reflection-in-itself. 
Standing opposite it is concrete existence [Existenz} as the form likewise 
of the other side of the relationship, with the empty determination of the 
reflection-in-another as outer. Their identity is the fulfilled identity, the 
contmt, the unity of the reflection-in-itself and the reflection-in-another, 
posited in the movement of force. Both are the same, one totality, and this 
unity makes them into the content. 
§ 139 
The outer is thus, in the first place, the same con~nt as the inner is. What 
is internal is also on hand externally and vice versa. The appearance shows 
nothing that is not in the essence and there is nothing in the essence that 
is not manifested. 
§ 140 
In the second plaet, however, inner and outer are also oppostd to one another 
as determinations of the form [Formbestimmungm} and, to be sure, unqual-
ifiedly so, as the abstractions of identity with itself and of sheer multiplicity 
or reality. Yet, since they are essentially identical as moments of the one 
form, what is only posited initially in the one abstraction is also immediately 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
only in the ocher. Hence, what is only something intmra/ is also, by this 
means, only something ext~rna/ and what is only something external is as 
yet also only something inttrna/. 
It is the usual mistake of reflection co take the mmu as the merely 
inntr. When it is taken merely in this way, then chis consideration is 
also a completely exurnal one and that essence is the empty external 
abstraction. 
The inntr side of nature - a poet says -
No created spirit can penetrate, 
Fonunate enough if he knows [u•tijit] merely the outtr shell.l.4 
It should have been said, rather, that precisely when he determines 
the essence of nature as something inntr, he knows (w~iff] only the 
out~r shell. 15 - Since in b~ing in general or even in merely sensory 
perception, the conupt is only the inner at first, it is something 
external for it [i.e. sensory perception] - a subjective being as well as 
thinking, devoid of truth. - In nature as in the spirit, insofar as the 
concept, purpose, law are at first only inn~r dispositions, pure 
possibilities, they are only an external, inorganic nature at first, 
science of a third, alien power [ G~a/t], and so forth. -As a human 
being is externally, i.e. in his actions (not, of course, in his merely 
corporeal externality), so he is internally; and if he is only internally 
virtuous, moral, and so forth, i.e. only in intentions and sentiments 
and his outer life is not identical with them, then the one is as 
hollow and empty as the other. 
Addition. Like rhe unity of the rwo preceding relationships, the relationship 
of inner and outer is the sublation at once of mere relativity and appearance 
... Moldenhauer-Michel: Cf. Goethe's annoyed adamalion, Zur Nllturwissmschllji [Zur Morphologit}. 
vol. I,) (182o; p. 304!: 
Das hOr ich scchzig Jahre wicderholen, 
Und Ruche drauf, aber ve~tohlen, ... 
Natur har weder Kern noch Schale, 
Alles isr sie mit einemmale, usw. 
>s Moldmhauer-Michd: Cf. Albrecht von Haller, 'Die Falschheir der menschlichen Tugenden' (in 
Vmuch schwt!iurischt'l' Gtdichu (Bern. 1731), V. 189 f.: 
Ins lnnere der Na1ur dringt kein erschaffner Gcisr, 
Zu glllcklich, wenn sie noch die augre Schale weist! 
The conrexr shows rha1 Hegel means wtifo, i.e. 'knows', ins1ead of wrist, i.e. 'shows', as in Haller's 
poem, where the subject is nature. 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
209 
altogether. Yet because the understanding, nonetheless, holds fast to the inner and 
outer in separation from one another, these are a pair of empty forms, the one as 
void [nichtig) as the other.- It is of enormous importance in the consideration 
of nature as well as the spiritual world to grasp properly what is involved in the 
relationship of inner and outer and to· guard against the error of presuming that 
only the formtr is essential and what actually matters, while the latter is inessential 
and irrelevant. We meet with this error initially when, as often happens, the 
difference between nature and spirit is reduced to the abstract difference between 
outer and inner. As far as the construal of nature is concerned in this connection, 
it is what is external in general not only for the spirit but also in itstlf. Yet this 'in 
general' is not to be taken in the sense of an abstract externality since there is no 
such thing. Instead it should be taken in such a way that the idea (which forms the 
common content of nature and spirit) is at hand in nature merely externally but 
precisely for that reason at the same time merely internally as well. Now, however 
much the abstract understanding with its 'either/or' might resist this construal of 
nature, we nonetheless find this manner of construing nature in our other modes 
of consciousness and, most definitely, in our religious consciousness. According 
to the latter, nature is no less a revelation of God than the spiritual world is, and 
they differ from one another by the fact that, while nature does not manage to 
become conscious of its divine essence, this is the explicit task of the (accordingly, 
initially finite) spirit. Those who regard the essence of nature as something merely 
internal and therefore inaccessible to us, come to occupy the standpoint of those 
ancients who regarded God as envious (against whom, however, Plato and Aristode 
already declared their opposition). God communicates, God reveals what he is and, 
indeed, first through and in nature. - Furthermore, the lack or imperfection of 
an object generally consists in its being merely something internal and thereby 
at the same time merely something external or, what is the same, being merely 
external and thereby merely internal. A child, for example, as a human being in 
general, is, of course, a rational being, but the reason of the child as such is on 
hand at first merely internally, i.e. as disposition, calling, and so forth; for the 
child, this merely internal character, as the will of his parents, the familiarity with 
his teachers, and generally the rational world surrounding him, has the form of 
something merely external. The education and formation of the child consists, 
then, in the fact that it also becomes for itstlf what it at first is only in itst/f and 
thereby for others (adults). Reason, at hand in the child at first only as an inner 
possibility, is made actual by education, and so too, conversely, the child becomes 
conscious of the ethical world, religion, and science as something that is its own 
and internal to it, after these had first been regarded as an external authority. -
As things go with the child, they go in this connection with the adult as weU, 
insofar as the adult, contary to his vocation [&stimmung), remains caught up in 
the naturalness of his knowing [ Wirsm] and willing. Thus, for example, for the 
criminal, the punishment to which he is subjected has, ro be sure, the form of 
an external coercion [ Gtuwlt], but it is in fact only the manifestation of his own 
criminal will. - We should also take from the discussion so far what we are to 
think of the fact that someone, in the face of his meagre accomplishments, indeed, 

210 
Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
reprehensible actions, appeals to the inner make-up distinct from them, the inner 
make-up of his allegedly splendid intentions and semimems. To be sure, in an 
individual instance it may be the case that well-meant intentions are thwaned 
by unfavourable external circumstances, that purposeful plans come to naught 
in the execution. Still, in general, even here the essential unity of the inner and 
the outer holds such that it must be said: a human being is what he do~ and 
the mendacious vanity that comforts itself with the consciousness of an inner 
splendidness must be countered with the words of the Gospel: 'By their fruits, you 
shall know them' [Matt. 7:16]. These majestic words hold in the first place in an 
ethical and religious respect, but they are valid in relation to scientific and artistic 
achievements as well. As far as the latter are concerned, a teacher with a sharp eye, 
convinced of a boy's decisive potential, may express the opinion that a Raphael 
or a Mozart lies hidden in the boy, and [the degree of) success will then instruct 
us on the extent to which the opinion was justified. But when an amateurish 
painter and a bad poet console themselves that they are full of high ideals on 
the inside, that is a poor consolation, and if they make the demand to be judged 
not by their accomplishments but by their intentions, such pretension is rightly 
dismissed as empty and unjustified. Conversely, it is then also frequently the case 
that, in judging others who have brought about something right and respectable, 
people avail themselves of the false distinction of inner and outer in order to claim 
that what those others have brought about was merely external, while internally it 
is about something quite different for them, such as the satisfaction of their vanity 
or some oilier reprehensible passions. This is the sentiment of envy that, itself 
incapable of achieving greatness, strives to put down and belittle what is great. We 
should remember, by contrast, Goethe's beautiful saying that, in the face of the 
great superiorities of others, the only means of saving ourselves is love. If then, 
further, in an attempt to take away from others' praiseworthy accomplishments, 
there is talk of hypocrisy, it should be noted against this that while a human being 
in an individual instance can. of course, act a part and conceal a great deal, he 
cannot conceal his inner make-up altogether, which announces itself infallibly in 
the tkcursus vitat [the course of life], such that, in this connection, it musr-also 
be said that a human being is nothing other than the series of his actions. In 
particular, the so-caJled 'pragmatic' historiography, by fallaciously separating the 
inner from the outer, has sinned in the modern era in a variety of ways with respect 
to great historical characters, clouding and distorting an unadulterated construal 
of them. Instead of satisfying themselves with simply narrating the great deeds 
accomplished by world-historical heroes and recognizing their inner make-up as 
corresponding to the content of these deeds, they considered themselves justified 
and obligated to sniff out allegedly secret motives behind what lies out in the 
open and then thought that historical research is all the more profound, the more 
ir succeeds in stripping away the aura of what, until then, was celebrated and 
praised, putting it down, as far as its origin and genuine meaning is concerned, to 
the level of common mediocrity. The study of psychology has then also frequendy 
been recommended for the purposes of such pragmatic, historical research, since by 
means ofit one allegedly acquires information about what the actual motives are by 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
211 
means of which human beings are determined to act at all. The psychology referred 
to here, meanwhile, is nothing other than that small-minded acquaintance with 
people, which principally considers merely the panicularities and contingencies of 
individualized drives, passions, and so forth, rather than the universal and essential 
character of human nature. For this p$fchological-pragmatic procedure in relation 
to the motives underlying the great deeds, the choice would still remain for the 
historian between substantial interests of the fatherland, justice, religious truth, 
and so forth, on the one hand, and the subjective and formal interests of vanity, 
dominance, greed, and so forth, on the other hand. Yet, while this choice remains, 
the latter interests are regarded as the genuinely motivating ones, since otherwise, 
indeed, the presupposition of the opposition berween the inner (the sentiment of 
the agent) and the outer (the content of the action) would not be confirmed. But, 
now, since inner and outer have the same content as far as the truth is concerned, 
then, over against that pedantic propriety, it must be explicidy maintained rhat, 
were it a matter merely of subjective and formal interests of the historical heroes, 
they would not have accomplished what they did and that, in view of the unity of 
inner and outer, it should be recognized that great men willed what they did and 
did what they willed. 
§ 141 
The empty abstractions, by means of which the one identical content is still 
supposed to obtain in me relationship. sublate themselves in the immediate 
transition, rhe one in the other; me content is itself nothing other than 
their identity (§ 138}, they are the shine [Schtin} of the essence, posited 
as shine. Through me force's expression, the inner is posit~d in concrete 
existence; this positing is the m~diating by means of empty abstractions; 
it vanishes in itself into the imm~diacy in which me inn~r and out~r are 
in and for thmzs~/v~s identical and their difference is determined as mere 
positedness [ Gtst'tztst'in}. This identity is the actuality. 
C. ACTUALITY 
§ 142 
Actuality is chat unity of essence and concrete existence [ Existmz], of inner 
and outer, that has immediately come to be. The expression [.A'u.ff~rung] of 
the actual is me aetual itself, so that in the expression it remains someching 
equally essential and is something essential only insofar as it is in immediate, 
external [iiuj{trlich} concrete existence. 

212 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
As forms of the immediate, being and concrete existence [Existenz] 
surfaced earlier; bting is completely unreftected immediacy and [the] 
passing ovtr into an other. The concrete existence is immediate unity 
of being and reflection, thus appearanct, coming from the ground 
and returning to it. The actual is the positedntss of that unity, the 
relationship that has become identical with itself. It is thus exempted 
from the passing ovn- and its attrnality is irs energy; in that 
externality, it is reflected in itself; its existence [Dastin] is only rhe 
maniftstation of itst/f, nor of an other. 
Addition. There is a tendency ro oppose in a uivial manner actuality and 
thought, or, more precisely, the idea, and in keeping with this practice, one can 
frequently hear it said that while there is nothing objectionable in a cenain thought 
as far as irs rightness and truth are concerned, nothing of the sort is to be found or 
carried out in actuality. Those who speak in this way, however, prove thereby that 
they have not suitably grasped either the nature of thought or that of actuality. 
For, on the one hand, in such talk thought is assumed to mean the same as a 
subjective representation, plan, intention, and the like and, on the other hand, 
actuality is assumed to mean the same as the external concrete existence, available 
to the senses. Talk of this sort may be indulged in ordinary life where one does 
not take things so exactly when it comes to categories and their designation and, 
moreover, it may be the case that, for example, while the plan or the so-called 
'idea' of a certain taX proposal is in itself quite good and appropriate, the ~e 
thing is neither to be found in the likewise so-called 'actuality' nor capable of being 
implemented under the circumstances at hand. But if the abstract understanding 
gets hold of these determinations and then intensifies the difference to the point 
of regarding it as a hard and fast opposition, such that in this actual world we 
have to put the ideas out of our heads, then in the name of science and sound 
reason we have to reject this sort of undemanding in the most decisive terms. For, 
on the one hand, the ideas are not at all merely stuck in our heads and the idea 
is not at all something so impotent, the realization of which would have to be 
brought about or not at our whim. The idea is, instead, much more something 
that is unqualifiedly active and at the same time also actual. On the other hand, 
the actuality is not as bad and irrational as imagined by those of a practical bent 
who are thoughtless or whose thinking is decrepit and rundown. The actuality in 
contrast to the mere appearance, at first the unity of inner and outer, is so far from 
being something else opposite reason that it is far more the rational and, because of 
this, what is not rational should not be considered actual. There is an educated way 
of speaking, moreover, that corresponds to this conception of actuality, namely, 
insofar as one hesitates to recognize as an 'actual' poet or and 'actual' statesman a 
poet or statesman incapable of producing anything competent and rational.- The 
common conception of actuality discussed here and the confusion of it with the 
tangible and immediately perceivable is also the place to look for the ground of that 
widespread prejudice regarding the relationship of the Aristotelian to the Platonic 

7k Encyclopedia Logic 
213 
philosophy. According to this prejudice, the difference between Plato and Aristotle 
is supposed to consist in the fact that, while the former recognizes the idea and 
only the idea as the true, the latter, dismissive of the idea, dings, by contrast, to 
the actual and is to be considered, for that reason, the founder and protagonist of 
empiricism. On this point, it must be rioted that, while actuality indeed forms the 
principle of Aristotelian philosophy, it is nevenheless not the common actuality of 
what is immediately on hand, but instead the idea as actuality. Aristotle's polemic 
against Plato consists then, more precisely, in the fact that the Platonic idea is 
designated as mere dunamis and that Aristotle makes valid the notion, to the 
contrary, that the idea, recognized by both of them likewise as what is alone true, 
is to be considered essentially as mergtia, i.e. as the inner [dimension] that is 
absolutely out there and thus as the unity of inner and outer or as the: actuality in 
the emphatic sense of the word discussed here. 
§ 143 
The actuality, as this concrete [dimension], contains those determinations 
and their difference; it is, for that reason, also their development so that 
they are determined in it at once as a shine, as merely posited (§ 141). 
(a) As identity generally it is initially the possibility;- the reflection-in-itself 
that is posited as the abstract and unmmtial ~ssmtiality in contrast to the 
concrtt~ unity of the actual. Possibility is what is mmtial for actuality but 
such that it is at the same rime only possibility. 
It is probably the determination of possibility that caused Klint to 
regard it, along with actuality and necessity, as modaliti~s. 'because 
these determinations did not in the slightest add to the concept 
as object [ Obj~kt] but instead express only the connection to the 
capacity of knowing' [ Critiqu~ of Pure R~ason, B 266]. Possibility is 
indeed the empty abstraction of the reflection-in-itself, what was 
previously called 'the inner', with the only difference that it is now 
determined as the sublated, m~r~ly posit~d, external inner, and thus, 
to be sure, is also posited as a mere modality, as insufficient 
abstraction, something that, taken more concretely, pertains only to 
subjective thinking. Actuality and necessity are, by contrast, rruly 
anything but a mere sort and mannn- for an other; rather, they are 
precisely the opposite, posited as the not merely posited bur instead 
as the concrete [dimension] that is complete in itself. - Because 
possibility, initially contrasted with the concrete as something 
actual, is the mere form of itkntity-tuith-itu/f, the rule for it is merely 
that something not be self-contradictory and thus evnything is 

214 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
possibk; for this form of identity can be given to any content 
through abstraction. But everything is just as much impossible, for in 
every content, since it is something concrete, the determinacy can 
be grasped as determinate opposition and thus as contradiction. -
There is, thus, no more empty way of speaking than about this so.rt 
of possibility and impossibility. In philosophy, in particular, there 
should not be any talk of showing that something is possible or that 
something else is also possible and that something, as one also expresses 
it, is thinkable. The historian is also directly advised not to use this 
category that was already declared to be untrue for itself; but the 
acumen of empty understanding is never more pleased with itself 
than when it emptily devises possibilities and an abundant supply of 
them. 
Addition. To (the faculty of] representation, possibility appears prima facie to be 
the richer and more encompassing determination, and acmaJity, by contrast, to be 
the poorer and more restricted determination. It is accordingly said: everything is 
possible, but not everything that is possible is therefore aJso actuaJ. But, actuaJity is 
in fact, i.e. in terms of the thought, the more encompassing since, as the concrete 
thought, it contains possibility as an abstract moment within itself. This can 
aJso be found in our ordinary consciousness when, in speaking of the possible in 
distinction from the actuaJ, we designate it as something 'mtrrly' possible. - It is 
usuaJiy said in generaJ of the possible that it consists in the thinkability. What is 
understood by 'thinking' here, however, is only the process of grasping a content 
in the form of abstract ~dentity. Now since every content can be put into this 
form (and that means merely that it is detached from its relations), even the most 
absurd and incongruous things can be considered possible. It is possible that this 
evening the Moon will fall to the Earth, since the Moon is a body separate from 
the Earth and, therefore, can fall down just as much as a stone thrown into' the 
air can. It is possible that the Turkish Sultan becomes Pope since he is a human 
being and, as such, can convert, become a Catholic priest, and so on. In taJking in 
this way of possibilities, it is above aJI the principle of sufficient reason (Dmkgnl'tz 
vom Grundt] that is used in the manner discussed earlier, and in this connection 
it means that if a ground of something can be given, then it is possible. The more 
uneducated someone is, the less familiar he is with the specific relations between 
the objects to which he directs his attention and the more inclined he is to entertain 
aJI sorts of empty possibilities, as is the case, for example, among so-called 'pundits' 
in the political arena. Furthermore, it often happens in a practical context that an 
evil will and laziness are adept at hiding behind the category of possibility in order 
to escape specific obligations, and in this respect the same thing holds that was 
noted earlier about the use of the principle of sufficient reason. RationaJ, practicaJ 
people do not aJiow themselves to be impressed by the possible just because it is 
possible. Instead they latch on to the actuaJ, though what is then to be understood 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
215 
by the latter is, of course, not merely an immediate existent [dar unmittelbar 
Daseimdt). In common life, moreover, there is no shortage of proverbs of all sorts 
that express the appropriate low assessment of abstraa possibility. It is said, for 
example, 'a bird in the hand is worth rwo in the bush.'- Yet, in addition, everything 
should be considered impossible by the same right that it is considered possible, 
especially to the extent that each content (which, as such, is always something 
concrete) contains in itself not only diverse, but also opposite determinations. 
Thus, for example, nothing is more impossible than the fact that I am, since 
the I is at once a simple relation to itself and relation to another through and 
through. The same is the case for every other content of the natural and spiritual 
world. One can say that matter is impossible, since it is the unity of repulsion and 
attraaion. The same holds for life, right, freedom, and, above all, for God himself 
as the true, i.e. triune God, the concept of which the Enlightenment, in keeping 
with the principle of its abstract mode of understanding things, has repudiated 
as allegedly contradicting thought. It is generally the empty understanding that 
knocks around with these empty forms; and, in relation to them, the business 
of philosophy consists simply in pointing out their vapidness (Nichtigkeit) and 
lack of content. Whether something is possible or impossible depends upon the 
content, i.e. the totality of the moments of the aauality, which in the unfolding 
of those moments proves itself to be the necessity. 
§ 144 
(~) In its difference from possibility as the reflection-in-itself. however, 
the actual is itself only the txttrnally concrete [dimension], the immediate 
in an intsstntial way. Or immediately, insofar as it initially is (§ 142) as 
the simple, itself immediate unity of the inner and the outer, it is what is 
external in an intssmtial way and is thus at the same time(§ 140) what is 
only internal, the abstraction of the reflection-in-itself; it itself is thereby 
determined as something only possible. In this value of a mere possibility, 
the actual is something contingtnt [Zufolliges] and, vice versa, possibility is 
mere contingency [Zufoll] itself. 
§ 145 
Possibility and contingency are the moments of actuality, inner and outer, 
posited as mere forms that constitute the txttrnality of the actual. In the 
actual qua determined in-itself, [i.e.] in the content as the essential ground 
of their determination, they have their reflection-in-itself. The finitude 
of the contingent and possible thus consists, more precisely, in the fact 
that the form determination is differentiated from the content and, htnct, 
whtthtr somtthing is contingtnt and possible deptnds on tht conttnt. 

216 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
Adtlition. The possibility, as the merely inner [dimension] of actuality, is precisely 
by this means also the merely external actuality or the contingmcy. The contingent 
is in general such as has the ground of its being not in itself but in another. This 
is the form [Gestalt] in which the actuality first presents itself to consciousness 
and which is frequently confused with actuality itself. The contingent, however, 
is merely the actual in the one-sided form of the reAection-into-another or the 
'actual' with the meaning of something merely possible. We accordingly consider 
the contingent as something that can be or also nor be, that can be so or also 
otherwise, and the ground of whose being or not-being, whose 'being so' or 'being 
otherwise' is nor grounded in itself bur in another instead. Now, overcoming the 
contingent, so construed, is generally the task of knowing [Erkmnms], on the 
one hand, as much as in the domain of practice, on the other, ir is a matter of 
not standing pat with the contingency of willing or arbitrary choice [WiUkiir]. 
Nonetheless, especially in the modern era, it has often happened that contingency 
has been elevated roan illegitimate level and accorded a value in rc:larion to nature 
as well as the spiritual world that does not in fact suit it. As far as nature is at first 
concerned in this respect, it is not uncommon for contingency to be principally an 
object of wonder simply because of the riches and manifold ness of its formations. 
This richness as such, apart from the devc:lopment of the idea at hand therein, 
presents no higher interest of reason and, in the great manifold ness of inorganic 
and organic formations, it affords us merely a look ar the contingency as it peters 
out into indeterminacy. In any case, the colourful play of individual varieties 
of animals and plants, conditioned by external circumstances as it is, and the 
configuration and grouping of clouds and the like, alternating in manifold ways, 
are not to be esteemed higher than the equally contingent inspirations of a spirit 
giving itself up to irs arbitrary whim. The wonder devoted to such a phenomenon 
is a very abstract way of behaving, from which it is necessary to take leave and 
move on to a deeper insight into the inner harmony and lawfulness of nature. -
Of particular importance next is the proper evaluation of contingency in relation 
to the will. In talk of freedom of the will, what is frequently understood by it is 
merely the arbirrary choice, i.e. the will in the form of contingency. Now, to be 
sure, arbirrary choice as the capacity to determine oneself to this or that, is an 
essential moment of the free will in keeping with irs concept. Nevertheless, it is in 
no way freedom itself but rather first merely formal freedom. The truly free will 
contains in itself arbitrary choice as sublated and is conscious of i[S coment as a 
content firm in and for itself and knows [wtifi] the same at the same time as its own 
without qualification. By contrast, the will that stands pat at the level of arbitrary 
choice, even if it makes the true and right decision with respect to the contem, 
still remains beset with the vanity of presuming that, were it to its liking, it would 
have been able to make a different decision. Under closer examination, moreover, 
arbitrary choice proves ro be conrradicrory insofar as form and content still stand 
opposite one another here. The content of arbitrary choice is a given content and 
known [gnuufi't] to be a content grounded [begrandet], nor in the will itself, but 
in external circumstances. Hence, in relation to such content, freedom consists 
merely in the form of choosing, a formal freedom that is then robe considered a 
merely alleged freedom insofar as, in the final analysis, it turns out that the fact 

Th~ Encyclopedia ltJgic 
217 
char che will decides exactly for chis and not for chat must be ascribed to the same 
excernal circumstances in which the content found by the will as already given is 
grounded. 
Now, although contingency, as a consequence of what has been discussed up 
to this point, is only a one-sided moment of actuality and therefore not to be 
confused wich the Iauer itself, contingency is stiU to be accorded its due even in 
the objective fgtgmsriindlich] world, since it is a form of the idea in general. This 
holds first for nacure on the surface of which contingency has, so to speak, its free 
sway which should also be recognized chen as such, wichout the pretension (at 
times erroneously ascribed to philosophy) of intending to find in it an instance 
of being able to be only so and not otherwise. In a similar way, the contingent 
asserts itself in the spiritual world as well, such as was already noted previously 
wich respect to the will that contains in itself what is contingent in the form of 
arbitrary choice, albeit only as a sublated moment. Even in relation to the spirit 
and its activity, one has to guard against letting the well-intentioned endeavour of 
rational knowledge mislead one imo purporting to demonstrate to be necessary 
or, as one is accustomed to say, to construe as a priori, appearances that possess 
che character of contingency. Thus, for example, in language, although it is as it 
were the body of thinking, chance undoubtedly also still plays irs decisive role and 
something similar is the case with the formations of righc, art, and so forch. It is 
quite right char che cask of science and, more precisely of philosophy in general, 
consists in knowing che necessity hidden beneath the semblance of concingency. 
Yet this should not be so understood as if the contingent percained merely to 
our subjective representation and that, therefore, it must be completely set aside 
in order to arrive at che truch. Sciencific endeavours that single-mindedly pursue 
this direction will not escape from the fair-minded reproach of vacuously playing 
around and being obstinately pedantic. 
§ 146 
That aternality of actualicy contains more precisely this: that the contin-
gency as immediate actual icy is essentially what is identical with itself only as 
b~ingposiud[G~snzts~in], but a being posited that is just as much sublated 
[au_&~hobm], i.e. an existing externalicy [tin~ das~imth Aufl~riichkeit]. It is 
thus something pmuppos~d, the immediate existence [Das~in] of which is 
at the same time a possibility and has the determination of being sublated-
of being che possibilicy of another- the condition. 
Addition. The contingent, as the immediate accuality, is at the same time the 
possibility of someching else kint·s Arukrm], yet no longer merely that abscracc 
possibility chat we had ac first, bur instead the possibility as b~ing [uimdj and, 
hence, it is a condition. If we speak of the condition of a basic matter, there lie therein 
the following two aspeccs: first, an exiscence kin D~in], a concrece exiscence kin~ 
.&irr~nz], in general someching immediate, and, second, the decermination of 
this immediate something to be sublated and co serve for the accualization of 
someching else. - Now, in general, the immediate actuality as such is nor what 

218 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
it is supposed to be but instead a finite actuality, broken in itself, and it is its 
determination to be used up [vm:ehrt]. However, the other side of the actuality 
is irs essentiality. This is at first the inner [dimension] that, as mere possibility, is 
equally determined to be sublated. As sublated possibility, it is the emerging of 
a new actuality that the first, immediate actuality had as its presupposition. This 
is the alternation that the concept of'condirion' contains in itself. If we consider 
the conditions of a subject matter, then these appear as something completely 
innocent. In fact, however, such immediate actuality contains in itself the seed of 
something completely other rhan it. This or her is at first only something possible, 
the form of which then sublares itself and transposes itself into actuality. This 
new actuality which thus emerges is the immediate actuality's own inner side that 
the new actuality uses up. A completely different shape of things thus comes to 
be and there also comes to be nothing different; for the first actuality is only 
posited in terms of its essence. The conditions that sacrifice themselves up. perish, 
and are used up, only join up with themselves in the other actuality. - Now, 
the process of actuality in general is of such nature. This is not merely some 
immediate being [tin unmitu/bar Stimd~s}, but instead as the essential being it 
is the subladon of its own immediacy and, by this means, mediating itself with 
itself. 
§ 147 
(y) This externality, developed in the manner depicted, is a circle of deter-
minations of possibility and of the immediate - actuality, their m~diation 
by one another, the real possibility in general. As such a circle, it is further-
more the totality, thus the content, the basic matkr [Sache] determined in 
and for itself, and equally, in keeping with the difference of determinations 
in this unity, the concrete totality of th~ form for itself, the immediate self-
transposing of the inner into the outer and of the outer into the inner. This 
self-moving of the form is activity, activation of the basic matter as the real 
ground that sublates itself and comes to be actual, and activation of the 
contingent actuality, the conditions, namely, their reflection-in-themselves 
and their self-sublating [Sichaufoeben] to become another actuality, the 
actuality of the basic matter. If all conditiom are at hand, the basic matter 
must become actual and the basic matter is itself one of the conditions since 
as something initially inner, it is itself only something presupposed. The 
developed actuality as the alternation of the inner and the outer collapsing 
into one, the alternation of its opposite movements that are united into 
one movement, is necessity. 
Necessity has been rightly defined, to be sure, as the unity of 
possibility and actuaJity. But this determination is superficiaJ and, 
for that reason, not understandable if expressed only in this way. 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
219 
The concept of necessity is very difficult and, indeed, it is so because 
it is the concept itself whose moments still are as actualities that, 
nonetheless, have to be grasped at the same time merely as forms, as 
in themselves broken and transitional. For this reason, in both of the 
following sections, the exposition of the moments that constitute 
the necessity has to be given in even greater detail. 
Addition. If it is said of something that it is necessary, we first ask 'why?' Hence, 
the necessary is supposed to prove itself as something posited, something mediated. 
If, however, we do not move beyond the mere mediation, then we still do not have 
what is understood by 'necessity'. What is merely mediated is what it is, not by 
means of itself, but by means of an other and, hence, it is also merely something 
contingent. We demand of the necessary, by contrast, that it be what it is by means 
of itself and thus mediated, to be sure, yet at the same time containing in itself the 
mediation as sublated. Of the necessary we accordingly say: 'It is' and accordingly 
for us it has the value of a simple relation to itself. in which the sense of being 
conditioned by another falls away. - It is customarily said of necessity that it is 
blind and, to be sure, this is right insofar as, in the process that necessity is, the 
purpos~ is not yet on hand as such for its~lf The process of necessity begins with 
the concrete existence of scattered circumstances that seem to have nothing to do 
with one another and to have no connection between them. These circumstances 
are an immediate actuality which collapses into itself and a new actuality emerges 
from this negation. We have here a content that is twofold, as far as its form is 
concerned. First, it is content of the basic matter at issue and, second, it is content 
of the scattered circumstances that appear as something positive and initially 
assert themselves in this way. This contem, as a 'nothing' [Nichtign] in itself. 
is accordingly inverted into its negative and thus becomes content of the basic 
matter. The immediate circumstances go under [zugruntk gehm] as conditions, 
but at the same time are also preserved as content of the basic matter. It is then 
said that something completely different emerged from such circumstances and 
conditions and, for this reason, the necessity of this process is called blind. If. 
by contrast, we consider purposive activity, then we have here, in the purpose, a 
content that is already known [gewujft] in advance and this activity is therefore 
not blind but instead sees [sehmdj. When we say that the world is governed by 
providence, we arc saying that the purpose in general is what effects things, doing 
so as something determinate in and for itself in advance, so that what comes 
about corresponds to what was known and intended in advance. lncidenrally, one 
must not consider the construal of the world as determined by necessity and the 
belief in a divine providence as in any way mutually exclusive. What underlies the 
thought of divine providence will mrn out for us subsequently to be the concept. 
This is the truth of necessity and contains the latter as sublated in itself just as, 
conversely, necessity in itself is the concept. Necessity is blind only insofar as it is 
not comprehended and there is, therefore, nothing more wrong than the reproach 
of a blind fatalism, a charge made against the philosophy of history, because it 
regards its task to be the knowledge of the necessity of what has happened. The 
philosophy of history acquires thereby the meaning of a theodicy, and, while 

220 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
there are those who believe themselves to be honouring the divine providence by 
excluding necessity from it, by this abstraction they in fact degrade it to a blind, 
arbitrary choice, devoid of reason. The innocent religious conciousness speaks 
of God's eternal and inviolable decrees and therein lies the explicit recognition 
of necessity as belonging to God's essence. In contrast to God, and given their 
particular opining and willing. human beings act according to mood and arbitrary 
choice and thus it happens to them that, in their aaions, what comes about is 
something completely different from what they intended and wanted. By contrast, 
God knows [w~ifil what he wants and, in his eternal will, he is not determined 
by inner or outer chance, instead bringing about, without resistance, what he 
wants. -The standpoint of necessity is generally of great importance in relation 
to our attitude [ G~sinnungJ and our comportment. Since we regard what occurs as 
necessary, then this seems at first glance to be a completely unfree relationship. The 
ancients, as is well known, construed necessity as fou and the modern standpoint 
is, by contrast, the standpoint of consolAtion. This consists generally in the fact 
that, while we give up our purposes, our interests, we do so with the prospect 
of acquiring a substitute for them. Fate, by contrast, is without consolation. If, 
now, we consider the ancients' artitude to fate more closely, then it nonetheless 
affords us in no way the intuition of unfreedom, but instead much more that of 
freedom. This lies in the fact that the lack of freedom is grounded in clinging 
to an opposition of the son that we regard what is and happens as standing in 
contradicition to what should be and happen. In the attitude of the ancients, by 
contrast, it was implied that btcaus~ something is the way it is, it is, and the way it 
is, is the way it ought to be. Here, therefore, no opposition is at hand and, with it, 
also no lack of freedom, no pain, and no suffering. Now, as previously noted, this 
comportment towards fate is, to be sure, without consolation, but such an attitude 
is also not in need of consolation and, indeed, because subjectivity here has still 
not reached its infinite meaning. It is this viewpoint that must be seen as the 
decisive one in the comparison of the ancient and our modern, Christian attitude. 
If. by subjectivity, one understands merely the finite, immediate subjectivity with 
the contingent and arbitrary content of its particular inclinations and interestS, in 
general what one calls the 'person' in contrast to 'basic mauer' in the emphatic 
sense of the word (in which sense one would say - and, to be sure, correaly -
that something depends upon the basic mtltUr and not on the person), then one 
cannot help but wonder at the ancients' serene surrender to fate and recognize 
this attitude as the higher and more dignified one than that modern attitude that 
selfishly pursues its subjective purposes and, if it sees itself necessitated to renounce 
the attainment of them, consoles itself merely with the prospea of acquiring a 
substiture in another form. Furthermore, however, the subjeaivity is not merely 
the bad and 6nite subjectivity, standing opposite the basic matter; instead it is, 
in keeping with its truth, immanent to the basic matter and, accordingly as 
infinite subjectivity, is the truth of the basic matter itself. So construed, then, 
the standpoint of consolation acquires a completely different and higher meaning 
and it is in this sense that the Christian religion is to be regarded as the religion 
of consolation and, indeed, of absolute consolation. Christendom contains, as is 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
221 
well known, the doctrine that God wants all human beings to be helped and this 
is a way of articulating that subjectivity has an infinite value. More precisely, the 
consoling quality of the Christian religion lies in the fact that, because God himself 
is known {gtwufi't] here as the absolute subjectivity, and subjectivity contains in 
itself the aspect of particularity, qur particularity is also by this means recognized, 
not merely as something that is to be abstractly denied, but at the same time as 
something to be preserved. The ancients' gods were, to be sure, likewise recognized 
as personal; the personality of a Zeus, an Apollo, and so forth is, however, not an 
actual, but an imagined personality or, to put it differently, these gods are mere 
personifications that, as such, do not /tnqu• [wissm] thtmselvts but are only ltnown 
{gtwufo]. We also find this deficiency and impotence of the ancient gods in the 
ancients' religious consciousness, insofar as they regarded not only human beings 
but even gods themselves as subject to fate (the ptpromtnl1n or the htimarmtnt), a 
fate which one has to imagine as the undisclosed [unmthiilltt] necessity and thus 
as utterly impersonal, devoid of self, and blind. In contrast to this, the Christian 
God is the God not merely known {gtwufi't] but the unqualifiedJy self-knowing 
[sich wissmdtJ God, and not merely imagined but instead an absolutely actual 
personality. - For further elaboration of the points touched on here, reference 
should be made to the philosophy of religion. Nevertheless, note can stiU be taken 
here of how imponant it is that the human being construe what befalls him in 
the light of that ancient proverb which says that everyone is the architect of his 
own fortune. Herein lies the fact that the human being in general is given only 
himself to enjoy. The opposite view is that we shove the blame for what befalls us 
onto other human beings, onto unfavourable circumstances, and the like. This, 
then, is again the standpoint of unfreedom and at the same time the source of 
dissatisfaction. Insofar as a human being recognizes, to rhe contrary, that what he 
experiences is merely an eVolution of himself and that he bears only his own guilt, 
he behaves as someone free, and in everything that confronts him he has the belief 
that no injustice is done to him. Someone who lives in dissatisfaction with himself 
and his lot [ Gtschiclt] does much that is wrong and twisted precisely because he is 
of the false opinon that others are doing him an injustice. Now, to be sure, in what 
happens to us, there is much that is contingent, too. This contingent element, 
however, is grounded in the naturalness of the human being. However, insofar 
as in another respect the human being has the consciousness of his freedom, the 
unpleasant things that confront him will not destroy the harmony of his soul, 
the peace of his mind. It is, therefore, the view of necessity through which the 
satisfaction and the dissatisfaction of human beings and thereby their fate itself 
are determined. 
§ 148 
Among the three moments, the condition, the basic matur, and the activity 
a. the condition is (a) something presupposed [das Voraurgesetzte]; as only 
something supposed [ Gesetztes], it is merely in the sense of being relative 

222 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
to the basic mauer, but as pr~-supposed [voraus] it is in the sense of 
a contingent, external condition, concretely existing for itself without 
regard for the basic matter. But at the same time, in this contingency, 
in regard to the basic matter which is the totality, this presupposition 
is a compk~ circk of conditions. (j3) The conditions are passiv~. they are 
used as material for the basic matter, and thereby enter into the content 
of the basic mauer. They are just as much suited to this content and 
already contain its entir~ tkurmination within themselves. 
b. The basic matt~r is equally (a) something presupposed; as suppoud 
(g~sttzte]. it is initially merely something internal and possible and, as 
pr~-supposed, a self-sufficient content for itsel£ (j3) Through the use of 
the conditions, it obtains its external concrete existence, realizing the 
determinations of its content, determinations that correspond mutually 
to the conditions, so that it both proves itself to be the basic matter on 
the basis of these conditions and emerges from them. 
c. The activity is (a) also something self-sufficient and existing concretely 
for itself (a human being, a character) and, at the same time, it has its 
possibility solely thanks to the conditions and the basic matter. (j3) It is 
the movement of translating the conditions into the basic matter and 
the basic matter into the conditions as the side of concrete existence; but 
the movement only of setting the basic matter forth from the conditions 
(in which it is on hand in its~!/) and by way of sublating [Aufh~bung] 
the concrete existence of the conditions, providing the basic matter with 
concrete existence. 
Insofar as these three moments have the shape of a s~lfsufficient concret~ 
ncisunce opposite one another, this process is the nct~rnal n~cmity. - This 
necessity has a limited content with respect to its basic matter. For. the· 
basic matter is this whole in a simpk determinacy. But since it is in its 
form external to itself, it is thereby also external to itself in itself and in its 
content, and this externality with respect to the basic matter is a limitation 
[Schrank~] of its content. 
§ 149 
Necessity is thus in itself the on~ ~ss~nc~, identical with itst/fbut full of 
content, the essence that shines in itself [in sich sch~int] in such a way 
that its differences have the form of s~lfsuffident actuals and this identity 
[di~s ltkntisch~], as the absolute form, is at the same time the activity of 
sublating [Tiitigk~it tks Aufh~bens) [immediacy) in mediated being and 
the mediation in immediacy. - What is necessary is through an oth" 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
223 
that has broken up into the m~diating ground (the basic matter and the 
activity) and an imm~diatt actuality, something contingent that is at the 
same time a condition. Insofar as it is through an other, the necessary is 
not in and for itself but instead something merely posit~d [G~s~~s]. But 
this mediation is just as immediately the sublating of itself; the ground 
and the contingenc condition are transposed into immediacy, by means 
of which that positedness is sublated to become actuality and the basic 
matter has com~ tog~thrr with itu/f In this return into itself, the necessary 
is in an unqualifi~d way, as unconditioned actuality. - The necessary is 
the way it is, m~diat~d by a circle of circumstances, - it is so, because the 
circumstances ace so; and, at che same time, it is the way it is, unm~diattd,­
it is so, because it is. 
a. The r~latiomhip of substantiality 
§ 150 
The necessary is in itself the absolut~ r~/atiomhip, i.e. the process (developed 
in the preceding sections) in which the relationship equally sublates itself 
to become absolute idencity. 
In its immediate form, it is the relationship of substantiality and acciden-
tality. The absolute identity of this relationship with itself is the substanc~ 
as such which, as necessity, is the negativity of this form of interiority, thus 
positing itself as actuality, but which is just as much the n~gativity of this 
outer dimension, in keeping with which the actual as immediate is only 
something accidental that, thanks to this, its mere possibility, passes over 
into another actuality; a passing over which is the substantial identity as the 
activity of the form(§§ 148, 149). 
§ 151 
The substance is accordingly the totality of the accidents in which it reveals 
itself as their absolute negativity, i.e. as absolute power and at the same time 
as the wealth of all content. This content, however, is nothing othn- than 
this manifestation itself since the determinacy itself, reflected in itself [and 
thus made into] the content, is only a moment of the form, a moment 
that passes over into the power of the substance. The substanciality is the 
absolute activity of the form and the power of the necessity, and all content 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
is only a moment that bdongs to this process alone, - the absolute turning 
over of form and content into one another. 
Addition. In the history of philosophy, we encounter substanu as rhe principle 
of rhe Spinozistic philosophy. Since the time of Spinoza there has been a great 
deal of misunderstanding and much talk back and forth about the meaning and 
value of this philosophy, which is equally acclaimed and defamed. It is customary 
to reproach rhe Spinozistic system above all for being atheistic and rhen for being 
pantheistic, and to make these charges because God is construed as substance 
and only as substance in this system. What one should rhin.k of these reproac.hes 
immediately follows from the place occupied by the substance in the system of the 
logical idea. The substance is an essential stage in the process of rhe development of 
the idea. Nevertheless, it is not this idea itself, nor the absolute idea, but instead the 
idea in the still limited form of necessity. Now, to be sure, God is rhe necessity or, 
as one can also say, God is the absolutt basic matur [absolutt Sacht), but also at the 
same time the absolute pmon, and this is the point not reached by Spinoza. In this 
connection, it must be admitted that the Spinozistic philosophy lagged behind the 
true concept of God, which forms the con rent of Christian consciousness. Spinoza 
was a Jew by descent and what found expression in the form of thought in his 
philosophy is in general the oriental intuition according to which everything finite 
appears merely as something transient, as something vanishing. Now, this oriental 
intuition forms, to be sure, the foundation of all true funher development, but it 
is not possible to stand pat with it. What is missing in it is the Western principle 
of individuality, a principle that first took shape in philosophy at the same time 
as Spinozism in the Leibnizian monadology. - If we look back from this vantage 
point at the reproach of atheism, directed at Spinoza's philosophy, then it will 
have to be dismissed out of hand as unjustified insofar as, according to this 
philosophy, God is not only nor denied bur instead recognized as the only true 
being [tin a/kin wahrhaft Srimek). It will also nor be possible ro maintain that, 
while Spinoza may speak, to be sure, of God as the only truth, this Spinozistic 
God is not the true God and therefore as good as no God. With the same right, 
all the other philosophers who in their philosophizing did not move beyOnd 
some subordinate level of the idea would have to be blamed for being atheistic. 
That would include not only Jews and Moslems because they know [wirsm] God 
merely as the Lord, but also all the many Christians who regard God merely as 
the unknowable, supreme, and other-worldly being. On closer examination, the 
reproach of atheism, direaed at the Spinozistic philosophy, reduces to this, that in 
it the principle of difference [Dzfftrtnz) or finitude does nor attain the legitimacy 
befitting it. & a result, this system would have to be designated not an 'atheism' 
but instead the reverse, an 'acosmism', since according to this philosophy there is 
actually no world at all in the sense of something positively being [tines positiv 
Stimekn]. What one should think of rhe reproach of panthtism follows from this 
then as well. If, as is often the case, one understands by 'pantheism' a doctrine 
that considers finite things as such and the complex of them robe God, then one 
cannot help but acquit rhe Spinozisric philosophy of the reproach of pantheism 
since absolutely no truth at all accrues to finite things or the world according to 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
115 
me Spinozistic philosophy. To the contrary, mis philosophy is, indeed, pantheistic 
precisely on account ofirs acosmism. The deficiency mar has been recognized here 
wim regard ro me nmtmt proves ro be a deficiency ar rhe same rime with regard 
ro the form as well. This is apparent first insofar as Spinoza places substance ar 
rhe pinnacle of his sysrem and defines ir as rhe unity of minking and extension, 
wimour demonstrating how he arrives ar this difference and ar irs reducrion ro 
the subsranrial unity. The further treatment of the content rhen follows in the so-
called 'mathematical memod' and, in keeping wirh this, definitions and axioms are 
immediately ser up, followed by a series of principles, me proof of which consists 
merely in a reduction to rhose unproven presuppositions, a reduction befitting 
rhe understanding. Although it is customary, even for rhose who utterly reject 
rhe content and results of me Spinozisric philosophy, ro applaud ir on account 
of rhe rigorous consistency of irs merhod, this unconditioned recognition of me 
form is, nonetheless, as unjustified as rhe unconditioned rejection of the content. 
The deficiency of the Spinozisric content consists precisely in the fact that the 
form is not recognized as immanent to the content and, for that reason, it is 
only as external, subjective form that it comes ro the contem. Substance, jusr as 
it is immediately construed by Spinoza without the prior dialectical mediation, 
is, as the universal negative power, only rhis dark, shapeless abyss, as ir were, that 
swallows up inro itself every determinate conrenr as vacuous [nichtig) from the 
outset and produces nothing thar has a positive standing [&stan41 in irself. 
§ 152 
Substance, qua absolute power, is the power that relates itself to itself as only 
inner possibility, determining itself thereby to accidentality, whereby the 
externality thus posited is distinguished &om it. Just as it is substance in 
the first form of necessity, so substance is, according to the moment just 
described, genuine relationship - the relationship of causality. 
b. The relationship of causality 
§ 153 
Substance is cause [ Ursacht] insofar as it is reAected in itself against its pass-
ing over into accidentality and is thus the original basic matter [ urspriJnglicht 
Sache], but just as much supersedes the reAection-in-itself or its mere pos-
sibility, posits itself as the negative of itself and in this way brings forth an 
effoct, an aauality which is only a posited actuality, but through the process 
of effecting is at the same time a. necessary actuality. 

226 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
As the original basic matter, the cause has the determination of 
absolute self-sufficiency and a subsisting that maintains itself 
opposite the effect. Bur in the necessity, the identity of which 
. 
constitutes that originality itself, it has merely passed over into the 
effect. There is no content in the effect that is not in the cause, 
insofar as it is possible again to talk of a determinate content. That 
identity is the absolute content irself. But it is also equally the 
determination of form, the originality is sublated in the effect in 
which it malus itself somahing posited. With this, however, the cause 
has not vanished such that the actual would be only the effect. For 
this positedness is immediately superseded just as much; it is indeed 
the reflection-in-itself of the cause, its originality; the cause is first 
actual and cause in the effect. The cause is rhus in and for itself causa 
mi {cause of itself].-jacobi, firmly caught up in the one-sided 
representation of the mediatwn, took the causa sui (the ejficttts sui is 
the same), this absolute truth of the cause, merely for a formalism. a6 
He also put forward that God must be determined, not as ground, 
but essentially as cause. That this move did not achieve what he 
intended would have emerged from thinking over the nature of 
cause much more thoroughly. Even in a finite cause and its 
representation, this identity in regard to the content is at hand; 
the rain, the cause, and the wetness, the effect, are one and the same 
concretely existing water. In regard to the form, the cause 
(the rain) thus falls away in the effect (the wetness); but so does the 
determination of the effect that is nothing without the cause and 
there remains only the indifferem wetness. 
The cause in the common sense of the causal relationship is firzite 
insofar as its content is finite (as in the finite substance) and insofar 
as cause and effect are represented as two different, self-sufficient 
concrete existences - which they are only because one abstracts from 
the relationship of causality in their case. Because in {the sphere 
of] finitude one does not move beyond the diffirmce between the 
determinations of form in their relation, the cause is also alternately 
determined as something posited or as effict. The latter then has 
another cause in turn and in chis way there arises here the 
progression from effects to causes ad infinitum. The same holds for 
the descending progression in that the effect, in keeping with its 
' 6 Moldenha~Kr-Michel: Friedrich Heinrich J.tcobi, Obn dit uhrr tits Spi,_ in Brit{m ,, dtn Hmn 
Mom Mmdtlssohn (I78s). n(W augmented edition 1789. 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
identity with the cause, is itself determined as cause and at the same 
time as anoth" cause that has other effects in turn and so on ad 
infinitum. 
AtJJition. To the same degree that the undentanding is accustomed to resisting 
(the idea of] substantiality, it is, by contrast, at home with causality, i.e. the 
relationship of cause and effect. If construing a content in a necessary fashion 
is what matters, then reflection at the level of the undentanding makes it its 
business to reduce that content to the relationship of causality above all. Now this 
relationship, to be sure, pertains to necessity, but it is only the one side in the 
process of necessity which is just as much this, to sublate the mediation contained 
in causality and demonstrate itself to be a simple relation-to-itself. If one does 
not move beyond causality as such, then one does not have it as it truly is, but 
instead as a finite causality, and the finitude of this relation then consists in the 
fact that cause and effect are firmly maintained in their difference. Yet these two 
are not only distinct, but also just as much identical, something that can also be 
met with in our ordinary consciousness when we say of a cause that it is this only 
insofar as it has an effect and of an effect that it is this effect only insofar as it 
has a cause. Both cause and effect are thus one and the same content, and the 
difference between them is immediately only that of positing and bting posittd, a 
formal difference that, however, then equally sublates itself in rurn in such a way 
that the cause is not only cause of something else but also cause of itself and the 
effect is not only effect of something else but also the effect of itself. The finitude 
of things accordingly consists in the fact that, while cause and effect are identical 
in terms of their concept, these two forms occur in separation in such a way that 
the cause is, to be sure, also effect and the effect is, to be sure, also cause, yet the 
former not in the same relation in which it is cause and the Iauer not in the same 
relation in which it is effect. This yields then in turn the infinite progression in 
the shape of an endless series of causes that shows itself at the same time to be an 
endless series of effects. 
§ 154 
The effect is diff"ent from the cause; the effect is, as such, a ~ing-that-is­
posited. But positedness is equally reflection-in-itself and immediacy, and 
the cause's effecting, its positing, is at the same time a pmupposing, inso-
far as the difference of the effect from the cause is maintained. There is 
accordingly another substance at hand, in regard ro which the effect hap-
pens. This [substance] is, as immtdiatt, not self-relating negativity and 
activt, but passive instead. But, as substance, it is equally active, it sub-
lares [htbt 111if} the presupposed immediacy and the effect posited in it; 
it reacts, i.e. it sublates the activity of the first substance which, how-
ever, is just as much this sublating [dits Aujhtbm] of its immediacy or 

228 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
the effect posited in it, and, with this, sublates the activity of the other 
and reacts. With this, causality has passed over into the relationship of 
reciprocity. 
In reciprocity, although causality is not yet posited in its true 
determination, the progress of causes and effecrs ad infinitum is 
sublated in a genuine manner as progress, since the linear movement 
from causes to effects and from effects to causes is bent around and 
back into itself. This manner of bending the infinite progress around 
to a relationship dosed in itself is, as everywhere, {based in] the 
simple reflection that in that thoughtless repetition there is only one 
and the same, namely, one and another cause and their relation co 
one another. However, the development of this relation, the 
reciprocal effecting, is itself the alternation of diffirentiating not 
causes but moments, in each of which for itself- again in keeping 
with the identity according to which the cause is in the effect (and 
vice versa), in keeping with this inseparability- the other moment is 
likewise posited as well. 
c. Reciprocity 
§ 155 
The determinations that have been kept separate in reciprocity are (a) in 
themselves the same; one side like the other is cause, original, active, passive, 
and so forth. So, coo, presupposing another and having an effect on it, the 
immediate primordiality { Urspri4nglichkeit] and the positedness by way of 
alternation are one and the same. The cause assumed to be first is, on 
account of its immediacy, passive, a positedness, and an ejfict. The difference 
becween the causes, identified as two, is thus empty and what is at hand is 
in itself only one cause that, in its effect sublates itself as substance just as 
much as it renders itself self-sufficient in this effecting. 
§ 156 
(!3) But chis unity is also for itself, since this whole alternation is the cause's 
own positing, and its being is nothing but this positing. The vacuousness 
[Nichtigkeit) of the differences is not only in itself or our reflection (see 
preceding section), but this reciprocity is itself also the process of sublating 
each of the posited determinations in turn, inverting each into the opposite 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
2.2.9 
determination, and thus positing that vacuousness of the moments that 
is in itself. An effect is posited in the primordiality; that is to say, the 
primordialicy is sublated. The action of a cause becomes a reaction, and so 
forth. 
Atldition. Reciprocity is me relationship of causality, posited in its complete 
development, and it is also this relationship in which reflection customarily takes 
refuge, if the consideration of things from the standpoint of causality proves to 
be inadequate on accounr of the previously mentioned infinite regress. Thus, for 
example, in historical considerations the question first negotiated is whether the 
character and customs of a people are the cause of its constitution and laws or 
whether the former are the effect of the latter. There is men a progression to the 
point of construing both of them, character and customs, on the one side, and 
constitution and laws, on the other, from the viewpoint of reciprocity in such 
a way mat the cause, in me same relation in which it is cause. is at the same 
time effect and that the effect, in the same relation in which it is effea, is at the 
same lime cause. The same thing happens also in the consideration of nature and 
particularly of a living organism, the individual organs and funaions of which 
likewise prove to be reciprocally related to one another. Reciprocity is, to be sure, 
the proximate truth about the relationship of cause and effect and it stands, so 
to speak. on the threshold of the concept. Nevertheless, precisely for this reason, 
one should not be satisfied with the application of this relationship, insofar as 
what matters is to know conceptually. If one does not move beyond considering 
a given content merely from me viewpoint of reciprocity, this is in fact an utterly 
concepdess way of behaving. One is then dealing merely with a dry fact and the 
requirement of mediation (what is prima facie at stake in the application of the 
relationship of causality) still remains unsatisfied. I fit is considered more precisely, 
what is unsatisfaaory in the application of the relationship of reciprocity consists 
in the &c:t that this relationship, instead of being able to hold as an equivalent 
of the concept, first needs to be comprehended itself, and this happens, not by 
leaving the two sides of it as something immediately given, but instead (as was 
shown in the two previous sections) by coming to know them as moments of 
a third, higher [dimension], which is precisely the concept. If we consider, for 
example, the customs of the Spartan people as the effea of its constitution and 
then, vice versa, this as the effect of its customs, this consideration may for all 
that be correct; but this construal, for this reason, does not provide any ultimate 
satisfaction, since by this means neither the constitution nor the customs of this 
people are in fact comprehended. That happens only. by virtue of the faa that 
those two sides, and equally all the remaining particular sides revealed by the life 
and history of the Spartan people, are known to be grounded lbwUntkt) in this 
concept. 
§ 157 
(y) This sheer alternation with itself is, accordingly, the unvtiltd or posittd 
ntcmity. The bond of necessity as such is the identity that is still inner and 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
hidden because it is the identity of those [things] that count as actual, but 
whose self-sufficiency is, nevertheless, supposed to be precisely the necessity. 
The course taken by the substance through causality and reciprocity is thus 
merely the process of positing that the st/fsufficimcy is the infinite, negative 
relation to itst/f. negative in the general sense that in it the differentiating and 
mediating become an original condition of actualities that are st/fsufficimt 
vis-a-vis one another- an infinite relation to itself. since their self-standing 
status is precisely nothing other than their identity. 
§ 158 
This truth of necessity is thus ftmlom, and the truth of substance is the 
concept - the self-sufficiency that is the repelling of itself from itself into 
different self-sufficient [moments] and, as this repelling, is identical with 
irself and, enduring by itself, is this alternating movement only with itself 
Addition. Necessity tends to be called 'hard' and rightly so insofar as there is 
no movement beyond it as such, i.e. in irs immediate shape. We have here a 
status or in general a content that subsists for itself, and necessity then emails 
prima facie that something else affects such content, destroying it. This is what is 
hard and sad about immediate or abstract identity. The identity of both, which 
appear bound to one another in necessity, losing their self-sufficiency in the 
process, is at first only an inner identity and is not yet at hand for those that 
are subjected to the necessity. So, too, from this standpoint, freedom is first 
merely the abstract freedom that is only saved through renunciation of what one 
immediately is and has. - Funhcrmore, however, as we have seen up to this 
point, rhe process of necessity is of the son that through it the rigid externality 
initially on hand is overcome and its inner dimension revealed. By this means, 
it then becomes apparem that the rwo sides bound to one another are in fact 
not alien to one another but instead only moments of on( whole, each of which, 
in its relation to the other, is with itself and comes together with itself. This i$ 
the transfiguration of necessity into freedom, and this freedom is not merely the 
freedom of abstract negation but instead a concrete and positive freedom. From 
this then it should also be gathered how wrong ir is to consider freedom and 
necessity mutually exclusive of one another. Although, to be sure, necessity as such 
is not yet freedom, freedom presupposes necessity and contains in itself the latter 
as sublared. An ethical human being is conscious that the content of his action is 
something necessary, something valid in and for itself. and so little docs he suffer 
a breach of his freedom on thar account that it is through this consciousness that 
such freedom first becomes freedom that is actual and replete with content, distinct 
from arbitrary choice as the freedom still devoid of content and merely possible. 
A criminal who is being punished may regard the punishment meted out to him 
as a limitation of his freedom. Nevc:nheless, the punishment is in fact not an alien 
force to which he is subjected but only the manifestation of his own action and 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
231 
insofar as he recognizes this, he behaves as someone who is free:. This is, in general, 
a human being's supreme self-sufficiency, to know [wissm] himself as unqualifiedly 
determined by the absolute idea, a consciousness and comportment that Spinoza 
designated as amor in«lkctulllis Dei [inttlkctual lovt of God]. 
§ 159 
The concept is accordingly the truth of being and tsSmce, since the shining 
of reflection within itself is itself at the same time self-sufficient immediacy 
and this being of diverse actuality is immediately only a shining in itulf. 
In that the concept has proven itself to be the truth of being and 
essence, both of which have gone bade into it as into its ground, it has 
tkveloped invmely, from being as from its ground. The former side of 
the progression can be considered a a'tepmingofbeing in itself. the 
inner [dimension] of which has been unveiled by this progression; 
the latter side can be considered the emergence of the more perfoct 
ftom the less perfoct. Philosophy has been reproached for considering 
such development from the latter side alone. The more determinate 
content that the superficial thoughts of the less perfect and the more 
perfect have here is the difference between being qua immediate 
unity with itself, and the concept qua free mediation with itsel£ 
Since being has shown itself to be a moment of the concept, the 
concept has demonstrated itself to be the truth of being; as this, its 
reflection-in-itself, and as the sublating [Aujl!ebm] of the mediation, 
it presupposes the immediate- a presupposing that is identical with 
the return-into-itself, the identity that makes up the freedom and 
the concept. If the moment is thus named the imperfect, then, 
of course, the concept, the perfect, is this, to develop itself from 
the imperfect, for it is essentially this sublating of its presupposition. 
However, at the same time, it is the concept alone that, qua positing 
itself makes the presupposition, as was the outcome in causality in 
general and more specifically in reciprocity. 
In relation to being and essence, the concept is determined in 
such a way that it is the essence that has gone baclt to bting as simple 
immediacy, the essence whose shining thereby has actuality and 
whose actuality is at the same time the process of fteely shining in 
itself In this manner the concept has being as its simple relation 
to itself or as the immediacy of its unity in itself, being is so 

2.32. 
The Encyclopedia Logi( 
impoverished a determination that it is the very least that can be 
pointed up in the concept. 
The transition from necessity to freedom or from the actual into 
the concept is the hardest transition, because the self-sufficient 
actuality is supposed to be thought as having irs substantiality only in 
the process of passing over and in the identity with the self-sufficient 
actuality other than it. The concept is also the hardest then, because 
it is itself precisely this identity. The actual substance as such, 
however, the cause that, in its being-for-itself, does not wain to let 
anything penetrate into it, is already subject to the ne(essity or fare of 
passing over into posiredness, and this subjection is the hardest by 
far. By contrast, thinking the necessity is rather the dissolving of that 
hardness: for it is the process of irs coming-together with itself in an 
other, - the liberation which is not the flight of abstraction bur 
insread the liberation of having itself nor as other bur of having irs 
own being and positing in something else actual with which what 
is actual is bound together by the power of necessity. As (Oncretely 
existing for itself, this liberation is called 'I', as developed in its 
totality 'free spirit', as feeling 'love', as enjoyment 'blessedness'.-
The great intuition of the Spinozisric substance is only in itself the 
liberation from finite being-for-itself. but the concept itself is for 
itself the power of necessity and the aaual freedom. 
Adtiition. If. as has happened here, the concep[ is designated the truth of being 
and essence, then one must expec[ the question why this S[udy did not begin 
wi[h it. What serves as an answer ro this is the fact tha[, where it is a matter 
of knowing through thinking, i[ is not possible to begin with the truth, because 
the truth, insofar as i[ forms [he beginning, rests on a mere assurance while the 
tru[h that is thought has ro verify itself. as such, to thinking. If the concept were 
placed at the pinnacle of logic and defined as the unity of being and essence (as is 
comple[ely correc[ in [erms of [he comenE), [he question would then arise what 
one is supposed [O [hink by 'being' and by 'essence' and how both of these come 
to be brought [ogether inro the unity of [he concep[. In this way, one would have 
s[aned wi[h the concep[ in name only and no[ as the basic mauer. The genuine 
beginning would be made wi[h being, such as also happened here, only with 
the difference that the de[ermina[ions of being and, similarly, those of essence 
would have to be taken up immediately from the represen[a[ion. In contrast, we 
have considered being and essence in their own dialec[ical development and come 
to know them as sublaring themselves towards the unity of the concept. 

Third subdivision of the Logic: 
The doctrine of the concept 
§ 160 
The concept is thefrtt [actuality] (das FrtitJ, as the substantial powtr that 
is for itrtlf, and it is the totality, since tach of the moments is tht wholt that 
it is, and each is posited as an undivided unity with it. So, in its idenrity 
with itself, it is what is dettrminatt in and for itrt/f 
Addition. The standpoint of the concept is in general that of absolute idealism, 
and philosophy is knowing conceptually [btgrtiftnt:ks Erkmnm]. his conceptual 
knowing insofar as everything that ordinary .consciousness regards as an entity, and 
in its immediacy as independent, is known fgtwUj!t] merely as an ideal moment 
in it. In logic at the level of the understanding [ Vmtandeslogik] the concept is 
usually considered as a mere form of thinking and, more precisely, as a universal 
representation. The claim, so often repeated from the side of sentiment and the 
heart, that concepts as such are something dead, empty. and abstract, refers to 
this low-level construal of the concept. Meanwhile, just the opposite holds and 
the concept is instead the principle of all life and thereby, at the same time, 
something absolutely concrete. That such is the case has emerged as the result 
of the entire logical movement up to this point and hence does not need first 
to be proven here. As far as the opposition of form and contem is concerned in 
this connection, namely, with respect to the concept as allegedly merely formal, 
this opposition, like all the other oppositions held fast by reflection, is already 
behind us as something overcome dialectically, that is to say through itself, and it 
is precisely the concept which contains all the earlier determinations of thinking as 
sublated determinations in itself. To be sure, the concept needs to be considered as 
form, but only as infinite, fecund form that encompasses the fullness of all content 
within itself and at the same time releases it from itself. By rhe same token, the 
concept may also be called 'abstract', if by 'concrete' one understands what presents 
itself to the senses as concrete - what can be perceived in any immediate way at 
all. We cannor grasp the concept as such with our hands and, when it comes to 
the concept, we generally have to take leave of seeing and hearing. Nonetheless, 
the concept is at the same time, as already noted, the absolutely concrete, and 
indeed is so insofar as it contains in itself being and essence, and accordingly 
contains the entire richness of these two spheres in an ideal [idulltr] unity. - If. 
233 

234 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
as previously noted, the diverse stages of me logical idea can be considered as a 
series of definitions of me absolute, then the definition of the absolute that is the 
result for us here is that the absolute is the concept. To be sure, one must in this 
case then construe the concept in a sense different from and higher than occurs in 
logic at the level of the understanding, for which the concept is regarded merely 
as a form of our subjective thinking, a form devoid of content in itself. In light 
of this, there is only one question that could srill be raised. If in speculative logic 
'concept' has a meaning completely different from the one that would otherwise 
be ordinarily associated with the expression, why is what is completely differenr in 
this sense [dim•s ganz A11dn-e] nonetheless called the 'concept' here, when doing so 
occasions misunderstanding and confusion? The reply to such a question would 
be that, however great the distance between the concept of formal logic and the 
speculative concept, it still turns out, on closer inspection, that the profounder 
meaning of the concept is by no means as alien to the ordinary usc of language as 
might at first seem to be the case. One speaks of the derivation of a content, such 
as, for example, the derivation of legal determinations concerning property from 
the concept of property, and one speaks also conversely of tracing such a content 
back to the concept. With this, however, it is recognized that the concept is not 
merely a form devoid of content in itself. since, on the one hand, there would be 
nothing to derive from the Iauer and, on the other, in tracing a given content back 
to the empty form of the concept, the content would not only be robbed of its 
determinacy; it would also not be known. 
§ 161 
The way the concept proceeds is no longer passing over or shining in an 
other. It is instead development since what are differentiated are at the same 
time immediately posited as identical with one another and with the whole, 
each being the determinacy that it is as a free being [tin freies &in] of the 
whole concept. 
Addition. Passing over into an other is the dialectical process in the sphere of 
bnng and the process of shining in an other within the sphere of mence. The 
movement of the concept is, by contrast, the tkveiopmmt, by means of which that 
alone is posited that is already on hand in itself. In nature it is the organic life, which 
corresponds to the stage of the concept. Thus, for example, rhe plant develops 
itself out of its seed. This seed contains the entire plant in itself already, but in 
an ideal manner and so one should not construe its development as if the various 
parts of the plant, root, stem, leaves, and so forth were already really in the seed yet 
merely in unerly miniature fashion. This is the so-called 'Chinese box hypothesis', 
the deficiency of which consists in the fact that what is only on hand initially 
in an ideal manner is considered as already concretely existing. What is right in 
this hypothesis is, by contrast, this: mat the concept, in its process, remains wit,h 
itself and that nothing new is posited by this means with respect to the content. 
Instead only an alteration of form is brought forth. It is then, too, this nature 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
235 
of the concept (that of demonsuating itself in its process as self-development) 
that one has one's eyes on when one speaks of ideas innate to human beings or 
considers all learning, as Plato did, merely as recollection. Yet this libise should 
not be understood as if what makes up t;he content of the consciousness educated 
by instruction were already on hand previously in the same consciousness in the 
specific way that that content unfolds. - The movement of the concept is to be 
considered, as it were, merely as a play; the other posited by it is in fact not an 
other. In the Christian religiow doctrine, this is articulated in such a way that God 
not only created a world that as an other stands over against him, but also that he 
has, from all eternity, produced a son in whom he is with himself as spirit. 
§ 162 
The doctrine of the concept is divided into the doctrine of (1) the subjective 
or fonnal {formeUm] concept, (2) the concept as determined to immediacy, 
or the objmivity, (3) the itka, the subject-object [Objekt], the unity of the 
concept. and objectivity, the absolute truth. 
Ordinary logic apprehends only matters in themselves that surface 
here as a part of the third part of the whole and, in addition, the 
so-called 'laws of thinking' (that surfaced earlier) and, in applied 
logic, some from the sort of knowing bound up with material 
that is still psychological, metaphysical, and otherwise empirical, 
since those forms of thinking in the end no longer sufficed for 
it. Nonetheless, this science thereby lost any solid orientation. -
Moreover, those forms that pertain at least to the genuine domain of 
logic are taken merely as determinations of conscious thinking and, 
indeed, conscious thinking at the level merely of the understanding, 
not of reason. 
The preceding logical determinations, the determinations of 
being and essence, are not mere determinations of thought, to be 
sure. In their process of passing over (the dialectical moment), and 
in their return into themselves and in their totality, they have proven 
themselves to be concepts. But they are (compare§§ 84 and 112) 
merely determinate concepts, concepts in themselves or, what is the 
same, concepts for us since the other (into which each determination 
passes over or in which it shines and is accordingly something relative) 
is determined not as something particular. Nor is the third factor 
determined as something individual or as a subject, which is to 
say that the identity of the determination is not posited in rhe 
determination opposite it, that its freedom is not posited, since it is 

2)6 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
not universality.- What is usually understood by 'conupts' 
ace determinations of understanding, even merely universal 
representations, hence, in general, finite determinations 
(compare § 62). 
The logic of the concept is usually understood as a merely formal 
lformelk] science, revolving around the form as such of the concept, 
the judgment, and the syllogism, but not at all around wherher 
something is tru~ this depends, to the contrary, completely on the 
content alone. Were the logical forms of the concept actually 
dead, ineffective, and indifferent receptacles of representations or 
thoughts, then familiarity with them would be a historical r~cord that 
is quite superfluous and dispensable for the truth. In facr, however, 
as forms of the concept, they ace, ro the contrary, the living spirit of 
th~ actual, and what is true of the actual is tru~ only by z•irtu~ of these 
forms, through th~m. and in th~m. However, the truth of these forms 
for themselves, let alone their necessary connection, has never been 
considered and investigated until now. 
A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT 
a. The conc~pt as such 
§ 163 
The concept as such contains the moments of universality (as rhe free 
sameness with itself in its determinacy), particularity (the determinacy in 
which the universal remains the same as itself, unalloyed), and individuality 
(as the reflection-in-itself of the determinacies of universality and particu-
larity, the negative unity with itself that is the determinat~ in and for its~lf 
and at the same time identical with itself or universal). 
The individual is the same as the actual, with the difference that the 
former has gone forth from the concept and is accordingly posiud as 
universal, as the negative identity with itself. Because it is first only 
in itself or immediately the unity of the essence and concrete existence 
[.&istenz], the amuzl [das Wirkliche] can be productive [wirken]. Bur 
the individuality of the concept is simply what produces [schkchthin 
das Wirkend~] and, indeed, no longer as the cause with rhe 
semblance [mit dem Scheine] of producing an other, bur as what 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
237 
produces its vtry stlf.- The individuality, however, is not ro be 
taken in the sense of only immediatt individuality in terms of which 
we speak of individual things, human beings. This determinate 
sense of individuality surfaces first in the case of judgment. While 
each momenr of the concept is itself the enrire concept (§ 16o), 
individuality, the subject, is the concept posittd as the totality. 
Addition r. When there is talk of concepts, one usually has in view an abstract 
universality and the concept would then also be customarily defined as a universal 
representation. One accordingly speaks of colour, plant, animal, and so forth, 
and these concepts are supposed to arise by way of rhe fact rhar, in rhe proce~ 
of leaving aside rhe particular factor through which the diverse colours, plants, 
animals, and so forth are distinguished from one another, we hold fast to what 
is common ro rhem. This is rhe manner in which rhe understanding construes 
rhe concept and it is right for sentiment f Gefohll to declare such concepts to be 
hollow and empty, mere schemata and shadows. Bur the universal factor of the 
concept is nor merely something common, opposite which the particular has irs 
standing for irsel£ Instead the universal factor is rhe process of particularizing 
(specifying) itself and remaining in unclouded clarity with itself in its other. It 
is of the most enormous importance as much for knowing as for our practical 
comportment that rhe merely common is not confused with the truly universal 
factor [Allgmuinm], the universal f Univ~ru/knJ. All the reproaches that tend to 
be raised from the standpoint of sentiment against thinking in general, and rhen, 
more particularly, against philosophical thinking, are grounded in this confusion, 
as is the often-repeated claim about the dangerousness of thinking, allegedly driven 
to extremes. Moreover, in its true and encompassing meaning, the universal is a 
thought, of which it has robe said that it cost millennia before entering into human 
consciousness and which attained full recognition only through Christendom. The 
Greeks, who were otherwise so highly cultivated, knew nc:irher God in hrs true 
universality nor even the human being. The Greek gods were only rhe particular 
powers of the spirit, and the universal God, the God of nations, was still the 
hidden God for the Athenians. So, too, for the Greeks rhere was an absolute 
chasm between them and the barbarians, and the human being as such was not 
yet recognized in his infinite worth and his infinite justification. When, indeed, 
the question has been posed why slavery has disappeared in modern Europe, 
first the one and then the other particular circumstance is cited to explain this 
phenomenon. The true reason why there are no longer slaves in Christian Europe 
is to be sought in nothing other than the principle of Christendom itsel£ The 
Christian religion is the religion of absolute freedom, and only for the Christian is 
the human being as such valid, in his infiniteness and universality. What the slave 
lacks is the recognicion of his personhood; the principle of personhood, however, 
is the universality. The master regards the slave not as a person but as a basic matter 
[Sach~J devoid of a self, and the slave himself does not counc as an 'I'; instead, 
the master is his T. -The previously mentioned difference between the merely 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
common and the truly universal is articulated in Rousseau's well-known Contrat 
social in a quite fitting manner where it is said that the laws of a state would have 
to proceed from the universal will (volontt gtntralt) without, however, needing 
at all to be the will of all (volontt ck tous). In relation to the theory of the state, 
Rousseau would have accomplished something more thorough, had he always 
kept this distinction in mind. The universal will is the conctpt of the will and the 
laws are the particular determinations of the will, grounded [begranckt] in this 
concept. 
Addition 2. In regard to the usual discussion in logic [operating) at the level of 
the understanding, about the emergence and formation of concepts, it remains 
to be noted that wt do not form the concepts at all and that the concept in 
general is not to be considered something that has a genesis at all. To be sure, 
the concept is not merely being or the immediate; instead, mediation is also part 
of it. However, this mediation lies in the concept itself, and the concept is what 
mediates itself through itself and with itself. It is wrong to assume, first that 
there are objecrs which form the content of our represemations and then our 
subjective activity comes along behind them, forming the concepts of objects by 
means of the earlier memioned operation of abstracling and gathering together 
what is common to the objects. On the contrary, the concept is what is truly first 
and the things are what they are, thanks to the activity of the concept dwelling 
in them and revealing itself in them. In our religious consciousness this surfaces 
in such a way that we say, 'God created the world out of nothing' or, to put it 
otherwise, 'the world and finite things have gone forth out of the fullness of divine 
thoughts and divine decrees'. In this manner it is recognized that the thought 
and, more precisely, the concept is the infinite form or the free, creative activity, 
which is not in need of some stuff on hand outside itself, in order to realize 
itself. 
§ 164 
The concept is what is utterly concrete since the negative unity with itself (as 
being-determined-in-and-for-itself which is the individuality) itself makes 
up its relation to itself, the universality. To this extent, the moments of 
the concept cannot be detached from one another; the determinations of 
reflection art supposed to be grasped and to be valid each for itself, detached 
from the opposed determination. Since, however, their identity is posited in 
the concept, each of its moments can be immediately grasped only on the 
basis of and with the others. 
Taken in an abstract sense, universality, panicularity, and 
individuality are the same as identity, difference, and ground. But 
the universal is what is identical with itself explicitly in the sense that 
at the same time the particular and the individual are contained in 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
139 
it. Furthermore, the panicuJar is what has been differentiated or the 
determinacy, but in the sense that it is universal in itself and as an 
individual. Similarly, the individual has the meaning of being the 
subject, the foundation which contains the genus and species in itself 
and is itself substantial. This is the posited inseparability of the 
moments in their difference (§ 160), -the clarity of the concept in 
which no difference interrupts or obscures the concept, but in which 
each difference is instead equally transparent. 
There is nothing said more commonly than that the concept is 
something abstract. This is correct in part insofar as its element is 
thinking generally and nor the empirically concrete sphere of the 
senses, in part insofar as it is not yet the idea. In this respect, the 
subjective concept is still formal (formei!J, yet not at all as if it should 
respectively have or acquire some other content than itself. - As the 
absolute form itself, the concept is every determinacy, but as it is in its 
truth. Thus, although the concept is at the same time abstract, it is 
what is concrete [das Konkrete) and, indeed, the absolutely concrete 
[dar schkchthin Konkrete), the subject as such. The absolutely 
concrete [das Absolut-Konkrete] is the spirit (see the note to§ 159),-
the concept insofar as it concretely exists as concept, differentiating 
itself from its objectivity which, despite the differemiating, remains 
the concept's own objectivity. Everything else concrete, as rich as it 
may be, is not so inwardly identical with itself and, for that reason, 
in itself not as concrete, least of all what one commonly understands 
by the concrete, a manifold externally held together. - What are also 
called concepts and, to be sure, determinate concepts, e.g. human 
being, house, animal, and so forth, are simple determinations and 
abstract representations, -abstractions that, taking only the factor of 
universality from the concept while omitting the particularity and 
individuality, are thus not developed in themselves and accordingly 
abstract precisely from the concept. 
§ 165 
The moment of individuality first posits the moments of the concept as 
differences, since it is the concept's negative reflection-in-itself. Thus it 
is initially the free differentiating of the concept as the first negation, by 
means of which the determinacy of the concept is posited, but posited as 
particularity. That is to say, first, that the moments differentiated have 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
the determinacy of conceptual moments only opposite one another and. 
second, that their identity (that the one is the other) is equally posited. This 
posited particularity of the concept is the judgment. 
The usual species of clear, distinct, and atkquate concepts pertain, 
not to the concept, but to psychology insofar as, by 'clear and 
distinct concepts', representations are meant, where 'dear' means an 
abstract, simply determinate representation and 'distinct' the sort of 
representation in which a distinguishing mark [Mrrkma/], i.e. some 
son of determinacy has been singled out as a sign for subjective 
knowing. Nothing is so much the distinguishing mark of the 
externality and decay of logic than the cherished category of the 
distinguishing mark. The adequate concept is more of a play on the 
concept, indeed even the idea, but still expresses nothing but the 
formal aspect [das FormeUe] of the agreement of a concept or even 
a representation with its object [Objekt], some external thing.-
Underlying the so-called subordinate and coordinate concepts is [a) 
the concept-less difference between the universal and the particular 
as well as {b] their relatedness in an external reflection. An 
enumeration of species of contrary and contradictory, affirmative, 
negative concepts and so forth is, moreover, nothing other than a 
process of arbitrarily reading off determinacies of thought that 
for their part belong ro the sphere of being or essence, where 
they have already been considered, and that have nothing to do 
with the determinacy of the concept itself as such. -The genuine 
differences of the concept- the universal, particular, and 
individual - constitute species of the concept, if at all only insofar as 
they are held apart from one another by external reflection. - The 
immanent differentiating and determining of the concept is on hand 
in the judgment, since the judging is the determining of the 
concept. 
b. The judgment 
§ 166 
The judgment is the concept in its particularity as the differentiating relation 
of its moments, which are posited as being for themselves and, at the same 
time, as identical with themselves, not with one another. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
In the case of a judgment one usually thinks first of the selfsufficimcy 
of the extremes, subject and predicate, such that the subject is a 
thing or a determination for itself and the predicate, too, is a 
universal determination outside that subject, in my head somehow. 
I then bring the predicate together with the subject and, by this 
means, I judge. However, since the copula 'is' assens the predicate 
of the subject, that external, subjective subsuming is sublated in turn 
and the judgment is taken as a determinacion of the object irsel(-
The etymological meaning of' judgment' [ Urttif) in our language is 
profounder and expresses the unity of the concept as what comes 
fim [das Eme] and its differentiation as the original division 
[ Teilung] that the judgment truly is. 
The abstract judgment is the sentence: 'the individual is the 
tmivma/'. These are the determinations that the subject and predicau 
first have opposite one another, in that the moments of the concept 
are taken in their immediate determinacy or first abstraction. (The 
sentences 'the particular is the universal' and 'the individual is the 
particular belong to the funher determination of the judgment.) 
It has to be viewed as an amazing lack of attentiveness that in the 
logic books there is nowhere to be found [acknowledgment of] 
the fact that in each judgment one is articulating a sentence such as 
'the individual is the universal' or, even more determinately, 'the 
subject is the predicate' (e.g. 'God is absolute spirit'). To be sure, 
the determinations - individualicy and universality, subject and 
predicate - are also distinct, but on that account, nonetheless, the 
completely universal fact remains that each judgment assens them 
as identical. 
The copula 'is' comes from the concept's nature, namely, to be 
identical with itself in its externalization. The individual and the 
universal, as its moments, are the sort of determinacies that cannot 
be isolated. The earlier determinacies of reflection, in their 
relationships, are equally related to one another, but their connection 
is only that of having, not being, the identity posited as such or 
the univmality. For this very reason, the judgment is the true 
particularity of the concept, since it is the determinacy or 
differentiation of the same, a differentiation that, however, remains 
the universality. 
Additio11. The judgment is customarily regarded as a combination of concepts 
and, indeed, diverse sons of concepts. What is right in this construal is this, that 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
the concept forms the presupposition of the judgment and makes its appearance 
in the judgment in the form of the difference. But it is wrong to speak of diverse 
sorts of concepts, for the concept, although concrete, is still essentially on~ and 
the moments contained in it are not ro be considered as diverse sorts. Moreover, 
it is equally false to speak of a combi11ation of the sides of the judgment since, 
when there is talk of a combination, then what are combined are thought of as 
being on hand for themselves even apart from the combinadon. This external 
construal is evident then in an even more determinate fashion if it is said of a 
judgment that it comes about by virtue of the fact that a predicate is attributed to 
a subject. In this connection the subject counts as something obtaining externally 
for itself and the predicate as something occurring in our head. Meanwhile, the 
copula 'is· already contradicts this representation. If we say 'this rose is red' or 'this 
painting is beautiful', what is thereby said is not that it is wt who in some external 
fashion make the rose red or the painting beautiful, but instead that these are the 
objects' own determinations. A further deficiency of the usual way of construing 
judgment (usual in formal logic) consists in the fact that, as a consequence of this 
construal, the judgment generally appears as something merely contingent and the 
progression from concept to judgment is not demonstrated. The concept as such, 
however, is not something in itself stagnant [vn-ha"mdj, devoid of process, as the 
understanding thinks. To the contrary, as infinite form, it is absolutely active, as 
it were, the punctum salitns of all vitality, and accordingly differentiates itself from 
itself. This diremption posited by the concept's own activity, the diremption of the 
concept into the difference between its moments, is the judgmmt, the meaning 
of which is accordingly to be construed as the particularization of the concept. 
In itstlf, the concept is, to be sure, already the particular bur, in the concept as 
such, the particular is not yet posittd, but is instead still in transparem unity with 
the universal. Thus, for example, as earlier noted (§ 160 Addition), the seed of 
a plant already contains the particular factor of the root, of the branches, of the 
leaves, and so forth. But this particular factor is at first only on hand in itst/fand is 
only posited in that the seed discloses itself, something which is to be considered 
the judgment of the plant. This example can also serve to draw notice to the 
fact that neither the concept nor the judgment are merely occurrences in our 
head and are not fashioned merely by us. The concept is something that dwells 
within the things themselves, by means of which they are what they are, and to 
comprehend [btgrtqtn] an object means accordingly to become conscious of its 
concept [Btgrif]J. If we then take the next step to judging the object, it is not our 
subjeaive doing that accounts for attributing this or that predicate to the object. 
Instead we consider the object in the determinacy posited by its concept. 
§ 167 
Judgment is usually taken in the subjtctivt sense as an optration and form 
that surfaces merely in st/fconsciotll thinking. This difference, however, is 
not yet on hand in the logical [sphere, where] judgment is supposed to be 

Th~ Encyclopedia logic 
143 
taken in the completely universal sense: all things art a judgment, - i.e. they 
are individuals which are a universality or inner nature in themselves, or a 
universal that is individuated. The universaliry and individualiry distinguish 
themselves in them [the things) but are at the same time identical. 
The sense of the judgment that is supposed to be merely subjective-
as if it were I who attributes a predicate to a subject- is contradicted 
by rhe objective expression of the judgment: 'the rose is red', 'gold is 
metal', and so forth; I do not first attribute something co them.-
Judgments are different from sentences; the latter contain the 
determination of the subjects that does not stand in a connection of 
universaliry with them - a condition, an individual action, and the 
like; 'Caesar was born in Rome in such and such a year, conducted 
the war in Gaul for ten years, crossed the Rubicon, and so forth' are 
sentences, not judgments. There is, furtherm~re, something quite 
empty in saying that sentences of rhe sort, e.g. 'I slept well last night' 
or even 'Present arms!' can be put into the form of judgments. A 
sentence like 'a carriage is passing by' would be a judgment and, co 
be sure, a subjective one only if it could be doubted whether what is 
moving by is a carriage or whether it is the object chat is moving 
and nor the standpoint from which we are observing it; where what 
then matters is finding rhe determination for a representation nor 
properly determined yet. 
§ 168 
The standpoint of the judgment is finitutk, and from this standpoint the 
ftnituJ~ of things consists in the fact chat rhey are a judgment, chat their 
existence [Dartin] and their universal nature (their body and their soul) are, 
certainly unified (otherwise the rhings would be nothing), but that these, 
their moments, are both already diverse and generally able to be separated. 
§ 169 
In the abstract judgment 'the individual is the universal', the subject relates 
itself negatively to itself and, as such, is the immediately concrtte, while the 
predicate is, by contrast, the abstract, indeterminate, the universal. But since 
they are joined by 'is', the predicate in its universality must also contain 
the determinacy of the subject and it [that determinacy) is the particularity 

244 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
and the latter is the posited identity of the subject and predicate. As thus 
indifferent to this difference of form, it is the content. 
Only in the predicate does the subject have its explicit determinacy 
and content; hence, taken by itself {foir sich] it is a mere 
representation or a bare name. In the judgments 'God is the 
supremely real' and so forth or 'the absolute is identical with itself 
and so forth, 'God' and 'absolute' are mere names. What the subject 
is, is first said in the predicate. What it might otherwise also be as 
something concrete does not matter to this judgment (compare§ 31). 
Addition. If one says: 'The subject is that of which something is asserted and the 
predicate is what is asserted of it', then this is to say something quite trivial. One 
learns nothing more precise about the difference berween the two by this means. 
As far as rhe thought of the subject is concerned, it is initially the individual and 
rhe predicate the universal. In the further development of the judgment, it then 
happens that the subject does not remain merely the immediately individual and 
the predicate merely the abstract universal. Subject and predicate then also acquire 
a [new] meaning, the former that of the particular and universal, the latter that 
of the particular and individual. This exchange in the meaning of the two sides 
of the judgment is what takes place under the rwo designations of 'subject' and 
'predicate'. 
§ 170 
As far as the more precise determinacy of subject and predicate is concerned, 
the Jonntr, as the negative relation to itself (§§ 163, 166 Addition), is the 
underlying fixity [das Feste] in which the predicate has its subsistence 
and is in an ideal way (it inheres in the subject). Moreover, since.the 
subject is generally and immediately concrete, the determinate content of 
the predicate is only one of the many determinacies of the subject and the 
larter is richer and broader than the predicate. 
Conversely, rhe predicate, as the universal subsisting for itself and indif· 
ferent ro whether this subject is or nor, goes beyond the subject, subsumes 
the subject under it, and is, for irs part, broader than the subject. The 
determinate content of the predicate (see preceding section} alone makes up 
the identity of both. 
§ 171 
Subject, predicate, and the determinate content or the identity [of them] 
are initiaUy posited in rhe judgment, in their relation, as themselves divmt, 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
falling outside one another. But in thtmstlvts, i.e. in terms of the concept, 
they are idmtical, since the concrete totality of the subject is this, not to be 
some sort of indeterminate manifold, but instead individuality alone, the 
particular and universal in an identity, and precisely this unity is the pred-
icate(§ 170).- In the copula, furthermore, the Vkntity of the subject and 
predicate is of course posittdbut initially only as the abstract 'is'. In keeping 
with this itkntity, the subject is also to be posited in the determination of 
the predicate, by means of which the latter also acquires the determination 
of the subject and the copula is folfilled. This is the .forthtr tktermination 
of the judgmem, by means of the copula fuU of content, into the syllogism. 
But first, in terms of the judgment, there is the further determination of 
it, the determining of the initially abstract, smsory unit1trsality into a stt 
of a/1 [AIIhtit], gmus, and sptcits and imo the developed univtrsality of tht 
conctpt. 
Only knowledge of the further development of the judgment gives 
a conttxt as well as a stnst to what are customarily put forward as 
sptcits of judgment. In addition to appearing completely contingent, 
the usual enumeration is superficial and even barren and wild in 
the presentation of the differences. In part, the manner in which 
positive, categorical, and assertoric judgments are differentiated is 
generally puUed out of the air and in part it remains undetermined. 
The various judgments should be considered as following necessarily 
from one another and as a .forthtr tktmnining of tht conctpt, since 
the judgment is nothing other than the tkttrminatt concept. 
In relation to the two previous spheres of bting and tssmct, the 
tkttrminatt conctpts, qua judgments, are reproductions of these 
spheres, but posited in the simple relation of the concept. 
Addition. The various species of judgment are to be construed not merely as an 
empirical manifold, but instead as a totality determined by thinking. One of Kant's 
great services is to have provided some validation for this demand. Kant divided 
judgments, according to the schema of his table of categories, into judgments of 
quality, quantity, relation, and modality. Although this division set up by Kant 
cannot be recognized as adequate {in part because of the merely formal application 
of the schema of these categories, in part also because of their content), underlying 
this division, nevertheless, is the genuine intuition that it is the universal forms of 
the logical idea itself through which the diverse species of judgment are determined. 
Accordingly, we initially obtain three main species of judgment, which correspond 
to the stages of being, essence, and concept. The second of these main species 
is then doubled in turn, corresponding to the character of essence as the stage 
of difference [Difftrmz]. The inner ground of this systematic [character] of the 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
judgment is to be sought in the fact that, since the concept is the ideal unity 
of being and essence, its unfolding, as it comes about in the judgment, also 
has to reproduce initially these two stages in a transformation [ Umbildung) that 
conforms to the concept, while it itself, the concept, demonstrates itself to be the 
determining factor for the genuine judgment. - The various species of judgment 
are to be considered, not as standing next to one another with the same value but 
instead as forming a sequence of stages, whose differences rest upon the logical 
meaning of the predicate. This sort of consideration is also already at hand in 
ordinary consciousness to the extent that one does not hesitate to ascribe a very 
slight capacity for judgment to those only used to making such judgments like 
'this wall is green', 'this stove is hot', and so fonh. At the same time, by contrast, 
it will be said that someone truly understands how to judge only if his judgments 
concern whether a cercain artwork is beautiful, an action is good, and the like. 
In judgments of the first-mentioned species, the content forms merely an abstract 
quality and the immediate perception suffices to decide on its presence, whereas, 
by contrast, if it is s:Ud that an artwork is beautiful or that an action is good, the 
objects named are compared with what they ought to be, i.e. with their concept. 
a. Qualitativ~ judgment 
§ 172 
The immediate judgment is the judgm~nt of existmc~ [ Urt~il des Daseins): 
the subject posited in a universality, as its predicate, which is an immediate 
(thus sensory) quality. (I) Positiv~ judgment: the individual is a particular. 
But the individual is not a particular; more precisely, such an individ-
ual quality does not correspond to the concrete nature of the subject; 
(1) n~gativ~ judgment. 
·It is one of the most essential logical prejudices that such qualitative 
judgments as 'the rose is red' or 'the rose is not red' can contain 
truth. They can be co"~ct, i.e. in the limited sphere of perception, 
finite representing, and thinking. This depends upon the content, 
which is just as much a finite content, untrue for itself. But the truth 
rests solely on the form, i.e. the posited concept and the reality 
corresponding to it; but such truth is not at hand in the qualitative 
judgment. 
Addition. Correctness and truth are very frequendy considered to mean the same_ 
thing in ordinary life and one accordingly speaks of the truth of some content 
where it is a matter of mere correctness. Correctness generally affects merely the 
formal agreemenr of our represenration with its content; however this content may 
be otherwise constituted. The truth consists, by contrast, in the agreement of the 
object with itself, i.e. with its concept. It may be correct anyway that someone is 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
247 
sick or that someone has stolen something. But such content is not true since a 
sick body is not in agreement with the concept of life, and so too theft is an action 
that does not correspond to the concept of human action. What is to be taken 
from these examples is that an immediate judgment, in which an abstract quality 
is asserted of something immediately individual, however correct it might be, still 
contains no truth since subject and predicate do not stand in the judgment in 
the connection of reality and concept to one another.- The lack of truth of the 
immediate judgment consists, further, in the fact chat its form and content do not 
correspond to one another. If we say 'this rose is red', then it lies in the copula 'is' 
that subject and predicate agree with one another. But now the rose, as something 
concrete, is not merely red; instead it also has an odour, a determinate form, 
and many other som of determinations that are not contained in the predicate 
'red'. On the other side, this predicate, as an abstract universal, does not apply 
merely to this subject. There arc also, in addition, other flowers and generally other 
objects that arc likewise red. Subject and predicate in the immediate judgment 
thus come into contact with one another, as it were, only at on~ point but fhey 
do not cover one another. The state of affairs is quite different in the conceptual 
judgment. If we say 'this action is good', this is then a conceptual judgment. 
One notices immediately that here, berween subject and predicate, there is not 
this loose and external connection as there is in the immediate judgment. In the 
immediate judgment the predicate consists in some abstract quality or other which 
may or may not apply to the subject. In the conceptual judgment, by contrast, the 
predicate is, as it were, the soul of the subject, by means of which the subject, as 
the body of this soul, is determined through and through. 
§ 173 
In this as first negation there still remains the relation of the subject to the 
predicate, which is thereby something relatively universal, the determinacy 
of which has only been negated ('the rose is not red' entails that it still has 
colour- immediately another [colour] which, however, would only be a 
positive judgment in turn). The individual, however, is also not a universal. 
(3) Hence, (aa) the judgment collapses in itself into the empty identical 
relation: the individual is the individual- identical judgment; and (bb) it 
collapses inro itself as the present, complete inadequacy of the subject and 
predicate: a so-called infinite judgment. 
Examples of the latter are 'the spirit is no elephant', 'a lion is no 
table', and so forth- sentences that are correct but as nonsensical 
[widersinnig] as the identical sentences 'a lion is a lion', 'the spirit is 
spirit'. These sentences are, to be sure, the truth of the immediate, 
so-called qualitative judgment, but not judgments at all, and they 
can only surface in a subjective chinking that can fix upon an untrue 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
abstraction. Objectively considered, they express the nature of being 
[des Seimdtn] or sensory things, namely, that they collapse into an 
empty identity and into afolfilkd relation that is, however, the 
qualitative otherness of what is related, their complete inadequacy. 
Addition. The negative-infinite judgment, in which no relation at all berween 
subject and predicate is on hand any more, is usually cited in formal logic merely 
as a senseless [sinnlost) curiosiry. Nevertheless, this infinite judgment is in fact not 
to be considered merely as a contingent form of subjective thinking. Instead it 
ensues as the very next dialectical result of the preceding, immediate judgments (of 
the positive and the simply negative), whose finitude and lack of truth explicidy 
come to light in it. Crime can be regarded as an objective example of the negative-
infinite judgment. Whoever commits a crime, more precisely a theft, does not 
merely negate, as in the civil juridical dispute, the particular right of someone 
else to this specific matter. Instead he negates the right of that person altogether 
and, for this reason, he is not merely ordered to restore the matter which he stole, 
but is instead punished in addition because he violated the right as such, i.e. 
the right in general. The civil juridical dispute is, by contrast, an example of the 
simple-negative judgment since in it merely this particular right is negated and 
right in general is recognized in the process. The connection here is thus as it is 
for the negative judgment 'this flower is not red', by means of which merely this 
particular colour, but not colour altogether, is negated in regard to the flower since 
it can still be blue, yellow, and so fonh. Likewise then, too, death is a negative-
infinite judgment in comrast to sickness, which is a simple-negative judgment. In 
a sickness, merely this or that particular vital function is restricted or negated; by 
conuast, in death, as one would say, body and soul separate from one another, i.e. 
subject and predicate fall completely outside one another. 
f3. The judgment of reflection 
§ 174 
The individual, posited as individual (reflected in itself) in the judgment, 
has a predicate, opposite which the subject, relating itself to itself, remains 
at the same time an other. - In the concrete existmu [Existenz], the subject 
is no longer immediately qualitative, but is instead in a conn~ction with and 
joined to an oth~r. an external world. The univtrsality has acquired hereby 
the meaning of this relativity. (For example, useful, dangerous; weight, 
acidity, - then drive, and so forth.) 
· 
Addition. The judgment of reflection is distinguished generally from the quali-
tative judgment by the fact that its predicate is no longer an immediate, abstract 
qualiry but instead of the sort that, by means of it, the subject demonstrates itself 
to be related to the other. If we say, for example, 'this rose is red', we consider the 

Tk Encyclopedia Logic 
249 
subject in its immediate individuality without relation to another. If, by conum, 
we make the judgment 'this plant has healing powers', we consider the subject, the 
plant, as standing in relation with another (the illness to be healed by it) through 
its predicate, the healing capacity. Matters are similar with the judgments 'this 
body is elastic', 'this insuument is useful', 'this punishment works as a deterrent', 
and so forth. The predicates of such judgments are generally determinations of 
reflection, by means of which one has moved beyond the immediate individuality 
of the subject while the concept of it is stiU not given. -The usual sort of rational-
izing [Riisonnnnmt) tends above all to immerse itself in this manner of judgment. 
The more concrete the object of concern, the more viewpoints it presents for 
reflection, by means of which, meanwhile, the distinctive nature, i.e. its concept, 
is not exhausted. 
§ 175 
(1) The subject, the individual as individual (in the singular judgment), 
is a universal [tin Al/gemeines]. (2) In this relation it is devated above its 
singulaciry. This expansion is an external one, the subjective reflection, 
ar first the indeterminate particularity (in the particular judgment which 
is, immediately, negative as well as positive; - the individual is in itself 
divided, it relates itself in part to itself. in part to another). (3) Some 
ace the universal, so the paniculariry is expanded to universaliry; or this 
universaliry, determined by the individualiry of the subject, is them of all 
(commonality, the usual universaliry-of-rq9ection). 
Addition. Since it is determined in the singular judgment as universality, the 
subject by this means moves beyond itself, past itself as this mere individual. 
When we say 'this plant has healing powers', this entails not merely that this 
individual plant has them but that several or some do and this results in the 
particular judgment ('Some plants have healing powers', 'Some human beings are 
inventive', and so forth). Through this parcicularity, the immediately individual 
[subject) loses its self-sufficiency and enters into a connection [Zusammmhang) 
with another. The human being is, as this human being, no longer merely this 
individual human being; instead he stands alongside other human beings and is 
thus one in a group [Mengt]. Precisely by this means, however, it also belongs to 
the universal and is thereby elevated. The particular judgment is positive as well 
as negative. Tf only some bodies are elastic, then the rest are not elastic. - Herein 
lies, then, again the progression to the third form of the judgment-of-reflection, 
i.e. to the judgment of the set of all ('all human beings are mortal', 'all metals are 
conductors of electricity'). The set of all [AUheit) is that very form of universality 
towards which reflection at first tends. In this connection the individuals form 
the foundation and it is our subjective act by means of which the individuals 
are gathered together and are determined [as belonging together] in their entirety 
[alr AUt bestimmt). The universal appears here only as an external bond which 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
encompasses the individuals subsisting for themselves and indifferent to it. The 
universal is, nevertheless, in fact the ground and basis, the root and substance of the 
individual. If we consider, for example, Caius, Ttrus, Sempronius, and the other 
inhabitants of a ciry or a country, then the fact that they are collectively human 
beings is not merely something common to them, but their univma4 their gmus, 
and all these individuals would not be at all without this, their genus. In contrast 
to this, matters are different with that superficial, only so-called universality that 
is in fact something that merely accrues to all individuals and is common to them. 
It has been noted that human beings, in contrast to animals, have this in common 
with one another, that they are equipped with ear lobes. It is, meanwhile, apparent 
that if. somehow, one or the other should not have ear lobes, the rest of his being, 
his character, his capacities, and so forth would nor be affected by this. It would, 
by contrast, make no sense to assume that Caius could somehow not be a human 
being but be brave, learned, and so forth. What the individual human being is in 
particular, this is only insofar as he is, above all, a human being as such and in the 
universal sense [im AUgtmtinmJ, and this universal is not only something external 
to and alongside other abstract qualities or mere determinations of reftection. 
Instead it is much more what pervades everything particular, encompassing it 
within itself. 
§ 176 
By the fact that the subject is likewise determined as universal, the identity 
of it and the predicate is posited as indifferent, as is, thanks to this, the 
determination of the judgment itself. This unity of the content as the 
universal identical with the subject's negative reflection-in-itself makes the 
relation of the judgment a ,zecessary relation. 
AJJition. The progression from the re8exive judgment of the set of all to the 
necessary judgment can be found already in our ordinary consciousness insofar 
as we say: 'what accrues ro everything, accrues to the genus and is, therefore, 
necessary.' When we say: 'a// plants', 'a// humans', and so forrh, this is rhe same as 
if we say 'the plant', 'the human', and so forrh. 
y. judgment of necessity 
§ 177 
The judgment of necessity as the identity of the content in its difference 
(1) contains within the predicate in part the substance or nature of the 
subject, rhe concrete universal - the genus; in pan, since this universal 
equally comains in itself the determinacy as negative, the excluding essential 
determinacy- the species;- categorical judgment. 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
251 
(2) In keeping with their substantiality, the two sides acquire the form 
of self-sufficient actuality, the identity of which is only an inner identity, 
and with chat the actuality of the one is at the same time not its actuality, 
but instead the being ofth~ other;- hypoth~tical judgment. 
(3) At the same time, in this externalization of the concept, the inner 
identity is posit~d and so the universal is the genus that is identical with 
itself in its excluding individuality. The judgment which has this universal 
on both sides of it, the one time as such, the other time as the sphere of 
its self-excluding particularization - the ~ith~r/or of which just as much 
as the as w~ll as is the genus - is the disjunctiv~ judgment. With this, the 
universality at first as genus and then also as the scope of its species is 
determined and posited as a totality. 
Addition. The categorical judgment ('Gold is a metal', 'The rose is a plant') is 
the imJMtiiiztt judgment of necessity and corresponds, in the sphere of essence, to 
the relationship of substantiality. All things are a categorical judgment, i.e. they 
have their substantial nature, which forms the fixed and unchangeable foundation 
of them. Only when we regard things from the viewpoint of their genus and as 
determined by it with necessity, does the judgment begin co be a true one. It must 
be designated a deficiency in someone's training in logic, if judgments like these: 
'Gold is expensive' and 'gold is a metal' are regarded as standing on the same level. 
That gold is expensive concerns an external relation of it to our inclinations and 
needs, co che costs of acquiring it, and so on, and the gold remains what it is, even 
if that external relation alters or falls away. By contrast, being a metal constitutes 
che substantial nature of gold, without which it or anything else that is otherwise 
in it or asserted of it cannot subsist. Maners are the same if we say 'Caius is a 
human being'; in this way we declare that everything that he may otherwise be 
only has value and meaning insofar as it corresponds to this, his substantial nature, 
co be a human being. - Furthermore, however, even the categorical judgment 
remains deficient insofar as in it the factor of particularity does not yet receive 
its due. Thus, for example, the gold is indeed metal, but silver, copper, iron, and 
so forth are likewise metals, and being metal as such behaves indifferently to the 
particular characrer of its species. Herein lies the progression from the categorical 
to the hypothetical judgment which can be expressed by the formula: 'if A is, 
then B is'. We have here the same progression as earlier from the relationship 
of substantiality to the relationship of causality. In the hypothetical judgment, 
the determinacy of the content appears as mediated, as dependent upon another, 
and this is then precisely the relationship of cause and effect. The meaning of 
the hypothetical judgment is chen generally this, that through it the universal is 
posited in its particularization and, with this, we acquire, as the third form of 
necessary judgment, the disjunctive judgment. 'A is either B or Cor 0'; the poetic 
artwork is either epic or lyrical or dramatic; the colour is either yellow or blue or 
red, and so on. The cwo sides of the disjunctive judgment are identical. The genus 
is the totality of its species and the totality of the species is the genus. This unity 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
of the universal and the particular is the concept and it is this, which now forms 
the content of the judgment. 
S. Tht j11dgmmt oftht conupt 
§ 178 
The judgmmt of tht conupt has the concept, the totality in simple form, 
for its content, the universal with its complete determinacy. The subject 
is (r) initially an individual that has, as its predicate, the rtjkction of the 
particular existence on its universal, - the agreement or lack of agreement 
of these two determinations: good, true, correct, and so forth - asurtoric 
judgment. 
In ordinary life, too, one only calls it judging when a judgment is of 
this sort, e.g. the judgment whether an object, action, and so forth is 
good or bad, true, beautiful, and so forth. One will not ascribe a 
power of judgment to someone [simply] for knowing, for example, 
how to make positive or negative judgments such as 'this rose is red', 
'this painting is red, green, dusty', and so forth. 
Even in philosophy, through the principle of immediate knowing 
and believing, the assertoric judgment has been made into the sole 
and essential form of the doctrine (despite the fact that in society the 
assertoric judgment counts as improper, when someone claims that 
it is supposed to be valid by itself). In the so-called philosophical 
works that maintain that principle, one can read hundreds upon 
hundreds of assurancts about reason, knowing [ Wissm], thinking, 
and so forth, which seek to gain credence for themselves through· 
endless repetitions of one and the same point, since external 
authority no longer counts for much. 
§ 179 
In what is at first the immediate subject of the assertoric judgment, this 
judgment does not contain that relation of the particular and the universal. 
that is expressed in the predicate. This judgment is thus merely a subjtctivt 
particularity and the opposite assurance stands over against it with the 
same right or, rather, the same lack of right. It is thus (2) at the same 
time only a probkmatic judgment. But (3) [insofar as] the objective par-
ticularity is posiud in the subjtct, [i.e.] its particularity as the constitution 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
2.53 
[&schaffmhtit] of its existence, the subject then expresses the relation of 
that particularity to its constitution, i.e. to its genus and, with this, expresses 
what (see preceding section) makes up the content of the predicate (this-
the immediate individuality- house-·genus -,so and so constituted- partie· 
ularity -, is good or bad) - apodictic judgment. -All things are a genus (their 
determination and purpose) in one individual actuality with a particular 
constitution; and their [i.e. all things'] finitude consists in the fact that 
their panicular [character] may or may not be adequate to the universal. 
§ 180 
In this way, subject and predicate are each themselves the entire judgment. 
The immediate constitution of the subject shows itself at first as the medi· 
ating ground between the individuality of the actual and its universality, as 
the ground of the judgment. What has in fact been posited is the unity 
of the subject and the predicate, as the concept itself; it is the fulfilment 
of the empty 'is', the copula, and since its moments are at the same time 
differentiated as subject and predicate, it is posited as their unity, as the 
relation mediating them - the syl/Qgism. 
c. The syllogism 
§ 181 
The syllogism is the unity of the concept and the judgment; - it is the 
concept as the simple identity (into which the judgment's differences of 
form have gone back), and [it is] judgment insofar as it is posited at the 
same time in reality, namely, in the difference of its determinations. The 
syllogism is what is rational and everything rational. 
The syllogism tends to be put forward usually as the form of the 
rational, but as a subjective form and without pointing up any sort 
of connection between it and any other rational content, e.g. a 
rational grounding principle, a rational action, idea, and so forth. 
In general, there is much and frequent talk of reason and appeal is 
made to it without indicating what it is, what its tkterminacy is and 
without giving the slightest thought to what inferring via syllogism 
[schliefen] is. In fact, formally inferring via syllogism is the rational in 
such a non·rational [vernunftlosel manner, that it has nothing to do 

254 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
with a rational basic content. Since, however, such a content can be 
rational only through the determinacy through which thinking is 
reason, it can be rational only through the form which the syllogism 
is. -This, however, is nothing else than the posittd, (at first formally) 
real concept, as this section expresses. The syllogism is, on account 
of this, the essential ground of everything trut; and the tkjinition of 
the absolute is from now on that ir is the syllogistic inference or, 
articulated in the form of a sentence, it is this dererminacy: 
'everything is a syllogism'. Everything is a conctpt, and its existence 
is the difference of its moments, so that its universal nature 
provides itself with external reality through particularity and, by this 
means and as negative reflection-in-itself, makes itself something 
individual. - Or conversely, the actual is an individual that by means 
of particularity elevates itself into univmality and makes itself 
identical with itsel£- The actual is one, but [it is] similarly the 
segregation of the moments of the concept, and rhe syllogism is the 
cyclical course taken by the mediation of irs moments, a course 
through which it posits itself as one. 
Addition. Like the concept and the judgment, the syllogism also tends to be 
regarded merely as a form of our subjective thinking and, in keeping with this 
tendency, it is said that the syllogism is the justification [B~ndung] of the 
judgment. Now, to be sure, the judgment poinrs to the syllogism, but it is not 
merely our subjective doing through which this progression comes about. Instead 
it is the judgment itself that posits itself as syllogism and, in doing so, returns to 
the unity of the concept. More precisely, it is the apodictic judgment that forms 
the transition to the syllogism. In the apodictic judgment we have an individual 
that relates itself, thanks to its constitution, to its universal, i.e. irs concept. The 
particular appears here as the mediating middle berween the individual and the 
universal and this is the basic form of the syllogism, the further development of 
which. formally construed, consists in the fact that the individual and the universal 
also occupy this place, by means of which the transition from subjectivity to 
objectivity is then formed. 
§ 182 
The immediate syllogism is such that the determinations of the concept 
stand opposite one another in an external connection as abstract determina-
tions, so that the two extremes [are] the individuality and universality, but 
the concept, as the middle joining the two together, is likewise only the 
abstract particttlarity. The extremes are accordingly posited as subsisting.for 
themselves, as indifferent to one another as they are to the middle [term that 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
255 
joins them]. This syllogism is thus rational but non-conceptual [btgrijflos]-
it is the formal syllogism of tht untkrstanding. - In it the subject is joined 
together with anothtr determinacy; or through this mediation the universal 
subsumes a subject txttrna/ to it. In a rational syllogism, by contrast, the 
subject joins itst/ftogether with itst/fby means of this mediation. It is only 
a subject in this way, or the subject is only in itself the syllogism of reason. 
In the following consideration, the syllogism of the understanding 
is expressed in terms of its ordinary, usual meaning, [namely,] in the 
subjective manner attributed to it in the sense that wt make such 
syllogistic inferences. In fact it is only a subjtctivt inferring via 
syllogism, though this has equally the objective meaning that it 
expresses only the finitude of things, but in the determinate manner 
that the form has attained here. With respect to finite things, 
subjectivity as thinghood, separable from its properties, [i.e.] its 
particularity, is equally separable from its universality insofar as this 
is the mere quality of the thing and its external connection with 
other things as its genus and concept. 
Addition. In keeping with the construal of the syllogism, mentioned above, as 
the form of the rational, reason itself has been defined as the capacity to make 
syllogistic inferences and understanding, by contrast, as rhe capacity ro form 
concepts. Underlying these definitions is a representation of the spirit as the mere 
sum of powers or capabilities lying next to one another. Apart from this superficial 
representation, what is to be noted about chis combination of rhe understanding 
with the concept and reason with the syllogism is that just as lirde as the concept 
is to be regarded merely as a determination of the understanding, so, too, rhe 
syllogism is to be regarded without fun her ado as ra£ional. On rhe one hand. what 
is usually rreared in formal logic in the doctrine of rhe syllogism is in fact nothing 
ocher chan the mere syllogism of rhe understanding, which in no way deserves the 
honour of counting as rhe form of rhe rational, indeed, as rhe rational itself. On 
the other hand, rhe concept as such is so lirde merely a form of understanding chat 
it is rather the understanding in rhe mode of abstracting alone, through which the 
concept is demoted to chis level. In accordance with this, there is also a tendency to 
distinguish mere concepts of the understanding [ Vmtam:ksb~griffi] and concepts 
of reason [VnnunftbwiffiJ, which is nevertheless not to be understood as though 
there w"~ two distinct species of concepts bur instead much more so that it is 
our doing either to stand par merely with the negative and abstract form of the 
concept or to construe it, in keeping with its rrue nature, as at the same rime 
positive and concrete. Thus, for example, the concept of freedom, insofar as it is a 
mere concept of the understanding, is freedom considered as the abstract opposite 
of necessity, while the true and rational concept of freedom contains in itself 
necessity as sublared. Similarly, the definicion of God pur forward by so-called 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
deism, is the concept of God insofar as it is a mere concept of the understanding, 
while by contrast the Christian religion, knowing [wissm) God as the triune God, 
contains rhe rational concept of God. 
cr. Qt~alitativt syUogism 
§ 183 
The first syllogism is tht syUogism of txisttnct [Schluss dts Dastim] or the 
qualitativt syllogism, as it was portrayed in the previous section, (I) I - P -
U [individuality, particularity, universality], that a subject as individual is 
jointd togtthtr, through a quality, with some univmal dtttrminacy. 
That the subject (ttrminus minor) has even further determinations 
than that of individuality, similarly that the other extreme (the 
predicate of the conclusion, the ttrmintts maior) is further 
determined than being merely a universal, does not come into 
consideration here; only the forms through which they constitute 
the syllogism [come into consideration]. 
Adtiition. The syUogism of existence is a syllogistic inference merely at the level of 
understanding and, indeed, insofar as the individuality, the particularity, and the 
universality stand opposite one another in an entirely abstract manner here. Thus, 
this syllogism is then the most extreme way that the concept comes to be outside 
itself. We have here something immediately individual as a subject; some particular 
side, a property, in this subject is then emphasized and by means of this property 
the individual demonstrates itself to be a universal. So, for example, we say 'this 
rose is red; red is a colour, therefore, this rose is something coloured'. It is this form 
[ Gtstalt] of the syllogism, above all, that is typically discussed in ordinary logic. In 
former rimes, the syllogism was considered the absolute rule of all knowing and a 
scientific claim obtained then as something justified only if it was demonstrated 
in a manner mediated by a syllogism. Today one encounters the diverse forms 
of the syllngism almost exclusively only in compendia of logic, and acquaintance 
with those various forms counts as empty pedantry, of no further usc of any sort 
either in practical life or even in science. In this regard, it deserves to be noted, 
first, that although it would be superfluous and pedantic to enter on the scene at 
each occasion with the entire elaboration of formal modes of inferring, the diverse 
forms of inference nonetheless continue to impose themselves on our knowing. 
For example, if someone waking up in the morning during the wintertime hears 
carriages clanging on the street and this occasions him to consider that things 
may well have frozen solid, he performs an operation of inferring and we repeat 
this operation daily amidst the most manifold complications. Becoming explicitly 
conscious of this, one's daily actions as a thinking being might thus at least be 
of no slighter interest than the well-recognized interest in becoming acquainted, 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
2.57 
not only with the functions of our organic life, e.g. the functions of digestion, 
production of the blood, breathing, and so forth, but also with the functions of 
the processes and formations of nature surrounding us. It will undoubtedly have 
to be conceded in this connection that just as lictle as a foregoing study of anatomy 
and physiology is needed in order to digest properly, to breath properly, and so 
on, one needs to have studied logic first in order to draw proper conclusions. - It 
is Aristode who first observed and described the diverse forms and so-called figures 
of the syllogism in their subjective meaning and, indeed, did so with such sureness 
and determinacy that essentially nothing further had to be added. Although this 
accomplishment beings Aristotle great honour, by no means is it the forms of 
syllogistic inference at the level of understanding or at the level generally of finite 
thinlcing that he employed in his genuine philosophical investigations (see the 
note to§ 189). 
§ 184 
This syllogism is (a) completely contingent with respect to its determi-
nations since the middle, as an abstract particularity, is m"~ly any sort of 
detmninacy of the subject, of which, as something imm~diatt and thus 
empirically concrete, it has several. Hence, it can be joined together just as 
much with many sorts of oth~r universalities, just as an individual particu-
larity in tum can also have several diverse determinacies in itself. Thus, the 
subject can be related to diffirent universals by means of th~ sam~ ~dius 
t~inus [middle term]. 
It is more that formally inferring has gone out of fashion than that 
its incorrectness has been detected and that the lack of its use has 
been justified on that basis [i.e. its incorrectness]. This and the 
following section indicate the vacuousness [Nichtigltrit] of such 
inferring for the truth. 
By means of such syllogisms (according to the side indicated in 
the section), the most diverse sorts of things can be proved, as it is 
said. The only thing required is to take up the medius terminus from 
which the transition to the desired determination can be made. Yet, 
with a different medius ttrminus, something else, even something 
opposite, may be proven. -The more concrete an object is, che more 
sides it has that inhere in it and can serve as medii t~ini. Which of 
these sides is more essential than the other must depend again on the 
son of inferring that fixes upon the individual determinacy and can 
likewise easily find for it a side and a rtsptct in terms of which it can 
be rendered important and necessarily valid. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
Addition. As little as in the daily course oflife one tends even to think of inference 
at the level of understanding, it nonetheless plays its role incessantly there. Thus, 
for example, in the civil dispUle of law, it is the business of the advocates to make 
the most favourable claim to a right IR~chtstit~IJ for their parties. In a logical 
res~ct, however, such a claim to a right is nothing other than a mttlius terminus. 
The same also takes place in diplomatic negotiations if, for example, diverse powers 
lay claim to one and the same land. In this connection, the right of inheritance, the 
geographical location of the land, the descendancy and language of its inhabitants, 
or any sort of other ground can be taken up as m~dius t~inus. 
§ 185 
(~) This syllogism is equally contingent on account of the form of the 
relation in it. According to the concept of the syllogism, the true is the 
relation of differentiated entities [ Untmchiedenen}, through a middle that 
is their unity. The relations of the extremes to the middle (the so-called 
premises, the major [ Obmatz] and the minor [ Untmatz)} are, however, 
immediate relations. 
This contradiction of the syllogism expresses itself again through an 
infinite progression [Progrqs] as the demand that each of the premises 
likewise be proven by means of a syllogism; since this syllogism, 
however, has two immediate premises of the same sort, this demand 
then repeats itself and, indeed, as a demand constantly doubling 
itself, ad infinitum. 
§ 186 
What here (on account of the empirical importance) has been noted as 
a defoimcy of the syUogism, to which in this form absolute correctness 
is ascribed, must of itself sublate itself [sich . .. von selbst aufhebtn] in the 
further determination of the syllogism. Here, within the sphere of the 
concept as well as in the judgment, the opposite determinacy is not merely 
in itself on hand, but instead it is posited, and hence, for the further 
determination of the syllogism, it is only necessary to take up what is 
posited each time by it itself. 
By means of the immediate inference (I - P - U), the individual is 
mediated with the universal and posited as universal in this conclusion 
[Schlufi'satz]. By this means, the individual as subject, thus itself as universal, 
is now the unity of the rwo extremes and the mediating factor, which results 

TIJ~ Encyclopedia Logic 
259 
in the s~contl 
figur~ of the syllogism ( (2) U-I- P). This expresses the truth of 
the first figure, [namely] that the mediation took place in the individuality 
and accordingly is something contingent. 
§ 187 
The second figure joins the universal with the particular (i.e. the universal 
that emerges from the previous conclusion is determined by the individ-
uality, and accordingly occupies the position of the immediate subject). 
As a result, the univma/ is posited as particular, via the conclusion [of the 
second figure], thus as the factor mediating the extremes, the positions of 
which are now taken by the others in the third figu" of the syllogism ((3) 
P- U -I). 
The so-called figur~s of the syllogism (Aristotle rightly acknowledges 
only thm of them; the fourth is a superficial, indeed fatuous, 
addition of the moderns) are placed next to one another in the 
standard treatment of them, without the slightest thought being 
given to showing their necessity, even less their meaning and their 
value. For this reason it is no wonder, if the figures have later been 
treated as an empty formalism. They have, however, a very basic 
[methodical] sense that rests upon the necessity that ~ach mommt as 
a determination of the concept becomes itself the whole and the 
m~diating grounJ. - What determinations the sentences otherwise 
have, whether they may be universal and so forth or negative, 
in order to bring about a corr~ct inference, this is a m«hanica/ 
investigation that has rightly come to be forgotten on account of 
its concept-less mechanism and its lack of inner meaning. - One 
can appeal least of all to Aristotle for the importance of such an 
investigation and of syUogism at the level of understanding. To be 
sure, he described these like countless other forms of the spirit and 
nature, and he both investigated and presented their determinacy. 
But in his metaphysical conctpts as weU as in the conctpts of the 
natural and the spiritual, he was far from intending to make the 
form of the syllogism at the level of the undemanding a foundation 
and criterion, so far that probably not a single one of these concepts 
would have been able to arise or be left standing if it were supposed 
to be subjected to the laws of understanding. In the considerable 
amount of descriptive and sensible [vmtandigtn] detail that 
Aristotle, after his fashion, brings together, the sp~culativt concept is 

260 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
invariably what dominates for him and he does not allow that 
inferring at the level of mere understanding, the inferring that he 
first outlined in so determinate a fashion, to enter into this sphere. 
Addition. The objective sense of the figures of the syllogism is in general this, 
that everything rational demonstrates itself in the form of a threefold syllogism 
and, to be sure, in such a way that each of its members occupies equally the 
position of an extreme and that of the mediating middle. This is expressly the 
case with the three members of philosophical science, i.e. the logical idea, nature, 
and spirit. First, nature here is the middle member that joins the others together. 
Nature, this immediate totality, unfolds into the two extremes of the logical idea 
and spirit. The spirit, however, is spirit only by being mediated by nature. Second, 
then, the spirit, which we know [wirsen] as individual and active, is the middle, 
and nature and the logical idea are the extremes. h is the spirit that recognizes 
in nature the logical idea and elevates it to its essence. Third, the logical idea 
is similarly the middle; it is the absolute substance of the spirit as of nature, 
the universal, what pervades everything. These are the members of the absolute 
syllogism. 
§ 188 
Since each moment has run through the position of the middle and the 
extremes, their determinate diffirence relative to one another has sublated 
itself and, in this form where there is no difference between its moments, the 
syllogism first has the external identiry of the understanding, the equality 
[ Gleichheit], as its relation- the quantitative or mathematical syllogism. If 
two things are equal to a third, then they are equal to one another. 
Addition. The quantitative syllogism mentioned here surfaces familiarty in 
mathematics as an axiom. It is customarily said of it, as of the other axioms, 
that its content cannot be proven, but also that this proof is not needed since 
it is immediately evident. Nevertheless, these mathematical axioms are in fact 
nothing other than logical sentences that are to be derived, insofar as partic-
ular and determinate thoughts can be articulated in them, from universal and 
self-determining thinking. a derivation which has to be considered then as their 
proof. This is the case here with the quantitative syllogism, set up in mathematics 
as an axiom that demonstrates itself to be the next result of the qualitative or 
immediate syllogism. - The quantitative syllogism, moreover, is the completely 
formless inkrence since in it the difference berween the members, a difference 
determined by the concept, is sublatcd. Which sentences here arc supposed to be 
premises depends upon external circumstances and, for this reason, in the appli-
cation of this syllogism one presupposes what already stands fast and is p1:0ven 
elsewhere. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
§ 189 
By this means, it has come about with respect to the fonn (r) that each 
moment received the determination and position of the middle, hence 
the whole in general, and with this it has lost the one-sidedness of its 
abstraction (§ 182 and§ 184) in itself, (2) that the mediation (§ 185) has been 
completed, also only in itself, namely, only as a circle of mediations that 
mutually presuppose one another. In the first figure (I - P - U), the cwo 
premises, I- P and P- U, are still unmediated; the former being mediated 
in the third, the latter in the second figure. But each of these cwo figures 
equally presupposes the cwo other figures to mediate their premises. 
In keeping with this, the mediating unity of the concept is no longer 
to be posited only as an abstract particularity, but instead as the dnJeloped 
unity of individuality and universality and, indeed, at first as the rtjkcud 
unity of these determinations, the individuality determined at the same time 
as universality. This sort of middle yields the syllogism of reflection. 
{3. Syllogism of refoction 
§ 190 
The middle is in the first place (I) not alone the abstract, particular deter-
minacy of the subject, but instead at the same time as aU individual concrete 
subjects, to which that determinacy as only one among others accrues. ~ 
such, the middle yields the syllogism of the set of all [Schlujf tier AUhtit]. 
The major premise (the subject of which is the particular determinacy, the 
tenninus medius, as the set of all) presupposes the conclusion, of which it 
is supposed to be the presupposition. It thus rests upon (2) induction, the 
middle of which is the complete [vollstiindig] set of the individuals as such, a, 
b, c, d, and so forth. Since, however, the immediate empirical individuality 
is different from the universality and, for that reason, cannot ensure any 
completeness, the induction rests upon (3) analogy, the middle of which 
is an individual but in the sense of irs essential universality, its genus or 
essential determinacy. - The first syllogism refers, for its mediation, to 
the second and the second to the third; but the Iauer equally demands a 
universality or the individuality as genus after the forms of the external 
relation of individuality and universality have been run through in the 
figures of the syllogism of reflection. 
By means of the syllogism of the set of all, some improvement is made 
relative to the deficiency of the basic form of rhe inference at the level 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
of the understanding (pointed out in § 184). But the improvement is 
only such that a new deficiency arises, namely, that the major premise 
presupposes as an accordingly immediate sentence what was supposed to 
be the conclusion.- ~I human beings are mortal, thereforeGajus is mortal', 
'all metals are electric conductors, therefore, for example, copper is, too'. In 
order to be able to assert those major premises that are supposed to express 
the set of all of the immediate individuals and to be essentially empirical 
sentences, it is required rhat already previously the sentences about the 
individual Gajus, the individual copper are confirmed for themselves as 
correct. - Everyone rightly notices not merely the pedantry, but the vapid 
[nichtssagmde] formalism of such syllogisms as 'all humans are morral, but 
now Gajus is human, and so forth'. 
Addition. The syllogism with respect to the set of all refers to the syllogism 
of induction in which the individuals form the middle that joins together the 
extremes. If we say 'all metals are electric conductors', this is an empirical sentence 
that results from testing undertaken with all individual metals. By this means, we 
get the inference of induction, which has the following form: 
P-I- U 
I 
I 
Gold is metal, silver is metal; similarly, copper, lead, and so forth. This is ~he 
major premise. Then comes the minor premise 'all these bodies are electric conduc-
tors', and from this results the: conclusion that all metals are dc:ctric conductors. 
Hence, here the individuality in the: sense of the: set of all is the: binding factor. 
This syllogism then likewise sends us on to another syllogism in turn. It has, as 
its middle, the complete set of individuals. This presupposes that the observation 
and experience be completed in a certain domain. But because it is a matter of 
individualilies here:, this yields in turn the progression [Progr4J1 into infinity (1, 
[, I ... ). In an induction the individuals can never be exhausted. If one says 'all 
metals', 'all plants', and so forth, this only means as much as 'all metals, all plants 
with which one is familiar up to now'. Each induction is, therefore, imperfect. One 
has, indeed, made: this and that observation, one has made many observations, 
but not all cases, not all individuals have been observed. It is this deficiency of 
induction that leads to analogy. From the fact that things of a certain genus have a 
certain property, it is inferred in the syllogism of analogy that other things of the 
same genus have the same property. Thus, for example, it is a syllogism of analogy 
if it is said: this law of motion has been found previously to hold for all planets; 
hence, a newly discovered planet will probably move according to the same: law. 
In empirical sciences, analogy is righdy hdd in high regard and very important 
results have been attained on this path. It is the instinct of reason that has the 

Tht Encyclopedia ugic 
presentiment that this or that empirically uncovered determination is grounded in 
the inner nature or the genus of an object and which is further based on this. Inci-
dentally, analogy can be more superficial or more rigorous [griindlich). Suppose, 
for example, it is said: 'Gaius, a human being, is a learned individual; Titus is also 
a human being; hence, he is also likc:ly to be learned.' This is in any case a very 
bad analogy and, indeed, for this reason, that for a human being to be learned is 
not grounded without further ado in this, his genus. Nonetheless, the same sort 
of superficial analogies occur very frequently. Thus, for example, it is customarily 
said: 'the Earth is a heavenly body and has inhabitants; the Moon is also a heavenly 
body; hence, it is probably also inhabited'. This analogy is not a bit better than the 
previously mentioned one. That the Earth has inhabitants docs not rest merely on 
the fact that it is a heavenly body; in addition, further conditions are also required, 
such as, first and foremost, the fact that it is surrounded by an atmosphere, that 
there is water on hand (something connected to that atmosphere), and so forth-
conditions that, as far as we know, are lacking in the case of the Moon. What is 
called 'philosophy of nature' in the modern era consists to a great extent in a vapid 
play with empty. external analogies, which are nonetheless supposed to count as 
profound results. On account of this, philosophical consideration of nature has 
fallen into a deserved disrepute [Miflltmlit). 
y. Sylwgism of ntmsity 
§ 191 
As far as the merely abstract determinations of this syllogism are concerned, 
it has the univmal as the middle term, just as the syllogism of reflection 
has the individUtJiity as the middle term - the latter in terms of the second 
figure, the former in terms of the third (§ 187); the universal posited as 
essentially determined in itsel£ (I) At first, the particular in the sense of 
the determinate gtnus or sptcits is the mediating determination - in the 
cattgorical syllogism; (2) the individual in the sense of immediate being 
that is both mediated and mediating- in the hypothetical syllogism; (3) the 
mediating univtnal is also posited as the totality ofits particularizations and 
as an individUtJI particular, an exclusive individuality- in the disjunctivt 
syllogism; - so that one and the same universal is in these determinations 
as merely in forms of difference. 
§ 192 
The syllogism has been taken in terms of the differences contained in 
it and the universal result of the course [VtrlauJJ of those differences 
is that these differences and the concept's manner of being-outside-itself 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
sublate themselves [das Sichauftuben] in it. Indeed, (I) each of the moments 
themselves has demonstrated itself to be the totality of the moments and, 
hence, to be the entire syllogism; thus, they are in thtmSeivts identical. 
(2) The negation of their differences and their mediation constitutes the 
manner of bting-for-itself, such that it is one and the same universal 
that is in these forms and is accordingly also posited as their identity. 
In this ideality of the moments, inferring acquires the determination 
of essentially containing the negation of the determinacies by means of 
which it runs its course and, with this, the determination of being a 
mediation by way of sublating the mediation and a manner of joining 
the subject together, not with anothtr, but with the st~blated other, with . 
itst/f 
Addition. In ordinary logic, the first part, forming the so-called 'doctrine of 
dements', tends to come to a close with the treatment of the doctrine of the 
syllogism. Following upon this is the so-called 'doctrine of method', as the second 
part, in which it is supposed to be demonstrated how an entire body of scientific 
knowledge is to be brought about, through application of the forms of thinking, 
treated in the doctrine of elements, to the objects'7 at hand. logic at the level 
of the understanding provides no further information about where these objects 
come from and what sort of a connection it has in general with the thought of 
objectivity. Thinking counts here as a merely subjective and formal activity, while 
what is objective, in contrast to thinking, counts as something firm and on hand 
for itself. This dualism, however, is nor the true stare of things [das Wahrt] and 
it is a thoughtless procedure to take up the determinations of subjectiviry and 
objectivity without further ado and to refrain from inquiring into their origin. 
Both, subjectivity as well as objectivity, are in any case thoughts and, to be sure, 
determinate thoughts which have to demonstrate themselves in universal and self-
determining thinking. This has happened here first with respect to subjectiviry. 
We have come to recognize this, or the subjective concept, which contains in itself 
the concept as such, the judgment, and the syUogism as the dialectical result of 
the first two major stages of the logical idea, namely, the stages of being and of 
essence. If it is said of the concept, 'it is subjective and only subjective', then this 
is completely correct insofar as it is, to be sure, subjectiviry itself. But then, in 
addition, no less subjective than the concept as such are the judgment and the 
syllogism, determinations that in ordinary logic, next to the so-caUed 'laws of 
thought' {the principles of identiry, difference, and sufficient reason), form the 
content of the so-called 'doctrine of elements'. Furthermore, this subjectivity with 
the determinations of it mentioned here (the concept, the judgment, and the 
syllogism) is not to be considered an empty framework which first has to acquire 
its filling from without, through objects on hand for themselves. Instead it is the 
' 7 Translators' notf: 'Object' here and in the remainder of rhe text is always a translation of Objtlrr. 
when 'objccr' is a translation of Gtgmstand, it is so Aaggtd. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
subjectivity itself that, as dialectical, breaks through its limitation and by means 
of the syllogism discloses itself to be objectivity. 
§ 193 
This realization of the concept, in which the universal is this singular 
totality that has returned into itself and whose differences are equally 
this totality, which has determined itself to be an immediau unity by 
sublating mediation, - this realization of the concept is the object [das 
Objekt]. 
At first glance, this transition from the subject, from the concept in 
general, and, more precisely, from the syiJogism into the object, may 
seem strange, especially if one regards the syllogism only at the 
level of the understanding and regards inferring only as an act of 
consciousness. At the same time, it cannot be our task to want to 
make this transition plausible to representation. It is only possible to 
recall whether our customary representation of what is caUed an 
'object' corresponds roughly to what constitutes the determination 
of the object here. By 'object', however, one tends to understand not 
merely an abstract entity or concretely existing thing or something 
in general. actual, but instead something concretely and completely 
self-sufficient in itself; this completeness is the totality of the conupt. 
That the object is also something standing opposite [ Gegmstandl and 
external to another, this wiU be determined subsequently insofar as it 
posits itself in opposition to the subjective. Here, as that into which 
the concept has passed over from its mediation, it is at first only 
an immediate, neutral [tmb~ngmes] object, just as the concept 
is determined to be the subjective only in the subsequent 
opposition. 
Furthermore, the object in general is also the one whole, in itself as 
yet indeterminate, the objective world in general, God, the absolute 
object. But the object equally has difference within it, breaking 
down in itself into an indeterminate manifold (as objective world) 
and each of these individuated entities is also an object, an existence 
[Dasein]. in itself concrete, complete, self-sufficient. 
As objectivity has been compared with being, concrete existence 
[ExistenzJ, and actuality, so too the transition to concrete existence 
and actuality (since being is the first, completely abstract 
immediacy) is to be compared with the transition to objectivity. 

266 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
The ground from which concrete existence emerges, the r~/ationship 
of reflection that sublates [and elevates] itself to acruality [sich zur 
Wirltlichk~it aufo~bt], these are nothing other than the conupt, 
posittd in a still imperfect way. Or they are only abstract sides of it, 
the ground being the unity of it merely in the form of essence 
{w~smhaft~]. the relationship merely the relation of sides that are 
supposed to be r~a~ "foct~d only in th~ms~lv~s. The concept is the 
unity of both and the object is not only the unity befitting an 
essence but the unity in itself universal, containing not only real 
differences but these differences as totalities in itself. 
It is clear, moreover, that in all these transitions, it is a matter 
of more than merely showing the inseparability of the concept or 
thinking from being. It has been frequently noted that b~ing is 
nothing more than the simple relation to itself and that this 
impoverished determination is contained, without further ado, in 
the concept or even in thinking. The point of these transitions is not 
to take up determinations only insofar as they are contain~d {in the 
concept) (as happens even in the ontological argument for the 
existence of God based upon the principle that being is on~ of the 
realities). The point is instead to take the concept as it is prima facie 
suppostd to be determined for itself as concept, with which this 
distant abstraction of being or even objectivity still has nothing to 
do, and to see whether, in its determinacy solely as the determinacy 
of the conupt, it passes over into a form which differs from the 
determinacy inherent in the concept and appears within it. 
If the product of this transition, the object, is placed in relation 
to the concept that has disappeared in the transition in its peculiar 
form, then the result can be co"~ct/y expressed in such a way that in 
its~lf concept, or also, if one prefers, subjectivity, and the object are 
th~ sam~. However, it is equally co"~ct that they are divm~. Since one 
is as correct as the other, then by the same token one is as incorrect 
as the other. Such a manner of expression is incapable of presenting 
their true relationship. The expression in its~lfhere is an abstractum 
and even more one-sided than the concept itself, the one-sidedness 
of which in general sublates itself {sich aufo~bt] in that it elevates 
itself [sich aufo~bt] to the object, the opposite one-sidedness. Thus, 
that in its~lf must also determine itself to bdng-for-its~lf through the 
ntgation of itself. As is everywhere the case, the speculative identity is 
not that trivial identity that concept and object are in themselves 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
identical- an observation that has been repeated often enough, but 
could not be repeated enough, if the aim is to put an end to the 
shallow and completely malicious misunderstanding of this identity. 
Understandably, however, this is not something that can be hoped 
for. 
Moreover, if that unity is taken quite generally, without recalling 
the one-sided form of its bnng-in-itself, then it is, as is familiar to 
many, what is presuppos~d in the ontological proof of God's existence 
and, indeed, presupposed as what is most pnftct. The utterly 
remarkable thought of this proof first occurs to Ans~lm who, to be 
sure, begins by discussing merely whether a content is only in our 
thinking. These, in brief, are his words: 'Certe id, quo maius cogitari 
nequit, non potest esse in intellectu solo. Si enim vel in solo 
intelleccu est, potest cogitari ~ss~ ~tin rr. quod maius est. Si ergo id, 
quo maius cogirari non potest, est in solo intellectu; id ipsum, quo 
maius cogitari non potest, est, quo rnaius cogitari potest. Sed certe 
hoc esse non potest.' [Certainly that, of which nothing greater can 
be thought, cannot be in the intellect alone. For if it is in the 
intellect alone, it can be thought to b~ in som~ thing as w~U: which 
is greater. If, therefore, that of which a greater cannot be thought is 
in the intellect alone, then it is possible to think something greater 
than that of which nothing greater can be thought. But this certainly 
cannot be the case.] - In terms of the determinations we are 
standing among here,finit~ things are such that their objectivity is 
not in agreement with the thought of them, i.e. their universal 
determination, their genus, and their purpose. Descartes and 
Spinoza, among others, have articulated this unity more objectively, 
whereas the principle of immediate certainty or belief takes them 
more in the subjective manner of Anselm, namely, that the 
determination of God's being is inseparably bound up with the 
representation of God in our consciousnm. If the principle of this 
belief also takes up [b4'zfi't] the representations of external, finite 
things into the inseparability of the consciousness of them and 
their being, because in th~ intuition they are bound up with the 
determination of concrete existence, then this is indeed correct. But 
it would be the greatest thoughtlessness if that were supposed to 
mean that in our consciousness concrete existence is bound up in 
the same way with the representation of finite things as with the 
representation of God. It would be forgotten that finite things are 

268 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
mutable and transient, i.e. rhat concrete existence is only bound up 
with them in a transitory manner, that this bond is not eternal, but 
separable. For this reason, in the course of relegating the sort of 
connection [ Verknupfong] that obtains in the case of finite things, 
Anselm rightly declared that alone to be the perfect being that is not 
merely in a subjective but at the same time in an objective manner. 
None of the condescension shown towards the so-called 'ontological' 
proof and against this Anselmi an determination of the perfect is of 
any help, since it lies in every innocent, common sense just as much 
as it returns in every philosophy, even against one's will and better 
judgment, as in the principle of immediate belief. 
But the deficiency in Anselm's argument (a deficiency, moreover, 
that Descartes and Spinoza as well as the principle of immediate 
knowing share with it) is that this unity, articulated as the most 
perfect being or subjectively as true knowing [Wissen], is 
presupposed, i.e. it is only assumed as something that is in itself. The 
diversity of the two determinations is immediately opposed to this 
identity which is accordingly abstract (something that has long 
since been held against Anselm). That is, in fact, to say that the 
representation and concrete existence of the finite are opposed to 
the infinite since, as noted earlier, the finite is the son of objectivity 
that is at the same time not adequate to the purpose, to its ~ssence 
and concept, the sort of objectivity that differs from it -or that it 
is the sort of the representation, the son of subjective entity that 
does nor involve concrete existence. This objection and contrast is 
sublated only by demonstrating that the finite is something untrue, 
that these determinations are, for themselves, one-sided and vacuous 
and that the identity, accordingly, is one into which they themselves 
pass over and in which they are reconciled. 
B. THE OBJECT 
§ 194 
The object is immediate being by virtue of the indifference towards the 
difference that has sublated itself in it. It is in itself the totality and, at 
the same time, since this identity is the identity of the moments bur an 
identity that only is in itself [ansichseiende], it is just as indifferent to its 
immediate unity. It breaks down into differentiated [moments], each of 
which is itself the totality. The object is thus the absolute contradiction of 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
the complete self-sufficiency of the manifold and the equally complete lack 
of self-sufficiency of the differentiated [moments]. 
The definition 'the absolute is the object' is contained in the most 
determinate manner in the Leibnizian monad which is supposed to 
be an object, yet [an object] in itself representing [things] and, 
indeed, is supposed to be the totality of the representation of the 
world. In its simple unity, every difference is merely something ideal, 
something not self-sufficient. Nothing enters into the monad from 
the outside; it is in itself the entire concept, only differentiated by its 
own greater or lesser development. By the same token, this simple 
totality breaks down into the absolute plurality of differences such 
chat they are self-sufficient monads. In the monad of monads and 
the pre-established harmony of their inner developments, these 
substances are just as much reduced in turn to the level of something 
ideal and lacking in self-sufficiency. The Leibnizian philosophy is 
thus the perfectly developed contradiction. 
Addition 1. Construing the absolute (God) as the object and not moving beyond 
such a construal is in general the standpoint of superstition and slavish fear, as 
Fichte above all has rightly emphasi:t.ed in recent times. To be sure, God is the 
object, and indeed the object without qualification, opposite which our particular 
(subjective) opinions and wants have no truth and no validity. But precisely as 
the absolute object, God does not stand like some sinister and inimical power 
over against subjectivity. Instead God contains subjectivity as an essential factor 
within himself. This point is formulated in the teachings of the Christian religion, 
when it is said that God wants for all human beings ro be helped and wants all 
of them to be blessed. That human beings are helped, that they are blessed, this 
happens by virtue of the fact that they attain consciousness of their unity with 
God and God ceases to be for them a mere object and thereby just an object 
( Gtgmstandl of fear and terror, as was the case for the religious consciousness of 
the Romans in particular. If, furthermore, in the Christian religion, God is known 
(gewujft] as love, and indeed insofar as he revealed himself to humanity in his 
Son, who is one with him, and did so as this individual human being, by this 
means redeeming humanity, this says likewise that the opposition of objectivity 
and subjectivity is in itself overcome and the basic matter for us is to participate 
in this redemption by letting go of our immediate subjectivity (taking off the old 
Adam) and becoming conscious of God as our true and essential self. - Now, 
just as religion and the religious culture consists in overcoming the opposition 
of subjectivity and objectivity, so too science, and more precisely philosophy, has 
no other task than to overcome this opposition through thinking. In the case of 
knowing, what generally needs to be done is ro strip away the alien ness of the 
objective world standing over against us, to find our way into it, as one says, 
which amounts to saying that we need to trace the objective [dimension] back 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
to the concept which is our innermost self. From the previous discussion it can 
be gathered how wrong it is to consider subjectivity and objectivity a rigid and 
abstract opposition. Both are utterly dialectical. In keeping wit:h its own activity, 
without needing any external material or stuff, the concept which at first is only 
subjective proceeds to objectify itself. and so too the object is not something 
immovable and devoid of process, but instead is the process of proving itself to 
be at the same time the subjective [dimension] that forms the progression to the 
idta. What happens to anyone who is not familiar with the determinations of 
subjectivity and objectivity, preferring to hold fast to them in their absuaction, is 
mat these abstract determinations slip through his fingers before he lays hold on 
them and he says precisely the opposite of what he wanted to say. 
Addition 2. Objectivity contains the three forms: mechanism, chtmilm, and 
the relation of purpou. The mtchanically determined object is the immediate, 
indifferent object. It contains difference, to be sure, but the diverse [elements] 
behave indifferently towards one another and the combination of them is only 
external to them. In chtmism, by contrast, the object demonstrates itself to be 
essentially different, such that the objects are what t:hey are only through their 
relation to one another and the difference constitutes their quality. The third 
form of objectivity, the ttkological rtlationship, is the unity of mechanism and 
chemism. The purpose is again, like the mechanical object, a totality enclosed 
wit:hin itself. yet enriched by the principle of difference [D@rmz] that emerged 
in chemism, and so it [the purpose] refers to the object standing over against it. It 
is the realization of the purpose, then, that forms the transition to the idta. 
a. Mechanism 
§ 195 
The object, taken first in its immediacy, is (1) the concept only in itself,.it has 
the concept at first as something subjective outside it, and every determinacy 
is posited as an external determinacy. As the unity of differences, it is rhus 
something composite, an aggregate, and the effect on another remains an 
external relation: formal mechanism. - In this relation and lack of self-
sufficiency, the objects remain equally self-sufficient, resistant, external to 
one another. 
Just as pressure and impulse are mechanical relationships, so we also 
know [wissen] in a mechanical way, by rote [auswendig), insofar as 
the words are devoid of any sense for us and remain external to the 
senses, representing, thinking; they [the words] are equally external 
to themselves, a senseless sequence. Acting, piety, and so fonh are 
equally mechanical insofar as what a person does is determined by 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
271 
ceremonial laws, a counsel of conscience, and so forth, while his own 
spirit and will are not in his actions, such that these actions are 
external to him himsel£ 
Addition. Mechanism, as the first form of objectivity, is also that very category 
that first presents itself to reflection in observation of the objective fgtgensriiruilich] 
world and a category from which this observation quite frequently does not budge. 
Nevertheless, this is a superficial manner of observation, lacking in thought, 
insufficient for making do either in relation to nature or even less in relation 
to the spiritual world. In nature only the completely abstract relationships of 
matter (insofar as it remains locked up in itselO are subject to mechanism. By 
contrast, even the phenomena and processes of the so-called 'physical domain' 
in the narrower sense of the word (for example, the phenomena of light, heat, 
magnetism, electricity, and so forth) cannot be explained in a merely mechanical 
manner (i.e. through pressure, impulse, displacement of parts, etc.). Even more 
unsatisfactory is the application and transference of this category to the domain 
of organic nature, insofar as it is a matter of conceiving what is specific to it: 
for example, the nourishment and growth of plants or even animal sensation. 
In any case it must be regarded as a quite essential deficiency, indeed, the chief 
deficiency of modern research into nature that, even where it is a matter of 
completely different and higher categories than those of mere mechanism, it 
nevertheless stubbornly clings oo the Iauer, contradicting what presents itself to 
an unprejudiced observation [Anschauung], and by this means blocks the path to 
an adequate knowledge of nature. - Next, with regard to the formations of the 
spiritual world, here too in the consideration of them the mechanical perspective 
has been unduly promoted in various ways. This is the case, for example, if it is 
said that a human being consistrofbody and soul. In this assertion these two count 
as subsisting each for themselves and as being combined with one another only 
externally. It also happens when the soul is regarded as a mere complex of forces 
and faculties, subsisting self-sufficiently next to one another. -Thus, on the one 
hand, the mechanical manner of observation must be rejected out of hand where 
it comes on the scene with the pretension of occupying the position of conceptual 
knowing in general and making mechanism the absolute category. Yet, on the 
other hand, mechanism's legitimacy and meaning as a universal, logical category 
must also be expressly vindicated, and accordingly by no means should it be 
limited merely to the domain of nature from which this category's name is taken. 
Thus, there is nothing to object to if attention is paid to mechanical actions (e.g. 
those of weight, lever, and so forth) even outside the realm of genuine mechanics, 
particularly in physics and in physiology. Only it should not be overlooked thereby 
that within these domains the laws of mechanism are no longer the decisive ones, 
but make their appearance only, as it were, in a subservient position. Immediately 
linked to this point is then the further remark that where the higher functions in 
nature, namely, the organic functions, suffer a disturbance or hindrance in one 
way or another in their normal effectiveness, the otherwise subordinate mechanism 
immediately emerges as dominating. Thus, for example, someone suffering from 

272 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
a weak stomach has a sensation of prmur~ in the stomach after consuming a 
modest quantity of certain foods, while others whose digestive organs are healthy 
remain free of this sensation, despite having consumed the same thing. This is 
also the case with the general feeling of htavinm in the arms and legs when 
the body is in a sickly mood. - Even in the domain of the spiritual world, 
mechanism has its place, albeit a place that is likewise merely subordinate. One 
speaks righdy of mechanical memory and of all sores of mechanical activities such 
as, for example, reading, writing, playing music, and so forth. More precisely in 
this connection, as far as memory is concerned, a mechanical manner of behaving 
is even inherent in its essence; a circumstance that has often been overlooked 
by modern pedagogy, to the great detriment of the education of youth, in a 
mistaken zeal for freedom of the intelligence. Neverthdess, someone would prove 
to be a bad psychologist if, in order to fathom the nature of memory, he were 
to take Hight to mechanics and apply its laws without further ado to the soul. 
The mechanical dimension of memory precisely consists solely in the fact that 
here certain signs, sounds, and so forth are construed in their merely external 
combination and then reproduced in this combination, without it being necessary 
thereby to attend explicirly to their meaning and inner combination. In order to 
recognize this connection with mechanical memory, no further study of mechanics 
is needed, and from this study there is nothing to be gained for psychology 
as such. 
§ 196 
Only insofar as the object is self-sufficient (see the preceding section) does 
it have the lack of self-sufficiency in terms of which it suffers violmc~. 
Insofar as the object is the posited concept in itself, neither of these deter-
minations sublates itself in its other determination; instead the object joins 
itself together with itself through the negation of itself, through its la~k of 
self-sufficiency, and only then is it self-sufficient. Thus, at the same time, 
in the difference from externality, and in its self-sufficiency negating this 
externality, it [the object] is the n~atir1e unity with itself, centrality, subjec-
tivity- in which it is itself directed and related to the external. The latter 
is equally centred in itself and, in that, just as much related to the other 
centre, having its centrality just as much in the other. [Hence, the object in 
the second place is] (2) a diffirmtiaud [dijf"tnt~rJ mechanism (fall, desire, 
social drive, and the like). 
§ 197 
The development of this relationship forms the syllogistic inference that the 
immanent negativity as the cmtral individuality of an object (the abstract 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
273 
centre) relates itself to objects lacking self-sufficiency as the other extreme, 
relating to them through a middle [term] that unifies the objects' central-
icy and lack of self-sufficiency, the relative centre. [Hence, the object is] 
(3) absolutt mtchanism. 
§ 198 
The syllogism that has been given here (I - P - U) is a triad of syllogistic 
inferences. The ftawed individuality of the objects lacking st/f-su.lficimcy, 
in which the formal mechanism is ar home, is, in keeping with its lack 
of self-sufficiency, just as much the external univmality. These objects 
are thus the middk also between the absolu~ and the rtlativt centre (the 
form of the syllogism: U - I - P). For it is by means of this lack of self-
sufficiency that those two are separated and are extremes just as they are 
related to one another. So, roo, the absolutt cmtrality as the substantial 
universal (the gravity that remains identical), which as the pure negativicy 
also encapsulates in itself the individuality, is the mediating factor between 
the rtlativt cmtTt and the objects lacking st/f-su.lficitncy; ([thus amounting 
to] the form of the inference P- U- I) and, to be sure, just as essential in 
terms of the immanent individuality where it functions to separate, as it is 
in terms of the universality as the identical cohesion and as the undisturbed 
being-in-itself. 
Like the solar system, the state, for instance, is, in the practical 
sphere, a system of three syllogisms. (I) The individual (the person) 
joins itself through its particularity (physical and spiritual needs, 
what becomes the civil sociecy, once they have been further 
developed for themselves) with the univmal (the society, justice, 
law, government). (2) The will, the activity of individuals, is the 
mediating factor which satisfies the needs in relation to society, the 
law, and so forth, just as it fulfils and realizes the sociecy, the law, 
and so forth. (3) But the universal (state, government, law) is the 
substantial middle [term] in which the individuals and their 
satisfaction have and acquire their fulfilled realicy, mediation, and 
subsistence. Since the mediation joins each of the determinations 
with the other extreme, each joins itself precisely in this way 
together with itself; it produces itself and this production is its 
self-preservation. - It is only through the nature of this joining-
together, through this triad of syllogisms with the same ttrminis, that 
a whole is truly understood in its organization. 

274 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
§ 199 
The imm~diacy of concrete existence that objects have in absolute mecha-
nism is in itulf negated by the fact that their self-sufficiency is mediated by 
their relations to one another, hence, through their lack of self-sufficiency. 
Thus, the object must be posited as diffn-mtiattd [diffn-ent], in its concrm 
exutmc~. opposite its other. 
b. Chemism 
§200 
The differentiat~d [different~] object has an immanent determinacy consti-
tuting its nature and in that determinacy it has concrete existence. But as 
the posited totality of the concept, it is the contradiction of this its total-
ity and the determinacy of its concrete existence [.Existenz]; it is thus the 
[process of] striving to sublate this contradiction and make its existence 
[Das~in] equal to the concept. 
Addition. Chemism is a category of objectivity that as a rule does not tend to 
be stressed particularly. Instead it is usually taken together with mechanism as one 
and, in this manner of taking them together, under the common title 'mechanistic 
relationship', it is opposed to the relationship of purposiz,mess. The motivation for 
this is to be sought in the fact that mechanism and chemism have, indeed, this in 
common: each is initially the concretely existing conc.:ept only ;, itst/f, whereas 
the purpose, by contrast, is to be regarded as the concept existing concretely for 
itself Nonetheless, mechanism and chemism also differ from one another very 
specifically, namely, in the way that the object, in the form of mechanism, is 
initially only an indifferent relation to itself, whereas the chemical object, by 
contrast, demonstrates itself to be related straightaway to an other. Now, to be 
sure, even in the case of mechanism, as it develops, relations to an other are already 
emerging. But the relation of the mechanical objects to one another is only an 
external relation initially, such that the objects related to one another are left with 
the semblance (Schein] of self-sufficiency. Thus, for example, in nature the various 
heavenly bodies that form the solar system are connected by their movements and, 
by this means, demonstrate that they are related to one another. Yet motion, as the 
unity of space and time, is nothing but an utterly external and abstract relation 
and so it seems as though the heavenly bodies, related in such an external manner 
to one another, would be and even remain what they are without this relation that 
they have to one another. -In the case of chemism, by contrast, things behave 
otherwise. ChemicaUy differentiated [chemisch-differenten] objects are explicitly 
what they are, only through their difference [Differenz], and are mus the absolute 
drive to integrate themselves through and with one another. 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
275 
§ 201 
The chemical process thus has as its product the ntutral dimension of 
these strung-out extremes, a neutral dimension which these extremes are 
in thtmStlvtr. by means of the differentiation of the objects (the partic-
ularization), the concept, i.e. the concrete universal, joins itself [schliejlt 
sich . .. zurammtn] with the individuality, i.e. the product, and so merely 
with itsel£ Equally contained in this process are the other syUogisms; the 
individuality, as activity, is likewise the mediating factor just like the con-
crete universal, the essence of the strung-out extremes, which enters into 
existence [Dastin] in the product. 
§ 202 
Chemism, as the reflexive relationship [Refoxionsverhiiltnis] of objectivity, 
still presupposes, together with the differentiated [different] nature of the 
objects, the immtdiatt self-sufficiency of those same objects. The process 
is that of passing back and forth from one form into the other, forms 
that at the same time still remain external. - In the neutral product, the 
determinate properties that the extremes had opposite one another are 
sublated. This is, indeed, in keeping with the concept; but the animating 
principle of differentiating does not exist concretely in it since it has sunk 
back into immediacy. For this reason, the neutral dimension is a separable 
dimension. Yet the judging principle that severs the neuual dimension into 
differentiated {dijftrtnU] extremes and gives the undifferentiated [indiffer-
ent] objects in general their difference [Dijfirtnz] and animation opposite 
an other falls outside that first process, and so does the process as the 
separation that strings things out. 
Addition. The chemical process is still a finite, conditioned procen. The concept 
as such is as yet only the inner dimension of this process and does not yet come 
into concrete existence in its being-for-itself. In the neutral product, the process is 
extinguished and what stirs things up falls outside the process. 
§ 203 
The txttrnality of these two processes, the reduction of what are differ-
entiated {Dijftrenten] to something neutral and the differentiation of the 
undifferentiated [DijftrenzitrUngdes Indifformttn] or neutral, which allows 
them to appear as self-sufficient opposite one another, shows itS finitude 
in passing over into products in which they are sublated. Conversely, the 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
process presents the presupposed immediacy of the differentiated [dif 
for~nten) objects as a vacuous immediacy. -By means of this n~gation of 
externality and immediacy, into which the concept as object was immersed, 
it is posited fr~~ly and for its~lf opposit~ that externality and immediacy- as 
purpos~. 
Addition. The transition from chemism to the teleological relationship is entailed 
by the fact that the two forms of the chemical process reciprocally sublate one 
another. In this way it comes about that the concept, initially only present in 
iMljm chemism and in mechanism, becomes free, and the concept, rhus exisdng 
concretely for itself. is the purpos~. 
c. T~kowgy 
§ 204 
Purpose is the concept that is for its~lf and that has entered into a free 
concrete existence [Existtnz) via the ntgation of immediate objectivity. It is 
determined as something st1bj~ctiv~. in that this negation initially is abstract 
and thus objectivity also only stands over against it [i.e. the purpose] at 
first. In contrast to the totality of the concept, however, this determinacy 
of the subjectivity is on~-sided and, indeed, for it [the purpose) its~/f, since 
all determinacy has posited itself as sublated in it. Thus, too, for it [the 
purpose] the presupposed object is only an ideal, in its~lf vacuous reality. As 
this contradiction of its identity with itself opposite the negation and the 
opposition posited in it, it is itself the sublating, the activity of so negating 
the opposition that it posits it as identical with itself. This is the process of 
r~alizing th~ purpos~ in which, by rendering itself something other than its 
subjectivity and objectifying itself, it has sublated the difference of both, 
has joined its~lf together only with its~ If and has pr~s~rv~d itself. 
The concept of purpose is, on the one hand, superfluous; on the 
other hand, it is rightly labelled a conc~pt of r~ason and contrasted 
with the understanding's abstract-universal that relates itself to the 
particular (which it does not have in itself) only by way of subsuming 
it. - Furthermore, the difference of the purpose as the final caus.~ 
from the merely 4.Jicient caus~ (i.e. what is ordinarily called the 
cause) is of the utmost importance. The cause pertains to the not yet 
uncovered, blind necessity; for this reason it appears to pass over 
into its other and lose its originality in it in the course of being 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
277 
posited. Only in itself or for us is the cause in the effect first a cause, 
and does it come back into itself The purpose, by contrast, is posited 
as in itst/fthe determinacy, or what there [in efficient causality) still 
appears as being-other contatns the effect [here], so that, in its 
efficacy, it does not pass over [into something else] but instead 
prtserves itself That is to say, it brings about itself alone and is, in the 
end, what it was in the btginning, in the original state. What is truly 
original is so only by means of this self-preservation. -The purpose 
requires a speculative construal, as the concept that itself. in its own 
unity and in the itkality of its determinations, contains the judgment 
or the negation, the opposition of the subjective and the objective, 
and is equally the sublating of them. 
With regard to the purpose, one should not immediately or 
should not merely think of the form in which it is in consciousness, 
as a determination on hand in the representation. Through the 
concept of inner purposiveness, Kant re-awakened the idea in 
general and that of life in panicular. Aristotle's determination of life 
already contains the inner purposiveness and thus stands infinitely 
far beyond the concept of modern teleology which has only the 
finite, the txternal purposiveness in view. 
Need and drive are the examples of purpose lying closest at hand. 
They are the ftlt contradiction that takes place within the living 
subject itself and they enter into the activity of negating this 
negation that is still mere subjectivity. The satisfaction produces 
the peace between the subject and object, in that the objective 
dimension standing over there {driibm] in the still on hand 
contradiction (to the need) is equally sublated with respect to this, 
its one-sidedness, through the unification with the subjective 
dimension. -Those who speak so much of the solidity and 
invincibility of the finite have an example of the opposite in every 
drive. The drive is, so to speak, the certainty that the subjective 
dimension is only one-sided and has just as little truth as the 
objective dimension. The drive is, furthermore, the implemmtation 
[Ausfohrun_d of this, its certainty. It manages to sublate this 
opposition - that the subjective dimension would be and remain 
only something subjective, just as the objective dimension would 
equally be and remain only something objective- and {to sublate] 
this finitude of them. 
With regard to the activity of the purpose, attention may also be 
drawn to the fact that, in the syUogism that conjoins the purpose with 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
itself through the means of the realization, the negation of the termini 
surfaces - the just mentioned negation of immediate subjectivity 
that surfaces in the purpose as such, like that of the immediau 
objectivity (of the means and the presupposed objects). This is the 
same negation that is exercised in the elevation of the spirit to God 
in contrast to the finite things of the world as much as in contrast to 
one's own subjectivity. This is the moment which (as mentioned in 
the Introduction and in § 192) is overlooked and left aside in the form 
of the syllogisms at the level of the understanding, the form that is 
given to this elevation in the so-called proofs of God's existence. 
§ 205 
The teleological relation in its immediacy is initially the extnnal purposive-
ness, and the concept is opposite the object which is something presupposed. 
The purpose is thus finite, partly in terms of the content, pardy in terms of 
the fact that it has an external condition in an extant object as the mattrial 
of its realization. To this extent, its self-determination is merely formal. The 
immediacy entails, more precisely, that the particularity (as a determination 
of form, the subjectivity of the purpose) appears as reflected in itself,· the 
content as distinct from the totality of the form, the subjectivity in itself, 
the concept. This diversity constitutes the finitude of the purpose within 
itself The content is, by this means, as limited, contingent, and given as 
the object is something particular and extant. 
Addition. When speaking of purpose, one usually has one's eye only on external 
purposiveness. In this manner of considering things, they do not count as bearing 
their determination in themselves. Instead they count merely as m~ans that are 
used and used up to realize some purpose lying outside them. This is in general 
the viewpoint of utility, which formerly played a great role in the sciences as weU, 
but then deservedly came to be discredited, and recognized to be insufficient for 
true insight into the nature of things. To be sure, justice must be done to finite 
things as such inasmuch as they are to be considered to be other than ultimate 
and to point beyond themselves. This negativity of finite things, however, is their 
own dialectic and, in order to know this, one first has to get involved with their 
positive content. Moreover, what is at stake in the case of the teleological manner 
of consideration is the well-intended interest of pointing out the wisdom of God 
announcing itself in nature. To this extent, accordingly, it should be noted that, 
with this search for purposes that things serve as means, one does not get beyond 
the finite and easily lapses into meagre reflections, as, for example, when not only 
is the grapevine considered from the viewpoint of the familiar use that it affords 
human beings, but even the cork tree is so considered in relation to the stopper 
that is cut from irs bark in order ro seal the wine bottle. In former times, entire 
books have been written in this vein and it is easy to establish that neither the true 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
279 
interest of religion nor that of science can be advanced in this way. The external 
purposiveness stands immediately before the idea, bur sometimes what thus stands 
on the threshold is precisely more insufficient than anything else. 
§206 
The teleological relation is the syllogism in which the subjective purpose 
joins itself together [sich ... zusammenschliejlt] with the objectivity external 
to it through a middle term [Mitt~] that is the unity of the two, both as 
the purposiv~ activity and as the objectivity immediauly posited under the 
purpose, the m~ans [Mitt~/]. 
Addition. The: devc:lopment of the purpose into the: idea comes about by way 
of three steps: first, that of the subjective purpose; second, that of the purpose 
bringing itself about [sich vollfohrendm]; and third, that of the: purpose that has 
brought itself about. - At the outset we have the subjective purpose and this, as 
the concept being for itsdf, is irsc:lf the totality of rhe conceptual moments. The 
first of these moments is that of the universality identical with itself: as it were, the 
neutral first water in which everything is contained but not yet separated out. The 
second is then the particularization of this universal, through which it receives a 
determinate content. But since this determinate content is posited by the activity 
of the universal, the latter then returns to itself by means of that content and 
joins itself together with itself[schliej!t sich mit sich selbst zusammm]. Accordingly, 
when we set a purpose in front of us, we: also say that we decide [beschliejfm] 
on something and accordingly consider ourselves at the outset to be, as it were, 
open and amenable to this or that determination. Similarly then, however, it is 
also said that 'one has resolved [mtsdllossm] to do something', which expresses 
that the subject has emerged from his inwardness, i.e:. his being only for himself, 
and let himself in for rhe objectivity standing opposite him. This then yields the: 
progression from the mc:rdy subjective: purpose to the purposive activity directed 
outwards. 
§ 207 
1. The subj~ctive purpose is the syllogism in which the universal concept 
joins together with individuality by means of particularity, such that this 
[individuality] as the self-determination judg~s. That is to say, this indi-
viduality both particularizes that still indeterminate universal, making it 
a determinate content, and also posits the opposition of subjectivity and 
objectivity. It [this individuality] is, in itself, at the same time the return 
into itself since it determines the concept's subjectivity (presupposed as 
something opposite the objectivity) to be deficient in relacion to the total-
ity that has joined together with itself and since at the same time it thereby 
turns outward. 

280 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
§ 208 
2. This activity rum~d outward is the individuality that, in the subjective 
purpose, is identical to the pardcularity in which, next co the content, the 
~umal 
obj~ctivity is also inc/Utkd. As such, this activity relates at the outset 
imm~diat~ly to the object and takes control of it as a m~am. The concept 
is this immediate pow~r because it is the negativity identical with itself, in 
which the b~ing of the object is thoroughly determined only as something 
ir.ka/ [ir.k~Ues]. - The mtir~ middk tmn is now this inner power of the 
concept as activity, with which the obj~ct is immediately unified as m~ans 
and under which it stands. 
In the finite purposiveness, the middle term is this status of being 
broken [das G~broch~n~] into two moments external to one another, 
the activity and the object. The relation of the purpose as pown to 
this object and the latter's being conquered by it is imm~dia~- it 
is the first pT?mis~ of the inference- insofar as in the concept qua 
ideality that is for itself the object is posited as in itu/f nothing. This 
relation or first premise b~com~s itu/f th~ middk urm which is, at the 
same time, the syllogism in its~lf, since by means of this relation the 
purpose joins together its activity, in which it remains contained and 
dominant, with objectivity. 
Addition. The process of carrying out the purpose is the mediated manner of 
realizing the purpose; just as necessary, however, is the immediate realization of 
it. The purpose seizes the object immediately because it is the power over the 
object, because in it the particularity is contained and, in the Iauer, the objectivity 
is also contained. - The living entity has a body; the soul takes control of it·and 
has immediately objectified itself in it. The human soul has a great deal to do in 
making its corporeal condition a means. A human being must first take possession 
of his body, as it were, so that it may be the instrument of his soul. 
§209 
3· The purposive activity with its means is still directed outward, since the 
purpose is also not identical with the object; thus it must first be mediated 
with the object. The means, as the object in this stcond premise, is in 
imm~diau relation with the othn extreme of the syllogism, the objectivity 
as presupposed, the material. This relation is the sphere of the mechanism 
and chemism now snving the purpose that is their truth and free concept. 
That the subjective purpose, as the power of these processes in which the 

Thr Encyclopedia Logic 
281 
objrctivr dimmsion rubs up against itself and sublates itself. keeps itself 
outsitk thrm and is what prrsrrvrs it~lfin them - this is the cunning of 
reason. 
Additum. Reason is as cunning as it is pownfol. The cunning consists generally 
in the activity of mediating, which, by letting the objects, in keeping with their 
own nature, act on one another and wear themselves out on one another, without 
meddling immediately in this process, achieves its purpose alone. In this sense, one 
can say that the divine providence, over against the world and its process, behaves 
as the absolute cunning. God gives free rein to human beings with their particular 
passions and interests and, by this means, what comes about is the accomplishment 
of his aims which are different from what was pursued by those of whom he makes 
use in the process. 
§ 210 
Thus, the realized purpose is the positrd unity of the subjective and the 
objective dimensions. This unity, however, is essentially determined in 
such a way that the subjective and objective dimensions are neutralized 
and sublated only with respect to their on~sidednm, while the objective 
dimension is subjected and made to conform to the purpose as the free 
concept and, thereby, to t~e power over it. The purpose prrurvrs itself 
against and in the objective dimension because, in addition to being the ont-
sitkd subjective dimension (the particular), it is also the concrete universal, 
the identity ofboth, that is in itself [dk an sich srimtk ldmtitiit bridrr]. This 
universal, that as simple is reflected in itself, is thr contmt that remains thr 
samr through all three tmnini [terms] of the syllogism and their movement. 
§211 
In the finite purposiveness, however, the purpose carried out is also some-
thing as internally broken as was the middle term and the initial purpose. 
What has come about is thus only a form posited rxtrrna/Jy in the mate-
rial found before it, a form that, on account of the restricted content of 
the purpose, is likewise a contingent determination. The purpose attained 
is thus only an object that is also in turn a means or material for other 
purposes and so on ad infinitum. 
§ 212 
What happens, however, in the process of realizing the purpose in itsrlf 
is that thr onr-sUird subjrctivity and the semblance [Schrin] of objective 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
self-sufficiency on hand opposite it are sublated. In seizing the means, 
the concept posits itself as the object's essence as it is in itself, in the 
mechanical and chemical process, the self-sufficiency of the object has 
already evaporated in itself and in the course it takes under the domi-
nance of the purpose, the semblance of that self-sufficiency, the negative 
dimension opposite the concept, sublates itself. Yet this object is immedi-
ately already posited as vacuous in itself, as only ideal by virtue of the 
fact that the executed purpose is determined onfy as means and mate-
rial. With this, the opposition of content and form has vanished as well. 
Since the purpose, by sublating [durch Aufhebrmg] the formal determi-
nations, joins itself together with itself, the form is posited as idmtica/ 
with itself, rhus as content, so that the concept as the activity of the form 
has only itself as content. It is thus posited through this process generally 
what the concept of the purpose was: the unity, being in itself, of the sub-
jective and the objective dimensions now posited as being for itself- the 
idea. 
AdtJition. The finitude of the purpose consists in the fact that, in the course 
of its realization, the material applied as means to it is only subsumed under it 
externally and made to conform to it. But, now, in fact the object in its~ifis the 
concept and because the concept, as purpose, is realized therein, this is only the 
manifestation of its own inner dimension. The objectivity is thus as it were only a 
huU under which the concept lies hidden. Within the finite, we cannot experience 
it or sec that the purpose is truly attained. To accomplish the infinite purpose is 
rhus merely to sublare the illusion [ Tiiuschung] that it is not yet accomplished. The 
good, rhe absolute good, brings itself to completion in the world eternally and the 
result is that ir is already brought to completion in and for itself, without needing 
first to wait for us. It is this illusion in which we live and at the same time it alone 
is th~ activating principle upon which the interest of the world rests. The idea in 
its process fabricates that illusion for itself, positing an other opposite itself. and 
its action consists in sublating this illusion. Truth emerges only from this error 
and herein lies the reconciliation with error and with finitude. Otherness or error, 
as something sublated, is itself a necessary moment of the truth, the truth which 
only is by making itself its own result. 
C. THE IDEA 
§ 213 
The idea is the true in and for itself, the absolute unity of the concept and objec-
tivity. Its ideal content is none other than the concept in its determinations. 
Its real [reeller} content is only its exhibition [Darstellung], an exhibition 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
that it provides for itself in the form of external existence [Dastin) and, 
with this shape incorporated into the concept's ideality and in its power, 
the concept thus preserves itself in that exhibition. 
The definition of the absolutt, that it is the idta, is itself absolute. All 
previous definitions go back to this one.- The idea is the truth; for 
the truth is chis, that objectivity corresponds to the concept, - not 
chat external things correspond to my representations; these are only 
correct representations that I, this person [kh Diestr), have. In the 
idea it is not a matter of an indexical this [DitsmJ, it is a matter 
neither of representations nor of external things.- But tvtrything 
actual, insofar as it is something true, is also the idea and possesses its 
truth only through and in virtue of the idea. The individual being is 
some side or other of the idea, but for this still other actualities are 
needed, actualities that likewise appear as obtaining particularly for 
themselves; the concept is realized only in them together and in their 
relation. The individual taken by itself (for sich) does not correspond 
to its concept; this limitation of its existence constitutes its finitwk 
and its demise. 
The idea itself is no more to be taken as an idea of something 
or other than the concept is to be taken merely as a determinate 
concept. The absolute is the universal idea and the ont idea that, by 
judging, particularizes itself into a systtm of determinate ideas: ideas, 
however, that are only this, the process of going back into the one 
idea, their truth. On the basis of this judgment, the idea is at the 
outset only the one, universal substance, but its developed, true 
actuality is that it is as subject and thus as spirit. 
The idea is frequently taken for something logical in a merely 
formal sense, insofar as it does not have some concrete existence 
[Existmz] as its point of departure and support. One must leave such 
a view to the standpoints for which the concretely existing thing and 
all further determinations that have not yet penetrated to the idea 
still count as so-called realitits and true ll('tualitits. - Equally false 
is the representation of the idea as though it were only something 
abstract. It is this, of course, insofar as everything untrut is consumed 
in it. However, in itself it is essentially concrete since it is the free 
concept, the concept determining itself and thereby determining 
itself as reality. It would be something formally abstract only if the 
concept that is its principle were taken as the abstract unity and not 
as it is, namely, as the negative return of it into itself and as subjectivity. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
Addition. By uurh, one understands ar first that Iltnow [wisst] how something 
is. Yet this is truth only in relation to consciousness or the formal truth, mere 
correctness. In contrast ro this, truth in the deeper sense consists in this, that 
objectivity is identical with the concept. It is truth in this deeper sense that is 
at srake if, for example, one is speaking of a trut state or of a trut work of an. 
These objects [ Gtgmstiintk] are tn1t if they are what they should be, that is to 
say, if their reality corresponds to their concept. So construed, the untrue is the 
same as what is otherwise also called 'the bad'. A bad human being is one who 
is not truly human, i.e. a human being who does not behave in keeping with 
the concept or determination of a human being. Nothing, meanwhile, can subsist 
utterly without rhe identity of the concept and reality. Even something bad and 
untrue is only insofar as its reality still behaves somehow in conformity with its 
concept. Something thoroughly bad or at odds with the concept is, precisely for 
this reason, something collapsing in itself. It is the concept alone through which 
things have their standing in the world; that is to say, in the language of religious 
representation, things are what they are only by vinue of the divine and thereby 
creative thought dwelling within them. - When speaking of the idea, one must 
not imagine something remote and other-worldly by this. The idea is instead what 
is thoroughly present, and so too ir is to be found in every consciousness, even 
if muddled and stunted. - We represent the world to ourselves as an enormous 
totality created by God and, indeed, such that God has revealed himself to us in 
it. So too we regard the world as governed by divine providence and herein lies the 
fact that the asundered character [Austinander] of the world is eternally led back to 
rhe unity our of which: it went forth and, in keeping with that unity, is preserved.-
From time immemorial in philosophy, ir has been abour nothing other than 
thoughtfully knowing the idea, and underlying everything that deserves the name 
'philosophy' has been the consciousness of an absolute unity of what holds for 
the understanding only in irs separation. - The proof that the idea is the truth 
is nor something to be demanded only now; the entire foregoing elaboration and 
development of thinking contains this proof. The idea is the result of the course 
rhat this has taken, a course that is, nevenheless, not to be understood as'if it 
were something only mediated, that is to say, mediated by something other than 
itself. The idea is instead its own result and, as such, just as much immediate as 
mediated. The stages considered so far, those of being and essence and equally 
of the concept and objectivity, are nor something fixed and resting on themselves 
with regard to this difference among them. Instead they have been demonstrated 
to be dialectical and their truth is only that of being moments of the idea. 
§ 214 
The idea can be grasped as reason (this is the genuine philosophical meaning 
of reason), further as subjtct-objtrt, as the unity of the itbal and the real, of 
the fini~ and the infini~. of the soul and the body, as the possibility that has its 
actuality in itself, as that the nature of which can only be conceived as existing, 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
and so fonh, because in it (the idea] all relationships of the undemanding 
are contained, but in their infiniu return and identity in themselves. 
The understanding makes easy work of pointing out that everything 
said of the idea is st/f-contradictory. This can be equally conceded 
to it or rather it is already accomplished in the idea; - a work that 
is the work of reason and, of course, not as easy as that of the 
understanding. -The understanding shows that the idea is self4 
contradictory because, for example, the subjective dimension is 
only subjective and the objective dimension, by contrast, is opposed 
to it; because being is something completely different from the 
concept and thus cannot be plucked from it; similarly, because 
the finite is only finite and precisely the opposite of the infinite, 
and consequently is not identical with it and so on for all 
determinations. If the understanding thus shows that the idea is 
self4 contradictory, the [science of] logic points out the opposite 
instead, namely, that the subjective dimension that is supposed to be 
merely subjective lacks any truth, contradicts itself, and passes over 
into its opposite, as does th.e finite that is supposed to be merely 
finite, the infinite that is supposed to be merely infinite, and so on. 
By this means, the process of passing over into its opposite and the 
unity in which the extremes are as something sublated, as a shining 
[Schtinen] or as moments, reveals itself as their truth. 
The understanding that tackles the idea suffers from a twofold 
misunderstanding. In tht first place, it takes the extrtmes of the idea, 
however they may be expressed, insofar as thty are in their unity, yet 
in the sense and determination proper to them insofar as they are not 
in their concrete unity but instead are still abstractions outside it. 
The understanding mistakes no less the rtlation, even if it is already 
posited explicitly. In this way the understanding overlooks, for 
example, the nature of the copula in a judgment, which asserts of the 
individual, the subject, that the individual is just as much something 
not individual but instead something universal. -In tht second plact, 
the understanding holds its reflection that the idea that is identical 
with itself contains the ntgativt of itself (that it contains the 
contradiction) to be an tXttmal reflection, that does not fall to the 
idea itself. In fact, however, this is not a wisdom proper to the 
understanding. The idea is instead itself the dialectic that eternally 
separates and distinguishes what is identical with itself from the 
differentiated [Dijftrenten], the subjective from the objective, the 

286 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
finite from the infinite, the soul from the body and, only insofar as it 
does, is it eternal creation, eternally alive, and eternal spirit. Because 
ir is thus itself the passing over or rather the transposing of itself into 
abstract understanding, it is also eternally r~ason. It [i.e. the idea] is 
the dialectic that takes what is understandable in this [superficial] 
way [diese·s Vmtandige]- including the diversity of its finite nature 
and the false semblance (fa Is chen Sch~in] of self-sufficiency of its 
productions- and renders it understandable in a recursive way 
[wi~tkr vmtiindigt} and leads it back to unity. Since this twofold 
movement is neither temporal nor separate and distinct in any way -
otherwise it would be again only abstract understanding -, it is the 
process of eternally intuiting [Anschaum] itself in the other; the 
concept that has carried its~lf out in its objectivity, the object that 
is inner purposiveness, essential subjectivity. 
The divm~ ways of construing the idea, as unity of the ideal 
and the real, of the fin it~ and infini~. of identity and diff"mu 
[Differmz], and so on, are more or less formal, since they designate 
some sort of stage of the det~inatt conc~pt. Only the concept itself 
is free and the truly univmal; in the idea its det~inacy is thus 
equally only itself, - an objectivity into which it, as the universal, 
continuously sets itself and in which it has only its own determinacy, 
the total determinacy. The idea is the infinit~ judgment, each of the 
sides of which is the self-sufficient totality and, precisely by virtue of 
completing itself to this end [dazu], has just as much passed over 
into the other. None of the other determinate concepts is this 
totality completed in its two sides, except the concept itself and the 
obj~ctivity. 
§ 215 
The idea is essentially a proem since its identity is that of the absolute 
and free concept only insofar as it is the absolute negativity and thus 
dialectical. It is the course [Verlaufl in which the concept as the univer-
sality that is individuality determines itself to be objectivity and to be the 
opposite of objectivity, and in which this externality that has the concept 
as its substance leads itself back into subjectivity through its immanent 
dialectic. 
Because the idea is (a) a process, the expression 'the unity of the finite 
and infinite, of thinking and being, and so on', as an expression. for 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
the absolute, is false, as often noted. For this unity expresses an 
abstract, calmly enduring identity. The expression is likewise false 
because clte idea is (b) subjectivity, since that unity expresses the 
in-itself. the substantial dimension of the true unity. The infinite thus 
appears as only neutralized relative to the finite, and so too the 
subjective relative to the objective, thinking relative to being. But 
in clte negative unity of the idea the infinite reaches over and beyond 
clte finite, as does thinking over being, subjectivity over objectivity. 
The unity of the idea is subjectivity, thinking, infinity, and hence it is 
essentially distinct from the idea as substance just as this overreaching 
subjectivity (thinking, infinity) is to be distinguished from the 
oru-sided subjectivity (one·sided thinking, one-sided infinity) to 
which it reduces itself in judging and making determinations. 
Addition. The idea, as a process, runs through three stages in its development. 
The first form of the idea is lift, i.e. the idea in the form of immediacy. The second 
form is then that of the mediation or the difference [DWmnz), and this is the idea 
as knowing which appears in the twofold shape of the theo"tical and the practical 
idea. The process of knowing has, as its result, the restoration of the unity, enriched 
by the difference, and this yields the third form of the hereby absolutt itka, the 
finaJ stage of the logical process that proves itself to be at once the truly first and 
the only entity that is through itself aJone. 
a. Lift 
§ 216 
The immediate idea is lift. The concept is realized as the soul in a body, the 
soul is the immediate, self-referring universality of the body's externality 
just as much as it is the body's particularization, so that the body expresses 
no other differences than the determination of the concept, and finally 
it is the individuality as infinite negativity - the dialectic of the body's 
objectivity, [the factors of which are] outside one another, an objectivity 
that is led back into subjectivity from the semblance of self-sufficient 
subsistence, so that all members are reciprocally momentary means as 
much as momentary purposes, while life, inasmuch as it is the inceptive 
particuJarization, results in itself as the negative unity that is for itself and, in 
the dialectic of embodiment [Leiblichkeit], joins itself together only with 
itself. - Life is thus essentially a living mtity [Lebmdiges] and, with regard 
to its immediacy, this individual living entity. In this sphere, finitude has 

288 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
the determination that soul and body are stparable, on account of the 
immediacy of the idea; this constitutes the mortality of the living. But 
those two sides of the idea are diverse component pans [Bestandstiicke] only 
insofar as it is dead. 
AJtlition. The individual members of the body are what they are only by means 
of their unity and in relation to it. Thus, for example, a hand that is severed 
from the body,·is a hand only in name, but not in reality [dtr Sacht nach], as 
Aristotle already noted. - From the standpoint of the understanding, life is usually 
regarded as a mystery and generally as incomprthmsibk. In this way, meanwhile, 
the understanding merely confesses its finitude and vacuousness. Life is, in fact, so 
little something incomprehensible that in it we are confronted with the concept 
itself and, more precisely, the immtdiate idea existing concretely as a concept. 
With this, then, the deficiency of life is also at once articulated. This deficiency 
consists in the fact that here concept and reality do not truly correspond to one 
another. The concept of life is the soul and this concept has the body for its reality. 
The souJ is, as it were, poured into its corporality and thus the former is only 
stnsing and fotling [empftndendl but not yet freely being-for-itself. The process of 
life consists then in overcoming the immediacy in which it is still caught up, and 
dtis process (which is itself in turn threefold) has as its result dte idea in dte form 
of dte judgment, i.e. the idea as knowing. 
§ 217 
The living is the syllogism, whose moments are systems and syllogisms 
in themselves (§§ 198, 201, 207) which, however, are active syllogisms, 
processes, and in the subjective unity of the living, they are only ·one 
process. The living is thus the process of its coming to closure together 
with itself [Zusammmschliejftns mit sich selbst], that runs its course by means 
of three processes. 
· 
§ 218 
1. The first is the process of the living within itself, in which it divides 
itself in itself and makes its corporal condition [Leiblichkeit] its object, its 
inorganic nature. For its part, this inorganic side, as the relatively external, 
enters into the difference and opposition of its moments that reciprocally 
surrender themselves, the one assimilating the other to itself. and preserve 
themselves in the process of producing themselves. This activity of the 
members, however, is only one activity of the subject, the activity into 
which its productions go back, so that through that activity only the 
subject is produced, i.e. it merely reproduces itself. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
Addition. The process of living that is internal to it has in nature the threefold 
form of sensibiliry, irritabiliry, and reproduction. As sensibiliry, the living is imme-
diately a simple relation to itself, the soul that is everywhere prc:scnt, in its body, 
the external juxtapositions of which have no truth for it. As irritabiliry, the living 
appears divided in itself and, as reproduction, the living is constantly reproducing 
itself from the inner difference of its members and organs. The living is only as 
this continually self-renewing process within itself. 
§ 219 
2. But the judgment of the concept proceeds freely to release from itself the 
objective dimension as a self-sufficient totality. The negative relation of the 
living to itself, as immediate individuality, presupposes an inorganic nature 
standing over against it. Since this negative aspect of itself is just as much a 
moment of the concept [Begriffimoment] of the living itself, it is thus in the 
latter (the at once concrete universality) as a lack. The dialectic, through 
which the object as something in itselfvacuous sublates itself, is the activity 
of the living entity certain of itself that accordingly preserves, ekvelops, and 
objectifies itself in this process opposite an inorganic nature. 
Addition. The living stands over against an inorganic nature towards which it 
behaves as its power and which it assimilates to itself. The result of this process 
is not, as in the case of the chemical process, a neutral product in which the self-
sufficiency of both sides standing opposite one another is sublated. Instead, the 
living demonstrates itsdf to be something that reaches over and beyond its other 
[u!Hrgr~ifond ub~r s~in Andms] which is incapable of withstanding its power. The 
inorganic nature that is subjugated by the living endures this because it is in itu!f 
the same as life is for itst/f Hence, in the other, the living is merely connecting 
with itself. When the soul has fled the body, the play of the elementary powers 
of objectiviry commences. Thc:sc powers are, so to speak, continually poised to 
initiate their process in the organic body, and life is the constant battle against 
them. 
§ 220 
3· In the initial stage of its process, the living individual behaves as a 
subject and concept in itself. Through its second stage, it assimilates its 
external objectivity to itself and thus posits in itself the real determinacy. 
As a result, it is now in itself the genus, substantial universality. The par-
ticularization of the latter is the relation of the subject to another subject 
of its genus and the judgment is the relationship of the genus to these 
determinate individuals standing opposite one another: the difference of the 
sexes [ Geschkchtsdiffirenz]. 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
§ 221 
The process of the gmus brings this [genus] to the point of being-for-itstlf 
Because life is still the immediate idea, the product of the process breaks 
down into two sides. On the ont side, the living individual in general, 
at first presupposed as immediate, emerges now as something mtdiattd 
and productd. On the othtr side, however, the living individuality that, on 
account of its initial immtdiacy, behaves ntgativt/y towards the universality, 
ptrishts in this [universality] as the power. 
A4dition. What is alive dies because it is the contradiction of being in itself 
the universal, the genus, and yet existing concretely and immediately only as 
individual. In death, the genus demonstrates itself to be the power over the 
immediately individual. - For the animal, the process of the genus is the highest 
point of its condition of being alive. But the animal does not manage to be for 
itself in its genus, succumbing instead to the Iauer's power. What is immediately 
alive mediates itself with itself in the process of the genus and thus elevates itself 
above its immediacy, only to sink back down to that same immediacy again and 
again. In this way, life runs its course at first merely into the bad infinity of the 
progression ad infinitum. What, meanwhile, in keeping with the concept, comes 
about through the process oflife is the sublation and overcoming of the immediacy 
in which the idea as life is stiU ensnared. 
§ 222 
By this means, however, the idea of life has not only freed itself from just 
any (particular) immtdiau 'this', but from this initial immediacy altogether. 
In this way, it comes to itst/f, to its truth, entering into concrett txisttnct 
[Existenz] as the frte gmus for itself The death of the merely immediate, 
individual living thing [Ltbmdigktit] is the spirit tmtrging. 
b. Knowing [Das Erktnntn] 
§ 223 
The idea concretely exists freely for itselfi nsofar as universality is the element 
in which it txists concrttt/y or insofar as it is objectivity itself as the concept; 
[that is to say,) the idea has itself for an object [ Gtgmstandj. Its subjectivity, 
determined as universality, is purt differmtiating within it - intuiting that 
keeps itself in this identical universality. But, as a differentiating in a 
determinate way, it is the further judgmmt of thrusting itself as a totality 
away from itself and, indeed, initially presupposing itself as the txttmal 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
291 
universe. These are two judgments that are in the~lves identical but not 
yet posited as identical. 
§224 
The relation of these two ideas that are identical in themselves or as life, 
is thus the relative relation that makes up the determination of finitude in 
this sphere. It is the relationship of refoction, since the differentiation of the 
idea in it [the idea] itself is only the first judgment, the presupposing is not 
yet a positing, and thus, for the subjective idea, the objective dimension 
is the extant immediate world or the idea as life in the appearance of 
individual concrete existence. At the same time, insofar as this judgment is 
a pure differentiating within it [the idea] itself (see the preceding section), 
the idea is for itseijboth itself and its other. Thus it is the certainty ofbeing 
in itself the identity of this objective world with it. - Reason comes to the 
world with the absolute faith in its capacity to posit the identity and elevate 
its cenainry to truth, and with the drive to posit as also vacuous for it that 
opposition that is in itself vacuous. 
§ 225 
In general, this process is knowing [d4s Erkennen}. In it, in one activiry, 
the opposition, the one-sidedness of subjectivity together with the one-
sidedness of objectivity. is sublated in itself But this process of sublating 
takes place at the outset only in itself The process as such is thus itself 
immediately beset with the finitude of this sphere and falls apart into the 
twofold, diversely posited movement of the drive. [In one respect,] it is the 
drive to sublate the one-sided ness of the subjectivity of the idea by taking 
up into itself the world that is [seiende Welt], taking it up into subjective 
representing and thinking, and to fill out the abstract certainty of itself 
with this objectivity as content, an objectiviry that thus counts as true. 
Conversely. it is the drive to sublate the one-sidedness of the objective world 
that here accordingly, by contrast, counts as a semblance, a collection of 
contingencies and shapes vacuous in themselves, and to determine and 
mould it through the inntr dimension of the subjective, that counts here 
as the objective, as what truly is. The former is the drive of knowledge 
[Wissen] to truth, knowing [Erkmnen] as such, the theoretical [activity]; the 
latter is the drive of the good to bring itself about, willing, the practical 
activiry of the idea. 

292 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
a. Knowing 
§ 226 
The universal finitude of knowing that lies in the first judgment, the 
pmupposition of the opposition (§ 224), which its very action contradicts, 
specifies itself more precisely in its own idea in this direction, that its 
moments receive the form of diversity from one another and, since those 
moments are in fact complete, they come to stand in the relationship of 
reflection, not of the concept, to one another. The assimilation of the 
material [Stofftr] as something given thus appears as a way of taking it up 
into conceptual determinations that at the same time remain catrnal to 
it, determinations that likewise display themselves opposite one another as 
diverse. It is reason active as untkrrtanding. The truth that this knowing 
comes to is thus likewise only finite; the infinite truth of the concept is 
fixed as a goal that is only in its~/f, something beyond this knowing. But 
in its external action, it stands under the guidance of the concept, and 
conceptual determinations make up the inner thread of the progression. 
Addition. The finitude of knowing lies in the presupposition of a world already 
found before it, and in the process the knowing subject appears as a tabula rasa. 
This representation of things has been ascribed to Aristotle, although no one is 
more removed from this external way of construing knowing than Aristotle. This 
knowing does nor yet know [wt~{S'] itself as the activity of the concept, something 
which it is only in itstlf, but not for itst{f. Its behaviour appears to it as something 
passive, yet it is in fact active. 
§ 227 
Because it presupposes what is difPrmtiated as a being that is found to 
be already on hand, standing opposite it (the manifold facts of external 
nature or of consciousness), finite knowing has (1) the formal idmtity or 
the abstraction of universality as the form of its activity at the outset. This 
activity thus consists in dissolving the given concrete dimension, individ-
uating its differences, and giving them the form of abstract univmality; 
or in leaving the concrete dimension as the ground and, through abstrac-
tion from the particularities that seem inessential, extracting a concrete 
universal, the genus or the force and the law. Such is the analytic method. 
Addition. It is customary to speak of analytic and synthttic method as though 
following the one or the other were a mere matter of our whim. Yet this is in 
no way the case. Instead, which of the two methods to apply- both of which 
result from the concept of finite knowing- depends upon the form of the objects 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
293 
[ Gegmstiinde] themselves that arc: to be known. Knowing is at the outset analytical. 
The: object has for it the shape of an isolated individual [Gestalt tkr Verdnulung] 
and the activiry of analytic knowing aims at tracing the individual lying before 
it back ro a universal. Here thinking_ has the meaning of abstracrion or fonnal 
idenriry only. This is the standpoint on which Locke and all empiricists stand. 
Many say that knowing can do nothing further than analyse the given, concrete 
objects [ Gegmstiinde] into their abstract elements and then consider the latter in 
isolation. It is immediately evident, meanwhile, that this is to tum things upside 
down and that the: sort of knowing that wants to take things as they are thereby 
falls inro self-contradiction. Thus, for example, the chemist brings a piece of meat 
to his test-tube, breaks it down in a variery of ways, and then says that he has found 
that it consists of nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen, and so on. However, these abstract 
bits of material are then no longer meat. Something similar is the: case when the 
empirical psychologist analyses an action into the diverse sides which it presents 
for consideration and then clings to them in abstraction from one: another. In this 
case, the analytically treated object [ Gegmstandl is regarded, as it were, as an onion 
from which one peds one skin after the other. 
§ 228 
This universality is (2) also a tktermina~ one. The activity here proceeds 
according to the moments of the concept that, in finite knowing, is not 
in its infinity but is the unekrstandabk [vmtandige], determinate concept 
instead. Taking up the object [ Gegenstantlj into the forms of the latter 
concept is the synthetic method. 
Addition. The movement of the synthetic method is the inversion of the analytic 
method. While the latter advances by going from the: individual as its starting point 
to the universal, in the former case the universal {as definition) forms the point of 
departure instead, and there is a progression from it through the particularization 
{in the division) to the individual {the theorem). With this, the synthetic method 
demonstrates itself to be the: development of the moments of the concept in the 
object [ Gegenstane/J. 
§ 229 
(aa) Knowing initially puts the object [ GegenstandJ into the form of the 
determinate concept in general so that, by this means, its genus and its 
universal tkterminacy are posited. The respective object is the definition. Its 
material and justification are procured by the analytic method(§ 227). The 
determinacy is, nevertheless, supposed to be only a characteristic [ M erkmal], 
that is to say, something to assist merely subjective knowing that is exremal 
to the object [ Gegenstand]. 

294 
Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
Adtlition. The definicion itself contains the three: moments of the concept: 
the universal as the proximate genus (gmus proximum}, the particular as the 
determinacy of the genus (qualitas sp~cifica), and the: individual as the defined 
object [ G~msttlnd) itself. With respect to definition, the question immediately 
arises 'where does it comes from?' and this question is generally to be answered 
by noting that definitions arise on the analytic path. With this answer, however, 
the dispute about the correctness of the definitions put forward immediately 
presents itself. For it is a matter here of the perceptions that formed one's point 
of departure and the kinds of viewpoint from which one looked. The richer the 
object [ G~mstand] is that is to be defined, i.e. me more diverse sides it offers for 
consideration, the more diverse the definitions given of it tend to be:. Thus, for 
example, there is an entire array of definitions of life, of the state, and so forth. 
Geometry, by contrast, has an easy time making definitions since its object, space, 
is such an abstract object [ G~gmsttlna]. - Fun her, there is generally no necessity 
on hand with respect to the content of the defined object [G~msttlnd]. One 
is supposed to accept that there is space, that there are plants, animals, and so 
forth, and it is not a matter for geometry, botany, and so forth to point out the 
necessity of the: defined objects [ G~gmstiintk). On account of this circumstance, the 
synthetic method is no more appropriate for philosophy than the analytic method 
is, since philosophy has, before anything else, to justify to itself the necessity of 
its objects [G~gmstantk]. Nevertheless, the effort has been made over and over 
to make usc of the synthetic method in philosophy. Spinoza in particular begins 
with definitions and says, for example, 'Substance is the causa sui.' He lays down 
the most speculadve themes in his definitions, but in the form of assurances. The 
same holds for Schelling. 
§230 
(bb) The account of the second moment of the concept, the determinacy 
of the universal as· particularization, is given by the division in terms of 
some sort of external aspect. 
Adtlition. What is demanded of the division is that it be complete, and part of 
this requirement is a principle or ground of the division that is so constituted that 
the division based on it encompasses the entire scope of the domain designated 
by the definition in general. In the course of the division it is then necessary, in 
addition, that it be done in such a way that its principle has been drawn from 
the nature of the object [ G~mstand] itself that is divided up. In this way the 
division is made naturally and not anificially, i.e. arbitrarily. So, for example, in 
zoology in the division of mammals, the claws and teeth are used above all as the 
ground of the division, and this is sensible since mammals themselves distinguish 
themselves from one another through these pans of their bodies and the general 
type of the diverse classes of them [i.e. mammals] are to be led back to this. - In 
general, the true division is to be regarded as determined by the concept. To this 
extent it is initially threefold; but since the particularity presents itself as something 

Th~ Encyclopedia Logic 
195 
doubled, the division then progresses to something fourfold as well. Trichotomies 
predominate in the sphere of the: spirit and it is one of Kant's accomplishments to 
have drawn attention to this circumstance. 
§ 231 
(cc) In the concuu indiviJuality (such that the simple determinacy in 
the definition is construed as a r~/ationship), the object [ Gtgmstllnd] is a 
synthetic relation of diffirmtiaud determinations- a th~"m. Because they 
are diverse, their identity is a m~diat~d identity. The process of supplying 
the material that constitutes the middle members is the construction; and 
the mediation itself, out of which the necessity of that relation for knowing 
goes forth, is the proof 
According to the usual accounts given of the difference between the 
synthetic and the analytic method, it appears on the whole arbitrary 
which one person might want to use. If the concrete dimension that 
is presented in the synthetic method as the result is pmupposed, then 
the abstract determinations may be analysed as its cons~qutnces (those 
abstract determinations constituting pmuppositions and material for 
the prooO. The algebraic dtjinitions of curved lines are theornns in 
the route taken by geometry. Similarly, analysis of the Pythagorean 
theorem, assumed as the definition of a right-angled rriangle, 
would yield principles proven earlier in geometry for the sake of 
establishing it. The arbitrariness of the choice rests upon the fact that 
the one method like the other proceeds from something ncttrnally 
pmttppos~J. As far as the nature of the concept is concerned, 
analysing is primary since it first has to elevate the given, empirically 
concrete material into the form of universal abstractions which can 
only then be put forward as definitions in the synthetic method. 
That these methods, so essential and so splendidly successful in 
their distinctive fields, are not usable for knowing philosophically is 
self-evident, since they have presuppositions and since knowing 
behaves in them as understanding, proceeding in terms of formal 
identity. In the case of Spinoza who principally employed the 
geometric method and, indeed, for speculative concepts, the 
formalism of the method makes itself immediately apparent. The 
Wolffian philosophy that develops it to the extremes of pedantry is a 
metaphysics of the understanding even in terms of its content. -
The abuse of the formalism of these methods in philosophy and the 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
sciences has been replaced in more recent times with the abuse of 
so-called construction. Kant brought into circulation the notion tbat 
mathematics constructs its concepts, which was to say nothing else 
than that it dealt, not with concepts but instead with abstract 
determinations of sensory intuitions. Accordingly, what has been 
labelled a construction of concepts is the process of giving an account 
of sensory determinations taken up from perception while 
circumventing the concept, and the further formalism of classifying 
philosophical and scientific objects [ Gegensliinde] according to a 
presupposed schema in the form of tables (doing so, moreover, at 
one's whim and discretion). Lying in the background here is 
probably an obscure representation of the idea, of the unity of the 
concept and of objectivity as well as the notion that the idea is 
concrete. But that play of the so-called process of construction is far 
removed from presenting this unity that only the concept as such is, 
and the sensory·concrete [content] of intuition is ju.st as far from 
being a concrete [content] of reason and the idea. 
Since, moreover, geometry has to deal with the sensory but abstract 
intuition of space, it can specify unrestrictedly simple determinations 
of the understanding in space. For this reason, it alone has the 
synthetic method of finite knowing in its perfection. Nevertheless, it 
is quite noteworthy that, following this course, geometry ultimately 
hits upon incommensurabi/ities and i"ationalities where, if it wants 
to go further in its determinations, it is driven beyond the principle 
of mere understanding. As often happens elsewhere, so here, too, 
the terminology is inverted such that what is named rational is 
. something due to the understanding [Verstiindige], but what is called 
i"ationa/ is much more a beginning and trace of what is in keeping 
with reason [Vernunftigkeit]. Other sciences, since they do not find 
themselves in the simple framework of space or time, come up 
against the limit of proceeding by merely understanding (which 
happens to them both necessarily and often) but they have an easy 
way of helping themselves ·out of this fix. They break up the 
consistency of that way of proceeding and take what they need, often 
the opposite of what went before, taking it in from the outside, from 
representation, opinion, perception, or whatever it may be. In its 
obliviousness to the nature of its method (and that method's relation 
to the content) this finite knowing is precluded from knowing that, 
in its progression through definitions, divisions, and so forth, it is 
guided by the necessity of the conceptual determinations. Nor does 
this obliviousness allow it to know either where it is at its limit or, if 

Tht Encyclopedia Logic 
297 
it has overstepped chat limit, chat it finds itself in a field where the 
determinations of understanding no longer count, determinations 
that ic nevertheless roguishly continues to use in that field. 
§ 232 
The ntcmity which finite knowing produces in a proofis initially an exter-
nal necessity, determined only for the subjective discernment. But in the 
necessity as such, it has itself left behind its presupposition and point of 
departure, che finding and givmness of irs content. The necessity as such is, 
in itself, the concept relating itself to itself. The subjective idea has thus, in 
itself. come to what is determined in and for itself, what is not given, and 
is thus immanent to it as the subject. As such, it passes over into the idea of 
willing. 
Atltiition. The necessity that knowing attains through the proof is the opposite 
of what forms for it its point of departure. In its point of departure, knowing had a 
given and contingent content. Now, however, at. the conclusion of irs movement, 
it knows [wrif} the content as a necessary one and this necessity is mediated by 
the subjective activity. So, too, subjectivity was at first completely abstract, a mere 
tabula rllSa, whereas it proves itself now, by contrast, to be determining. Herein, 
however, lies the transition from the idea of knowing to the idea of willing. This 
transition consists then, more precisely, in the fact that the universal is to be 
construed in irs uuth as subjectivity, as the self-moving, active concept. positing 
determinations. 
[3. WiDing 
§ 233 
The subjective idea- as what is determinate in and for itself. che simple, self-
same content- is the good. Irs drive of realizing itselfinverts the relationship 
that holds relative to the idea of the ~. and is bent on determining, in 
terms of its purpose, che world that it finds. - This wiUing is, on the one 
hand, certain of the vacuousness [Nichtigkeit] of the presupposed object 
bur, on the other hand, as finite, it at the same time presupposes both the 
purpose of the good as a merely subjective idea and the independence of the 
object. 
§ 234 
The finitude of this activity is thus the contradiction that, in the self-
contradicting determinations of che objective world, the purpose of the good 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
is both carried out and not carried out, and that it is posited as something 
inessential just as much as something essential, as something actual and at 
the same time as merely possible. This contradiction presents itself as the 
mdkss progression in the actualization of the good, that is therein established 
merely as an ought. Formally, however, this contradiction disappears in 
that the activity sublates the subjectivity of the purpose and thereby the 
objectivity, the opposition through which both are finite, and not only the 
one-sidedness of this subjectivity but subjectivity in general; another such 
subjectivity, that is to say, a new generation of the opposition, is not distinct 
from what was supposed to be an earlier one. This return into itself is at 
the same time the recollection [Erinnerung] of the content into itself, which 
is the good and the identity in itself [die an sich srimtk Itkntitiit] of both 
sides, - the recollection of the presupposition of the theoretical stance (§ 
224), that the object is what is substantial in itself and true. 
Addition. While what matters for intelligence is merely taking the world as it 
is, the will, by contrast, is bent on making the world what it ought to be. The 
immediate, what it finds before it, counts for the will, nor as a fixed being, but 
instead only as a semblance [Scht'in], as something in itself vacuous. Here those 
contradictions come to the fore in which one stumbles around on the standpoint 
of morality. This in general is rhe standpoint of the Kantian and even also the 
Fichtt'an philosophy in a practical context [Bnit'hung). The good is supposed 
to be realized; one has to work to produce it, and the will is only the good 
activating itsel£ But then, were the world as it is supposed to be, the activity 
of willing would fall by the wayside. Thus the will in itself requires that its 
purpose also not be realized. This account correctly expresses the will's finitude. 
But then we should nor stand pat with this finitude, and it is the process of 
willing itself through which this finitude and the contradiction contained in it 
are sublated. The reconciliation consists in the fact that the will, in its result, 
returns to the presupposition of knowing, that is to say, it consists in the unity of 
the theoretical and practical idea. The will knows [!Ut'ifl) the purpose as irs own 
and the intelligence construes the world as the actual concept. This is the true 
posture of rational knowing. What is vacuous and vanishing makes up only the 
surface, not the genuine essence of the world. This is the concept, being in ·and 
for itself, and the world is thus itself the idea. The unsatisfied striving disappears 
if we know that the final purpose of the world has been brought about and to the 
same degree eternally brings itself about. This is generally the posture of rhe adult 
man, while the youth believes that the whole world is in a bad way and out of it 
a completely different world must be made. By contrast, religious consciousness 
regards the world as governed by Divine Providence, and thus as corresponding 
to what it ought to be. This correspondence of is and ought, meanwhile, is nor 
a frozen and inert correspondence; for the good, the final purpose of the world, 
is only in that it produces itself again and again, and the difference between 
the spiritual world and the natural world then consists in the fact that while 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
299 
the laner constantly only returns into itself, a progression also takes place in the 
former. 
§ 235 
The truth of the good is, by this means, posited as the uniry of the theoretical 
and practical idea, [the notion] that the good has been attained in and for 
itself- that the objective world is thus in and for itself the idea precisely as 
it [the idea] at the same time eternally posits itself as purpose and through 
activiry produces its actualiry. This life, having come back to itself from the 
differentiation [Differmz] and finitude of knowing, and having become 
identical with the concept through the activiry of the concept, is the 
speculative or absolute idea. 
c. The absolute idea 
§236 
The idea as the uniry of the subjective and the objective idea is the concept 
of the idea, for which the idea as such is the object [ Gegmstand), for which 
it is the object [ Objekt] -an object [ Objekt] into which all determinations 
have gone together. This uniry is accordingly the absolute and mtire truth, 
the idea thinking itself, and here, indeed, as thinking, as the logical idea. 
Addition. The absolute idea is first the unity of the theoretical and the practical 
idea and, by this means, at the same time the unity of the idea of life and the idea 
of knowing. In knowing [Erkmnm), we had the idea in the form of difference 
[D~n2:] and the process of knowing has presented itself to us as the overturning 
of this difference and as the restoration of that unity which, as such and in its 
immediacy, is first the idea of life. The deficiency of [the concept of] life consists 
in being at first only the idea insofar as it is in itse/f[dit an sich srimtk Idet]; 
in contrast to this, but in just as one-sided a fashion, knowing is only the idea 
insofar as it is for itself. The unity and truth of these two is the ilka insofar as it 
is in and for itst/f and, thereby, abso/uu. - Up to now Wt' have had for our object 
[ Gtgmstana'J the idea in the development through its diverse stages; now, however, 
the idea is objective with respect to itself [sich stlbst grgmstiindlich]. This is the 
VOflO"IS vot)aews; what Aristotle already designated as the highest form of rhe idea. 
§ 237 
The absolute itka is for itself, since in it there is no transition or presupposing 
and no determinacy at all that is not Ruid and transparent; it is the pure 

300 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
form of the concept that intuits its content as itself. It is content for itself 
insofar as it is the ideal differentiating of itself from itself, and one side of 
what has been differentiated is the identity with itself. in which, however, 
the totality of the form is contained as the system of the determinations 
of the content. This content is the system of the logical. Nothing remains 
here of the idea, as form, but the method of this content- the determinate 
knowledge [ Wissen] of the validity of its moments. 
Adtlition. When one speaks of the absolute idea, one can think that here finally 
the substantive must come to the fore, that here everything must become clear. 
One can, to be sure, vacuously spout on end about the absolute idea; the true 
content, meanwhile, is nothing but the entire system, the development of which 
we have considered up to this point. It can accordingly also be said that the absolute 
idea is the universal, but the universal not merely as an abstract form opposite 
which the particular content stands as something other than it. Instead it is the 
absolute form, into which all determinations, the entire fullness of the content 
posited by it, have gone back. In this respect, the absolute idea is comparable to 
the old man who says the same religious sentences as the child docs, but for the 
old man rhey have the meaning of his entire life. Even if the child understands 
the religious content, what validity that content has for him is still of the sorr that 
lies outside his entire life and world.- The same holds then also for human life in 
general and the occurrences that make up the content of it. All work is only aimed 
at the goal, and if this is attained, then one is astonished at finding nothing else 
than precisely this, what one wanted. The interest lies in the entire movement. If 
a human being pursues his life, then the end can appear to him as quite limited, 
but it is the entire tkcursus vitiU [course of a life] that is encompassed in it.- Thus, 
too, then the content of the absolute idea is the entire expanse of what we had 
before us up umil now. The final [point] is the insight that the entire unfolding 
makes up the content and interest. - This is, furthermore, the philosophical view 
that everything that appears limired, taken for itself. acquires its worth through 
inhering in the whole and being a moment of the idea. Thus it is that we have 
had the content and what we still have is the knowledge [ Wissm] that the content 
is the living development of the idea and this simple rerrospective is contained 
in the form. Each of the stages considered up to this point is an image of the 
absolute, albeit in a limited manner at first, and so it drives itself on to the whole, 
the unfolding of which is precisely what we have designated the method. 
§ 238 
The moments of the speculative method are (a) the beginning, which 
is being or the immediate; for itself for the simple reason that it is the 
beginning. From the vantage point of the speculative idea, however, it is 
the speculative idea's self-determining which, as the absolute negativity or 
movement of the concept, judges and posits itself as the negative of itself. 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
301 
Being, which from the vantage point of the beginning as such appears 
as abstract affirmation, is thus instead the negation, positedness, being-
mediated in general and being prt-supposed. But as the negation of the 
concept that is simply identical with itself in irs otherness and is the cenainty 
of itself, it is the concept not yet posited as concept or, in other words, it is 
the concept in itself. - For that reason, as the still undetermined concept, 
i.e. the concept determined only in itself or immediately, this being is just 
as much the univ"sal. 
The beginning is taken in the sense of immediate being from 
intuition and perception - the beginning of the analytic method of 
finite knowing; in the sense of the universality, it is the beginning of 
the synthetic method of such knowing. Since, however, the logical 
[dimension] is immediately something universal as much as 
something that is [Seiendes], just as much something presupposed by 
the concept as it is immediate, its beginning is as much synthetic as 
it is analytic. 
Addition. The philosophical method is as much analytic as it is synthetic, 
yet nor in the sense of a mere juxtaposition or a mere oscillation of these two 
methods of finite knowing. It is instead such that it contains them as sublared 
in itself and accordingly behaves in each of its movements both analytically and 
synthetically at the same time. Philosophical thinking proceeds analytically insofar 
as it merely takes up irs object [G~tnrtand], the idea, giving the laner fuJI play, 
and as it were merely looking upon irs movement and development. To this 
extent, philosophizing is completely passive. But philosophical thinking is then 
equally synthetic and demonstrates itself to be the activity of the concept irsel£ 
This requires, however, the strenuous effort of holding off on one's own notions 
[Einftillt] and particular opinions which are always rrying to assen themselves. 
§239 
(~) The progression is the posited judgmmt of the idea. The immediate 
universal, as the concept in itself, is the dialectic of reducing, within itself, 
its immediacy and universality to a moment. It is accordingly the negative 
[aspect] of the beginning or the first [moment] posited in its rktmninacy; 
it is for something {fiir eines], the relation of what has been differentiated,-
the moment of reflection. 
This progression is just as much analytic (in that the immanent 
dialectic only posits what is contained in the immediate concept) as 
synthetic (since in this concept this difference was not yet posited). 

302 
The Encyclopedia Logic 
Adaition. In the progression of the idea, the beginning demonstrates itself to be 
what it is in itself. namely, something posited and mediated and not what simply 
and immediately is [nicht als d4s Seimtk zmd Unmitulbart]. Only for immediate 
consciousness is nature the beginning point [Anfiinglicht] and the immediate, and 
the spirit something mediated by nature. In fact, however, nature is posited by the 
spirit and the spirit itself makes nature its presupposition. 
§ 240 
The abstract form of the progression within the stage of being is [to be] 
an othtr and a passing over into an other; in the stage of the essence, it is 
tht shining {das Schtinm] in something opposiu; in the stage of the concept, 
it is the differentiated status of the individual from the universality which 
continues itself as such in what is differentiated from it and is as an identity 
with the latter. 
§ 241 
In the second sphere, the concept at first being in itself came to shine 
fonh [zum Scheinm gtkommm] and is thus in itself already the idea.- The 
development of this sphere becomes the return to the first, just as the 
development of the first sphere is a transition into the second. Only by 
means of this double movement is justice done to the difference, since each 
of the two differentiated factors, each considered in itself, completes itself 
so as to form the totality and, in that totality, puts itself into unity with the 
other. Only the fact that both sublate [dar Sichaufheben] the one-sidedness 
in themselves prevents the unity from becoming one-sided. 
§242 
The second sphere develops the relation of what has been differentiated 
into what the relation is at first, namely a contradiction in the relation itself 
-in the infinite progrmion. This contradiction (y) resolves itself into the 
end, where the differentiated [das Differmtt] is posiced as what it is in the 
concept. It is the negative of the first, and, as the identity with the latter, 
the negativity of itself. Hence, it is the unity in which these first two, as 
ideal and as moments, are sublated, i.e. preserved at the same time. The 
concept, starting out from its being-in-itst/f, thus comes to a close with 
itself by means of its difference [Differmz] and the process of sublating 
that difference. This concept is the rtalized concept, i.e. the concept that 

The Encyclopedia Logic 
contains the positedness of its determinations in its being-for-itself- it is the 
it:ka for which, as the absolutely first (in the method), this end is at the 
same time nothing more than the process by which the semblance that the 
beginning is something immediate and ic [the idea] a result vanishes;- in 
other words, this end is the knowledge that the idea is the one totality. 
§ 243 
In this way, the method is not an external form but the soul and concept 
of the content, from which it is distinguished only insofar as the moments 
of the concept, even in themselves, in cheir [respective] t:kterminacy, come 
to appear as the totality of the concept. Insofar as this determinacy or the 
content, with the form, leads itself back to the idea, this idea exhibits itself 
as the systematic totality which is only one idea, the particular moments of 
which are in themselves this same idea to the same extent that they bring 
forth the simple being-for-itself of the idea through the dialectic of the 
concept. - The science concludes in this way by grasping the concept of 
itself as the pure idea, for which the idea is. 
§ 244 
The idea, which is for itself, consitkred in terms of this, its unity with itself, 
is the process of intuiting [Anschauen] and the idea insofar as it intuits is 
nature. & intuiting, however, the idea is posited by external reflection 
in a one-sided determination of immediacy or negation. Yet the absolute 
fteedom of the idea is that it does not merely pass over into lift or let 
life shine in itself as finite knowing, but instead, in the absolute truth of 
itself, resolves to release freely from itself the moment of its particularity or 
the first determining and otherness, the immediate it:ka, as its r4fection 
[Widerschein], itself as nature. 
AdJition. We have now returned co the concept of the idea with which we 
began. This return to the beginning is at the same time a move forward [Fongang]. 
What we began with was being, the abstract being, and now we have the itka as 
bnn~ this idea insofar as it is [ditse seimtk Idee], however, is nature. 

Bibliography 
THE MOST WIDELY USED GERMAN EDITIONS 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. Enzyklopadie der philosophischen Wissenschaften 
im Grundrisse (I83o), Erster Teil: Die Wissenscha.ft der Logik. Mit den 
miindlichen Zusiitzen, ed. Eva Moldenhauer and Karl Markus Michel, 
in Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Werke, vol. VIII (Frankfurt a.M.: 
Suhrkamp, 1970). 
Enzyklopiidie der philosophischen 
Wissenscha.ften 
im 
Grundrisse 
(I83o), 
Philosophische Bibliothek, vol. XXXIII, ed. Friedheim Nicolin and Otto 
Poggeler (Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 8th edition, 1991). 
THE NORTHRHINE-WESTFALIAN ACADEMY EDITIONS OF 
THE 1817, 1827 AND 1830 EDITIONS OF THE ENCYCLOPEDIA 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. Enzyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften 
im Grundrisse (1817), ed. W Bonsiepen and K. Grotsch, in Gesammelte 
Werke, Rheinisch-Westfalische Akademie der Wissenschaften edn, vol. XIII 
(Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 2000). 
Enz.yklopadie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse (1827), ed. W 
Bonsiepen and H.-C. Lucas, in Gesammelte Werke, Rheinisch-Westfalische 
Akademie der Wissenschaften edn, vol. XIX (Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1989). 
Enzyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse (1830), ed. W 
Bonsiepen and H.-C. Lucas, in Gesammelte Werke, Rheinisch-Westfalische 
Akademie der Wissenschaften edn, vol. XX (Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1992). 
SECONDARY LITERATURE 
Beiser, Frederick C. 'Introduction: Hegel and the Problem of Metaphysics', in 
The Cambridge Companion to Hegel, ed. Frederick C. Beiser (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1993), pp. 1-24. 
• 
'Hegel, a Non-Metaphysician? A Polemic', Bulletin of the Hegel Society ofGreat 
Britain 35 (1995): 1-13. 
Hegel (London and New York: Routledge, 2005). 

Bibliography 
Burbidge, John. On Hegel's Logic. Fragments of a Commentary (Atlantic Highlands, 
N]: Humanities Press, 1981). 
Di Giovanni, George. Essays on Hegel's Logic (Albany: State University of 
New York Press, 1990). 
Doz, Andre. La Logique de Hegel et les problemes traditionnels de /'ontologie (Paris: 
Vrin, 1987). 
DUsing, Klaus. Das Problem der Subjektivitiit in Hegels Logik. Systematische und 
entwicklungsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen zum Prinzip des Idealism us und zur 
Dialektik, Hegel-Studien, Beiheft 15 (Bonn: Bouvier, 1976). 
Gardner, Sebastian. 'The Limits of Naturalism and the Metaphysics of German 
Idealism', in German Idealism: Contemporary Perspectives, ed. Espen Hammer 
(London: Taylor and Francis, 2007), pp. 19-49. 
Gloy, Karen and Lambrecht, Rainer. Bibliographie zu 'Hegels Enzyklopiidie der 
philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse': Primiir- und Sekundiirliteratur 
I817-1994 (Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 1995). 
Hanna, Robert. 'From an Ontological Point of View: Hegel's Critique of the 
Common Logic', in The Hegel Myths and Legends, ed. Jon Stewart (Evanston, 
IL: Northwestern University Press, 1996), pp. 253-81. 
Harris, E. E. An Interpretation of the Logic of Hegel (Lanham, MD: University Press 
of America, 1983). 
Hartmann, Klaus. 'Hegel: A Non-Metaphysical View', in Hegel· A Collection of 
Critical Essays, ed. Alasdair Macintyre (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1972), 
PP· IOI-24-
'Die ontologische Option', in Die ontologische Option. Studien zu Hegels 
Propiideutik, Schellings Hegel-Kritik und Hegels Phiinomenologie des Geistes, 
ed. Klaus Hartmann (Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1976), 
pp. 1-30. 
Hegels Logik, ed. Olaf MUller (Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter, 
1999). 
Henrich, Dieter. Hegel im Kontext (Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp, 1971). 
Horstmann, Rolf-Peter (ed.). Seminar: Dialektik in der Philosophie Hegels (Frank-
furt a.M.: Suhrkamp, 1978). 
Hosie, Vittorio. Hegels System. Der Idealismus der Subjektivitiit und das Problem 
der Intersubjektivitiit, 2 vols. (Hamburg: Meiner, 1988). 
Houlgate, Stephen. The Opening of Hegel's Logic: From Being to Infinity (West 
Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press, 2006). 
Jaeschke, Walter. Hegel-Handbuch. Leben, Werk, Schule (Stuttgart and Weimar: 
]. B. Metzler, 2003). 
Kainz, Howard P. G. W F Hegel. The Philosophical System (Athens: Ohio 
University Press, 1996). 
Longuenesse, Beatrice. Hegel's Critique of Metaphysics, tr. Nicole J. Simek 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007). 
Lucas, Hans-Christian-Tuschling, Burkhard-Vogel, Ulrich (eds.). Hegels enzyklo-
piidisches System der Philosophie. Von der Wissenschaft der Logik zur Philosophie 
des absoluten Geistes (Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 2003). 

306 
Bibliography 
Nicolin, Friedrich. 'Padagogik, Propadeutik, Enzyklopadie', in Hegel. Einfohrung 
in seine Philosophie, ed. Otto Poggeler (Freiburg and Munich: Karl Alber, 
1977), PP· 91-105. 
Pinkard, Terry. Hegel's Dialectic. The Explanation of Possibility (Philadelphia, PA: 
Temple University Press, 1988). 
Pippin, Robert B. 'Hegel's Metaphysics and the Problem of Contradiction', in 
The Hegel Myths and Legends, ed. Jon Stewart (Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press, 1996), pp. 239-52. 
Schick, Friederike. Hegels Wissmschaft der Logik: Metaphysische Letztbegriindung 
oder Theorie logischer Formm? (Freiburg and Munich: Karl Alber, 1994). 
Schnadelbach, Herbert (ed.). Hegels Phi!osophie. Kommmtare zu den Hauptwerkm, 
vol. III: Enzyk/opadie der philosophischm Wissemchaften (Frankfurt a.M.: 
Suhrkamp, 2000). 
Stace, W. T. The Philosophy of Hegel [1924] (New York: Dover Publications, 1955). 
Taylor, Charles. Hegel (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975). 
Theunissen, Michael. Sein und Schein. Die kritische Funktion der Hegelschen Logik 
(Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp, 1980). 
Wandschneider, Dieter. Grundziige einer Theorieder Dialektik. Rekonstruktion und 
Revision dialektischer .Kiztegorienentwicklung in Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik 
(Stuttgart: Klett-Cocca, 1995). 
Wartenberg, Thomas E. 'Hegel's Idealism: The Logic of Conceptuality', in 
The Cambridge Companion to Hegel, ed. Frederick C. Beiser (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1993), pp. 102-29. 

Glossary of translated terms, German to English 
Abwechslung 
Allgemeinheit 
an sich 
anerkennen 
angemessen 
anschauen 
Anstoj 
Anzahl 
Art 
au./fassen 
Auffassung 
aujheben, Aufhebung 
aufzeigen 
Ausfohrung 
ausfohrlicher 
Aujere, das 
iiuferlich 
Band 
Bedeutung 
Bedingung 
Begehren 
Begierde 
begreifin 
begrenzt 
begrunden 
Behauptung 
Beisichsein, das 
Bekanntschaft 
beruhmt 
beschriinken 
Beschriinkung 
Besondere, das 
Bestand 
bestehen 
oscillation 
universality 
in itself, as such 
recognize 
adequate, suitable, appropriate 
intuit, observe, inspect, look at 
check 
amount 
species, type 
construe, apprehend 
construal 
sublate, sublation (see Translators' note) 
show 
elaboration 
in more detail 
the outer, the outer dimension 
external 
bond 
sense, meaning, significance 
condition 
desiring 
desire 
conceive, comprehend 
bounded 
justifY, ground 
claim 
being-with-itself, being-at-home-with-itself 
familiarity 
acclaimed 
limit 
limitation 
the particular 
standing, status, the stable 
subsist, consist, obtain 

308 
G/ossmy: German to English 
bestimmen 
Bestimmung 
betrach tm 
bewiihrm 
Beweis 
beweisen 
Beziehung 
bilden 
Bildung 
Boden 
Dasein 
Denkbestimmung 
Denkformen 
Denkgesetz 
Diffirente, das 
Diffirenz 
Diffirenzierung 
Einfochheit 
Einigkeit 
eintreten 
Einzelne, das 
Empjindung 
Entgegensetzung 
Entwicklung 
Entzweiung 
Erbsunde 
Erdichtung 
E1fohrzmg 
erhalten 
Erkennen, das 
Erkenntnis 
erregen 
Erscheinung 
erweisen 
Erzeugte, das 
Erziehung 
Existenz, Existenzen, existie1·end 
Jassen 
Feld 
Jest 
Jesthalten an 
determine, specifY 
determination, vocation, function 
consider, regard, contemplate, view, 
observe 
prove 
proof 
prove 
relation, connection, context 
form, shape 
education, formation 
basis, terrain, province 
existence (see Translators' note) 
determination of thinking, thought-
determination 
forms of thinking 
principle 
differentiated 
difference (see Translators' note) 
differentiation 
simple form 
oneness 
enter in 
individual 
sensation, sentiment, feeling 
opposition 
development 
division 
original sin 
contrivance 
experience 
acquire, sustain 
knowing (see Translators' note) 
knowledge (see Translators' note) 
arouse 
appearance, phenomenon, manifestation 
demonstrate 
generated entities 
education 
concrete existence, concretely existing 
entities, concretely existing (see 
Translators' note) 
grasp 
field, plane 
stable, firm, fixed 
cling to, firmly maintain, hold fast 

Fortgang 
fortschreiten iiber 
forsich 
Gang 
Gebiet 
Gedankenbestimmung 
Gefohl 
Gegensatz 
gegenseitig 
Gegenstand 
gegenstandlich 
Gehalt 
gehiiren 
geltend machen 
Gemeinschaftlichkeit 
gesetzt 
Gesinnung 
Gestalt 
Gestaltung 
Glaube 
glauben 
gleichgiiltig 
Gleichheit 
Grenze 
Grundlage 
Cute 
Historie 
indifferent 
Inhalt 
lnnere, das 
innerlich 
kennen 
kennenlernen 
Kraft 
Kreis 
Leere 
liegen in 
Logische, das 
Macht 
Mannigfaltigkeit 
Material 
Materie 
Glossary: German to English 
progression 
advance beyond 
for itself, on its own account 
route, path 
domain 
thought-determination 
feeling 
opposition 
mutually 
object (see Translators' note) 
objective 
309 
basic content, significance (see Translators' 
note) 
inhere, pertain, belong to, be inherent in, 
be part of 
maintain and uphold 
commonality 
posited, supposed 
sensibility 
shape, formation, configuration 
formation 
faith 
believe 
indifferent 
likeness, being alike, equality 
boundary 
foundation 
loving kindness 
historical record 
undifferentiated 
content (see Translators' note) 
the inner, the core, the inner dimension 
internal 
be familiar, acquainted with 
become acquainted with, familiar with 
force, might, power 
sphere 
void 
to lie in, to be inherent in 
the logical dimension 
power 
multiplicity, manifoldness 
material 
matter, sort of matter (see Translators' 
note) 

310 
Materien 
meinen 
Menge 
Mensch 
Moment 
nach 
Nachdenken 
neben 
nichtig 
Notwendigkeit 
Objekt 
objektiv 
Objektivitlit 
Prozef 
Riisonnement 
Rechtftrtigung 
Rejlexion 
Sac he 
sachlich 
Satz vom Grund 
Schmftinn 
Scheidung 
Schein 
scheinen 
schlecht 
schliefen 
Schluf 
Schranke 
Seiende, das 
Sein 
selbststiindig 
Selbststlindigkeit 
selbsttiitig 
Sinn 
sinnig 
sinnlich 
Sinnlichkeit 
sinnvoll 
sprode 
Glossary: German to English 
sorts of matter 
believe, mean 
set, assortment 
human being, human (n.) 
moment (see Translators' note) 
in keeping with, according to, in terms of 
thinking over, thinking through, 
meditation, deliberation 
alongside, along, next to 
vacuous, vapid, empty 
necessity 
object (see Translators' note) 
objective 
objectivity 
process 
rationalizing, formal reasoning, formal sort 
of reasoning 
justification 
reflection 
basic matter (see Translators' note) 
factual 
principle of the ground 
craftiness 
divorce 
shine (n.), shining, semblance (see 
Translators' note) 
shine (v.), seem (see Translators' note) 
bad 
infer, infer via syllogism (see Translators' 
note) 
syllogism, syllogistic inference (see 
Translators' note) 
barrier, limitation 
entity 
being (n.) 
self-sufficient, self-standing 
self-sufficiency, independence 
active on irs own 
sense, sensitivity 
sensible 
sensory, via (by way of) the senses 
sentience 
meaningful 
austere 

stehen bleiben bei 
Stellung 
Stoff 
Substantielle, das 
Sundenfoll 
Tiitigkeit 
Trennung 
Trieb 
Ubereinstimmung 
Ubergang 
ubergehen 
ubersetzen 
umschlagen 
Unabhangigkeit 
unbefongen 
Unbegrenzte, das 
Unbeschriinkte, das 
Unformlichkeit 
Unsagbare, das 
unterscheiden 
Unterschied 
Unterschiedenheit 
unterwerfen 
Verbindung 
verbunden 
Vereinzelung 
Verfohren 
Verhiiltnis 
verknupfen 
Verknupfung 
verse hi eden 
verwerfen 
vorhanden 
vorkommen 
Vorsehung 
Vorwuif 
Wechsel 
Weg 
Wert 
Wesen 
Wille 
Willensvermogen 
Wirken, das 
Glossary: German to English 
stand pat with, remain at a standstill, 
remain content with 
position 
material 
the substantial element 
the Fall 
activity 
separation 
urge, drive 
agreement 
transition 
pass over 
translate, transpose, transport 
turn over 
independence 
naive 
unbounded 
unlimited 
informality 
ineffable 
differentiate, distinguish 
difference (see Translators' note) 
distinctness 
subject 
bond, combination, connection 
31I 
be combined with, be bound up with 
individualization, individuated condition, 
instantiation 
procedure, process 
relationship, relation, proportion 
attach, connect 
combination 
different, diverse, various 
reject 
on hand, at hand, present 
surface 
providence 
reproach 
alternation, exchange 
path, way 
value 
essence, being (see Translators' note) 
will 
volition 
effecting 

JI2 
Wirklichkeit 
Wissen, das 
Wollen, das 
zerfollen 
zerlegen 
Ziel 
Zufall 
zufollig 
Zufolligkeit 
Zusammenhang 
zwammenschlieflen 
Glossary: German to English 
actuality 
knowledge, knowing (see Translators' note) 
willing, wanting 
break down, fall apart, collapse 
analyse 
goal 
chance, (the) contingent, coincidence 
contingent, accidental, ad hoc 
contingency 
connection 
sich mit etwas zwammenschliejen 
join together with (see Translators' note) 
joins itself (decisively, conclusively) 
Zustand 
Zweck 
together with (see Translators' note) 
status 
end, purpose 

Glossary of translated terms, English to German 
accidental 
acclaimed 
according to 
acquainted 
be acquainted with 
become acquainted with 
acquire 
active on its own 
activity 
actuality 
ad hoc 
adequate 
advance beyond 
agreement 
alike, in 'being alike' 
along, alongside 
alternation 
amount 
analyse 
appearance 
apprehend 
appropriate 
arouse 
as such 
assortment 
at hand 
attach 
austere 
bad 
barrier 
basic 
basic content 
basic matter 
basis 
zufollig 
berohmt 
nach 
kennen 
kennenlernen 
erhalten, erwerben 
selbsttiitig 
Tiitigkeit 
Wirklichkeit 
zufollig 
angemessen 
fortschreiten uber 
Ubereimtimmung 
Gleichheit 
neb en 
Wechsel 
Anzahl 
zerlegen 
Erscheinung 
auffassen 
angemessen 
erregen 
an sich 
Menge 
vorhanden 
verknupfon 
sprode 
schlecht 
Schranke 
Gehalt (see Translators' note) 
Sache (see Translators' note) 
Boden 

314 
Glossary: English to German 
being (n.) 
being-at-home-with-itself 
being-with-itself 
belief 
believe 
belong 
bond 
bound up with 
boundary 
bounded 
break down 
chance 
check 
claim 
cling to 
coincidence 
collapse 
combination 
combined with 
commonality 
comprehend 
conceive 
concrete 
concrete existence 
concretely existing 
concretely existing entities 
condition 
condition 
individuated condition 
configuration 
connect 
connection 
consider 
consist 
construe 
construal 
contemplate 
content 
content 
basic content 
in 'remain content with' 
context 
contingency 
contingent, the 
contingent 
Sein, Wesen (see Translators' note) 
das Beisichsein 
das Beisichsein 
G/aube 
glauben, meinen 
gehoren 
Band, Verbindung 
verbinden 
Grenze 
begrenzen 
zerfollen 
Zufall 
Anstoj? 
Behauptung 
festhalten 
Zufall 
zerfollen 
Verbindung, Verkniipfong 
verbunden 
Gemeinschaftlichkeit 
begreifen 
begreifen 
Existenz (see Translators' note) 
existierend (see Translators' note) 
Existenzen (see Translators' note) 
Bedingung 
Vereinzelung 
Gestalt 
verkniipftn 
Beziehung, Verbindung, Zusammenhang 
betrachten 
bestehen 
aujfassen 
Aujfassung 
betrachten 
Inhalt (see Translators' note) 
Gehalt (see Translators' note) 
stehenbleiben bei 
Beziehung 
Zufolligkeit 
Zufall 
zufollig 

contrivance 
Glossary: English to German 
Erdichtung 
core 
craftiness 
deliberation 
demonstrate 
desire 
desiring 
determination 
determinations of thinking 
determine 
development 
difference 
different 
differentiate 
differentiated, the 
differentiation 
dimension 
inner dimension 
logical dimension 
outer dimension 
distinctness 
distinguish 
diverse 
division 
divorce 
domain 
drive 
education 
effecting 
elaboration 
element, in 'substantial element' 
empty 
end 
enter in 
entity 
entity 
in 'generated entities' 
equality 
essence 
exchange 
existence 
experience 
external 
factual 
das lnnere 
Scharfiinn 
Nachdenken 
erwezsen 
Begierde 
Begehren 
Bestimmung 
Denkbestimmungen 
bestimmen 
Entwicklung 
Diffirenz, Unterschied (see Translators' 
note) 
verschieden 
unterscheiden 
das Differente 
Diffirenzierung 
das lnnere 
das Logische 
dasAujere 
Unterschiedenheit 
unterscheiden 
verschieden 
Entzweiung, Einteilung 
Scheidung 
Gebiet 
Trieb 
Bildung, Erziehung 
das Wirken 
Ausfohrung 
das Substantielle 
nichtig 
Zweck 
eintreten 
das Seiende 
das Erzeugte 
Gleichheit 
Wesen 
Wechsel 
Dasein (see Translators' note) 
Eifahrung 
iiujerlich 
sachlich 

316 
faith 
fall 
Glossary: English to German 
Glaube 
fall apart 
the Fall 
familiar 
be familiar with 
become familiar with 
familiarity 
feeling 
field 
firm 
firmly maintain 
fixed 
for itself 
force 
form 
form 
forms of thinking 
in 'simple form' 
formal reasoning, 
formal sort of reasoning 
formation 
foundation 
function 
generated entities 
goal 
grasp 
ground (v.) 
historical record 
hold fast 
human (n.), human being 
In ... 
in itself 
in keeping with 
in more detail 
in terms of 
independence 
indifferent 
individual 
individualization 
individuated condition 
ineffable (n.) 
infer, infer via syllogism 
inference, in 'syllogistic inference' 
informality 
zerfollm 
S iindmfoll 
kennen 
kennenlernen 
Bekanntschaft 
Empjindung, Gefohl 
Feld 
fest 
festhalten an 
fest 
for sich 
Kraft 
bilden 
Denkformen 
Einfochheit 
Rasonnement 
Bildung, Gestalt, Gestaltung 
Grundlage 
Bestimmung 
das Erzeugte 
Ziel 
foss en 
begriinden 
Historie 
festhalten 
Mensch 
an sich 
nach 
ausfohrlicher 
nach 
Selbststandigkeit, Unabhangigkeit 
gleichgiiltig 
das Einzelne 
Vereinzelung 
Vereinzelung 
das Unsagbare 
schlieflen (see Translators' note) 
Schlujf (see Translators' note) 
Unformlichkeit 

Glossary: English to German 
317 
inhere 
inherent, in 'to be inherent in' 
inner, inner dimension 
inspect 
instantiation 
internal 
Intuit 
join 
join together with 
join itself decisively/conclusively 
together with 
justification 
justify 
kindness, in 'loving kindness' 
knowing 
knowledge 
lie in 
likeness 
limit 
limitation 
look at 
loving kindness 
maintain and uphold 
maintain firmly 
manifestation 
manifoldness 
material 
matter 
matter 
basic matter 
in 'sort/sorts of matter' 
mean 
meaning 
meaningful 
meditation 
might 
moment 
multiplicity 
mutually 
na"ive 
necessity 
next to 
object 
gehiiren 
gehiiren, liegen in 
das lnnere 
anschauen 
Vereinzelung 
innerlich 
anschauen 
zusammenschlieflen 
sich mit etwas zusammenschliejlen 
Rechtfertigung 
begrilnden 
Cute 
das Erkennen, das Wissen (see Translators' 
note) 
Erkenntnis, das Wissen (see Translators' 
note) 
liegen in 
Gleichheit 
beschriinken 
Beschriinkung, Schranke 
anschauen 
Gute 
geltend machen 
festhalten 
Erscheinung 
Mannigfaltigkeit 
Material, Stoff 
Materie 
Sache (see Translators' note) 
Materie, Materien 
me men 
Bedeutung 
sinnvoll 
Nachdenken 
Kraft 
Moment (see Translators' note) 
Mannigfaltigkeit 
gegenseitig 
unbefongen 
Notwendigkeit 
neb en 
Gegenstand, Objekt (see Translators' note) 

318 
objective 
objectivity 
observe 
obtain 
on hand 
on its own account 
oneness 
opposition 
original sin 
oscillation 
part, in 'to be part of 
particular, the 
pass over 
path 
pertain 
phenomenon 
plane 
posited 
position 
power 
present 
principle 
principle of the ground 
procedure 
process 
progression 
proof 
proportion 
prove 
providence 
provmce 
purpose 
rationalizing 
recognize 
reflection 
regard 
reject 
relation 
relationship 
remain at a standstill 
remain content with 
reproach 
route 
seem 
self-standing 
Glossary: English to German 
gegemtiindlich, objektiv 
Objektivitiit 
anschauen, betrachten 
bestehen 
vorhanden 
for sich 
Einigkeit 
Entgegensetzung, Gegematz 
Erbsunde 
Abwechslung 
gehiiren 
das Besondere 
ubergehen 
Gang, Weg 
gehoren 
Erscheinung 
Feid 
gesetzt 
Steiiung 
Kraft, Macht 
vorhanden 
Denkgesetz 
Satz vom Grund 
Verfohren 
Prozefl, Verfohren 
Fortgang 
Beweis 
Verhiiltnis 
bewiihren, beweisen 
Vorsehung 
Boden 
Zweck 
Riisonnement 
anerkennen 
Rejlexion 
betrachten 
verweifen 
Beziehung, Verhiiltnis 
Verhiiltnis 
stehen bieiben, stehenbleiben bei 
stehenbleiben bei 
Vorwurf 
Gang 
scheinen (see Translators' note) 
selbststiindig 

Glossary: English to German 
self-sufficiency 
self-sufficient 
semblance 
sensanon 
sense 
sensibility 
sensible 
sensi ti vi ty 
sensory 
sentience 
sennment 
separation 
set 
shape (n.) 
shape (v.) 
shine (n.) 
shine (v.) 
shining 
show 
significance 
simple form 
sort, in 'sort/sorts of matter' 
species 
specifY 
sphere 
stable 
stable (adj.) 
stable (n.) 
stand pat 
stand pat with 
standing 
standstill, in 'remain at a standstill' 
status 
stop short 
subject (v.) 
sublate 
sublation 
subsist 
substantial element 
sufficiency, in 'self-sufficiency' 
sufficient, in 'self-sufficient' 
suitable 
supposed 
surface (v.) 
sustain 
Selbststiindigkeit 
selbststiindig 
Schein (see Translators' note) 
Empfindung 
Bedeutung, Sinn 
Gesinnung, Sensibilitiit 
sinnig 
Sinn 
sinnlich 
Sinnlichkeit 
Empfindung 
Trennung 
Menge 
Gestalt 
bilden 
Schein 
scheinen (see Translators' note) 
Schein (see Translators' note) 
aufoeigen 
Bedeutung, Gehalt 
Einfochheit 
Materie, Materien 
Art 
bestimmen 
Kreis 
fest 
Be stand 
stehen bleiben 
stehenbleiben bei 
Bestand 
stehenbleiben, stehenbleiben bei 
Bestand, Zustand 
stehenbleiben 
unterweifen 
aufheben (see Translators' note) 
Aufhebung (see Translators' note) 
bestehen 
d4s Substantielle 
Selbststiindigkeit 
selbststiindig 
angemessen 
gesetzt 
vorkommen 
erhalten 

320 
syllogism 
syllogism 
Glossary: English to German 
infer via syllogism 
syllogistic inference 
terrain 
thinking over, through 
thought-determinations 
transition 
translate 
transport 
transpose 
turn over 
type 
unbounded, the 
undifferentiated 
universality 
unlimited, the 
uphold, in 'maintain and uphold' 
urge 
vacuous 
value 
vapid 
vanous 
view 
vocation 
void 
volition 
wanting 
way 
will 
willing 
Schlujr 
schliej{en 
Schluj! 
Boden 
Nachdenken 
Denkbestimmungen, 
Gedankenbestimmungen 
Ubergang 
ubersetzen 
ubersetzen 
ubersetzen 
umschlagen 
Art 
das Unbegrenzte 
indifferent 
Allgemeinheit 
das Unbeschriinkte 
geltend machen 
Trieb 
nichtig 
Wert 
nichtig 
verschieden 
betrachten 
Bestimmung 
Leere 
Willensvermogen 
das Wollen 
Weg 
Wille 
das Wollen 

Index 
absolute, the, 40, 41. 43· s6. 61, 66, 68, 71, 75. 
87, 88, 89, 99, !IO, 133, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 
140, 145· 151. 154· 157· 169, 173· 177, 234, 
244, 254· 269. 283, 287, 300 
as object of history of philosophy, 14 
abstraction, u, 15, 25, 34· 47, 50, 51, 54, 68, 75, 
76, 79. So, 81, 89, 103, 108, 114, 121, 125, 128, 
132, 139, 140, 141, 144, 147, 173, 176, 177, 
183, 192, 206, 207, 208, 2IJ, 215, 220, 232, 
239· 241, 248, 26!, 266, 270, 285, 292, 293· 
295 
accident, 223 
accidentaliry, 223, 225 
achievement(s) 
of modern time, 181 
Achilles, 201 
acosmism, 99, 224, 225 
act, 45, 64, 192 
absolute (/lktuositiit). 74 
negative, 173 
activity, 50, 53, 73, 84, 86, 88, 101, 103, 104, 109, 
129, 197· 221, 222, 223, 227, 228, 275· 280, 
293· 297· 298, 299 
absolute, 223 
formal, 201, 264 
of negating, 276, 277 
of sublating, 222 
of the concept, 238, 242, 270, 280, 292, 299, 
JOI 
of the form, 218, 223, 282 
of the particular, uo 
of the universal, 279 
of things, 58 
of thinking, 29, 41, 49• 50, 51, 53, 54· 57, 84, 
97' 102, 110, 179 
of willing, 298 
practical, 291 
purposive, 205, 219, 279, 280 
spiritual, 59, 203 
subjective, 50, 53, 56, So, 83, 87, 127, 130, 238, 
264,297 
321 
actual, the, 226, 232, 236 
actuality (Wirklichkeit), 9, 33, 34· 44, 50, 62, 74, 
79, 98, 104, 106, 107, 133, 15J, 198, 2II, 212, 
2IJ, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 22J, 225, 
230, 2JI, 2J2, 251, 253, 265, 266, 283, 284, 
299 
Adam, 64, 65, 269 
affirmation, 93, 150, 190 
absolute, 140 
abstract, 301 
as negation of negation, 171 
aggregate, 44 
as matter, III 
as object, 270 
of contingencies, 97 
of data, 44 
of sciences, 44 
the world as, 96, 99 
agreement 
of thought with basic matter (Sache), 56 
alteration (Veriinderung), s6, 156 
and immortality, 73 
of existence (Dasein), 148, 156 
ofform, 234 
of magnitude, 157 
of matter, 195 
of quality, 169, 171 
of quantity, 168, 170, 171 
of quantum, 169 
of the finite, 148 
amount (Menge, Anzah[), 82, 161, 162 
analysis, 38, 72, So, 100, 142 
and empiricism, So, 81 
chemical, 169, 194 
in geometry, 295 
in mathematics, u6 
of experience, 82 
anatomy, JO, 257 
comparative, 181 
ancients, the, 58, 129, 143, 145, r82, 209, 220, 
221 

322 
Index 
animal 
as a genus. 62. 290 
as a universal. 59 
as such, 58 
can nor say T, 6o 
individual. 59 
specific, 58 
animals, 16, 64 
and feeling. 49 
and human beings, 29, 50, 53, 65, 138, 153, 
179· 250 
are pure physicists. 155 
don't have morality, 29 
stop short at sensation and intuition, 97 
annihilation. 151 
Anselm, 18, 124, 267, 268 
antinomy 
in Kant, 93, 94· 95· IJO. 159 
of measure, 170 
antithesis 
in Kant, 95 
Apollo, 221 
appearance, 32, 41, 45, 54, 62, 74, 90, 93, 104, 
109, 166, 196, 197· 198. 199· 200, 205, 207, 
209, 217 
and actuality. 33· 212 
and concrete existence (Existenz). 197, 212 
and empiricism, 79 
and essence. 10, 40, 44· 74, 175, 176, 197, 198 
and thought, 92 
as relationship, 202 
ground of. 90 
in Fichte, 109, 199 
in Kant, 82, 89, 90, 105, 106, 108, 109, 198, 
199 
lawof. 200 
meaning of, 198 
of spirit, 66 
world as, 198, 199 
world of, 35· 199, 200 
apperception, 85, 86 
argument 
ontological, 266 
Aristotle, 14, 17, 21, 26, 36, 53, 54, 57, 78, 164, 
166, 209, 212, 213, 257. 259· 277. 288, 292, 
299 
art, 9, 15, !OJ, 127, 201, 217 
dialectic as, 128 
essence of, 85 
fine, 103, n6 
work of, 18, 62. 85, 128, 201, 284 
atheism. 98, 99, 120, 224 
Athenians, the, 56, 120, 237 
atom. p, 95, 155, 156, 163 
atomism, 155 
attraction, 155. 156, 159 
and matter, 156, 215 
and repulsion, 154, 155, 156, 160 
Baader, Franz von, 17, 18, 19, 20 
basic matter (Sache), 9, 10, 23, 25, 26, 49, 54, 57, 
6o, 142, 157, 158,187, 218, 219, 221, 222, 223, 
269 
absolute, 224 
actuality of, 218 
and agreement with thought, 56 
and condition, 222 
and externality, 222 
and necessity, 222 
and person, 220 
and predicate, 135 
and self, 237 
and subjectivity, 220 
as concept, 232 
as real ground, 218 
as totality, 222 
condition of, 217 
content of, 222 
nature of, Il5 
original, 225, 226 
becoming, 140, 142, 143, 144, 145, 156 
and being, 144 
and concept of being, 143 
and existence (Daseilz), 143 
and life, 144 
and spirit, 144 
as concrete determination of thought, 144 
as first concept, 143 
as ground of existence (Dasein), 177 
as unity of being and nothing, 143 
as vanishing, 14 5 
in Heraclitus, 41 
in the form of being, 145 
logical, 144 
proposition of, 143 
restless, 145 
two kinds ot: 145 
beginning, 25, 28, 137, 1J8, 141, 142, 301, }OJ 
and mediation, 40 
and philosophy, 45 
and pure being, 136, 139 
and purpose, 277 
and speculative method, 300 
and truth, 232 
as becoming, 142 
as posited, 302 
first, 136 
in philosophy, 35, 45· 67 
is something immediate, 28 
nature of, 136 

Index 
323 
of history of philosophy, 138 
of the Logic, 142 
of wisdom, 175 
rerurn to, 303 
with being, 96, 136 
being, 28, JI, 47, 61, 72, 77• 87, 96, 98, IOI, II5, 
118, 134, 135· 212, 234, 302 
absolute, 151 
abstract, II9, 147 
and nothing, 140, 144, 145 
and objectivity, II4 
as immediate, 96 
as moment of tbe concept, 231 
beginning with, 96 
determinate, Ili 
finite, 118 
forms of, 136 
fullness of, 96 
in Eleatic school, 41 
inner, 35 
most real, 76, 77• 96 
of external things, 124 
of the thinker, 123 
of the world, 98, II9 
pure, 136, 139, 157 
same as nothing, 139 
sensory, 64 
supreme, II3 
thinking, 51, 61, 114 
true, 76,98 
universal, 96 
utterly empty, 77 
being-at-home-with-itself. See being-with-itself 
being-for-another (Sein-for-Anderes), 147, 153 
being-for-itself(Fur.richsein), 46, 47, 59,134,150, 
I5l, 154· 155· 156, 303 
being-in-itself (Ansichsein), 47, 64, 147 
being-in-itself (lnsichsein), 204 
being-other (Ander.rsein), 146, 147 
being-with-itself (Beisichsein), 57, 71, 134 
beyond, the, 77, 79, 89, 108, 109, 153 
body, 75· 78, 214, l49> 287 
living, 20l 
members of, l88 
organic, 194, l89 
sick, 202, 247, 272 
specific weight of, 163 
Bohme, Jakob, 16, 19 
Brahman, Ill 
Brougham, Henry, Lord, 36 
Brucker, Johann Jakob, 14 
Buddhism, 139, 140 
Caesar, Julius, 174, 243 
Canning, George, Lord, 36 
caput mortuum, 89, 173, 175 
category, 9, 10, II, 15, 19, 25, 37, 53, 87, 88 
absolute, 158, 271 
and philosophy, 31 
and the understanding, 194 
finite, 9, 15, III 
in abstract immediacy, 192 
in Fichte, 109 
in Kant, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 91, 9l, 93, 94, 95. 
IOl, 107, 110, III, 245 
in sentences, 31 
in the sciences, 37 
logical, 158, 271 
metaphysical, 79 
of chemism, 274 
of essence, 17 4, 175 
of existence (Dasein), 146 
of ground, 188 
of mechanism, 271 
of metaphysics and the sciences, 177 
of qualiry, 146 
of quantity, 175 
of universal agreement, 119 
value of, 15 
causa sui, 123, 226, 294 
causality 
as form of thinking, 58 
cause, 55, 95, 226, 228, 276 
and effect, 10, 52, 55, 70, 84, 87, 105, 226, 227, 
229, 251 
as basic matter (Sache), 226 
efficient, 276 
final, 276 
finite, 226 
nature of, 226 
purpose as, 105 
cenainry, 35, 101, 120, 277 
abstract, 291 
and perception, 79 
as a beginning, 136 
of immediate knowing, II3 
of the supersensory, 131 
principle of, 267 
subjective, 25, 43, 106 
change. See alteration 
check (Anstof, in Fichte), 109 
chemism, 270, 274, 275, 276, 280 
as a form of objectivity, 270 
chemistry, So, 127, 159, r68 
Chinese box, 234 
Christ, J7, 23, 24, 54, 64 
Christianity, 23, 24 
Cicero, M. Tullius, 22, II9 
circle, 20, 87, 184 
and philosophy, 43 

324 
Index 
circle (cont.) 
of circles, 43 
of circumstances. n3 
of conditions. 222 
of determinations. 218 
of mediations, 261 
common sense, ll, IIJ, II7, 226 
and the understanding, 77 
healthy, 96. 178 
innocent, 268 
comprehending (Bcgreifonl. 28, 95 
concept (see also universal, the). 5· 9· 21, 31, 44, 
45• 52, 58, 134. 176, r88, 208. 219, 232. 234, 
302 
abstract, 8, 76. 233, 239 
active. 104, 297 
and basic matter (Sac/u), II5 
and becoming. r.u, 14~ 
and being, roo, 101, 135. 231 
and development, 234 
and essence, 173 
and genus, 62 
and judgment, 240, 241, 245 
and realiry, 62, 104, 202, 246, 288 
and representation, 28, 31, 76, 142 
and syllogism, 253 
and the subjective purpose, 279 
and the understanding, 75, 126, 233, 236, 238, 
255 
as absolute form. 239 
as activiry, 280 
as certainry of itself, 301 
as form of thinking, 58 
as free and infinite form, 196 
as idea, 282 
as infinite form, 233, 238 
as innermost core of spirit, 101 
as object (Objekt), 213, 265, 270, 276 
as power, 280, 283 
as purpose, 276 
as soul, 287, 288 
as such, 242 
as truth of being and essence, 231 
as truth of substance, 230 
concrete, 15, 73, 233, 238, 239 
determinate, 235, 239· 283, 286. 293 
development of, 20 
dialectic of, 303 
divine, 147 
doctrine of. 235 
externalization of, 251 
finite, 9 
form of, 32, 37 
formal, 235, 239 
free, 283, 286 
has no genesis, 238 
in Aristotle, 259 
judgment of. 252 
logic of, 236 
moments of, 236. 239, 293, 294, 303 
movement of, 234, 235 
neccssiry of, 6 
of existence (Dmeiu), 148 
of finite things. 62 
of God, 76, 77• 100, 130, 215, 224, 256 
of idealiry, 153 
of reason, 276 
of spirit, 65 
of the concept, 46 
of the idea, 299. 303 
of the science, 45 
of the understanding, 83, 85, 255 
of things, 166 
of true infiniry, 149 
pure region of. 31 
real, 254 
realization of. 265 
species of. 255 
speculative, 37• II9, 234, 259, 295 
standpoint of. 233 
subjective, 264, 270 
totaliry of, 265, 274 
true, 72 
usual species of, 240 
concrete existence (Exis"nz), B· 34, 44, 53, 62, 
73, So, 88, II2, 114, 115, u6, 139. 169, 177, 
190, 191, 192, 194· 196, 197· 199· 200, 202, 
203, 207, 211, 212, 222, 236, 248, 265, 267, 
274· 276, 28J. 290 
absolute, 141 
external, 222 
individual, 291 
consciousness, 28, 31, 36, 56, 85, 119, r2o 
and experience, 33 
and perception, 79 
and spirit, 122 
and the l, 59 
and the idea, 284 
as abstract I, 57 
as qualiry, 146 
concrete shapes of, 66 
content of, 29, 30, 32, 90 
facrs of, 45, 114, 119 
forms of. 30 
immediate, 40, 66, 90, 199, 302 
in Descartes, 123 
in Kant, 86, 109 
inner and outer world of, 33 
object of. Jo 
of self. 35 

Index 
325 
ordinary, 31, 54. 61, 62, 72, 84, 87, 88, 90, 130, 
156, 165. 172, 185, 191, 198. 201, 227, 246, 
250 
philosophical, 198 
reflecting, 195 
religious, 130 
representational, 158 
scientific, 41, 158 
sensory, 136 
constitution ( Verfassung), 50, 170, 171, 191, 2.29 
COntent, 16, 35, 52, 53, 56, 60, 87, 107, III, 2.00, 
201, 202, 204, 207, 111, 214, 215, 218, 223, 
236. 250, 281, 300 
absolute, 9· 19, 226 
as living development, 300 
concrete, 77, 78 
determinate, 91, 132, 141, 190, 244, 279 
empirical, 37 
essential, 70 
formless, 200 
given, 297 
ideal, 2.82 
infinite, 81 
logical, 125 
necessity of, 2.8 
of absolute idea, 300 
of cause and effect, 226 
of consciousness, 29, 30, 32, 90 
of empirical sciences, 41 
of force, 2.04 
of judgment, 244, 252 
oflogic, 47• 50, 53, 61 
of philosophy, 33· 138 
of predicate, 244, 253 
of purpose, 278 
of qualitative judgment, 246 
of representation, 51 
of scientific knowledge, 15 
particular, 43 
real, 282 
sensory, 6o 
sensuous, 31 
speculative, 133 
spiritual, 49. 159 
untrue, 246 
contingency, 44• 66, 74, 215, 216, 217, 222., 312, 
314 
conrinuity, 161 
and discreteness, 160 
of space and time, 95 
of the Many, 159 
contradiction, 63, 106, 145, 196, 297, 302. 
absence of, 102. 
absolute, 268 
and existence (Dasein), 148 
and living nature, 107 
and reason, 93· 94 
and the finite, 149 
and the understanding, 183 
and truth, 73 
and untruth, 73 
as determinate opposition, 214 
as endless progression, 2.98 
cardinal aspect oflogic, 39 
developed, 2.69 
felt, 277 
moves the world, 185 
of the syllogism, 258 
posited, 176, 186 
thinking and, 39 
copula, 2.41, 2.42, 2.45. 247, 2.53, 285 
correctness. See truth 
cosmology, 74 
crime, 248 
cunning, the, 281 
absolute, 2.81 
of reason, 281 
Dalai Lama, II3 
Dante Alighieri, 2 3 
deduction, 156 
analytical, 141 
of Descartes's cogito, II5 
of the categories, 109 
definition, 38, 293, 294, 2.96 
abstract, II 
algebraic, 295 
correct, 61, 158 
grounded in free thinking, 158 
in metaphysics, 79 
in Spino2a, 294 
of being, 137 
of God, 135, 140,255 
of the absolute, 135, 137, 139, 140, 169, 173, 
234· 254· 283 
of the finite, 135 
degree, 160, 162, 163, 164, 170 
Democritus, 144 
Descartes, Rene, 114, n5, 117, 123, 124, 267, 268 
desire, 30, 53· 65, n8, 121, 272 
determinacy, II, 30, 47, 73, 77, 101, 127, 137, 254, 
301, 303 
and existence (Dasein), 146 
and ground, 190 
and negation, 147 
and purpose, 276, 277 
and quality, 136, 146 
and quantity, 136, 157, 160, 170 
and the concept, 239 
and the particular, 239 

determinacy (co•lt.) 
and the quantum, 161 
external, 270 
immanent, 274 
in and for itself. 154 
infinite, 152 
of being, 146, 169 
of concept, 44 
of philosophical idea. 43 
of reflection, 241 
of the concept. 236. 239. 240, 286 
of the genus. 294 
of the object of knowledge, 293 
of the subject, 244 
real, 289 
sculpted, 128 
universal, 47 
Index 
and the nature of thinking, 39 
and the understanding, 130 
as a universal power, 130 
as moving soul of scientific progression, 129 
as soul of all. truly scientific knowing, 129 
has a positiv~ result, 132 
immanent in thought-determinations, 84 
in the Phenomenology ofSpirit, 66 
in the spiritual world, 131 
not a sophistic technique, 129 
of embodiment, 2.87 
of feelings, IJI 
of quality. 156 
of quantity, 168 
of the concept, 303 
of the finite, 130, 2.78 
of the idea, 285, 286 
of the physical elements, 130 
determinateness. Sec determinacy 
determination, 14, 32, 34· 51, 52, 96 
abstract, 41. 81, 90, 99, 101, 129, 136 
conceptual, II, 296 
difference, 78, 135, 141, 160, 172, 179, 184, 190, 
elementary, 47 
empirical, 83 
finite, 44• 71. 78, 8o, 115 
in essence, 173 
infinite, So 
logical, 135, 235 
ofbeing, 135 
of objects, 28 
of reflection, 193. 238 
of the undemanding. 69. 70, 72, 74· n. 93· 
108, 128, 129 
of thinking, 110, 233 
of thought, 10, 86 
simple, 52 
spiritual, 52 
rotality of, 136 
true. 61 
universal, 41, 55, 82 
determinism, 102 
development, 26, 117, 234 
and the concept, 234 
as mediation, 117 
dialectical, 138 
logical, 63, 165 
of consciousness. 66 
of philosophy, 41, 42 
of the idea, 138, 155, 224, 300 
of the system, 300 
of thinking, 40, 41, 42, 284 
organic, 169 
dialectic, 128, 129, 130, 131, 144, 145, 172., 173, 
287,2.89.301 
and Kant, 130 
and Plato, 129, 130 
and Socrates, 130 
195, 203, 224, 238 
absolute, 184 
abstract, 140 
and abstract identity, 90 
and diversity, 181, 182 
and essence, 179 
and ground, 186 
and identity, 177, 178, 179, 182, 193 
and the concept, 239, 2.40, 302 
and the idea, 286, 299 
and the judgment, 2.42 
as likeness and unlikeness, 180 
as self-referring, 186 
as sublated, 152, 186 
between philosophy and the sciences, 2.01 
between Plato and Aristotle, 213 
between the understanding and reason, 89 
concept-less, 240 
determinate, 126, 181, 182, 260 
empty, 141 
essential, 182, 186 
external, 181 
formal, 33· 188, 227 
full of content, 141 
immediate, t8o 
inner, 289 
of cause and effect, 22 7 
ofform, 244 
of identity and difference, 187 
of itself from itself. 186 
of the difference, 184 
of the sexes, 289 
posited, 160 
principle of, 264, 270 
qualitative, 181 
real, 266 
vacuousness of, 228 

Index 
327 
discreteness, 160, 161 
diversity, ISO 
dogmatism, 71, 72, 94 
dualism, 76, lOS, ISO, lSI, 264 
of the Kantian philosophy, 108 
duty 
in Kant, 103, 106 
education, IS, 61, 71, 117, r1.7, 132, 272. 
and Platonic recollection, 117 
Christian, 117 
of subjective thinking. 15 
of the child, 2.09 
of the spirit, 64 
ordinary, 32 
religious, 117 
ego. See I, the 
Eleatics, 41, 137, 138, 144, 166 
electricity, 1S2, xSs, xSS, 20s, 249, 2.71 
empiricism, 7S, 79, So, 81, 108 
and Aristotle, 213 
and Critical philosophy, S2 
and Kantian philosophy, IoS 
metaphysicizing. 107 
naive, 107 
reflective, xoS 
scientific, 79 
empiricists, the, 293 
encyclopedia, S, 43, 44 
end (Enu) 
and philosophical method, 302., 303 
end (Zweck), ss. 153 
and means, 104, IOS 
ultimate, 139 
English, the, 3S 
Enlightenment, 19, 2S, 6s, 7S· 122., 17S· 2.06, 21S 
ms summe perfoctum, 12.3 
Epicureans, the, 131 
equality 
and number, 161, 162. 
and the syllogism, 260 
in quantity, IS9 
Eskimo, 120 
essence, 97, 137, 172, 173, 174, 176 
and actuality, 211 
and appearance, 10, 74• 197, 19S, 199, 
207 
and being, 177 
and concept, 124 
and etymology of Wesen, 174 
and judgment, 24S 
and metaphysics, 72 
and necessity, 22.2. 
and reflection, 174 
and semblance, 177 
and shine, 179, 211 
and shining, 190, 302 
and the concept, 231, 2.32, 2.33 
as being shining in itself, 173 
as ground, 186 
doctrine of, 116, 134 
in Kant, 19S 
in physics, 61 
must appear, 197 
not merely inner, 2.oS 
of nature, 209 
of spirit, 64, 93 
sphere of, 176, 2.34 
universal, 40 
worldly, 93 
ethical life (Sittlichkeit), 117, 12.9, xs8 
and logic, so 
in Phenomenology of Spirit, 66 
Eve, 64 
c:vil, 10, II, 12, 13, 24, 33• 64, 65, 74 
and good, 75 
and Spinozism, 14 
origin of, 63, 7 4 
existence (Dasein), 33. 72, 143, 1s6, x6S, 200, 
26s 
alterability of, 148 
and actuality, 34, 2.12 
and finitude of things, I8S 
and limit, 147 
and quantity, 16o 
and the individual, 283 
and the object (Objekt), 274 
as a predicate, 6S, 69 
as affirmative, IS2 
as being-for-another, 147 
as unity of being and nothing, I4S· 146 
definition of, 146 
different from concept, 100 
external, 59· 147 
judgment of, 246 
of God, 30, 77 
realm of, 33 
sensory, 101 
syllogism of, 2S6 
experience, 9· 33, 7S, 116, 164, 178, 194, I9S· 
2.82 
and perception, 79, So, 81 
and philosophy, 33, 41 
and the Critical philosophy, 82, 83, 88, 90, 
104 
and the dialectic, 130, 131 
and the origin of philosophy, 39, 40 
as form of knowledge, 62. 
in Aristotle, 36 
of freedom, 102 
principle of, 3S 
scope of, 36 

32.8 
Index 
externality, 200, 202 
absolute, 164 
and quantity, 167 
and substance, 225 
and the idea, 2S6 
and the object (Objekt). 272 
in chemism. 275· 276 
in quantity. 167 
of actuality, 212, 215, 217, 218 
of intuition, 16-l 
of nature. 209 
faith. 25, 35. 50 
absolute, 291 
abstract, 124 
and immediate knowing. m. 1!7 
and theology, 76 
as condition of truth, 25 
Christian, 24, n2, IIJ 
content of, 24 
mere, 24 
natural, 63 
Fall 
myth of the, 63 
feeling, 30, 39, 49, 53 
and spirit, 49 
and thinking, 29, 32 
as a liberation, 232 
as form of consciousness, 29. 30 
language of. 15 
ofshame, 64 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, S6, 109, 150. 199. 269, 
29S 
finite, the, 13, 6S. 74· roo, 124, 129, 135. 
14S 
and bad infinity, 149 
and empiricism. 79 
and quality, 146 
and the dialectic. 12S, 130 
and the infinite, 11, 4S, 69, 75, 97, 150, 151, 
152, 165, 26S, 2S4, 2S5. 2S6 
and the purpose, 2S2 
and the sciences, III 
and the understanding, 70 
contradicts itself, 129 
elevation above, uS 
forms of, 62 
in Fichte, 109 
in Jacobi, III 
in Kant, S9, 90 
in Spinoza, 224 
in the Moslem religion, 175 
invincibility of. 277 
nature of, 14S 
only ottght to be sublared, 149, 150 
posited as absolute, 121 
realm of. 175 
something untrue, 16S 
sublates itself, 129 
to be sruck in, 149 
truth of. 151 
finitude, 6S, 69, 70. 75, 226 
and chemism. 175 
and ideality, 152 
and life, 1S7, 291 
and modality, 215 
and the Critical philosophy, roS 
and the idea, 2S2 
and the judgment, 143. 14S 
and the syllogism, 255 
and untruth, 122 
as demise of the individual, 2S3 
of cause and effect, 22 7 
of force and expression, 205, 206 
ofknowing, 292, 299 
of knowledge of experience, 103 
of the epistemological ground, 45 
of the form, 45, Sr 
of the Kant ian categories, roS, III 
of the material, 45 
of the purpose, 27S, 2S2 
of the sciences, 101 
of the something, 147 
of the undersranding, 129, 130 
of things, rSs, 227, 253 
of thinking and willing, 65 
of thought-determinations, 66, 132 
of willing, 297, 19S 
reflected. 199 
world as, 99 
force, 126, 104, 205, 106, 107 
a metaphysical category, 79 
and expression, 55, 70, 103, 105, 206, lll 
as concrete universal, 191 
magnetic, 105 
nature of, 204 
of attraction and repulsion, 155, 156 
primal, 206 
form, vii, viii, x, xi, xiii, xiv, 6, xs, 16, 18, lO, 11, 
32, 33· 35· 37, 39· 40, 41, 46, 49, 53, s6. 57. 
5s, 6o, 6r, 61, 63, 6s, 6S, 71, 72, 73· 74• 7S, 
So, Sr, Ss, 91, 95. 96, 97· 104, 106, 10S, no, 
u4, 117, nS, 111, 121, 119, 135, 139, 143, 144, 
145, 146, 153• 155, 157, 160, 163, 164, 165, 166, 
172, 176, 177· I7S, lSI, IS4, JS7, JS9, 190, 191, 
191, 193, 195, 196, 199, 100, 202, 203, 104, 
207, 209, 244, 155, 17S, JOO, 30S, 316, 319 
absolute, 4S, 63, 212, 239. 300 
abstract, 51 
alteration of. 134 

Index 
329 
and content, 200, 201, 216, 219, 223, 233, 247, 
282 
and content in logic, 6r 
and content in representation, 6o 
and content of consciousness, 30 
and essence, 197 
and matter, 157, 158, 196 
and the syllogism, 253, 254, 255 
and truth, 246 
as element of experience, 82 
as product of reRective understanding, 197 
as thought-determination, 62 
bears principle of matter in itself, 196 
contingent, 248 
determinations of, 207 
empirical, 45• 97 
empty. 209, 215 
external, 200, 201 
finitude of, 45 
infinite, 8o, 242 
logical, 6o, 6r, 236 
mere, 195, 215, 233 
of being, 135, 136, 147, 172 
of consciousness, 29, 30, 130 
of essence, 172 
offeeling, 49 
of finite thinking, 54 
of finite thought, 63 
of immediacy, 121, 122 
of intuition, 85 
ofjudgment, 68 
of judgment in Kant, 86 
of knowing, 63, 87 
of necessity, 37 
of nothing(ness), 140 
of objectivity, 270, 271 
of reason, 63, 102 
of representation, 31 
of sentence, 178 
of spirit, 39 
of the a priori, 83 
of the concept, 236 
of the dialectic, 135 
of the idea, 217, 287, 299 
of the logical, 125, 131 
of the rational, 253, 255 
of the syllogism, 254, 256, 259, 261, 273, 278 
of the understanding, 81, 206 
of thinking, 37, 63, 235 
of thought, 29, 31, 32, 37, 51, 58, 6o, 84, 201 
of threefold syllogism, 260 
oftruth, 68 
of universality, 52, 53, 126 
pure, 300 
self-referring, 196 
totality of, 218 
formalism, 25, 189, 296 
and the syllogism, 259, 262 
in Jacobi, 226 
in Kant, 102 
in philosophy, 41 
in Spinoza, 123 
of enlightened theology, 25 
of method, 295 
of the ground, 187 
France, 158 
freedom, 6o, 8r 
and necessity, 74 
and necessity as absolute opposites, 74 
and necessity in Kant, 95, 104 
as truth of necessity, 230 
of the will, 216 
of thought, 41 
genus, 62, 250, 255, 262 
and the apodictic judgment, 253 
and the categorical syllogism, 263 
and the concept, 239 
and the idea as life, 290 
and the judgment, 245, 251 
and the living individual, 289 
and the syllogism, 261 
as a universal, 37, 55, 56, 59, 250, 251 
as concrete universal, 250, 292 
as power over individual, 290 
as torality of its species, 251 
as universal determinacy, 293 
as what is common, 140 
not merely a common feature, 59 
process of, 290 
proximate, 294 
geometry, 47, 87, 126, 162, 181, 294, 295, 296 
Germany, 150 
God, 70, 75• 77• 99, 121, 209, 284 
and a hundred dollars, 100 
and creation our of nothing, 196 
and immediate knowing, IIO 
and modern Enlightenment, 206 
and the Greeks, 237 
and the old metaphysics, 76 
and the understanding, 127, 130 
as a power, 198 
as absolute cunning, 281 
as absolute ground, 77 
as agreement of thought with reality, 62 
as caput mortuum, 175 
as concrete universal, 70 
as content of thinking, 49 
as most real being, 76 
as object ( Objekt), 269 

330 
Index 
God (com.) 
as object of reason in Kant. 96 
as object of religion. 121 
as self-mediating spirit. !21 
as spirit, 235 
as sum total of all realities, 137 
as sum total of reality, 96 
as supreme being. 113, 139. 174, 175 
as supremely real, 137 
as the absolute, 269 
as the highest truth, 49 
as the truth, 28, 134 
Christian, 221, 269 
in Buddhism, 140 
in deism. 255 
in Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi. 18. 121, 226 
in Herder, 204 
in Jakob Boehme. 19 
in Spinozism. 13, 14. 98, 224, 231 
in the Moslem religion, 175 
intellectual intuition of, 112 
is spirit, 99 
is what is most actual, 33 
knowledge of. 40, 179 
metaphysical definitions of, 135 
proofs of the existence of, 30. 75. 77, 97, too, 
IIO, 118, 119 
the unknown. 121 
triune, 215, 256 
gods 
Greek, 237 
language of. 15 
of mythology, 128 
of the ancients, 221 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 62, 127, 210 
good, 291, 297, 298, 299 
absolute, 282 
and evil, 11, 13, 14• 64, 65, 74• 75 
as final purpose of the world, 298 
as subjective idea, 297 
in Fichte, 298 
in Kant, 102, 103, 105, 106 
purpose of, 297 
gravity. 273 
Greeks, the, 35· 189, 237 
and the antinomy of measure. 170 
and the barbarians, 237 
and the concept of matter, 196 
religious consciousness of, 169 
Grotius, Hugo, 35 
ground, xi, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 23, 25, 26, 31, 50, 61, 
75, n. 85, no. 145, 156, 177, 178, 185, 186, 
!87, 188, 189. 190. 191, 193· 198. 199· 212, 
214, 215, 218, 238, 2)0, 266, 292, 307, JIO, 
316, 318 
and concrete existence (Existenz), 191 
and consequence, 187 
and content, 215 
and the concept, 231 
and the contingent. 216 
and the inner, 207 
and the syllogism, 254 
and thing. 192 
as unity of identity and difference, 186, 187, 
191 
determinate, 190 
epistemological, 4S 
external, 189 
good, 190 
in formal logic, 187 
in the formal sense. 188, 189, 190 
inner, 245 
mediating. 223, 253, 259 
mere, 189 
of appearances, 90, 199 
of division, 294 
principle of, 186, 187, 188, 189 
real, 218 
specific, 190 
sufficient, 186, 188 
usual definition of. 187 
Haller, Albrechl von. 165, 208 
harmony 
of nature and freedom in Kant, 104 
Hegel, Georg Friedrich Wilhelm 
Phmomenology of Spirit, 66 
Philosophy of Right, 33 
Science of Logic, 34, 94 
Heraclitus, 41, 144 
Herder, Johann Gottfried, 204 
Herodotus, 120 
history, 44• 45 
external, 42 
of modern philosophy, 198 
of philosophy, 14, 42, 67, 137, 138, 144, 166, 
224 
of scientific consciousness, 158 
of the human being, 64 
Holy Spirit, 24 
Homer, 15 
Hotho, Heinrich Gustav, 1!4 
human being, 7, 13, 14, 15, 19, 24, 29, 32, 
35· 50, 55· 56, 58. 59· 6o, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 
71, 79• So, 86, 87, 96, 102, 103, 111, 113, 117, 
II8, 127, 129, IJ2, 138, 140, 148, 153 
a born metaphysician, 155 
by nature evil, 65 
Hume. David, 82, 83, 92, 96, 102 
!Jyfe, 166 

I, the, 51, 52, 53 
=I, 137. 138 
abstract, 57 
and being, 101, 136 
and being-for-itself, 152 
and impossibility, 215 
and judgment, 241, 243 
as abstract universality, 53 
as determinate person, 59 
as individual, 53 
as infinite, 69 
as liberation, 232 
as negative relation to self. 153 
as person, 283 
as pure relationship to itself, 53 
as pure thought, 59 
as pure unity of itself, 179 
as simple universality, 57 
as thinking subject, 53, 59 
as universal, 59 
in Descartes, 1!5, 123 
in Fichte, 109 
in Jacobi, II2 
in Kant, 53, 85, 86, 87, 89, 91 
idea, II, 43, 46, 62, IJJ, 144, 179, 235, 239, 270, 
282, 28J, 296 
absolute, 224, 231, 299, 300 
aesthetic, 104 
and actuality, 34, 212 
and purpose, 2 79 
and quantity, 158 
and the philosophical sciences, 46 
as absolute substance, 260 
as being, 303 
as certainty, 291 
as content of philosophy, 138 
as definition of the absolute, 283 
as essence of history, 44 
as foundation of knowledge, 15 
as infinite judgment, 286 
as knowing, 287, 288, 290 
as life, 287 
as nature, 303 
as process, 286, 287 
as process of intuiting, 303 
as reason, 284 
as self-contradictory, 285 
as subjectivity, 287 
as substance, 287 
as the absolute, 43 
as the absolutely first, 303 
as thoroughly present, 284 
as totality, 303 
as truth, 283, 284 
as unity of concept and objectivity, 282 
Index 
as unity of the ideal and the real, 
286 
as universal substance, 283 
as willing, 297 
concrete, 104, 158 
determinate, 283 
development of, 224, 299 
divine, 90 
historical development of, 155 
immediacy of, 288 
immediate, 288, 303 
in Aristotle, 213 
in immediate knowing, uS, II9 
in Kant, 89, 90, !OJ, 104, 105, 106, 
277 
in nature, 46, 209 
in Plato, I17, 213 
in Plato and Aristotle, 21, 213 
in the form of immediacy, 287 
in the form of necessity, 224 
in the form of otherness, 158 
in the form of the judgment, 288 
innate, u7, 235 
331 
logical, 88, 1J4, 136, 137, 138, 144, 155, 158, 191, 
198,224,234.245,260,264,299 
not impotent, 212 
ofGod, 99 
ofknowing, 299 
of life, 290, 299 
of speculative philosophy, u 
philosophical, II, 15, 19, 43 
philosophy as science of, 46 
progression of, 301, 302 
pure, 47, 303 
qua logical, 47 
sole object of philosophy, 34 
speculative, 9• 299, 300 
stages of, 42, 138, 194 
subjective, n8, 291, 297 
theoretical and practical, 298, 299 
universal, 283 
ideal, the, 100, 104 
of reason, 96 
idealism, 72, 152 
absolute, 90, 233 
Kantian, 92 
subjective, 87, 90, 91, 199 
ideality, 153, 277, 280 
and being-for-itself, 152, 153 
and identity, 178 
and reality, 147, 153 
as truth of reality, 153 
of moments, 264 
of the concept, 283 
of the finite, 152 

332 
Index 
identity, 177, 178. 238 
absolute. 179, 223 
abstract. II, 77, 89, 90. 96. 101, 102, 122, 133, 
163, 179· 230 
and actuality. 213 
and difference, 179, 182, r86. 187. 193 
and diversity, 203 
and empiricism, 79 
and likeness. 182 
and the concept. 232, 233 
and the idea, 286 
and the object <Objekt), 268 
as principle of the understanding. 126 
concrete, 77 
empty, 94· 248 
formal, 109, 177, 292, 293, 295 
in essence, 176 
inner, 251 
meaning of, 178, 179 
mediated, 295 
negative, 236 
of being and thinking, 144 
of cause and effect, 226, 227, 228 
of concept and reality. 284 
of indiscernibles, r8r 
of inner and outer, 207 
of so met hi ng and an other, 148 
of subject and predicate, 244, 245, 250 
of the I in Kant, 85, 89 
of the manifold in Kant, 87 
of the understanding. 75· 122, 143, 178, 181, 
182, 260 
philosophy of, 163, 182 
principle of, 178, r8o, r8r, 183, 264 
pure, 179 
relative, 171 
speculative. 266 
system of, II, 13 
imagination, 53 
and aesthetic ideas in Kant, 104 
immediacy. 121, 137. 176 
a barren category, 10 
abstract, 192 
and being. 190, 198 
and finitude, 205 
and mediation, 40, 115, II9, 123, 125, 176 
and mediation in Logic of Essence, 1I6 
and the Cartesian cogito, !14 
as concept in itself, 134 
as mediation with itself. rn 
as relation to itself, 122, 152 
of being, 137 
of content in consciousness, IIJ 
ofknowing. II6 
of perception, 8o 
of spiritual life, 64 
of thought-determinations, 68 
simple, 231 
unreRected, 212 
immortality, 73. 150 
incommensurability, 296 
Indian, the, 121 
indifference 
absolute, 136, 138 
and the form/expression relationship, 203 
in measure, 1_16 
in quantity, r68 
of diversity, 180 
of macrer, 195 
of the object ( Objekt) ro its difference, 268 
of thinking, 41 
poinr of, 6r 
individual, the, 52, 55, 59, 302 
and induction, 262 
and judgment, 241, 243, 244, 246, 247, 249, 
2j2, 285 
and perception, 8o, 82 
and the actual, 254 
and the particular, 61 
and the species, 160 
and the ~llogism, 258, 261, 163, 273 
and the universal, 57· roo, 1J8, 193 
and universality of living nature, 107 
as a human being, 65 
as a particular, 241 
as a universality, 243 
as atom, 51 
as determinate person, 59 
as individual, 248, 249 
as moment of rhe concept, 241 
as species of the concept, 240 
as universal, 53 
consciousness of, 120 
does not correspond to its concept, 283 
isolated, 293 
living, 289, 290 
nor a universal, 56, 247 
sensory, 55 
the same as the actual, 236 
individuality. 52, 62, 65, 103, 138 
and the idea, 286 
and universality. 105 
as a set, 262 
as genus, 261 
as infinite negativity, 287 
as moment of the concept, 236, 239 
cenrral, 272 
concrete, 295 
egoistic, 66 
empirical, 261 

exclusive, 263 
flawed, 273 
immanent, 273 
immediate, 237, 289 
in chemical process, 275 
in judgment, 241, 243, 245, 249, 251, 253 
in purpose, 279, 280 
in syllogism, 254, 256, 259, 261, 263 
living, 290 
negative, 107 
Western principle of, 224 
individuation 
in nature, 65 
sensory, 81 
induction 
inHume, 102 
inference 
syllogistic, 254, 255, 273 
infinite, the, 37, 68, 149, 150 
actual presence of, 107 
affirmative, 152 
and finitude, 69 
and measure, 171 
and the finite, 48, 75, 97, 150, 151, 285, 286 
and the idea; 284, 286 
as a particular, 150 
as the true, no 
as the unconditioned, 89 
finite, 151 
forms of, 62 
God as. 175 
in Jacobi, 98, rn, ll3 
in Kant, 91, 94• IOI, !OJ 
in Kane and Fichte, 109 
merely imagined, 165 
negative and positive, 150 
not an abstract yonder, 69 
of the understanding, 152, 165 
true, 90, 149, 152, 165 
infinitude 
of the understanding, 77 
infinity, 287 
abstract, 206 
and force, 204 
and induction, 262 
and the quantum, 164 
bad, 149, 165, 172, 290 
bad or negative, 149 
of practical reason in Kant, 103 
of reflection, 150 
of space and time, 149 
true, 149, 150, rp, 172 
inner, the, 55, 231 
and force, 211 
and possibility, 213, 216 
Index 
333 
and the outer, 207, 208, 209, 210, 2rr, 212, 
213, 215, 218 
as ground, 207 
of the world, 58 
synonymous with mergeia, 213 
synonymous with the true, 54 
synonymous with the universal, 56 
synonymous with what is subjective, 147 
interiority 
absolute, 108 
and substance, 223 
of essence vs appearance, 198 
of spirit, 7 4• 159 
of things, 54 
intuition, 56, 103, 196, 267 
and beginning of knowledge, 301 
and Humean scepticism, 82 
and immediate knowing, 32, ll4 
and logic, 47 
and number, 164 
and the ideal, 104 
and the judgment of taste, 104 
and thinking, 67 
as form of consciousness, 29, 30 
forms of, 85 
immediate, 169, 179 
in animals, 97 
in empiricism, 79 
in Kant, 85 
inner and outer, 4 5 
intellectual, 137 
of consciousness in Descartes, ll5 
of freedom, 220 
of space, 296 
of Spinozistic substance, 232 
opposed to the understanding, 126 
oriental, 224 
role in modern philosophy, 35 
sensory, 296 
untutored, 163 
irritability 
as a moment of organic life, 289 
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich, 18, 98, 110, m, rr2, 
I15, 137, 226 
Jesus, 24, 48 
judgment, 86, IJO, 244, 253, 254, 264, 289 
abstract, 241, 243 
and determinate individuality, 237 
and finitude, 243 
and nature of copula, 285 
and propositional form, 136 
and the idea, 283, 290, 291, 292, JOI 
and the purpose, 277 
and the syllogism, 253 

334 
judgment (cont.) 
apodictic, 253, 254 
as a form of truth, 68 
as form of thinking, 58 
as original division, 241 
as particularity of the concept, 240, 241 
as particularization of the concept, 242 
as the determining of the concept, 240 
assertoric, 252 
categorical, 2 50, 251 
conceptual, 247 
disjunctive, 251 
etymological meaning of, 241 
form of, 71, 236 
hypothetical, 251 
identical, 247 
immediate, 246, 247, 251 
in Kant, 86, 105, 245 
infinite, 247, 248, 286 
necessary, 250, 251 
negative, 246, 248 
negative-infinite, 248 
not a sentence, 243 
objective, 85 
of existence, 246 
of necessity, 250 
of reflection, 248 
of taste, 104 
of the concept, 252, 289 
of the set of all (Allheit), 249, 250 
particular, 249 
positive, 246, 247 
problematic, 252 
qualitative, 246, 2.47, 2.48 
reflective, 103, 104 
singular, 249 
species of, 2.45, 2.46 
structure of, 241, 244 
subjective, 2.43 
synthetic a priori, 83 
things as, 242., 251 
true, 251 
usual meaning of, 241, 242 
justice 
dialectic of, 131 
must be done to finite things, 278 
Kant, Immanuel, 53, 67, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 89, 
90, 91, 92, 94• 95, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 
105, 106, 107, 108, 109, III, IJO, 150, 155, 
156. 165. 192, 198. 21}, 245· 277· 295. 2.96. 
298 
Critique of the Power of Judgment, 103 
Kasmer, Abraham Gotthelf, 156 
Klopstock, Friedrich Gottlieb, 165 
Index 
knowing, 9, 18, 19, 20, 38, 66, 94, 107, 116, 126, 
158, 269. 291, 292., 293 
analytic, 2~3 
and rational psychology, 73 
and the idea, 290 
and the syllogism, 256 
as comprehending, 28, 29, 181 
as opposed to perception, So 
as recollection, 117 
as subjective activity, 56 
as such, 291 
conceptual, 233, 271 
empirical, 79 
everyday need of, 188 
faculty of, 38 
finite, 122, 124, 292, 2.93, 296, 297, 301, 303 
finitude of, 292, 299 
form and matter of, 87 
forms of, 62, 63 
idea as, 287, 288, 2.99 
immediacy of, 116 
immediate, 6, 15, 32, 39, 101, 109, III, 112, 113, 
Il4, 115, 116, II7, II8, II9, Ill, 122, 123, 124, 
252, 268 
in Aristotle, 292 
in empiricism, 163 
in Genesis, 65 
in Jacobi, m 
in Kant, 84, 92, 106, 107, 108, 213 
in philosophy, 29, 31, 38, 65, 138, 2.33, 295 
infinite, 201 
meaning of, 90 
method of, 28 
most perfect form of, 63 
not merely subjective, 56 
objectivity of, 199 
ordinary, 107 
Oriental manner of, 70 
origin of, 63 
philosophical, 63, 94 
positive, 131 
presupposition of, 298 
rational, 298 
reflective, 63 
scientific, 124, 129 
subjective, 119, 240, 293 
task of, 216 
through thinking, 232 
true, 268 
types of, 51 
knowledge 
and the method of the Logic, 300 
and things-in-themselves, 89 
as an instrument, 38 
certain, 123 

critique of, 101 
drive of, 291 
educated, 15 
empirical, 36, 108 
exact, 158, 159 
experiential, 83, 90 
faculty of, 84 
genuine, 8 
immediate, 35, 63 
in DescarteS, 124 
in Kant, 82, 85 
kinds of, 35 
love of, 6 
mediated, II5, Ill 
meraphysical, 95 
objective, xo 
of appearances, Io6 
of experience, 103 
of God, 38, 40, 76, 77, no, III, u8, Ill, 175, 
I79· 206 
of good and evil, 64 
of nature, 271 
of the absolute, 68 
of the infinite, 94 
of the supersensible, 8I 
of the truth, 66 
of the understanding, 90 
of thoughts, I 5 
philosophical, to, 38, 142 
positive, 131 
rational, 217 
religious, Ill 
scientific, 8, I5, 264 
theological, 16 
through intuition, 32 
true, 69 
Lalande, Joseph JerOme Lefran~ois de, III 
language, I93, 241 
and the thought-determinations, 61 
as body of thinking, 2I7 
as product of thought, 52· 
comparative study of. t8I 
expresses the universal, 52. 
irregularity of use of, 174 
of earthlings, IS 
of religious representation, 284 
of the gods, 15 
of the sciences, 83 
ordinary use of. 62., 133 
speculative spirit of, I53 
use of, I7 4, 20I, 2.34 
law(s), 65, 12.7, I32., 153, 2.73, 2.92 
and the character of a people, 2.29 
as inner dispositions, 2.08 
Index 
cosmological, 74 
in empiricism, 79 
inHume, 82 
in Kant, I04 
in Rousseau, 238 
international, 35 
legal and ethical, 82 
moral, 102., I05, Io8 
natural, 9, III 
of abstract understanding. I78 
of appearance, 2.00 
of freedom, 102 
oflogic, 37• 47 
of mechanism, 2.7I 
of motion, 262. 
of nature, 55• 185 
of reason, 150 
ofSolon, 56 
of the empirical sciences, 35, 37, 4I 
335 
of thinking, 53, I78, 179, t8o, I84, 2.35, 264 
of truth, 178 
of understanding, 259 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 181, I88, I89, 2.24, 
2.69 
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, 14 
life, So, 99, 12.8, 2.91, 303 
and contradiction, 107 
and inner purposiveness in Kant, 2.77 
and the bad infinity, 2.90 
and the inorganic, 2.89 
as a mystery, 288 
as absolute idea, 2.99 
as form of becoming, I44 
as individual living entity, 2.87 
carries germ of death within itself, I2.9 
common, 174, 2.I5 
concept of, 2.47, 288 
deficiency of, 2.88, 2.99 
everyday, 42., 2 58 
human, 300 
idea as, 2.87, 7.9I 
natural, 64 
ordinary, 33· 56, 84. 90, I32., 142., I87, 2.12., 
246, 2.52. 
organic, I94. 2.03, 234, 2.57 
practical, 2.56 
principle of, 12.9, 2.33 
process of, 288, 290 
spiritual, 63 
light 
and darkness, 42., 77 
and reflection, I7 4 
degree of, I63 
not a mechanistic phenomenon, 271 
limit, I62 

Index 
Locke, John, 293 
logic, 39, 52, 6o, 62, 67, 86, 135 
a system of pure thought-determinations, 6o 
and formal thinking, 49 
and the categories of metaphysics, 177 
and the history of philosophy, 138 
applied, 6o, 235 
as animating soul of the sciences, 6o 
business of, 62, 187 
coincides with metaphysics, 58 
deals with thoughts as such, 201 
decay of, 240 
division of, 134 
earlier, 49 
formal, 54· 61, 179, 187, 234, 242, 248, 255 
former, 37, 178 
has to do with pure abstractions, 47 
in more recent times, 54 
instrumental, 54 
not the science of merely formal thinking, 50 
not without content, 61 
object of, 53 
of Aristotle, 53 
of the concept, 236 
of the understanding, 132, 233, 234, 238, 
264 
ordinary, 58, 86, 132, 184, 235, 256, 264 
science of, 50 
science of the pure idea, 47 
science of thinking, 47, 50 
speculative, 37, 132, 182, 234 
standpoint of, 66 
the spirit of all the sciences, 61 
three sides of, 125 
usefulness of, 48 
logical, the, 71, 94, us, 242, 301 
as a system of thought-determinations, 58 
as absolute form of the truth, 48 
first form of, 127 
has three sides, 125 
in Aristotle, 54 
not merely a subjective activity, 127 
system of, 300 
third form of, 131 
logos, xiii 
love 
as liberation from necessity, 232 
Luther, Martin, 34 
magnet, 184 
and the syllogism, 61 
magnetism, 185, 205, 271 
magnitude, 47, 126, 158, 163 
and degree, 162 
and limit, 162 
and number, 167 
and quality, 169 
and quantum, 164 
continuous, 159, 160, 162 
customary definition of, 157, 164, 168 
determinate, 160 
discrete, 159, 16o, 162 
extensive, 162, 163 
intensive, 162, 163 
unsuitable for quantity, 157 
manifold, 177, 239 
and force, 205 
and judgment, 245 
and object (Objekt), 269 
as objective world, 265 
in Kant, 85, 86 
manifoldness, 86, 87, 91 
and Spinoza, 98 
and unity, 55 
Many, the, 79, 130, 154, 155, 159, 161, 163 
materialism, 81, 108, 158, 206 
mathematics, 50, 87, 126, 157, 158, 159, 164, 168, 
181, 260 
in Kant, 296 
matter, 78, 126, 195, 196 
abstractness of, 158 
an abstraction, 81 
and attraction, 156 
and form, 196, 199 
and form as absolute opposites, 74 
and form of knowing in Kant, 87 
and form of representation, 6o 
and mechanism, 271 
and repulsion, 154 
and the thing, 196 
antinomy of, 159 
as a form of being, 139 
as a metaphysical category, 79 
as indeterminate aggregate, III 
as product of reflective understanding, 197 
as unity of attraction and repulsion, 215 
atomistic interpretation of, 156 
definition of, 195 
divisibility of, 95, 203 
dynamic construction of, 156 
eternity of, 143 
formless, 195 
in itself, 85 
in Kant, 156 
in materialism, 81 
indifference of, 195 
metaphysical interpretation of, 155 
not without form, 200 
one, 195 
sorts of, 194, 195, 196 
the absolute as, 157 
types of, 146 

matters. See matter, sorts of 
meaning 
infinite, 220 
logical, 146 
of appearance, 198 
of aujheben, 153 
of being and nothing, 139 
of 'concept', 234 
of identity, 178 
of 'judgment', 241 
of objectivity, 85 
of representations, 70 
of representations for thinking, 31 
of the universal, 237 
of truth, 62 
measure, 169, 171, 172 
and essence, 172 
and ql!antity, 171 
and the measurdess, 171 
antinomy of, 170 
as a rule, 169 
as a stage of being, 136 
as identity of quality and quantity, 170 
as qualitative quantity, 136, r68 
as unity of quality and quantity, 172 
definition of, r68 
in nature, 169 
in organic nature, 169 
indeterminacy of, 169 
process of, qr, 172 
specific, 169 
measureless, the, 171 
mechanism, 111 
a universal logical category, 2 71 
absolute, 273, 274 
and chemism, 274 
and modern science, 2 71 
and purpose, 280 
and the concept, 276 
as a form of objectivity, 270 
as first form of objectivity, 271 
differentiated, 272 
formal, 2 70, 2 73 
in logic, 259 
in the spiritual world, 2 72 
laws of, 271 
mediation, 5, 9, 40, 117, 122 
and education, 117 
and essence, 190 
and immediacy, 115, n6, II9, 176 
and immediacy of knowing, n6 
and immediate knowing, n8, 122 
and necessity, 222 
and Spinozistic substance, 225 
and sublation, 98, 101, 190, 264, 265 
and the beginning of the Logic, 136 
Index 
and the concept, 231, 238 
and the doctrine of thought, 134 
and the nature of thinking, 98 
and the syllogism, 254, 255, 261 
and the synthetic method, 295 
as negation of the negative, 173 
definicion of, 40, 137 
essential to spirit, 64 
external, II5 
finite, 124 
in Jacobi, III, 226 
infinite, 199 
mere, 219 
semblance of, 95 
sublated, 77, 98 
that sublates itself, 172 
within consciousness, 40 
medius terminus, 257 
metaphysics, 122, 151, 155, 163 
and empiricism, 79 
and Kane, 91, 92, 93, 95 
and Newton, 155 
and physics, 156 
and Pythagoras, r66 
and speculative logic, 37 
and the Critical philosophy, 83 
and the Logic, 58 
and Wolffian philosophy, 295 
bad, 14, 158 
categories of, 177 
in Baader, 19 
nal've, 123 
of the past, 67 
337 
of the understanding, 72, 78, 94· 151, 197 
old, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 77• 78, 79• 
So, 8r, 83, 84, 91, 94· 95 
popular, 181 
reflective, 122 
usual, ro8 
method, 9 
analytic, 292, 293, 294, 295, 301 
and immediate knowing, 124 
as form of content, 300 
Descartes's, 124 
formalism of, 295 
identical with the content, 
in the Encyclopedia, 8 
Kant's, 95 
mathematical, 225 
of doing logic, 86 
of finite determinations, 78 
of finite knowing, 296 
ofknowing, 28 
of ordinary knowing, 107 
of the Logic, 300, 303 
of the old metaphysics, 84 

Index 
method (cont.) 
philosophical, 301 
speculative, 300 
Spinoza's, 225, 295 
synthetic, 292, 293, 294, 295, 301 
the only true, 5 
Middle Ages, 54, 76 
mind (Geist), 58, 69 
molecule(s), 155, 163 
moment (Moment), 40, 43, 106, 145 
abstract, 214 
conceptual, 239 
dialectical, 128, 129, 235 
essential, 216 
fluid, 46 
ideal, 95. 133, 138, 144, 152, 160, 186, 233 
negative, 98 
of consciousness, 109 
of negation, 97, 14 7 
of reflection, 301 
of the concept, 231, 233, 236, 237, 238, 239, 
241, 254· 259· 289, 293· 294· 303 
of the idea, 99• 284, 300 
of the logical, 94, 125 
of the speculative method, 300 
of the syllogism, 260, 288 
of the truth, 282 
sublated, 217 
monad, 269 
monadology, 224 
morality, 29, 55· 66, 105 
standpoint of, 298 
motion 
as unity of space and time, 274 
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 210 
nature, 55, 127, 229, 289 
and contingency, 217 
and evil, 63 
and human beings, 153, 179 
and its impotence, 61 
and nous, 59 
and quality, 146 
and spirit, 153 
and the dialectic, 130 
and the idea, 46, 260, 303 
as a Proteus, 68 
as otherness of the idea, 158 
as presupposition of spirit, 302 
as starting point for human beings, 65 
as system of unconscious thoughts, 58 
as the beginning point for consciousness, 302 
construal of, 209 
contemplation of, 126 
essence of, 209 
history of, 44 
impotence of, 61 
inorganic, 159, 169, 185, 194, 208, 288, 289 
is posited by spirit, 302 
lies in the bonds of individuation, 65 
makes no leaps, 7 4• 78 
metaphysical, 73 
of a human being, 96 
of force, 204, 206 
of knowing, 51 
of spirit, 42 
of subjectivity, II4 
of the object, 56 
of the soul, 73 
of things, 56, 57, 59• 278 
of thinking, 39, 50, 94 
organic, 103, 159, 169, 271 
philosophy of, 46 
spiritual, 99 
necessity, 75, 139, 185, 213, 219, 222 
and causality, 227 
and freedom, 74, 230, 232 
and freedom in Kant, 95, 104 
and philosophy, 294 
and the content of science, 129 
and the understanding, 52 
and true thinking, 185 
as a modality, 215 
as a modality in Kant, 213 
as element in experience, 82 
as element of objectivity, 83 
as fate, 22,0, 221, 232 
as form of subjective reason, 37 
blind, 219, 2 76 
definition of, 218 
external, 222, 297 
external and internal, 7 4• 75 
form of, 37, 223, 224, 225 
freedom as the truth of, 230 
hard, 230 
in finite knowing, 297 
inHume, 83 
judgment of, 250 
of conceptual determinations, 296 
of the concept, 6, 20 
of the content, 28, 40 
of the spiritual nature, 26 
of the standpoint of philosophy, 66 
of thought-determinations in Fichte, 86 
of thought-determinations in Kant, 86 
posited, 229 
power of, 232 
process of, 219, 227, 230 
syllogism of, 263 
truth of, 219 

negation, 96, 97, 13~ 
abstract, 131, ~30 
and determinacy, 77 
and existence (Dasein), 147 
and reality, 75 
and the finite, 69 
and thinking, 40 
as affirmation, 150 
as determinateness, 145 
as foundation for determinacy, 147 
as relation, 179 
in quality, 146 
of negation, 150, 15~. 171 
of the negative, 173 
negative, the, 107, 186 
and being-for-itself, 15~ 
and evil, 75 
andKant, 90 
and the positive, 17~. 177, 182, 183, 
184 
and the understanding, 285 
as difference, 184 
as not-! in Fichte, 109 
as pure being, 139 
as relationship to itsdf, 153 
as result of the dialectic, 131 
as the finite, 150 
as the infinite, ISI, 204 
formalism of, ~s 
in essence, 176 
of negation, 150 
of representation, 89 
of the understanding, 39 
negativity, 173 
absolute, n3, ~6, 300 
and conrradiction, 30~ 
and essence, 173, 179 
and freedom, 140 
and God, 139 
and substance, n3, ~~7 
and the concept, ~o 
immanent, 272 
infinite, 287 
of abstract being, 144 
of finite things, ~78 
pure, 273 
Newton, Isaac, 3S. I5S• 206 
non-contradiction 
principle of, 117 
non-identity, 39 
not-being (Nichtsein), 98, 141, 216 
and being, 72 
not-finite, the, ISO 
not-!, the 
in Fichte, 109 
Index 
nothing, the, 139 
absolutdy different from being, 141 
an empty abstraction, 143 
and Buddhism, 139 
and being, 138, 140, I4S 
and the void, 155 
as definition of the absolute, 139 
as a moment, 140 
as opposed to being, 139 
comes from nothing, 143 
equivalent to pure being, 139 
same as being, 140, 141 
unity of being and, 140, 14~. 143 
nothingness 
and Buddhism, 140 
highest form of, 140 
of all finite things, 131 
nous (lntellekt, Geist), 36 
number, 4S• so, 161, 16s, x66, x68, 183 
and calculation, 161 
and equality, 161 
and geometry, 16~ 
and quantum, 161 
and the quantitative infinite, 167 
as a One, 161 
as mathematical unit, 161 
as quantum, 162 
as thought external to itself, 164 
concept of, 161 
empirical, 161 
equality of, 162 
in Pythagoras, x6s, x66 
is a thought, 166 
qualitative make-up of, 161 
undetermined, 161 
object (Gegmstand), 54, 174, ~93· ~94, ~9S 
absolute, 38, 66 
and agreement with representation, 6~ 
and being, 87 
and its concept, 242 
and Kant's thing-in-itself, 89 
and object ( Objekt), ~6s 
and predicate, ~~ 
and the forms of thought, 84 
and the idea, ~90, ~99 
as appearance, 90 
as content of representations, ~38 
as determinate content, 91 
as the true, ~98 
as unity of opposite determinations, 95 
as unity of propenies, 87 
conceptualized, no 
definition of. 69 
given, 117 
339 

340 
object (Gegenstand) (cont.) 
God as, roo 
in old metaphysics, 69 
inner nature of, 263 
knowledge of, 94 
of consciousness, 30, 78 
of judgment, 241 
oflogic, 48, 49 
of old metaphysics, 70 
of philosophy, 28, 36 
of reason, 68, 70, 77• 81, 89, 96 
of spirit, 42 
of thinking, 45, 69 
representation of. 62 
space as, 294 
thinking as, 39 
true knowledge of, 69 
true nature of, 56 
unconditioned, 89, 93 
untrue, 202 
object (Objekt), II, 57, 67, 71, 213, 265, 
268 
absolute, 265, 269 
and agreement with concept, 240 
and subject, 277 
and subjectivity, 266 
and the absolute, 269 
and the concept, 266 
and the idea, 299 
and the purpose, 280 
as a means, 280 
as absolute contradiction, 268 
as inner purposiveness, 286 
as the concept, 2 70, 282 
differentiated, 274 
God as, 75 
self-sufficiency of, 282 
objectivity, 133· 265 
and empiricism, 82 
and immediate knowing, II4 
and subjectivity, 83, 88, II4, 254, 264, 269, 
270,279· 287,298 
and subjectivity in Kant, 105 
and the body, 28 7 
and the concept, 235, 239, 286 
and the idea, 282, 290, 296 
and the logic of the understanding, 264 
and the process of knowing, 291 
and the syllogism, 265 
and truth, 283, 284 
elementary powers of. 289 
external, 280, 289 
in Kant, 84, 85, 106, 199 
in teleology, 276, 279, 280, 282 
in the Critical philosophy, 83, 88 
of the categories in Kant, 91 
Index 
of the finite, 267, 268 
of the good in Kant, 102 
one-sidedness of, 291 
ordinary meaning of, 84 
positions of thought towards, 66 
three forms of, 270 
threefold meaning of, 85 
true, 85 
One, the (see also Many, the), 153, 155 
and number, 161 
and quantity, 159 
and the Many, 154 
as a being that is for itself, 152 
as being-for-itself, 154 
as the absolute, 14 5 
as the same in many Ones, 159 
in atomistic philosophy, 154 
in Plato, 148 
in Plato's Parmenides, 130 
mere, 161 
repulsion of, 153 
ontology 
as part of the old metaphysics, 72 
opposite(s), the, 128, 130, 133, 285, 302 
absolute, 7 4 
abstract, 255 
and being and nothing, 141 
and difference, r86 
and the dialectic, 131 
and the One aad the Many, 154 
and the something, 150 
of an other, 56 
of being, 138 
of the finite, 129 
opposition 
and appearancq, 202 
and contradiction, 185, 2.14 
and essential difference, 183 
and identity, 184 
and magnetism, 185 
and polarity, 184 
and the process of knowing, 291 
and the purpose, 2 76 
and the speculative, 132, 133 
as distinct from diversity, 182 
between freedom and necessity, 95 
between human beings and nature, 64 
between immediacy and mediation, 125 
between inner and outer, 2II 
between reality and negation, 75 
between the understanding and sensation, 
!26 
between thinking and things in themselves, 
56 
between truth and knowledge of the truth, 
66 

Index 
341 
of attraction and repulsion, 155 
of being and nothing, 139 
of consciousness, 64 
of contradictory concepts, 184 
ofform and content, 233, 282 
of good and evil, 75 
of immediacy and mediation, 115, 122 
of subjectivity and objectivity, 83, 269, 270, 
279,298 
of the finite and the infinite, 150, 151 
of the object ( Objekt) and the subjective, 265 
of the subjective and the objective, 58, 66, 
133· 277 
of the understanding, 183 
of thinking against itself, 67 
of thinking and being, roo 
of thinking and immediate knowing, 112 
of universality and individuality, 105 
of whole and parts, 203 
polar, 185 
principle of, 183, 184 
vacuous, 291 
other, the, 40, 46, 52, 56, Go, 69, 72, 77, 8r, 86, 
r6o, 235, 302 
absolute, 142 
and determination, 137 
and electricity, 185 
and essence, 176 
and essential difference, 183 
and Fichte's '!', 109 
and mediation, III, 172 
and the finite, 69 
and the ground, r86 
and the idea, 291 
and the One, 152, 154 
and the something, 149, 150, 154, 184 
as a nothing that is, 148 
as a something, 148 
as ground of appearances, 90 
as limit of the something, 148 
as object, 69 
in essence, 172 
in general, 183 
in Plato, 148 
of itself, 130, 148 
of the other, 150, 183 
passing over into, 135 
otherness, 130 
and the concept, 301 
and the idea, 46, r 58 
as moment of the idea, 303 
as necessary moment of the truth, 282 
qualitative, 248 
outer. See inner 
ought, the, 34, 79, 104, 150, 165, 298 
standpoint of, 150 
pantheism, 13, 16, 75, 98, 143, 224 
as acosmism, 224 
paralogism, 92 
Parmenides, 138, 166 
part(s), 207 
and organs of a living body, 203 
and whole, 202, 203, 205 
as a totality, 43 
of ordinary logic, 264 
of philosophy, 43, 46 
of the body in mammals, 294 
of the living, 288 
of the soul, 203 
particular, the, 37, 110, 122, 237 
and the universal, 42, 52, 55, 59, 126, 240, 241, 
259 
and the universal in judgment, 244, 
252 
and the universal in Kant, 103 
as a relating of itself to an other, 122 
as middle term, 61 
as principle of the will, 103 
as qualitas specifica, 294 
as species, 263 
as species of the concept, 240 
contained in the universal, 238 
individual, 263 
particularity, 57, 65, 77 
abstract, 254, 257, 261 
and subjectivity, 221 
and the abstract universal, 239 
and the judgment, 240, 241, 251 
and the predicate in a judgment, 243 
and the purpose, 280 
and the universal, 155 
and universality, 254 
as a moment of the concept, 236 
as determinacy of the concept, 239 
as determination of form, 278 
as external reality of the universal, 254 
as middle term in the syllogism, 2 73 
as moment of the idea, 303 
indeterminate, 249 
individual, 257 
objective, 252 
subjective, 6o, 252 
the same as difference, 238 
particularization, 41, 78, 275 
and the idea, 287 
and the judgment, 251 
and the universal, 251, 263 
of the concept, 242 
of the universal, 2 79, 294 
of universality, 289 
passing over. See transition 
Pelagianisrs, the, 13 

342 
Index 
perception 
as foundation of truth, 82 
person, 128 
absolute, 224 
and the 'I', 59· 283 
as finite subjectivity, 220 
educated, u6, 127 
personality 
absolutely actual, 221 
and the 'I', n:z. 
imagined, 221 
ofGod, n:z. 
pure, n:z. 
personhood, 237 
philosophers 
Popular, 13 
Scottish, II7 
philosophy, 9. ro, :z.6, 34· 63, 65, 67, 72., IIJ, 114, 
12.3, 1£4, 138, 141, 294 
aim of. 185 
among the English, 35 
and contemporary culture, 8 
and its parts, 43, 46 
and its proper form, 32 
and religion, 16, 28, 63 
and scepticism, 131 
and the dialectic, 129 
and the empirical sciences, 41, 201 
and the philosophies, 42 
and the true infinite, 152 
and the understanding, 128 
Aristotelian, 213 
as a circle of circles, 43 
as a sphere that circles back into itself. 45 
as comprehending thinking, 76 
as infinite knowing, 201 
as knowledge of the idea, 284 
as thinking things over, 30 
as thoughtful examination of things, 28 
atomistic, 154, 155 
bad, 178 
beginning of, 45, 138 
business of, 57 
Cartesian, n4, 123, 124 
contains the sceptical within itself, 131 
content of, 33 
Critical, 38, s6. 68, 82, 8J, 90, 95· 105, 106, 
108, 109, 131 
definition of. 30, 52. 
development of, 41 
does not deal with abstractions, 132 
does not waste its time with empty 
transcendent things, 149 
Eleatic, 138 
Fichtean, 86, 109, 150, 298 
goal of, 39, 66 
Greek, 71 
has no beginning, 45 
highest goal of. 33 
history of. 14, 42, 67, 137, 138, 144, 166, 
224 
in Germany, 6, 150 
is idealism, 152. 
is knowing conceptually, 233 
Kantian, 67, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 90, 102, 103, 
107, 108, 109, III, 150, 192 
knows only what is, 79 
lacks advantage of other sciences, 28 
Leibnizian, 269 
modern, 56, u4, 198 
of history, 219 
of identity, II, 163, 182 
of immediate knowing, II4 
of international law, 35 
of nature, 35, 46, 6o, 61, 263 
of religion, 76, 2.21 
of spirit, 46, 6o 
origin of, 39· 42 
Platonic, 117, 129, 213 
principle of, 34, 43, ro8 
Pythagorean, 166 
recent, 163, 182 
replaces representations with thoughts, 31 
scholastic, 81 
scientific, 5 
speculative, n, 13, 14, 36, 71, 72, 78 
Spinozistic, f-24· 225 
task of. 149, 165, 174, 217, 269 
transforms representations into thoughts, 
52· 
truly one science, 44 
Wolffian, 295 
physicists 
German, 156 
physics, 61, 155, 159, 163, 184, 196, 271 
empirical, 9, 205 
experimental, 45 
Newton's, 35 
rational, 78 
physiology, 30, 49, 257, 271 
Pilate, 48 
Plato, 14, 2.1, 39, 78, n7, 129, 130, 148, 151, 189, 
209, 212, 213, 235 
pneumatology, 73 
positive, the, r86 
and evil, 75 
and existence (Da.rein), 69 
and the negative, 172, 177, 182, 184 
as identical relation to itself, 184 
possibility, 213, 214 

Index 
343 
abstract, 215, 217 
and actuality, 284 
and alterability of existence (Dasein), 148 
and contingency, 215 
and externality, 217, 218 
and impossibility, 214 
and necessity, 218 
and the actual, 215 
and the faculty of representation, 214 
as a modal category, 213 
as the inner of actuality, 216 
in Kant, 213 
inner, 209, 225 
mere, 215, 218, 223, 225 
real, 218 
power 
absolute, 23, 223, 225 
alien, 208 
and Spinoza's substance, 225 
and substance, 225 
and the concept, 233, 28o 
and the genus, 290 
and rhe living, 289 
and the purpose, 280, 281 
and the subjective purpose, 280 
elementary, 289 
healing, 249 
in mathematics, 162 
ofGod, 179 
of imagination in Kant, 104 
of judgment, 252 
of necessity, 223, 232 
of reflective judgment in Kant, 103, 104 
of the heart, 16 
of the law, 65 
of the soul, 205 
of the substance, 223 
of the world, 97 
of thinking, 50 
predicate, 71, 135, 242, 243, 245 
and subject, 244, 247, 248, 250, 252, 253 
and the syllogism, 256 
as a universal, 244> 252 
as an attribute, 242, 243 
as determination of reflection, 249 
as explicit determinacy of subject, 244 
as genus, 250 
as moment of particularity in judgment, 244 
finite, 70 
in a judgment, 241 
in a sentence, 178 
in essence, 178 
in Kant's paralogisms, 93 
in pre-Kantian metaphysics, 68, 69, 70, 75 
inheres in the subject, 244 
logical meaning of. 246 
of the absolute, 137 
prejudice 
of our time, 29, 108, II3 
presupposition, 37, 38, 39. 61, 77, 99. 132, 292 
absolute content as, 19 
and Cartesian philosophy, 124 
and finite knowing, 297 
and free thinking, 83 
and Kant's dialectic, 95 
and scepticism, 125 
and the concept, 231, 242 
and the condition, 222 
and the finitude of knowing, 292 
and the old metaphysics, 68, 79, 81 
and the syllogism, 261 
and the synthetic method, 295 
as arbitrary assurance, 125 
illegitimate, 28 
in empiricism, 8r 
in logic, 141 
object as, 62 
of knowing, 298 
of uncritical understanding, II 
subjective, 45 
unjustified, 43 
principle 
of contradiction, 184 
of difference, 224 
of identity of indiscernibles, r8o 
of non-contradiction, 117 
of opposition, 183 
of sufficient reason, 187, 214, 264 
of the Eleatics, 144 
progress 
of science, 185 
progression 
ad infinitum, 290 
and the dialectic, 66 
as moment of the speculative method, 301 
as opposed to external order, 5 
as self-determination of the logical idea, 88 
finite, 165 
from causes to effects, 226, 228 
from concept to judgment, 242 
from effects to causes, 226 
from perception to experience, So 
from quantity to quantum, 160 
from the abstract to the concrete, 137 
in knowing, 145 
in the actualization of the good, 298 
infinite, 106, 149, 151, 171, 172, 203, 227, 258, 
302 
infinite qualitative, 165 
infinite quantitative, 164, 165, 167 

344 
progression (cont.) 
methodical and necessary, 141 
rectilinear, 17 4 
scientific, 129 
serial, 111 
to infinity, 149, 262 
to the idea, 270 
progressus in infinitum, 165 
proof 
and reason, 77 
and scientific philosophy, 5 
by the understanding, 98 
cosmological, 96 
definition of, 295 
in finite knowing, 297 
in Kant, 95 
in logic, 86 
in philosophy, 6 
lawyer's, 95 
of division oflogic, 134 
of mathematical axioms, 260 
of the existence of God, 30, 75, 77, 97, 110, 
uS, u9, 120, 278 
of the presence of the infinite, 107 
ontological, roo, 267, 268 
physico-teleological, 96 
replaced by assurances and narratives, ro 
that the idea is the truth, 284 
that thinking is the absolute form of the 
truth, 63 
property. See thing 
proposition 
abstract, 41 
and Descartes's Cogito, ergo sum, 114, 115 
and innate ideas, II7 
and speculative determinations, 143 
and the understanding, 75 
form of, 135 
of becoming, 143 
of empirical science, 35 
of immediate knowing, 113, 114 
of innate knowing, II9 
of philosophy, u4, 152 
paradoxical, 140 
Protestantism, 17 
psychology, 146, 203, 210, 240, 272 
empirical, 73, 78, 205 
metaphysical, 92 
rational, 73, 93 
punishment, 230 
purpose, 45, 96, 99, 127, 208, 219, 270, 281 
and force, 204, 205 
and necessity, 219 
and the idea, 297, 299 
and the will, 298 
Index 
as a form of objectivity, 270 
as determinacy in itself, 277 
as determination of things, 253 
as opposed to causality, 7 4 
as opposed to mechanism and chemism, 274 
as power, 280 
concept of, 276, 282 
definition of, 276 
essential, 141 
examples of, 277 
executed, 282 
final, 191, 298 
finite, 141, 278 
finitude of, 278, 282 
immoral, 121 
in Kant, 104, 105 
in Socrates, 14 
infinite, 282 
of finite things, 267 
of philosophy, 45, 174 
of punishment, 189 
of the good, 297 
particular, 141 
preserves itself, 281 
realization of, 1;76, 281 
realized, 281 
' 
requires speculative construal, 277 
subjective, 220, 279, 280 
subjectivity of, 278, 298 
syllogistic structure of, 277 
ultimate (in Kant), ro5 
purposiveness, 274 
external, 277, 278, 279 
finite, 104, 277, 280, 281 
in Kant, 103 
inner, 286 
inner (in Aristotle), 277 
inner (in Kant), 277 
internal (in Kant), 104, 105 
Pythagoras, 165, 166, 295 
quality, 146 
and being-for-itself, 152 
and measure, 168, 169, 171 
and quantitative increase and decrease, 170 
and quantity, 168, 170 
and quantum, 169 
and the infinite, 171 
and transition to quantity, 156, 172 
as a category of the finite, 146 
as a stage of being, 136 
as alterable, 157 
as being-for-another, 146 
as being-in-itself, 147 
as reality, 146 

definition of, 136 
in judgment, 2.46, 247, ~48 
in the sphere of spirit, 146 
in the syllogism, ~56 
of quantity, 167 
specific, 171 
sublated, 156, 168 
quantity 
and transformation into quality, 171 
as a stage of being, 136 
quantum, 160, 163, 164 
alteration of. 169 
and the limit, 16~ 
and transition from quality, 171 
as a contradiction, 164 
as external to itself, 167 
as number, 161, 16~ 
as quantitative proportion, 167 
concept of, 164 
definition of. 160 
immediate, 167 
qualitative, 168 
specific, 169 
Raphad (Raffaello Sanzio da Urbino), ~10 
rationalization (Riisonnemmt), 10, 17, 12.4, 189 
reality, 137, ~o~, ~07 
affirmative, 98 
and existence (Dasein), 15~ 
and finitude, 15~ 
and ideality, 147, 153 
and its separation from the concept, 104 
and the concept, 2.46, ~83, ~84, ~88 
and the judgment, ~47, ~53 
and the limit, 148 
and the ought, 106 
and truth, ~84 
as positivity, 75, 76 
as quality, 146 
external, ~54 
fulfilled, 2 73 
ofthe I in Descartes, 1~3 
of the world, 87, 99 
ordinary meaning of, 147 
other-worldly, So 
pure, 75 
uuthof, 153 
vacuous, ~76 
reason, III 
and abstract thinking, 101 
and proof. 77 
and the idea, ~84, ~86 
and the irrational, ~96 
and the need to grasp matters conceptually, 
191 
Index 
and the old metaphysics, 70, 76, 77 
and the syllogism, ~53, ~55 
and the unconditioned, 89, 101 
345 
and the understanding, 7~, 77, 89, 93, ~35 
and the world, 58 
and truth, 291 
antinomies of. 130 
as conscious ofitsdf, 33 
as highest determination of thinking, no 
as immediate knowing, In 
as it exists, 33 
as knowledge of God, 111 
as the soul of the wodd, 58 
as understanding, ~~ 
concept of, ~76 
concepts of, ~55 
critique of. 91 
cunning of, ~81 
forms of, 63 
genuine philosophical meaning of, ~4 
ideal of. 96 
in immediate knowing, 111 
in Kant, 89, 91, 9~, 93, 94, 108 
in the child, ~09 
incurs contradiction, 94 
instinct of, ~6~ 
interest of, ~16 
lawof, 150 
natural, II? 
object of, 68, 70, 96 
practical, 10~, 103, 105 
principle of independence of, 108 
principle of sufficient, 186, 187, ~14, ~64 
reduced to abstract identity, 101 
sound, u~ 
subjective, 37 
syllogism of, ~55 
theoretical, 10~, 103 
thinking as a form of, 10~ 
universal objects of. 81 
workof, ~85 
reasoning 
formal, ~6, 30, 38, 40, 45, 67 
ordinary, 3 5 
reciprocity, n8, ZZ9 
and causality, ~~9 
and substance, ~30 
and the concept, ~31 
of mutual solicitation, ~05 
relationship of, ~~8 
viewpoint of, ~~9 
recollection 
and the idea, ~98 
in Socrates, 130 
Platonic, 117, ~35 

Index 
reduction 
of nature to thoughts, 155 
reflection, 17, 30, 62, 79, 134, 137, 149, 187, 229, 
233 
a being of, 176 
abstract, 194 
abstracting, 160 
and essence, 17 4 
and the concept of infinity, 150 
and the idea, 303 
and the understanding, 227, 285 
artificial, n8 
as predicate in judgment, 252 
as shining in itself, 173 
being as determined by, 144 
determinations of, 177, 193, 238, 249 
external, 69, II5, 240, 285, 303 
-in-another, 186, 191, 192, 193, 195, 196, 197, 
198. 203, 207' 216 
-in-itself, 176, 186, 191, 192, 193, 195, 196, 197, 
198, 199· 203, 204, 207, 213, 215, 225, 226, 
227, 231, 236. 239· 250, 254 
-in-itself and -in-another, 190 
-in-itself and the thing-in-itself, 192 
judgment of, 248 
meaning of, 174 
moment of, 301 
of force, 206 
philosophical, 59 
relationship of, 291, 292 
standpoint of, 187 
subjective, 249 
syllogism of, 261 
unity of being and, 212 
usual mistake of, 208 
Reformation, 34 
Reinhold, Karl Leonhard, 38 
relation, 301, 302 
and essence, 172 
and identity, 180 
and the One, 154 
and the positive, 186 
and the syllogism, 258 
and the understanding, 285 
and unlikeness, 182 
as a category in Kant, 245 
external, 195 
immediate, 122 
in essence, 173 
negative, 154 
of having as opposed to being, 193 
of matter and form, 196 
of moments in judgment, 240 
of necessity, 52 
of one to its other, 172 
of purpose, 270 
of subject and predicate, 247 
of the 'I' to the 'not-I', 109 
of the living to itself, 289 
of the negative to itself, 152 
of the subject to another subject, 289 
of thought, 15 
teleological, 178, 279 
to another, 150, 183 
to itself, 143, 150, 172, 183 
to itself in essence, 177 
to itself, abstract, 122 
to itself, infinite, 230 
to itself, negative, 153, 203 
to itself, simple, 126, 135, 152 
to oneself, 86 
-to-self, 51 
relationship 
absolute, 223 
and reflection, 129 
and the categories in Kant, 83 
as a category in essence, 202 
between means and ends in Kant, 105 
immediate, 101 
mechanical, 203, 270 
mechanistic, 2 7 4 
negative, 153 
of Aristotelian to Platonic philosophy, 212 
of causality, 225, 229 
of cause and effect, 87, 22 7, 229 
of earlier and later philosophical systems, 
137 
of force and expression, 205 
of forms of thinking, s8 
of immediacy, 40 
of inner and outer, 208, 209 
of purposiveness, 274 
of reciprocity, 228, 229 
of reflection, 266, 291 
of substantiality and accidentality, 223 
of the finite and the infinite, 150 
of the genus to individuals, 289 
of the 'I' to itself, 53 
of the Many to each other, 156 
of the speculative to the other sciences, 37 
of the universal and the particular, 52 
of thinking towards point of departure, 40 
of thought-determinations, 83 
of three stages of thought to each other, 134 
of understanding and intuition, 104 
of whole and parts, 202, 203 
reflexive, 2 75 
teleological, 270 
religion, 9, 18, 29, 50, 76, 269 
and its separation from thought, 29 

Index 
347 
and philosophy, 16, 28, 32, 63 
and the Enlightenment, 25 
and the universal, 56 
and thinking, 29, 41 
as existence of the truth for all humans, 15 
Christian, 76, 207, 220, 237, 256, 269 
contains representations of God, 76 
deficiency of, 175 
Jewish, 175 
Moslem, 175 
not merely an affair of the heart, 18 
of most recent rimes, 15 
of the spirit, r6 
philosophy of, 76, 221 
polytheistic, 175 
representation ( Vorsttllung), 46, 52, 71, 99 
abstract, 239 
abstract sensory, 47 
and immediate knowing, II3 
and irs role in the old metaphysics, 69, 70, 
71, 72, 76 
and the concept, 237 
and the Logic, 5 
and the meaning for thinking, 31 
and the subject term in judgment, 244 
and the task of philosophy, 31, 52 
and the understanding, 52 
and the unity of being and nothing, 140, 142 
and thinking things over, 32, 56 
and thought, 29, 31, 50, 52 
and truth, 62 
as a concept, 240 
as form of consciousness, 29 
as metaphor of thoughts and concepts, 31 
buried in the night of the 'I', 59 
consciousness's need for, 31 
content and form of. 6o 
content of, Go, 62 
correct, 283 
empirical, 96 
fullness of, 70 
in Kant, 53, 85, 105 
language of, 15 
mythological, 71 
nature of, 51 
of becoming, 142 
of the idea, 283, 296 
ordinary, 83, 156 
precedes conceptualiution, 28 
sensory, 54, 73, 90, 155 
subjective, 199 
universal, 79, 236 
reproduction 
as a moment of organic life, 289 
repulsion, 154 
and attraction, 154, 156, r6o 
and matter, 215 
force of, 155 
of the Ones, 153, 154 
process of, 154 
Romans, the, 120, 269 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 238 
scepticism, 6, 71, ll5, 131 
ancient, 63, 82, 131 
and the dialectic, 128 
as a negative science, 125 
consummate, 125 
Greek, 82 
Humean, 82, 83 
modern, 82, 131 
needs to be feared only by the understanding, 
131 
not merely a doctrine of doubt, 131 
proper, 131 
Sceptics, the 
ancient, 71 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph, 58, 82, 294 
Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von, 103 
scholasticism, 71 
Scholastics, the, 54, 73, 78 
science, 6, r8, 21, 28, 30, 44, 67, 125, 177, 278 
affirmative, 125 
and culture, 9 
and irs relation to philosophy, 37 
and philosophy, 9 
and the idea, 46 
as an encyclopedia, 43 
as grasping the concept of itself, 303 
as thinking of thinking, 48 
concept of, 45 
empirical, 35, 40, 41, 54, 181, r82, 206, 262 
exact, 158, 159 
finite, 181, 187 
formal, 236 
goal of philosophical, 33 
highest task of, 76 
history of philosophical, 42 
natural, 182, 185 
negative, 125 
object of, 48 
oflogic, 50, 53 
of mathematics, 181 
of political economics, 36 
of reason, 76 
of the idea, 43, 46 
of the new era, 124 
of the pure idea, 47 
of the understanding, 76 
of things captured in thoughts, 58 

science (cont.) 
of thinking, 47, 50 
particular, 43, 46 
particular philosophical, 46 
pans of, 46 
philosophical, 9, 10, 32, 34, 44, 45. 6o, 66, 
260 
positive, 44 
progress of. 185 
rational, 45 
reawakening of, 206 
standpoint of philosophical, 66 
success of, Ill 
system of, 66 
task of, 206, 217, 269 
usual procedure of, 142 
self-annihilation, 140 
self-consciousness 
and other self-consciousness, xt 
and spirit, 122 
and the experience of freedom in Kant, 102 
as infinite in itself, 87 
in Kant, 87 
transcendental unity of, in Kant, 85, 87 
unity of, in Kant, 86, 91 
self-contradiction 
and empiricism, 293 
self-sufficiency, 230, 273 
absolute, 226 
and mechanism, 270 
and substance, 230 
and the concept, 230 
and the judgment, 241, 249 
and the Leibnizian monad, 269 
and the living, 289 
and the object ( Objekt), 269, 272, 282 
immediate, 275 
mediated by relations to one another, 274 
of a human being, 231 
of reason, 108 
of the actual, 230 
of thinking, 108 
semblance of, 274, 282, 286 
semblance (see also shine), 13, q6, 291 
and essence, 174 
and the being of external things, 124 
and the will, 298 
as a moment within essence, 177 
caused by similarity of words, II3 
false, 286 
in causation, 236 
mere, 175, 197 
of contingency, 217 
of contradictions, 128 
of dependence of God, 98 
Index 
of mediation, 95 
of negativity, 75 
of objective self-sufficiency, 281 
of self-sufficiency, 2 7 4, 282 
of the being of the world, 98 
that the beginning is something immediate, 
303 
sensation, 36, 6o 
and modern scepticism, 131 
and the categories in Kant, 87 
and the understanding, 126 
as content of thinking, 56, 67 
as opposed col the universal, 85 
external origin of, 51 
in animals, 97, 271 
in Kant, 53 
is always of individuals, 59 
of something negative, 107 
sensibility 
as a moment of organic life, 289 
common (Gemeiminn), 113 
human, 120 · 
sentence 
and contradiction, 93 
and the judgment, 241 
and the syllogism, 262 
as an expression of truth, 72 
as containing categories, 31 
as expression of the universal, 79 
as statement of identity, 177 
cannot express speculative content, 133 
determinations of, 259 
empirical, 262 
form of, 71, 178 
identical, 24 7 
logical, 260 
logical structure of, 71 
nonsensical, 247 
not a judgment, 243 
speculative, 142 
subject and predicate in, 71 
Sextus Empiricus, 131 
Shakespeare, William, 201 
shine (see also semblance} 
and actuality, 213 
and essence, 179, 198 
and the concept, 302 
as moment of the essential, 176 
as proximate truth of being, 197 
as something merely negative, 173 
of the essence, 1.11 
sickness 
of our rime, 56 
sin 
original, 63, 65 

Index 
349 
slavery, 237 
Socinians, the, 13 
Socrates, 14, 130, 189 
and the dialectic, 129 
and the Sophists, 189 
Solomon, King, 49 
Solon, 56 
something, the (see also other, the) 
and an other, 148, 150 
and its limit, 148 
and negation, 146 
and the negation of the limit, 148 
and the other, 148 
and the progression to infinitude, 149 
as existence (Dasein) reflected into itself, 146 
becomes an other, 149 
comes together with itself in the other, 150 
is finite and alterable, 147 
is in itself the other, 148 
is itself an other, 148 
is what it is by virtue of irs quality, 146 
is what it is only within its limit, 147 
sophism, 189 
Sophists, the, II7, 130, 189 
soul, 16, 93 
and body, 147• 243, 247, 248, 271, 280, 284, 
286, 287. 288, 289 
and psychology, 272 
and the predicate in judgment, 247 
as a thing, 92 
as animating principle of the body, 73 
as complex of forces and faculties, 271 
empirical determinations of, 93 
immortality of, 73, 150 
in Kant's paralogisms, 91, 92, 93 
in rational psychology, 73 
in the old metaphysics, 68, 69, 70, 73, 78 
is neither wholly finite nor wholly infinite, 
72 
na rure of, 73 
powers of, 205 
space, 95 
absolute, 178 
abstract, 178 
and mathematics, 50 
and motion, 274 
and the soul, 73 
as being-outside-of-one-another, 52 
as continuous and discrete quantity, 16o 
as example of quantity, I 57 
as form of intuition in Kant, 85 
as infinite, 78 
as object of geometry, 294, 296 
determinate, 95 
dimensions of. 159 
framework of. 296 
in Kant's antinomies, 95, 159 
infinity of. 149 
of representation, 52 
species, 46, 159, 182, 245, 250, 263 
and the judgment, 239 
genus as totality of, 251 
of concepts, 240 
of judgment, 245, 246 
speculation, 17, 163 
ordinary meaning of. 132 
sphere 
logical, 127, 134 
of being, 135, 172, 176, 234, 240, 245 
of essence, 176, 234, 240, 245, 251, 302 
of finite things, 28 
of nature and the human spirit, 28 
of perception and finite representing, 246 
of philosophy, 43 
of spirit, 295 
of the concept, 2 58 
of the idea, 136 
of the living spirit, 33 
of the logical, 71 
of the logical idea, 136 
Spinoza, Benedict, 14, 98, no, 137, 147, 165, 224, 
225, 226, 231, 267, 268, 294, 295 
spirit, 9, 24 
absolute, 98, 134 
activities of. 50 
and becoming, 144 
and corporeality, 73 
and Kant, 92, 93 
and the absolute, 56 
and the concept, 236 
and the death of the individual, 290 
and the idea, 28 3 
and the logical idea, 26o 
and the reconciliation with itself. 9 
and the soul, 16 
as a thinking subject, 57 
as a world offree interiority, 159 
as architect of the work of millennia, 42 
as different from nature, 153, 209 
as object of psychology, 203 
as power of the heart, 16 
as self-consciousness, 122 
as the absolutely concrete, 239 
as the cause of the world, 36 
as thinking things over, 55 
bitter labour of. 48 
comes to itself in thinking, 39 
concept of, 65 
devoid of. n, 16 
distinguished from the soul, 73 

350 
spirit (cont.) 
elevation of. 97, 98, 278 
essence of, 64, 93 
eternal, 286 
finite, 81, 134 
human, 28 
infinite right of, 25 
innermost dimension of. 74 
is activity, 73 
is essentially consciousness, 16 
is essentially mediation, 64 
is not without nature, 185 
is the severing in itself. So 
living, 33 
makes nature its presupposition, 302 
must be mediated by nature, 260 
nature of, 42 
not a mere sum of powers, 255 
objects of, 39 
of all the sciences, 61 
of our language, I 53 
philosophical, 6 
philosophy of, 46, 6o 
pure, 6x 
rebirth of, x6 
recognizing spitit, 49 
relates purely to itself, 6o 
religion of, x6 
speculative, 15, 19 
subjective, 146 
taken as a thing, 73 
task of. 209 
thinking, 28 
two directions of, 6 
vocation of, 57 
state, 9, 50, 127, 155 
as a system of three syllogisms, 273 
bad, 62, 202 
constitution of, 170 
constitutions, 50 
laws of, 238 
patriarchal, 192 
theory of. 238 
true, 284 
untrue, 62 
Stoics, the, 131 
stuff (Sto./!J (see also matter), 194, 238, 270 
abstract, 194 
and chemical analysis, 194 
formless, 200 
self-standing, 194 
self-sufficient, 206 
subject, 252, 253 
and another subject, 289 
and object, II, 143 
and object (Objekt), 265, 277 
Index 
and predicate, 178, 241, 242, 243• 244, 245, 
247, 248, 250, 253 
and the beginning of philosophy, 45 
and the concept, 239 
and the idea, 283 
and the subjective idea, 297 
and the syllogi~m, 255 
as body of soul, 247 
as foundation containing the genus and 
species in itself, 239 
as immediate individuality, 248 
as individual, 235, 249 
as living individual, 289 
as terminus minor, 256 
as totality of the concept, 237 
as universal, 250 
cognitive, in Kant, 87 
concrete nature of, 246 
concrete totality of, 245 
in a sentence, 71, 73 
individuality of. 249 
is the predicate, 241 
knowing, 292 
living, 277 
-object, 235, 284 
of a sentence, 71, 177 
of the major premise, 261 
relates itself negatively to itself. 243 
something superfluous in a proposition, 136 
subsumed by predicate, 244 
thinking as, 53 
thinking represented as, 51 
subjectivity, 66, 176, zzo, 255, 298 
absolute, 221 
abstract, 297 
and evilness, 65 
and its opposition to objectivity, 269 
and Kant's categories, 108 
and objectivity, 254, 264, 270, 279, 287, 
291 
and objectivity in immediate knowing, 114 
and objectivity in Kant, 88, 105 
and objectivity not a rigid opposition, 270 
and representations, 70 
and the concept, 264 
and the idea, 283, 286, 287 
and the object ( Objekt), 266, 272 
and the purpose, 276, 277, 278, 281 
and thought, JI4 
as an essential factor within God, 269 
as inner purposiveness, 286 
as opposed to objectivity in Kant, 83 
dialectical, 265 
finite, 220 
has infinite value, 221 
immediate, 269 

in Kant, 83, 91, lli 
infinite, 220 
is not the last word, 56 
meaning of, 220 
of the concept, 279 
of the idea, 290, 291 
sublation 
and the process of actuality, 218 
and the process of life, 290 
as opposed to immediacy, 137 
dual meaning of aufhebm in German, 153 
is likewise mediation, 101 
of immediate determinacy, 178 
of the contradiction, 187 
of the mediation, 191 
self-, 128 
substance, 223, 230 
absolute, 260 
and appearance, 7 4 
and causality, 225 
and reciprocity, 227 
and Spinoza's God, 13 
and the idea, 283 
as absolute power, 225 
as causa sui, 294 
as cause, 225, 232 
as principle of Spinozistic philosophy, 224 
as totality of the accidents, 223 
finite, 226 
in Spinoza, 225, 232 
in the system of the logical idea, 224 
of external things, 59 
of the world, 97, 99 
power of, 223 
Spinoza's absolute, 98 
truth of, 230 
substratum 
representational, 135 
syllogism, 245, 253, 256 
absolute, 260 
and Descartes's Cogito, ergo sum, ll4 
and formal inference, 253 
and formal logic, 255 
and objectivity, 265 
and ordinary logic, 256 
and reason, 255 
and the judgment, 254 
and the living, 288 
and the logic of the concept, 236 
and the logical idea, 264 
and the object ( Objekt), 265 
and the purpose, 277, 279, z8o 
and the triad of syllogistic inferences, 
273 
as essential ground of the true, 254 
as form of all things, 61 
Index 
as form of everything rational, 253 
as form of pure thinking, 61 
as form of thinking, 58 
as unity of concept and judgment, 253 
basic form of, 254 
categorical, 263 
contradiction of, 258 
deficiency of, 258 
disjunctive, 263 
everything is a, 2 54 
figures of, 257, 259, 260 
form of, 261 
formalism of, 262 
hypothetical, 263 
immediate, 254 
immediate, in Descartes, u4 
in Descartes, ll5 
mathematical, 260 
not merely a form of subjective thinking, 
254 
of analogy, 262 
of existence (Dasein), 256 
of necessity, 263 
of reason, 255 
of reflection, 261, 263 
of the set of all (AiJheit), 261 
of the understanding, 255 
qualitative, 256 
quantitative, 260 
rational, 255 
threefold, 260 
system 
and Christian faith, II3 
and its refutation, 144 
and the absolute, 283 
and the idea, 43 
and the living, 288 
and the science of the idea, 43 
as a definition of the absolute, 137 
development of, 300 
dualistic, 106 
in the history of philosophy, 137 
no scientific philosophizing without, 43 
of direct and indirect taxation, 44 
of empiricism, 108 
of eudemonism, 102 
of Heraclitus, 144 
of identity, n, 13 
of philosophy, 42 
of pure thought-determinations, 6o 
of science, 66 
of the Epicureans, 131 
of the logical, 300 
of the logical idea, 144 
of the Stoics, 131 
of thought-determinations, 58 
351 

352 
system (cont.) 
philosophical, 137, 138 
seesaw, 128 
solar, 169, 274 
solar, as a system of three syllogisms, 273 
Spinoza's, 13, 99. 224 
what it is not, 43 
tabula rasa, 292, 297 
tautology 
empty, 204 
teleology, 276 
concept of modern, 277 
tenderness 
for worldly things in Kant, 93 
term 
middle, 61, 254, 263, 273, 279, 28o, 281 
theodicy, 219 
theology, 23, 76 
as science of faith, 76 
enlightened, 25 
natural, 75 
rational, 75• 76, 77 
systematic, 16 
true, 76 
theorem, 293 
as determination of an object, 295 
Pythagorean, 295 
thing 
and appearance, 196 
and matter, 195 
and matter and form, 196 
and properties, 193, 194 
and quality, 156 
and quantity, 156 
and sorts of matter, 195 
and sorts of stuff, 194 
and the determinations of reflection, 193 
as a totality, 196 
as reflection-in-itself, 193 
definition of, 191, 192 
meaning of, 73 
soul as, 73 
spirit as, 73 
the in-itself of, 192 
thinking, in Descartes, 115 
thing-in-itself, 139, 195 
abstract, 206 
and the thing, 193 
as an absolute beyond, in Kant, 108 
as the in-itself of things, 192 
empty, in Kant, 90 
in Kant, 83, 89, 109, 192, 198 
not unknowable, 192 
thinking, 50, 59, 76, 287 
Index 
abstract, 73, 8r, 122, 131 
and being, r?o• 123, 144 
and freedom, 57, ro8 
and human beings, 29, 58, 6o 
and its abstract form, 53 
and its beginning, 137 
and its content, 37 
and its separation from feeling, 29 
and language, 217 
and nour, 59 
and philosophy, 32 
and reason, 254 
and the dialectic, 39 
and the empirical sciences, 41 
and the Enlightenment, 25 
and the idea, 46, 299 
and the Logic, 47 
and the opposition of subjectivity and 
objectivity, 269 
as a subject, 51, 53 
as activity of the particular, 11o 
as comprehending, 28 
as innermost part of spirit, 49 
as inwardness of spirit, 39 
as merely subjective activity, 50 
as merely subjective activity, in Kant, 83 
as object oflogic, 49 
as substance of external things, 59 
as the absolute form, 63 
as the active universal, 51 
as the object of thinking, 45 
as the truth of what is objective, 57 
as thinking over, 29 
as understanding, 66, 126 
barbaric, 13 
becomes knowing in philosophy, 29 
brings about the resolution of its own 
contradictions, 39 
causes the wound and heals it, too, 64 
comprehending, 76 
development of, 42, 284 
effects of, 50 
elevates itself above the natural, 40 
entangled in contradictions, 39 
finite, 54, 68, 69, 257 
finite, in Kant, 109 
finitude of, 65 
formal, 49, 50 
forms of pure, 6r 
has itself for object, 69 
in finite categories, 15 
in immediate knowing, 112 
in Kant, 84 
in opposition to truth, in Kant, 109 
in philosophy, 38 

Index 
353 
in philosophy different from ordinary 
thinking, 29 
in the form of being, r66 
in the old metaphysics, 67, 69 
infinite, 69 
infinite and rational, 68 
is essentially infinite, 69 
is inherent in all human intuiting, 59 
is the negation of immediacy, 40 
is the universal in all representations, 59 
is ungrateful, 41 
knowledge grounded in free, 158 
laws of, 178, 2.35 
Logic as science of, 47 
logical, 139 
makes the soul a spirit, r6 
meaning of, so, 53, 58, 2.14 
meaning of representations for, 31 
nature of, 94, 97 
not a merely formal activiry, 201 
not a merely subjective activiry, 53 
not merely an abstract identity, 179 
objective, 71 
of object of spirit, 39 
of the old metaphysics, 83 
of thinking, 48, 83 
opposition of, 67 
philosophical, 301 
power of, 50 
produces the thought, 50 
produces thoughts, 50 
produces truth, 57 
pure form of, 63 
reflective, 2.9 
reproaches made against, 179 
self-conscious, 242. 
self-determining, 165, 2.6o 
self-sufficiency of, 108 
speculative, 37 
spontaneity of, in Kant, 83 
subjective, 2.13, 234, 247, 248, 254 
the concept of the form of, 37 
there is only one, 29 
thinks itself, 69 
true, 185 
universal substance of all things spiritual, 59 
thinking over (Nachdenkm), 30,34 
as producing the universal, 54 
as reflective thinking, 29 
process of, 37 
Tholuck, Friedrich August Gottreu, 12, 13, q, 18 
thought, 49, 58 
and language, 52 
and representation, 30, 31, 32, 52 
and the content of consciousness, 29 
and the history of philosophy, 14 
and the Logic, 6o 
and the sensory, 51 
as a category, 5J 
as content of reflective thinking, 29 
as form as distinct from thought as content, 
29 
as intermingled with representations, 31 
constitutes the core of the world, 58 
content in the form of, 6o 
finite, 63 
forms of conscious, 58 
freedom of, 2.5 
genuine, 43 
in the ordinary sense, 6o 
is itself and its other, 52 
logical, 61 
objective, 58, 66 
of what there is, 35 
positions of, 66 
pure, 31, 47, 59, 6o 
self-conscious, 51 
subjective, 49 
unconscious, 58 
unmixed, 31 
usual determinations of. 10 
thought-determination, s8, 92 
abstract, 68, 76 
and language, 6r 
and the metaphysics of the understanding, 
72 
and the understanding, 72, 155 
as a predicate, 71 
as concept of the understanding, 83 
as fundamental determination of things, 68 
finite, 62, 66, 67 
in Fichte, 86 
in Kant, 83, 84, 91 
oflogic, 61 
pure, 6o, 61 
simple, 67 
system of, 58 
the 'I' as source of, in Kant, 86 
truth of, 61, 62 
time, 95 
absolute, 178 
abstract, 178 
and immortality, 73 
and motion, 274 
and spiritual content, 52 
as a sensory condition in Kant, ro6 
as continuous and discrete quantity, r6o 
as example of quantity, 157 
as form of intuition in Kant, 85 
determinate, 95 

354 
time (cont.) 
framework of, 296 
in Kant's antinomies, 95· 159 
infinity of, 149 
moment in, 149 
philosophical standpoint of our, 66 
sickness of our, 56 
takes care of what is, 87 
totality, 72, 232, 279 
and actuality, 215, 218 
and being-for-itself, 156 
and essence, 190, 198 
and force, 204 
and form and content, 207 
and naive consciousness, 199 
and substance, 223 
and the concept, 233 
and the idea, 290, 303 
and the idealism of speculative philosophy, 
72 
and the judgment, 245 
and the Leibnizian monad, 269 
and the moments of the concept, 237 
and the moments of the idea, 43 
and the moments of the syllogism, 264 
and the object ( Objekt), 268 
and the particular parts of philosophy, 43 
and the purpose, 270, 278 
and the speculative, 133 
and the spheres of the logical idea, 136 
and the subjective purpose, 279 
and the syllogism, 263 
and the true, 43. 72 
and universality in judgment, 251 
as basic matter (Sache), 222 
essence posited as, 186 
form as, 196 
genus as, 251 
God as concrete, 101 
matter as, 195 
nature as immediate, 260 
of appearance, 205 
of being, 135 
of being and essence, 235 
of subject in judgment, 245 
of the categories, 88 
of the concept, 265, 276 
of the form, 218, 300 
of the logical idea, 302 
of thinghood, 196 
self-sufficient, 286, 289 
the idea as systematic, 303 
the world as, 284 
the world of appearance as, 199 
thing as, 192, 196 
Index 
thinking as self-developing, 47 
universal as singular, 265 
transition, 98, 266, 302 
and actuality, 212, 223 
and being, 212 
and immediate knowing, 118 
and substance, 225 
and the absolute idea, 299 
and the concept, 234 
and the dialectic, 128, 132 
and the idea, 286 
as inference, 96 
as infinite progression, 171 
as the dialectical moment, 235 
from basic matter (Sache) to knowledge, 10 
from being to essence, 172 
from chemism to teleology, 276 
from judgment to syllogism, 254 
from knowing to willing, 297 
from necessity to freedom, 232 
from quality to quantity, 156 
from subjectivity to objectivity, 254 
from the finite to the infinite, 75 
from the syllogism to the object ( Objekt), 265 
immediate, 2II 
in being, 135 
in essence, 172 
in measure, 172 
in the sphere of being, 234 
into an other, 302 
into its opposite, 285 
of being into nothing, 143 
of something into an other, 150 
of the purpose to the idea, 270 
thinking as transitioning, 97 
to a higher sphere, 45, 46 
to concrete existence (Existenz), 265 
translation 
of content into the form of thought, 32 
tree 
of knowledge, 64 
of life, 64, 65 
trinity 
doctrine of, 17 
God as, 159 
truth, 134, 232 
absolute, 235, 303 
absolute and entire, 299 
absolute form of, 48 
abstract identity as criterion of, 122 
alleged laws of, 178 
and appearance, in Kant, 82 
and correctness, 61 
and faith, 24, 25 
and finite mediations, 124 

Index 
355 
and finite thought-determinations, 66 
andGod, 28 
and human imperfection, 48 
and Humean scepticism, 82 
and knowledge in our rime, 66 
and objective thoughts, 66 
and opinion, 269 
and perception, 82 
and reason, 291 
and religion, 15 
and rhe dialectic, 132 
and the form of the judgment, 68 
and rhe forms of rhe concept, 236 
and the forms of thinking, in Kant, 84 
and the idea, 283, 284, 290 
and the qualitative judgment, 246, 247 
and rhe sensory realm, 124 
and things in their immediate being, 175 
and thinking, 57 
and thinking things over, no 
as a quality of sentences, 72 
as agreement of a content with irself, 62 
as agreement of object and representation, 62 
as object of philosophy, 48 
as object of philosophy and religion, 2.8 
as opposed to correctness, 72, 246, 247, 
284 
as opposed to subjective certainty, 106 
as proper concern of the logic, 62 
canon of, in Kant, 101 
comes to be known through thinking things 
over, 67 
criterion of, in immediate knowing, 119, 
121 
definition of, 283 
drive of knowledge ro, 291 
emerging from error, 2.82 
exists for the spirit, 114 
false modesty about, 48 
finite, 292 
formal, 284 
God as absolute, 105 
in immediate knowing, III 
in Kant, 106 
in Kant's third critique, 104 
in Reinhold, 38 
in the form of thinking, 63 
infinite, 292 
is objective, 56 
lack of, in rhe judgment, 248 
meaning of, 284 
more than the lack of contradiction, 73 
nor known by the senses, 50 
objective, 16 
of a philosophy, 33 
of actions, 55 
of being and of essence, 134, 231 
of being and of nothing, 140 
of necessity, 219, 230 
of reality is ideality, 153 
of substance, 230 
of the finite, 152 
of the good, 299 
of the supersensory domain, 131 
of things to be found in thought, 81 
of thought-determinations, 62 
organon of, in Kant, 101 
philosophical meaning of, 62 
philosophy as investigation of, 10 
proximate, 229 
religious, 211 
rests solely on rhe form, 246 
scientific knowledge of, 8 
study of, 48 
rhe concept as a higher level of, 178 
unconditioned, rhe 
and immediate knowing, no 
first, in Kant, 91 
in Jacobi, 98 
in Kant, 89, 90, 91, 101 
second, in Kanr, 93 
understanding ( V erstand), 34, 126 
abstract, 8o 
abstract thinking of, 131, 133 
analogous ro loving kindness of God, 127 
and appreciation of arr, 127 
and immediate knowing, 119 
and irs principle of identity, 126 
and reason, 101 
and representation, 52 
and scepticism, 131 
and sensation, 36, 126 
and the abstract universal, 78 
and the battle of reason, 72 
and the determinations of the finite, 12.8 
and the dialectic, 39, 128 
and the old metaphysics, 68 
and the principle of abstract identity, 133 
as a thinking rhar produces finite 
determinations, 66 
as an essential aspect of education, 127 
as distinct from reason, in Kant, 89 
as knowledge of appearances only, in Kant, 
!06 
as one side of the logical, 125 
as the first form of the logical, 127 
concepts of, in Kant, 83 
finite, 75 
finite and conditioned character of, 90 

Index 
understanding (Verstand) (cont.) 
finitude of determinations of, 129 
identiry of, 122 
imparcs the form of universality to its content, 
126 
in Jacobi, 98 
in Kant, 83 
intuitive, in Kant, 103 
is indispensable, 126 
limited determinations of, 69 
logic of, and speculative logic, 132 
metaphysical, II5 
metaphysics of, 72, 78 
necessary for philosophy, 128 
perspective of, 68 
principle of, 12 7 
proper place of, 70 
science of, 76 
sound human, II3 
stops short at oppositions, 133 
subjective, 79 
thinking as, 126 
tries to resist the dialectic, 130 
Unitarianism, 17 
unity 
absolute, 87 
absolute, of concept and objectivity, 282 
and amount, in mathematics, 162 
and number, 161 
and the human being, 64 
and the predicate in judgment, 245 
and the understanding, 285 
concept as, 73 
extraneous, 44 
formal, 132 
ideal (idee!~, 233 
in the form of uniry, 143 
natural, 63, 64 
negative, 196 
negative, of the idea, 287 
negative, with itself, 236, 238, 272 
of becoming, 144 
of being and essence, 232 
of being and nothing, 140, 141, 142, 143, 
145 
of concept and objectivity, 235 
of determinations in their opposition, 132 
of distinct determinations, II9 
of essence and concrete existence (Existenz), 
2II 
of God and the world, in Spinoza, 98 
of identity and difference, 186 
of infinite and finite, 151 
of itself in itself, 179 
of manifoldness, 55 
of mathematical unit, 159, 161 
of mechanism and chemism, 270 
of opposite determinations in an object, 95 
of possibility and accualiry, 218 
of properties in an object, 87 
of qualiry and quantity, 169, 172 
of relation to itself and relation to an other, 
202 
of repulsion and attraction, 156 
of self-consciousness, 86, 87, 91 
of something and an other, 154 
of space and time, 274 
of the concept, 232 
of the concept and of objectivity, 296 
of the concept and the judgment, 253 
of the idea with being, 119 
of the ideal and the real, 284 
of the inner and the outer, 210 
of the living, 288 
of the living organism, 203 
of the manifold, in Kant, 87 
of the subject and the predicate, 253 
of the subjective and the objective, 133, 
281 
of the subjective and the objective idea, 
299 
of the theoretical and the practical idea, 
298 
of the universal and the particular, 251 
of thinking and being, 287 
of thought and sensory representation, in 
Schiller, 103 
self-positing, 116 
transcendental, of self-consciousness, 85, 87 
universal, the (Allgemeine, das) (see also concept), 
59 
abstract, 78, 244, 247 
active, 51 
and human thought, 59 
and language, 52 
and the activity of thinking, 57 
and the animal, 59 
and the empirical world, 97 
and the 'I', 53 
and the individual, 247, 249 
and the judgment, 241 
and the particular, 42, 240, 242 
and the predicate, 243, 244 
and the sensory, 52 
and the subject in judgment, 250 
and the syllogism, 258, 273 
and thinking things over, 58 
as a moment of the concept, 58 
as an external bond, 249 
as essence, 61 

Index 
357 
as genus, 2 50 
as ground, 250 
as product of thinking, 51 
as product of thinking things over, 54 
as that which abides, 55 
cannot be grasped with the senses, 55 
concrete, 70, 250, 275 
contains the particular and the individual, 
238 
does not exist outwardly, 56 
exists for the universal, 59 
in a formal sense, 6o 
in all representations, 59 
in the sciences, 37 
in the sea of empirical particulars, 35 
individuated, 243 
true meaning of, 237 
universality, 59, 241 
abstract, 53, 109, 237, 292 
abstract, of thinking, 41 
and analysis, So 
and necessity as Kantian a priori, 83 
and necessity in Hume, 83 
and necessity not to be found in perception, 
92 
and perception, 82, 97 
and representation, 51 
and the genus, 261 
and the 'I', 53 
and the 'I', 'this', 'here', 'now', 53 
and the idea, 43, 290 
and the individual, 254 
and the living individuality, 290 
and the predicate in the judgment, 
243 
and the subject in the judgment, 246 
and the syllogism, 254 
as being-at-home-with-itself of thinking, 41 
as determinate, 293 
as element in experience, 82 
as genus and species, 251 
as individuality, 286 
as inner nature of individuals, 243 
as moment of the concept, 236 
as predicate in the judgment, 241 
as principle of personhood, 237 
as product of the understanding, 126 
as relation to itself, 238 
as the character of all thought, 51 
concrete, 289 
continues itself in what is differentiated from 
it, 302 
external, 2 73 
formal, 79 
in Kant, 105 
inherent in representation, 52 
nor exhibited by perceptions, 96 
not merely a common feature, 59 
of reason, in Kant, 105 
of representing, 52 
of the body's externality, 287 
of the concept, 245 
of the human being, 237 
of the living nature, 107 
-of-reflection, 249 
produced by thinking, 96 
sensory, 245 
substantial, 289 
superficial, 250 
taken in isolation, 239 
the same as identity, 238 
unity of individuality and, 261 
untruth, 73, 122 
of finite things, 62, 202 
void, the 
'I' as, 59 
in ancient atomism, 155, 156 
volition, 30, 53 
of a child, 132 
whole, 207 
and parts, 202, 203, 205 
will, 216, 298 
and arbitrary choice (Willkiir), 216, 217 
and character, 121 
and contingency, 216 
and motivation, 190 
as activity of individuals in society, 273 
as the good activating itself, 298 
criminal, 209 
eternal, of God, 220 
evil, 214 
finitude of. 298 
free, 216 
freedom of, 216 
in Kant, 103 
knows the purpose as its own, 298 
of all, in Rousseau, 238 
of the individual as principle of the state, 155 
principle of, in Kant, 103 
rational, of a child, 132 
unethical content of, 121 
universal, in Rousseau, 2 3 8 
willing 
as merely subjective idea, 297 
as practical activity of the idea, 291 
finite, 297 
idea as, 297 
Wolff, Christian, 295 

world 
alienness of, 269 
and God, 99 
and God in Spinoza, 98 
and the object (Objekt), 265 
as a mass of sensory intuitions, 88 
as actual concept, 298 
as aggregate, 96 
as an aggregate of purposes, 97 
as an enormous totaliry, 284 
as contingent, 97 
as governed by divine providence, 
298 
as governed by providence, 219 
as it appears for the subjective spirit, 93 
as it appears, in Kant, 93 
as mere appearance, 198 
as object of cosmology, 7 4 
world (cont.) 
as object of Kant's antinomies, 93 
as reali!y of the divine concept, 147 
as the idea, 298 
as topic of old metaphysics, 68 
cause of, 37 
construal of, 219 
contains infinite determinacy, 8o 
divine governance of, 33, 206 
empirical, 97 
Index 
empirical view of, 96 
external, 65, 248 
final purpose of, 298 
finite, 76 
governed by nous, 58 
in Spinoza, 224 
inner and outer, of consciousness, 33 
its reali1y must be idealized, 87 
modern, 75 
natural, 158 
natural and spiritual, 185, 192 
objective, 265, 291, 297, 299 
of appearance, 35, 199 
of free interioriry, 159 
of reciprocal dependency, 190 
of representations, 59 
reason exists in, 58 
reason is the soul of, 58 
spiritual, 131, 146, 158 
splendour of, 179 
supersensible, 107 
supersensory, 50 
that is, 291 
there is rhyme and reason to, 58 
ultimate purpose of, in Kant, 104 
Zeno of Elea, 145, 164 
Zeus, 120, 221 

