
Hegel's Preface to the Phenomenology of Spirit 
GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH HEGEL 
Translation and Running Commentary by 
Yirn1iyahu Yovel 
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS · PRINCETON AND OXFORD 

Copynght © 2005 by Yirmiyahu Yovel 
Requests for permissions to reproduce material from this work 
should be sent to Permissions, Princeton University Press 
Published by Princeton University Press, 
41 William Street, Princeton, New jersey 08540 
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 
3 Market Place, Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 lSY 
All Rights Reserved 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1770-1831. 
[Vorrede, Phanomenologie des Geistes. English] 
Heger s preface to the Phenomenology of spirit I Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel ; 
translation and running commentary by Yirmiyahu Yovel. 
p. 
em. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-691-12052-8 (alk. paper) 
1. Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1770-1831. Phanomenologie des Geistes. 
2. Knowledge, Theory of. 3. Spirit. 4. Consciousness. 5. Truth. 
I. Yovel, Yirmiahu. II. Title. 
B2928.E5Y 68 
2005 
193--dc22 
2004044514 
British Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available 
This book has been composed in Dante 
Printed on acid-free paper.oo 
pupress. princeton. edu 
Printed in the United States of America 
1 
3 
5 
7 
9 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 

In memory of Yaakov (Eugene) Fleischmann 

Contents 
Preface 
1X 
Introduction 
1 
Text and Running Commentary 
63-198 
Works on Hegel 
199 
Index 
213 

Preface 
THE Phenomenology of Spirit is the mature Hegel's first systematic 
work, which practically laid the ground for the rest of his system. 
It is also his most original work. The thirty-six-year-old Hegel, then 
teaching at Jena, finished the book around the time of the historic 
Battle of Jena, in which Napoleon crushed the Prussian army in 
the vicinity of Hegel's university town. At that time Hegel, not a 
nationalist like Fichte, saw the French emperor as the propagator 
of the French Revolution, who was to institutionalize its abstract 
ideas in concrete European laws and institutions. 
Hegel wrote the Preface after finishing the book. In it he exposed 
his unorthodox ideas and revolutionary new approach to philoso-
phy in succinct, intense terms, which made this text a much-ad-
mired classic, perhaps the best introduction to his general thought 
(and not specifically to the Phenomenology). Hegel himself, however, 
was uncomfortable writing a preface. Philosophical ideas, he says, 
derive their justification and very meaning from their context of 
development. Severing them from this living context (and, in addi-
tion, trying to frame the generalizations in ordinary, "predicative" 
language) is doomed to miss or distort their message. 
This is a strong objection, which might count as Hegel's critique 
of the present book, too (and of any other introduction to his 
work). But in the end, Hegel himselfbowed to necessity and, fortu-
nately, gave us the celebrated Preface. The result is an enlightening 
(and tacitly ironic) text, which seems to negate performatively its 
own claim (namely, that truth lies exclusively in its full evolution). 
Hegel came to this decision because he considered that the Preface 
could work as a prephilosophical preparation to actual philosophiz-
ing. Well, so does any good introduction; and with this pontifical 
dispensation, the present book cheerfully adds its own voice to the 
company of "Introductions to Hegel," trying to be helpful to the 

X 
Preface 
growing audiences who face the Hegelian texts in a mixture of 
perplexity and despair. 
Hegel's Preface contains a number of passages which are hard 
to digest, because of either syntax or content. At the same time it 
offers several short, pointed proverbs (like "the true is the whole," 
and ccthe absolute is a result") which mislead the reader into be-
lieving they hold their meaning within themselves, when in fact 
they require a development to be properly grasped. Even so, this 
Preface is a remarkably valuable introduction to Hegel, written by 
him at the height of his energy and original powers. Many thou-
sands of students and Hegel scholars, in various periods and many 
languages, have discovered the special value that can be drawn 
from this text, provided one invests in it the necessary attention 
and, when needed, uses an appropriate interpretation. 
THE TRANSLATION 
After some hesitation, I decided to undertake my own translation 
of the text, for two reasons. One is that the extant translations (of 
the whole Phenomenology), by Baillie and Miller, are not sufficiently 
accurate for the magnifying glass that must be used in a close read-
ing and commentary. (Baillie's winding sentences have a certain 
Victorian charm but not enough precision; and Miller takes more 
liberties with paraphrase and style than a running commentary can 
allow.) Another reason was that translations, even when they try 
to be as close to the original as I wished to be, often embody the 
translator's understanding of the text; so it made more sense to 
offer a unified introduction to Hegel in which the translator and 
commentator are the same person. 
I followed the letter of the original Hegelian text (edited by J. 
Hoffmeister, Meiner, 1952), using straightforward contemporary 
style and avoiding literary embellishment. Often I broke Hegel's 
Jong sentences, or simplified their structure. I also omitted his ital-
ics. My aim was to make the translation work in conveying the 
German original even where it is ambiguous: the place for clarifi-
cation is the commentary. 

Preface 
Xl 
""Dear reader, study Latin and commit my translation to the fire-'-' 
is the best advice ever given to readers of translations, though not 
the most practical. I do not claim to have produced an easy text. 
But whoever has read the original knows it is also not easy to read 
(and in this the translation agrees with the original). I hope the 
commentary, written in my own manner, succeeds in making intel-
ligible both itself and Hegel's important and fascinating text. In any 
case, to me the two are integral parts of a single "introduction to 
Hegel's philosophy," which this book offers. 
THE COMMENTARY 
The commentary evolved in various semi11ars I have given over the 
years at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, and in several institu-
tions abroad. It contains an explication of the letter of the text to-
gether with its philosophical interpretation, given in a single se-
quence. Therefore, the beginner may encounter two levels of 
difficulty in understanding the commentary. Since the purpose of the 
commentary is to introduce the reader to basic Hegelian concepts, it 
often expands on an issue beyond what is strictly said in the text. For 
this reason, the volume of the commentaries is quite large at first, 
when one is entering Heger s world, and diminishes later, when the 
reader has already been acquainted with important concepts. 
As I explain in the introduction, my interpretation tries to be 
faithful to the historical Hegel and reconstruct his ideas within their 
own context. I abstained as much as possible from mixing my own 
philosophical preferences with my reading of HegeL Approaches 
differing from mine, and works by other interpreters, are broadly 
illustrated in the section entitled "'Works on Hegel.-'-' 
AcKNOWLEDGMENTs 
An earlier Hebrew version of this book was published by The Mag-
ness Press of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem (1996). For help 
in preparing the original version, and now the English-language ver-

xu 
Preface 
sion, I owe thanks to many people, above all my students in jerusa-
lem, and also at Princeton university, the Sorbonne, and the New 
School University. I have learned from them all. Colleagues and 
friends from whom I learned include Charles Taylor, Dieter Hen-
rich, Werner Becker, Nathan Rotenstreich, Axel Honneth, Richard 
Bernstein, Richard Schacht, and, during my student days, Jean Hyp-
polite, Jean Wahl, Paul Ricoeur, and also Walter Kaufmann, with 
whom I had my differences, but I appreciated the differentiating 
freedom in which he criticized authors he held in esteem. Above all 
I should mention Yaakov (Eugene) Fleischmann, my teacher in the 
early Jerusalem days, through whom I first encountered Hegel and 
discovered the power of life and thought hidden in the Hegelian 
text that looks at first so opaque and academic. Fleischmann later 
emigrated to France where he wrote two books on Hegel (see 
"Works on Hegel"), but above all he was a charismatic teacher, 
ironic and piercing, who passed to his students the sense that philos-
ophy in general, and dialectical thinking in particular, can matter to 
their lives. Fleischmann himself was a dialectical person, restless, 
without a synthesis between his many contradictions. I cannot think 
of anyone more suitable to whom to dedicate this work. 
My thanks go to the Israel Science Foundation, whose grants 
assisted this work at different stages, and to the New School Univer-
sity in New York (Graduate Faculty), in whose friendly and unique 
intellectual atmosphere I was able to work on the expanded English 
version. Thanks are due to three of my doctoral students and for-
mer assistants in New York and Jerusalem, Howard Panzer, Dr. 
Pini Ifergan, and Dr. Aaron Garrett, who helped in revising the text 
or completing the bibliography. I thank Michael Forster and an 
unnamed reader for Princeton University Press, whose remarks 
helped clarify important points in my text and approach. And, as 
in all my works, I am warmly indebted to Ms. Eva Shorr, the man-
aging editor of the Jerusalem philosophical quarterly IYYUN, for 
her devoted help and advice. My thanks go also to Kathleen Cioffi 
of Princeton University Press, who helped improve the text, and to 
David Luljak, who prepared the index, and special thanks to Ian 
Malcolm, my wise Princeton editor. 
Yirmiyahu Yovel 

Hegel's Preface to theThenomenology of Spirit 
++-

Introduction 
THIS INTRODUCTORY essay is not intended to replace the commen-
tary, but to complement it. Its main purpose is to lay the ground 
for reading the text and commentary, by elaborating on two fa-
mous aphorisms in Hegel's Preface-rrThe true is the whole," and 
HThe true [the absolute] is subject"-and by offering a short interpre-
tation of the Hegelian dialectic and its dual direction, which I call 
Hdialectic as journey" and 'rdialectic as science." Another purpose 
is to explain my hermeneutical approach in relation to other Hegel 
interpretations. 
ONTOLOGY, SOCIETY, AND RELIGION 
First, a few words about my approach. Every commentary involves 
a standpoint and a choice of emphases. Different readers see differ-
ent things in Hegel. Many interpreters tend to identify the whole 
of Hegel with that aspect of his philosophy which they consider 
valid or important today. I tend, however, to view Hegel in his own 
context and his variety of aspects, without suppressing elements of 
his thought that were crucial to him only because they can no 
longer be so to us. A good example is the rrsocial Hegel." Many 
current scholars treat Hegel's innovative social and political theory 
as separate from pis ontology (or even interpret his ontology as 
social philosophy), an approach I cannot share. Philosophy in Hegel 
does not climax in social praxis: this was Marx's view, which he 
voiced against Hegel, who put philosophical knowledge and com-
prehension at the top. In Hegel's own self-understanding, the social 
world and its evolution, while crucially important, are embodied 
within a larger project, in which being itself is supposed to attain a 
more actual and manifest state. The changing networks of social 
relations, built upon the human striving for recognition and self-

2 
Introduction 
hood, make possible diverse modes of reflective experience, that 
is, of knowledge and self-knowledge; ·and through the historical 
evolution of all these forms-cognitive, practical, and aesthetic-
something is going on that, to Hegel, transcends the purely social 
domain-namely, being is made actual and known to itself Therefore, 
one cannot adequately grasp the meaning of Hegel's social philoso-
phy in separation from the specifically Hegelian ontology, ac-
cording to which being is not given at the outset as finished and 
actual, but rather evolves toward actuality. 
Moreover, this was a modern project for Hegel, not a residue of 
the metaphysics of the past. His ultimate interest in cognitive ontol-
ogy defined a modern task for Hegel~the task of reconstructing-
through philosophy, rather than religion or social praxis merely-
the meaning of being that modern philosophy itself, working as 
abstract intellect, has irreversibly undermined when working as 
Enlightenment. 
Other interpreters, especially in Europe, attribute to Hegel an 
overriding religious (Lutheran) outlook, and even a tendency to-
wards mysticism. I cannot share this outlook, although I do recog-
nize-indeed, stress-a religious substrate in Hegel, which calls for 
careful definition no less than the social. Hegel views religion as 
inferior to philosophy, a kind of metaphoric expression of it. The 
inferiority is due to the medium employed by each of them (which 
is a crucial consideration to the conceptually oriented Hegel). With 
respect to content, however, religion and philosophy share the 
same goal and general subject matter. The latter view is quite ex-
ceptional in modern philosophy, which has, for the most part, taken 
care to distinguish religion from philosophy, assigning a different, 
and usually more modest, role to philosophy. To understand He-
gel's thought we must, therefore, recognize both its religious back-
ground, and the fact that Hegel transcends this background in two 
major respects. 
First, philosophy stands on a higher level than religion because it 
is capable of conceptualizing religion~s spiritual content: Reason is 
superior to image and metaphor. Although these elements (reason, 
image, metaphor) do not mutually exclude one another, the rational 
concept encompasses them all. And this also means that the concept 

Introduction 
3 
is rational only in so far as it contains the essence of the experiences 
of imagining, feeling, and real being, and links them to a historical 
tradition. Hegel rejects the rationalism of the Enlightenment, which 
excludes imagining, feeling, and history from reason. Hegel calls 
such thinking Understanding (Verstand) as distinguished from Reason 
(Vernunft). Yet, in the final analysis, within the synthesis which all 
these elements are supposed to constitute, it is the rational form 
that reinstates itself as supreme. In this way the Enlightenment is 
essentially preserved in Hegel's philosophy, but only after it has reap-
propriated and encompassed its opponents rather than exclude them. 
Second, even within the world of religious imagery, Hegel takes 
a heterodox position. Absolute being, God himself, does not exist 
as absolute from the outset. God rather develops, evolves in stages, 
mediated by the temporal becoming of the world-spirit, that is, by 
human history. Herein lies the essence of Hegel's dialectical version 
of Christianity: God does not only become man (in the image of 
Jesus), he also becomes God through the mediation ofhis becoming 
man. Human history is the phenomenal manifestation of absolute 
spirit's process of becoming, and consequently of God's own be-
coming. These are certainly metaphors, not concepts, but religious 
metaphor carries philosophical weight for Hegel, since it expresses 
absolute truth in images. 
This is also true of Hegel's personal itinerary. 1 Religion remained 
a foundation of his mental world, but as the object of critique, 
transformation, Aujhebung. To reach the deeper truth to which reli-
gion points, one needs to go beyond it-that is, leave it, and do 
something else with it, something which religion itself, when duly 
understood, is found to be calling for. But what? The young Hegel 
found the answer in Kant's Enlightenment critique of religion, 
which draws the moral kernel of religion and disposes of its histori-
cal shell. The mature Hegel, on the contrary, turned to the history 
of religion as a substrate (along with social history) of the evolution 
1 For a vast panorama of the young Hegel see H. S. Harris,s Hegel's Ladder 
(Indianapolis: Hackett Publications, 1997). For a succinct analysis of Hegers 
grappling with the spirit of Christianity and Judaism see chapters 2 and 6 of my 
Dark Riddle: Hegel and Nietzsche on the jews (Cambridge: Polity Press; University 
Park: Penn State University Press, 1998). 

4 
Introduction 
of Reason and absolute spirit. Hegel's two opposite answers were 
linked by a common goal: to inform philosophy with religion's 
essential content, while using philosophy's conceptual truth to rein-
terpret religion and raise it to a higher form of life. 
Uniting the two issues, we may say that Hegel's distinctive social 
theory, while most important, is dependent upon his view of his-
tory, which must be understood in relation to ontology and with 
background reference to-the same thematic as treated by-reli-
gion. Religion, as a system of images, endows philosophy with ex-
periential and historical depth. Yet Hegel transcends religion in the 
two ways mentioned above: he goes beyond religion to the higher, 
philosophical Concept; and he interprets the religious (Christian) 
tradition itself in a sharply heterodox way. 
My reading of Hegel thus gives priority to universal thought-
the Logos-though in a dialectical manner, which incorporates his-
tory, life, social relations, the imagination, and existential experi-
ences as integral dimensions of the rational Concept. Hegel is not a 
mystic, quite the contrary, but the life-experience he calls ''absolute 
Knowing" is supposed to provide in a rational manner that which 
mystics have always sought and promised to provide through irra-
tional means like enthusiasm, concentration, or indeterminate ftel-
ing-namely, a dialectical union with the absolute, which encom-
passes one's whole existential experience and is not confined to 
one's intellectual consciousness alone. This also distinguishes 
Hegel from other rational philosophers-Plato, Aristotle, or Spi-
noza-for whom such union can only occur through the intellect, 
and by a separate, extraordinary mental act. The Hegelian uabsolute 
Knowing" is supposed to evolve and take shape within ordinary, secular 
life-through work, family, social concerns, practical engagements, 
political participation in the state, and so forth-and also through 
ordinary religious practice: only thus can it attain a pure, Concep-
tual expression. 
The Worldly Embodiment of Spirit 
As I read it, then, Hegel's absolute Knowing is not merely an intel-
lectual event but a living experience and a mode of life. As such it 

Introduction 
5 
arises from concrete life-forms located in some definite historical 
time and in a social and geographical place. This is how we are 
anchored in the universe, immersed in a social life and a cultural 
milieu, and tied to our ordinary, earthly existence. In Hegel's phi-
losophy, the highest spiritual state needs to be realized in and 
through worldly life. It is not an ascetic ideal aspiring to purity and 
dependent on mere intellectual concentration. 
It should be noticed that the worldly dimension of the spirit does 
not manifest itself primarily in economics, as in Calvinism, but in 
more solidary forms of social life like the family and civil society, 
leading to citizenship and the state. Economics per se is for Hegel 
the domain of particular interests fighting a war of all against all, 
and therefore lacks spirit. Still, the state in Hegel is based on civil 
society (as its sublation), and civil society presupposes the interplay 
of economic interests; in this respect the state's universality perme-
ates economic life as well and gives it a universal significance be-
yond itself. 
In a word, Hegel's thought assigns weight and importance to 
worldly secular life (social and personal), while viewing it as em-
bodying a meaning which extends beyond itself, a "rational" mean-
ing in Hegel's sense, which translates (or sublates) a religious mean-
ing. Spirit is realized in our world, but for Hegel (as for Luther, 
though not in the same Christian sense) our world-this world-
is not merely an inferior, contingent being: our world is the em-
bodiment of Spirit with a capital S. Even absolute Knowing, the 
top intellectual and existential state, is not severed from the rest of 
this worldly life, but is realized through it. 
Modernists and Alienation 
As I mentioned above, a central concern of Hegel, especially in the 
Phenomenology, was to reconstruct, and thereby redeem, those areas 
of modern life that have been damaged and undermined by mod-
ern rationality-community, family, custom, work, the sense of a 
well-anchored self, of political and social belonging, the assurance 
of meaning in life and the universe-and in doing so, to make reason 
itself restore the broken unity on a different and higher plane. The 

6 
Introduction 
goal was, in other words, to transform modern self-conscious ratio-
nality from a destabilizing and alienating element into a construc-
tive and invigorating force: the same reason that had produced the 
rift must repair it from its own resources. It was obvious to Hegel 
that the new unity could not be as compact and immediate as the 
lost unity had been-there is no turning back from modernity in 
Hegel, no romantic, conservative nostalgia toward the past. The 
modern unification had to be more complex, mediated by differ-
ence, built on tension and opposition, and therefore requiring a 
"dialectical" rationality. 
As Hegel foresaw it, a successful modernity would make possible 
an autonomous-that is, truly free-individual, at home in society 
and the universe, and provide a self-sustaining (''absolute,..) mean-
ing to human life and the world's existence: the love of wisdom 
(philo-sophia) would turn into actual sophia. By autonomy Hegel did 
not only mean enjoying abstract political rights and the freedom to 
choose between alternative options, but using universal rationality, 
as embodied in the historicized products of one's culture, in con-
structing one's individual self and singularity in the world. 
To put it differently: the problem of severance and alienation is 
not unique to the social domain in Hegel. It runs through all parts 
of his system, including (indeed, primarily) the questions concern-
ing the meaning of life and the universe, to which absolute Know-
ing-or wisdom, when attained-was to provide an adequate re-
sponse, one that no longer undermines itself dialectically and is 
therefore "absolute," or self-sustaining. This problem has become 
particularly pressing in early phases of modernity, and must be re-
solved by high modernity. With the decline of the religious 
worldview, the individual finds herself cut off from the vindicating, 
meaning-generating elements she possessed in the past; the uni-
verse has undergone desenchantement, and lost, as Hegel says in our 
text, "the thread of light that links it to heaven" (p. 78, below). 
So the modern individual turns to philosophy for new insights, to 
philosophy as a mode of "Knowing" (Wissen) and not as a social 
doctrine merely. Speculative philosophy, which rides on a substrate 
of religion but transcends it toward a secular, conceptual wisdom, 
is expected to overcome this theoretical and existential alienation, 

Introduction 
7 
a task which the doctrine of'rethicallife" (Sittlichkeit) cannot achieve 
in itself, although it is a necessary condition for it. Ethical life-the 
modern reconstruction of social and political relations and institu-
tions, and thereby of a concrete human subjectivity-prepares and 
makes possible the redemptive element in philosophical Knowing, 
but cannot replace it. To view the social domain, with its outward-
looking activity and business, as substitute for the ontological and 
existential concerns is to escape or repress the issue rather than 
face it; and repression, which splits the self further, cannot be the 
solution. 
This said, we should nevertheless remember that absolute 
Knowing is not a detached intellectual activity. Hegelian self-knowl-
edge rides on a substrate of a socially engaged and affective life, 
and always involves the intermediation of theory and practice. At 
all levels, we know ourselves (and our environment) through a 
rrlived" experience embodied in actual life-forms. This is due in part 
to the social dimension of the human self, whose individuality is 
mediated by intersubjective relations, and partly to the affective 
character, that of a lived experience, which rationality has in Hegel. 
The Hegelian self is gradually constituted and known to itself 
through involvement and interaction with other selves within a 
common world of work, language, conflict over recognition, love, 
shared beliefs, social institutions, religious symbols and cult, and 
other forms of concrete life which, by nature, are entwined with 
affective elements: emotions, drives, and moods. 
This distinctive Hegelian outlook, which is foreshadowed by 
some elements in Aristotle and even Luther, evolved from Hegel's 
Jena lectures preceding the Phenomenology. There, Hegel had 
stressed the practical basis of cognitive reason, as a kind of ethical 
self-understanding that mediates the theoretical.2 The conceptual 
essence of philosophy, and of absolute Knowing, is distilled through 
practical forms of experiencing oneself, others, and the world. But 
this does not indicate the primacy of practical reason, as in Kant or 
2 These lectures were particularly emphasized by Siep, Habermas, and Han-
net. Recently, Pini Ifergan's doctoral thesis (The Hebrew University of jerusalem, 
2003) richly elaborates this issue. 

8 
Introduction 
Fichte. Indeed, practical experience itself is important also from a 
cognitive standpoint, and not only from that of reason's socializa-
tion; for there is in Hegel a practical form of self-knowledge (or self-
understanding). It is a kind of prereflective reflection that occurs 
through the experience of living, working, entering into social con-
flict and intercourse, and so forth. But then, a reflective, philosophi-
cal comprehension is said to grow from this soil. To use Hegel's 
proverb, it is over this practical terrain that the owl of Minerva 
spreads its wings at dusk: from here the genuinely cognitive reflec-
tion of philosophy arises and is distilled when the day's work is done. 
All this does not exclude the possibility of dealing sensibly with 
Hegers ethics and social philosophy per se, as long as we do not 
see them as standing alone, but recognize their role within a higher 
and broader Hegelian project. Social philosophy can have this rela-
tive independence because it cannot be derived from ontology, al-
though it cannot be fully understood without it. 
An Ontological journey 
Let's take a cursory look at the road traveled by the Phenomenology. 
By almost all accounts, the first part ("Consciousness") describes dif-
ferent cognitive modes, in which the mind pictures what is actually 
real, and what it takes to be a concrete individual being. At first we 
believe the actually real (the concrete individual) is a sense datum; 
then a pack of properties we call rrthing'; then an abstraction we call 
"force," and its even more abstract counterpart we call [natural] 
"law." Yet all these interpretations collapse because of inner deficien-
cies. With them, collapses our broader initial attempt-to capture 
the actually real directly, and through a cognitive (and representa-
tional) attitude merely. To try again, relying on the knowledge we 
have gained from those failures, we must turn from cognition to 
desire, and from the natural object to the other human subject, to 
whom we relate through the will-the will that wills another's will. 
This turn, which results in a struggle for recognition and a dialectic 
of subjugation and liberation, leads me to seek the actually real (and 
individual) in my own self, which, however, turns out to be equally 
abstract, split from itself (alienated), and not given immediately. 

Introduction 
9 
Self-consciousness, as we discover, is far from being Cartesian, 
or even Kantian; its dynamic of being makes it depend on its own 
social and cognitive evolution. And this opens a vast new domain-
practical, social, and cognitive history-whose evolution is the ter-
rain that allows self-consciousness, including philosophical self-
knowledge, to arise in several levels and degrees. Through this pro-
cess, new forms of interpreting the real arise and are replaced, until 
a Knowing of the actually real-and the true, individual self, both in 
the social and the antic sense-is made possible, a Knowing whose 
dialectic no longer undermines its results but reinforces them, and 
thereby becomes self-sustaining, or absolute. 
This is an ontological journey-toward the constitution and rec-
ognition of the transperspectival (the no-longer-relative, or abso-
lutely true) meaning of the real (i.e., to God, in a non theological, 
immanent sense)-that uses a social turn as its necessary medium 
and condition. In taking this crucial turn, we express a tacit recogni-
tion that the question, What does it mean to actually be? must 
assume the form, What does it take to actually be-to which a 
shorthand answer is: It takes living and being involved in a society, 
one that, despite inevitable regressions, eventually leads to freedom 
and mutual recognition. Yet this evolution is not the answer itself, 
only a prerequisite to it. 
Similarly in Hegel's Science of Logic, which is not a formal science, 
the tacitly underlying query is, What is actually there, and what is 
the meaning of that which is? Here, too, we go at first through a 
failed immediacy and abstraction. We start from general, indefinite 
'being" which, as such, is uniform and meaningless; we move on to 
specific, one-dimensional (positivistic) entities, which on that account 
are unreal and abstract; then we move to complex entities, things 
with an "inner" and "outer" dimension-an "essence" and an ''ap-
pearance"-which, in their duality, are dogmatically considered to 
be there in themselves. To this extent we have traversed (reenacted 
in thought) the history of the thing-like interpretations of the real 
which Kant called "dogmatic metaphysics," and whose final collapse, 
after a climax in Spinoza, calls for Kant's Copernican revolution (see 
p. 17 below). Here again, discovering subjectivity entails, beyond 
Kant, the discovery of sociality and the other subject as mediating 

10 
Introduction 
our relations with the object; but this is a dimension of the search 
for actuality and not a substitute for it. The logic of the Concept, or 
rather the Idea, is mediated by the natural and the social dimensions 
of the Idea but, for Hegel, transcends them both. 
Absolute Spirit 
No less distinctive of Hegel than the intimate link of theory and 
practice is the claim that the institutional anchors of the self he 
calls "objective spirit" serve to realize "absolute spirit." In its narrow 
technical sense, absolute spirit denotes the self-reflective ways in 
which every historical period and culture-and eventually, human-
ity at large-affirms itself, and articulates its self-understanding and 
experience of the world in its art, religion, and philosophy. As men-
tioned earlier, Hegel sees something greater going on in human 
history than merely contingent societies and cultures expressing 
and justifying their modes of life in their reflective creations (philos-
ophy, art, religion): there is an encompassing rational, even divine, 
principle that is actualized through their combined theory and 
practice. This encompassing principle, Spirit writ large-in its uni-
versal sense3-transcends (aujhebt) the objective (socialized, institu-
tional) dimension of spirit toward the realization, and manifesta-
tion, of the absolute meaning of being.4 The result is a heterodox 
Hegelian version of a self-revealing immanent deity: neither the 
transcendent creator-God of Christianity, nor the immanent sub-
stance-God of Spinoza, but an immanent synthesis of substance 
and subject that becomes manifest to itself through human history 
and knowledge. 
A full explication of absolute spirit (or, also, of ccworld-Spirit") is 
impossible to give in an introduction, especially as Heger s account 
3 In the sense of spirit that transcends its confinement to a certain culture or 
Zeitgeist. (These particular penods have also, so to speak, "perspectival', shapes 
of absolute spirit, expressed in their religions and dominant philosophies.) 
4 If this recalls Heidegger, it is no accident; Heidegger had appropriated Hegel-
ian ideas more than he cares to admit. But let me also note the crucial difference 
between them: in Heidegger,s terms, Hegers question is inauthentic, because at 
every stage he drowns the issue in a scholastic umetaphysical', apparatus of terms 
and categories that hopelessly conceal it. 

Introduction 
11 
is not univocal. It is easier to start by stating what Hegelian spirit 
is not: it is neither a separate Hworld-soul," nor a superperson, nor 
the world seen as "·a large, single intentional subject," as some con-
temporary scholars still write dismissively. 5 These images are typi-
cal of a misunderstanding that led to much derision and Hegel-
bashing in the twentieth century, but cannot be anchored in the 
logic of Hegel's own system, which rejects the transcendent status 
of the divine, and stresses spirit's necessary inherence in the empiri-
cal world-in nature, history, and actual, empirical persons. There 
are only empirical persons in Hegel-only people like Plato, Solon, 
Rembrandt, Luther, Napoleon, Newton, or Kant-as well as ordi-
nary members of society, like Hegel's wine-supplier in Jena and the 
lord-mayor of that provincial town. Spirit (in one of its basic senses) 
is the underlying element of their conscious, preconscious, and self-
conscious activity, in which such actual men and women reshape 
(or, "subjectivize") nature by generating history and the products of 
culture, including the artifacts of techne, social and ethical attitudes, 
political institutions, scientific knowledge, as well as the public 
products and mental experiences of art, religion, and philosophiz-
ing. Spirit writ large, the immanent Hegelian divinity, is the uni-
fyng, or totalizing, principle of all these developments, their under-
lying and self-displaying meaning, which informs the process and, 
at the same time, is also constituted and revealed by it. 
As such, spirit is not foreign to nature-to the seemingly inert, 
thing-like being of the world-but is its dialectical outgrowth and 
evolution. As the human mind transforms (aujhebt) nature into his-
toricized culture, it also constitutes itself as self-conscious spirit, 
and, so to speak, Hhumanizes" and Hspiritualizes" the world-that 
is, causes the world's objective texture to manifest human goals 
and meanings. This does not occur, as in Kant (and later in Marx 
and in Sartre),
6 by the incursion of a foreign (human) teleology into 
nature, but by an immanent process, whose conflicts and resolu-
5 Paul Redding, Hegers Hermeneutics (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1996), p. 15. 
6 On Marx's different approach to the humanization of nature-and its Kant-
ian antecedents-see my Spinoza and Other Heretics, vol2, The Adventures oflmma-
nence (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989), chapter 4. 

12 
Introduction 
tions develop a latent structure in nature itself, and drive nature 
towards its higher mode of being. 
Hegel thus assigns to human history an antic role. This role is 
made possible by Hegel's specific brand of idealism, which not only 
claims to have uncovered a subject-like (i.e., a dynamic and self-
differentiating) structure in what seems to be an inert natural sub-
stance, but goes on to interpret this structure as tacitly teleologicaL 7 
This semi-Schellingian view was laden with many consequences 
for HegeL Among other things, it drove him beyond the Kantian 
limits in performing his own ''Copernican turn" in the philosophy 
of history. Heget's extended Copernican turn consisted in assigning 
to human agency-to the socialized human subject, conceived as 
embodied will rather than as pure intellect-a determining role in 
the shape and career of the ultimately real. What human history is 
said to promote are not human goals only, but the inner telos ofbeing 
itself this, no less, was Hegel's expectation of modernity (at least 
before his more sobering Berlin years). When philo-sophia turns 
into sophia, spirit would have achieved a centuries-long project of 
realizing and making manifest the overall meaning of existence, its 
self-understanding and vindication.8 
All this was frightfully ambitious (and hopelessly optimistic), a 
symptom of the exuberant hopes of budding modernity. 9 But there 
7 Kant had also looked for an ontological ground for explaining man's capabil-
ity to "moralizeH nature and further the goal of history; but his radical dualism 
excluded an immanent common ground, and forced Kant to postulate God's 
existence as a transcendent mediator. In Hegel, his immanent ontology supplies 
this ground by attributing to nature itself a dynamic, self-differentiating (subject-
like) mode of being. 
8 At the same, absolute spirit also has relative phases as long as the historical 
process goes on, for then it serves to assert and vindicate the self-expenence of 
specific cultures and periods. 
9 It is not, however, as harmonious and optimistic as it may superficially sound. 
The Hegelian dialectic remams cruelly sober and realistic to the end. Neither war, 
nor evil, suffering, violence, irrationality, or metaphysical contingency can ever 
be totally eliminated, because negativity remains constitutive of the positive result, 
even in its absolute form. Yet the rational principle has the upper hand. The 
intermediation of the rational and its opposite yields in Hegel a "concreten rational 
(which also means, a realized, and therefore impure and nonuniform, rationality). 

Introduction 
13 
is no personification of the revealed meaning of being, or of the 
underlying principle that makes its emerging possible. Hegelian 
spirit, even at its highest point, remains embodied in empirical per-
sons, societies, books, cults, works of art, and the like. There is no 
transcendence even at the end. 
10 
Analogies and Incorporations 
Hegel is so many-sided-often in the same body of text-that there 
is no univocal single key to his doctrine. Nor is there a valid way 
to peel off one aspect ofhis thought as the '"'trueJJ or "actual" Hegel. 
Of course, the structural parallels in the system make it easy to 
identify the marks of one issue in another, and from here to claim 
that what goes on in one area of the system is "in truth" a discus-
sion of the other. Thus, religious interpreters have argued that 
Hegel gives theology precedence over philosophy because of the 
structural analogy between dialectical logic and the Christian Trin-
ity (or the Gospel); and socially oriented philosophers were 
tempted to read Hegel's Logic as a social treatise, noticing parallels 
between the evolution of the subject/ object relation in ontology 
and in social philosophy. But such hermeneutical moves are dubi-
ous. The Logic, as a ((kingdom of shadows,"' is meant to contain the 
conceptual skeleton which nature and spirit flesh out in their di-
verse subsystems; therefore, observing analogies between these do-
mains should not impress us as a '"'discovery"; we should rather be 
surprised if we noticed no such analogies. 
The Hegelian happy end is neither messianic nor scripted a Ia Hollywood, but 
preserves a tragic element, a bitter taste even at the accomplished end, and, as 
Kierkegaard realized, cannot satisfy the individual's particularity in full. 
10 Absolute spirit, when accomplished, is considered a subject but not a world-
encompassing person. A subject has certain ontological charactenstics and modes 
of beings, including a self-differentiating identity that exists only as return-to-sel£ 
This applies to the absolute (no-longer-relative) totality, which can be said not only 
to be subject-like, but also to know itself, in so far as its understanding arises in 
human culture and philosophy, which constitute an integral element of the same 
(absolute) totality. But this does not make it a superperson with particular thoughts 
and intentions. The absolute-as-person (as distinguished from the absolute-as-sub-

16 
Introduction 
their dialectical sterility and illusory form, nevertheless point to an 
important objective that the learner will have conquered when he 
or she overcomes the temptation and false promise oflearningfrom 
those dicta. 
As given, then, these ironic dicta have a real, important reference 
and a delusive, vacuous meaning. They bear from the outset a false 
and a true promise at the same time, which clash at first, creating 
puzzlement, yet can and must be separated for actual knowledge 
to proceed. 
The view above creates a problem for an interpreter who wishes 
to explicate the historical Hegel as faithfully as possible, yet does 
not share his organistic view of philosophical discourse. Inevitably, 
I shall use the good old predicative language, knowing that an or-
thodox Hegelian (if any is left) will call my text a mere konversation 
about Hegel rather than expressing the Sache selbst. 
THE ABSOLUTE AS SUBJECT 
The single most important sentence in the Preface reads: 
According to my way of seeing ... everything depends on compre-
hending and expressing the true not as substance, but equally also 
as subject. (p. 95) 
This aphorism has several meanings, on different historical and on-
tological levels of the Hegelian philosophy. 
Historically, this dictum calls for a synthesis between Spinoza' s 
concept of substance and Kant's (and Fichte's) concept of subject. 
Each of these poles will thereby be liberated from one-sidedness, 
and the road to "absolute Knowingn will at last be opened. Hegel 
declared this synthesis to be the final goal of his philosophy, and 
viewed it as a task defining philosophical modernity in general. 
Indeed, at least in Germany, this project stood at the center of 
the philosophical, cultural-even political-interests for almost a 
century after Kant's Critique. The attempt, in various and some-
times opposing ways, to establish a union between Kant and Spi-

Introduction 
17 
noza is visible in the work of Fichte, the early Schelling, Hegel 
himself, Schopenhauer, some of the Left Young Hegelians, and, in 
a less obvious way, Marx.
11 
The central place this attempt held in Hegel's philosophy is at-
tested by several main texts beside the Phenomenology. In the Logic, 
Hegel sees Kant's idealism as the foundation of modern philosophy, 
because it asserted the role which the knowing I plays in the consti-
tution of the reality which it knows. This revolutionary discovery 
led philosophy away from the long phase of dogmatic metaphysics 
(which Hegel calls ''Objective Logic") on to the so-called '"'"Subjec-
tive Logic." Henceforth, the mind no longer views the world-logos 
as a kind of substance or thing (Ding, res)-that is, as object only-
but starts viewing it also as subject. This decisive turn leads philoso-
phy from dogmatic metaphysics (culminating in Spinoza) to the 
critical, idealist metaphysics initiated by Kant; and in what concerns 
the ontological categories we thereby pass from the category of 
'"'"actuality," centered on Spinoza's concept of substance, to Hegel's 
own category of the ''Concept," which takes its paradigm from 
Kant's "I think." Thus a clear parallel exists between the structure 
of the Logic, and what Hegel says programmatically in the Preface 
to the Phenomenology. 
The same idea in different version recurs in Hegel's Lectures on 
the History of Philosophy. Hegel praises Spinoza's doctrine as the 
necessary basis of all true philosophy, but says it must be tran-
scended-by presenting the absolute not as substance only but also 
as spirit. God is immanent in the world, and identical with its total-
ity, yet he is not therefore a mere thing, not substance or nature 
only, but a spiritual process, as well. Moreover, God as spirit is not 
external to men and women; he is not some separate, sublime 
subject over and above them, but is embodied in human history 
and human culture, and evolves within and through them. This 
means, in essence, that God is realized through man, and that 
God's subjectivity is mediated by the consciousness of particular 
men and women and the social culture which unites them. 
11 See note 6 above. 

14 
Introduction 
In the next section we shall see how Hegel incorporates ele-
ments from earlier philosophies into the Copernican ontology he 
inherited from Kant-above all, Spinoza,s immanent monism, and 
Aristotle, s view of being as a self-actualizing process. This illustrates 
a typical spiral (progressive/regressive) movement by which He-
ger s dialectic progresses: once a higher level of knowledge and 
being has been attained in principle, one must turn back to earlier 
stages and elevate their sound kernel to that new level, so it can be 
further explicated and transformed by it. Kant had launched the 
higher phase of ((Subjective Logic,,-the subject-based ontology; 
now, crucial elements from Spinoza, Aristotle, and other past sys-
tems must be transformed and reinterpreted in terms of the new 
principle, so as to become integral components of the new system, 
as essential as the Kantian revolution itself. And just as Kant has 
served Hegel to criticize and overcome the flaws of those «dog-
matic,, metaphysics, so their essential contribution serves him to 
criticize Kant,s shortcomings no less severely, and greatly modify 
his teaching. 
With these background remarks in mind, let me now turn to 
the two main aphorisms of the Preface. But first, a word about 
their role in discourse. 
The Paradox of Aphorisms 
It is ironic that Hegel should use aphorisms to explain his ideas, he 
who, in the same text-indeed, in those very aphorisms-denies 
the possibility of saying anything significant about philosophy in a 
single generalized statement. Such a statement, in addition to lack-
ing truth, fails to contain the meaning that it claims to convey. 
Truth and meaning require an evolving context; hence, they can 
arise only at the end, as a result of the full explication and self-
tranformation of the idea that the general statement purports to 
enounce, but inevitably misses. Nevertheless, Hegel happily uses 
those inadequate means of philosophical communication as intra-
ject) is strictly speaking a metaphor, a (Judea-Christian) religious Vorstellung, pro-
duced by the imagination, which represents the philosophical Concept in images. 

Introduction 
15 
ductory devices, in prefacing both the Phenomenology and the Philos-
ophy of Right ("what is rational is actual and what is actual is ratio-
nal''). Hegel seems to believe that the initiation to a rrspeculative" 
(i.e., dialectical) mode of thinking requires a surprising shock, a 
sense of paradox or enigma that puzzles ordinary rationality (Ver-
stand) and calls for the Aufhebung of its customary ways of thinking, 
by which alone the paradox can be resolved. Neither an argument 
nor a rrdeduction," this shock treatment is an auxiliary device-call 
it rrSocratic"-serving the process of philosophical Bildung. 
No less important, Hegel has a general problem with philosophi-
callanguage. On the one hand he has a strong systematic reason 
for denying the propriety in philosophical discourse of using the 
predicative proposition (which is built as a unilateral dependence 
of a predicate on a subject); yet on the other hand, he has an equally 
systematic reason against devising a special, nonnatural language 
for philosophy. Philosophical discouse, being rooted in society and 
its history, cannot be severed from the actual historical languages 
in which philosophy has evolved, and these are all predicative in 
character (and thereby captive of Verstand, abstract rationality). 
Since no theoretical resolution of this antinomy is possible, Hegel 
turns to practical solutions, like using the whole paragraph, and 
even larger portions of a chapter or an oral explication. This tech-
nique allows for the back-and-forth movement, the looping, the 
undermining of what has just been said, so as to progress to a 
higher viewpoint that Hegel's dialectic requires and for which it is 
both famous and notorious. 
Using blatantly predicative aphorisms may be another device of 
coping with the antinomy of language. These aphorisms are funda-
mentally self-refuting; what they say contradicts what they are and 
seem to perform; so they must either explode (when taken at face 
value), or their indicative appearance must be bypassed, so that, as 
merely evocative proverbs, they will serve to allude to what offi-
cially they must fail to convey. Either way, these aphorisms are 
meant to do a preparatory rhetorical work, in helping clear the way 
for the dialectical mode of thinking. 
This will have occurred if the newly initiated learner proceeds 
to a detailed systematic explication of these ironic dicta that, despite 

18 
Introduction 
From an ontological standpoint, asserting that "the absolute is 
subject, means, in the first place, that being itself exists as a process-
it is not given in its perfect state from the outset, but has to be 
actualized. For this reason, absolute being is a result-of its own 
movement and process of self-becoming. It is therefore also a pur-
posive process, which has itself-in its actualized essence-as the 
immanent goal of its movement. This already says that the move-
ment of mediation-philosophical knowledge-is not external to 
being but is being's own motion. Being-as-subject knows itself, and 
this knowledge actualizes being according to its true essence. 
To grasp this profound and difficult idea we must note that the 
movement in question is not only the movement of something in 
being, but the movement of being itself-its development toward 
higher levels of actuality. In its lower stages, being's subjective char-
acter, that is, its self-actualizing movement, is manifest in the or-
ganic domain: the phenomenon of life. In its higher stages it is a 
historical movement-the movement of culture, practical life, so-
cial forms, and institutions, and of the consciousness they express 
or embody. And at still a higher stage this is the movement of self-
consciousness, pure contemplative cognition, and absolute Spirit. 
An Aristotelian idea is hiding in the background of this Hegelian 
view. There are several degrees of being, and reality evolves from 
one to the other until it attains energeia, actuality, or "entelechy."
12 
But, in keeping with his strictly immanent and historical approach, 
Hegel introduces deep and far-reaching changes into this Aristote-
lian view. For Aristotle, God as the unity of the knower and the 
known exists outside man and even outside the universe, or at least 
at its limit. Also, the Aristotelian God enjoys his perfect state from 
eternity to eternity, with no relation to time and the particular 
items of existence. For Hegel, however, God is immanent; he exists 
only in time and within the world, and attains his perfect state 
through human culture and its evolution. 
The subjectivity of being thus has two complementary senses in 
Hegel: (a) the self-actualizing movement of being; and (b) the self-
12 Cf. also medieval views, as in Maimonides, of the C<unity of knowledge, the 
knower and the known., 

Introduction 
19 
knowledge of being. The second sense is the climax of the first, its 
Hentelechy,, of sorts. Both senses are united at the highest stage, 
where being is fully actualized through Knowing itself. This occurs 
through human philosophy, religion, and art. Thus, it follows from 
the idea of the absolute-as-subject that human culture (with its nec-
essary social and historical frame) is not some external, contingent 
relation into which being happens to enter, but is a state of being's 
own development. 13 
This also affects Hegers philosophical notion of truth, as distin-
guished from the truth of a formal or an empirical statement. In 
philosophy, truth is not the Concept's adequacy with external real-
ity. Truth is, first of all, the adequacy of reality with its own inner 
Concept, that is, its end. Truth is therefore an ontic state, and not 
a state of consciousness merely. It is linked to the process of the 
actualization of being and its several degrees. In this sense, Hegel 
often says of a higher stage that it is the '"'"truth" of the one beneath 
it. He means that the higher stage does not only disclose what is 
contained in the lower one, but thereby also actualizes it. 
The Subject and Self-Negation 
Another important way of viewing the absolute as subject concerns 
the structure of the movement by which being is actualized, and 
the role negation fulfills within it. This has direct relevance to the 
logic and method of philosophy. 
To be a subject is to exist according to a certain ontological struc-
ture (or '"'"logic") which differs from that of a substance or mere thing. 
The difference lies in the subject's characteristic activity, which is 
to negate, or produce negation. This negation is first directed at the 
subject itself, and at any content or definite state with which the 
subject seems initially to be identified. The subject therefore exists 
as distinguished from itself, it transcends its own particular states 
and negates any immediacy that exists within it or is attributed to 
it. True, in the last analysis, the subject has also a positive activity in 
which it recognizes certain stable contents as "its own," identifies 
13 Herein seems to lie one of Heidegger, s Hegelian roots. 

20 
Introduction 
with them, and reconstitutes its own identity through them. Yet 
even this positive activity is performed through another negation. It 
presupposes a series of negations which do not return the process 
to its point of departure, but rather each negation constitutes a new 
state of affairs, and a new state of consciousness. As a result, the 
subject attributes to itself a diversity of states and contents which 
are seen in retrospect as expressing its selfhood, and one even consid-
ered as the subject's own particularization. Yet this is a selfhood in 
the process of becoming, a selfhood which will not actually exist 
until it reaches the end of the road. In other words, as long as the 
process is still ongoing there is no actual subject. 
Self Identity 
Hegel makes a crucial distinction between the identity of a sub-
stance and the identity attributed to a subject. A substance or mere 
thing is considered as directly identical with itself: its self-identity 
is conceived as a simple primary datum: A = A. A subject, however, 
does not have this sort of simple identity (I = 1). Its self-identity 
must be understood as an activity of self-identification, which takes 
place through the mediation of otherness and is attained only at 
the end of the process. Therefore, as mentioned above, the subject 
is not immediately self-identical, but acquires and constitutes its 
identity both through the complete process and as its result. 
This idea is pertinent to today's debates concerning the subject: 
does the subject have identity and ontological status in itself? He-
gel's innovative answer as just described had its origin in the "Tran-
scendental Deduction" of the Critique of Pure Reason, where Kant 
explicates the structure of ''I think" while tacitly polemicizing 
against Descartes. Descartes presented "I think" (a) as a simple, 
primary datum; (b) as substance; and (c) as a thinking thing (res 
cogitans). And Spinoza, following Descartes, presented God himself 
as substance and as thing (res), which does not think and has no I. 
Opposing Descartes, Kant tried to show that "I think" is neither a 
substance or thing nor a simple datum, but rather a complex struc-
ture whose self-identity presupposes a set of preconditions. Put suc-
cinctly (and somewhat simplified): the identity of the I is made 

Introduction 
21 
possible because the I refers to a manifold of sensible data, unites 
it according to patterns of connection (called "categories") supplied 
by the understanding-which follow from the I itself--and attrib-
utes those connections to the unity of an objective world and tem-
poral sequence which is separate from the I and faces it. Only 
through this complex process can the I eventually return to itself 
as identical, say "I think" to itself, and thus constitute, or actualize, 
that self-identity which is lacking at the outset. 
From this it follows (already in Kant's philosophy) that (a) the 
subject's self-identity occurs as the result of a set of relationships, 
or process, and is not primordially given; (b) it is an activity of self-
identification, not an inert fact; and (c) the pure subject is identified 
with itself through the mediation of its opposites-the sense im-
pressions opposing the understanding, and the outer world oppos-
ing the 1.14 
Hegel adopts this Kantian model, but extends its application 
from the finite I to infinite, comprehensive reality. Absolute being 
itself has the structure of a subject. It, too, is not from the outset 
that which it will ultimately become, but proceeds towards itself 
through its opposites-namely, through multiplicity and otherness. 
In addition, multiplicity and otherness are now considered to be 
the subject's O\Vn particularization. Thereby, Hegel breaks away 
from the boundaries of the Kantian critique of reason-which re-
quires the subject to have an external source for all its particular 
contents-and gives the subject a daring ontological (and also theo-
logical) interpretation. The subject discussed in Hegel's theory is 
not only the I of a finite individual-of this or that man or 
14 At the background is also a distinction between the self, the object, the 
consciousness of self, and the consciousness of the object's relation to the self 
In Reinhold and Fichte, following Kant, these constituent elements of conscious-
ness seem to be simultaneous; in Kant-and certainly in Hegel-some of them 
are preconditions to others. (The consciousness of the external object's relation 
to the self, and the tacit, not necessarily explicit awareness of the self s own role 
in setting up this relation, are in Kant preconditions for the self being conscious 
of itself and able to say or think, HI think., For a slighrly different analysis see 
Michael Forster, Hegel's Idea of a Phenomenology of Spirit [Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1998], 116-17.) 

22 
Introduction 
woman-but also God as immanent in nature and history, that is, 
the Spinozistic substance become subject-object. Thus, Hegel uses 
the Kantian model of the subject-with a crucial change-in order 
to explicate not only the ontology of finite, conditioned beings, as 
Kant did, but also the ontology of the infinite, absolute Being. This 
forces us to stress the religious, albeit heterodox, background of 
Hegel's thought. 
The Enigma of Self-Particularization 
Hegel's readers are often puzzled by an apparently mysterious 
problem. Against Kant, Hegel demands that the multifold particu-
lars which the subject ascribes to itselfbe seen not as utterly exter-
nal but, in a certain sense, as the subject's own particularization. 
This idea is hard to understand, and even harder to accept, when 
considering the particular I in separation from the broader context 
of the spirit; in other words, when trying to understand the issue 
in purely epistemological terms. Who in his or her right mind 
would agree that, for instance, the particular contents of our sensa-
tion, or the contingent facts which face us and lie beyond our con-
trol, have their material source in our own consciousness? Many 
interpreters struggling with this problem have attributed to Hegel a 
mystical position, according to which consciousness spontaneously 
particularizes itself into the rich, manifold system of the world. I 
think we might better understand Hegel by realizing that his philos-
ophy is not primarily concerned with epistemology of the individ-
ual mind, but with the ontology (and history) of the universal spirit. 
From this perspective we shall see the following: 
(1) The particularization in question does not concern contin-
gent particulars in the empirical world like facts or sense percep-
tions (not Professor Krug' s pen), 15 but primarily the ontological 
categories: Being, Being-there, Quantity, Essence, and so forth. 
Only they are said to derive from the absolute subject, and their 
derivation in the Logic indeed follows a structured dialectical devel-
15 Professor Krug was a philosophy professor who challenged Hegel to ''de-
duce,, his pen from the absolute subject. 

Introduction 
23 
opment rather than being a mere assemblage, which Hegel says 
both Aristotle and Kant have offered. 
(2) All the other contents which eventually appear in the system 
of philosophy-" matter," "family," ''passion," "Stoicism," "civil so-
ciety," or "magnetism"-are indeed first borrowed from historical 
experience; but since that experience has been philosophically 
shaped and is the unfolding of the universal spirit, these contents 
can all be seen as spirit's own self-particularization in the process 
in which it is realized; and from this viewpoint they are neither 
contingent nor external. To be sure, the particular individual will 
always see such contents as contingent and external; but here the 
process of philosophy comes in, whereby the individual sets out to 
understand herself, her history, the formation of her consciousness, 
and thereby reaches the point where she views these ingredients as 
belonging to her own identity and not as contingent and imposed 
by accident. For this to happen, the individual must attain a self-
consciousness which grasps her connection to the whole of spirit; 
and she must be living in a period that is not completely alienated, 
and within circumstances that allow the individual, in great mea-
sure, to rationally identify with the basic ingredients of her social, 
political, and cultural environment. 
In such a case Hegel would say that the particular contents of 
reality are not external and contingent even for the individual. They 
are rather a particularization of her own spirit which constitute the 
individuars self (at least partially)-in so far as the self can identify 
with the universal spirit as embodied in the individual's time and 
place. In a word, the question of "particularization" must not be 
dealt with in epistemological terms mainly, but in social and histori-
cal ones. (See also the commentary on "recollection," pp. 86ff., 
123ff. below.) 
The Absolute as a Totality-in-Becoming 
As we have mentioned above, absolute being, because it is a subject, 
is not immediately identical with itself, nor is it a static, finished 
totality-as it is for Spinoza-but exists as a becoming totality. This 
means that the entirety of being-the immanent God-constitutes 

24 
Introduction 
its self-identity by becoming other than itself, and by rediscovering 
itself both in its otherness and as the result of its own development. 
More specifically, the hidden rational-indeed divine-essence of 
the whole of being externalizes itself in the empirical world, and 
exists in a variety of empirical shapes and degrees in nature and 
history. These shapes diverge from the rational essence in ways 
which cause them to oppose it and cause the essence to be alienated 
from itself. The result is that the essence seems to have been lost in 
its contradictions. Actually, however, the essence remains present 
and active within its contradictions, and through them continues to 
structure the movement of the evolving reality. That process contin-
ues until reality itself reaches a stage at which the rational essence 
can rediscover itself in and through the empirical world and ade-
quately actualize itself. The three major stages in this process involve 
many intermediary processes, each of which again manifests the 
structure of negation and re-negation: they are spelled out in detail 
both in the Phenomenology and in Hegel's later works. 
The self-actualization of spirit is equally a process of liberation. 
Freedom has both an ontological sense and a sociopolitical sense in 
Hegel, which mediate one another. It is both freedom from political 
oppression and the autonomy of self-realization-of the subject,s 
becoming a true individual through political rights and standing, 
and through the awareness that her natural, social, and political 
environment is not an alien (or even alienating) "substance" but an 
active expression (and enhancing externalization) ofher own ratio-
nal self; this too is a central aspect of substance becoming a subject. 
Seen from the human standpoint, the process ends at the stage 
of Reason or freedom. From the standpoint of being it ends with the 
actualization of absolute being, when the totality reaches self-under-
standing through human culture and philosophy. This event fully 
actualizes the subjective character of substance and makes it into a 
subject/ object. Thus, according to Hegel, the emergence of absolute 
Knowing-and of human freedom-is a crucial event, not only in 
the history of the human race, but in the history of being itsel£ 
16 
16 Heidegger drew the idea of ''the history of being, from the Hegelian tradi-
tion, but did away with its teleological character, including the goal of freedom. 

Introduction 
25 
Society and Politics as Conditions for Knowledge 
A central feature of Hegel's philosophy is that both the ontological 
process (the actualization of being) and the process of knowledge 
which serves it are carried out through social and historical evolu-
tion-the evolution toward human freedom. Philosophical knowl-
edge can only arise as the conceptualization of a certain social and 
political reality, and therefore presuppose the latter's existence. 
Hence the crucial importance of human practical history as a pre-
condition for realizing the subject/ object. The subjectivity of the 
absolute indicates, among other things, that social and cultural life, 
with their various forms of private and public consciousness, are 
genuine modes in which being itself exists and develops. Although 
the climax of this development is cognitive, its major body is histori-
cal and resides in social and cultural life: in the family, the commu-
nity, civil society, state institutions, religion and art, collective men-
tality and the psychic life of the individual within her time and 
sociocultural environment. Hegel makes these the necessary sub-
strates and conditions for the evolution of knowledge. 
Herein, as I already mentioned, lies a major Hegelian novelty. 
Philosophical knowledge does not occur within a separate logical 
space of its own, but is the conceptualization of various forms of 
life-social, political, mental, and so on-as they have already been 
realized in the world. Knowledge depends on its own history, and 
also on the history of other, practical forms of culture, which are 
embodied in the objective world and which philosophical knowl-
edge explicates. This is the Hegelian notion of Zeitgeist (''the spirit 
of the times"), which philosophy is said to explicate and which 
expresses the inner meaning of the forms of human culture in a 
certain era-up to and including the last epoch. 
Special importance in this context is given to civil society and 
politics. Hegel sees the social and political institutions as the spirit's 
outer (objective) shape, through which alone-by its Aujhebung 
(sublation)-the spirit can be actualized and know itself in its inner 
dimensions, too. This, to use a different Hegelian idiom, means 
that the domain of lived and embodied ethics (Sittlichkeit)-social 

26 
Introduction 
norms and customs, contractual relations, the family, law, politics, 
and the state-are the necessary presupposition of philosophy, and 
also of art and religion, the three shapes of absolute spirit. Hegel 
is not satisfied with stating this major thesis in the abstract, but 
spells and works it out so significantly in the Phenomenology and 
other works that it can be said to be the most extensive, or at least 
the most visible, domain in which Hegel's idea of the a absolute as 
subjecf' is realized. Social, practical, and political life is based on 
both the external and the internal shapes by which consciousness 
relates to itself and to other consciousnesses. Even its relation to 
nature is mediated by its relation to another consciousness, since 
both knowing nature and using nature are socially mediated activi-
ties. And because all of these stand in a network of mutual interrela-
tions, it can be said that "objective spirit" has a subjective substrate, 
in the sense that social institutions are outer configurations of inter-
subjective relations. As such, objective spirit provides the medium 
and underlying structure for the evolution of the subject/ object, 
and of the philosophical system that explicates it. 
Conceiving the absolute as subject also has direct implications 
with respect to philosophical method. Before we begin to discuss 
this topic, however, three further remarks are required. 
(1) Hegel's position involves a dialectical monism. Being is con-
ceived as a single totality whose unity emerges from a synthesis of 
all those ontological poles and dimensions which philosophy usu-
ally regards as mutually exclusive. The Hegelian philosophy sees 
these poles as reciprocally constitutive of each other: unity and 
plurality, universality and particularity, thought and being, spirit 
and nature, theory and practice, intellect and will, the inner and the 
outer, and so on. In viewing the absolute as subject, the philosopher 
avoids the splitting of reality into disparate, unmediated regions, as 
happens in dualism, and understands each of these regions as an 
abstract sector, or aspect, of the one absolute being. 
(2) The view of this overarching One as a single, animated indi-
vidual, expresses a quasi-pantheistic tendency which is found in 
some of Hegel's contemporaries from Goethe to Schelling. Nature 
was conceived as a living entity, a global organism endowed with 

Introduction 
27 
inner animation, rather than as an inert mass of matter in motion. 
Hegel shares this tendency but makes spirit rather than nature into 
the comprehensive One. Spirit is the overall living principle, of 
which nature is but a dimension or "moment." Nature is inferior 
to spirit and to history (spirit's appearance in time), but is also 
included in spirit as substrate and base. Hegel thereby opposes the 
naturalism ofSpinoza, from whom he nevertheless takes the princi-
ple of immanent philosophy. The overarching immanent being for 
Hegel is not natura (nature) but Geist, self-conscious spirit. In conse-
quence, Hegel rejects Schelling's romantic philosophy of nature 
and its foundations in Goethe. Nature as such has no spirituality 
and is certainly not divine: Hegel would consider this to be pa-
ganism. Nature is primarily an aggregate of items in space and 
time, each located outside the other in an inert relation which en-
dows them with quantity and disposes them to measurement. 
True, nature in its deeper dimension also discloses an organic, sub-
ject-like structure and thereby the potentiality for spirit; yet realiz-
ing that potentiality will take us outside of nature and into the 
domain of human culture and thought, of which, as mentioned, 
nature is a mere substrate. Thus, even when he transcends Chris-
tian orthodoxy towards a kind of pantheism, Hegel does so in a 
genuinely Christian way: namely, by insisting on the superiority of 
spirit over nature and on God's identity with his human embodi-
ment in history. 
(3) If overall being attains self-knowledge through human knowl-
edge, it is because it contains human knowledge as one of its integral 
constituents. Hegel insists that this is internal knowledge, namely, 
knowledge which contemplates its object because it belongs to its 
very constitution. As such, it is knowledge by "Reason," and not the 
ordinary scientific ''Understanding" which contemplates its objects 
from the outside while maintaining the barrier between itself and 
the object. Philosophical contemplation is not only knowledge about 
reality, it is, so to speak, reality~ s contemplation of itself Therefore, 
from the viewpoint of the individual philosopher, the act of philo-
sophical Knowing involves her dialectical unification with the whole 
ofbeing. Hegel here offers his own, rational and nonmystical version 
of the achievements which mysticism falsely leads its followers to 

28 
Introduction 
expect. The finite human being, when engaged in the philosophical 
act of knowing and in the social and political activity which makes 
that act possible, is contemplating true being from within, and is an 
inner moment of it. This person is thereby not only united with 
absolute being but, in a small way, even helps to constitute it. Philos-
ophy is not a detached, analytical contemplation through the intel-
lect only, but a mode of being, a living experience of the person 
who contemplates being from within. Yet this is no vague, isolated, 
romantic event, because its medium is conceptual thinking, and be-
cause the thinker is equally a practical agent involved in the society 
and practical life through which philosophical Knowing is actualized. 
This sociopractical involvement "secularizes" the act and deroman-
tidzes the experience. 
Thus again, the phase of absolute Knowing involves a sublation of 
religion and mysticism, which preserves their underlying interests. 
It radically differs from mysticism while pursuing similar goals. The 
difference lies, first, in the rational character of the Hegelian 
method, which translates everything into the level of the Concept; 
and, second, in that the experiential element retained in Hegel's 
absolute Knowing is largely nourished by practical concerns-the 
individual's immersion in social, political, and worldly affairs; it is 
not a privileged mental event confined to a person's interior world, 
or a form of contemplation which takes her beyond this world to 
a transcendent domain. Even at the highest stage, the individual 
goes on living an ordinary life in the external world, in society, in 
her daily work and occupation, as an active member of the polity, 
in the privacy of the family and the public arena of politics, without 
retiring into a closed inner world or being carried away by romantic 
enthusiasm. This is Hegel's version of Spinoza's "intellectual love 
of God," and more broadly, Hegel's substitute for the mystical no-
tion that knowing God is union with him. 
Consequences for the System and Method of Philosophy 
The subjective nature of the absolute also has far-reaching effects 
on the system and method of philosophy. Because reality itself has 

Introduction 
29 
a subject-like structure, Hegel concludes that philosophical logic, 
which has to express that structure, must likewise have a subject-
like character. From a methodological point of view, therefore, to 
say that ''the absolute is subject" amounts to saying that actuality 
is shaped by dialectical logic rather than by ordinary, formallogic. 17 
We have seen that subject and substance obey different ontical 
logics. The logic of substance is the logic of entities which are di-
rectly and tautologically self-identical (A = A), and therefore obey 
the law of noncontradiction. Also, within this domain, the negation 
of negation is a tautology which simply reverts to the point of 
departure (-----p = p). Such items in Hegel's judgment are not, 
however, actual beings but, as we shall see later, abstractions. True 
actuality is governed by another kind of logos, that of evolving, 
subject-like systems, which are not self-identical at the outset, and 
therefore do not obey the law of noncontradiction, and in which 
double-negation produces something new. 
Another consequence of viewing the absolute as subject is that 
philosophical logic must derive from the structure of the subject 
matter which it is investigating, rather than being imposed upon 
("applied to") it externally. Hegel uses the term "logicJ' as a deriva-
tive of logos, the principle the Greeks understood as structuring 
reality. Hegel does not mean a formal calculus, nor an a priori 
method whose norms precede its subject matter. Hegel insists that 
dialectical, subject-like logic cannot be formalized, not even by the 
famous formula "thesis-antithesis-synthesis" (which is Fichte' s, not 
Hegel's). 18 All we can learn in advance from this logic are a few 
general characteristics: for example, that every domain of actual 
being will have a subject-like shape; that it will thereby have an 
evolving, organic nature which must be actualized through oth-
17 Incidentally, the term "dialectical logic" is more common in the secondary 
literature than in Hegel himself. I use it because of its wide acceptance. 
18 Fichte constructed his system by triads of the form "thesis-antithesis-synthe-
sis/' which repeat themselves throughout his systematic work, The Theory of 
Science, as an a priori formula. Though Hegel refrains from using this formula, 
it has nevertheless been ascribed to him in many textbooks and in the public's 
mind. It is true that Hegel's system, in its broad lines, also advances a triadic 
form, but it is different, freer, and without a priori formulaic limitations. 

30 
Introduction 
erness; and therefore it can be expected to return to itself as the 
result of a three-stage process. But, beyond those generalities, it is 
impossible to formalize a set of mandatory a priori rules which must 
be followed at all times and in all particular cases. One must rather 
depend on some intellectual immersion~r "phenomenological in-
sight" in the modern sense-which permeates the philosophical sub-
ject matter and follows its movement "from within.'' 
As to formal logic, it is valid in such areas as mathematics, the 
natural sciences, and daily discourse, areas which Hegel sees as 
abstract because they peel off a single aspect of being and grasp it 
one-sidedly, as if it were the whole. These areas deal with allegedly 
simple, self-identical units of discourse, which are dominated by 
the form of identity of a substance, not a subject, and therefore 
must obey the law of noncontradiction. Hence formal logic is the 
supreme canon (or legislation) of the "Understanding," though not 
of ''Reason," of Verstand but not Vernunft. The entities treated in 
these areas (simple data, numbers, symbols, facts, self-identical ar-
guments, inert systems, and objects built as aggregates of such enti-
ties) are abstract, imaginary beings in Hegel's ontology-not com-
plete nothingness, to be sure, but an inferior aspect of reality, that is, 
impoverished reflections of being similar to Plato's "appearances." 
It is ironic that both Hegel and the positivists make the same 
criticisms of each other. The positivist believes the concrete world 
to be constructed from allegedly ''simple" units (sensible and logi-
cal), and will see a dogmatic metaphysician in any philosopher who, 
like Hegel, regards the empirical particulars as expressing an inner 
conceptual "essence." For Hegel, however, the dogmatic metaphy-
sician is the positivist, because he takes such abstractions and imagi-
nary entities ("the simple") to be actual beings. 
Subject-like dialectical logic is appropriate to all areas which ex-
press the movement of self-actualizing systems: the philosophy of 
mind, of being (ontology), of society, culture, and history. Above all, 
it is the way philosophy itself is to construe and relate to its objects. 
Philosophy, too, is a mode of being's movement and actualization; 
therefore, dialectical logic, with its subject-like shape, must come to 
bear on the structure of philosophy and the way its specific areas 
are organized. The chief methodological demand implied here is 

Introduction 
31 
that philosophical truth be shaped as an organic totality, which main-
tains itself through its own negations. Since philosophy must express 
the structure of reality from within, and that structure is subject-
like, true philosophy must share that structure, as well. Hence the 
second famous dictum of our Preface, ''the true is the whole." 
THE TRuE Is THE WHOLE 
The dictum, "the true is the whole," is usually understood as a 
principle of method only. It is said that Hegel holds a coherence 
theory of truth, and therefore requires that all the system's ingredi-
ents be given in order to be reciprocally verified. This reading is 
only partially correct. It ignores the ontological basis of Hegers 
view, and also the developmental character of truth in his system. 
When Hegel asserts that the true is the whole, he immediately 
adds his own explanation: 
The true is the whole. Yet the whole is but the essence which brings 
itself to fulfillment through its development. Of the absolute it must 
be said that it is essentially a result, that only at the end is the absolute 
what it is in truth; and herein consists its nature-to be actual, subject, 
or becoming-its-own-self (p. 102) 
This passage links together all three dicta-the true is subject, the 
absolute is a result, the true is the whole-which are here disclosed 
as ingredients of the same idea. Therefore the claim that the true is 
the whole says more than the ordinary coherence theory. First, 
Hegel is speaking of an organic, or dialectical, coherence, not of 
external links of inference connecting static, self-identical items. Sec-
ond, the "whole" in question includes its own generation as one of 
its elements. The philosopher cannot therefore abstract the result 
from its genesis and view the process of development as a scaffold 
to be disposed of when the goal is reached, as can be done with 
mathematical demonstrations and analytical arguments. This is true 
not only of the history of philosophy, but also of a special kind of 
process which affects the conceptual system from within. In the 
finished system of philosophy, every member will point to all of the 

32 
Introduction 
others in a process of negation and negation-of-negation, so that our 
thought cannot rest until it runs the whole course of the system; 
and even then it will not hold on to it as something static and fin-
ished, but rather as a self-repeating conceptual movement. 
In this sense the history of philosophy is preserved (as aufgehoben) 
in the pure system of philosophy. The diachronic process that has 
generated the system is sublated (negated but preserved in new 
form) within the synchronic movement of the system of philosophy 
that emerges from it. If we forgo that movement and make do with 
a simple list of concepts and principles which make up the final 
system~ like Kant, s list of the categories, we shall lose the dynamic 
structure of their mutual negation, and thereby their truth. And 
if we offer some general proposition or formula as a concluding 
summary, again we shall have an abstract and unrealized universal 
which cannot, as such, be true; rather, in so far as it is abstract and 
only part of the story, it is false. 
An ironic illustration of this is given by our own dictum, the true 
is the whole. Because it stands in the Preface as an abstract general-
ity severed from its systematic context-namely, from the remain-
der of the book which demonstrates its meaning by carrying it 
out-the dictum fails to convey its own purported meaning and is, 
dialectically speaking, untrue. 
Thirdly, the true is the whole not only in the sense that its diverse 
elements form a unified system of discourse, but also in that knowl-
edge is therein unified with its object. The system of philosophy 
does not reflect the world from the outside; it expresses in the sub-
ject's domain the same structure that has successfully realized itself 
in the objective world. Hence the on tic character of truth, by virtue 
of which it is truth. As we have remarked, the term a truth" does not 
denote the property of a sentence or a statement but a certain mode 
of being, which is revealed to itself in philosophical knowledge. It is 
therefore the ontic nature of truth from which its methodological 
conditions are also derived, including the principle of coherence. 
Truth has been traditionally, and notoriously, defined as adequatio 
rei et intellectus-the conformity of the thing and the intellect (or 
the concept). This definition views the thing and the concept as 
two foreign elements which share nothing in common. There is a 

Introduction 
33 
world of things on the one hand and a world of thoughts on the 
other, and the latter must conform to the former. Hegel has no 
problem accepting the nominal definition (because it is so broad 
and says so little), but rejects the dualism inherent in it. If the con-
cept agrees with reality, it is because reality itself has evolved until it 
agrees with its concept (which includes its self-knowledge through 
philosophy). Or putting it conversely, they agree because the con-
cept is latent in reality as its essence, and drives reality to develop 
and agree with it (that is, in the final analysis, to agree with itself, 
with its own essence). These two, reality and the concept, are not 
foreign elements but two complementary moments within a single 
dialectical process. Hegel expressed this by another famous prov-
erb, "what is rational is actual, and what is actual is rational." 19 
Hegel does not intend to confer the adjective (~rational" (or, for that 
matter, "actual") on any contingent existence, but only on existence 
that has been actualized and reached its rational telos. The rational 
and the actual are united only at the final, culminating stage of 
being's evolution. This peculiar, speculative view can be called "an 
ontic theory of truth." 
Hegel rejects the pre-Kantian ("dogmatic") metaphysics, which 
holds that the concept corresponds to reality because it copies or 
represents it as it is in itself. This view presupposes that being does 
not change but is forever static, only our concepts about it evolve 
until they correspond to it. Yet Hegel maintains there is evolution 
and self-actualization in being itself, mediated by human action and 
knowledge. He also rejects an important element in Kant: the thesis 
that Concepts are external to reality and injected into it (or imposed 
on it) by human self-consciousness. This "subjective" idealism, as 
Hegel calls it, gives priority to the subject over the object, and 
makes reality a function of knowledge. By contrast, Hegel claims 
that the Concept-in his sense-does not reside in our knowledge 
alone, but is implicitly at work in the object of our knowledge, that 
19 Preface to the Philosophy of Right; I have interpreted this proverb in Yirmi-
yahu Yovel, "Hegers Dictum that the Rational Is Actual and the Actual Is Ratio-
nal," in The Hegel Myths and Legends, ed. Jon Stewart (Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press, 1996), 26-41, from which the present lines are taken. 

34 
Introduction 
is, within reality. And as reality evolves towards its Concept, it en-
ables knowledge, too, to evolve ever more clearly and to con-
sciously explicate that implicit Concept. 
In summary, the true is the whole, but this whole includes the 
process of its own genesis, as well as the moment of being with 
which it stands in a dialectical relation. Only in this way does the 
system of philosophy form an organic, self-grounding whole which, 
like Spinoza's causa sui, bears witness to its own truth. 
Consequences for the Theory of Discourse 
This leads to several consequences concerning Hegel's theory of 
discourse (which could also have arisen independently). First, phil-
osophical statements are only true within their total dynamic con-
text, which is the system as a whole. It should therefore be impossi-
ble to cut off a proposition from the overall context and still ascribe 
a truth value to it, as the analytic understanding tends to do. Every 
singular statement, even those which merely summarize the sys-
tem's conclusions, must miss those conclusions and function as an 
aabstract universal" whose form opposes the content it purports 
to express. 
Second, the same applies to the meaning of a philosophical state-
ment. Just as singular statements have no autonomous truth value, 
so they also lack an autonomous meaning. They fail to express 
adequately what they are meant to state. Hegel views meaning as 
dependent upon intention (meinen), yet every partial statement or 
sentence is marked by a dialectical opposition between its meaning 
and what is intended by it: that which the statement says in actual-
ity must fall short of what it says (or ffintends saying") implicitly.20 
20 The dialectical relation between intending (Hto mean," meinen) and linguistic 
expression (ausprechen) starts with the mind,s most primitive stance-its grasp 
of allegedly simple particulars here and now (which Hegel calls "sense certainty,; 
see chapter 1 of the Phenomenology). The tension takes different forms in other 
mental attitudes. In a more general way, every stage in Hegers dialectic involves 
an opposition between what this stage is implicitly meant (intended) to be and 
the incongruent form it assumes in realizing that meaning. Incidentally, Hegel 
plays with the potential of the verb meinen in other ways, too, linking it to 

Introduction 
35 
This opposition explains the need for further development of the 
statement and serves as the drive for it. As long as such an inade-
quacy persists, it indicates that the explication has not attained its 
goal and must move on to further stages. Only when the end is 
reached can it be expected that the circular totality will lack noth-
ing. At this stage we can finally explore the full meaning-and each 
category will only then express its meaning adequately, that is, 
within the framework of the attained totality. 
Thirdly, the same can be said of the process of the pupiY s subjec-
tive process of understanding. The issue now is no longer the logical 
relations between the elements of discourse, but the learner's abil-
ity to grasp the philosophical meanings which they express. And 
here again, Hegel argues that philosophical understanding requires 
the complete system: a person who has carefully gone through the 
system's detailed stages will grasp a single sentence (a generaliza-
tion) very differently than someone hearing the same sentence for 
the first time. For the latter person the sentence is an indetermi-
nate, out-of-context generality, whereas for the person who already 
knows the system, it compresses and summarizes an entire set of 
interrelations which are present in her memory. Even generaliza-
tions like ''the true is the whole" or "the absolute is a result" will 
have a completely different value at the end of the road than they 
did at the beginning. 
THE DIALECTIC: A FEW GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS 
In light of what has been said, it is clearly impossible to give a 
formal definition of Hegel's dialectic or to explain it adequately in 
an introduction. In order to grasp its nature, one must follow its 
actual denouement in one of Hegel's major works, such as the 
Phenomenology or the Logic. Keeping this caveat in mind, we may 
still offer a tentative preview of some of the main features of the 
dialectic, hoping that the reader will remember that the true is the 
Meinung (opinion), and even to meinen in the sense of umaking mine.,, (I owe 
the latter point to Michael Forster.) 

36 
Introduction 
whole, and will use this preview to enter the substantive matter on 
his own. 
In the Phenomenology, the dialectical structure of truth and history 
displays the following interrelated characteristics: 
( 1) Spirit's rational essence needs its "other"-empirical exis-
tence, appearance, contingency, error, suffering-as a necessary 
medium through which alone that essence can develop and be actu-
alized. The rational essence must become other-than-itself in order 
to be able to eventually return to itself on a higher level, that is, as 
actualized. 
(2) In consequence, the rational essence exists actually only at 
the end of the road-as its own result. At the outset it is not actual, 
but abstract and latent. It needs a long, arduous, and diversified 
process of development in order to actualize itself and become 
what it is. 
(3) Thereby, Hegers so-called dialectical logic follows the dy-
namic structure of mental, or rather subject-like, systems. In a sub-
ject-like system, self-consciousness and self-identity are attained 
only at the end. This result presupposes a process in which con-
sciousness ascribes to itself a multitude of predicates, stages, mental 
states, and the like and recognizes them as its own, while at the 
same time recognizing, and thereby realizing, itself as the subject 
of that manifold. Dialectical logic is the dynamic structure-the 
logos-at work in this kind of system. And since absolute being 
itself has that structure, it follows that dialectical logic must be the 
logic of philosophy and of ''Reason,', as distinguished from mere 
analysis and the "Understanding." 
(4) In a system expressing the life and evolution of consciousness, 
the act of negation does not erase its preceding stages but retains 
them in the next stage as a kind of '"'recollection." The collapse of 
a given mental stage drives the process on, towards a new position 
that serves as the specific, if tentative, answer to the particular flaw 
which has arisen in its predecessor and caused its collapse. Thus 
all the affirmations, negations, and negations of negations, all the 
foregoing ups and downs, the rises and falls, are retained in spirit's 
organic memory-that is, in the texture of every new stage. 

Introduction 
37 
(5) Hegel's dialectic views the evolution of spirit as a teleological 
process, made of circles or rather spirals, in which ''the end is the 
beginning." In other words, the purpose which is actualized in the 
end is also the abstract beginning of the process. Between that 
beginning and the actualized end there is a whole sequence of 
shapes and forms which spirit assumes and in which it is partially, 
and therefore always inadequately, realized. Because of its limited, 
one-sided character, each partial stage is affected by contradictions 
and inadequacies which drive the process forward through further 
contradictions, incongruities, alienations, and further partial real-
izations. But this is not an open-ended process: Hegel conceives it 
in Aristotelian fashion, as a potentiality moving toward entelechy. 
The movement is supposed to finally cease when all contradictions 
have been reconciled within the fully actualized end. 
( 6) From a dialectical perspective, therefore, opposing positions 
in the domain of spirit are not mutually exclusive; they rather com-
plement and modify each other within the framework of a higher 
totality. Truth and falsity are not a binary pair, not an either I or 
relation. There is a latent kernel of truth in all conflicting religions, 
in all systems of philosophy, in all diverse political institutions, and 
all rival artistic schools. Some of these cultural forms are higher 
than others (Hegel's is a hierarchical, not an egalitarian multi-
culturalism), because they express truth in a less fragmentary way, 
or in a more adequate form and medium; but none are utterly 
false. Falsity resides in the claim of a partial form of culture to 
exhaust the whole truth and to exclude its opponent (its own 
other), when actually it needs that other-and all the others-in 
order to be itself, to complement and modify it within the overall 
system of truth. 21 
(7) Unlike formal logic, the dialectic has no a priori rules. In 
particular, its subject-like dynamic rejects the rule which says that 
21 In terms of a contemporary discussion, Hegel"s dialectic expresses-indeed 
is-a logic of multiculturalism, although in a hierarchical, not an egalitarian 
form. Hegel"s multiculturalism is not based on relativism or skepticism, but on 
an absolute truth that is made possible by dialectical diversity and by recognizing 
the other as medium for the self. But that is a purposive process with higher and 
lesser degrees of achievement. 

38 
Introduction 
double-negation returns the process to its initial point of departure, 
together with the attendant laws of noncontradiction and the ex-
cluded middle. These laws are fit for inert systems in which un-
changing, self-identical items (like mathematical propositions, or 
sense data) are organized by external rules of order. They are inap-
propriate in a system which has the capacity of interiorizing its past 
experiences (''recollection,), and has the subject-like structure of a 
dynamic totality existing as a movement of self-actualization. 
DIALECTIC-AS-J GURNEY AND DIALECTIC-AS-SCIENCE 
The above ideas will be worked out in the commentary. Mean-
while, we might distinguish two different directions in the dialectic, 
which I label dialectic-as-journey and dialectic-as-Science. Both these 
directions already existed in Plato's dialectic. The first direction is 
basically negative: Socrates puts questions to his interlocutors (for 
example, Theaetetus) in order to undermine their dogmatic beliefs. 
As a result, they adopt a new position which resolves, so they be-
lieve, the flaws in their previous position. But this is only a tentative 
pause, because the second position is eventually also undermined 
and calls for a third to overcome it, and so forth. In this process of 
negative dialectic, each new stand is nourished by the failure of its 
predecessor(s), and draws its new positive content from their spe-
cific inadequacy, that is, negation. For Plato this process is an as-
cent, a journey towards knowledge and true being, which climbs 
a preestablished ladder, described in the Republic and elsewhere; 
whereas for Hegel the process traces its own way and builds, as it 
were, its own ladder. Also, in Plato the road is undergone by an 
individual pupil, Glaucon or Iheaetetus, whereas Hegel historicized 
Plato's process of education: the pupil or apprentice undergoing 
the process of dialectic-as-journey is the entire human race. Corres-
pondingly, the single individual is limited by his times, and cannot 
advance beyond the constraints of his or her contemporary culture 
and the new, if limited, perspective opened up by the Zeitgeist. The 
Platonic trainee, however, is free of such limitations and depends 
solely on his individual talents and those of his teacher. 

Introduction 
39 
Taking a retrospective look, Hegel reviews this process in the 
Phenomenology as it had led to the modern era and made it possible. 
Human consciousness has experienced all the important positions 
and standpoints which it might take, and has transcended them 
because of the one-sided and limited character which undermines 
each partial position from within, and exposes its immaturity. Dia-
lectic-as-journey-a journey to truth, or to "Science" (episteme) 22-
with its successive negations and transcendings, cannot cease be-
fore consciousness finally rises to a comprehensive standpoint. At 
this stage, all the partial perspectives of earlier stages are aufgehoben 
and retained in the higher synthesis, where they do not exclude 
each other but rather mutually constitute a common result. At this 
point, dialectic-as-journey becomes dialectic-as-Science. The se-
quence of negations which links the partial standpoints is interior-
ized into the system of absolute Knowing in which they function 
as a positive, constructive factor. 
The Platonic philosopher, too, after he has gone through all the 
stages of dialectic-as-journey, finally arrives at the vision of the Ideas 
(Forms). Henceforth he becomes a "dialectician, in a new, positive 
sense (discussed in the Republic, the Parmenides, and the Sophist)-
the one who knowingly moves within the realm of ideas and truth. 
For Hegel, at least in his middle period, this is the stage at which 
the Phenomenology turns into the Science of Logic-the foundation of 
absolute Knowing. The appearance of positive dialectic does not 
abolish negative dialectic, but reverses its result. Within dialectic-as-
Science there is also a permanent transcending of each position-or 
category-but the sum total of these negations and transcendings 
now upholds the positive system of truth. In a Dionysian image 
which he takes from the Greek mystics, Hegel draws an analogy 
with the Bacchanalian dance, where no dancer remains in his or 
her place; all are whirling in an intoxicated ecstasy (extasis-,a tran-
scending of oneself), yet their repeated mutual motion creates a 
stable, transparent, and circular structure. Similarly, dialectic-as-Sci-
22 The term C<Science" (Wissenschaft) has in Hegel the sense of episteme. It does 
not refer only to the natural or so-called exact sciences, but to philosophy as 
absolute Knowing. (I therefore capitalize it.) 

40 
Introduction 
ence is a system of negations and transcendings that have been 
interiorized and now maintain the system from within. 
Dialectic-as-Science is thus the "synchronic" movement within 
which the universe of absolute Knowing is achieved, while dialectic-
as-journey is the "diachronicJJ movement towards it. From a textual 
point of view, we might say that the Phenomenology corresponds to 
dialectic-as-journey,23 and the Logic represents dialectic-as-Science.24 
In its first (1807) edition, the Phenomenology was subtitled the 
"first parfJ of a projected two-part work called The System of Science 
(System der Wissenschaft). As first part, the Phenomenology was meant 
to study spiritJ s outer, phenomenal existence, and follow its dialec-
tical transformations from sensual knowledge to absolute Know-
ing. The second part was supposed to contain three divisions: logic, 
philosophy of nature, and philosophy of spirit. With certain amend-
ments, a similar project was carried out many years later under the 
title The Encyclopedia ofPhilosophical Sciences. Meanwhile, Hegel had 
abandoned his original conception and regarded the Phenomenology 
as a preparation for the philosophical Science rather than an or-
ganic part of it. (In the edition of the Phenomenology he published 
in 1831, shortly before his death, Hegel omitted the subtitle "first 
partJJ altogether). The relation between the Phenomenology and the 
rest of Heger s system, especially the Logic, has since become a 
subject of much debate. From the standpoint of the Phenomenology 
itself, however, and of the present preface, there is no doubt that 
the genesis of absolute Knowing must be considered an integral 
part of its system. We can see this also by viewing the Phenomenol-
ogy (as was suggested before) as the historicization of PlatoJs pro-
cess of philosophical education. In Plato that process, which is at 
first a dialectic-as-journey, is replaced by a dialectic-as-Science, in 
which the Platonic dialectician moves among the Ideas in the state 
of theoria (intellectual intuition). By analogy, we might say the Phe-
23 Later supplanted by the various philosophical histories on which Hegel lec-
tured: world politics, religion, art, and philosophy. 
24 Later supplanted by the philosophies of nature and spirit (i.e., the philosophy 
of right), and the discussions of the essence (not the history) of politics (objective 
spirit), religion, art, and philosophy contained in the lectures mentioned in the 
previous note. 

Introduction 
41 
nomenology represents Hegel's dialectic-as-journey, and the Logic 
(more generally, his full system) is Hegel's dialectic-as-Science. And 
since, in Hegel's philosophy, one understands the process in retro-
spect, it follows that the structure of the journey-the Phenomenol-
ogy-is grasped and exposed from the same standpoint of theoria, 
and thereby belongs to Science's own context. 
In addition, the Phenomenology is needed in order to provide the 
meta theory of the special philosophies of history contained in the 
system-of religion, politics, art, philosophy, and world history in 
general. These special philosophies of history belong to the system 
not as separate blocks, but rather as the necessary dimension of 
becoming which permeates the system throughout; and the Phe-
nomenology is their underlying systematic structure.25 
DIALECTIC-AS-SUBJECTIVE EDUCATION 
The Phenomenology also has a second, educational and subjective 
task: to offer the individual a ladder by which he or she can be 
liberated from the standpoint of naYve consciousness and attain phi-
losophy. This, too, is an aspect of dialectic-as-journey, now seen 
from the standpoint of the philosophizing individual. The need for 
a ladder arises from a recognition that rational truth cannot be 
externally imposed on the individual. Consciousness must be able 
to recognize truth as its own-an expression of its selfhood. Yet, 
philosophical truth at first is alien to the individual and extremely 
remote from her. The Phenomenology offers the individual that same 
ladder which universal human consciousness has been climbing up 
to that time, and helps the individual personally to mount it. It 
starts from the point where the nonphilosophical individual stands 
at present-sense certainty, perception, passion, the familiar world, 
and so forth-and is supposed to ascend step by step, stage by stage, 
25 The fact that Hegel delivered them only orally, and that the Berlin system 
does not set a rubric for the Phenomenology in its original dimension of spirifs 
historical becoming (there is only a limited section dealing with philosophical 
psychology, or the subjective mind) do not pose an essential difficulty; they stem 
rather from more technical and academic-didactic considerations, which also 
distinguished the older, Berlin Hegel from the more innovative thinker he had 
been at Jena. 

42 
Introduction 
even if by spiral, roundabout moves, towards absolute Knowing. 
The evolution of the Phenomenology is therefore the development 
of a personal, subjective mind which experiences the dialectical 
contradictions arising within it as a personal problem and malaise, 
and is driven beyond them in search of new positions. Within this 
subjective journey, the Phenomenology is meant to play the role of 
the Socratic educator, who serves as '"'"midwife'' to his pupil and 
helps draw dialectic-as-Science from the pupil's own mind. 
EVIDENCE AND TRUTH 
Also implied here is the modern principle formulated by Desc-
artes: the individual subject rightfully demands that universal truth 
not oppose his consciousness, but be derived from it. Descartes, 
however, identified universal truth with subjective certainty ('"'"evi-
dence'') and made that identity the starting point of philosophy, 
whereas Hegel sets a distance between certainty and truth. Each 
of these two stands at an opposite end of the Phenomenology. The 
process begins with subjective certainty which, because it is a di-
rect, unmediated personal experience, is not yet truth; truth is at-
tained only at the end, when the subject's consciousness has fully 
overcome its merely particular standpoint and adopted the stand-
point of the whole as a development of its (the subject's) own sel£ 
It must be stressed that overcoming particularity does not en-
tail that subjectivity has been abolished. On the contrary, the ac-
tual subject-the thinking, feeling, willing, desiring subject-is 
present in all the positions which he or she attains and adopts, 
including the most universal standpoint. In this respect, all the 
standpoints the subject undergoes over the course of his mental 
career are his own, they express his subjective self and identity, and 
are not imposed upon him by external coercion, brainwashing, or 
manipulation. 
RATIONALITY CANNOT BE IMPOSED (NOR CHOSEN ARBITRARILY) 
This is a crucial point. It preserves the modernity of Hegel's posi-
tion in stating that rationality cannot be imposed. When the individual 
cannot recognize the universal standpoint as an expression of her 

Introduction 
43 
own self a fundamental condition of rationality is broken and the 
position is not rational. As with Kant, rationality for Hegel is a union 
of a subjective recognition and an objective, universal point of view. 
Both of these ingredients are equally necessary for rationality to 
exist. From this it follows that it is impossible to coerce a person or 
a society to be free, as Rousseau wanted; one can only help them 
to evolve toward freedom and rationality. It is likewise impossible 
to become rational by mere choice or decision, because rationality, 
again, must arise from the subject's evolution and self-explication. It 
is neither an automatic outcome-a position which can be deduced 
analytically-nor is it an arbitrary existential choice. Rather, ratio-
nality must emerge from and through the mind"' s self-evolution, as 
a kind of novelty, an Aujhebung that both depends on what went 
before and cannot be merely reduced to it. Rationality is attained 
neither by coercion nor by choice, but by a self-educational process 
which draws all its levers and shapes from the philosophizing indi-
vidual's own mind and, when mature, allows rationality to emerge 
as an outcome, that is, as the expression of that mind and the culture 
which embodies it. There is neither an "algorithmic,_, necessity here 
nor an arbitrary occurrence. Hegel sees this rather as a "historical-'' 
necessity, meaning that although its outcome can be accounted for 
by reasons, it can neither be predicted in advance nor recur in pre-
cisely the same way. And this also explains the historical boundaries 
which, unlike for Plato, limit the individual's capacity to jump ahead 
and attain full rationality when the rest of the Zeitgeist has not yet 
reached its threshold. 
HEGEL AND KIERKEGAARD 
Hegel thereby addresses a famous existentialist objection raised 
by Kierkegaard, who complained that Hegel's philosophical "Sci-
ence"'' may be beautifully constructed, yet he, as this particular indi-
vidual, cannot find himself in it. Though Hegel did not know Kier-
kegaard, he had fully concurred with his demand. Indeed, the 
individual must be able to rediscover himself within the universal 
philosophical truth, or else the latter will not be rational. Hegel's 
original answer is to construct the Phenomenology as an educational 

44 
Introduction 
bridge by which the individual can gradually cross into the absolute 
standpoint, and thereby be actualized as a genuine individual, 
rather than existing as an unreal individual-that is, as a merely 
particular entity. 
26 
One can criticize or reject Hegel's account ("narrative") of this 
journey, but one cannot say that he ignores the demands of the 
particular consciousness or bans it from his system. True, Hegel 
does not allow for an absolute or 'bare" particularity, the kind 
which Kierkegaard and other existentialists start from. This is to 
him as illusory a metaphysical notion as Descartes' disembodied I, 
or the 'bare simples" on which the positivists build their world. The 
shape which the historical "universal'' (culture, tradition, language, 
political institutions, rational claims and aspirations, and so on) has 
taken in the individual's lifetime plays a role in constituting that 
person's very individuality; it is the "spiritual substance" which 
nourishes each person's self and defines the range in which, as indi-
vidual, he is able to move, either identifying with the historical 
situation, or dissenting from it, or seeking to transcend it towards 
some reformed shape. In this respect, a 'bare'' or a absolutely partic-
ular" individual is a figment of the imagination, and if he demands 
to find his most particular and personal traits expressed conceptu-
ally in thought and in spirit, he would indeed find no satisfaction 
in philosophy, neither in Hegel's nor in anyone else's.27 
just as the Socratic midwife educes dialectic-as-Science from his 
pupil's mind, so the Phenomenology claims to offer the individual the 
same ladder which universal human consciousness has been as-
cending up to his or her time, and helps him to personally ascend it, 
while also reliving its deficiencies as a call to go on. 
26 In Hegers Logic, a true individual (as "singularn) is a synthesis of particularity 
and universality. A merely particular entity is not a true individual-it does not 
have "singularity'' (Einzelheit). It is an unreal individual, only appearing as such. 
Individuality (like actuality) is not given but gained: when the particular rises to 
a universal standpoint and recognizes it as her own. 
27 Just as, ontologically, Professor Krug could not find satisfaction when asking 
Hegel to "deduce" his pen. 

Introduction 
THE PoLEMICs IN THE PREFACE: HEGEL, FICHTE, 
SCHELLING, HOLDERLIN 
45 
The Phenomenology is not only the founding work of Hegel's mature 
system, but also-and for the same reason-a document of divorce. 
The Preface has a trenchant polemical dimension. In coming into 
his own, Hegel had to break away from leading figures and fashions, 
and, more important, to suffer the pains of an inevitable (and self-
inflicted) severance from some of his most intimate personal and 
intellectual friends, especially Schelling and Holderlin. The three of 
them had been classmates and close friends ~t the Tiibingen Stift; 
they matured, dreamed, and argued together. All had been to some 
extent influenced by Fichte. Schelling, though younger than Hegel, 
made his name as philosopher before him; the two friends debated 
common problems and collaborated in publishing a philosophical 
journal. And Holderlin, before he submitted to mental illness, had 
not only been a towering young poet but also a promising system-
atic philosopher. At a certain point he got the young Hegel a tutor's 
job in Frankfurt, and their reunion in that town seems to have sig-
nificantly marked Hegel's future evolution.28 
The Preface to the Phenomenology, without mentioning names, 
censures all three men: Schelling, Fichte, and Holderlin. The ma-
ture Hegel, as often happens, poured more sarcasm on those closer 
28 This thesis is defended by Dieter Henrich who devoted many years of study 
to the two young men's relationship. His conclusion, which sounds convincing 
in what concerns the main point, is based on several documentary fragments, a 
rigorous philosophical analysis, and some intuitive speculation bridging over the 
gaps. Although Holderlin left very little written philosophy, Henrich makes it 
plausible to maintain that he had influenced Hegel no less, and perhaps more 
pointedly, than Schelling and Fichte. See Dieter Henrich, The Course of Remem-
brance and Other Essays on Holderlin (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
1997). The evidence, however, does not seem to warrant overstatements, like 
saying that "Hegel's system emerged uninterruptedly" (my emphasis) from his 
adoption of Holderlin' s concept of love "as the central term in his thought" (see 
.... Holderlin and Hegel," ibid., p. 131). (I am grateful to Howard Panzer for his 
help in working on this topic). 

46 
Introduction 
to him than on complete intellectual strangers. Schelling is so cut-
tingly criticized that his consequent break with Hegel could never 
be repaired. Hegel's insincere excuse, that he had only targeted 
Schelling's cruder disciples, did not help. Holderlin, by then a sick 
man, is treated more mildly and indirectly in the Preface, yet his 
basic claim-that the absolute must be ineffable-is forcefully and 
repeatedly rejected. Above all, Fichte is made the target of an exten-
sive and particularly acidic attack. (He seems to be taking the blame 
also for faults which Hegel attributes jointly to him and Schelling.) 
Fichte was neither a friend, nor a direct teacher of Hegel's. Hegel 
looked with irony on the older philosopher's vagaries, his bombas-
tic public claims (the Preface pokes fun at Fichte's famous title: "A 
Sun-clear Account . . . An Effort to Force the Reader to Under-
stand"), and the ardent German nationalism to which Fichte was 
soon to become a spokesman. Fichte, nevertheless, was a philo-
sophical stepfather to Hegel, the first modern thinker who tried to 
fuse Kant's self-consciousness and Spinoza' s absolute substance 
into an overall system of idealism. But since Hegel had adopted the 
standpoint of idealism from early on (perhaps since his Frankfurt 
days with Holder lin), he was more acutely aware of his differences 
with Fichte than of their common ground. 29 
Among other things, Hegel rejected Fichte's "subjective" brand 
of idealism; his attributing primacy and absolute identity to the 
I; his placing self-consciousness (or the "I am I") at the center of 
philosophy; and the abstract formalism by which he applied a single 
a priori formula-thesis-antithesis-synthesis-to all domains of re-
ality. (Ironically, a current view attributes the same abstract formula 
to Hegel himself.) 
Hegel's break with Schelling, and indirectly with Holderlin, had 
a different nature. Its wider target was the romantic school in phi-
losophy and art, which sought to grasp absolute reality by special 
nonrational gifts-intellectual intuition, poetic vision, an unspeak-
able act of faith and the like-rather than by reason. Hegel shared 
the goal of overcoming the shortcomings of the formal Under-
29 In an early work, The Difference between Fichte's and Schelling's Systems, Hegel 
analyzed the evolving systems of idealism as an immanent critic. 

Introduction 
47 
standing-not, however, by poetic or mystical means, but through 
a higher and richer mode of rationality he called the Concept or 
speculative Reason, which unfolds systematically, and cannot be an 
esoteric gift, but must be open to everyone undergoing a philo-
sophical formation. 
Holderlin's Impact 
Holderlin had studied under Fichte and criticized him. In an early 
fragment (later known as judgment and Being) Holder lin argued that 
the transcendental subject is not the source of unity, but rather of 
separation and distinction. Hence, Fichte' s "I am I" cannot be the 
absolute principle because, as consciousness and self-consciousness, 
it entails self-separation and is constituted by it. "The I is possible 
only through its separation from the I," Holderlin argues, so it is a 
principle of distinction, not unity. 
Now distinction and separation are the domain of judgment (Ur-
teil, which implies Ur-Teil-original division), whereas being is ab-
solute unity. Identity therefore falls under judgment, whereas the 
absolute principle must be prior to judgment and immune to it; it 
must be original unity without original division. And that, Holder-
lin argued, can only be Being, construed as lying altogether beyond 
the domain of consciousness and rational discourse-namely, as 
ineffable being. In consequence, philosophy must start not with the 
"I think" but with Being (as Spinoza had started, opposing Des-
cartes, and as Hegel was to do later, opposing Fichte). 
Holderlin's adoption of Spinoza was modified by Jacobi's cri-
tique of Spinoza. The absolute which underlies everything cannot 
be a rationally demonstrable substance, as in Spinoza, but must 
precede rational knowledge. To give a rational argument for the 
absolute is not only invalid but unnecessary, because the absolute 
is always already there as an ultimate certainty, which one needs 
to assume rather than prove or search for. Whereas Jacobi con-
strued this act as a leap of faith, Holderlin placed his expectations 
on poetic expression as the privileged access to Being. (This ex-
plains Heidegger's fascination with Holderlin, and repeated exege-
sis of his work.) 

48 
Introduction 
When Holderlin met Hegel in Frankfurt he was, as Henrich sug-
gests/0 equally preoccupied with the broader project of {(unification 
philosophy"-the need to unify not only life's various and conflict-
ing powers, but especially the opposing human craving-for individ-
uality and finitude, on the one hand, and for the absolute and the 
infinite, on the other. Again, Holderlin sought the ground of these 
unifications in a primitive unity prior to consciousness and selfhood, 
namely, in that ineffable Being he had already opposed to Fichte. 
The evidence may be too scarce to prove that Hegel's philosophi-
cal course was decisively and lastingly revolutionized by Holderlin 
in Frankfurt. But it stands to reason that, as Henrich suggests, their 
encounter impinged upon Hegel the agenda and part of the termi-
nology of unification philosophy,
31 as well as the need to cope with 
the failures of idealism in its Fichtean version. The mature Hegelian 
system, with its dialectical reconciliation of diversity and opposition, 
contains an original and far-reaching answer to the problem of uni-
fication, including the idealist attempt to unite being and reason. 
Hegel agreed with Holderlin that philosophy can neither start 
with the I nor be centered around it, and unlike Fichte (and like 
Spinoza), started his own system (in the Logic) with being rather than 
consciousness. Yet Hegel forcefully denied that being is ineffable and 
prerational, or that it underlies knowledge without being submitted 
to it. The being with which Hegel starts is, on the contrary, mediated 
in itself, immanently leading to its opposite (nothing) as its own 
condition, and producing the self-reflective "for itself' which is the 
nucleus of all selfhood, and eventual subjectivity and consciousness. 
No wonder that the notion that the absolute is opaque being which 
must be intuited, felt, approached by poetic means, and so forth, is 
one of the most debunked in the Preface before us-and with it, not 
only Schelling, but Holderlin, too, is strongly censured. 
Absolute immediacy is a myth to Hegel, an incoherent concept. 
Idealism, he says in the Logic, maintains that everything is both im-
30 This is inferred from the papers of another friend, presumably echoing 
Holderlin. 
31 On the evolution of his thought at this time, and use of love, see also chapter 
2, in my Dark Riddle: Hegel, Nietzsche, and the jews. 

Introduction 
49 
mediate and mediated at the same time-that immediacy (existence, 
definiteness, being) owes itself to a complex of mediations. All as-
pects and levels of being are pervaded by a movement of self-media-
tion, which is another way of saying that being has a subject-like 
structure even before it is expressed as self-consciousness. Therefore 
being is, to some extent, intelligible on any level of its evolution, up 
to-and most of all-the level of the realized absolute, which results 
from its evolution rather than preceding it as ineffably given. In de-
claring the absolute to be a result-and a subject-Hegel therefore 
implies a total rejection of Holder lin, s chief idea. 
Note on the Meaning of "Speculativen 
This polemics pertains also to the meaning of the term "specula-
tive" in Heger s special sense. Having several times used this term, 
let me pause for a brief explanation. 
"Speculative, derives from Latin speculare, to see. In Hegel's use 
the term contains an allusion to Plato's vision of the Forms (Ideas), 
the highest stage in Plato's philosophy, which rises above scientific 
understanding (dianoia) and reaches to true being (ousia). This 
mode of thinking directly grasps the particular by thinking the 
universal, and vice versa. It thereby is capable of grasping the true 
shape of a totality, which is a condition for conceiving the absolute. 
Closer to home, the term "speculation"" also alludes to Kant's (and 
Schelling, s) notion of "intellectual vision" ( intellektuelle Anschau-
ung, often translated into English as "intellectual intuition"), 
which Kant denied to man, and to which Schelling gave an irratio-
nalist interpretation. Hegel wants this kind of vision to be given 
a rational interpretation-albeit in terms of Reason rather than 
Understanding; and this calls for a dialectical mode of thinking 
that overcomes the habits of formal thinking and of ordinary pred-
icative language (see pages 107-9 and 181-85, below). Hegel's use 
of "speculative" (and also "truly speculative") thus addresses the 
demand, raised by Schelling and others, of restoring to philosophy 
something analogous to intellectual intuition-and reinterprets 
this something as a nondiscursive logic, that of subject-like sys-
tems-in which conceptual Reason replaces mystical visions. Intel-

50 
Introduction 
lectual intuition is a romantic illusion in so far as it is understood 
as a direct mental event, a semimystical gift; but when converted 
from a privileged mental experience into a logical structure (the 
structure of dynamic totalities, in which particulars and their uni-
versals inherently lead to each other), then its notion is compatible 
with conceptual Reason and, indeed, as dialectical logic, is the 
moving principle of philosophy. 
PosT ScRIPTUM: HEGEL AND KANT-CONTINUITY IN WHAT? 
A reader who wished to know where I stood with respect to a 
dichotomy he called Hpost-Kantian versus traditionalist" was puz-
zled to discover that my reading of Hegel did not fit into this 
matrix. The so-called post-Kantian reading, despite its merits, is 
too restrictive to do justice to Hegel's many-sided complexity and, 
in any case, depends on how one interprets Kant. I, too, insist on 
essential continuities between Kant and Hegel (some of which are 
not generally recognized); 32 but my Kant is not quite the Kant of 
current Anglo-American epistemology and philosophy of mind. 
Moreover, I see implicit in Kant, both at the core and in pregnant 
peripheral texts/3 the roots of ideas that are usually considered 
distinctly Hegelian. 
The Ontological Import ofKant,s Copernican Revolution 
The post-Kantian reading denies, or plays down, Hegel's interest 
in ontology. This is because it equates ontology in general with 
pre-Kantian metaphysics, which Hegel indeed rejected (or rather, 
32 Especially in Kant and the Philosophy of History (Princeton, 1980, 1986; second 
ed. forthcoming), and in Kant and the Renewal of Metaphysics (Heb., Jerusalem, 
1973, 1986). 
33 Such as, in the first Critique, the two prefaces, f<The Architectonic of Pure 
Reason, and "The History of Reason,; also the first part of the Lectures on Logic; 
the "Final End of Creation, in the third Critique; aThe Idea of Universal Historyu; 
and other programmatic texts concerning the nature and goals of philosophy 
and of rational human action. 

Introduction 
51 
transcended). However, I see no dichotomy between continuing 
Kant, s enterprise and being deeply versed in ontology. Kant, in my 
reading, had not demolished metaphysics in general but only what 
he called dogm.atic metaphysics, which sees actual being as a thing-
like domain, facing human subjectivity from an unreachable Be-
yond. Metaphysics as such, however, was to Kant an inalienable 
requirement inherent in human rationality. In his words, it is an 
rr essential interest of human reason/' which must, therefore, be 
reconciled with reason,s equally essential interest in self-criticism 
and the recognition of its own finitude. As Kant reiterated several 
times in his programmatic texts, his project was to create a new, 
valid rrmetaphysics-as-science," 34 conforming to critical demands, 
and thereby give metaphysics rra new birth.,, This, he maintained, 
became possible for the first time through his Copernican revolu-
tion, which locates the structure and grounds not only of knowl-
edge, but also of the objects of knowledge-the actual entities ex-
isting in nature-in the productive structure of human subjectivity 
(the rri think"). 
The Copernican revolution states that the subjective-universal 
conditions of knowing real objects in the world are the same as 
the conditions for those objects to be what they are, and what our 
description claims they are. 35 Thereby, Kanfs transcendental ideal-
ism established an ontology no less than an epistemology, since it 
explicates what it means for something to be an actual entity in 
the world, and not only the conditions of enouncing true proposi-
tions about it. Kant regards the result as rrscientific,, metaphysics. 
At the same time, he restricts the positive import of his new meta-
physics to finite or rrconditioned, entities only: conditioned by the 
boundaries of sensual experience, and, within those boundaries, 
conditioned by each other in causal chains. No valid metaphysics 
34 See for example the two prefaces to the Critique of Pure Reason and the first 
sections of the Prolegomena. 
35 That is, to be actual, through being numerically quantifiable, causally deter-
mined, open to sense perception, subject to mutual interaction, and so forth, and, 
in the second degree, by having the particular qualities and quantities they do. 

52 
Introduction 
is allowed of infinite, unconditioned elements, at least not as a cog-
nitive theory. 36 
The ontological significance of Kant, s Copernican revolution is 
manifest also in the novel concept of rrtranscendentallogic/, which 
stands at its center (and which Hegel appropriated and tranformed 
in his own Logic). Kant distinguished between formal logic and a 
logic of actual entities-that is, a logic of being. Formal logic sets 
the conditions for thinking anything at all-any intentional object, 
whether existing, fictional, or an empty symbol, whereas transcen-
dentallogic-Kanfs system of a priori categories and principles-
sets the conditions for thinking actual entities in nature ( = the world 
of experience); it is thereby a logic of being derived from the struc-
ture of the subject-in other words, it is a subject-like ontology. 37 
Hegel followed the Kantian distinction between the two logics 
even to the point of dethroning formal logic from its role of supreme 
legislator and limiting its grasp of truth and its scope of application. 
Hegers Logic treats the history of dogmatic metaphysics as finished, 
irreversibly overcome by Kanf s principle of idealism, according to 
which the deep structure of reality is the same as the structure of 
the subject. At the same time, rejecting Kanfs radical dualism of 
the rational and the sensual, Hegel carried the new interpretation 
of objecthood and actuality beyond the limitations set by Kant. Most 
notably, Hegel refused to confine the subject-centered ontology to 
finite entities only, and claimed that absolute Knowing was possible, 
both in principle and as a looming historical event. Furthermore, 
36 The unconditioned is attainable only by moral action, which produces it 
through the will. This is where the surplus metaphysical interest of reason that 
is frustrated by knowledge is transformed in Kant, who duly calls the moral-
practical domain a "metaphysics of morals." 
37 Some interpreters deny that the Logic is an ontology on the grounds that it 
is but a HScience of pure thought" (understood as a transcendental structure). 
Thus John Burbridge, On Hegel's Logtc: Fragments of a Commentary (Atlantic High-
lands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1982) supported by E. H. Harris, The Philosophical 
Review 93, no. 1 (Jan. 1984): 138-40). They seem to follow Hans Friedrich. Fulda"'s 
general reading. Yet to followers of Kanf s idealism like Hegel, there cannot be 
a contradiction between a science of ''pure thought" and ontology, since ac-
cording to the Copernican turn, the structure of objective reality is the same as 
the structure of subject's "pure thought.', 

Introduction 
53 
Hegel attributed subject-like dynamics and self-individuation not 
only to the "I think,'' but to other systems-organic, social, and 
cultural-as well, and even to the whole of being, which he con-
ceived as a single totality that generates its self-knowledge through , 
human culture and history. 
In these respects, Hegel used Kant's wings to take off to regions 
that Kant had declared out of bounds. Yet Hegel believed he re-
mained faithful to the new critical metaphysics, because (1) he abol-
ished the pre-Kantian metaphysics of substance, and (2) he negated 
all metaphysics of transcendence. In Hegel there is only the imma-
nent world, spiritualized by itself (through human action), on the 
basis of the subject-like dynamic he attributed to being in the Logic 
and elsewhere.
38 
Hegel's Logic is about the logos that articulates both the mind 
and the world. As such, it is linked at every level to some aspect of 
the real, from the most indefinite to the most concrete. At first the 
unformed mind conceives this logos in a mode that has persisted 
from the Greeks to Spinoza-namely, as a thing-like entity, or sub-
stance, existing externally in itself; but then, following Kant, the 
logos is conceived as a subject-centered system of forms, expressing 
the subject's dynamic. Thereby, the Logic at its peak understands 
itself as having all along been egaged in explicating the pure structure 
of subjectivity. This is what Kant has done paradigmatically (and on a 
smaller scale) in the Transcendental Logic. Or, using a post-Kantian 
comparison, Hegel's Logic can also be seen as having reworked and 
translated the mentalist "absolute subject" of Fichte and Schelling 
into structural terms as a system of dynamic categories. Moreover, 
Hegel's Logic understands the absolute subject as a result. This im-
plies that although the Logic is a metaphysics, as 1-Iegel expressly 
claims, it cannot serve as "first philosophy" (or a priori foundation), 
but must be the last, the summary of all our other cognitive and 
practical enterprises. 39 
38 For a more extensive analysis ofHegel's philosophy of immanence, see chap-
ter 2 of my Spinoza and other Heretics, val. 2, The Adventures of Immanence. 
39 Even as such it is still a Hrealm of shadows," because the actual subject is also 
mediated by forms of social intercourse and recognition that are only sketched in 
the Logtc itself. 

54 
Introduction 
Furthermore, the Logic also assumes an implicit historical dimen-
sion. It tacitly describes our diverse philosophical images of the real, 
as they change in relation to the partial levels of reality captured 
by each dominant logical category. This implied history of meta-
physics significantly breaks into two distinct parts (the only such 
division in the book), and the break between them marks the rise of 
modernity. It separates the object-centered pre-Kantian metaphysics 
from the new view of the world stemming from the Copernican 
revolution, which not only created the modern, subject-centered 
ontology, but also revolutionized our understanding of logic itself. 
Hegel also followed Kant in maintaining that the self is not a 
primary given, as in Descartes, but a constituted result, whose iden-
tity depends on confronting otherness.
40 But Hegel completed this 
Kantian strategy by advancing the powerful argument that the 
selfs confronting its Other cannot be limited to the world of natu-
ral objects, as in Kant, but must, even primarily, include the other 
subject and the world of intersubjective relations and institutions 
built upon this encounter. In this way, the social world gains onto-
logical import in Hegel, not only as the substrate ofbeing's histori-
cal evolution, but also as the condition for the emergence of self-
hood and singular individuality as such. 
The Will and History 
I cannot here discuss all the dialectical continuities between Kant 
and HegeL But I should briefly mention the will, history, the ((cun-
ning of nature," and the construal of reason as a motivating force. 
40 I read this view as implied in the ''progressive,, argument of the Transcen-
dental Deduction. The argument starts from the '1 think, as given, and searches 
for the conditions that make it possible. It concludes that these preconditions 
include the application of the categories to sense materials in a way that con-
structs a world of experience distinct from the constructing subject, who then, 
and only then, is capable of the self-reflection expressed in the thought ('f!.>r enun-
ciation), "I think.', Thus objective reality and subjective identity are mutually 
dependent in Kanfs idealism; they enable each other in a benign circularity; and 
the structure of the ego is, already in Kant, that of a result of its own world-
objectifying activity. 

Introduction 
55 
Kant understood human rationality not as calculus merely, but as 
a goal-oriented activity which he explicitly calls "interest."41 Kantian 
reason is a system of rational interests, all directed toward the real-
ization, in different domains, of rationality as an end in itself. This 
accounts, inter alia, for Kant's construal of practical rationality as 
will; his concept of "the history of reason"; and the demand-in-
deed, imperative-that the moral will become a world-shaping 
power. This task defined world history for Kant: the human will 
projects itself in objects of moral civilization. In so doing, the will 
transforms the naturally given, and strives to rediscover itself in its 
products: to see its own norms and moral vision embodied in new 
laws and institutions, including a "republican" polity; a reformed 
religion of reason (understood as an "ethical community"); enlight-
ened educational methods; a world confederation ensuring peace; 
and-no less important (because '"'"morally deserving")-the mate-
rial benefits which such reforms justify and make possible. 
This merger of universal morality and prosperity, to which Kant 
shifted the title of "Highest Good," 42 was envisioned as an offshoot 
of the Copernican revolution and its principle of autonomy: The 
subject, as will, has the self-imposed task of reshaping the naturally 
given into cultural objects-a moral civilization-that bear the 
marks of the will's own structure. At the same time, anticipating 
Hegel's "cunning of reason," Kant himself recognized a semidialec-
tical natural dynamic which promotes political progress through 
ambition, exploitation, and violence rather than the moral will. 
Even more important, Kant's "unsociable sociability," his main the-
sis in social philosophy, according to which all egos stand in a non-
utilitarian conflict over the prestige and acknowledgment each re-
fuses to grant others, recurs grandly in Hegel's philosophy as the 
struggle for recognition that drives all human affairs. 
An even less-recognized continuity between Kant and Hegel con-
cerns the goal of the world as a whole. At the end of the Critique 
41 The term c~interest(s) of reason/' which many Kant scholars find odd, is so 
genuinely Kantian that it recurs several hundred times in his writings. 
42 The shift occurred in the third Critique and in the political and religious 
writings. At first however (notably in the Critique of Practical Reason), the Hhighest 

56 
Introduction 
of judgment Kant inquires about ((the ultimate end of Creation it-
self,"43 a metaphor by which he means all there is, empirical and 
noumenal alike; and Kant, like Hegel, gives a future-oriented an-
swer, grounded in human action. The meaning-endowing goal 
which justifies the world's existence cannot be found in anything 
given beforehand or already existing; it is a moral task, which the 
human race must accomplish by the gradual "moralization of na-
ture."44 In the first Critique, the metaphysics of the unconditioned 
collapsed into antinomies because it claimed to know (attribute 
specific features to) the world as a single whole. Now Kant declares 
there is, after all, a valid critical way of making the world intelligible 
and justified as a whole, not cognitively but morally, by centering 
on the world's final end rather than beginning. In other words, 
while avoiding idle metaphysical speculations about the world's ori-
gin, or global features, or concerning a natural teleology allegedly 
inherent in it, Kant introduces instead a human-projected moral 
teleology, which determines what the world ought to become 
through the moral action of the will. In this way, the justifying 
meaning of being is not metaphysically given "in itself' (it defies 
essentialism and a Hmetaphysics of presence," as one might say 
today), but constitutes a moral Ought (Kant also calls it "vocation") 
to be realized in history. 
Similarly in Hegel, the meaning and justification of being do not 
exist beforehand. They are generated by transforming nature into 
spirit. Yet Hegel judges Kant's position as one-sided, because 
(among other reasons) Kant shrinks the specifically human input 
to pure morality alone, and considers this input to be an obligation 
extraneous to nature, a foreign teleology imposed upon it. This 
makes Kant's theory not only narrowly moralistic, but hopelessly 
utopian, and, in addition, requires him to postulate a transcendent 
God to mediate between the two disparate domains of nature and 
freedom. In Hegel no external God is needed, because an imma-
good, had a narrower personal meaning, the combination of personal virtue 
and happiness. (See my Kant and the Philosophy of History, part 1.) 
43 Der Endzweck der Schopfung selbst. 
44 See the Critique of judgment, paragraphs 82-84, 87, as well as my analysis in 
Kant and the Philosophy of History, pp. 70-80, 175-78. 

Introduction 
57 
nent teleology takes his place. The historical process realizes a pos-
sibility that inheres in nature's own, semisubjective structure. 
Hegel: A Critical Philosopher? 
If Hegel saw no possibility of return to pre-Kantian metaphysics, 
was he then a critical philosopher? Yes and No: yes, if to be critical 
means to reject the ""naive" view of objects in themselves, and grasp 
objectivity and actuality as mediated by the structure of the subject; 
and no, in so far as criticism insists on the finitude of human reason, 
its inability to access to the infinite and unconditioned to which, 
nevertheless, it necessarily aspires. In denying the unbridgeable gap 
between the finite and the infinite, Hegel denied a crucial Kantian 
insight, indeed a fundamental recognition, in which Kant, not 
Hegel, had anticipated the dominant tone of modernity. Kant re-
garded this _hiatus as the lot of modern man, the price of critical 
enlightenment and freedom. A self-criticized rationality is all we 
have in Kant, our only valid source and authority: if it leaves the 
unconditioned beyond our reach, then this is the genuine "know 
thyself' that philosophy provides, the true, if painful, insight into 
ourselves and where we stand in being. Hegel refused to accept 
this conclusion. He aimed his heaviest artillery at the "philosophy 
of finitude," and, equipped with a dialectical teleology, claimed to 
have overcome it by "absolute Knowing." Personally, I think that 
on this issue, Kant had the more sober, profound, secular, and disil-
lusioned view of the human (and the modern) condition than 
Hegel (although on other issues Hegel was more attuned to the 
inevitable realities of life and the world.). Moreover, I think Kant 
did not go far enough, that his immutable a priori principles barred 
him from recognizing the greater scope of human finitude and con-
tingency, on which Nietzsche, and most existentialist and antiessen-
tialist thinkers, including the pragmatists, later insisted. But Hegel 
is neither Kant nor Nietzsche, and a fair historian of philosophy 
must recognize that the metaphysics of absolute spirit was essential 
to Hegel's own project, even if it is incongruent with the aims of 
many who are otherwise deeply indebted to him. 

58 
Introduction 
Who Is the "Old Hegel"? 
Every period has its ''old Hegel.'' And in every period there are peo-
ple who claim Hegel did not say what they think he had better not 
say. My own "old Hegel" does not consist of actual Hegelian views 
I consider untenable or embarrassing, but of views I think had been 
falsely attributed to Hegel, which he did not, or could not (given his 
texts and the logic of his other important positions) own. Thus, one 
need not be apologetic, only careful, in order to deny that Hegel 
proposed any of the following: (1) a return to pre-Kantian metaphys-
ics; (2) an understanding of "spirit" as a Platonic world-soul, or the 
personification of the universe; (3) a transcendent absolute God, con-
ceived as a separate superperson, whose rational intentions precede 
nature and history; (4) a preestablished essence of man (and of his 
culture and ethics) which history only unveils, but does not consti-
tute or remake; (5) a closed, rigidly knit, semideductive system of 
truth, allowing of no contingency; ( 6) a calculus-like dialectical 
method, separable from its content and driven by a formula (as in 
Fichte), which can, in itself, attain to ultimate reality; (7) a semitotal-
itarian understanding of "totality"; (8) a social rationality in which 
the universal suppresses the individual, rather than being mutually 
dependent on the individual's consent and recognition. 
At the same time, I think it equally untrue to suggest, as some 
do today, that the historical Hegel (1) was antimetaphysical through-
out; (2) that he viewed the climax of his philosophy in a stand-alone 
social ethics and practice; (3) that philosophy for him was only a 
historicist, relativistic vindication of contingent cultural forms (this 
is more Rorty than Hegel); (4) that he had no interest in ontology 
and the question of being; or (5) that he minimized the import of 
religion, or postulated its superiority to reason. In other words, it 
would be incorrect to play down the teleological, transhistorical, 
and heterodox-theological import of his absolute spirit. 
Hegel, Dead and Alive 
Benedetto Croce, the Hegel-inspired Italian philosopher, wrote al-
most a century ago a famous essay entitled "What is Alive and 

Introduction 
59 
What is Dead in Hegel's Philosophy?" Croce's blunt and somewhat 
naive title makes a worthwhile point. A philosophical interpreta-
tion of past philosophers must not deny or play down the flaws of 
an important philosopher, who can still greatly inspire us even if 
we do not make him suit contemporary tastes and fashion, or use 
him as tacit authority to promote our own ideas. Such practices, I 
might add, are often necessary in religion and in law, but not in 
philosophy. Religion uses authoritative, charismatic texts as its justi-
fying vehicle, and therefore needs to read them selectively, by a 
flexible hermeneutics. The same holds for law, whether written or 
precedent-based. But philosophy has no authoritative texts or fig-
ures, only rational discourse by which to justify its claims, and a 
secular, strictly rational history of philosophy cannot adopt those 
practices without compromising its own project. 
There is no textually fair way of making Hegel's overall system 
and ambitions withstand the test of our time: the result will either 
not be Hegel, or not stand. Even so, Hegel is an immense intellec-
tual power, and still a vital philosopher in much of what he had to 
say. I see three important respects that make him indispensable. 
First, if one believes that ideas do not exist in a pure Platonic space, 
but rather are embodied in actual, historical men and women using 
shared language and concepts, then Hegel is absorbed into many 
ways in which we speak, think, and act today, and is a major factor 
for both the understanding and the critique of high modernity. As 
such, Hegel has become a kind of modern Aristotle, to Kant's 
Plato. (The extent to which he stands at the background, and cross-
roads, of much European cultural history is partially illustrated in 
then-Works on Hegel in English" section at the end of this book.)45 
Secondly, Hegel is a source of philosophical stimulation and insights 
large and small, and a path-setter in the modes, issues, attitudes, 
and goals of philosophizing. As such he can be an outstanding phil-
osophical educator-in the sense that Nietzsche called Schopen-
hauer an educator-provided one is careful to avoid the pitfalls 
that his texts also contain, including his often esoteric style and his 
system's claims to totality and infinity, that is, its closure. 
45 Only partially, not only because of the brief survey, but because his influence 
was not only on philosophy, but also on history, sociology, law, art and politics. 

60 
Introduction 
But Hegel is relevant not only as educator, or in providing con-
text to much of what we are, think, and debate. He is also, in the 
third place, alive and important in matters of philosophical sub-
stance-many actual positions in which he points in the right gen-
eral direction. I cannot spell out all the relevant examples here 
(many will recur in some form in the following text and commen-
tary); I can only summarily list their headings. 
For example, Hegel conceives of human beings as basically crea-
tures of desire, a desire for something that transcends mere survival 
and is considered more worthwhile than sensual happiness and in-
strumental utility-call it freedom, recognition, selfhood, existen-
tial meaning, coping with alienation, or self-actualization through a 
universalized principle. This approach, immanent and this-worldly, 
offers, I think, a more convincing alternative to the sensualist-utili-
tarian image of human life and desire, and also to the lofty, reli-
gious, spiritualist (and Platonic) striving towards an imagined world 
of the Beyond. 
Other examples: the view that rationality-the logos-is substan-
tive rather than merely formal; that it is a driving power and not 
just a calculus; that it operates through the "lower" and the "non-
cognitive" mental structures-imagination, recollection, emotion, 
desire, love, and so forth; that reason is always embodied in empirical 
situations and entities; and (as an implied consequence of all the 
above) that reason is impure rather than pure, and contains unrea-
son, contingency, and negativity as integral ingredients. Further 
important Hegelian views: the historical situatedness of all human 
affairs; the essential role of negativity in all important matters, in-
cluding the constitution of the self and of the real; the view that 
the human subject is constituted by its involvement in the world 
rather than given beforehand in a Cartesian way; the view that the 
human will (rather than a natural law, or the divine will) underlies 
the entire normative world (i.e., civilization itself); and, on a meta-
level, understanding identity as involving difference in its very con-
stitution, and accepting other elements of the Hegelian dialectic 
that make sense even without casting them into an overall system-
atic panacea. 

Introduction 
61 
Finally (to conclude these personal reflections), Hegel's concern 
with the meaning of existence, which, as he suggested, is not lying 
ready-made somewhere, but involves human input and action, indi-
cates an existential interest that remains relevant independently of 
the social concerns with which it is linked in part. Of course, He-
gel's messianic expectation that the modern world would make this 
meaning manifest, a redeeming power in people's lives and culture, 
had turned sour, as all messianism must. But the drive behind it-
to reconcile modern individuals not only to their growingly com-
plex and alienated societies, but to the being of the universe which 
has become estranged by modernity's disillusions, the price of intel-
lectual emancipation and desenchantement-expresses a genuine 
philosophical problem that does not go away, and cannot be truly 
submerged in political and social activism. 
Each of the above issues contains a world of philosophical poten-
tial. The problem is to release this potential from the grip of the 
uabsolute idea," and from Hegel's dream of a final synthesis or 
reconciliation, that gives definite priority to unity and identity over 
their opposites. Some people have tried to amend the flaws they 
found in Hegel in a local, case-by-case approach. Yet much in Hegel 
cannot be moved or removed until the top is shattered-namely, 
until the claims of totality and final synthesis are gone, which close 
and lock the Hegelian system. The key to a fruitful Hegel critique 
does not lie in piecemeal counterarguments-if necessary, they can 
come later-but in renouncing in one critical sway the claims to 
infinity and absolute knowledgtj'. 
This move will open up aq abundance of Hegelian ideas by 
which one can philosophize in/a free, semidialectical, and historical 
way, unburdened by the gr~d illusions of Hegel and his oppo-
nents: on the one hand, t~~ illusions of positivism (as if reality 
lies in the immediately giyen), and of analytic philosophy (as if we 
have a direct access to a' univocal, ahistorical truth, governed by 
pure logic or some other formal canon); and, on the other hand, 
the illusion of the re~g'ious absolute translated into conceptual phi-
losophy. 
46 The resu~ will be a free, historicized, and semidialectical 
46 These lines paraphrase the conclusion of the Hegel portion of my Dark 
Riddle: Hegel, Nietzsche, and the jews. 

62 
Introduction 
philosophizing that would depart from Hegel in accepting human 
finitude and contingency, the lack of a final synthesis, the role of 
inreconcilable difference in producing our never-integral human 
identities, and more generally, in accepting immanence and finitude 
without giving up on the logos, while deflating its pure image as an 
overriding deity. 
That would no longer be Hegel, but would not have been possi-
ble without him. 

Text and Running Co111rnentary 
[ 1] IN A PREFACE it is customary to explain the goal which the author 
has set for himself, the circumstances of his writing, and the way 
he thinks his work relates to other, earlier or contemporary efforts 
at treating the same object. But in a philosophical text this custom 
seems to be not only superfluous, but, by the nature of things, 
inadequate and contrary to its purpose. For what would be appro-
priate to say about philosophy in a preface, and in what manner? 
Roughly, one would give a historical account
0 of the work's stand-
point and tendency, its general content and results-a conjunction 
of assertions and assurances
0 made here and there
0 about what is 
true; but this cannot be the valid way of exhibiting
0 philosophical 
Historical account: Meaning a narrative, a storytelling statement, or simply 
an empirical one. In a preface, all one can do is narrate the author's position 
""as in a story." Therefore, the general principles themselves appear within 
a preface as particular claims, lacking justification and severed from their 
systematic context. Such statements are in fact empirical (another sense of 
"historical" in Hegel's use) even when their content is philosophical. 
Assurances (Behauptungen): Verbal warrants merely, as when saying, "Take 
it from me, I assure you this is so." 
Made here and there: In a preface, one can express only dogmatic statements 
which, even when true as sentences, are only mere talk and, strictly speak-
ing, because they lack their grounding context, are false (see below). 
Exhibiting: The German darstellen (and Darstellung) acquired a special sys-
tematic meaning in Kant, retained by Hegel. The terms indicate the outer 
expression, indeed translation and transformation, of a rational essence 
or meaning into a sensual or empirical medium. This idea is best trans-
lated as "exhibition"; although "presentation'" makes more readable En-
glish. (I make this remark once, and may later interchange between these 
terms as context advises.) 

64 
Text and Running Commentary 
truth. Also, philosophy resides essentially in the element of univer-
sality which contains the particular; therefore philosophy, more 
than other sciences, gives rise to the illusion° that the matter it-
self-even in its accomplished essence-is expressed in the goal or 
final result, in relation to which the development is inessential. Yet, 
[even] in the common image
0 one has of, say, anatomy-roughly, 
that anatomy consists in knowledge of the body, considered in its 
nonliving existence-one is convinced that the matter itself, the 
content of this science, is not thereby possessed, but, in addition, 
one must take the trouble of dealing with the particular. Further, 
in such an aggregate of cognitions which has no right to the name 
of science, there is no difference between a conversation about the 
goal and similar generalities, and the historical and Conceptless 
Gives rise to the illusion: It might create the illusion that what is essential 
resides only in the final end taken in isolation, while the detailed devel-
opment is inessential, a mere vehicle which can be disposed of at the 
end of the road. This is the view of ordinary common sense and also 
of the formal (and mathematical) Understanding (Verstand), as opposed 
to philosophical Reason (Vernunft). In philosophy, the conclusion has 
neither meaning nor truth-value without the whole context within 
which it has evolved. 
The common image: Literally, "the general image" (Die allgemeine Vorstel-
lung). Hegel refers to what the formal understanding calls definition. By 
using the term Vorstellung (representation, image) he indicates that defini-
tions are not genuine Concepts; they rather belong to a lower, more exter-
nal level analogous to an image. Anatomy, for example, is a rationally 
inferior science, because it grasps a living body as if it were dead, and 
ignores its organic, dialectical structure. Yet even in anatomy, everyone 
will admit that a merely general definition of that science is inadequate 
and teaches us nothing, unless we consider the relevant particulars, 
namely, the diverse bodily organs. This is even more so in philosophy, 
which is organic and dialectical at a higher level, because it deals with 
reason. Nothing actual can be understood in philosophy by mere general-
izations. We must observe how the generalization works within the body 
of the system, and how the particulars which realize it are integrated 
within the evolving context of the whole. 

Text and Running Commentary 
65 
manner
0 in which the content itself--the nerves, the muscles, et 
cetera-are discussed. In philosophy, however, this would give rise 
to an incongruity
0 that consists in using a way of discourse which 
philosophy itself shows to be incapable of attaining the truth. 
[2] 
Similarly, to state how a philosophical work sees its relation to 
other treatments
0 of the same object introduces a foreign interest, 
obscuring that which is important in the knowledge of truth. The 
more the current opinion° views the opposition between the true 
and the false as rigid, the more it expects that every given philo-
sophical system should be either endorsed or contradicted, and 
takes every explanation of such a system to be only the one or the 
other. It does not conceive the diversity of philosophical systems 
The historical and Conceptless manner: HHistorical" indicates here merely 
empirical, a simple enumeration of particulars lacking a Concept (Begri.ff), 
in the sense of an organic dialectical structure. Hegel is using the term 
'"'Concept'' in his own, systematic sense (which is why I capitalize it). 
The universality of a genuine Concept is neither formed inductively, by 
abstracting from particulars, nor is it a priori in the sense of being inde-
pendent of particulars. Rather, the universal Concept is an organic totality 
in which every particular makes its own contribution to the whole and is 
constituted by the dialectical movement of all the others. This is Reason's 
characteristic structure, as distinguished from the analytical Understand-
ing, which expresses a lower level of rationality. 
Incongruity: Anatomy, though its object is organic, is rather an inorganic 
body of knowledge, and thereby external to its object. This makes it mere 
talk about this object. However, in philosophy, the organic Science of reason, 
mere talk involves an incongruity, indeed a contradiction, between philoso-
phy's own form of discourse and the form of discourse about philosophy. 
Other treatments: Other philosophical treatises. In a preface it is customary 
to compare the author's views with other writers. In philosophy, that 
convention may be misleading because it presupposes that every philo-
sophical opinion is either absolutely true or absolutely false. Hegel will 
criticize this view. 
The current opinion (Meinung): a Opinion" here takes the sense of the Pla-
tonic doxa as distinguished from actual Knowing. Hegel frequently con-
flates the connotations of c.-opinion" and ccimage" (Vorstellung). Any sub-
Conceptual view of things is an n"image" in terms of its cognitive medium, 
and an Hopinion" in terms of epistemic status. 

66 
Text and Running Commentary 
as the progressive development of truth; it only sees contradic-
tion0 in that diversity. The bud disappears in the eruption of the 
flower, 
0 so one could say that the flower contradicts the bud. In a 
similar way, the fruit declares the flower to be the plant's false 
existence, 0 and steps forward in its place as the plant's truth. These 
forms are not only distinct; they reject one another as mutually 
exclusive. At the same time, their fluid nature
0 makes them into 
It only sees contradiction: The ordinary view of the understanding assumes 
that any two contradictory claims, or philosophical doctrines, are mutually 
exclusive. Only one of them can be true, whereas the other is absolutely 
false. Hegel proposes a different view according to which conflicting philo-
sophical doctrines are all dynamic ingredients or "moments" of a single 
system of truth, which evolves out of their contradictions. In the fulfilled 
system, every moment emphasizes a single, one-sided aspect of the overall 
truth. As such, it is both true and false: false in its one-sided claim to 
exhaust the whole truth of the subject matter; and true in so far as, liber-
ated from that one-sided pretense, every philosophical doctrine contributes 
some nuclear, positive content to the evolution of overall truth. Taken as 
a "moment" of truth rather than its totality, each of the clashing philosophi-
cal doctrines has its inner necessity and is dialectically compatible with the 
others. This Hegelian view of the history of philosophy was in some re-
spects prefigured by Kant (see Yrrmiyahu Yovel, Kant and the Philosophy of 
History [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989], chapter 7). 
The bud disappears in the eruption of the flower: Hegel frequently uses im-
ages of organic life to illustrate what he means by "dialectical evolution, 
and the logical relations within it. 
Existence: In Hegel's ontology, the term Dasein indicates the state of sped-
fled being, a being which has received some primary characterization, but 
is still grasped as standing in merely external relations with everything 
else, and as lacking a rational essence at its ground. Higher than Dasein 
is the stage of Existenz, where we grasp the particular empirical existent 
as expressing a rational essence latent in it. That stage corresponds to the 
dualistic "Understanding," not yet to the level of "Reason," which rises 
from existence to actuality (Wirklichkeit). 
Their fluid nature: By "fluid" (and later Hplastic,) Hegel does not mean 
shapelessness, but structured flexibility. It is a nonrigid grid in which every 
ingredient refers us to all the others in a process of development and self-
shaping. Hegel wishes to expose the same kind of structure within 

Text and Running Commentary 
67 
moments
0 of an organic unity, in which they not only do not strug-
gle with each other, but one is as necessary as the other; and only 
this equal necessity constitutes the life of the whole. However, the 
contradiction ° of a philosophical system does not usually conceive 
of itself in that way, and the consciousness grasping the contradic-
philosophical thinking. Because it is the structure of true being, thinking 
too must be characterized by it. The process of thinking which leads to 
philosophical self-consciousness will be, for Hegel, the climax of being's 
own development and self-realization. Both ought to have the same struc-
ture, since they are two moments of one and the same unity. 
Moments: This term, borrowed from mechanics, is given new meaning in 
Hegel's dialectics. It points to a dynamic factor or ingredient, which 
works together with other contradictory ingredients to produce a com-
mon positive result. According to Hegel, the formalistic understanding 
tends to isolate any such moment and turn it into an independent entity 
or a rigid notion, losing the dialectical ""plasticity" which characterizes 
true being. In a system developing through time-like an organic body, 
a society, or human history-the dialectical moments appear diachroni-
cally, one after the other; yet within the fully actualized system they 
operate synchronically. This means that a dialectical movement persists 
even at the stage when a system is fully realized: now it operates as the 
principle which structures that system and repeatedly maintains it. In 
other words, the dialectical movement is interiorized into the system and 
becomes the constant, reciprocal transition in which each of the system's 
ingredients passes into the others and is recurrently rebuilt by them. 
Therefore, in an actualized dialectical system, every moment has an a ec-
static" existence transcending its limits. Even in the final stage no single 
ingredient is self-sufficient; each is negated, and passes into the others to 
be recurrently constituted through them as what it specifically is. Hence, 
actuality in Hegel, as in Aristotle, is not static, but an activity (dynamis, 
Wirklichkeit; the German word derived from wirken, to act). Hegel some-
times calls this process ccthe inner movement of the Concept" and uses the 
metaphors of "drunkenness" and '"'Bacchanalian whirl" to describe it. 
The contradiction: A second philosophical system which contradicts the 
first (as in Locke vs. Descartes). By "the consciousness which grasps a 
contradictionH Hegel means the historian, or observer, who grasps the 
contradiction while reflecting on both systems. (Hegel frequently uses 

68 
Text and Running Commentary 
tion does not know how to free it of one-sidedness, or to maintain 
it as free; it fails to recognize mutually necessary moments
0 in 
the shape of that which appears to be in conflict and opposition 
with itself. 
[3] 
The demand for such explanations
0 and the satisfaction of this 
demand easily count as the essential thing. Where could the inner 
side of a philosophical text be better expressed than in its goals and 
results? And how would these be known more precisely, 
0 if not 
through their difference from whatever else the period has pro-
duced in the same domain? But when such activity is taken to be 
more than the beginning of knowledge, 
0 when it is considered as 
actual knowledge, then we must count it among the devices which 
bypass the matter itself, and combine its actual neglect with the 
semblance of serious exertion. For the matter is not exhausted in 
this unusual style, which refers to real people and actual events by ab-
stract nouns, or converts adjectives into substantives.) 
Mutually necessary moments: The two opposing moments (like empiricism 
and rationalism) are equally necessary for the complete truth-the total-
ity-and for each other. Ordinary consciousness is driven by the law of 
noncontradiction (which suits the empirical and formal sciences, but not 
philosophy) to exclude one moment because of the other. This leads 
to a Hrigid" view of the role of contradiction. A dialectically educated 
consciousness will identify the opposing systems as equally necessary 
moments of the truth. 
Such explanations: Statements about the author's goal, her difference from 
other authors, and so forth. 
Precisely: The German word bestimmt (determined), or Bestimmung (de-
termination), is a key term in Hegel. It means being '"'specific," being 
determined at some level of precision, having this and that particular 
content. 
The beginning ofknowledge: At this point, Hegel starts to modify his critique 
of "mere conversation,, and prepares the ground for writing a preface. 
A philosophical preface, he now claims, can be useful if we regard its 
generalizations as a mere beginning calling for development and particu-
larization. We must not take its statements as adequately conveying the 
information to which they allude. 

Text and Running Commentary 
69 
its goal, 
0 but in its development; and the actual whole is not the 
result, but the result together with its becoming. The goal for itself 
is the nonliving universal, just as the tendency is the mere drive 
which lacks actuality, and the naked result is the corpse which the 
tendency has left behind. just as much, diversity is the matter, s 
boundary;
0 it exists where the matter ceases to be, or is what the 
matter is not. Such labor concerning goals and results, the distinc-
tion between one system and another, and their respective judg-
ments is therefore much easier work than it seems. For this activity, 
instead of concerning itself with the matter itself, is always hovering 
outside it; instead of residing in the matter and forgetting itself in 
it, 
0 such knowing always resorts to [greift nach] another, and re-
The matter is not exhausted in its goal: The term Sache means the real issue, 
that which is seen as essential, the actual subject matter of our talk or 
action. In Heger s use the word Sache (or die Sac he selbst, as distinguished 
from Ding, ((thing,,, which recalls the Kantian Ding-an-sich) also signifies 
actuality as a unity of bein& and thought. In this more systematic sense, 
the issue referred to is the philosophical subject matter in its actuality; and 
this cannot be exhausted by generalized results. It can only exist through 
the full dialectical process in which it is particularized and realized. Thus 
the philosophical result cannot be cut off from the process of its becom-
ing. The genesis of truth is an inseparable part of the philosopher,s essen-
tial subject matter; so he must either understand the result out of this 
process, or be left with a dead corpse instead of truth. 
Diversity is the matter's boundary: A philosopher explaining what distinguishes 
her work from others,-thus engaging in comparisons-conducts her dis-
course outside the actual subject matter. Hegel calls this "external reflec-
tion,': talking about something from the outside, or thinking about some-
thing without participating in its constitution. This echoes Spinoza, s 
critique of comparative thinking as external to being, though Hegel adds 
an idealist frame to it. 
Residing in the matter and forgetting itself in it: This is the necessary condition 
for avoiding external reflection and performing an "inner,, philosophical 
thinking. Philosophy is not about something; its thinking evolves and is 
actualized together with its object. Therefore, philosophical thinking must 
first ""tarry', or "·reside', within its content and even '"'1ose itself' in it. This 
also indicates that in philosophy there is no a priori method or schema 
by which thinking must proceed. Rather, the material itself should guide 

70 
Text and Running Commentary 
mains with itself rather than being with the matter and giving itself 
to it. To pass judgment on what has substance and content is easi-
est; grasping it is more difficult; and the hardest is to unite these 
two by performing its exhibition. 
0 
philosophical reflection and shape the structure emerging from it. The 
dialectical method, we shall see, is not a schema imposed on the subject 
matter from the start, but a structure emerging from it retrospectively. The 
philosopher lets the subject matter itself be her guide and, following its 
inner dynamics and constraints, also discovers its deficiencies-that which 
turns out to be lacking and called for by it-and traces the structure arising 
from the subject matter's evolution. Some might see here a phenomenolog-
ical approach in a quasi-Husserlian sense (which Hegel partly accepts); but 
seen in terms of Hegel's contemporary debate, this is a special kind of 
"intellectual intuition,, though not a mystical experience but obedience to 
the Sache's inner logic and development. Hegel rejects intellectual intuition 
as a special mental experience, romantic or super-rational. He demands to 
interpret it rationally, in terms of a logical structure and conceptual con-
straints. These structural elements can manifest themselves to us only if 
we follow the lead of the subject matter and refrain from imposing a priori 
abstractions upon it (including the law of noncontradiction). When, on the 
contrary, our thinking neglects the Sache and starts by concentrating on 
itself-for example, by investigating its own methodology (Descartes) or its 
own power and limits (Locke, Kant), or when it starts from laws that are 
said to govern every thought a priori-then it puts itself on the line rather 
than centering on reality. That viewpoint, says Hegel, is ''merely subjective'' 
because it always remains enclosed within its own domain. And it is onto-
logically empty, because the object-actual being-remains outside it. Ade-
quate philosophy does not apply ready-made formal laws of thought to an 
external object; it is rather the inner explication of the rational structure 
of the object itself (of being), as it evolves and alters its shapes in the process 
of its actualization, and as it eventually attains self-consciousness through 
human knowledge and culture. Thought fulfills a constitutive role in this 
evolution, not as an object-like logos governing outer nature, but as embod-
ied in human thoughts, acts, and artifacts; and thereby the object discloses 
itself also as subject. 
Peiforming its exhibition: Darstellung, as we mentioned above, is a key concept 
in Hegel as in Kant, though in a different sense. In Kant it means the 
exhibition or embodiment of a conceptual content within a medium of 

Text and Running Commentary 
71 
[ 4] 
The beginning of cultural education [Bildung], of working one's 
way out of the immediacy of substantial life, must always first consist 
in acquiring knowledge of universal principles and standpoints, and 
raising oneself to the thought of the matter in general. No less, one 
must learn to support or refute that thought with reasons, to capture 
the rich and concrete fullness with specific determinations, and to 
provide an orderly answer and serious judgment about it. This begin-
ning of Bildung will then have to give place, first, to the earnestness 
of life in its fullness, which leads to experiencing the matter itself; 
and second, if, in addition, the Concept's earnestness will descend 
to the depths [of the subject matter], then this kind of knowledge 
and judgment will retain an appropriate position in conversation. 
[ 5] 
The true shape in which truth exists can only be its scien-
tific system. The goal I set myself is to contribute to bringing 
philosophy nearer to the form of science-to help it renounce 
its name as love of Knowing, 
0 and become actual Know-
• 
intuition. Thus schematism is the Darstellung of the categories of the under-
standing. For Hegel, it means the full exposition of the philosophical system 
in the context of its evolution, whereby the ideas emerging in it are justified 
and refuted. It is impossible to exhibit philosophy by directly jumping to 
its final stage or ccconsequences." To present a philosophical truth, one 
must follow the stages of its becoming, exhibiting all parts of the system 
according to their mutual relations and evolution. This is also the only way 
to justify or ground the system. In a formal system, the doctrine and each 
of its parts possess an independent meaning and a separate truth-value; it 
is therefore possible to grasp the doctrine's meaning by a different proce-
dure than that used to justify it. In philosophy, however, the consequences 
have neither meaning nor a truth-value except as part of a totality which 
includes the process of their genesis; therefore, the same movement by 
which the system of philosophy evolves and is justified is also the procedure 
by which we can properly understand its meaning and exhibit it to others. 
A single process controls the system's evolution, its justification, its under-
standing, and its adequate exposition. 
Love of Knowing: Love indicates that we lack its object and are still searching 
for it. In wishing to put an end to .... the love of Knowing," Hegel proclaims 
his far-reaching pretension to bring the philosophical quest to an end. 
This is the idea of the H end of philosophy" in its historical version, already 

72 
Text and Running Commentary 
ing. 0 The inner necessity that knowing should become science lies 
in its nature: and the only satisfactory explanation ° of that necessity 
is the exhibition of philosophy itself. However, the external neces-
sity, so far as it is grasped in general, regardless of a person's contin-
gency and individual dispositions, is the same as the inner neces-
found in Kant. On the one hand, the true system of philosophy depends 
on its historical development; it cannot emerge atemporally from the 
head of some genius, be he a Plato or a Spinoza. Yet on the other hand, 
philosophical progress is not open-ended; it has an end, which Hegel 
believes has finally matured and-following Kant's philosophy, the French 
Revolution, and the Napoleonic code--can already be seen on the hori-
zon. When the final stage is realized, philosophy will overcome its histori-
cal character, transcend time, and become supratemporal. This means 
that it will continue to exist in time, but will no longer depend on it. 
This will realize eternity within time. The supratemporal character which 
Plato and other philosophers ascribe to philosophy from the start is at-
tained in Hegel through history and is the result of a process in time. 
(Moreover, in at least a metaphorical sense, time itself is said to come to 
an end when absolute Knowing emerges. By that Hegel cannot mean 
that time ceases as a sequential, continuous quantity, but as the bearer of 
qualitative novelty; since, in principle, nothing new can emerge, time,s 
progressive direction becomes the eternal recurrence of the same.) 
Actual Knowing: The Platonic ideal of sophia-wisdom-based on uncondi-
tioned knowledge (episternt). In Hegel this ideal awaits philosophy, at the 
end of a long and complex process of education. Philo-sophia is to become 
sophia: the Knowing mind will overcome eros, the element of love which 
implies lack and remoteness from its object, and will become actual 
knowledge and wisdom. While in Plato this process can be consummated 
in a single individual,s life, in Hegel it presupposes the history of the 
whole human race. The Phenomenology thus historicizes Plato's theory of 
education. A single individual, however talented, cannot jump beyond his 
or her period and attain absolute truth in one ahistoricalleap. All great 
philosophers express the immanent potential which their periods entail, 
and also its limitations, experienced as their own personal limitation, 
which drives them to seek new solutions. This process can end only with 
Habsolute Knowing,', into which all the major previous stages with their 
mutual contradictions are interiorized as partial "moments." 
The only satisfactory explanation: The complete justification of the system 
of philosophy is immanent and can be grasped only from within it. Being 

Text and Running Commentary 
73 
sity-shaped, that is, in the way in which time represents the 
existence of its moments. To demonstrate that the time has come
0 
for philosophy to be raised to Science is, therefore, the only true 
justification of the efforts pursuing this goal; for that would mani-
fest the goal's necessity even while realizing it. 
[6] 
I know that in placing the true shape of truth in its scientific 
character
0-or, which is the same, in asserting that the Concept 
circular and comprehensive, the system of truth includes its justification 
within itself as a kind of causa sui (cause of itself). In other words, its 
grounding does not depend on some singular, privileged item (evidence 
or axiom), but on the mutual dialectical relation linking its parts. The 
necessity of philosophy becoming an apodictic system thus follows from 
its own nature. This inner necessity can be grasped and justified only by 
someone who already knows the final system, having worked internally 
through all the parts of the Logic, and, eventually, of the whole Hegelian 
system. Still, the external necessity that philosophy should become system-
atic is exhibited by the Phenomenology. The Phenomenology expounds that 
necessity under a different configuration-temporal sequence. It follows 
the same logic that governs the system, s formation as it manifests itself in 
the evolution of human consciousness in historical time. This is made 
possible because, in Hegel, the inner, supratemporal necessity of absolute 
Knowing must externalize itself as a historical need. Every philosophical 
standpoint and every historical configuration needs to reconcile its contra-
dictions by evolving into a new form and-when the time is ripe-by 
passing into the complete system. Hegel offers here the nucleus of his well-
known doctrine that the system of philosophy and the history of philosophy 
are two facets of the same organic whole, one existing within time and 
empirical history, the other transcending time and existing in a purely con-
ceptual manner, which however, presupposes history and derives from it. 
The time has come: In view of the previous note, the expression "now is 
the time" is not an exhortation, but a systematic claim: historical time 
has already ripened for that purpose. Yet this is only the threshold of the 
New Era. Before philosophical knowledge is fully actualized, we can jus-
tify the passage towards it only genetically, by historical need. The genetic 
justification of philosophy comes first in the order of time, although the 
system will justify itself also internally and become self-grounded. 
In its scientific character: The word "scientific, indicates here a systematic 
character, which endows a body ofknowledge with unshakable (apodic-
tic) certainty. In philosophy, this occurs in a different mode than in the 

74 
Text and Running Commentary 
alone is the element in which truth has existence-! seem to contra-
diet a certain opinion ° [Vorstellung] and its consequences, which are 
as pretentious as they are widespread in the conviction of our age. It 
does not seem superfluous, therefore, to explain this contradiction, 
although my explanation cannot be anything here but a mere assur-
ance, just like the assurance it opposes. Now, if the true exists only 
in that-or rather, only as that-which sometimes is called intu-
ition, sometimes immediate Knowing of the absolute, religion, or 
being0-not being in the center of divine love, but the being of that 
empirical sciences-mainly, in the "organic" mode discussed above (and 
further below). 
A certain opinion: By grounding the absolute (truth) of philosophy in its 
comprehensive system, Hegel opposes the conventional view that philo-
sophical knowledge is made absolute by some special mental experience. 
Hegel thinks, among others, of his former friend and current oppon-
ent, Schelling, and also of the doctrine of irrational "faith" promoted by 
F. H. Jacobi. These philosophers made absolute Knowing depend upon 
a direct grasp unmediated by conceptual reason-either through imme-
diate faith, or by an experience of intellectual intuition. Hegel fights the 
Concept's war on two fronts: against romantic irrationalism he demands 
that philosophy be grounded on reason; and against shallow rationalism 
he denies that reason can be reduced to mere ((Understanding.'' The 
absolute, Hegel holds, must be attained through rational thinking: irra-
tional experiences only provide emptiness and illusion. Yet for reason to 
reach the absolute, it must be construed as dialectical rationality, which 
recognizes the positive role of negation, and is linked to life, feeling, 
and being, all while retaining conceptual constraints and the capacity to 
universalize (= the basic conditions of rationality). 
Intuition, ... immediate Knowing ... , religion or being: the joint critique is 
of Schelling, Holderlin,jacobi, and romantic metaphysics (see the introduc-
tion above). A special target here is "intellectual intuition," which is sup-
posed to grasp absolute truth by an original (and for Hegel, mysterious) 
experience of the intellect. Kant had used the concept of '"'"intellectual intu-
ition" to define the limits of human reason, and gave it a precise cognitive 
structure: it is a mode of knowledge which, by knowing the particular, 
allows us to directly know the universal principle governing it, and vice 
versa: if we know the universal principle, we can directly know all the 
particulars belonging to its range. Kant's Critique of Pure Reason is based 

Text and Running Commentary 
75 
love itself-then philosophy, too, will have to be exhibited in a form 
opposing the Concept's. The absolute should not then be con-
ceived, but felt and intuited; not its Concept but its feeling and 
intuition should guide the word and be expressed in speech. 
[7] 
In order to grasp the appearance of this demand in its general 
context, 
0 we must view it within the phase in which self-con-
scious spirit stands at present. Here we see that spirit has gone 
beyond the substantive life
0 it had previously led in the element 
of thought
0-beyond the immediacy of its faith, beyond the sa tis-
upon the denial that humans can have such a privileged mode of cognition. 
By contrast, some of Kant's followers wished to restore an element of 
intellectual intuition to philosophy, but each construed it differently. For 
Schelling it is a privileged mental and experiential faculty (the inscrutable 
origin of all the other faculties); whereas Hegel accepts Kant's structural 
definition of intellectual intuition, but claims, against Kant, that it can be 
realized in human cognition through a dialectical logic of philosophy. Of 
course, it then is no longer intuition, but (a special kind of) conception. 
In its general context: Following his rather sarcastic description of Schelling 
and the romantics, Hegel proceeds to explain why the philosophical culture 
of the time must produce such positions. At the present historical juncture, 
the "self-conscious spirit" (the subject matter of the Phenomenology) occu-
pies the following position. On the one hand, it has broken away from the 
immediate, unexamined life in which it had previously felt complaisance 
and plenitude. From that doubtful paradise, spirit was expelled by the 
power of reflection and universal thought (Enlightenment) which, however, 
drove it to the other extreme-a world of mere abstractions. Cut off from 
concrete life, it now suffers from the acute sense of loss of reality and 
nostalgia for it. That nostalgia drives spirit to seek solid reality through 
irrational means-renouncing the intellect's achievements by blurring all 
distinctions and submerging itself in a chaos of opaque experiences. 
Substantive life: This is life marked by conformism and unreflective confi-
dence in one's existence and environment. In itself, this life is already 
transfused with thought, because it contains conceptions and world-
images, norms, and traditions. Yet, thought itself is still immediate at 
this state, enclosed within life's plenitude without performing a critical 
reflection about it. 
In the element of thought: Hegel here has in mind a high level of substantial 
life, structured by a rich culture and tradition. Yet people are submerged 

76 
Text and Running Commentary 
faction and certainty which consciousness possessed of its recon-
ciliation with the essence
0 [Wesen°] and its general, inner and 
outer, present. Spirit has not only gone over to the other ex-
treme-to a non-substantive reflection of itself in itself-but has 
gone beyond that, too. Not only did it lose its essential life, it is 
also conscious of its loss, 
0 and of the finitude which [now] is its 
in that tradition in a "substantial" manner without critical reflection. 
Hegel may be thinking of medieval culture and more generally, of any 
tradition-oriented culture like that of the ancien regime. Life in that conser-
vative way gives a sense of concreteness and solidity, as if it were an inert 
thing. Culture, knowledge, society is experienced as a substance. Yet in 
its essence, this culture is not an inert substance but "the self-conscious 
spirit," though only in a potential and alienated mode. 
Its reconciliation with the essence: Here, consciousness is not cut off from the 
real substance of life but is reconciled with it. The person feels at one with 
this world; but this takes place dogmatically, without reflection, as if the 
spirit were an inert substance. Hegel's philosophy makes conscious ratio-
nal reflection a necessary condition for all spirituality and truth, but goes 
beyond them to a third stage in which rational thought-the very same 
power that has undermined the dogmatic universe-is reconfigured in 
such a way as to restore the sense of plenitude and reconciliation with the 
absolute, which was lost to human life when thought had first become 
conscious and critical. While this project puts Hegel at odds with romantic 
irrationalism, it also explains why, at the same time, Hegel speaks favorably 
of the romantics' '"'"nostalgia, towards the plenitude of life, which he con-
siders a legitimate and necessary goal. Hegel thus transforms the roman-
tics' nostalgia from a past-oriented into a future-oriented desire. 
Wesen in German means both essence (principal meaning) and a being or 
an entity. Hegel mostly uses the first, but sometimes connotes both by 
the same word. (Miller chose to translate it '"'essential being." I prefer the 
more classic translation ""essence," which context will make us read with 
or without the other connotation). 
Conscious of its loss: Herein lies the driving force of the Phenomenology: it 
is not simply the fact of being torn from the lost unity, but the conscious-
ness of this rupture which generates the drive to overcome it. Hegel's 
doctrine is not nostalgic; there is nothing attractive in the primordial 
state: compact, dogmatic, immediate life is contrary to man's spiritual 
essence and not worth living. As rational creatures, humans can elevate 

Text and Running Commentary 
77 
content. Turning away from the pig's leftover food,
0 confessing 
how badly it is doing and cursing its state, spirit demands of phi-
losophy not so much to provide it with knowledge of what it is, 
as to make it regain that [lost] substantiality and dependability of 
being. Hence, philosophy should satisfy this need not by opening 
up 
0 the tightly closed substance and raising it to consciousness-
not by bringing chaotic consciousness back to a thought-based 
order and to the simplicity of the Concept-but rather by dump-
ing the distinctions of thought, suppressing the differentiating 
Concept, and putting forth the feeling of being, which confers 
not so much insight, as edification. 
0 The beautiful, the sacred, the 
their life only if intellectual reflection awakens in them-with all the 
sorrow, alienation, destruction, self-criticism, and the sense of rupture 
between a person and his world which this awakening will cause. Aware-
ness of this rupture produces an acute sense of deprivation and the desire 
to restore the lost unity. Yet this cannot be satisfied by an impossible 
regression to the past, either in the form of nostalgia (abandoning oneself 
to the pure experience of yearning), or by a romantic attempt to retrieve 
the plenitude of the past through artificial and possibly violent means; it 
can be satisfied only by going forward within the element of reason and 
developing it further. The rational principle which, as ccunderstanding," 
has produced the rupture, must now overcome it as "reason." It ought 
to evolve further, until it produces a re-conciliation, which must be at-
tained not at the expense of reason and self-consciousness but through 
them-and on the basis also of the social and practical life which reason 
structures and expresses in concepts. From here, too, Hegel derives the 
need for a new philosophical logic expressing the power of onward-going 
life and not only formal thinking. 
Turning away from the pig's leftover food: This comes fron1 the New Testa-
ment story of the Prodigal Son (Luke 15:16 and passim), who was so 
hungry he was ready to eat the husks the pig was fed. 
Not by opening up: Although that would have been the adequate way-
breaking up the compactness of substance and raising it to rational self-
consciousness. The romantics reject this answer; preferring vague feeling 
to the Concept, they confuse all distinctions. 
Edification (Erbauung): A sort of arousal and uplifting produced, for exam-
ple, by a lofty sermon or a vague yet deep experience which one cannot 
quite clarify to oneself. Hegel sees edification as unphilosophical and op-

78 
Text and Running Commentary 
eternal, religion and love are the bait needed to arouse the desire 
to bite. Not the Concept but ecstasy, not the cool progressing 
necessity of the subject matter, but effervescent enthusiasm, are 
to sustain and extend the richness of substance. 
To this demand corresponds a strenuous effort, which looks irri-
tated and almost zealous, to tear people away from their immersion 
in the sensual, the vulgar, and the singular, 
0 and direct their gaze 
toward the stars; as if, forgetful of the divine, they were about to 
satisfy themselves with dust and water, like worms. In earlier times 
they had a heaven richly studded with ideas and images. Everything 
that is had its meaning in the thread of light linking it to heaven; 
and instead of abiding in this [-worldly] presence, the gaze of people 
followed the thread of light outside this world to a divine essence-
to a transcendent presence (if such a phrase is possible). It took 
coercive power to redirect the spirit, s eye back to the terrestrial 
domain and attach it to it;
0 it took a long time until that clarity, 
posed to the "Concept.', Philosophy must be "scientific," not edifying; it 
has to do with knowledge and understanding, not with preaching and 
creating sublime, yet opaque feelings. (Not accidentally, philosophers op-
posing the goal of philosophy as science-like Rorty today-argue that 
philosophy ought to be edifying.) 
The sensual, the vulgar, and the singular: The new era, of which Hegel thinks 
himself the philosopher, restores to this-worldly existence the value it 
lost in the Middle Ages. Hegel objects to the philosophical preaching 
which negates this world in the name of a hidden transcendent world. 
Although he, too, seeks to rise from vulgar sensuality to reason, Hegel 
is not ready on that account to abandon the terrestrial, sensual element 
in reality: his goal is to provide the sensual and terrestrial with a new 
significance derived from the rational essence they embody. Hegel is 
therefore a philosopher of immanence. Philosophy is to give a new mean-
ing and a higher, even divine, value to this world in all its concreteness. 
This goes against the transcendent tendency which despises the world 
and makes it depend upon the Hthread of light linking it with heaven." 
To redirect the spirit='s eye back to the terrestrial domain and attach it to it: 
The return from the supernatural to the immanent world was expressed, 
among other ways, in the high value which Bacon, Galilei, Locke, and 
others restored to empirical experience, following the long medieval pe-

Text and Running Commentary 
79 
which only otherworldly things used to possess, could be reintro-
duced into the muddle and blur in which the sense of this world 
was lying; and a long time was necessary before the attention to the 
present as such, which we call experience, could be made valid and 
interesting. But now the opposite need seems to be felt: sensibility 
has become so strongly rooted in the worldly domain, that the same 
violent force is needed today to raise it above it. Spirit shows itself 
to be so impoverished, that like a wanderer in the desert who longs 
for a simple gulp of water, spirit seems to be craving to refresh itself 
with the meager feeling of the divine in general. From this little 
which satisfies spirit, one can tell how great its loss is. 
[9] 
But this humble satisfaction in receiving or parsimony in giving 
are unfit for Science. He who seeks edification only, who demands 
to shroud the diversity of his earthly existence and of thought in a 
foggy mist, and to bask in the indefinite enjoyment of that indistinct 
divinity, will see for himself where he can find it; he will easily find 
a way to stir himself into enthusiasm and thus pump himself up. 
But philosophy must beware of the will to be edifying. 
[ 1 OJ 
Even less should this humble sufficiency, which has renounced 
Science, pretend that its enthusiasm and opacity
0 are higher than 
riod (and scholastic metaphysics) in which sense experience had been 
despised. Hegel views this restoration as a major turn toward, and condi-
tion for, the rise of modernity. Contrary to what is sometimes believed 
of him, Hegel does not deprecate experience; on the contrary, as testified 
by our text, he sees great historical progress in restoring value and validity 
to what Hwe call experience." However, attachment to sensual experience 
is today overpowering and conceived as the essential thing rather than a 
necessary moment of truth. This one-sidedness manifests itself in philo-
sophical empiricism, in the metaphysics of vague feeling, and in the theol-
ogy that goes with it. 
Enthusiasm and opacity: Hegel now criticizes the call for "enthusiasm'' in 
religion and mysticism, which rejects the power of the intellect in favor 
of an ecstatic rapture considered more spiritual. This haziness sacrifices 
the conceptual distinctions in order to create an empty feeling of depth. 
(Hegel's sarcasm against (C enthusiasm" recalls Kant's disdain for its par-
ent-concept, Schwiirmerei; yet Kant would so qualify Hegel's own pre-
sumptions to attain the absolute.) 

80 
Text and Running Commentary 
Science. Believing itself to be residing in the center and in the very 
depth, such prophetic talk looks down with disdain on specific de-
terminateness (horos), and intentionally distances itself from the 
Concept and from necessity, as belonging to a reflection which 
resides in the finite alone. However, just as there is an empty 
breadth, so there is empty depth; just as the extension of substance 
can pour itself in a finite diversity without a unifying force holding 
it together, so there is an intensity without content, holding itself 
as pure force without extension, 
0 which is the same as superficiality. 
Spirit's force is only as great as its externalization;
0 its depth is only 
as deep as it dares expand and lose itself in its expansion. When 
this substantive and Conceptless knowing
0 pretends that it has sunk 
Pure force without extension: In Hegel's dialectics, a force lacking outward 
manifestation signifies that the force does not actually exist. What these 
philosophers consider as their greatest discovery is an unreal thing, analo-
gous to an occult quality. 
Spirit's force is only as great as its externalization: Inwardness is meaning-
less unless it expresses itself outwardly: this is a major element of He-
gel's dialectic. Every inward essence, every hidden potentiality will re-
ceive its meaning as inwardness only in so far as it has been manifested 
in the external world. This does not mean that Hegel dismissed the 
concept of interiority in the manner of positivists or behaviorists. On 
the contrary, the various forms of interiority ('c essence/"' ccprinciple '" 
ccforce,"'"' cctalent," "potentiality,"'"' and so forth) play a fundamental role in 
Hegel-'s system. Yet they receive their status qua interiority from being 
exteriorized, that is, embodied in a series of empirical manifestations 
(actions, events, particulars, and the like). On the other hand, no empiri-
cal series is actual if it exists as a discrete aggregate of particulars with 
no inner essence or power expressing itself in them. An empirical entity, 
or set, is actual only insofar as it embodies an inner principle of essence. 
Thus each of the two opposites (inner and outer, essence and empirical 
existence) receives its meaning and distinct status from their mutual 
constitution. 
Substantive and Conceptless knowing: A vague inner feeling which cannot 
be articulated or expressed as a Concept. 

Text and Running Commentary 
81 
the selfs ownness [Eigenheit]
0 in the essence and is philosophizing 
in truth and sanctity, it conceals from itself that [in fact], because 
it disdains measure and determinateness, it does not give itself to 
God, but, at times, gives itself [rather] to the contingency of the 
content, and at other times submits the content to its own arbi-
trariness. In abandoning themselves to the unrestrained ferment 
of substance, [these people] believe that by shrouding self-con-
sciousness and renouncing the understanding, they become God, s 
own [God's elect], to whom he imparts wisdom in their sleep. 
And, to be sure, what they thus receive and engender in their 
sleep are dreams. 
The selfs ownness [Eigenheit]: The "ownness'' meant here is that which 
distinguishes one individual self from others (not a personal trait 
but the selfs antic uniqueness, its being a separate entity). The mys-
tics claim to have unified the self with the essence of the whole uni-
verse, and thereby with the deity; but because they follow a nonconcep-
tual way, they inevitably miss their goal. The self is neither preserved 
in the mystical experience, nor built by it, but is rather sunk and lost. 
Worse, the mystical self is not even sunk and dispersed in God-the 
true essence of being-but in a shapeless mass of subjective feelings 
and arbitrary images. Because the mystics despise reason's lucidity, ne-
cessity, and conceptual distinctions, they miss the actual character of 
the deity and lose themselves within an empty illusion of God. Note 
that Hegel's criticism is partly immanent; his own philosophy also leads 
in the end to the selfs dialectical unity with the absolute (i.e., the deity); 
but this involves neither a mystical leap nor the dissolution of the Self. 
In Hegel, the self s individuality is built (or constituted) rather than 
destroyed through its relation with the absolute; and this relation, 
moreover, presupposes the complex mediation of rational concepts, so-
cial practice, and a long historical evolution. In the final analysis, Hegel, 
like Plato and Spinoza, shares the ultimate goals of mysticism, but re-
jects the imaginary ways that the mystic suggests for attaining them. 
Those goals can be achieved only in a rational way, which calls for a 
different view of rationality-one based upon dialectic and mediated 
by history. 

82 
Text and Running Commentary 
[ 11] 
It is further not hard to see that our time is a time of birth 
0 
and transition into a new era. Spirit
0 has broken away from its 
former world of existence and imaging [vorstellen]; it is about 
to sink all that into the past, and is busy shaping itself anew. 
Our time is a time ofbirth: When writing the Preface Hegel had a deep sense 
of a new historical era standing at the gate. The text vividly describes the 
dynamics of historical transformation-how, from the decadence of the 
old world, a new world emerges as both a continuation and a new qualita-
tive leap, as in childbirth. The metaphor of the Nativity hovers over this 
text. In 1807, when Hegel and the new world announced by Napoleon 
were still young, Hegel seemed to believe that the approaching era was 
to conclude the whole historical process: henceforth everything would 
be an extension or repetition of a realized principle. Beside the negative 
symptoms announcing the new world-the sense of decadence, the bore-
dom, the irony and frivolity with which sensitive people regarded their 
present culture-Hegel identifies positive signals, especially Kanfs philos-
ophy and the French Revolution. In Kant's philosophy, the human subject 
recognized its autonomy and constitutive role in shaping knowledge, eth-
ics, and objective reality; and the French Revolution gave that idea a politi-
cal expression and propagated the principle of freedom. Yet, these two 
revolutionary innovations took a one-sided form. Kant remained a subjec-
tive idealist and a philosopher of finitude; to overcome its flaws, his philos-
ophy needed a synthesis with Spinoza (and Aristotle), a task which Hegel 
set himself to perform. And the French Revolution needed to overcome 
its abstract and ahistorical principle of Enlightenment, which severed it 
from reality and led to terror. The first part of the Phenomenology offers 
a theoretical Aufhebung of the Enlightenment, just as Napoleon (who at 
the time was crushing the Prussian army near Hegel's city of Jena) was 
performing a similar Aufhebung in the social and practical world. Unlike 
Fichte, Hegel was not a German nationalist; he saw Napoleon as a dialec-
tical agent of freedom, expressing the H cunning of reason" which operates 
in history. Although motivated by ambition and egoistic desires, Napo-
leon was propagating and institutionalizing the principles of the French 
Revolution in Europe. By embodying these principles in a code of law 
and various political institutions, Napoleon, in Hegelian terms, was mak-
ing an even greater contribution to the new era than the original revolu-
tion. Hegel's sense of an imminent new era in world history was later 
diminished and sobered by the Restoration. His other major works al-

Text and Running Commentary 
83 
Of course, spirit is never at rest, but is in ever-progressive 
movement. 
0 But this resembles the birth of a child where, after a 
long quiet nourishing, the gradual, merely additive progress is 
broken by the first breath and-in a qualitative leap-a child is 
born. 
0 Similarly, self-shaping spirit matures slowly and silently 
ready point to more realistic and sober expectations. Yet even then he 
seems not to have abandoned the vision of a last historical phase looming 
on the horizon, although the horizon now receded to greater distance 
and the road to it became far more marred by obstacles. 
Spirit: Here the concept of spirit appears in its full significance. For Hegel, 
Spirit writ large is not simply identical with human history (as Kojeve 
famously interpreted it), but is the essential principle of history-it is his-
tory together with the inner meaning and significance it reveals. As such 
spirit is both historical and transhistorical, and each of these aspects of 
spirit mediates the other. Spirit in the global sense exists through actual 
human beings, evolves with their changing culture, endows them with 
essential meaning, and attains its absolute state through them. In that 
respect, spirit is an autonomous principle assuming the form of otherness 
and self-alienation on its way to self-actualization. From a theologico-
historical standpoint, spirit in the global sense is the divine principle 
which dialectically realizes itself through the secular, worldly spirit of 
particular human beings, including their practical lives, actions, laws, and 
institutions, and also their art, religion, and philosophy. When Hegel says 
that spirit stands at the threshold of a new era-presumably the last-he 
alludes to a kind of messianism whose attributes are secular, though its 
significance remains religious. 
Ever-progressive movement: Spirit is a permanent activity transcending any 
given particular state. In history, this movement progresses in a semilinear 
way modified by detours and regressions. When the end is attained, spirit 
remains an activity, but its essential movement is ·interiorized and be-
comes circular. Within the final system, spirit still transcends every partial 
element which it professes to capture or express the whole of (notice the 
image of "Baechle whirl," below). This maintains spirifs active character 
even at the stage of its actuality; but now its transcending takes place 
within the system rather than pointing beyond it. 
A child is born: The vivid text before us undoubtedly alludes to the myth 
of the Nativity (perhaps even to the phrase et homo factus est, as recited 
in the Mass). If so, Hegel is saying that the imminent historical change is 

84 
Text and Running Commentary 
toward a new shape, while shedding the edifice of its former world 
piece by piece. The tottering of the old world is indicated by few 
symptoms only. The frivolity and boredom which cut into that 
which [still] subsists, and a vague premonition of something un-
known, are harbingers of a change that is about to come. This 
gradual crumbling, which does not change the physiognomy of the 
whole, is broken by the rising day which, in a flash, outlines the 
features of the new world. 
[12] 
However, it is essential to bear in mind that the new [world] has 
no more perfect actuality then the newborn child. Its first emerging 
is its immediacy or Concept. 
0 Just as a building is not finished when 
its foundations are laid, so the attained Concept of the whole is not 
the whole itself. If we wish to see an oak in the strength of its trunk, 
the spread of its top, and the abundance of its foliage, we shall not 
be satisfied if an acorn is shown to us instead. So also Science, the 
crown of a world of spirit, 
0 is not fulfilled in its beginning. The begin-
ning of the new spirit is the product of a far-reaching upheaval in 
multiform cultural shapes; it is the prize given to a tortuous and 
diverse way, which requires an equally diverse effort and exertion. 
This beginning is the whole which returned to itself from succession 
comparable in magnitude to the birth of Christ. Another allusion to the 
Nativity (with vivid descriptions of the mother's birth-pangs and push-
ing), appears at the end of the Phenomenology, precisely where the birth 
of Christianity from the pagan world is discussed. 
Its immediacy or Concept: By "immediacy,'' Hegel means the principle's 
existence in a preliminary and undeveloped way. By ('Concept," he means 
here an abstract generality still lacking development and realization (see 
"simple Concept," below). Yet this abstraction is already a Hegelian Con-
cept (Begriff) in embryo. Popular use opposes the sense in which the 
term Begriffis used in Hegel's systematic work, where it indicates concrete 
universality-that is, a universality that is spelled out in relevant particu-
lars and has attained detailed embodiment in empirical reality. The two 
senses of HConcept" might mislead the reader, but can be distinguished 
according to context. 
The crown of a world of spirit: In Hegel's system, philosophy, when accom-
plished, is the conceptualization of ''absolute spirit." 

Text and Running Commentary 
85 
and its own extension,
0 and became a simple Concept.
0 But the actu-
ality of this simple Concept consists in letting those configurations 
that have become moments develop again and reshape themselves-
now within their new element and the meaning that has arisen. 
[13] While the first appearance of the new world is still only 
the whole shrouded by its simplicity-or is that whole's univer-
sal ground-consciousness, on the other hand, still retains the 
richness of the former world
0 present in its inner recollec-
Succession and its own extension: Time and space are essential to spirit, be-
cause it attains actuality only by being deployed in the empirical world and 
returning to itself through its temporal evolution. As we said above, the 
modern era is the beginning of spirit's self-reinstatement, its return-to-self 
from its dispersal and alienation in the external world; yet spirit's return-
to-self starts in merely abstract form. The revolutionary new concept arises 
at first as a "mere" concept. In order for it to take concrete shape, all the 
previous cultural forms which have made the final stage possible (and are 
latently preserved in it) must evolve and and make it actual. 
A simple Concept: Again, the term indicates an abstract, unrealized Concept. 
Whatever is "simple" is empty, impoverished, or a potential beginning 
without actuality. Hegel therefore opposes the philosophers who believe 
(like Descartes, the empiricists, and the positivists) that the building blocks 
of knowledge are simple units. Hegel argues that no simple entities exist 
at all, because everything depends on the negation and mediation of some-
thing else, especially of some universal factor. True, some things are sim-
pler than others; but the simpler is also the less actual, the more impover-
ished and abstract. And mere undistinguished 'being" is the dullest and 
emptiest concept of all. (In contradistinction to those, from Plato to Hei-
degger, who made being the most important philosophical concept.) 
Still retains the richness of the former world: The diverse, empirical existence 
which spirit had in the past. Dasein in Hegel's vocabulary means CCBeing-
there" (or existence), and should not be confused with actuality (Wirklich-
keit). Not everything which exists or is there (ist da) is actual. Thus, spirit's 
past modes of existence, though part of objective reality, were never ac-
tual, because existence had not attained in them the ontological level of 
"actuality." A finer distinction is drawn between Dasein and Existenz. The 
latter is the external empirical manifestation of an inner rational essence 
or principles; yet Dasein has no such essence manifested in it, but is a 
merely particular and contingent mode of being. (The English language 

86 
Text and Running Commentary 
tion. 
0 In the newly appearing shape, consciousness misses the 
breadth and specificity of the content;
0 even more, it misses the 
cultivation of form, 
0 by which distinctions are set with certainty 
and ordered according to their solid relations. Without this culti-
vation science lacks Understandability [Verstiindigkeit], and looks 
has no special words to distinguish between these two categories, so both 
are rendered as "existence.") 
Its inner recollection: This German term (Erinnerung) has a systematic func-
tion in Hegers work, meaning both memory or recollection (the conven-
tional sense) and interiorization. Memory, the mental preservation of past 
experiences and cognitions is a form of interiorization; as such it is essential 
to the dialectic. Every dialectical Aujhebung involves some content whose 
deficient form is negated and abolished, but whose essential nature is pre-
served at a higher level of articulation. Preservation is made possible by 
interiorization, which is a kind of memory, either conscious (as in mental 
or cultural systems) or merely organic memory. Interiorization in one of 
these forms is a necessary condition for a dialectical process, in which the 
negation of negation does not revert the process to its point of departure, 
but creates a more complex new quality. Thus the first original negation 
is not annihilated by the second. They are both preserved in the subject 
or Self which undergoes the process and, together with the consequences 
which result from them, become an organic part of that subjecf s history. 
This analysis makes clear that dialectical logic is only suited to subject-like 
entities, mental or at least organic-that is, living, conscious, or cultural 
systems, whose new states are capable of incorporating the negations of 
earlier states, and to preserve them as an ingredient (or "moment"). On 
the other hand, dialectical logic is unsuitable to inert or self-same enti-
ties-atoms, numbers, simple "facts," univocal terms in a logical calculus, 
fixed propositions (p, q, r,s), statements in daily discourse, in legal dis-
putes, and so forth, as well as any other ''positivistic,, item lacking interi-
orization and presumed to be simply what it is; for these are subject to 
formal logic. It follows that the genuine domain of dialectic is spirit. 
Dialectic requires a capacity for memory, that is, interiorization, be it even 
an unconscious or merely organic interiorization. A so-called materialistic 
dialectic is therefore an incoherent concept for Hegel; and so is any at-
tempt to capture the dialectic by a formal schema. (It is true that Hegel 
has a dialectical crphilosophy of nature,'' but this, to be coherent, must be 
understood as applying to the philosophy of nature, to the changing Con-

Text and Running Commentary 
87 
as if it were the esoteric possession of a few singular individuals: 
an esoteric possession-because it is present at first only in its 
Concept of inwardness; and of a few singular individuals-because 
its unextended appearance makes its existence singular. Only that 
which is fully determined is also exoteric,
0 capable of conceptual-
ization [begreiflich],
0 and ofbeing learnt and made everyone's pos-
session. The understandable [verstiindige]
0 form is the road to Sci-
ence which is open to all and equal to all; and the demand to 
access reason's [mode of] Knowing
0 through the understanding 
cepts of natural phenomena (like physicalism, magnetism, life, et cetera) 
but not to particular, inert items. The latter's only possible dialectic is 
negative-they turn out not to be the real entities they purport to be, but 
to have their reality in something higher, like an organism or a cultural 
entity. Even the fact that nature is considered a moment of spirit does 
not exempt self-same inert natural entities from being nondialectical in 
all but this basic negative sense. 
The breadth and specifidty of the content: The principle has not yet been 
worked out and deployed in relevant particulars-the various cultural 
forms which will be discussed in the Phenomenology. 
The cultivation of form: Shaping the new principle rationally, as a system of 
conceptual distinctions, is necessary in order to make absolute Knowing 
intelligible to every rational person, instead of its being the esoteric prop-
erty of the few. For Hegel, this condition does not concern the system's 
presentation merely, but its very essence. If the system is to express actual 
reality, which is the active logos, then it must be rational in itself: this is a 
condition for its truth (or actuality) and not only for its accessibility. That 
the system should be open to everyone follows from its essence. Corres-
pondingly, the inherent form of the philosophical Science and the form 
in which it must be presented are the same. 
Exoteric: This term refers to being open to the many; the opposite of esoteric. 
Capable of conceptualization [begreiflich]: The context indicates this transla-
tion, rather than the use of begriff in its technical sense. 
The understandable [verstiindige]: Discursively intelligible: from Verstand, dis-
cursive reasoning. 
Reason
7S [mode of] Knowing: The English adjective "rational" does not ren-
der the specific me~ning of verniinftig in this sentence, which discusses 
the understanding (Verstand) as a bridge to reason (Vernunft). 

88 
Text and Running Commentary 
is a justified demand which consciousness makes in approaching 
Science. ° For the understanding is thinking, the pure 1° in general; 
and the understandable is that which is already known [ das Be-
kannte ], 0 which is common to Science and to the unscientific con-
sciousness, by which the latter can accede to Science. 
[ 14] 
The science which only begins, and has not yet gained complete-
ness of detail or perfection of form, is thereby exposed to reproach. 
But if the reproach is aimed at the essence of Science, 
0 it is as 
justified demand which consciousness makes in approaching Science: Philo-
sophical Science must satisfy the need of the individual consciousness, 
which refuses to accept truth on the force of external authority or conven-
tion, but demands being able to testify to this truth and recognize it as 
its own truth. This requires philosophy to involve itself from the start 
with the individual consciousness, to adopt its standpoint, and evolve 
dialectically along with it. The flaws and contradictions which arise in 
every stage of philosophy,s evolution are then experienced by the individ-
ual consciousness as its own; so it is driven to overcome them and move 
onwards, to new tentative solutions and to broader, more coherent stand-
points, until, in the end, universal truth arises as the self-development of 
the individual consciousness itself. In this way the genesis of the system 
of philosophy and the evolution of individual consciousnesses mediate 
one another within a common process. 
The pure I: According to Kant, understanding is the principle which con-
nects different concepts or representations; and the ground of the under-
standing is the (Cpure, I, that is, the self-conscious subject which ascribes 
the diverse representations to itself in the unity of a single consciousness. 
Hegel further develops this idea. Thinking is the activity of the subject 
who, as I, is already at work in the nonscientific consciousness, and by 
whom the latter can rise to the level of philosophical Science. 
That which is already known [das Bekannte]: When nonscientific conscious-
ness-the ordinary unformed mind-attempts to know, it relies on that 
which seems familiar or reasonable to it, based on its previous experience. 
Although this cannot provide truth, it starts a process in which the I and 
the understanding are already latently at work, thus providing a lever 
for further dialectical progress, the beginning of a long movement to-
wards truth. 
Aimed at the essence of Science: If the claim tends to negate the very possibil-
ity of absolute Knowing (as both the empiricists and the rationalists of 

Text and Running Commentary 
89 
unjustified as the refusal to recognize the demand for the well-
formed development we discussed above. This conflict seems to be 
the foremost knot which contemporary scientific culture is strug-
gling to undo, but does not quite fully understand. One side flaunts 
the richness of the material, and the [virtue of] understandability, 
while the other side disdains the latter (to say the least) and flaunts 
immediate rationality [Verniinftigkeit] and divinity. Even if the first 
side is reduced to silence, either by the force of truth alone or 
because of the other side's fervor, and even if it feels beaten in 
what concerns the fundamental issue, it is still unsatisfied in its just 
demands, which remain unfulfilled. Only half its silence is due to 
its opponent's victory; the other half derives from the boredom 
and indifference which follow from a constantly aroused expecta-
tion, when promises are not fulfilled. 
[ 15] 
Concerning content, others make it easy for themselves to have 
a broad extension. They draw a great deal of material into their 
territory, namely, that which has already been known and ar-
ranged;0 and in busying themselves mostly with curiosities and 
finite understanding, including Kant, maintain), then it cannot be ac-
cepted, just as one must reject the romantic demand that absolute Know-
ing be realized without the understanding. Hegel's targets here are not 
sufficiently clear. On the one hand, he seems to allude to the philosophy 
of the Enlightenment, in its three major trends of rationalism, empiri-
cism, and Kantian criticism. Empiricism flaunts the richness and variety 
of its contents, and rationalism flaunts its intellectual rigor. Both are justi-
fied in their boasting, yet neither offers a comprehensive system which 
joins conceptual rigor and richness of content in producing absolute 
Knowing. Hegel believes this dilemma confronts his time and philosophi-
cal culture, and is resolved in the Phenomenology: in this sense we may say 
that Hegel, like Kant, seeks a synthesis of rationalism and empiricism, 
while transcending the finitude of reason on which Kant insisted. On the 
other side, Hegel confronts another contemporary trend-a romantic 
philosophy of the absolute, which despises the authority of the under-
standing and of systematized experience. 
That which has already been known and arranged: Fichte and Schelling did 
not derive the partic:ular contents of their respective systems from other 
contents in the system, or from underlying principles, but assembled 

90 
Text and Running Commentary 
peculiarities, they look as if the rest-namely, everything with 
which knowledge has finished in its own way-is already in 
their possession, in addition to that which has not yet been regu-
lated. In this way they appear to be subordinating everything to 
the absolute Idea, which looks as if it is known in everything 
and has extended itself to a comprehensive Science. 
0 A closer ob-
servation, however, will discover that this extension has not been 
generated by one and the same [principle] differentiating itself 
into a variety of shapes, but is rather the shapeless recurrence 
of the same, which is applied externally to diverse materials and 
thereby acquires a tedious semblance of variety. As long as the 
development consists merely in such recurrence of the same 
formula, then the Idea, which is true for itself, remains always 
stuck at the beginning. To have the knowing subject
0 merely dis-
them empirically, by merely observing the various phenomena of life and 
knowledge. This was a frequent complaint in German Idealism. Kant had 
accused Aristotle of having merely picked the categories up as they came 
his way instead of deriving them Hfrom a single principle.'' Fichte in turn 
accused Kant of only declaring the need for a deduction, but again assem-
bling the categories of the understanding in an empirical manner; and 
Hegel wielded a similar accusation against Fichte. 
As if it . . . has extended itself to a comprehensive Science: For Fichte and 
Kant's followers, a philosophical system had to unify the whole inven-
tory of human knowledge under a single absolute idea, as that idea's 
own manifestation and adequate mode of existence. Hegel shares 
this general goal (which he attributes to Spinoza, as did all German 
Idealists), but claims that it must be carried out by an immanent evolu-
tion of the absolute Idea-the totality-and of every specific content 
which spells it out. The components of the system are not empirical 
details about the world but basic categories, such as "matter," "quantity," 
Hmovement," "gravity," "family," '"'state," and also Henlightenment" or 
"skepticism." The crucial question is (a) how do these categories par-
ticularize themselves from the absolute principle (the totality)? and 
(b) what happens to the absolute Idea itself as a consequence of their 
particularization? 
The knowing subject: The absolute principle which Fichte "monoto-
nously" applies to the material is the unity of self-consciousness, that is, 
the knowing subjecfs pattern of existence. From this, Fichte derives the 

Text and Running Commentary 
91 
tribute
0 this one inert form to whatever comes its way, and to 
plunge the material into that immovable element from without, 
is to frustrate the requirement [of Science], just as it would be 
frustrated by using merely arbitrary flashes of ideas concerning 
the content. What is required is a richness which flows out of 
itself, and a self-determining differentiation of shapes. But this is 
a monotonous formalism to gets at only the material's differ-
ences, and only because these differences are already known and 
prepared in advance. 
law of noncontradiction as the highest standard of thought and reality: 
Only that which is compatible with the unity of consciousness can be 
true or real; whatever is affected by contradiction can be neither true 
nor real, because self-contradiction destroys the unity of consciousness. 
Hegel rejects this consequence. The subject's identity, which indeed is 
the measure of philosophy, must not be understood as simple equality 
with itself (A = A), but as a unity of equality and difference, and there-
fore as necessarily entailing self-contradiction. This is a major difference 
between Hegers dialectic and Fichte"'s triads. Fichte separates the do-
mains of the I and the not-I so as to let each of them coexist; thus 
their alleged synthesis runs away from contradiction into compromise. 
Hegel-'s dialectic accepts contradiction as a productive principle and is 
built upon it. Both philosophers model the logic of being upon the 
structure of the knowing subject: this is what makes them Idealists and 
followers of Kant. But Hegel understands the subject's structure as a 
unity of oppositions, a self-identity realized through otherness. For 
Fichte, on the other hand, the subject is simple, primary self-identity 
from beginning to end. An important consequence is that Fichte"'s 
knowing subject remains a fixed, indifferent, and external accompani-
ment to the process of its Knowing, whereas for Hegel, the subject itself 
evolves (is gebildet) through the process of its Knowing, and together 
with its object. 
Merely distribute: The dominant relation in Fichte's system is subsumption, 
applying a unifying form from the outside. Hegel demands an immanent 
development. A uniform formula applied to material foreign to it pro-
vides a false and artificial systematization which, therefore, cannot prop-
erly ground the philosophical doctrine. Philosophical claims made within 
an artificially devised system are as arbitrary as claims made outside of 
any system. 

92 
Text and Running Commentary 
Yet he [the holder of this view] asserts
0 with assurance that this 
monotony and abstract universality are the absolute; and that who-
ever is not satisfied with them indicates that he is incapable of mas-
tering the absolute point of view and holding fast to it. In the past 
it used to be sufficient to indicate the empty possibility of represent-
ing something in a different way
0 in order to refute it; and this 
Yet he ... asserts: By "he" Hegel means Fichte' s method, which reiterates a 
single formula in a nondialectical manner. Fichte started from the I as a 
Spinozistic absolute from which he proposes to deduce all the domains of 
being and knowledge. In a second step, the I posits its opposite, the not-I 
(being, the world, the object), against itself; and in order to avoid contradic-
tion, both the I and the not-I limit themselves to their respective domains, 
so as to allow for coexistence between them. Fichte calls the third act a 
ccsynthesis," but Hegel argues it is an external juxtaposition of two foreign 
elements which remain unaffected by each other. A true synthesis requires 
the opposites to reside within and not just alongside one another. Fichte's 
three primary acts generate his supreme methodological formula, "thesis-
antithesis-synthesis," which is repeated in all subsequent deductions. The 
synthesis becomes a new thesis, which in turn generates a new opposition, 
and so on. Hegel calls this method formalistic rather than dialectical, be-
cause the opposite terms do not penetrate one another, and because each 
is relegated to a different domain, instead of applying to the same domain. 
Thus, contradiction does not actually obtain in them, but is the 'boundary 
between them." For Hegel, as we have seen, the architecture of philosophy 
must arise from the evolution of its content. And because the philosophical 
material demands contradiction as a positive and constructive principle, one 
cannot impose a preordained formula upon philosophy, certainly not a 
formula which obeys the law of noncontradiction. 
Representing something in a different way: In formal logic and metaphysics-
for example, in Leibniz-it is enough to conceive without contradiction 
that something, Y, can be different from what it is, in order to deny it 
necessity. Hegel oddly calls this a "refutation" (perhaps because philoso-
phy demands necessity, so an opinion that cannot claim necessity loses 
its philosophical support). This formal approach to metaphysics is ab-
stract and, therefore, inferior in Hegel's eyes, because it presupposes that 
contradiction is sufficient for something to be annulled, and that, more 
broadly, a merely formal test can dismiss the reality of something, with-
out having to consider its nature and specific content. 

Text and Running Commentary 
93 
sheer possibility, the general thought, even had the full positive value 
of actual knowledge. In the same way
0 we see that all value is attrib-
uted here to the general idea in its form of nonactuality, and the 
dissolution of what is differentiated and determined
0 -or rather, its 
casting away into the abyss of emptiness, with no further develop-
ment or self-justification-is regarded as a speculative mode of think-
ing.0 To consider some entity [irgendein Dasein]0 as it is in the abso-
lute means nothing else here than saying: "Although just now we 
have referred to it as something, yet in the absolute, in the A = A, 0 
there is no such thing, but everything there is one." To set this single 
In the same way: Similarly, there are contemporaries of Hegel holding that 
the mere idea of the absolute, without further distinctions and develop-
ment, can provide actual and even supreme knowledge. Heger s critique 
now returns to focus on Schelling and the romantics. 
The dissolution of what is differentiated and determined: The dissolution of 
rational distinctions within the mystical experience of a shapeless absolute. 
Speculative mode of thinking: This was a laudatory adjective in Hegel and 
his milieu. It did not indicate wild and baseless conjectures, as in ordinary 
speech today, but a higher kind of rationality which grasps actual reality 
(see the introduction). Derived from Latin speculare, crto see," "specula-
tive" alludes to the Platonic vision of ideas, which stands above scientific 
understanding and attains true being. Indirectly and also polemically, this 
alludes to the notion of intellectual intuition. Kant construed intellectual 
intuition (which he denied man) as a methodological structure, by which 
one grasps the particular by thinking it is universal and vice versa; 
whereas Schelling understood intellectual intuition as a kind of spiritual 
vision, a privileged mental experience (which he did attribute to humans). 
Hegel agrees with Schelling that philosophy is capable of transcending 
the finite understanding and grasp the absolute, yet not through intellec-
tual intuition understood as a mental experience, but rather through a 
science which, following Kant, translates the vague notion of intellectual 
intuition into precise logical terms. This is the sense in which Hegel takes 
his own philosophy to be truly ((speculative'' and Schelling's to be falsely 
speculative, in the bad sense of enthusiasm and Schwiirmerei. 
Irgendein Dasein: This phrase seems to be used here in ordinary German, 
not in its systematic Hegelian sense, so I translate it as a entity., 
A= A: The famous Fichtean formula (adopted by Schelling) which indi-
cated the directly identical nature of the I as absolute principle. 

94 
Text and Running Commentary 
knowledge, that in the absolute everything is equal, 
0 against a 
knowledge that is differentiated and fulfilled, or that seeks and re-
quires fulfillment, or to construe one"' s absolute as the night in 
which, as the saying goes, all cows are black
0-this is the naivete of 
the void in knowledge. The formalism which modern philosophy 
condemns and despises is nevertheless reborn in its midst;
0 and al-
though its insufficiency is well known and felt, it will not disappear 
from Science until the knowledge of absolute actuality makes its 
nature fully clear to itself 
Taking into account
0 that when a general notion precedes the 
attempt to work it out it makes that attempt easier to comprehend, 
Equal: Lefebvre (Hegel, Phenomenologie de l'Esprit, translated by Jean-Pierre 
Lefebvre [Paris: Aubier; 1991], 37n3) notes that Hegel wished to avoid 
the word ccidentity" too closely associated with Schelling, so he usedgleich 
and Gleichheit, which anyway are ineptly rendered as "identical." 
All cows are black: The irony here is directed mainly at Schelling. The 
romantic experience claims to attain the absolute while obliterating all 
distinct particular existents and, therefore, fails to grasp anything actual: 
everything dissolves into a shapeless homogenous whirl. This kind of 
mysticism misses its own goals and provides empty exultation instead, 
an experience in which (a) nothing can be distinguished, criticized, or 
assessed, and which (b) has no actual being at its core. Schelling was 
deeply hurt by Heger s sarcastic remarks and the breach between the two 
former friends was never healed. 
Reborn in its midst: Hegel does not say that Fichte or Schelling are inten-
tional formalists. Yet contrary to their stated intention, they fall back 
into formalism because they failed to coherently clarify to themselves the 
implications of their project-namely, to create an overall system based 
on an absolute principle. (This illustrates to Hegel the irony-and dialec-
tic-of cultural history.) 
Taking into account: In these seemingly innocent sentences, Hegel sets out 
to write his own philosophical preface after having explained why such 
a preface must be inadequate. A closer look at the text will show that 
Hegel considers the forthcoming preface to be "mere conversation'' 
whose goal is didactic and prephilosophical. Although it lacks the value 
of genuine philosophical discourse, it may prepare the reader to philoso-
phize by externally challenging some basic prejudices in her mind. 
According to my way of seeing: Einsicht is often translated as '"'insight," but 
here it more plausibly means "way of seeing." This famous statement is so 

Text and Running Commentary 
95 
it will be useful to give a rough outline of it here. Another intention 
is to remove on this occasion certain forms [of thinking] whose 
habitual use stands in the way of philosophical knowledge. 
[ 17] According to my way of seeing, 
0 which must justify itself only 
through the exhibition of the system itself, everything depends 
on comprehending and expressing the true not as substance, but 
equally also as subject. 
0 It should be also remarked that substanti-
ality includes
0 the universality
0 or immediacy of knowing, no less 
rich in systematic implications that we can only discuss some of them here; 
for fuller elaboration see the introduction ("The Absolute as Subject"). 
But equally ... as subject: Viewing the true (the absolute) as subject does 
not abolish its being substance but adds a vital dimension to it. The addi-
tion has the structure of Aufhebung, in which the new form negates its 
predecessor"'s inadequate form but incorporates its essence within itself. 
Grasping the absolute as substance (as did Spinoza) and grasping it as 
subject (as did Fichte and Hegel himself-both following Kant and, theo-
logically, following Christianity) are dialectically compatible moves. Still, 
the concept of subject is the higher one; it is constituted by the dialectical 
negation of the concept of substance while preserving its ground. Of 
course, this will change the meaning of the concept of subject. The syn-
thesis of subject and substance generates a new concept of subject, a 
subject that has being, that has a substantive aspect (the subject/ object); 
it is therefore distinguished from Kant"'s or Fichte"'s pure ego, which Hegel 
calls "merely subject ..... 
Substantiality includes: To view substance (the ground of reality) also as 
subject implies that we have from the outset recognized the element 
of thought or knowledge as present in being. Earlier philosophers have 
recognized this in dim form: thought has appeared in the ground of being 
in a rudimentary, still undeveloped form, a latent potentiality which can-
not be discovered before it starts actualizing itself. That is why premodern 
philosophy has been dominated by a one-sided view which takes sub-
stance to be a kind of "thing," a merely external object that only faces 
knowledge but contains no subjective ingredient in itself. To make prog-
ress in philosophy, Hegel says, one must-and in his own time, already 
can-grasp substance itself as entailing subjectivity, namely, as capable of 
development and eventually of self-consciousness. Note that in de-
manding that substance be recognized also as subject, Hegel does not 
impose an external meaning on the object but claims to discover the 
roots of the new meaning immanently within the object itself. 
The universality: Das Allgemeine, here in the sense of generality, a "simple, 
or '"'immediate" universal. 

96 
Text and Running Commentary 
than the immediacy which is being, 
0 that is, which is immediacy 
for knowing. If conceiving God as the single substance aroused 
the indignation of the age
0 in which this definition was pro-
nounced, this indignation was, on the one hand, due to the in-
stinctive [feeling] that self-consciousness was thereby not pre-
served, 0 but only submerged. 
0 Yet on the other hand, the opposite 
The immediacy which is being: This is the ordinary view. Substance is usually 
taken to indicate the element of being, to which knowledge refers as 
object. Hegel accepts this element as only a partial and one-sided moment 
of substance. The Concept of substance includes the "immediacy'' 
(roughly, the being) of both domains, ofknowledge as well as of the object. 
Incidentally, Hegel uses the term "immediacy" to denote the element of 
simplicity in general; as such, '"'immediacy" is more fundamental than 
'being." Yet this fine distinction is often overlooked and Hegel uses 
'being" and "immediacy" as equivalent. 
The indignation of the age: An allusion to Spinoza' s doctrine that God and 
nature are one and the same substance. Hegel explains the furious reac-
tions to Spinoza' s doctrine by the fact that it negated God's subjectivity, 
his character as spirit. (Actually I think it was the immanent nature of 
Spinoza' s God-the denial of God's transcendent role as Creator-that 
generated most of the hostility.) Accepting Spinoza's immanent view of 
the absolute, Hegel demands that the absolute be interpreted also as 
subject and spirit, and not only as substance or thing. Hegel's critique of 
Spinoza is indeed helpful for understanding the famous statement in our 
text; see Hegel's chapter on Spinoza in Lectures on the History of Philosophy 
(translated by E. S. Haldane and Frances U. Simon [London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, 1898], val. 3, 253, et passim) and Hegel's remark on 
Spinoza in The Science of Logic (ed. G. Lasson, val. 2, 218); for an analysis 
of these texts see my Spinoza and Other Heretics, vol. 2, chapter 2, "Spinoza 
and Hegel: The Immanent God-Nature or Spirit?" 
Not preserved: Spinoza rightly abolished the crude image of the absolute-
as-subject-namely, the image of an external God who created the world 
by a special act of his will. Yet Spinoza was unable to provide the higher, 
more valid philosophical interpretation of the absolute as self-conscious-
ness. This required the work of German Idealism following Kant. 
Submerged: In Spinoza, Hagel suggests, the element of self-consciousness 
inherent in substance is being submerged and made to disappear. It only 
persists as latent, abstract generality, hidden from Spinoza's eyes. 

Text and Running Commentary 
97 
position, 
0 which clings to thinking as thinking-to universality as 
such-is the same immediate, immovable, and undifferentiated 
substantiality. And when, in the third place, 
0 thinking unites the 
being of substance with itself and conceives of immediacy, or intu-
ition, as thinking-the important thing is still. to know whether 
this intellectual intuition does not fall back into immovable sim-
plicity, and does not present actuality itself in a nonactual manner. 
[ 18] Further, the living substance
0 is being which is truly subject, 
or-to say the same
0-which is truly actual only in so far as it is 
a movement of self-positing, 
0 or the mediation of itself with its 
The opposite position: Fichte's construal of the pure subject as a substance-
less ell think," which faces substance (the "not-1") externally. The Fichtean 
subject, like the Cartesian, is identical with itself through the pure and 
immediate act of thinking, independently of its relations to the c'not-1.'' 
In the third place: Hegel alludes to Schelling who tried to unify the I with 
substance by the power of intellectual intuition. This solution returned 
him to "inert simplicity," namely, to a subjectless substance. A subject 
entails a process whose unity is constituted by the various differences it 
generates, whereas in Schelling's intellectual intuition everything falls back 
and concentrates into the compact point of a semimystical experience. 
The living substance: Life-the organic world-is the first manifestation of 
substance having "subjective" features. Even before substance attains self-
consciousness, it manifests an organic movement of self-realization as 
described in the text. It is a dialectical movement in which substance 
exists through its own mediation, namely, becomes the "other" of itself 
and returns to itself as actual in and through this otherness. 
To say the same: Saying that being is really a subject means it is actual only 
as a process of self-actualization. Hegel,s idea is far-reaching: not only the 
accidents of substance, its particular states and modes, but substantiality 
itself undergoes development and actualization. Thereby, substantiality is 
a subject, a process of self-constitution which proceeds through negating 
itself and again negating the first negation. 
Self-positing: The word "positing', (or setting, Setzung) originates in Kant, 
who used it to denote an existential statement, as distinguished from 
predication or the ascription of properties. In German Idealism, the 
term "to posit', means to set something as existing. In Fichte, the I posits 
itself, which implies that it is uncreated but is a kind of Spinozistic 
"cause of itself,; and it also posits the "not-I/' or the world of objects 

98 
Text and Running Commentary 
becoming-other. As subject, substance is pure simple negativity,
0 
and precisely thereby it is the splitting of the simple in two, or an 
opposition-setting duplication which again is the negation of 
that indifferent difference and of its opposite: only this self-reconsti-
tuting identity
0 [Gleichheit], this self-reflection° in being-other
0
-
facing it. Though Hegel uses the same language, he argues that the 
subject-or I-does not exist as direct self-positing. A subject posits itself 
in a way that immediately undermines its simple identity and drives it 
to transcend itself toward a series of figures and modes of being distin-
guished from itself, which eventually it negates again and thereby re-
turns to itself as concrete, actualized identity. 
Negativity: A fundamental Hegelian idea that construes subjectivity as pri-
marily a negative power: to be a subject is to transcend every partial, 
immediate identity, and to go beyond any given state. The subject is pri-
marily this power of negation both with respect to itself and to its other. 
In Existentialist philosophy (Sartre ), this negation adds up to a frustrating 
pursuit of stability which cannot attain its goal; in Hegel, on the contrary, 
it is capable of producing a stable positive result-not as inactive rest but 
as a recurrent activity, a constant cycle of negation and re-affirmation which 
follows a rational pattern. Negation and the negation-of-the-negation re-
peat themselves on higher levels of expression, and realize the latent con-
ceptual structure at their base. Thus, the H subjective,, process is teleological 
in Hegel as in Aristotle: the movement of transcendence and negation is 
guided by a latent final end, and eventually leads to its realization. 
Self-reconstituting identity: This is the kind of identity characteristic of the 
subject. A subject reconstitutes its identity at the end of a process which 
is marked by otherness and contradiction. This pattern is the origin of 
dialectical logic, as the logic of actual being (see the introduction). 
Self-reflection: A key term in Heger s dialectical vocabulary, used according 
to need in one of two main senses: (a) something mirrored in something 
else, (b) something mirrored (or expressed) in thought. Hegel also distin-
guishes between external and internal reflection. In external reflection-
a house reflected in a lake-the relation is accidental from the standpoint 
of both related terms. Internal reflection, however, is not simply mirror-
ing but also mutual mediation, namely, a reciprocal relation which consti-
tutes the being and the specific nature of each of the opposite terms. 
In addition, each term is reflected not in some straight double which 
mechanically reproduced its features, but in its opposite or specific other, 
whom it needs in order to become what it is. (Thus, correlates like Hes-
sence" and "appearance," "inner" and "outer" are "reflection Concepts.,) 
According to Hegel, reflection can also exist in a substantive way without 

Text and Running Commentary 
99 
and not some original unity as such, or an immediate thing0 as 
such
0-is the true. The true is the becoming of its own self,
0 the 
circle whose end is presupposed as its goal and constitutes its begin-
ning, and which is actual only through its development and end. 
consciousness. This is how a ground relates to its consequence, a cause 
to an effect, substance to accident, or internalization to externalization. 
Although they seem to be dualistic relations, actually each of the terms 
constitutes the other even if none is conscious of it. Another example: most 
individuals are unaware of the fundamental unity between themselves and 
their other-like the natural object or the social and political environment; 
however, the relation of reflection, as mutual mediation, exists between 
them in itself, that is, in a substantive or antic manner, even though it does 
not exist for consciousness, which continues to view its other as alien to 
its essence and merely facing it. Thereby it has a flawed self-awareness, 
because its reflection as consciousness fails to adequately express the ontic 
reflection at its base. In order to overcome that flaw, the antic mediation 
must be reflected also in consciousness, and thereby actualized. This occurs 
in concrete philosophical knowledge which enables me to grasp my self 
within the other, and grasp the other as a constitutive moment of my self. 
At that point, reflection as antic mediation and reflection as consciousness 
are united. As for external reflection, it persists even at the top stage, as 
long as we merely '"'converse'' or think about the world from the outside, 
and also when investigating the abstract aspects of the world, as in the 
formal and the empirical sciences. 
In being-other: '"'Self-reflection in being-other" is perhaps Hegel's most suc-
cinct formulation of a dialectical relation. It includes everything we men-
tioned about the subject's pattern of existence and how dialectical logic-
the logic of being-derives from that pattern. Although the dialectic can-
not be squeezed into an a priori formula, when a short characterization 
is needed, we might prefer to speak of ''self-reflection within otherness" 
instead of the problematic formula "thesis-antithesis-synthesis." 
An immediate thing: Hegel usually avoids the word "thing,, (Ding), which 
recalls Kant's "thing-in-itself'; but sometimes, as here, we may add it with 
no harm to the sense. On the other hand, Hegel likes turning adjective 
into nominative, which makes his style peculiar and requires some train-
ing in order to read it properly. 
As such: Against philosophical realism, but also against the view that some-
thing can be immediately true or absolute. (Here Fichte, jacobi, and of 
course Holderlin are specifically meant.) 
The true is the becoming of its own self "It" in this phrase refers to Hthe 
true" (or absolute). Hegel stresses the teleological nature of the absolute 

100 
Text and Running Commentary 
[ 19] 
The life of God and divine knowledge may therefore be ex-
pressed as the play of love with itself.
0 [But] this idea descends to 
the level of edification° and even triteness when lacking the earnest-
ness, the pain, the patience, and the work of the negative. 
0 In itself, 
this life is the undisturbed identity and unity with itself, which fails 
as subject. The system's purpose is immanent. It serves nothing but itself; 
the goal of its movement is the system itself as actualized. Therefore we can 
view the system as a circular process whose goal resides in its beginning, 
as an abstract essence which predefines its direction. The concrete subject 
is generated from that process as its result. Mediated by negation and oth-
erness, it becomes actual only at the end of the road. (Strictly speaking, this 
is not a regular circle but a spiral, whose closing elevates it to a higher level.) 
The play of love with itself Dialectical logic-the absolute subject's form 
of being-is here metaphorically compared to love. This idea recurs in 
Hegel's thought from early on and is expressed more clearly at the end 
of the Logic. Love is the relation in which I rediscover myself within the 
other-my own other-and thereby actualize my existence. To love is to 
alienate or lose yourself in another, but thereby to regain and actualize 
your own life and selfhood. And this, as we have seen (here and in the 
introduction), is what a dialectical relation consists in. Love serves Hegel 
as an image of the fundamental relation governing the absolute subject, 
God, and reality at large. It is God's love for the world, his love for hu-
mans, and his love for himself through them, just as it is the human's 
love for God and love of himself through God. Hegel's dialectic thus 
translates an idea-cosmic love-which has come down in philosophy 
and mysticism since Plato (or at least since Plotinus), and can be found in 
Jewish Kabbala, Renaissance thinkers like Pica, Leone Ebreo, and Meister 
Eckhart, recurred in Spinoza, and was revived by Schelling and the young 
Holderlin. Yet Hegel refuses to use the notion of love as a mental state or 
vague cosmic experience; he translates it into a conceptual pattern which 
becomes the basis of his dialectical logic. He also objects to interpreting 
love as the absolute's direct relation to itself, a kind of narcissistic play by 
God which is unrelated to the struggle and suffering of human history. 
Descends to the level of edification: Compared with conceptual thinking, 
edification is a lower mental form. Instead of understanding, it offers a 
kind of enthusiastic sermonizing about the absolute which repeats one 
single idea or hazy feeling. Reason, however, must follow and laboriously 
decipher all the stages of the absolute subject's evolution. 

Text and Running Commentary 
101 
to take seriously either being-other and self-alienation, or the over-
coming of self-alienation. 0 This in-itself, however, is an abstract uni-
versality which overlooks the essential nature of this [God's] life
0 
(is) to be for itsel£0-and thus loses sight of the self-movement of the 
form in general [as pertaining to life]. When the form is pro-
nounced to be identical to the essence, it would be misleading to 
conclude that, therefore, knowledge can be satisfied with the in-
itself or essence, and spare itself the need to deal with the form-
as if the absolute principle can dispense with being spelled out, and 
The earnestness ... of the negative: The term "the negative" indicates two 
ideas here: (a) God is identified with himself not immediately but through 
the negation of the negation, and (b) God is identified with himself 
through the mediation of human life and following a "laborious and pa-
tient" historical process, with all its human pain and suffering; therefore 
it is not a playful crdisporting" but "earnestness.'' (Moreover, it makes of 
human history a kind of secularized "passion-tale"-of God becoming 
God through his becoming human and undergoing suffering.) 
Self-alienation (Entfremdung): This key Hegelian concept makes its first ap-
pearance here. Alienation is a radical form ofbecoming other; it occurs 
when existence takes a form which not only opposes its essence (as a 
particular opposes the universal) but impedes and falsifies that essence (as 
in self-servitude, masked as freedom). It is sometimes difficult to distin-
guish alienation from ordinary otherness by their content, but ontologi-
cally they are distinct. Also, alienation is a temporary state which can in 
principle be overcome and abolished; whereas otherness is present at all 
stages, including the last, as a necessary moment mediating the self. 
This [God's] life: The life of the absolute subject. From the narrow theologi-
cal standpoint, Hegel alludes to God's dialectical necessity to exist as 
other than Himself, that is, as the world and as human history, with all 
the negativity and suffering they entail. (This also sketches a Hegelian 
solution of the problem of theodicy.) The pattern of alienation and its 
overcoming has, however, a much wider scope and is manifest in many 
other domains of Hegel's system (an organic creature, an individual per-
son, a society, a historical era, and so forth). 
To be for itself To exist for self-reflection and have a distinct singularity as 
subject. And that also means to move oneself by negating and tran-
scending one's primary essence, to undergo alienation, overcome it, and 
return to oneself as actual. 

102 
Text and Running Commentary 
absolute intuition makes its development superfluous. Precisely be-
cause the form is as essential to the essence as the essence is to 
itself, the latter must be grasped and expressed not merely as es-
sence-that is, as immediate substance-but equally as form, with 
all the richness of the developed form. Only thereby is the essence 
grasped and expressed as actual. 
[20] The true is the whole. 
0 Yet the whole is but the essence which 
brings itself to fulfillment
0 through its development. Of the absolute 
it must be said that it is essentially a result, that only at the end is 
the absolute what it is in truth; and herein consists its nature-to be 
actual, subject, or becoming-its-own-self [sichselbstwerden]. However 
contradictory it may appear to conceive the absolute as essentially 
a result, a slight consideration will suffice to redress this apparent 
contradiction. The beginning, the principle, or the absolute, however 
it is called immediately and at first, is only the universal. 
0 When I 
say Hall animals," the word does not count as zoology; and just as 
little can words such as Hdivine," "absolute," "eternal,'' and the like 
express what they contain;
0 yet only in such words is [intellectual] 
The true is the whole: A major dictum in our text. Together with the epigram 
"the absolute ... is essentially a result," it complements the idea of the 
absolute as subject. (For a fuller explication, see the introduction.) 
Fulfillment (Sichvollendende): Driving itselfboth to perfection and to plenitude. 
Subject, or becoming-its-own-self Viewing the absolute as subject entails that 
it is a becoming-itself (Sichselbstwerden; see the introduction). The abso-
lute has brought itself into perfection through its evolution, and so is a 
result. 
Only the universal: In the sense of merely universal-undeveloped universality. 
Express what they contain: The ideas that "the true is the whole" and that 
it is a subject are here applied to the theory of language. Linguistic expres-
sions that do nothing more than denote an object actually miss it. There-
fore one cannot construct an adequate philosophical discourse by aggre-
gating singular indicative expressions. In philosophy, every expression 
points beyond itself towards a whole context which the reader must first 
actually traverse in order to grasp the meaning of the original expression. 
Putting it somewhat more loosely: behind any such expression, there is 
a whole story without which it cannot be understood. The unit of dis-
course which is adequate for philosophy must therefore transcend indica-

Text and Running Commentary 
103 
intuition expressed as the immediate. Anything that contains more 
than such a word, be it even the transition to a sentence, entails a 
becoming-other that must be taken back, and is [thereby] media-
tion. 
0 And this is what provokes indignation ° [in those believing the 
divine is immediate], as if we forsake absolute Knowing when we 
tive expressions and convey the whole story behind them in a holistic 
and evolutionary manner; and it must weave these expressions into the 
story so that each is formed and becomes significant in its proper place. 
This explains (a) the narrative background of the Phenomenology (and on 
a more abstract level, also that of the Logic), and (b) Hegel's tendency, 
which gives his readers so much trouble, to use as his basic unit of dis-
course not the single sentence but larger blocks of text-the paragraph, 
or even a whole chapter-which he also often forces into loops, so as to 
provide more context and dialectical reversals. 
And is [thereby] mediation (Vermittlung): Even when trying to express a phil-
osophical truth in the inadequate form of a single subject/predicate sen-
tence, we must go beyond the subject and say something else about it in 
order to start explicating that subject. Thereby, Hegel believes, the subject 
'becomes other" within the predicative form of discourse. As predication 
gets richer, the subject is further transformed into new states of "oth-
erness"; yet throughout all these "others" (the predicates), the same sub-
ject is implicitly referred to, and in the end, we return to it explicitly as 
something developed and more complex. To take an abbreviated exam-
ple: in a sentence or definition like "man is a thinking animal/' the first 
predication says that man is an animal-that is, "makes him into an-
other." The second predication then says he is an animal of a special 
kind, to which only the human race corresponds, and thereby returns 
the subject to itself, now in a more developed and concrete manner than 
in the original expression, "man." One may wonder if Hegel is not con-
fusing two functions of the copula ('is"), ascribing a property and af-
firming existence. In any case, by invoking the predicative sentence which 
he usually dismisses as inadequate for philosophy, Hegel makes an a forti-
ori ("even more so") argument: the relation of"mediation and becoming-
other" is so fundamental that even the lower form of discourse cannot 
rid itself of it. 
Indignation: The "indignation" was shared by romantics and those who 
regard the law of noncontradiction as supreme. The former reject any 
rational reflection, any mediation whatsoever by thought, because they 

104 
Text and Running Commentary 
attribute something positive to mediation, rather than merely [say-
ing] that it has nothing absolute and is not in the absolute. 
[21] 
Actually, the indignation derives from lack of familiarity with the 
nature of mediation and of absolute Knowing itself. Mediation is 
nothing but the self-identity which moves itself; in other words, it 
is reflection into itself [in sich selbst], the moment of the 1° as being-
for-itself, pure negativity, or-when reduced to its pure abstrac-
tion-it is simple becoming. 
0 The I or becoming in general, this 
activity of mediation, is, on account of its simplicity, precisely the 
immediacy-that-becomes
0 [die werdende Unmittelbarkeit] and the im-
consider logical thinking extraneous to the absolute and as alienating its 
nature; whereas the latter do require mediation by thought, but only of 
an analytic and not a dialectical style. 
The reflection into itself, the moment of the I: This sentence demonstrates the 
inner link Hegel establishes between the concepts self-reflection, being-for-
itself, I, and negativity. They are all different aspects of the subject, as a 
system moved by self-negation and marked by an inner split. 
Simple becoming: The most abstract model of self-mediation or becoming. 
Unlike Plato, Hegel does not consider the category of becoming as exclud-
ing being. Becoming entails being and is necessarily derived from it. An 
attempt to think being makes clear it is not as simple and immediate as it 
seems at first. Being entails self-mediation, and therefore splitting and self-
motion, and appears at first as a merely general and abstract category, 
namely, as "immediate." 
The immediacy-that-becomes: Insofar as becoming (or the I which stands for 
it) is at first only simple and immediate, there is no difference between 
it and being. Initially, therefore, becoming and being have the same char-
acter. This may seem a forced or scholastic quibbling, but it should be 
noted: (a) Hegel has no other concept by which to designate the element 
of being or existence (as opposed to knowledge or spirit) except .. 'immedi-
acy." Words like "matter," ""fact," '"'datum," or "spatiotemporal percep-
tion'' will not do, because they indicate items in whose constitution some 
categories of the knowing mind are already at work; (b) at the same time, 
there is no absolute immediacy in Hegel-everything in the world has a 
certain degree ofmediacy; and (c) immediacy in the minimal (or crudest) 
sense exists in the domain of spirit itself: Hegel calls it "the pure I," or 
, .. simple becoming." This will help Hegel argue later that spirit has a 
dimension of being, just as substance has a dimension of subject or spirit. 

Text and Running Commentary 
105 
mediate itself. 
0 One therefore misconstrues reason by excluding 
reflection from the [domain] of the true and not grasping it as a 
positive moment of the absolute.
0 It is reflection which makes the 
true into a result, but it also sublates the opposition° between the 
true and its becoming. For this becoming is equally simple, 
0 and 
hence is undistinguished from the form of the true, which consists 
in presenting itself in the result as something simple; indeed, the 
becoming is precisely this being returned to simplicity. Although 
the embryo is in-itself a man, it is not so for-itself; for-itself, it is a 
man only as a formed reason which has made itself into what it is 
in-itself. This alone is its actuality. Yet the result is itself simple 
immediacy, for it is a self-conscious freedom at rest within itself, 
which did not push the opposition to the side and let it lie there, 
but is reconciled with it.
0 We can also express the above by saying [22] 
And the immediate itself: Simple becoming is, in that respect, being itself. 
A positive moment of the absolute: This again directly opposes Holderlin 
(and Jacobi, among others). 
Sublates the opposition: Hegel rarely uses the term Hantithesis'' which is 
more central in Kant and Fichte. 
This becoming is equally simple: Despite its complexity, the result of the 
process is compressed in a person's consciousness into a quasi-simple 
state, which a new person, generation, or era can experience as if it were 
immediate. In other words, they will experience it in the mode of pleni-
tude and primary identification, free of the alienation and splits of identity 
which occurred while the process was going on. Hegel's use of the word 
usimple" should be taken with caution. Actually he means an elaborate 
process which, for the person who has undergone it, has crystallized into 
something seemingly simple. This should not be confused with the undia-
lectical concept of "second naYvete," which is far from Hegel's mind. 
Is reconciled with it: The reconciliation overcomes the contradictions and 
alienations that had characterized the former stages. (This is what "sim-
ple" in the previous note means.) The individual can now experience the 
result of the historical process in direct, simple, and harmonious identifi-
cation with it. For instance, feeling herself free within society and the 
world, she can enjoy this sense directly, almost as self-evident, without 
needing to live again through the pains and contradictions of the histori-
cal past which led to this result and are embodied in it. But that direct 
experience lacks self-knowledge. The reconciliation cannot be under-

106 
Text and Running Commentary 
that reason is a purposive activity. 
0 Those who elevated pseudo-
nature0 over and above misconceived thinking, and, in particular, 
those who banned external teleology, have brought the form of 
purpose in general to disrepute. 
0 Yet, even as Aristotle says in de-
fining nature as teleological activity, the purpose is the immediate, 
the resting, the immovable which is itself a mover; and so it is 
subject. 0 Its power to engender movement, taken in the abstract, 
is being-for-itself or pure negativity. The result is the same as the 
beginning only because the beginning is purpose, 
0 or [in other 
words], the actual and its Concept are the same only because the 
immediate, as purpose, holds in itself the self or pure actuality. The 
stood without deciphering the former dialectical conflicts and bringing 
them to light. 
A purposive activity: Hegel means internal purposiveness, the movement 
he called (becoming-oneself," or the Hcircle that presupposes its end, as 
its goal." 
Pseudo-nature: Vermeint; I follow Lefebvre,s suggestion here. 
Have brought ... to disrepute: Following Leibniz (and Kant in his way), 
Hegel wants to rehabilitate the concept of teleology which modern 
mechanistic science has rejected. As precondition, he must first reject the 
superstitious kind of teleology (the idea that an entity or event A exists in 
order to serve an entity or event B), and allow only internal or immanent 
purposiveness. The latter is the subjecfs mode of being; it is realized in 
the organic world, in history, in culture and society, and in the pattern of 
absolute spirit. 
And so it is subject: Though Hegel claims Aristotle as his source, in fact 
they differ. In Aristotle, the purpose as unmoved mover is fixed and mo-
tionless; it moves all other things by being the focus of their aspiration 
(orexis). Not so in Hegel: the subject is not a motionless purpose but a 
whole teleological system, including its movement. One cannot therefore 
agree with Hegel that Aristotle, s unmoved mover had already been a 
kind of subject. It certainly had been an intellectual activity (as nous and 
noein) but not a subject in the Hegelian sense. 
The beginning is purpose: In a subject-like teleological system, the purpose 
is given at the beginning as abstract and recurs at the end as actualized. It 
is therefore a circular-spiral system, Hhaving its end also as its beginning,, 
because the purpose is given both at the outset (abstractly) and at the 
end-result (as actualized). 

Text and Running Commentary 
107 
realized purpose, or the existing actual [das daseiende Wirkliche], is 
movement and unfolded becoming; but this unrest is precisely the 
Self. And the reason why the Self is the same as that simplicity and 
immediacy of the beginning is that it is the result, that which re-
turned into itself; and that which returned into itself is precisely 
the Self, and the Self is self-relating identity and immediacy. 
[23] The need to represent the absolute as subject uses propositions0 
like: God is the eternal, or [God is] the moral world-order, or [God 
is] love, and so forth. In such propositions
0 the true is posited as 
subject in a merely direct way, 
0 but is not presented as the move-
That which returned into itself. Selfhood is attained as "return-to-self.,, Yet 
this is a return to one's own self. What has been actualized at the end is 
not something new or foreign but the system, s own latent identity and 
purpose. 
Uses propositions: At this point, Hegel launches a critical discussion of philo-
sophical language and its limitations. He is about to criticize the predica-
tive sentence ("S is P" or "Sis PQR") which links diverse predicates to a 
fixed subject in a unilateral way, making the predicates depend upon the 
subject but not vice versa. This common grammatical subject does not 
suit the philosop~ical Concept of subject as explicated above. Ordinary 
grammar is incongruent with the needs of philosophy. 
In such propositions: When philosophers say, "God is the eternal Being," or 
"God is the moral world-order," or, in general, "God is P," they are trying 
to capture and express the ontological subject, being-as-subject, by a 
grammatical subject which is incongruent with it. For in ordinary lan-
guage, the subject-term is taken to be immediately identical with itself 
regardless of its predicates and not depending on them; it therefore lacks 
""reflection within itself, and cannot count as subject in the philosophical 
sense. In order to express the philosophical subject, the grammatical sub-
ject must be a complex construct, derived from the mutual relation-and 
dialectical movement-between all its predicates. Yet ordinary predicative 
language is incapable of performing this move, which goes against (a) 
ordinary syntax, (b) the law of contradiction, and (c) the unidirectional 
nature of speech and writing. It is therefore a form of discourse unfit for 
philosophical truth. 
A merely direct way: In such discourse, only the predicates have some infor-
mative value, whereas the expression of the grammatical subject seems 
superfluous. 

108 
Text and Running Commentary 
ment of that which reflects itself in itself. In this kind of proposition 
one starts with the word "God." In itself, this is a senseless sound, 
a mere name. Only the predicate says what it is, and is its filling 
and meaning;
0 only in this end does the empty beginning become 
actual knowing. In this respect one may wonder why people should 
not speak of the meaning only (of the eternal, the moral world 
order, etc.) or, in the manner of the ancients, of pure Concepts (like 
Being, the One, etc.) without adding the senseless sound. This 
word [God] serves indeed to indicate that what is posited is not a 
being or an essence or something merely general, but is something 
reflected in itsel:f-a subject. 
Yet this is only anticipated. 
0 The subject is taken here as a rigid 
point, to which the predicates, as to their support, are attached by 
a movement which belongs to the one who knows
0 about the sub-
ject, but which cannot count
0 as belonging to the point itself; yet 
Its filling and meaning: I use "meaning" for Bedeutung, since Hegel did not 
mean "reference" in its Fregean sense here. 
Something reflected in itself Retracting his fast dismissal of (Cthe senseless 
sound/' Hegel now admits that the word HGod" does have some informa-
tive value, for it alludes to an entity with self-reflection rather than to 
mere being. 
Yet this is only antidpated: It is only as an embryonic hint that the absolute 
is here understood as subject. Also, the idea takes a form that contradicts 
its content and impedes its execution. This is because the subject is still 
understood as a finished unit rather than as a movement which consti-
tutes the subject by its particularization into predicates and by their mu-
tual relations. 
The one who knows: In ordinary philosophical discourse, the predicates are 
linked to their subject by an external agent-namely, the knowing subject, 
the mind of the person who studies and investigates the matter; it is she 
who, as in Kant's Metaphysical Deduction, ascribes the predicates to the 
subject from the outside. Therefore the movement of thought is here exter-
nal to the matter itself; in Hegel's idiom, it is "an external reflection." 
But which cannot count: Ordinary language forces us to use predicative 
propositions in philosophy, and thereby veils the subject-like nature of 
reality from us. This produces a problem for Hegel which elsewhere I 
have called "the antinomy of language" (that is, of philosophical language; 

Text and Running Commentary 
109 
only through this movement would the content be presented as 
subject. The way in which the movement is here obtained
0 prevents 
its belonging to the fixed subject of the content; yet having presup-
posed that point, the movement cannot be obtained differently, and 
can only be external. This anticipation-that the absolute is sub-
ject-is therefore not only not the actuality of that Concept, but 
see Yirmiyahu Yovel, HReason, Actuality, and Philosophical Discourse in 
Heger' [Heb.], Iyyun 26 [1975]: 59-115; see also Menahem Rosen, Problems 
of Hegelian Dialectic [Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1992], part 5.) On the one hand, 
ordinary, historical language is predicative by nature and therefore unfit 
for philosophy; on the other hand, philosophy is the conceptualization 
of real life, practice, and culture, and must arise from the historical modes 
of our discourse. Hegel is barred from turning to the language of poetry 
in the manner of Heidegger or Holderlin, since philosophy is concerned 
with the Concept; and he ought not invent a separate, artificial language 
for philosophy because philosophy must arise from its own history and 
that of our social, cultural, and linguistic practices. Result: what is neces-
sary from one standpoint of the Hegelian system (his logic of discourse) 
is impossible and impermissible from another Hegelian standpoint. Fur-
thermore, this contradiction seems to be irreconcilable. Evidently recog-
nizing the problem, Hegel alludes later in the text to a ((speculative propo-
sition" which is supposed to replace the predicative proposition, but he 
sheds little light on that enigmatic idea. In the end, the only effective way 
Hegel copes with the problem is pragmatic: he uses a mode of writing 
whose basic unit is not the single sentence but the whole paragraph, the 
section, even whole chapters, and which include many ((loops" and special 
expositions. These broader units of discourse allow Hegel to partly over-
come the predicative nature of the sentence, to maintain a back-and-
forth movement between the various ingredients, go from one issue to 
its opposite aspects and return to it from a new angle, and so forth. 
This can explain the notorious difficulties of Hegel's style, and the often 
awkward, back-and-forth movement characteristic of the Phenomenology 
and the Logic. (It should be clear, however, that the antinomy affects only 
the language of strict philosophy. There is no antinomy regarding the 
natural social discourse, which, as a basic practico-theoretical activity, is 
an ingredient in the constitution of the self-or regarding the language 
of the formal and empirical sciences.) 
Obtained (Beschafft): Here meaning "figured out,'J '"'constituted." 

110 
Text and Running Commentary 
even makes it impossible. For it posits the subject as a point at rest, 
when the subject's actuality is self-movement. 
[24] Among the many consequences which follow from what we 
have said, let me emphasize the following in particular: [first], that 
knowing is actual and can be presented only as Science, or as sys-
tem. ° Further, that in philosophy, a so-called principle or basic prop-
osition, if it is true, is on that account also already false, 
0 so far as 
it is only a principle or basic proposition. Therefore it can be easily 
refuted. The refutation consists in showing its deficiency, which lies 
in its being only general or a principle, in its being a beginning. 
When the refutation is fundamental, it is drawn and developed 
from the principle itself, 
0 and is not contrived externally, through 
As science, or as system: In the idiom of German idealism "Science" does 
not denote any special discipline (like physics) but a certain epistemic 
level-that of complete, accomplished truth (episteme). For Kant, Fichte, 
and Hegel, Science and system are equivalent. A necessary and sufficient 
condition for philosophy to rise to the level of Science is that it should 
be formed as a complete system-that is, as the original totality of its 
ingredients. Yet the three philosophers differ on the shape and order of 
that system: Kant and Fichte start from a fundamental principle which 
they take to be true without qualification from the outset, and see the 
rest as deriving unilaterally from it. But this, in Heger s eyes, commits his 
two predecessors to the same philosophical fallacy he analyzed in the 
predicative proposition. 
Is ... already false: If truth exists only as a complete system, then as long 
as the system's grounding principle stays undeveloped, it is also false. It 
is thus vulnerable to criticism and refutation, because it has not been 
grounded in all its opposing aspects. To actually ground the principle, 
we have to refute every partial aspect of it which pretends to be exclusive. 
In the end, only the fully developed system will maintain the claim of 
truth, whereas its partial developments will find their place within it as 
"'moments." 
It is drawn and developed from the principle itself A dialectical refutation of 
philosophical doctrines does not destroy what it criticizes, but develops 
and complements it; its act of negation becomes a positive layer in build-
ing the system of truth. As a first condition, such refutation must be 
immanent, that is, performed in terms of the criticized principle itself 
rather than thrust against it as an external assertion ("mere assurance"). 

Text and Running Commentary 
111 
opposite assertions and flashes of ideas. The refutation is in fact 
the principle's development and the fulfillment of its deficiency, 
provided that it does not misconceive itself by paying attention to 
its negative activity only, but takes notice of the positive side of its 
progress and result. 
0 
On the other hand, the beginning's positive development is at 
the same time a negative relation toward it, that is, toward its one-
sided form, [which consists in] being only immediate or in being a 
purpose. Hence it can also be taken as the refutation of the first 
principle which constitutes the system's foundation; but it is more 
appropriate to see it as indicating that the system's foundation or 
principle is, in fact, only its beginning. 
[25] That the true is actual only as system, or that substance is essen-
tially subject, is expressed in the notion which pronounces the abso-
lute to be spirit:
0 this is the most sublime Concept, a Concept 
A dialectical refutation actually completes the criticized principle, be-
cause it solves a specific problem, or fulfills some definite lack that it has 
identified in it; thus it enriches and further develops the principle it re-
futes. That process will continue as long as the principle has not been 
fully developed, that is, until the series of its possible immanent refuta-
tions is exhausted. 
Takes notice ... of its progress and result: Hegel's description fits the history 
of philosophy and the construction of the pure system of philosophy; but 
the relevant state of consciousness is different in each case. A philosopher 
refuting his predecessor (like Aristotle vs. Plato, a Stoic against an Epicu-
rean, or Locke vs. Descartes) is unaware of the dialectical complementar-
ity which exists between them. All he sees is an irreconcilable opposition 
between himself and his opponent. In retrospect, however, when con-
structing the pure system of knowledge, the philosopher's mind (like 
Hegel's in writing the Phenomenology) must already be aware that every 
negation is immanent determination, and every position which he ne-
gates and transcends is preserved in the system's positive texture and adds 
further to it. 
Pronounces the absolute to be spirit: This further explicates the idea that 
the absolute is subject and expresses the historical (and not the merely 
evolutional) nature of the absolute. Hegel's concept of spirit comprises 
both "objective spirit/' the world of social and political institutions, and 

112 
Text and Running Commentary 
which belongs to the modern era and its religion. 
0 The spiritual 
alone is the actual: it is [1] the essence, or that which is-in-itself; [2] 
that which relates itself and becomes determined-a being-other 
and being-for-itself; [3] that which, in its determinateness, remains 
within itself: in other words, the spiritual is in-and-for-itself. 
0 
At first, however, its being in-and-for-itself is so only for us, or 
in itself;
0 it is the spiritual substance. 
0 The spiritual must yet be 
the higher "absolute spirif' which includes art, religion, and philosophy, 
in which a given culture or period expresses (and justifies) itself in its 
reflective mental products. 
The modern era and its religion: The idea that true actuality ("the absolute") 
is spirit rather than substance entails the principle of idealism, which 
Hegel sees as defining the modern era. In this respect, Spinoza was only 
a premodern philosopher. Genuine Modernity, according to Hegel, did 
not arise with the Renaissance or the seventeenth century, but with the 
appearance of German Idealism, first in Kanf s limited form marked by 
finitude, and then in Hegel's more comprehensive form of Idealism, 
which sets the ground for reconciling modern philosophy with religion, 
and, thereby, for creating a theory of the absolute. 
In-and{or-itself(an und fiir sich): This expression usually indicates in Hegel 
the mode of being in which a system or an individual has realized its 
essence through its other and returned to itself as actual. Thereby it has 
become fully autonomous, or free. It now possesses both a dimension of 
being ("in-itself') and a dimension of reflection ("for-itself') which mutu-
ally mediate one another. Because nothing external limits that system or 
that individual anymore, it has been fully realized as free or self-sufficient. 
From a metaphysical standpoint, this freedom entails idealism. At our, 
present point it the text, Hegel, again criticizing Spinoza, identifies the 
in-and-for-itself with spirit or spirituality in general. Spinoza was wrong 
in believing substance to be free or self-sufficient ("cause of itself'); only 
a spiritual principle can be that. At first, however, the spiritual principle 
itself appears as a kind of "spiritual substance"-namely, in abstract or 
self-alienated form and therefore as not-yet-free. (See Hspiritual sub-
stance," on the next page.) 
For us, or in itself A common expression in the Phenomenology. The experi-
ences and adventures of consciousness-the protagonist of the story-
are described in this book from the standpoint of the experiencing con-
sciousness as it is involved with and immersed within the process. But 

Text and Running Commentary 
113 
spiritual for itself too, it must be knowledge of the spiritual and 
knowledge of itself as spirit. This means that spirit must be an 
object to itself, but at once a sublated object, which is reflected 
in itself. Spirit is for-itself only for us, in so far as its spiritual 
content is generated by itself; but insofar as it is for-itself also for 
itself, then this self-generation, 
0 the pure Concept, 
0 is also the 
the Phenomenology also takes a second standpoint-that of our conscious-
ness, of the philosophers who observe and study the experiencing con-
sciousness and its evolution from the vantage-point of the final result, of 
which "we" are already aware. That which for the experiencing con-
sciousness is only latent or potential ("in-itself') is already manifest to the 
investigating consciousness ("for-us"). Hence, the equivalence in Hegel's 
usage between the two expressions: c'in-itself' and "for-us." What some-
thing is in itself, it is also for us, though not for itself: we know something 
about it that it does not. 
Spiritual substance: The essence of spirit is to be free and self-sufficient in the 
sense described above; yet at the outset, the principle of spirit still appears 
as a kind of substance. The substantive form of spirituality shows itself in 
the immediate ways in which people live, act, and relate to each other and 
to nature; it is embodied in their forms of work, discourse, intercourse, 
and conflict, in their social customs and political institutions. Yet it lacks 
self-reflection: people live it, but are not aware of its actual nature. There-
fore its subjective dimension is not yet realized: it is spirit in the form of a 
substance. This dialectical opposition between content and form creates a 
flaw which helps drive the process further. Spirit has existed in that substan-
tive form in most historical periods, though to different degrees; whereas 
the modern era signifies for Hegel that true being has become spiritual 'cfor-
itself'; namely, it is aware of its spirituality through an explicit philosophical 
system. This is a true revolution which started with Kant's Idealist philoso-
phy and the historical situation from which it matured. 
Self-generation: Idealism provides a more adequate interpretation of Spino-
za's notion of "cause of itself': overall reality derives from its own re-
source. It is self-generated both as object (or being) and as subject (or 
reflection). These two aspects-reflection and being, concept and exis-
tence-belong to each other in the context of one whole. 
The pure Concept: This refers to the subjective aspect of the absolute which 
includes self-motion and self-generation. In the Logic (the part called 'CThe 

114 
Text and Running Commentary 
object-element [das gegenstiindliche] in which spirit has its exis-
tence; and in this way, in its existence, spirit is for-itself a self-
reflecting object. The spirit which, thus developed, knows itselF 
as spirit is Science. 
0 Science is its actuality, and the realm it builds 
itself in its own element. 
[26] Pure self-knowledge in absolute being-other, this ether
0 as such, 
is the foundation and territory of Science, or is knowing in generaL 
The beginning of philosophy presupposes or demands that con-
sciousness reside in this element. But this element acquires its com-
pletion and transparency only through the movement of its becom-
ing. It is pure spirituality, as a universal in the mode of simple 
immediacy. 0 This simple, which, as simple, has existence, is the soil 
Subjective Logic") Hegel draws a parallel between the structure of the 
(CConcepf' and the structure of the CCI think:'' Both exist as self-particular-
izing universals, that is, as a dialectical self-engendering unity of universal-
ity and particularity. Hence the subjective interpretation that should be 
given to expressions like ""the Concept in general" or ccthe pure Concept., 
Knows itself (from Selbsterkennen, in the sense of self-recognition): I recognize 
myself in the way one recognizes someone known in the past. 
Science: The final system of philosophy. Spirit, in the course of its evolution, 
undergoes several degrees of partial self-consciousness-either because it 
becomes aware of itself through the less-than-adequate medium of reli-
gious and artistic images, or because its adequate medium-philosophy, 
the Concept-has not yet evolved into a fully coherent and explicit state. 
When the final system of philosophy arises, spirit becomes conscious of 
itself as it is in truth, a reflection that has also an objective side, a side of 
being. This is the moment of idealism in philosophy. It then resides in its \ 
own element, its genuine environment, as when one says that the ele-
ment of fish is water. 
Ether: Hegel picks the metaphor of ether to characterize the "element" of 
knowledge, because ether had traditionally been considered the purest, 
most transparent and ''minimally corporeal'-' body, yet a real being, one 
of the elements of the universe. 
SimJ!le immediacy: As mentioned, the only way Hegel believes he can expli-
cate being is by such notions as "immediacy." What characterized being 
is its being posited immediately, barring reduction to anything else. Since 
this is how spirit, too, appears at first, spirit, too, has being; it is a real 
form of existence and not a lofty abstraction. 

Text and Running Commentary 
115 
[Boden]: it is the thinking which has its being only in spirit. Since 
this element, this immediacy of spirit, is spirit's substantiality in 
general, it is the transfigured essentiality; the reflection which is 
itself simple;
0 the immediacy which, as such, is for itself; it is being 
which is, in itself, reflection. Science requires that self-conscious-
ness, by its own agency, be already elevated to this ether, so it can 
live-and will live-with and within it. But from the opposite side, 0 
the individual has a right to demand of Science that it give him at 
least the ladder
0 by which to access that standpoint-and that it 
point out [that ladder] within the individual himself. The individu-
al's right is grounded in his absolute independence, which he 
knows he possesses in every shape which his knowledge assumes. 
0 
The reflection which is itself simple: This and the following two phrases are 
further attempts to say that reflection has an aspect of being, and that 
being is of itself reflection. 
From the opposite side: At this point, Hegel starts a discussion explaining 
another major role of the Phenomenology. The individual person cannot 
be expected to get out of himself and embrace an absolute truth which 
to him is foreign and in which he cannot recognize his own self. Rather, 
philosophy must start with the individual as s/he is, responding to the 
particular individual's demands and state of consciousness as individual. 
This is Kierkegaard' s objection to Hegel which Hegel here recognizes as 
valid (see the introduction). Hegel also accepts Descartes .. demand that 
philosophy start with the individual's subjective state of certainty. Yet, 
unlike Descartes (and following Kant), Hegel shows that the "I think" is 
neither primary nor simple. There are different levels of consciousness 
and self-consciousness making one another possible, which the experienc-
ing consciousness-the protagonist of the Phenomenology-will traverse 
as its own states of consciousness. This is why the Phenomenology must 
not be written as abstract theory but as a kind of existential experiment, 
as if describing the adventures and experiences of some real (though uni-
versal) mind capable of using the first person. 
The ladder: This ladder is the Phenomenology. 
In every shape which his knowledge assumes: The process we are going to 
reconstruct will therefore be the individual-'s own process of evolution: 
At every stage, his knowledge and self-knowledge will take a different 
form; but he, as individual, will persist in all of them and attain subjective 
satisfaction according to the conditions of every given stage. And just as 

116 
Text and Running Commentary 
For in each of these shapes, whatever its content, and whether or 
not it is recognized by Science, the individual is the absolute form, 
namely, the immediate certainty of himself, 
0 and thereby (if some-
one prefers this phrase) he is unconditioned being. 
The standpoint of consciousness
0 is to know the object-like [ge-
genstii:ndlich] things as standing opposite it, and to know itself as 
the higher standpoint implicit in the new stage will become the individu-
ar s own standpoint, so the lack or flaw affecting that stage will also be 
experienced by the individual as his own deficiency. This will drive him 
to continue searching for the specific standpoint that would respond to 
the particular successive flaws he experiences. In that way, reliance on the 
individual's mind is a necessary condition for the overall spirit's evolution. 
The immediate certainty of himself Unlike Descartes, the experience of cer-
tainty (Gewissheit) has only subjective value for Hegel. "Certainty" stands 
in opposition to '"'"truth." Certainty is the illusion of complete simplicity 
and lack of mediation, whereas truth requires that everything be medi-
ated by everything else. Certainty therefore stands at the starting point 
of the Phenomenology whereas truth emerges at its end. The individual 
subject begins by knowing herself in the primitive form of '"'"certainty" 
and ends as the consciousness of herself in the developed universalized 
state of "truth." This entails that the subject knows and recognizes his 
self through the complete system of philosophy, and through those natu-
ral and social configurations which embody-and partly also alienate-
his essential selfhood, and from which the subject reconstitutes itself as 
actualized spirit. In every case, the subject, the self, remains at the center 
while its content and modalities change as it reaches toward more com-
plex and universal levels of self-consciousness. 
, 
The standpoint of consciousness: This phrase, in the strict (and narrow) sense 
of "consciousness," which is distinct from '"'self-consciousness" and "rea-
son," is a recurring systematic term in Hegel. It means the standpoint of 
dualism, the severance between man and world, subject and object. Dual-
ism is inherent in the way the ordinary person ('natural consciousness'') 
experiences the world as self-evident; on a higher level, dualism character-
izes the scientific and philosophical consciousness at the stage of the "un-
derstanding." All of these standpoints accept the severance of conscious-
ness from its objects as self-evident. But for a philosophically formed 
mind taking the standpoint of "reason," dualism is false. It is the other 
of spirit in which spirit is lost. Each side thus experiences the other's 

Text and Running Commentary 
117 
standing opposite them. For Science, however, this standpoint is the 
other; and the state in which consciousness knows itself to be by 
itself is to Science the loss of spirit. To consciousness, on the other 
hand, the element of Science is something remote and lying beyond, 
in which it no longer possesses itsel£ Each of these sides appears to 
the other as the reversal of truth. In entrusting itself directly to Sci-
ence, natural consciousness, drawn by something it does not know, 
attempts for once to walk on its head. 
0 And the compulsion to take 
this unfamiliar posture and move in it is a needless and unprepared 
for violence
0 which natural consciousness is expected to do to itself. 
Science can be what it may in itself; in relation to immediate self-
consciousness it presents itself as being upside down. 
0 In other 
words, since immediate self-consciousness has its principle of actual-
ity0 in self-certainty, Science has the form of nonactuality as long as 
standpoint as utterly alien, distant, and impossible, a position which it 
cannot adopt without self-betrayal and self-deception. The role of the 
Phenomenology, as said before, is to offer the ccladder" by which one can 
pass from the standpoint of natural consciousness to that of speculative 
philosophy by way of self-realization rather than self-betrayal. 
To walk on its head: This is what the ordinary person feels when agreeing 
to philosophize, and what the philosopher of the "understanding" (or 
((consciousness") feels when experiencing the philosophy of dialectical 
reason. Hegel in this passage shows comprehension for the gap and 
strangeness separating philosophy from ordinary life, and from ordinary 
discursive science, too. (The image of "walking on the head" has served 
Marx,s polemics against Hegers.) 
Unprepared for violence: A rational standpoint might land on a person as a 
violent imposition from the outside if she has not evolved toward it grad-
ually out of herself. Hegel seems to aim this criticism against the Enlight-
enment, whose radical rationalism led to violence-not only mental and 
intellectual, but physical violence-in the name of reason. 
Being upside down (verkehrt): The idea here is stronger than a mere "rever-
sal": it is a world which looks completely out of order. 
Self-consciousness has its principle of actuality: The actuality of self-con-
sciousness lies in the certainty it has of itself, without which it would 
lose itself and disperse. One cannot therefore reach the standpoint of 
philosophical Science by provoking a violent rupture between conscious-
ness and itself, namely, by losing self-certainty. Without the subjective 

118 
Text and Running Commentary 
this principle stands for itself outside Science. Hence, Science must 
unite this element with itself, or rather, it must show that-and 
how-this element belongs to it. In lacking that actuality, Science is 
but the content as in-itself, 
0 the purpose which is still only in-
wardness-not spirit, but a spiritual substance. This in-itself must 
exteriorize itself and become for-itself; which means it must posit 
self-consciousness as one with itself. 
0 
[27] This becoming of Science in general, or the becoming of Know-
ing [Wissen],
0 is what this phenomenology of spirit presents. Know-
ing as it is at the outset, immediate spirit, is the spiritless: sensible 
consciousness. In order to become actual Knowing, or to generate 
the element of Science which is its pure Concept, that conscious-
ness must work its way through a long road. That process of be-
coming, as it will constitute itself [ aufstellen] in the shapes and con-
experience of conviction, philosophical Science will lack actuality and 
be abstract, empty talk. One must therefore combine Science and self-
certainty; and since at first they contradict each other, we need a gradual 
bridging between them in the form of the Phenomenology. 
The content as in-itself. This refers to the content of truth given dogmati-
cally, as dead philosophical doctrine, in which the subjective mind cannot 
recognize itsel£ Such doctrine, even when it has an inherent ground, is a 
mere in-itself, an end that has not been realized by existing consciousness. 
Therefore, we may regard it neither as spiritual, nor as actually rational, 
but only as a spiritual substance in the sense described above. (Ironically, 
this is how some of Heger s later writings, like the Encyclopaedia, might 
look from the viewpoint of the Phenomenology.) 
One with itself. What is required is not only that self-consciousness recog-, 
nize truth as the content of philosophical science, but that it identify and 
recognize itself within it; so that philosophical science will be formed as 
a form of self-consciousness (and self recognition). In its attempt to grasp 
being, philosophy thus discovers that it has actually understood con-
sciousness itself. This discovery leads to philosophical self-conscious-
ness-Heger s brand of idealism-which, in comprehending being, also 
comprehends the constitutive role of knowledge within being. 
Knowing [Wissen]: A cognitive attitude distinguished both from sheer faith 
(glauben) and from active behavior (praxis, handeln). Actually, however, 
by Wissen Hegel understands not only rational science proper, but also 
opinions, myths, and practical attitudes. 

Text and Running Commentary 
119 
tents which are to show themselves in it, will be different from 
one"' s image
0 of an introduction by which a nonscientific conscious-
ness enters into Science; and, in particular, will differ from that 
enthusiasm
0 which, as in a gunshot, starts immediately with the 
absolute and is finished with other points of view by simply declar-
ing that it will take no notice of them. 
[28] The task of guiding the individual from his uncultured stand-
point to Knowing had to be taken in its universal sense;
0 that is, we 
had to consider the universal individual-self-conscious spirit
0-in 
its cultural education [Bildung]. 
0 The relation between these two is 
That process ... will be different from one's image: The Phenomenology is 
neither an introduction to the philosophical Science nor its grounding, 
although it contains elements of both. It resembles an introduction in 
that it introduces the unphilosophical mind into philosophy, yet not 
externally, not by summarizing a set of rules and results, but rather 
through an inner existential thought-experience which the mind under-
goes in the first person. At the same time the Phenomenology also provides 
an external grounding for philosophical Science in that it demonstrates 
its historical necessity. 
That enthusiasm: Abstract rationalists leap directly into their truth and, 
with patronizing disdain, dismiss all the preceding false opinions, myths, 
and unphilosophical standpoints as useless. By contrast, the Phenomenol-
ogy works hard to understand those inferior forms, both from within 
themselves and from their role in the overall process of the spirit. 
In its universal sense: The subject of the Phenomenology must be an individ-
ual, but one whose scope transcends the limits of the single person and 
encompasses the whole history ofhumanity. The true subject of the pro-
cess is therefore the human race taken as a universal individual. Hegel 
follows up on Kant and Herder, but modifies their ideas with a principle 
of totalization derived from his own metaphysics. 
The universal individual-self-conscious spirit: The ground for viewing the 
human race as a singular subject derives from spirit's need to be actual-
ized through human history. The human race creates history as the sub-
ject of the process in which it both manifests and constitutes itself. 
Cultural education [Bildung]: The link Hegel sets between Bildung (culture 
or formative education) and humanity at large indicates that the Phenome-
nology can be read as the story of the human race's self-education, a 
process in which it creates culture (by spiritualizing nature) and creates 

120 
Text and Running Commentary 
the following: in the universal individual, every moment displays 
itself in the same way that it assumes a concrete form and gains its 
own configuration, whereas the particular individual is an incom-
plete spirit, a concrete shape whose whole existence is dominated 
by one single determination, while all the others are present in him 
in blurred outline only. In a spirit that stands higher than another, 
the lower concrete existence has been reduced to an indistinct mo-
ment. 0 What formerly was the matter itself is now but a trace; its 
shape is shrouded and become a simple shadow. An individual 
whose substance
0 is the higher-standing spirit traverses this past in 
the same way that someone undertaking an advanced science 
would go over the preparatory cognitions he already possesses, in 
order to make their content freshly present to his mind; he calls 
itself through culture. We have here a parallel with the Platonic process 
of education which is also supposed to lead eventually to absolute Know-
ing. Yet in Hegel the disciple is not a single person, a Glaucon or a 
Theaetetus, but the Huniversal subject" underlying the whole human 
race; and the educator (or ((midwife,') is not a separate individual (Socra-
tes) but the same overall subject, the human race itself. For this reason, 
the process of Bildung is not merely biographical, but historical; it is the 
self-Bildung of spirit through human history. This process entails a special 
relationship between the single and the universal individual. On the one 
hand, there can be no universal individual separate from the particular 
individuals in whom alone it exists, thinks, and acts, and through whose 
sense of lack or insufficiency it changes and transforms itsel£ On the 
other hand, the single individual depends upon the universal individual, 
both as the source from which single persons derive much of their iden- \ 
tity, and also as the framework limiting the ranges of the achievements 
they may expect. 
An indistinct moment: The previous stages of spirit have sunk and been 
compressed into its past and are no longer at the center. They have been 
interiorized, and become a kind of "memory." 
An individual whose substance: The single individual is nourished by the 
achievements which the universal spirit has accumulated up to her time. 
These are now the individual's "substance" or "inorganic nature" which 
she no longer has to reach and conquer, but only to reappropriate, in the 
same way that a learner reappropriates the mental acquisitions of former 
generations. 

Text and Running Commentary 
121 
those cognitions back to memory without focusing his interest in 
them and dwelling on them. The singular individual must also 
0 
go through the content of the stages in universal spirit's cultural 
education, but as configurations which spirit has already left be-
hind, like stages in a road that has been worked out and leveled. 
What in former periods had occupied the mind of mature men we 
now see descending to mere [ready-made] cognitions, exercises, 
even games of a youthful age; and in the youth"s pedagogical prog-
ress we shall recognize the history of the world's cultural education 
outlined as in silhouette. This past existence is the acquired posses-
sion ° of universal spirit, which constitutes the individual's sub-
stance-or inorganic nature-and thus appears external to him. 
Seen from the individual's perspective, the process of cultural edu-
The singular individual must also: The single individual during his education 
must go again through the stages which the universal spirit has traversed, 
no longer as a new conquest but as something that has been passed and 
become past. In every boy's education, one can observe the major stages 
in the development of the world-Spirit drawn "as in a silhouette." For 
example, the Ten Commandments, Euclidean geometry, Aristotelian 
logic, popular religion, or Bach's chorales-the great spiritual conquests 
of the past-have become items in the curriculum of eighth- to twelfth-
grade children, or are routinely learned within the family. (As we shall 
presently see, this is also Hegel's particular, historicized version of the 
Platonic idea of Hrecollection.") 
The acquired possession: What has been transmitted by former genera-
tions-tradition in its broader sense-contains something which the in-
dividual finds foreign from the start, unfitting her own spirit, although 
in-itself (in a "substantial" and "inorganic" manner) it is a spiritual es-
sence nevertheless, which even contains that individuars essence, albeit 
in an inert mode. The solution lies in that the individual appropriates 
tradition, and makes it her own property and thus assimilates the inor-
ganic to her own organism. Against abstract rationalism, Hegel stresses 
the necessary weight of tradition; but he demands that tradition receive 
its import from the individual's making it her own; and this, as long as 
the process has not attained final reconciliation, must lead to the imma-
nent critique of tradition and to transcending some of its vital features. 
Thus the individual remains the 'ultimate test and the '"'absolute form" 
of the process. 

122 
Text and Running Commentary 
cation consists in that the individual appropriates that which is of-
fered to him ready-made, nourishes himself with his inorganic na-
ture, and takes possession of it for himself. Whereas from the side 
of universal spirit taken as substance, the process consists in its 
giving itself self-consciousness, and generating its becoming and its 
reflection within itself. 
[29] Science in its design [Gestaltung] exhibits [darstellt] this formative 
movement in all its developed detail and necessity, and exhibits also 
that which has already sunk into a moment and possession of spirit. 
The goal is for spirit to gain insight into what Knowing is. Impatient 
minds
0 demand the impossible-to reach the goal without the 
means. However, one must endure the length of this road, since 
every moment is necessary; and one must [also] abide in each of 
these forms, 
0 since each is a whole individual shape, and is consid-
ered in an absolute way only so far as its specific determination is 
considered as whole or as concrete, or [in other words]: when the 
totality is considered within this form's own distinctive determina-
tion. Even the individuar s substance, that is, world-spirit
0 itself, 
has had the patience to go through these forms in time's long ex-
panse, and to undertake the prodigal work of world history, in 
which it fashioned its whole content into each of these forms to 
Impatient minds: This section again criticizes abstract rationalism which 
wants to erase history and advance to the pure rational system in one 
leap ("as in a gunshot," see p. 119). 
And one must [also] abide in each of these forms: Every previous stage and 
passed moment deserve that their essence be contemplated in depth: first, 
because they are a necessary condition for the resulting totality, 
and second because this lingering contemplation will bring out the 
specific deficiencies in every stage and generate the immanent drive to 
pass onward. 
World-spirit: This important term makes here its first appearance in the 
Phenomenology. The world-spirit is the subject of world history (Welt-
geschichte); as such, it is a moment, or dimension, of the absolute subject, 
that is, the universal individual whom Hegel has discussed before. The 
self-expression of the world-spirit in a certain era is Zeitgeist, Hthe spirit 
of the time.'' 

Text and Running Commentary 
123 
the extent of that form's capacity.
0 Now since world-spirit could 
not attain self-consciousness with less work, the individual, too, by 
the nature of things, cannot reach a Conceptual grasp of his sub-
stance with less. Yet the effort required of the individual is today 
smaller, 
0 because the task is already accomplished in itself. The 
content is now an actuality suppressed into possibility;
0 it is a co-
erced immediacy, 
0 a shape reduced to its abbreviation, 
0 to simple 
thought-determinations. As something which is already thought, 
the content is not the possession of substance. It is no longer exis-
tence in the form ofbeing-in-itself--neither an original in-itself, nor 
an in-itself that has sunk into existence-but an in-itself that was 
interiorized into memory [erinnerte Ansich]
0 and must now be con-
To the extent of that form's capacity: Every historical shape is capable of 
expressing the spirit's essence only in a partial and limited way. This ap-
plies also to the individual's belonging to that Zeitgeist. 
The effort required . . . sm.aller: At every given period, the individual must 
reappropriate spirit's past achievements. Yet she needs much less effort 
because this is no longer a new acquisition. 
Suppressed into possibility: In past periods, when spirit had attained cultural 
contents for the first time, it had turned them from abstract possibility 
to actuality. When, later, the individual reappropriates these contents, 
they devolve to a possibility for her, though from the standpoint of the 
world-spirit, they are already actual; therefore, acquiring them does not 
involve the same amount of innovation and labor. 
Coerced immediacy: An immediacy which is forced on the particular individ-
ual, as his "substance." 
A shape reduced to its abbreviation: Now we can remember it as a kind of 
code, no longer in its previous living actuality. 
An in-itself that was interiorized into memory [ erinnerte Ansich ]: The immedi-
acy of spiritual content retained from the past should not be confused 
with the immediacy of inert entities, or of being in general. It is rather 
the immediacy which is specific to spirit-that is, substantive memory. 
Memory is the inventory of past experiences and cultural forms which 
human spirit has accumulated, and which is not conscious of itself but 
needs to be brought to the form of self-consciousness (in Hegelian jargon, 
the interiorized and memorized "in-itself' must become ccfor-itself'). The 
term Erinnerung means both interiorization (creating substantive memory) 
and recollection (calling to memory). The process of interiorization creates 

124 
Text and Running Commentary 
verted [from the form ofbeing-in-itself] into the form ofbeingfor-
itself. Let us describe more closely how this is performed. 
[30] At the stage in which we take up this process, we are spared 
the sublation of existence. What remains, and calls for a higher 
transformation, are representation and the familiarity with the 
forms. The existence which, in a first negation, has been taken 
back0 into the [spiritual] substance, was thereby transposed into 
the element of the self only immediately. Therefore, the newly ac-
quired property of selfhood still retains the same character of un-
moved indifference, ofunconceived [unbegriffner] immediacy, as ex-
istence itself; existence has passed only into representation. 
0 This 
a mental inventory of images, language, knowledge, experiences, aspira-
tions, conflicts, norms, and so forth, which serve as material for spirit's 
evolution (and, at the end of the day, enables the philosophical system to 
particularize itself into specific topics and categories). The thought-con-
tents of the past, having fulfilled their role in the life of the spirit, are 
thereby interwoven into spirif s own texture, even though they have not 
attained self-consciousness. Furthermore, a thought-content belongs by 
nature to spirit itself rather than to something outside it; and because 
that content has never been absolutely external, we are actually "recalling 
it" when thinking it. This is why Hegel considers his system's particular-
ization into specific concepts to be a self-particularization; for when spirit 
derives these concepts from its recollection of its own past, it can be said 
to be deriving from itself. (The concept of interiorization is, I think, Heg-
el's chief version of Plato's theory of recollection and is as central. It 
stands at the background of the concept of cultural education and is the 
substrate enabling the activity of dialectic. 
Has been taken back: By being thought, existence was negated as something 
completely external; it became the property of spirit and entered into the 
general element of selfhood or reflection. However, it first entered that 
domain as something immediate, which is not yet comprehended and 
lacks a concept of itself-namely, as image or figurative representation 
(Vorstellung). This representation must be negated in the next stage in 
order for the Concept to arise. 
Representation (Vorstellung; also, "mental image,): This is what the imagina-
tion, using sense perception, builds as a representation of reality. The real 
has thereby been made mental or spiritual-taken up the form of the 

Text and Running Commentary 
125 
makes it something familiar, 
0 in which the existing spirit no longer 
has its interest and activity, but is done with it. To be thus done 
with existence is the typical activity of a merely particular spirit 
[mind], which does not grasp itself conceptually. By contrast, 
Knowing is directed
0 against this being-familiar and against the rep-
resentation that has so emerged; it is the activity of the universal 
self, and the interest of thinking. The familiar or well-known in[31] 
general, because it is well-known [bekannt], is not known [erkannt]. 
The most common deception in matters of knowledge, a deception 
of oneself and of others, is to presuppose something as well-known 
and let it placate us. 
0 Such knowing, with all its talking here and 
self-but only in a rudimentary, inert way. The representational image 
is the passive, immediate mode in which existence-which appears as 
external-is internalized and becomes spirit's own property. (In philoso-
phy, this moment corresponds to empiricist idealism, as in Berkeley.) The 
image shows a "motionless indifference" to reality, by relating to it as a 
passive and inert representation. By contrast, the Concept plays an active 
role in constituting true actuality. (This moment corresponds to Kant's 
and Hegel's own idealism.) 
Familiar: At the stage of sense perception and figurative representation, 
consciousness is still enslaved in its direct experience. Familiarity becomes 
the supreme test of what it ought to accept or reject (and is given the 
dignified name of "philosophy of common sense"). Because the world as 
it appears in sense perception and image representation looks so familiar, 
one hardly bothers to investigate it any further and reach out for its truth. 
As a result, (a) the familiar thing remains the least known and understood; 
(b) it generates dogmatism; and (c) it expresses the standpoint of particu-
lar subjectivity, in which every person views things in his or her own way. 
Knowing is directed: Philosophical knowledge requires that the dogmatism 
and tyranny of the familiar be overcome, and that the mind rise to the 
standpoint of universality. This, as we have seen, cannot be performed in 
one leap, but requires that the particular consciousness be satisfied in all 
subsequent stages. Yet that satisfaction will no longer consist of relating 
every new idea to something directly familiar. 
Let it placate us: Hegel recognizes that every act of knowledge must refer 
the unknown to something known. But he opposes the arbitrary connec-
tions which simply link something distant and abstract to something famil-

126 
Text and Running Commentary 
there, and without knowing what is happening to it, does not move 
an inch from its place. 
0 The subject, the object, God, nature, the 
intellect, sensibility, and so forth are laid down at the foundation 
without examination, as well-known and valid elements, to serve 
as rigid points for both the outgoing and ingoing movement [of 
knowledge]. The movement
0 passes back and forth between these 
immobile points-and thus only crosses their surface. Likewise, to 
understand and verify something
0 consists [in such philosophy] in 
checking whether what is being claimed is found in everybody 
else"'s representation, whether this is how it appears to him and 
looks familiar, or not. 
[32] 
Yet, even an ordinary analysis of a representation, 
0 as it is usually 
performed, is nothing but the sublation of the form of its being-
iar as it is, without transforming the latter in any way-neither breaking 
it down into its constituent parts, nor relocating it into the proper context, 
nor following its internal dialectic. And once the direct linkage to the famil-
iar is made, one thinks it gives us an explanation, when all it does is silence 
our curiosity or anxiety. This procedure is not an attempt to understand 
but to cater to the popular mind, which is satisfied by what is considers 
familiar, thereby overcoming its apprehension of the unknown. 
Does not move an inch from its place: Without alerting the reader, Hegel 
extends his attack to include Fichte. Not only the partisans of common-
sense and the familiar, but also Fichte, their apparent opponent, who 
claims to represent a rational science as against commonsense empiri-
cism, actually commits the fallacy of basing himself on the familiar. 
Fichte' s Theory of Science contains a large number of categories-forms 
of knowledge and existence-which it explains by simply weaving them 
one after the other on the thread of a single principle, and often linking 
the abstract to the familiar in the way just criticized. 
The movement: The activity of discovery, proof, and the like, which in Fichte 
is external to the subject matter and belongs to the I alone. 
To understand and verify something: All the allusions here are to the proce-
dure, or "movement," by which Fichte constructs and justifies his Theory 
of Science. This movement affects the I alone, but not its object, actual 
reality 
Analysis of a representation: Even analytic thinking dissects an image into 
its constituents, thereby abolishing it as an image and passing over to the 
meaning it has for the intellect. It also tries to penetrate the deep structure 

Text and Running Commentary 
127 
familiar. To break down a representation ° into its original elements 
is to go back to its moments which, at least, no longer have the 
form of the representation as initially found, but are the immediate 
possession of the self. True, the analysis gets only to thoughts
0 that 
are themselves familiar, that are rigid and static determinations. 
But this severed, nonactual
0 element is nevertheless essential as 
moment, because the concrete can move itself only by severing 
itself and becoming nonactual. The activity of dissolution is the 
force and work of the understanding, which is the greatest and 
most wondrous power
0-indeed it is the absolute power. The cir-
cle, which rests enclosed in itself and holds its moments in the 
immediate relation of substance, provokes no sense of wonder. But 
that the accidental in detachment from its surrounding-the acci-
dental as such, that connected [entity] which is actual only in mu-
tual dependence with others-should gain its unique existence and 
of its subject matter, its ''inner'' or "true" form as it exists for the under-
standing. Hegel implies that Fichte forgoes even the analytical stage: he 
not only lacks true dialectic, but fails to perform even a genuine analysis 
of the concepts which he simply threads together. 
To break down a representation: Hegel does not mean breaking a complex 
image into its image-ingredients, but into its categorized elements; analy-
sis is also categorization. 
Thoughts: Even though analytic thinking reaches fixed or rigid thoughts 
only, the understanding's activity of division and analysis is the model of 
thinking in general. 
Nonactual: Analysis and division do not belong to the actual thing itself; 
they express the external limit between its parts. Even so, they are an 
essential element of thought-the ground of the understanding, which 
is the preparatory condition for philosophical reason. 
The greatest and most wondrous power: From Parmenides to Spinoza, phi-
losophers of unity and totality had trouble explaining the origin of nega-
tion, and therefore the origin of movement, particularity, and difference. 
Hegel says that the origin of negation is the understanding (intellectus, 
nous, Verstand) ... Therefore, the understanding is the most wondrous 
power, for it explains and makes possible the awonder" of there being a 
diversified universe with movement and distinctions-it makes creation 
itself possible. 

128 
Text and Running Commentary 
a separate freedom, this is the colossal power of the negative; 0 it is 
the energy of thinking, the pure I. Death
0 (if we wish to give that 
name to nonactuality) is the most awesome thing of all; and up-
holding the dead requires the greatest force. A powerless beauty0 
hates the understanding, because the understanding expects it to 
do what it cannot. 
0 But the life of the spirit is not a life that shuns 
death
0 and bewares destruction, keeping clean of it; it is a life that 
The colossal power of the negative: Understanding (the intellect) is the negative 
principle which constructs the world by undermining the compact monot-
ony of being and generating distinctions, diversity, and movement. Under-
standing also penetrates beyond the immediate images into what is consid-
ered their underlying structure. Yet at the same time understanding 
generates severance, rupture--even terror-in life and the mind; it creates 
a break between the mind and itself, between man and world, finite and 
infinite, subject and object, and so forth. Therefore, in the next stage one 
must go beyond the understanding, though not before having exhausted 
the positive power which the understanding's "negative energy, holds. 
Death: A metaphor for the power of negativity. Just as negativity is neces-
sary for the constitution of positive reality, so death is needed for the 
constitution of life and of spirit's power. 
A powerless beauty: Hegel says kraftlose Schonheit, "powerless beauty," as 
distinguished, I think, from a powerful beauty which admits negativity 
and death. Powerless beauty is shallow, pale, rosy, one-dimensional; it 
hates the understanding, not only because it cannot stand analysis, but 
also because it abhors negativity. (Abhorring all negativity is a possible 
characterization of kitsch.) Beauty, however, need not be powerless or 
kitschy-it can and should accept negativity with all its implications, in-
cluding tragedy and death. 
To do what it cannot: This concerns only powerless beauty, which is super-
ficial; powerful beauty can sustain the negative. 
Not a life that shuns death: Hegel now turns from logical and metaphysical 
negativity to the role of death and destruction in the life of the spirit. Just 
as reality entails negativity, so the spirit is built by coping with death, 
suffering, and destruction. Spirit does not build itself as pure positivity 
shunning or ignoring these factors. Spirit can grow only by "looking the 
negative in the face," coping or struggling with it and residing within it. 
Thereby, negativity becomes a positive, constructive force. This is a major 
implication ofHegers dialectic: suffering, passion, war, destruction, false-

Text and Running Commentary 
129 
bears death and maintains itself in it. Spirit gains its truth only 
through finding itself within absolute rupture. Spirit is that power 
not as a positive which turns away from the negative, as when we 
say of something that it is nothing or false, and having thus finished 
with it we turn to something else; rather, spirit is that power only 
in so far as it looks the negative in the face and dwells in it. This 
dwelling is the magic force which converts the negative into being. 
That power is what we called above subject:
0 the power which, in 
giving the specific determination existence in its own element, 
0 
sublates the abstract immediacy, namely, that which merely is in 
general, and thereby is the true substance: it [the subject] is being 
or immediacy which does not have mediation outside itself, but is 
that very mediation. 
[33] The fact that what is represented becomes the possession of pure 
self-consciousness, this elevation to universality in general, is only 
one side of cultural education° and not yet its fulfillment. The 
hood, violence, and the other modalities of negativity are organic constit-
uents of truth and of spirif s growth and actuality. Even the end of the 
road will not abolish them completely. History does not lead toward 
utopia in the fairy-tale sense of pure positive freedom and happiness. 
(This, to the dialectic, is historical kitsch.) The negative elements, though 
no longer dominant, will still be there when reason is actualized, func-
tioning dialectically within an overall positive and rational system. 
Subject: Again identifying the subject with the power of negativity. 
In its own element: The same specific content is believed to exist in two ways: 
as external being, and as a thought-content grasped by the mind. In the 
latter mode, it receives existence from the subject within the element of 
the spirit, albeit in a low level of spirituality-that of sense perception, 
imaging, or inarticulate thought. Even so, the content no longer merely 
exists but, in order to exist, enters mediation: and that which mediates it 
is the subject. Hegel thinks it follows from here that the subject does not 
face an external substance, but is itself the substance: it is mediated being, 
both being and its self-mediation. Therefore, the true element of being is 
the spirit, by which being is mediated and becomes what it is. 
Cultural education: The process we have described in epistemic and onto-
logical terms (the transformation of apparently external being into spiri-
tual reality through perception and thinking) is for Hegel a privileged 

130 
Text and Running Commentary 
mode of study in antiquity differed from modern times
0 in that 
the ancient mode of study was the genuine education of natural 
consciousness. Examining itself separately with regard to every as-
pect of its existence, and philosophizing about everything that came 
its way, it produced itself as a thoroughly active universality. In 
modern times, however, the individual finds the abstract form 
ready-made. The effort to grasp and make it one's own is more 
like directly pushing the inner toward the outside, and like an ab-
breviated birthgiving
0 [abgeschnittne Erzeugung] of the universal, 
rather than developing this universal out of the concrete and the 
manifold of existence. Therefore, our work today is not so much 
to purify the individual from the immediate mode of the senses 
and make him into a substance that thinks and is thought, but 
rather the opposite task-to sublate the rigidly determinate 
thoughts, and thereby to actualize and spiritualize the universal. 
0 
However, it is much harder
0 to give fluidity to the rigid thoughts 
than to sensible existence. The reason was given above: the deter-
minations of thought have the I, the power of negativity or pure 
example of Bildung. This may indicate that Bildung is not something we 
make in addition to other things, nor does it depend on specific institu-
tions; rather it derives from our cognitive relation to being. Culture con-
tinues and develops the primordial mode of Bildung in which humans 
exist in the world. 
Antiquity differed from modern times: In ancient times, cultural formation 
consisted in breaking away from the apparent concreteness of the senses 
and rising to the standpoint of understanding and universality in general. 
In modern times, the universal standpoint of the understanding has already 
been attained (or, rather, reappropriated on a higher level) by the philoso-
phy of the Enlightenment. Now we should overcome the abstractions of 
the understanding with its gaps and dualisms and assume the standpoint 
of dialectical reason. 
An abbreviated birthgiving: Sounds like a caesarian birth! ... 
Spiritualize the universal: The understanding's analytical and merely gen-
eral mode of thinking is not yet true spirituality. One must (a) negate the 
rigid self-identity of the thoughts of the understanding and make them 
"fluid'' and dialectical; and, even more difficult, one must (b) reunite the 
understanding with the senses, the interiority of thought with external 
empirical being. Both tasks call for dialectical reason. 

Text and Running Commentary 
131 
actuality, for their substance and for the element of their existence, 
whereas the sensible determinations have only the powerless ab-
stract immediacy, 
0 or being as such. The thoughts become fluid 
when pure thinking, this inward immediacy, 
0 recognizes itself as 
moment;
0 or when sheer self-certainty
0 abstracts from itself. 0 This 
does not mean° that it neglects itself or turns aside, but that it 
It is much harder: In its modern position, the dualistic understanding entails 
two forms of dogmatism: (a) the analytic rationalist kind, which clutches 
its rigid laws as if they were the last word of thought; and (b) the empiri-
cist kind, which takes sense data to be absolute and certain in their giv-
enness. (CCThe myth of the given/' as some later philosophers call it.) 
Hegel demands to abolish the dogmatic compactness ofboth these views 
and render them "fluid." The first task was made possible by Kant's dis-
covery that the activity of the understanding derives from the I (which 
is, Hegel adds, essentially the process of self-negation). Yet the second 
dogmatism, that of sense data, is far harder to remove, because sense 
data refer to immediate being as their principle (c£ the beginning of both 
the Phenomenology and the Logic), and because people tend to grasp being 
as a rigid external "thing-in-itself' immune to the subject's intervention. 
Even Kant, Hegel charges, did not overcome this powerful fallacy. 
Powerless abstract immediacy: The immediacy attributed to external being 
is abstract because it lacks distinctions; it is powerless because it is passive 
and inert. Whereas the immediacy of being which is attributed to the I 
is a distinction-creating activity and in this respect powerful. 
Inward immediacy: The aspect of being or existence pertaining to the I, 
that which allowed Descartes to say: cogito, sum. 
Moment: And not as the first and last stage, not as absolute. 
Self-certainty: The primary self-certainty of the 'j;I think" and of its immedi-
ate thought-contents: in both cases, the I is attached to them-and is 
attached to itself-with the same kind of certainty and dogmatic fixity. 
Abstracts from itself The ego's certainty of itself is the source of the cer-
tainty it has of other things. The latter, whether they are sense objects 
or objects of thought, derive their certainty from their unchallengeable 
presence within the certainty which the I has of itself. Yet this initial 
certainty is uncritical and must be overcome-must be "abstracted" 
from-as a prerequisite for moving toward truth. 
This does not mean: We have seen that the individual's self-certainty is pre-
served throughout the process, though not as fixed in its primary form, 
or as attached to the seemingly immediate experience of being in which 

132 
Text and Running Commentary 
gives up the fixity of its self-positing-both the fixity of the purely 
concrete, namely, the 1° in opposition to the differentiated content, 
and the fixity of the differences
0 which are set in the element of 
pure thinking and participate in the same unconditionality
0 of the 
I. By this movement, the pure thoughts become Concepts, 
0 and 
are for the first time what they are in truth-self-movements, cir-
cles, 0 or (that which is their substance) spiritual essentialities [geis-
tige Wesenheiten ]. 
0 
it had first appeared to itself. The process of Bildung transforms self-cer-
tainty to its true configuration: at the end of the road, the individual will 
be conscious of himself, no longer in a direct mental experience, but 
through a complete philosophical system in which the individual redis-
covers his own self, and through the diverse natural and social forms 
which that system conceptualizes. 
The fixity of the purely concrete, namely, the I: Perceiving the Cartesian I as 
a separate entity capable of existing in-itself even without there being a 
world, other persons, and intellectual truth-that view was "given up" 
(overcome) by Kant. 
The fixity of the differences: What Kant was unable to "give up" was fixing 
the laws and categories of the understanding as a rigid set, subject to the 
law of noncontradiction which receives its fixity from a self-identical I. 
Kant could never overcome this second fixity because he refused to intro-
duce self-contradiction into the I. Recognizing that the second overcom-
ing is necessary leads to Hegel's philosophy. 
Unconditionality: This is Kant's term for the absolute. 
Concepts: As distinguished from images, representations, and also self-iden-
tical determinations of the intellect which common language calls "con-
cepts." Hegel uses the term "Concepts" here in his special sense of dy-
namic structures of thought and reality alike, which have objective 
existence in nature and society and not merely in the thinking mind. In 
that respect, Hegel's Concepts broaden the scope of Kant's categories 
which are also said to simultaneously determine both the structure of 
subjective understanding and that of objective reality. (This is the essence 
of Kant's Copernican revolution, or principle of idealism, which Hegel 
accepts and reworks.) 
Self-movements, circles: At this point we are peering into the heart ofHegel's 
speculative thought. The Concepts in the strict systematic sense are sub-

Text and Running Commentary 
133 
[34] This movement
0 of the pure essentialities constitutes the nature 
of scientificity in generaL Seen as the mutual connection of their 
content, the movement is the content's necessity and its extension° 
into an organic whole. Moreover, this movement also makes a com-
plete and necessary Science of the way in which the Concept of 
Science is attained. The preparation of Science ceases to be a con-
ject-like principles moving in purposive motion-as was said earlier about 
the subject. These are the fundamental patterns of reality-the categories 
of the Hegelian philosophical Science. 
Spiritual essentialities [geistige Wesenheiten J: This uncommon term stands 
as a synonym for the system of categories which constitute philosophical 
Science (and, to a certain extent, it is Hegel's substitute for Plato's "realm 
of ideas"). The categories or "spiritual essences" are not only notions but, 
at the same time, principles of objective reality, and thereby unite thinking 
and being. When philosophy rethinks those categories, it is therefore 
dealing not with itself only, but with actual being and its structure. The 
first Science in which Hegel worked out these "spiritual essences" is the 
Logic, which treats the basic categories of thought as the foundations of 
actual reality. Still, the Logic is only a Hkingdom of shadows"" (Hegel's 
idiom), for it lacks the rich variety of natural and historical forms, which 
Hegel worked out in other parts of his system. Eventually he tried to 
unify them in the Encyclopaedia of Philosophical Sciences. 
This movement: The dialectical movement in which all basic concepts are 
negated and .reconstituted through further negations, as described above. 
The movement of the categories within an organic whole is what, for 
Hegel, gives philosophy its own kind of scientific character (WtSsenschaft-
lichkeit), which must be distinguished from that of the formal and the 
experimental disciplines. 
The content's necessity and its extension: When we try to think a concept 
from all relevant angles and grasp its various and opposing implications, 
it leads us to further concepts, which again take us further. This expan-
sion can cease only if it turns out to be a circular movement which pro-
duces an organic whole. As the thought-movement expands, it incorpo-
rates concepts which philosophers have used here and there, in a 
piecemeal or urigid" manner, and liberates them of the accidental and 
dogmatic character they had before, endowing them with necessity 
within the complete system. 

134 
Text and Running Commentary 
tingent philosophizing which hangs on to these or other objects, 
thoughts, or relations of the imperfect consciousness as they arise 
by accident, or which seeks to ground the true in arguments turn-
ing here and there, or drawing inferences and consequences from 
[pre]determined thoughts.
0 Rather, by the movement of the Con-
cept, this road will encompass the complete worldliness of con-
sciousness in its necessity. 
[3 5] This exhibition constitutes the first part of Science. 
0 The reason is 
that, at first, spirit's existence is nothing but the immediate or the 
beginning, and the beginning is not yet its return to itself: What distin-
guishes this part of Science from its other part is therefore the element 
of immediate existence.
0 Pointing out this difference leads us to exam-
ine some rigid thoughts
0 which arise usually in this context. 
[36] Spirit's immediate existence, consciousness, has two moments:
0 
Knowing and objectivity. The latter is the negative with respect to 
Knowing. Since spirit develops itself in the element [of conscious-
ness ]
0 and expounds its moments in it, they all assume this opposi-
[Pre ]determined thoughts: Like axioms or first principles. 
The first part of Science: Meaning the Phenomenology; see the introduction. 
Immediate existence: In its concrete or immediate existence, spirit takes the 
form of consciousness: this is the medium in which the Phenomenology 
will move. Therefore, the Phenomenology is also called "the Science of 
consciousness' experience." In a different context, Hegel says the Phenom-
enology exhibits spirit according to its empirical appearance and develop-
ment in time. The two descriptions are compatible. The subject of the 
Phenomenology is spirit, manifested as consciousness and embodied in time 
and in phenomenal reality. 
Some rigid thoughts: Dogmatic ideas which Hegel intends to undermine 
and criticize through a dialectical process. 
Two moments: Consciousness is by nature a consciousness of something; it 
has an intentional character. It therefore has two moments: the moment 
of knowledge, and the moment of the object (of abjectness), which is 
negative with regard to knowledge. The two moments relate to one an-
other as an opposition or mutual negation; both belong to consciousness' 
characteristic intentional relation, and therefore, to its essence. 
In the element [of consciousness]: Presenting spirit within the element of con-
sciousness means that all the ingredients of spirit appear as configurations 
of consciousness and are subject to the duality which characterize it. 

Text and Running Commentary 
135 
tion and emerge as shapes of consciousness. The Science of this 
road is the Science of the experience
0 which consciousness under-
goes: substance together with its movement are here considered as 
an object of consciousness. Consciousness knows and conceives 
nothing but that which is in its experience; for what is in conscious-
ness' experience is the spiritual substance, [which is there] as object 
of its self' [ihres Selbst]. Spirit, however, becomes object because it 
is this movement: becoming other to itself, that is, becoming an 
object of its self, 
0 and sublating this being-other. And experience is 
indeed the name given to this movement, in which the immediate, 
that which is not experienced, that is, the abstract
0-be it the [ ab-
stract] of sensible being, or the simple which is merely thought-
alienates itself, and then returns to itself from this alienation, in 
which stage it is, for the first time, manifest in its actuality and 
truth, while also being the property of consciousness. 
[37] The disparity [Ungleichheit] found in consciousness between the 
"'l" and substance, which is the I' s object, is their difference, the 
The Science of experience: The object of our study is consciousness-in-its-
experiencing, in which the world of substance appears as part of con-
sciousness' own world, that is, as the object of experience rather than as 
an object-in-itself. 
As object of its self The dualistic relation is not abolished but is interiorized 
into consciousness' own world. 
Becoming an ~bject of its self. At a higher stage, when consciousness is ex-
pressed as self-consciousness, then, as its own object, consciousness has 
its other within itself and is the overcoming of that otherness. This struc-
ture is analogous to the asubjecf .. as we discussed it in the introduction. 
(Yet Hegel seems here to have leaped from consciousness as a dualistic 
principle to self-consciousness as the restoration of unity.) 
That which is not experienced, that is, the abstract: Hegel means Kant's 
"thing-in-itself," which takes two forms: (a) sensation presupposes some 
indefinite ('abstract") element existing in itself beyond experience; and 
(b) the understanding presupposes an "abstract'"' element both as a pri-
mary truth, and as a separate, noumenal world. In Heget's concept of 
experience-according to which consciousness experiences the world as 
the experiencing of its self, and vice versa-no room is left for a ""thing-
in-itself," which always remains alien. Rather, the ontological other is 
now interpreted as the self-alienation of consciousness (or spirit), which 

136 
Text and Running Commentary 
negative in general. One might view it as their deficiency, yet it is 
rather their soul, or their mover;
0 which is why some ancient think-
ers conceived the void
0 as mover: they grasped the mover already 
as negative, but did not yet grasp the negative as the Self. If this 
negative appears at first as the disparity between the I and the ob-
ject, then, to the same extent, it is a disparity between substance 
and itself What seems to be going on outside substance and looks 
like an activity directed against it, is actually its own doing, 
0 and 
substance shows itself to be essentially subject. When this has been 
made manifest in a complete way, then spirit has made its existence 
identical to its essence; now it is object to itself as it is, and the 
abstract element of immediacy, 
0 and of the split between Knowing 
and truth, is overcome. Being is now absolutely mediated; it is a 
substantial content which is immediately the property of the I:
0 it 
is self-like [selbstisch], or the Concept.
0 
returns to it as its property. (See also ''the abstract element of immedi-
acy," below). 
Their mover: Each of the sides is lacking something, and that lack moves 
it-it is its "soul.n (As in Aristotle, soul is the principle of self-movement.) 
The void: Even those ancients who understood that movement presupposes 
negativity still imagined negativity as a kind of thing or substance (the 
void), rather than as subject (selfhood). 
Is actually its own doing: At a later stage (over which Hegel passes here), it 
will emerge that the negation between consciousness and its object is 
actually an inner negation within the object itself; therefore, the object 
manifests itself also as subject (as subject/ object). This can take place 
only when spirit has so developed that its actual existence becomes equal 
to its latent essence. 
The abstract element of immediacy: That again is the "thing-in-itself,, the 
illusion of rigid unmediated being. Overcoming this phase of spirit's evo-
lution implies that nothing in the world lacks mediation, that being itself 
has been mediated in all important respects, and no irreducibly alien 
residuum remains beyond spirifs synthesis of the subject/ object. 
The property of the I: In the state of universal mediation, reality (the substan-
tive contents) has a subject-like property, and the subject has a substantive 
dimension: this is Hegel's so-called "objective idealism." Neither side over-
comes or overwhelms the other; a unity of opposites is rather obtained 
within them, which endows each side with its distinct character and status. 

Text and Running Commentary 
137 
This concludes the phenomenology of the sp1nt. What spirit 
prepares for itsel£0 in this phenomenology is the element of Know-
ing. Within that element, the moments of spirit deploy themselves 
in the form of a simplicity which knows its object to be itself. 0 
They no longer fall outside each other into the opposition of being 
and Knowing, but remain within the simplicity of Knowing; they 
are [now] the true in the form of the true, 
0 and their being-different 
The Concept: Hegel here describes the "Concept'"' as a substantial con-
tent which is self-like, meaning a unity of object (substance) and subject 
(selfhood). The Hegelian Begriff is a specific expression of the unity of 
these t\Vo. 
What spirit prepares for itself With the conclusion of the Phenomenology, 
the metaphysical illusion, which holds that beyond the spirit there is a 
separate being in itself, is finally abolished. Henceforth, being and 
thought are grasped as mutually mediating each other, and as moments 
of a single overall context: absolute Knowing. Within this context, the 
road is open to performing the complete philosophical Science. 
Which knows its object to be itself This is another characterization of objec-
tive idealism, or absolute Knowing. At this stage, external being has been 
sublated. The spirit's object, its other, is spirit itself as it becomes con-
scious of that fact through a detailed philosophical Science, and the dualis-
tic opposition of being and knowledge has been abolished. Being mani-
fests itself as an inner moment of knowledge, whereas knowledge turns 
out to be (as in Spinoza) a mode of reality itself rather than an external 
representation of it. Moreover, as we saw in the introduction, the emer-
gence of absolute Knowing is even the selfactualization of reality. This is 
the high point of idealism. But it must be stressed that it is an idealism of 
knowledge and not of consciousness. It does not maintain that being is only 
')or someone's mind," but that being is actualized and acquires meaning 
only through the rational categories which human knowledge (and previ-
ous action) have actualized and made manifest. 
The true in the form of the true: This is another way of describing the final 
stage. Until then, truth has appeared in untrue forms, inadequate for 
its content-like sense perceptions and images, or like the lower and 
contradictory degrees of conceptual understanding. Absolute Knowing 
requires that the true content assume also the genuine form and medium 
of absolute truth, and reside only within that form. Yet this occurs only in 
pure philosophical contemplation. In the historical arena, the inadequacy 

138 
Text and Running Commentary 
is only a diversity of content. Their movement, which organizes 
itself in this element into a totality, is the Logic
0 or speculative 
philosophy. 
0 
[38] Since the system of spirit's experience deals only with the ap-
pearance [Erscheinung] of spirit, progressing from here to the Sci-
ence of the true in the shape of the true may appear to be a merely 
negative move; and of the negative, as false, one might wish to get 
rid, demanding to be led without delay to the truth: why occupy 
ourselves with the false?
0 
The demand to start directly with Science was already discussed 
above; now we should respond to it by examining the character of 
the negative as something false in general. The current notions
0 
between truth and its form cannot be completely abolished. A certain 
degree of contingency, imagination, sense perception, violence, and other 
negative elements is inevitable in the real world, and will persist even 
when historical progress has attained its highest point. This means that 
the real world will remain the other of philosophical knowledge even 
when the latter is realized and recognizes itself within it. In this respect, 
there is no utopian end to history in Hegel. 
The Logic: Hegel does not mean formal logic, but rather his own kind 
of transcendental logic-the logic of being and of actual objects. More 
specifically, he means the logos that structures reality in its self-develop-
ment. This is the system of pure ontological categories in their mutual 
relations; and more broadly speaking, it is speculative philosophy. 
Speculative philosophy: The term does not indicate "theoreticar' as distin-
guished from "practical," nor does it mean "speculation" in the sense of 
wild, unfounded opinions (on its meaning see the end of the introduction 
and commentary on page 93). 
Why occupy ourselves with the falser: One cannot enter truth without under-
standing its relation to falsity. Truth needs falsity and affirmation needs 
negation-both as a motive for its development and as part of its texture. 
The following discussion therefore comes close to explaining the founda-
tions of the dialectic. 
The current notions: (Literally, Hrepresentations," but here opinions are 
meant.) Most philosophers ("of the understanding") follow one of two 
ways: either they ignore the opinions of other thinkers and start imme-
diately with what seems true to them, or else they deal with other 

Text and Running Commentary 
139 
about this issue are a major barrier to the entry into truth. This 
will give us an opportunity to speak also of mathematical knowl-
edge, which unphilosophical knowing sees as the ideal which phi-
losophy should have attained, but has so far sought in vain. 
[39] The true and the false belong to the determinate thoughts 
which, being unmoved, are seen as separate essences, rigidly stand-
ing in isolation, one here and one there, without communion [Ge-
meinschaft] with each other. Against this view we must stress that 
truth is not a minted coin which can be pocketed as such, finished 
and ready.
0 Nor does the false have being, any more than evil has.
0 
To be sure, the false and the evil are not as bad as the devil, for in 
philosophers only in order to refute them and manifest their falsity. The 
Hegelian philosopher deals at length with other thinkers, including his 
immediate predecessors; and when refuting them, does so in order to 
draw the nucleus of truth latent in their thoughts, and makes their refu-
tation a positive ingredient of his own system of truth. Thus in Hegel, 
rethinking the role of falsity is linked to a new understanding of philo-
sophical refutation. 
Finished and ready: Philosophical truth is not a static statement (like mathe-
matical formulae) but a system whose ingredients are always in mutual 
movement. It therefore has no static final state. Within that system, nega-
tion and falsity fulfill a constitutive role. There is no treasure of pure gold 
(truth without falsity) waiting to be discovered in some hidden vault. 
Kaufmann notes that Hegel alludes here to Lessing's play Nathan the 
Wise, where""Nathan is pressed by the Sultan to prove which of the three 
monotheistic religions is the true one, to which Nathan retorts ironically: 
HHe wants the answer in cash so ready and shining as if truth were a 
coin" (Walter Kaufmann, Hegel [Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1965], 414-
15). I agree: the young Hegel was strongly influenced by Nathan and 
knew it thoroughly. See my Dark Riddle: Hegel, Nietzsche, and the jews, 
(Cambridge: Polity Press, 1996), part 1, chapter 2, pp. 45-49. 
Nor does the false have being, any more than evil has: Falsity and evil do not 
exist as independent entities. This can be said only of the devil, and he is 
a creature of legend. Falsity and evil are moments of a wider system in 
which they mutually share in constituting truth and the good; and within 
that system, each of these elements has a different meaning from that 
which is attributed to it in separation. 

140 
Text and Running Commentary 
the devil they even become a particular subject, whereas as false 
and evil they are only universal, although each has its own essen-
tiality in opposition to the other. 
The false-for here we are speaking of it alone-is supposed to 
be the other, the negative of substance, which, in being the content 
of knowledge, is the true. But substance itself is essentially the neg-
ative, partly in being the differentiation and determination of the 
content, partly in being simple differentiation, that is, in being a 
self and knowing in general. One certainly can know falsely. To 
know something falsely means that knowing is in disparity with its 
substance. 
0 Yet this disparity is differentiation in general, 
0 which is 
Knowing is in disparity with its substance (or, they have no equality, Gleich-
heit.): Hegel seems to be using the ordinary definition of truth and falsity: 
truth is the ccequality" (agreement) ofknowledge and its object, and falsity 
is their disagreement. Yet Hegel interprets that tired definition in his own 
way. Falsity resides not in the failure of some particular cognitive attempt, 
but in the way in which knowledge understands its relation to its object. 
As long as the subject-the world, reality-is conceived as utterly external 
to knowledge, we are subject to falsity in the sense of a fundamental 
'"'"inequality" (disagreement) between knowledge and its object. The fal-
sity in question does not arise because knowledge misses some separate 
object existing in itself, but because knowledge separates the object 
from itself and itself from the object. It is therefore knowledge itself which 
(as in Spinoza) generates the realm of falsity; yet it does so as a necessary 
condition for realizing truth. Heger s underlying presupposition is that 
an original, though abstract and as-yet-unrealized unity exists between 
knowledge and its object (substance). To actualize that latent unity, 
knowledge must go through a long intermediary process in which it first 
separates itself from substance and regards the two of them as unequal-
that is, generates the realm of falsity. The intermediary phase-dualism-
is a precondition for knowledge and substance to become equal again 
(that is, identical), in an actualized and concrete mode, which produces 
truth. The gap characterizing that intermediary phase assumes many 
shapes and forms, all of which are therefore marked by some measure 
of falsity. So familiar is this dualistic situation to us that we tend to see it 
as primordial, a timeless ontological state, when in fact it is a lower phase 
in spirit's development. 
Differentiation in general: The separation of substance from knowledge 
which introduces their "inequality'' or severance, and thus generates falsity. 

Text and Running Commentary 
141 
an essential moment. ° From this differentiation their identity arises, 
and this having-become-identical is truth. But not in such a way 
that the disparity was thrown out of truth like dross from pure 
metal, or like a tool that is removed from the finished vase. Rather, 
the disparity, as the negative, as the Self, is still immediately pres-
ent0 in the true as such. Even so, one cannot say0 that the false is 
a moment of truth, or that it is an ingredient of it. In the proverb 
which says that everything false contains something true, the two 
are linked externally, like oil and water which cannot mix. In order 
to give its full significance to the moment of perfect otherness, 
these expressions [true and false] should no longer be used where 
their otherness has been sublated. In a similar way, the talk about 
the unity of subject and object, the finite and the infinite, being and 
thought, is improper, because [the terms] object, subject, and so 
on refer to what they are outside their unity, whereas in their unity 
they no longer mean the same as their expressions enunciate. In 
the same way, the false as false0 is no longer a moment of truth. 
Essential moment: It is essential for knowledge to separate itself from the object 
and thus introduce falsity as a condition of the eventual reidentification. 
Immediately present: The resulting system of truth entails the mutual nega-
tion between its moments. As such, it interiorizes the inequality into its 
own texture. While the outcome, the system as a whole, is equal to itself, 
this result does not occur directly, but through persisting inner negations 
and oppositi9ns. 
One cannot say: Although negation, refutation, and contradiction are mo-
ments of truth, Hegel avoids saying the same about falsity. The reason 
for his prudence seems to be verbal and tactical. I think Hegel is con-
cerned that people might say that the system of absolute Knowing is, 
according to its author, "only partially true,-a conclusion that does not 
follow, yet might be drawn nevertheless. So Hegel warns that expressions 
drawn from the world of dualism must not be used where dualism has 
been sublated, and where these terms have thereby acquired a completely 
different meaning. For example, a subject/ object is not a conjunction of 
subject plus object, but something new; and within their synthesis, the 
terms Hsubject" and "objecf' have a different meaning from the one they 
had beforehand. 
The false as false: Hegel means to say, if"falseJJ is understood in the absolute 
sense of dualism, as an absolute negative state which excludes truth, then 

142 
Text and Running Commentary 
[ 40] Dogmatism, as a way of thinking in knowledge and philosophy, 
is nothing but the belief that the true consists in a proposition 
which is obtained as a rigid result, or else is known immediately. 
To questions like, when was Caesar born? how many yards [Toise] 
are there in one stadium? and the like, one must give a straight and 
definite answer, just as it is definitely true that in a right-angled 
triangle, the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the 
squares of the other two sides. Yet the nature of this so-called truth 
is different from the nature of philosophical truths. 
[41] Regarding historical truths
0 (to mention them briefly), one will 
easily grant that, in their purely historical aspect, these truths con-
cern a singular existence
0 and the contingent, arbitrary side of the 
content, namely, its non-necessary determinations. But even naked 
truths
0 like those we cited above are not devoid of the movement 
of course one cannot say that falsity is a moment of truth. Yet falsity in 
the nonabsolute sense is indeed a dialectical moment of truth, even if 
Hegel was reluctant to say so openly. 
Historical truths: In German philosophy from Kant to Heidegger the term 
historisch is usually distinguished from geschichtlich, though both are trans-
lated into English as "historical." Historisch means the empirical gathering 
of data, and geschichtlich refers to the latent pattern governing the events, 
or the history-dependent nature of something or someone. (See my Kant 
and the Philosophy of History, chapter 6, 240-51.) Though Hegel is one of 
the creators of the second sense, here he is mainly using the first, which 
approximately means, "particular empirical truth." 
Singular existence: Empirical history refers to non-recurring particulars, not 
to general patterns and laws. It therefore deals only with the contingent 
side of reality. (This view became prevalent in German philosophy after 
Hegel, especially through Dilthey and his followers.) 
But even naked truths: Hegel admits the aforementioned claim but refuses 
to give it a positive interpretation. There are no ""naked truths.)J Even 
the empirical historian investigating non-recurring facts needs a broader 
context, an explanatory scheme, in which to place those facts and by 
which to understand them. At this point, Hegel brusquely stops the dis-
cussion; had he continued, he certainly would have argued that the 
schemes ofhistorical explanation must derive from an overall philosophi-
cal structure-the one studied by the Phenomenology-rather than being 
fragmentary and arbitrary. 

Text and Running Commentary 
143 
of self-consciousness. In order to know one of them, one must 
make many comparisons, consult books, do some research. Even 
in direct observation [Anschauung], a cognition is held to have true 
value only when accompanied by its justifying grounds, even if the 
naked result remains the thing which one is really looking for. 
[ 42] As for mathematical truths, 
0 it is even clearer that a person will 
not be considered a geometer if he knows Euclid's theorems only 
by heart [auswendig], without knowing their proofs-without, so 
to speak (to invert the expression) knowing them from within [in-
wendig]. Similarly, if a person has measured
0 many right-angled tri-
Mathematical truths: A philosophical convention in the eighteenth century 
distinguished between two kinds of true statements (or cognitions): 
""mathematicaln and "historical." The distinction was not between mathe-
matics and history, but between general rational cognitions and particular 
empirical ones. Kant recasts the above distinction as holding between 
knowledge "from principles'' and knowledge "from data,'' and further 
divides the former into two kinds, philosophical and mathematical. The 
mathematical (actually geometrical) cognitions are constructed by a de-
ductive method, which Descartes, Spinoza, and other early rationalists, 
like Kant's predecessor, Christian Wolff, wanted to impose on all 
branches of knowledge that claim certainty, regardless of their content. 
Kant rejected this method as unfit for philosophy, because it is unilateral, 
and because every partial step in it is absolute and conclusive; whereas 
philosophic~! cognitions consist in the gradual self-explication of reason, 
which always turns back to correct and complement its previous steps 
(see Critique of Pure Reason, II, ""Transcendental Doctrine of Method," 
chapter 1, section 1.) 
Hegel follows the Kantian approach, but complains that Kant subjects 
even philosophical reason to '"'rigid" principles which obey the law of non-
contradiction. In this respect, Kant's rational cognitions are as dogmatic as 
cognitions '"'from data." This is in essence the backdrop of the next few 
polemical pages. Heger s attack focuses at first on mathematical truth in 
the narrow sense, and on the geometrical method which he, too, bans 
from philosophy, though his reasons are different from Kant's. At the same 
time Hegel criticizes the kind of philosophical reason by which Kant pro-
poses to replace the geometrical reason of Descartes and Spinoza. 
If a person has measured: Geometrical propositions are not inductive. They 
are not learned "from data., Incidentally, Hegers two demands, (a) that 

144 
Text and Running Commentary 
angles and concluded that their hypotenuse and two other sides 
stand in the well-known relation to each other, his knowledge will 
be considered deficient. Still, the essential role which demonstra-
tion plays in mathematical knowledge does not have the signifi-
cance and nature of a moment of the result itself;
0 on the contrary, 
the demonstration vanishes and disappears in the result. The theo-
rem, as a result, is indeed something that appears true;
0 yet this 
adjunct circumstance does not concern its content, but only its 
relation to the subject. The movement of a mathematical demon-
stration does not belong to that which is the object; its activity is 
rather external to the matter. For example, the nature of the right-
angled triangle itself does not disassemble in the same way as its 
construction° exhibits, the construction which is needed to demon-
knowledge derive from general principles, and (h) that knowledge arise 
through subjective understanding-are both included in Kant's definition of 
ccrational cognitions." (See my Kant and the Philosophy of History, chapter 6.) 
Of the result itself Although geometrical demonstrations, to be rational, 
must be internal to the learner's mind, they are not considered internal 
also to the result, that is, to the conclusion they produce. The demonstra-
tion is viewed as external to its conclusion, a kind of vehicle that can be 
disposed of at the end of the road. ( Cf., by contrast, Hegel's words earlier 
in our text that a bare result is a cccorpse," and that in philosophy, the 
true is the whole which includes its genesis as an integral part.) 
Something that appears true: That is, something accepted as true on 
grounds that are sufficient for our subjective conviction. Such grounds 
are provided by a formal deductive demonstration which, nevertheless, 
may not be the reason which constitutes the truth of the matter in itself. 
(At best, the demonstration makes us see that something is true, but not 
why.) In several places Hegel therefore reiterates that knowledge based 
on formal logic or mathematical inference is merely Hsubjective," or an 
"external reflectionn: the reasons why we arrive at that knowledge are 
not the reasons because of which the matter itself is what it is. 
Construction: The activity, according to Kant, by which mathematical items 
are produced. Hegel follows Kant with a noteworthy difference: in Kant, 
construction sets up the matter itself-the mathematical entity as such-
and deduction is external to it; for Hegel, both these activities seem to 
be equally external. (So uconstruction" in our text might perhaps be re-
placed with "deduction,JJ and the sentence modified as follows: HThus 

Text and Running Commentary 
145 
strate the proposition expressing that relation. The production of 
the result is [here] a means and a procedure of knowledge alone. 
In philosophical knowledge, 
0 too, there is a difference between 
the becoming of existence as existence, and the becoming of es-
sence, that is, of the inner nature of the matter. But, first, philosoph-
ical knowledge includes them both, 
0 whereas mathematical knowl-
edge exhibits only the becoming of existence--namely, the 
becoming of the being of the nature of the matter
0-in knowledge 
the nature of the right-angled triangle does not divide itself into parts in 
just the way set forth in the deduction necessary for the proof of the 
proposition expressing that ratio.") What Hegel is saying is that the math-
ematical subject matter,s order-of-being [ordo essendi] is not the same as 
its order-of-knowledge (ordo cognoscendi). 
In philosophical knowledge, too: In philosophy, too, there is no identity be~ 
tween the pure system, s inner order and the genetic order in which it 
manifests itself in time and history (for example, between the order of 
the Phenomenology and the order of the Logic). 
Includes them both: Philosophical knowledge includes both the Phenomenal~ 
ogy and the Logic, both the conceptualization of spirit's inner essence 
and the conceptualization of its empirical appearance in historical time. 
Furthermore, both these aspects (as Hegel will soon argue) belong to the 
nature of the subject matter. That the essence should appear in time and 
in external reality is an inner philosophical necessity-that is, it is essential 
to the essence. 
The being of the nature of the matter: Here Hegel contrasts the being of the 
nature of the thing with the essence of the nature of the thing, using the 
technical sense which 'being', and ''essence'' have in the Logic. Mathemat-
ics, the science of quantity, is discussed in the division, or supercategory, 
of ((Being,, rather than the division of "Essence,', because, as quantity, 
mathematics belongs to pure externality, to the surface dimension of real-
ity (discussed under "Being,,) and ignores, or abstracts from, the depth-
dimension of reality, its interiority (discussed under "Essence"). While 
empirical reality is always external, it makes a crucial difference whether 
it is also grasped as the externalization of an inner essence, or not. Mathe-
matical knowledge does not grasp it so, but as purely quantitative, ex-
plores the properties of being only in its inessential externality. In sum-
mary, the present text can be rephrased as follows: philosophical 
knowledge presents its subject matter (reality) in its inner essence, 

146 
Text and Running Commentary 
as such. In addition, philosophical knowledge unites
0 these two 
particular movements. The inner generation or becoming of sub-
stance is an unbroken passage to the outside or to existence, it is 
being-for-another; and vice versa: the becoming of existence is the 
taking-itself-back into essence. In this way, the movement is a dupli-
cated process, a becoming of the whole in which each of them 
posits the other and therefore has them both as two aspects [of 
itself]. Together they constitute the whole, by dissolving and mak-
ing themselves into its moments. 
[43] In mathematical knowledge, the act of insight is external to the 
matter;
0 in consequence, the true matter is changed by it. The 
instrument-construction and demonstration-does contain true 
propositions; but it must be said that the content is false. In the 
example above, the triangle is torn down, and its parts are conveyed 
to other figures which construction builds alongside it. Only at the 
end is the triangle restored-the one with which we are actually 
dealing, but which has disappeared from sight in the course [of the 
demonstration] and appeared only in segments belonging to other 
wholes. So here, too, we see the negativity of the content entering, 
a negativity which ought to be called its falsity, just as, in the move-
ment of the Concept, this name applies to the disappearance of the 
rigidly construed thoughts. 
whereas mathematical knowledge presents only its quality-indifferent 
surface properties. 
Unites: In addition, philosophical knowledge grasps the external appear-
ance from the standpoint of its essentiality, that is, of the necessity that 
essence has to appear outwardly. 
The act of insight is external to the matter: A geometrical demonstration 
dismembers its object into other figures by which it demonstrates the 
relations governing that object. The object is altered and reduced to 
something else, and only at the end (at the stage of q.e.d.) do we return 
from that ccother'' to the original object of proof. Hegel sees this '"becom-
ing other'' as a sign that, not only in philosophy but even in mathematics, 
negativity (or "falsity," as he called it before) has a role in the generation 
of truth. However, in geometry the process of becoming-other is not 
essential to the subject matter itself, but only to our subjective state of 
mind: it lacks dialectical import. 

Text and Running Commentary 
147 
[ 44] The genuine deficiency of this mode of knowledge affects both 
knowledge itself, and its material. Concerning knowledge, one can-
not, in the first place, see the necessity of the construction. The 
construction is not drawn from the Concept of the theorem, but is 
put forth as a command. 
0 We must blindly obey an instruction 
which bids us draw precisely these, rather than infinite other possi-
ble lines; meanwhile we know nothing further, but must only have 
faith that this would serve the purpose of the demonstration. True, 
the purposiveness becomes manifest later, but on that account it is 
only external, 
0 since it manifests itself only after the fact, when the 
demonstration is done. [Initially] the demonstration follows a road 
which starts somewhere, while we ignore how it is related to the 
expected result. In its course it picks up these determinations and 
relations, and leaves others out, by what necessity we cannot see. 
An external purpose dominates this process. 
[ 45] The evidence that characterizes
0 this deficient knowledge, which 
is the pride of mathematics, and which it vaunts even against philos-
ophy, relies only on the poverty of its purpose and the deficiency 
of its material; therefore it is of a kind which philosophy must find 
repugnant. The purpose or Concept of mathematical knowledge is 
Put forth as a command: A person offering a geometrical demonstration 
usually starts with a move whose reasons initially look arbitrary ("let AB 
be parallel to CD"), and invites us to follow a series of further instructions. 
Only late in the process, or at its very end, can we understand where 
these moves were leading. In this sense, we are called to follow in blind 
obedience a procedure which is not essential to the matter itself, and its 
purpose is not clear even subjectively. (I think Hegel is unfairly attacking 
the element of creative imagination in geometry-a rather attractive and 
rewarding power, which Hegel sees as evidence that geometry is not 
Hconceptual',-that is, does not follow the subject matter's own order 
and necessity.) 
Purposiveness . . . is only external: Although the sequence of steps does 
have a rational form, it concerns only the way in which our subjective 
knowledge is to be satisfied, so it is external to the subject matter. 
The evidence that characterizes: The intellectual experience of certainty 
which made Descartes and Spinoza set geometry as the model for all 
branches of knowledge, including philosophy. 

148 
Text and Running Commentary 
the magnitude. This is precisely an inessential, Conceptless rela-
tion. 
0 Hence, the movement of Knowing proceeds on the surface 
and fails to touch the matter itself, the essence or the Concept; so 
it is therefore no Conception [begreifen] at all. As for the material 
about which mathematics offers such a delightful treasure of truths, 
it is space and the unit. Space
0 is the existence into which the Con-
cept inscribes its distinctions as to an empty, dead element, in which 
they are likewise lifeless and unmoved. The actual is not something 
spatial,
0 as it is thought to be in mathematics. Neither philosophy 
nor concrete sense perception ° is as interested in such nonactuality 
An inessential, Conceptless relation: Magnitude belongs to quantity and thus 
to the surface of being, the area lacking interiority and essentiality. As 
such it is Conceptless. The division called "Concepf, holds the third 
super-category in the Logic, following "Being" and "Essence," and is con-
sidered their synthesis. Since mathematics has no relation to essence, it 
is a fortiori irrelevant to the Concept. Also, as we have seen, a Concept 
has the structure of an organic whole, yet in a quantitative science, where 
diversity is merely aggregative, an organic structure is impossible. 
Space: Hegel accepts most of the characteristics Kant gave to space, but 
opposes viewing space as merely a "form of intuition., Space is a form 
of being, though of a low, quantitative kind. (a) In The Philosophy of Nature 
(part of the Encyclopaedia) Hegel defines space as the Concepfs external-
ization into existence; more precisely: space is the merely quantitative 
first stage of that externalization. (b) According to our more picturesque 
text, the Concept inscribes its differences onto the inert, undifferentiated 
matter of being, and this is the origin of space. (c) In any case, space is 
not a pure form, but a homogenous continuum of being, which still lacks 
motion and qualitative distinctions; the only differences it recognizes are 
those of addition and subtraction: expansion and shrinking of one and 
the same mathematical quality. As such-as pure quantity-space is the 
substrate of reality, but is not itself fully actual. This view excludes Berke-
ley,s kind of idealism, which allows space no reality whatever, and also 
rejects Kanf s view of space as an external form of intuition. 
The actual is not something spatial: An imprudent sentence, which calls for 
more precision. Hegel does not say that what is actual cannot have spatial 
characteristics-it certainly can, and has; he says that what is actual is not 
spatial Hit is thought to be in mathematics., In other words, its actuality 
does not consist in its spatiality as inert quantifiable being. Space is only 
a moment of actuality, the basis for its externality, and as such is necessary 

Text and Running Commentary 
149 
as are the things of mathematics. In a nonactual element there is 
only nonactual truth, namely, fixed and static propositions. We may 
stop at any of these propositions; the next starts anew for itself, 
0 
without the former moving further into its other, and therefore 
without maintaining a necessary and mutual interconnection be-
tween them, as ought to arise from the nature of the matter itself. 
Also-this is the root of the formal character of mathematical 
evidence-because of its principle and element, knowing proceeds 
here on the track of identity. 
0 That which is dead, because it does 
not move, does not reach the differentiation of the essence, or the 
essential opposition or nonidentity, and therefore does not get to 
the passage of opposite into opposite, to the qualitative, immanent 
movement, and to self-movement. For it is only magnitude, an ines-
sential difference
0 which mathematics considers. It abstracts from 
for it. Yet actuality cannot be reduced to its spatial dimension alone 
(against materialism). 
Sense perception: Even the one-sided, illusory appearance of the world as 
grasped by the senses is more real than space, because it contains a diver-
sity of qualities. 
Starts anew for itself This echoes Kanf s critique of the deductive Ccmathe-
matical") method, in which every proposition is considered fully signifi-
cant and conclusively true at any stage of the development. There is no 
correctiue backward movement, and no drive to go forward. Wherever 
we stop, the system shuts off. In philosophy, however, which is the grad-
ual self-explication of reason, earlier cognitions depend on those which 
follow them. Therefore, the movement does not stop before one reaches 
the complete system. 
The track of identity: Hegel here uses Gleichheit (equality) in the sense of 
identity. Because the matter of pure mathematics is homogeneous and 
lacks distinctions (except for quantitative distinctions, which are them-
selves uniform), mathematical knowledge is capable of being formal and 
thus attaining great clarity and convincing power. The price it pays is 
renouncing the actuality and content of material differences. 
An inessential difference: Distinctions in magnitude are secondary or un-
essential. Things are distinguished from one another by their contents, 
their essence, the degree of their being, and these cannot be reduced to 

150 
Text and Running Commentary 
the fact that it is the Concept which divides
0 space into its di-
mensions and determines the connections within and between 
them. For example, mathematics does not contemplate
0 the line's 
relation to the plane, and when comparing the circle's diameter to 
its circumference, it runs into incommensurability,
0 namely, into 
something infinite-a relation of the Concept which eludes its com-
prehension. 
0 
[46] Immanent mathematics (also called pure mathematics) also 
does not consider time as time0 in juxtaposition to space as the 
second material of its consideration. Of course, applied mathe-
matics0 deals with time, and also with motion and other real 
distinctions in magnitude. This goes against Descartes, and against taking 
mechanism to be the last word of philosophy. 
It is the Concept which divides: As the Concept externalizes itself into space, 
(a) it endows itself with external being (albeit at the lowest level), and (b) 
geometry finds its foundations within the Concept. 
Does not contemplate: Mathematics is unaware of its foundations. For exam-
ple, the relations between basic elements of Euclidean space (point, line, 
plane, volume) are not discussed in mathematics, which accepts them as 
given, dogmatically. 
Incommensurability: The phenomenon in mathematics of irrational num-
bers and of incommensurability in general testifies that quantity is not 
reality's last word. (This line of argument recalls Einstein's refusal to 
admit quantum physics as the last word about the universe~) 
Something infinite . . . which eludes its comprehension: Hegel distinguishes 
between "a good infinity,, which is a circular, subject-like system, and the 
'bad infinity'' of open-ended quantitative sequence. The first is the sym-
bol of reason, the second is a model of irrationality-of that which eludes 
reason's grasp. Strictly speaking, the 'bad, kind should not be called 
"infinity'' but only cc indefiniteness." 
Time as time: Time as pure duration or continuity (which Kant saw as the 
ground of arithmetic)-as distinguished from physical or applied time (time 
as the t-factor in scientific formulae). The latter is discussed in physics and 
other fields of "applied mathematics." Yet, Hegel complains, we have no 
proper discussion of time as time-its essence, properties, relation to space, 
and so forth. Whereas geometry is also an investigation of the properties 
of space, number theory is not in itself a study of the properties of time. 
Applied mathematics: Mathematics as functioning in the natural sciences. 

Text and Running Commentary 
151 
things. 0 But the synthetic propositions concerning the relations 
between those things-relations which [actually] the Concept de-
termines-are drawn from experience; applied mathematics only 
applies its own formulae to these presuppositions. The fact that 
the so-called proofs which mathematics allegedly gives to these 
[physical] propositions-for example, concerning the lever, or the 
relation between space and time in a falling motion-are indeed 
given and accepted as proofs, only serves to prove how strongly 
knowledge needs proofs; for when it lacks them, it will revere 
even the empty appearance0 of a proof and draw some satisfaction 
from it. A critique of such proofs will be as remarkable as it is 
instructive, first, in order to purify mathematics of these false or-
naments,0 and secondly, in order to indicate its boundaries,0 and 
thereby show the need for a different kind of knowing. 
Other real things: So it does not deal with it as time. For example, the t 
units in a physical formula use a notion of time as a variable in physics, 
but do not contemplate what time as time is, philosophically. 
Empty appearance: The mathematical demonstrations working in physics 
are external to the content of their subject matter. They impose a certain 
type of order and procedure upon opaque cognitions, which we get from 
experience; but they cannot explain the physical phenomenon itself and 
why it is as it is. Mechanics, the basis of classical physics, is grounded on 
the phenomenon of motion; and motion entails a relation of time and 
space which can be expressed mathematically; but we do not thereby 
understand what the matter itself is, why a relation between time and 
space exists at all, and what binds them together. The sense of satisfaction 
which applied mathematics raises in us is therefore exaggerated, and 
tinged with illusion. 
False ornaments: Vain expectations of those using mathematics. 
Indicate its boundaries: This is Heger s main purpose. His critique is not 
intended to abolish mathematics, or to restrain its development or that 
of physics and the other natural sciences in which mathematics is applied. 
These are all indispensable branches of knowledge. However, their philo-
sophical value is poor, because they don't reach true actualities. Hegel's 
critique of pure and applied mathematics is only meant to point out the 
external character of mathematical measurements and proof-procedures, 
and thereby to indicate the limitations and relative failure of mathematics 
when it claims to explain and interpret reality. 

152 
Text and Running Commentary 
Concerning time: One might think
0 that time, as counterpart 
to space, constitutes the material of the second part of pure math-
ematics [arithmetic]. Yet time is the existing Concept itself. 
0 The 
principle of magnitude, the Conceptless difference, and the princi-
ple of identity, the abstract unit devoid of life, cannot come to 
terms with that pure unrest of life and of [time's] absolute differ-
entiation. This negativity, therefore, becomes the second material 
of mathematical knowledge only in paralyzed form, namely, as 
the One. It is a knowledge which, as external activity, degrades 
the self-moving into material, in which it finds an indifferent, ex-
ternal, and lifeless content. 
[ 4 7] Philosophy, by contrast, 
0 does not consider the inessential deter-
mination, but the determination insofar as it is an essential one; 
the element and content of philosophy is not the abstract and non-
actual, but the actual, which posits itself in itself and lives in itself--
existence in its Concept. 
0 It is the process which engenders its mo-
One might think: It appears as if time stands on the same ontological level 
as space. Actually time is higher with respect to its status and structure. 
The existing Concept itself Unlike space, time is not a mere externalization of 
the Concept, but is the Concept itself as existing. In that respect, temporal 
duration is a mirror image of the Concepfs own movement, and can like-
wise not be reduced to a series of simple units. Time, with the organic 
form of the Concept at its base, expresses "the pure unrest of life," and 
therefore the going-beyond, the ecstasies of every discrete unit which must 
transcend itself. This is why time, as a continuum produced by the self-
transcendence of each of its alleged units, cannot be captured by a simple 
series of numbers. The attempt to do so results in an inadequate presenta-
tion, a paralyzed view of time's flow and negativity. The back-and-forth 
movement between the discrete and the continuous dimensions of time is 
frozen by the theory of numbers into an inert unit, a unit indicated by the 
expression "one." That unit is then added to itself in an external aggregative 
manner (1 + 1 + 1 ... ), and this is the foundation of the theory of numbers, 
and of numerical calculations in other sciences. 
Philosophy, by contrast: As distinguished from mathematical knowledge, 
and from the empirical-historical knowledge which we have discussed. 
Existence in its Concept: As distinguished from the two kinds of knowledge 
mentioned above. Mathematics and empirical knowledge of particulars, 
presents being ( Sein) and existence (Dasein) respectively, neither as within 

Text and Running Commentary 
153 
ments and goes through them; and the complete movement consti-
tutes the positive and its truth. Truth, then, contains the negative-
that which would have been called false, if it could have been 
viewed as something from which one must abstract. 
0 
That which vanishes must be rather considered essential, though 
not in the mode of something rigid that should be cut away from 
the true and left outside, who knows where; just as the true must 
not be considered a lifeless positive [element] which lies inert on 
the other side. Appearance
0 [the phenomenon] is the generation 
and passing away which itself is neither generated nor passes away, 
but is in itself and constitutes the actuality of truth and the move-
ment of its life. The true is thus the Bacchanalian whirl
0 in which 
their Concepts, nor according to their essence. They therefore lack truth, 
which is the unity of existence and its Concept. 
From which one must abstract: Which one must completely abolish. This is 
how people think of falsity-that it must be completely done away with. 
Hegel at this point accepts the ordinary manner of speaking, reiterates 
that falsity must not be seen as a moment of truth, even though truth 
contains negativity. As I mentioned earlier, Hegel's interest here is rhetori-
cal rather than substantive. Because the nondialectical sense of Hfalsity, 
dominates public discourse, and there is little chance of changing this, 
Hegel decides to rephrase his position in terms of the current idiom. So 
instead of calling the essential element '"'false/' he calls it '"'negative" or 
"evanescent," but-this is the main point-insists that as such it ought 
to be preserved within truth. 
Appearance: According to Hegel's metaphysics, essence must appear exter-
nally. Appearance is therefore a constant moment of truth. Particular 
things appear and pass away, though appearance itself persists. It is as 
fixed and eternal as essence. 
The Bacchanalian whirl: A famous image of the Phenomenology. An extended 
explanation is given in the introduction, and a parallel image is offered 
on the previous page: "the pure unrest of life." Basically, the "Bacchana-
lian whirl" indicates that the system of truth is a circle of mutual nega-
tions. Every ingredient in the system, when considered in itself, tran-
scends its own particularity and passes over into the others. Their mutual 
negation and interconnection constitutes a stable system, which is pure 
and eternal but not frozen, rather existing as permanent motion. Hegel 
compares this movement to worshippers dancing in the cult of Bacchus 

154 
Text and Running Commentary 
there is no link which is not drunk; but since each [link] dissolves 
immediately when disconnecting, the whirl is equally a simple and 
transparent rest. Before that movement's court of justice, 
0 neither 
the singular shapes of spirit, 
0 nor the determinate thoughts
0 can 
subsist; nevertheless, they are just as much positive and necessary 
moments as they are negative and vanishing. In the whole of the 
movement taken as rest, that which differentiates and gives itself 
particular existence is retained as something that interiorizes and 
remembers itself' [sich erinnert], whose existence is its knowing of 
itself, just as its knowing itself is immediately existence. 
(that is, Dionysus), each of whom ecstatically transcends himself or her-
self, and passing into the other, thereby regains singularity from the gen-
eral movement. Hegel cautiously exploits the mystical implications of 
this image, but insists that the final outcome is dominated by the Con-
cept. The circle as a whole seems to exist in a state of purity and rational 
transparency, yet it comprehends the power of life and even the power 
of mystical experience, translated into rational terms. (Nietzsche used a 
similar image in The Birth of Tragedy-the drunken dance of the Dionysian 
cult, though without a rational outcome-to explain the power of life 
and tragedy underlying his philosophy.) 
Court of justice: This passage alludes to the pre-Socratics, especially Anaxi-
mander, for whom the coming-to-be and passing away of particulars was 
dominated by the principle of "justice." Hegel may also be hinting that 
the movement of history is a kind of "divine justice," a theodicy, since 
previous forms of life and spirit which have passed away contribute to 
spirit's progress and the coming-to-be of truth. This is surely no consola-
tion to an individual sunk in suffering or falsity, but Hegel does not wish 
to console such an individual, because he recognizes no individual provi-
dence, not even in a secular version. 
Neither the singular shapes of spirit: Meaning the historical shapes of spirit 
as they arise in the Phenomenology. 
Nor the determinate thoughts: [Any more than] the categories of philosophy 
as they arise in the Logic. Hegel speaks here, in a general way, of both parts 
ofhis intended system. Both are supposed to be shaped by the form of the 
Bacchanalian revel, that "whirr' which is the court of justice, condemning 
each particular form to perish as long as it stands only as particular. 
Interiorizes and remembers itself The Concept of memory, or interiorizing-
into-memory (Erinnerung) receives a further meaning which, not acciden-
tally, directly precedes Hegel's discussion of philosophical method. In a 

Text and Running Commentary 
155 
[ 48] It may seem that the method
0 of this movement, or of science, 
requires a long prefatory discussion. Yet its Concept is already 
contained in what we said above, 
0 and its genuine exhibition be-
longs to logic, 
0 or rather) is logic. For method is nothing but the 
structure of the whole as it is constructed [aufgestellt] in its pure 
dialectical, subject-like system, whatever has gone before, and passed 
away, is retained in the inwardness of memory. That interiorization, as 
we have seen before, is the reason why a negation of negation does not 
result in a return to the dialectical starting point. A system's capacity to 
interiorize its previous experiences at some level of consciousness (or 
subconsciousness) is therefore a necessary condition for a dialectical form 
to exist~ In an inert, nondialectical system, which lacks the capacity for 
interiorization, the negation of negation does lead back to the point of 
departure, and the order dominating the system is that of formal logic 
or mathematics. However, each entity that has an organic structure, and 
hence the capacity to interiorize a previous set of relations, even if it has 
already been negated and transcended, is a possible subject of a dialectical 
process and capable of demonstrating the characteristic Hegelian struc-
ture of Aufhebung. In addition, the very capacity to interiorize into mem-
ory demonstrates that at some level of consciousness the substrate of the 
process is not knowledge. The reality we are dealing with is not only an 
object, but also a subject, not merely an inert substance, but one having 
the capacity for awareness and self-consciousness. 
The method: The following pages are devoted to discussing philosophical 
method. 
What we said above: The general principle of philosophical method is im-
plied in the principle we have discussed: the absolute is subject, the true 
is the whole which includes its own becoming, and philosophy must fol-
low the progress of its own subject matter from within. Given these prin-
ciples, it is easy to understand why no a priori method is possible in 
philosophy. 
Its genuine exposition belongs to logic: One cannot present the method of 
philosophy without spelling out the philosophical system itself. The sys-
tem,s complete exhibition (which Hegel here calls "Logic") is the only 
adequate way of realizing the method. The Logic works out the basic 
categories of all there is. As such, the Logic does not deal with the method, 
but is in itself-in its full layout-also the method. There is no special 
theory of, or chapter on, method in the Logic, because philosophy has no 
theory of method distinct from its actual unfolding. Hegel is opposed 

156 
Text and Running Commentary 
essentiality. 
0 As to what has been going on until now in this do-
main-the whole system of opinions about the nature of philo-
sophical method-we must take notice that it belongs to a culture 
that is now obsolete. If this claim sounds boastful or revolutionary 
(although I know this tone is far from what I intend), let me point 
out that even current opinion views the scientific apparatus of-
fered by mathematics-with its explanations, divisions, and rows 
of theorems, its demonstrations, principles, and the conclusions 
derived from them-at least as old-fashioned.
0 Even when its in-
adequacy is not clearly seen, it is never or seldom used; and 
to most modern philosophers, from Bacon and Descartes onward, who 
wanted philosophy to begin with the theory of method as a separate 
topic which must precede actual, substantive philosophizing, and provide 
a priori rules to guide it. Locke's Essay, and even Kant's Critique, can 
also be seen as c• an essay on method" preceding substantive philosophy. 
Amongst all of Hegel's major philosophical predecessors, only Spinoza 
opposed this trend. He argued that a method is knowledge of knowledge, 
but we cannot know what knowledge is before we have actual knowledge. 
Therefore "'method" must be studied retrospectively, after we have al-
ready gained true knowledge (Treatise on the Improvement of the Intellect, 
paragraph 38). Hegel holds with Spinoza the minority position, as will 
be seen in the next sentence. 
Method is nothing but the structure of the whole as it is constructed [aufgestellt) 
in its pure essentiality: This is Hegel's most succinct statement about 
method. There is no a priori method in philosophy. The word Hmethod" 
does not refer to a set of procedural rules guiding philosophy, but to the 
structure of its result. When the complete system attains its form, and we 
view and reconstruct its pure structure from this retrospective standpoint, 
then we have its method. Of course, this is not the ordinary sense of 
method, as Hegel would agree. But he would add that philosophy does 
not have a method in the "ordinary sense." Its pure, logical structure arises 
out of its evolving subject matter, as a result of that process. The science 
of method is therefore a reflexive science which contemplates the unfolded 
result of the system, and extracts its distinctive features ex post facto. 
Old-fashioned: The view that philosophy needs a quasi-mathematical 
method has become old-fashioned. Hegel interprets its decline as the 
decline of the demand for an a priori philosophical method, though they 
are not the same. 

Text and Running Commentary 
157 
although not denied in itself, it is not loved. But we must have the 
prejudice that an excellent thing will put itself into use and make 
itself loved. 
It is not hard to see that the manner which puts forth a proposi-
tion, adduces reasons in its favor, and refutes its opposite by other 
reasons, is not the form by which truth can emerge. 0 Truth is the 
movement of itself within itself; whereas that [reasoning] method0 
is knowledge which is external to the material. Therefore, it is 
proper to mathematics
0-whose principle, as mentioned, is the 
Is not the form by which truth can emerge: Having criticized and limited the 
power of mathematics per se, Hegel now attacks the desire to transpose 
mathematical method onto philosophy. 
That [reasoning] method: The reasons why mathematical method does not 
fit philosophy are as follows: First, mathematics is a quantitative science, 
and therefore inappropriate for knowing anything qualitative; and actual 
being, the topic of philosophy, is qualitative. Second, the underlying topics 
of mathematics, space and unit, are inert; it is therefore inappropriate for 
systems possessing the capacity for organic, or semiorganic, subject-like 
self-movement. There is a further objection which Hegel took, at least 
implicitly, from Kant. In the mathematical method itself, regardless of 
the topic to which it is applied, we have at every stage concepts that are 
exhaustively defined, and propositions that are conclusively true, which 
we can neither correct nor reconsider. In philosophy, however, as Kant 
says, Hthe incomplete exposition [explication] precedes the complete one" 
(Critique of Pure Reason, A 730/B 758). Philosophy is the self-explication 
of reason which cannot proceed in a linear fashion, but only in recurring 
circles or loops by which reason modifies, reconsiders, and corrects its 
previous achievements. These previous statements, therefore, necessarily 
include a measure of vagueness and falsity. Hegel implicitly subscribes to 
this view, and develops it in the Phenomenology in a far-reaching way. 
It is proper to mathematics: Mathematical method is unquestionably valid 
for its own special subject matter and its applications in empirical sci-
ence and daily affairs and arguments. As mentioned above, Hegel does 
not challenge the validity of the forms of nondialectical understanding. 
His approach is critical in the Kantian sense; that is, he examines the 
capabilities and shortcomings of the nondialectical forms of thought, 
and limits each to the legitimate domain for which it is necessary. At 
the same time, though, he denies its pretension to transcend the domain 

158 
Text and Running Commentary 
Conceptless relation of magnitude, and whose material is the dead 
space and the equally dead unit-and must be left to it. In a freer 
manner, 
0 mixed with arbitrary and accidental elements, this 
method can also be maintained in ordinary life, in conversation, or 
in historical instruction, which aim to satisfy curiosity more than 
knowledge. In ordinary life, the content of consciousness is made 
up of cognitions, experiences, sensible concretions, also thoughts 
and basic principles, 
0 and in general, such [items] that one consid-
ers to be given to consciousness beforehand, or to be a fixed and 
static being or essence. Sometimes consciousness follows those 
contents, and sometimes, by exercising free will [die freie Willkiir ], 
0 
of its effective and legitimate application, and to serve as a model for 
philosophy. 
In a freer manner: The method of argumentation, which belongs to the do-
main of the Understanding, has an important role in everyday discourse, 
in the acquisition of nonphilosophical knowledge, and in a philosophical 
introduction like the one before us. But in philosophy proper, truth cannot 
arise through argument and counterargument; for such a technique, like 
geometrical demonstrations, only manipulates the subject matter from 
without. In philosophy one must follow the internal evolution of the sub-
ject matter itself, and structure it according to the needs arising from the 
process. Therefore (we may add), philosophy also contains a quasi-narra-
tive element, which does not deal with details, but rather follows the logi-
cally necessary transformations of the subject matter. 
Also thoughts and basic principles: Hegel places sensory experience and the 
axioms of the understanding on the same dogmatic level. Rational 
axioms, when experienced as direct evidence, are "rigid thoughts,H which, 
like sensory data, arise without mediation. As such, they belong to the 
noncritical consciousness and count among the mind's prejudices. 
By exercising free will [die freie Willkiir J: By way of arbitrary, and therefore 
dogmatic, decisions. According to Hegel, one is not necessarily liberated 
from dogmatism by making a decision to break one's attachments to the 
immediate contents of consciousness and subject them to critical scrutiny. 
Rather, dogmatism persists as long as we try to arrive at an explanation 
through an external and formal logical manipulation of the explained, 
which eventually is reduced to some other primary datum familiar to us 
and experienced as evident. This is so for two reasons: first, this knowl-
edge, like mathematical demonstrations, is external to the subject matter; 

Text and Running Commentary 
159 
it breaks the connection and relates to them as their external deter-
mination and manipulation. It leads the content back to something 
certain, be it even a momentary sensation, and when reaching a 
familiar resting point, conviction is satisfied. 
[49] Still, as we have mentioned, although the Concept's necessity 
banishes the loose march of the reasoning conversation as well as 
the rigidity of scientific pomposity, 
0 their place should not be taken 
by the nonmethod of vague intuition [ Ahnung] and enthusiasm, or 
by the arbitrariness of prophetic talk, 
0 which disdain not only this, 
but any scientific approach. 
[50] When triplicity, which Kant had rediscovered
0 by instinct and 
still as something dead and Conceptless, was raised to its absolute 
second, it is dogmatic in itself, since all it does is lead us from a sensible 
to an intellectual primary datum, that is, from one to another. It sub-
sumes the first under the second without dismantling the idea of "pri-
mary'' or "simple" data as such. I think that Hegel specifically has in 
mind Descartes, the father of geometrical method in philosophy, who 
demanded that sensible data be explained on the basis of the data of 
intellectual evidence. Descartes was also a philosopher who tried to break 
away from dogmatism through a major decision of the will. Hegel, like 
Spinoza, does not believe that one can overcome dogmatism through an 
arbitrary decision. One can only overcome dogmatism by the gradual 
development of consciousness. 
Of scientific pomposity: Of those who use formal science as a philosophical 
method. 
Arbitrariness of prophetic talk: Formal Understanding was also attacked by 
mystics, romantics, and prophetic visionaries, from whom Hegel sepa-
rates himself. One should not interpret Hegel's critique of formal science 
as a critique of the very idea of scientific inquiry. Formal science is valid 
and necessary within the boundaries set for it by critical reason, as a 
product of the understanding. Beyond those boundaries, what is needed 
is not a mystical delusion, but a different kind of scientificity or scientific 
approach. 
Which Kant had rediscovered: For Kant, the third category within each of 
the four groups making up the table of categories is a synthesis of its two 
predecessors. For example, totality is a synthesis of unity and plurality; 
limitation is a synthesis of reality and negation; and so on (Critique ofPure 
Reason, B 111 ). Hegel views this as one of Kant's important philosophical 

160 
Text and Running Commentary 
significance, the true form was placed in the true content, 
0 and the 
Concept of Science emerged. 
0 But here again, we should avoid 
considering as scientific that use of triplicity which degrades it to a 
lifeless schema, indeed to a phantom, and reduces scientific organi-
zation to a table. We discussed
0 this formalism above in general 
terms, and will now describe its manner more closely. 
discoveries, which remained undeveloped until Fichte "raised it to its 
absolute significance," by deriving the triad from the complex structure 
of the Kantian HI think.') Hegel's praise does not, however, subscribe to 
Fichte) s formalistic use of the schema ((thesis-antithesis-synthesis," 
which he applied indifferently and repetitively to any subject matter, and 
does not support the view that Hegelian dialectic can be captured by a 
formula, this or any other. The three-tiered structure of the dialectic 
can, and often must, take less expected, more flexible shapes at various 
stages of the system's unfolding. This is because the process is structuring 
itself in accordance with the diversity of the subject matter it traverses, 
rather than obeying, as in Descartes, some ready-made a priori rule. 
The three-tiered design is therefore an ex post facto result. It emerges 
from the process rather than controlling it in advance, and should be 
expected to yield a variety of particular forms, each responding to the 
context in which it arises. That the Berlin Hegel became somewhat more 
rigid and didactic as a system-builder does not change this analysis of 
his original position. The original position is sounder in terms of Hegel's 
other strong claims-and other views, concerning method, or the rela-
tion of form and content; and it is manifest in the quite unique texture 
of the Phenomenology and the Logic, the only Hegelian texts in which we 
see the dialectic actually at work (rather than merely summarized in 
retrospect). 
True form was placed in the true content: Fichte, unlike Kant, derived the 
triadic form from the philosophical content itself-the I in relation to the 
non-I-rather than from an accidental and transient intuition. 
And the Concept of Sdence emerged: Meaning Fichte's Wissenschaftslehre, 
which Hegel, despite his many ironic criticisms, credits as the beginning 
of true philosophical scientificity. From Kant arises the goal of establishing 
metaphysics as a science; Fichte, rather than Kant, opened the way to 
the realization of that goal by positing the triad as the principle 
of philosophical Science. Hegel, therefore, links himself to Fichte, and 
perhaps also to Schelling, as having gone decisively beyond their master, 

Text and Running Commentary 
161 
This formalism believes it has conceived and expressed the na-
ture and life of some shape by attributing to it one of the schema's 
determinations as predicate
0-be it subjectivity or objectivity, mag-
netism, electricity, contraction and expansion, east and west, and 
the lik.e.
0 This can be multiplied to infinity, since every determina-
tion and shape can be made to serve as another shape's form or 
moment according to that schema-and in gratitude, each will ren-
der the same service to the others: a circle of reciprocity in which 
it is impossible to experience what is the one, and what is the other, 
and what the matter itself is. These determinations are borrowed 
partly from ordinary sense perception [Anschauung]-in which case, 
of course, they are meant to signify something else from what they 
say-and partly they are taken from what has significance in itself, 
0 
namely, from pure tliought-determinations like subject, object, sub-
stance, cause, the universal, and so forth. However, they are used 
Kant. However, Hegel will soon argue that Fichte and Schelling failed to 
attain a truly scientific philosophy because they did not give it a living 
form. (Here again we have an example of a "dialectical" refutation in 
philosophy, which recognizes the great novelty in a thinker, yet exposes 
his failure to carry his own revolution out.) 
We discussed: See text and commentary to pages 89 ff., which provide the 
background also for the following pages. 
As predicate: The structure of Fichte's system is predicative. Each form 
which life and experience take serves as a rigid subject whose "nature 
and life" are purportedly explained by linking it to some new rigid predi-
cate: "x is y." Fichte' s procedure does not involve dismantling those rigid 
predicates and "setting them in motion" within a fluid system, as Hegel 
claims to do. 
Magnetism, electricity, 
0 
0 
• 
: These examples are also discussed in Heger s 
Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences, a work which, ironically, is written 
in an even less "fluid" language than Fichte' s Wissenschaftslehre. The Ency-
clopedia is a series of concise, compressed (and "frozen") paragraphs 
which are to be further developed by the lecturer. 
What has significance in itself An a priori category. The former (like "mag-
netism," or "east") are borrowed from empirical observation and artifi-
cially elevated to the rank of categories. Hegel argues that all are used 
uncritically, "as in daily life.'' 

162 
Text and Running Commentary 
in the same uncritical and unexamined way as in ordinary life, or 
as when speaking of strengths and weaknesses, expansion and con-
traction; so that this [rational] metaphysics is as unscientific as 
those sensual images. 
[51] Such a simple determination, instead of being taken from the 
inner life and self-movement of its existence, is drawn from intu-
ition-which here means sensual knowing-and is expressed by 
a superficial analogy;
0 and this empty, external application of the 
formula is called a H construction. JJ This formalism is like any other. 
How dull must be the head which cannot be stuffed within a quar-
ter of an hour with the theory that there are asthenic, sthenic, and 
indirectly asthenic diseases, and as many cures, and thus [expect 
to] be transformed in that short time from a common healer [Routi-
nier] into a theoretical physician (for such instruction was consid-
ered sufficient until recently)? When the formalism of the philoso-
phy of nature
0 teaches, for example, that the intellect is electricity, 
or that the animal is nitrogen, or that it is equal to the south, to 
the north, et cetera, 
0 when it presents its teaching either in this 
naked form, or brewed with further terminology-an inexperi-
enced mind might stand in dazed wonder in front of such power, 
which links together what seems to be so distant, and in front of 
the violence done
0 to the immovable sensual image, to which that 
Superficial analogy: Fichte's Theory of Science, like Schelling's Philosophy of 
Nature, is constructed from the intuitive discovery of analogies and paral-
ogisms which obtain between phenomena, rather than on the deduction 
or inner derivation of their contents. 
The formalism of the philosophy of nature: This irony is also aimed at Schelling. 
The intellect is electricity ... : Examples of the ccsuperficial analogy" men-
tioned above. 
The violence done: The doctrine which Hegel attacks establishes connec-
tions between remote concepts by coercion, as if by an act of violence. 
However, we must stress that Hegel does not find all such connections 
between remote concepts to be violent or artificial. The crucial question 
is whether we have followed through the inner development and media-
tion which obtains between them or not. A special kind of intellectual 
violence occurs when a sensual image is given the dignity of a concept. 
Hegel attributes this particular vice to Schelling, although he himself falls 

Text and Running Commentary 
163 
linkage gave a false appearance of a Concept, while avoiding the 
main task-namely, the need to express the Concept itself, or the 
meaning of the sensual image. In all this an inexperienced mind 
will revere a profound genius. It will rejoice in the brightness of 
these definitions, which replace an abstract Concept with an ob-
servable ersatz and thus make it more attractive, and will congratu-
late itself for its soul-kinship with so splendid an enterprise. The 
trick of such wisdom is easy to learn and easy to exercise; but to 
repeat it when it has become known is as tiresome as repeating a 
pickpocket's sleight -of-hand whose secret has been exposed. 
The instrument of this monotonous formalism is no more diffi-
cult to operate than a painter"' s palette which has two colors only, 
say red and green, one serving to color a historical picture, and the 
other a landscape. It is hard to decide which is greater: the facility 
with which everything in heaven, on earth, and under the earth is 
coated with this painter"'s-broth, or the conceited claim to excellence 
of this universal medium: the one supports the other. This method, 
which sticks to everything terrestrial and celestial, to every natural 
and spiritual shape, the few determinations of the universal schema, 
and thus labels and classes everything, yields nothing less than a 
'"'report as clear as daylight"
0 about the organism of the universe-
that is, a table, resembling a skeleton on which paper-notes are stuck, 
or rows of closed boxes with labels in a spice dealer"' s shop. 
0 That 
report is as clear as those two. In the example of the skeleton, the 
flesh and blood have been removed from the bones, and in the sec-
ond example the boxes are hiding the matter [Sache], which itself is 
prey to the same fallacy, as we can see in his Philosophy of Nature where 
empirical concepts like ""air," relight," '"'electricity/' "water," "disease/' and 
the like appear as philosophical categories . 
.:'Report as clear as daylight": A barb against the title of Fichte's work "A 
Report as Clear as Daylight to the General Public about the True Charac-
ter of the New Philosophy: An Attempt to Force the Reader to Under-
stand" (1801). 
Closed boxes with labels in a spice dealer's shop: This is a deadly sarcastic 
attack on the formula Hthesis-antithesis-synthesis," which is Fichte's (al-
though it is attributed to Hegel himself by innumerable books and refer-
ences, that fail to recognize his antiformalistic system). 

164 
Text and Running Commentary 
not alive. Similarly, the report leaves out or hides the living essence 
of the matter. This approach, as we noted, culminates
0 in a totally 
monochromatic painting: ashamed of the schema's differences, it 
sinks them in the absolute's void as belonging to reflection, from 
which pure identity arises, the formless whiteness. 
0 The schema's 
monochromatic character and lifeless determinations, like this pure 
identity and like the passage from the one to the other, are all alike 
a dead understanding and are all equally external knowledge. 
[52] Indeed, the most excellent thing cannot escape its destiny-to 
be deprived of its life and spirit and, thus abused, to see its flayed 
skin° adorning a lifeless and vain knowledge. But that is not the 
whole story:
0 in its very destiny we can recognize the power which 
the excellent thing exercises on people's hearts, if not on their 
minds, and also to notice the process of schooling it undergoes, a 
schooling toward [true] universality and the [true] specificity of 
form, 
0 in which its fulfillment consists, and which alone makes it 
possible to use this universality also in the service of superficiality. 
[53] Science must organize itsel£0 only through the Concept's own 
life. The determination, which others take from the schema and 
Culminates: This way of thinking is liable to end in mysticism, because, 
ashamed of its schematic and frozen distinctions, it tries to dissolve them 
in the one indistinct absolute, that is, in the void. 
Formless whiteness: This image is analogous to the "night in which all cows 
are black," above. In both cases, Hegel hints at the indistinctness of Schel-
ling's absolute. Hegel argues that Fichte's failure to suggest real, live dis-
tinctions led to a dead, spiritless scheme. This prompted Schelling to 
abandon all distinctions and dissolve them in the empty One. 
Its flayed skin: The scheme that replaced the set of living distinctions. 
But that is not the whole story: There is also a positive side to this matter, 
because the truth of the new philosophy remains present even in the 
systems that force it into dead schemes, and the new philosophy is what 
actually makes those systems possible. The power and actuality of the 
new philosophy of idealism can be seen in the influence it exercises over 
people's hearts, for it continues to evolve even within those systems 
which falsify its message, and nevertheless strives towards its highest 
form, concrete universality. 

Text and Running Commentary 
165 
stick to existence from outside [triplicity], is in Science the self-
moving soul of the fulfilled content. That which is [das Seiende] 
goes through a movement
0 which becomes other, thus becoming 
its own immanent content, and on the other hand, takes this un-
folding, or its existence, back into itself; namely, it makes itself into 
a moment and simplifies itself into a specific determination. In the 
former movement, negativity consists in the differentiation and 
positing of existence; and in the movement of return-to-self, nega-
tivity is the becoming of the determinate simplicity. This is how 
the content shows that it does not receive its specific determination 
from something else, as when stapling a label, but gives it to itself, 
0 
and range.s its own place out of itself as a moment of the whole. 
The table-like understanding keeps for itself the necessity and Con-
cept of the content, [namely,] that which constitutes the concrete 
and living actuality of the matter it ranges. Or rather, it does not 
keep it, but simply does not know it; for if it had this insight, it 
would surely have manifested it. It does not even feel the need
0 for 
Sped.fidty of form: The form of triplicity. 
Sdence must organize itself In retrospect, the triad is the form organizing 
the philosophical Science, yet, that form must derive from "the Concept's 
own life,-'' that is, from the evolution of its content. This form is thereby 
"the self-moving soul'' of the content, rather than an a priori schema 
imposed upon it externally. 
... 
That which is [ das Seiende] goes through a movement: Hegel reiterates the 
structure of dialectical movement-self-becoming in three stages-which 
he has already described several times before. 
Gives it to itself This is one of Hegel's most speculative ideas, that of 
self-particularization. The particular contents arise through a dialectical 
movement, neither as a mere catalog of sense contents or dogmatic 
thoughts, nor by "stapling a label." As I have suggested above, an element 
of empirical '"being so" remains in Hegel's philosophy. Yet all particular 
contents are supposed to derive from spirit's recollection, namely from 
the internalized, historical form of its experience that has been interior-
ized in memory and become an organic part of spirit itself. 
It does not even feel the need: This is the chief symptom of a frozen concept. 
Dialectic recognizes the necessity of the inferior forms of the understand-
ing, but presumes that their deficiency creates a need that drives them 
beyond themselves. For this to happen, however, it is necessary that the 

166 
Text and Running Commentary 
this, otherwise it would renounce its schematization, or at least 
view it as a Table of Contents
0 merely. Indeed, this understanding 
does not deliver the content, but only indicates its table. 
Even a specific determination (say, magnetism) which is concrete 
or actual in itself, is cast down into something dead when it is 
only predicated of another entity,
0 but is not known as that entity's 
immanent life,
0 or as having in that entity its own native and genu-
ine self-engendering
0 and exhibition. The formal understanding 
lack be noticed, that the mind have a clear and strong awareness of it, or 
else the drive will be ineffective and a stalemate would arise, at least for 
the moment. 
As a Table of Contents: I already mentioned the irony that Hegel's two final 
books are also written in such a style (the Encyclopedia and the Philosophy 
of Right). Each has the form of a compendium which succinctly crystal-
lizes the Idea at its base, as a list of chapter headings which need oral 
development. In addition, both Hegel's followers and his opponents gave 
an even more schematic image to his later works than they actually de-
served. Disciples, as is well known, tend to be more rigid and pedantic 
than their master, sometimes to the point of absurdity, and opponents 
rejoice in each absurdity they can denounce. Actually, from the logic of 
Heger s system it follows that, since form follows content, the system 
cannot take on a rigid, monotonously repetitious form. Indeed, the two 
fully developed works Hegel wrote, the Phenomenology and the Logic, 
evolve in a rather free and flexible manner, and take various unexpected 
routes which cannot be enclosed in a rigid framework. The only unifor-
mity they maintain is the circular, dialectical movement, that is, the triad 
taken in a broad, macro sense; but there is much freedom in how that 
movement proceeds, and where it turns each time. 
Only predicated of another entity: See commentary on the problem of rigid 
predication, above. 
Immanent life: Instead of linking rigid predicates which define one another 
in accidental strings, the philosopher should grasp the meaning of one 
predicate as belonging to the "self-movement" of the other, and as inter-
nally constituting that other. 
Its own native and genuine self-engendering (also translatable as, "its original 
and unique way of self-generation."): The generation of each category 
from the dynamic context of all other categories involves a spontaneous 
element of emergence, or ccself-engendering., It is not a mechanical or 
merely analytic deduction, and the necessity involved in this unique gen-

Text and Running Commentary 
167 
leaves to others the task of adding that main thing. Instead of pene-
trating into the matter's immanent content, the formal understand-
ing overviews the whole and stands above the singular entity of 
which it speaks-that is, does not see it at all. Scientific knowledge, 
however, requires that we give ourselves up to the life of the Con-
cept, or-which is the same-face and express its inner necessity. In 
so deepening its object, scientific knowledge forgets that overview, 
which is but the reflection of knowledge in itself outside of the 
content. 
0 Rather, in being immersed in the content and following 
its movement, it returns to itself--not before the filling or content 
has taken itself back into itself, simplified itself into a specific deter-
mination, reduced itself to one side of an existence [Dasein] and 
passed into its higher truth. 
eration is not automatic, as with an algorithm. Each step in this move-
ment involves an original activity, a new or renewed act which cannot be 
reduced to its predecessor, although what has gone before it is a necessary 
condition for its generation. In other words, the dialectical progression 
is neither analytic nor synthetic (in the Kantian sense), but a synthesis of 
both. The movement of the other categories leads each particular cate-
gory to the threshold of its emergence and definition, yet the last step is 
always the original "self-engendering" of that category: The ultimate con-
tent characterizing a particular category, and the act by which it emerges, 
cannot be derived from the prior movement of the other Concepts in a 
deterministic way. We rather have a novel element here, a "synthetic" 
element, in two senses: first, the ultimate emerging content cannot be 
reduced to what preceded it (but needs the participation of recollection); 
and second, the new, emergent Concept requires a specific activity of 
thinking or spirit. It follows that philosophical reason-as spirit's activ-
ity-cannot be represented by an algorithm, by a computer model, or by 
a formal scheme. 
The reflection of knowledge in itself outside of the content: Hegel reiterates 
that philosophy is not an external reflection which observes the content 
of reality from outside its development, but is an inner reflection of the 
content of reality itself. As such, it must become immersed in the content, 
and allow it to guide its progress. No wonder that eventually it returns 
to itself within that content. 

168 
Text and Running Commentary 
In this way, the simple, 
0 self-overviewing
0 whole emerges from 
the richness, in which its reflection seems to have been lost. Since [54] 
substance in general, as we put it above, is in itself subject, every 
content is its own reflection in itself. The subsistence or substance
0 
of an entity [Dasein] is its self-identity, since its being nonidentical 
to itself would be its dissolution. However, self-identity is pure 
abstraction; and the latter is thinking. 
0 Wh~n I say quality, I enun-
ciate the [Concept of] a simple determination; through quality
0 
Simple: This is the tranquil result into which the series of negations, "the 
Bacchanalian whirl," eventually crystallizes, after all the contents and con-
figurations have passed over into one another. Actually, the whole only 
appears to be simple, but is not actually so. One might say it has a kind 
ofccsecond simplicity,') which results from the fact that the circular move-
ment has, in its full articulation, attained a state which appears to be rest, 
but is in fact full actuality. 
Self-overviewing: Reflection returns to itself from the confusion and rich-
ness of the specific contents within which it seems to have been lost 
during previous stages. And through philosophical consciousness reality 
gains reflection of itself as one whole. 
The subsistence or substance: The permanent element of being. 
And the latter is thinking: Hegel reformulates an idea he expressed before. 
Being and thinking belong to one another within the same undeveloped 
and abstract beginning. This idea, in pages 97-99, 114-15, and elsewhere, 
was discussed primarily from one of its aspects, arguing that to take think-
ing in its immediate simplicity is to take it as simple being. Here, Hegel 
approaches the idea from its other aspect. To take being in its simplicity, 
namely as self-identical, without any difference and distinction, is to hold 
onto being as pure abstraction, and thus as an intellectual entity, or 
thought. Hegel's discussion here is too scanty and obscure to be com-
pared with its full treatment in the Logic. 
Quality: In Hegel's Logic, the category of "quality" presupposes being. 
Quality is qualified being, a being of such and such a character. Hegel 
calls this 'being there"'' (Dasein). By this he means a particular and deter-
minate being which exists on a rather low ontological level-like a partic-
ular color, a sound, a disconnected fact, a mere idea-and not yet as 
concrete substance. The determinate character of Hbeing there" indicates, 
first, that it is no longer mere indistinct being (Sein), but qualified being, 
a particular entity. Second, it indicates that the entity possesses at least a 
minimal uniqueness ("being-for-itself'), for it is capable of referring to 

Text and Running Commentary 
169 
one entity
0 is different from another, or is an entity, is for itself, 
or subsists by virtue of that simplicity with regard to itself. 
0 Yet it 
is thereby essentially thought. Herein lies the [proper] conception 
of being as thought; hereto belongs the insight which seeks to 
avoid the ordinary, Conceptless talk
0 about the identity of thinking 
and being. 
itself as distinct from all the others. Third, the uniqueness of that entity 
and its being-for-itself are the result of the reciprocal negations in and by 
which it stands in relation to everything that coexists with it as different, 
and by virtue of which it is what it is. It follows that what seems to be a 
"simple and primary" quality or fact is not so in actuality, because it owes 
its very simplicity to a mediating system of relations and negations. In 
principle, the simple entity before us is only relatively simple; yet, within 
the overall texture ofbeing, cbeing there" is the simplest and most primi-
tive entity: its very being is nothing beyond a simple quality. The red spot 
persists in its being only as long as it remains red. Change its specific 
shade, even in a slight degree, and you have abolished the very being of 
that entity. This state of affairs persists until the category of substance is 
attained, which allows an entity's individuality to be preserved while its 
quality changes. 
One entity: Dasein in the sense of entity or specific-being. 
Simplicity with regard to itself The content, or simple quality, by which the 
entity is self-identical is, as said before, its element of being by virtue of 
... 
which that entity is and persists. Yet that simple quality is an abstraction. 
As such, one must "abstract from it," too; and view the simple quality 
as due not to the simplicity of being, but to the simplicity of thinking. 
For an abstraction does not exist by itself; it always points towards some-
thing else. 
The ordinary, Conceptless talk: Many misunderstandings, especially within 
idealism, result from the idea that being and thought are identical, an 
identity-principle attributed to Parmenides. Hegel accepts this identity as 
true and profound, but under the following conditions. First, it must be 
construed as dialectical identity, rather than as simple equality. Therefore, 
being cannot be reduced to thinking, as has been done by various "subjec-
tive idealists" from Berkeley to Leibniz. Second, the identity in question 
must be recognized as being still abstract and primary, and in need of 
further development and actualization. In other words, the dialectical 
identity of being and thought is the outcome and final end of the evolu-
tion of spirit, rather than an atemporal ontological state. That evolution 

170 
Text and Running Commentary 
Now because the entity's subsistence consists in its self-identity 
or pure abstraction, it is its abstraction from itself,
0 or its non-
identity with itself and dissolution-its own inwardness and return-
to-self-it is its becoming. By virtue of this nature of that which is 
[das Seiende], and insofar as this nature is there for knowledge, the 
activity of knowledge does not manipulate the content as some-
thing foreign, and is not its own reflection outside of the content: 
Science is not that idealism 
0 which replaces the dogmatism of asser-
tions0 with a dogmatism of[subjective] assurances; in other words, 
it is not the dogmatism of self-certainty. Rather, while watching the 
content return to its own inwardness, the activity of knowledge is 
no less immersed in the content, because it is the content's imma-
nent self, and at the same time it returns to itself, 0 because it is 
pure self-identity within otherness. In this way, the activity of 
knowledge is the cunning0 which, while seeming to abstain from 
of spirit requires that thought remain internal to being, namely, that it 
accompany and drive the process of actualization from within itself, 
rather than observe it through an external method. 
Its abstraction from itself: The abolition of its simplicity, or of its direct 
equality to Self. Its immediate being is dissolved and passes into 
becoming. 
Science is not that idealism: Hegel believes there is dogmatic idealism just 
as there is dogmatic realism. Philosophical Science is indeed idealism, but 
not of the dogmatic kind known in the past, which Hegel views as the 
dogmatism of self-consciousness replacing the dogmatism of the thing-
in-itself. 
Dogmatism of assertions: Dogmatic realism, which makes direct assertions 
of being as a thing-in-itself. This is the famous position which Kant criti-
cized as "dogmatism." 
At the same time it returns to itself: Knowledge is engrossed within the 
content of reality as its self, but within the content of reality, it also returns 
to itself as knowledge. Thus we have reflection, specifically inner reflec-
tion. The process of knowledge, or thinking, is not identical with its 
object but retains a distance from it, an inner distance, as it is itself within 
its other. 
The cunning: A central concept in Hegel's philosophy of history. Because 
consciousness is immersed within the process, it seems to be lost within 
the multiplicity of its figures. It is unaware of its own activity. Thus, an 

Text and Running Commentary 
171 
all activity, watches0 how the [specific] determination is living its 
concrete life in the belief that it is promoting its own particular 
interests and self-preservation, while actually doing the opposite, 
namely, dissolving itself into a moment of the whole. 
[55] The importance of the understanding was indicated earlier with 
respect to substance as having self-consciousness; now we see its 
importance with respect to substance as having existence. 0 Exis-
tence0 is quality, is a determinateness which is equal to itself, or is 
ironic gap is formed between what consciousness thinks and knows about 
its activity, and the motivation and true significance of that activity. This 
ironic gap is a permanent feature of spirifs evolution which Hegel calls 
"the cunning of reason." People act from motivations of passion, ambi-
tion, violence, and exploitation, and thereby unwittingly contribute to 
historical progress and reason's development in the world. (This happens 
not only to great "historical heroes," but also to the multitude of people 
in their ordinary lives and actions.) In the text before us, Hegel provides 
the ontological basis for the cunning of reason. By dialectical necessity, 
reason must exist and act within its other, including the narrow egoism 
which makes particular individuals persevere and strive to dominate oth-
ers. But, it is equally necessary that Reason should return to itself within 
them, and make those particular strivings a means for realizing its own 
universal end. 
Watches: Actually, a bird's-eye view of the system is only available to con-
sciousness at the end of the road, not amidst the process within which it 
moves both earnestly (without irony) and ambitiously, yet paradoxically, 
and with a degree of inner awareness and self-deception. The ironic stand-
point which is capable of recognizing the cunning of reason in history is 
born retrospectively, when consciousness reconstitutes its past move-
ments, and observes how it had been furthering universal goals while 
striving merely to further its own particular objectives. 
As having existence: In most of the foregoing text, the intellect's major role 
has been seen from the standpoint of"subjective logic"-that is, of the fact 
that being has the character of a subject. Here, however, Hegel stresses 
the role of the intellect as the principle of objective external being. In other 
words, so far we have primarily stressed that substance is also an intellec-
tual subject; now we stress that the intellect itself is a kind of object. 
Existence: Although Dasein in this context is used more closely to its techni-
cal sense in the Logic (best translated as 'being there"), it is not quite so; 
a little later it is linked to substance and to genus, which are more devel-

172 
Text and Running Commentary 
determinate simplicity, determinate thought; this is the Under-
standing of existence.
0 Thereby it is Nus [sic]. The first one to have 
recognized the essence [of existence] as Nus was Anaxagoras. His 
followers conceived the nature of existence more precisely as eidos 
or idea, that is, as a specifically determined universality, 
0 or kind 
[genus]. The term "kind" sounds common and a little too low for 
the ideas-for the beautiful, the sacred, the eternal which today 
reign supreme. But in fact, an idea expresses neither more nor less 
than a kind. People nowadays often despise a term which expresses 
a Concept with precision; they prefer a term which-if only be-
cause it is a foreign word-wraps the Concept in fog, and thereby 
gains an edifying ring. Precisely because existence is determined as 
kind, it is simple thought; Nus, simplicity, is the substance. Because 
of its simplicity or self-identity, substance appears
0 as rigid and en-
oped categories than the simplest particular determination of being, 
called Dasein. So even here, Hegel uses Dasein in the nontechnical sense 
of "existence,'' and thus I translate it. 
The understanding of existence: This is the objective intellect, or Understand-
ing as immersed within the object, in outer being. The Greeks, for exam-
ple Anaxagoras, expressed this idea when speaking of nous (intellect) as 
a kind of natural power which dominates and guides the cosmos. For 
Anaxagoras, intellect was a kind of being or object. Plato refined this 
view by conceiving the objective intellect as a Form or Idea. Aristotle 
interpreted this view in terms of genus and species. In all these transfor-
mations-including Plato's Ideas, Aristotle's genera, and the Aristotelian 
nous operating at the outter limit of the cosmos, as unmoved mover-
the intellect has always been understood as an object, a thing (res). This is 
the principle which underlies the first part of Hegel's Logic, the "Objective 
Logic"(== logos, taken as object). Accordingly, this part of the book places 
the concept of substance, and not subject, at its center. It not only ac-
counts for Greek philosophy, but also the modern "dogmatic" metaphys-
ics of Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz. 
Specifically determined universality: As distinguished from determinate par-
ticularity (being there, Dasein), and from mere universality, or indetermi-
nate universality (being, Sein). The Platonic idea or the Aristotelian genus 
is specific universality, a unity of universality and particularity. 
Because of its simplicity ... substance appears: What has been said pre-
viously concerning being (Sein) in general and being there (Dasein) is 

Text and Running Commentary 
173 
during. Yet this self-identity is likewise negativity; thereby the rigid 
existence passes into dissolution. At first
0 it seems that the determi-
nateness is what it is by virtue of its relation to another, and that 
its movement is forced upon it by a foreign power. Actually, how-
ever, it has its being-other within itself, and is self-movement: this 
is implied in the very simplicity of thinking. For that simplicity 
is the self-moving and self-differentiating thought, and is genuine 
interiority, the pure Concept. In this way, understandability [Ver-
sti:indigkeit] is a becoming [a process], and as becoming it is rational-
ity [Verniinftigkeit]. 
0 
now said about substance, the highest form of objective logos. Substance 
stands higher than mere particular existence, and also higher than its 
characteristics, quantity, and quality, because substance allows particular 
existence to pass away, while maintaining the thing's individuality. Sub-
stance is a complex and highly mediated system which finally Hreturns 
to itself' as the pure and self-identical being by virtue of which a perma-
nent existent endures. However, in the next stage, it turns out that sub-
stance also lacks ontological stability. The element of simplicity in sub-
stance must produce self-negation and be dissolved into a system of 
relations. It is only as subject-as HConcept"-that an entity can gain 
ontological stability. 
At first: At the stage of primary, undeveloped individuality, that of particular 
quality or being there (Dasein). At that stage of the Logic, it seems that 
the particular entity, identified with its determinate quality, is what it is 
only by virtue of the external relations of negation which it maintains 
with all the others: red is not green, not yellow, also not sweet, and so 
on, and all these negative relations constitute its being red. Because no 
substance is yet present, all the other entities are foreign to the first entity, 
and the negative relations which constitute its specific existence are 
viewed by the first entity as an external and foreign power. But in the 
next stage-that of substance-the multiplicity of those qualities turns 
out to belong to the identity of one and the same existing system, and 
the negative relations are grasped as internal to its identity. This provides 
the basis for further development, in which self-negation produces reflec-
tion and subjectivity as a further dimension of substance. 
Understandability [Verstiindigkeit] is a becoming . . . is rationality [Vernunf-
tigkeit]: The rigid, objective intelligibility of substance enters a dialectical 
process, and therefore moves from "Understanding" to "Reason." 

174 
Text and Running Commentary 
[56] This nature of that which is-to be, in its being, its own Con-
cept-constitutes logical necessity
0 in general. It alone is the ratio-
nal; it is the rhythm of the organic whole; it is as much the knowing 
of the content as the content is essence and Concept-in other 
words, it alone is the speculative. The concrete shape, in moving 
itself, makes itself into a simple determinateness; thereby it raises 
itself to logical form and is in its essentiality;
0 its concrete existence 
is only this movement, and is immediately a logical existence. 
There is no need, therefore, to impose formalism on the content 
from without; the content itself is a passage to formalism, which 
ceases to be external formalism, since the form is the native becom-
ing of the concrete content. 
[57] This nature of scientific method-to be unsevered from the 
content, and to determine autonomously its own rhythm-receives 
its authentic exhibition in speculative philosophy. As for our pres-
ent text, although it expresses the Concept, 
0 it must not be taken 
as anything more than an anticipatory assurance. Its truth does not 
lie in its partly narrative presentation. Therefore, it cannot be re-
futed by a counterassurance which claims that things are not so, 
but different, or by reciting and recalling conventional opinions as 
if they were established and well-known truths; or again by dishing 
up some innovation from the shrine of inner divine intuition. Such 
is the usual [negative] reception which [the world of] knowledge 
reserves to what is unfamiliar-it reacts with resistance to it, in 
order to save its own freedom, its own insight and authority, from 
Logical necessity: For Hegel, necessity is not a property of assertions, propo-
sitions, sentences, or speech acts, but a dimension of being in its evolu-
tion. Necessity means that being itself is shaped as Concept. Thus, there 
is no mere being, opaque and "in itself," upon which thinking projects 
necessity through external discourse. Rather, empirical reality is itself the 
embodiment of a Concept which operates within it, and gives it its struc-
ture. This is the origin of logical necessity to Hegel. 
Is in its essentiality: In following logical necessity, philosophical knowledge 
grasps reality not in its crude manifestation as being, but in its essential 
manifestation as Concept (see "the pure essentialities," above). 
Although it expresses the Concept: Of true philosophy. 

Text and Running Commentary 
175 
the authority of a foreigner (since those we meet for the first time 
are perceived as foreigners); and also in order to remove the appear-
ance of a certain kind of shame which supposedly lies in learning 
something. Likewise, when the unfamiliar is received with ap-
plause, 
0 this reaction is of the same kind which, in another sphere, 
constituted ultrarevolutionary
0 talk and action. 
[58] The important thing in the study of Science is that we should 
take upon ourselves the exertion of the Concept. Science requires 
attention to the Concept as such, to simple determinations like 
being-in-itself, being-for-itself, equality-with-itself [ = self-identity], 
and so forth. These are self-movements which we might have called 
souls, had not their Concept indicated something higher than the 
soul. When the habit of following representations is broken by the 
Concept, it suffers as much stress
0 as does the formal thinking 
which reasons here and there in nonactual thoughts. The former 
habit
0 should be called material thinking, 
0 an accidental conscious-
ness which is so absorbed in its material that it finds it very painful 
at the same time to lift its self [sein Selbst] out of the material in a 
pure way, and be with itself. Reasoning, on the contrary, is freedom 
With applause: Even though the unknown usually produces anxiety and 
resistance, at times it provokes superficial enthusiasm. Both cases point 
to an immature mind. 
Ultrarevolutionary: Hegel wrote at the time of Napoleon, with the French 
Revolution still reverberating in the air. He viewed the revolution as 
bringing about great progress, but objected to the ultrarevolutionaries, 
abstract approach to it. The applause which they received from a sector 
of the public, including, at times, the young Hegel himself, was the fash-
ionable applause with which a new, but immature, idea is often received. 
Suffers as much stress: A dialectical mode of thinking disturbs the ordinary 
course of both sense images and formal conceptual thinking. Therefore 
each objects to it to the same degree. 
The former habit: The sense images and ordinary life-beliefs. 
Material thinking: The mode of thinking which is attached to matter, with-
out liberating itself from its coercive power. Hegelian philosophical think-
ing resides immanently within its matter, whereas formal or analytical 
thinking is liberated from matter in being external to it. Thus it loses its 
matter and ends in abstraction. 

176 
Text and Running Commentary 
from the content and the arrogance
0 which treats the content from 
above; of it is required the effort to renounce that freedom, and 
instead of acting as the arbitrary moving principle 
0 of the content, 
to submerge its freedom in it, let the content move itself by its own 
nature-that is, through the self as its own self [ durch das Selbst als 
das seinige ]-and to contemplate that movement. 
0 In the immanent 
rhythm of the Concept, one must get rid of one's own occurring 
ideas, and abstain from interfering in it with an arbitrary act [durch 
die Willkiir] or wisdom acquired elsewhere. This restraint is an es-
sential moment of paying attention to the Concept. 
[59] We should notice two further aspects in which the reasoning 
[argumentative] attitude is opposed to conceptual thinking: 
(1) On the one hand, argumentative reasoning takes a negative 
relation to the content it apprehends; it knows how to refute and 
Arrogance: Analytic thinking regards matter as something given to it for 
manipulation, and thus experiences its freedom from it as a kind of arro-
gance. The "subject matter itself-'-the content of reality-becomes 
something passive, dead, which moves only when set in motion by the 
analytical understanding through acts of inference and external organiza-
tion. The understanding is the active moving power which manipulates 
the content of reality, and is considered superior to that content. (This 
is "vanity.") 
The arbitrary moving principle: In acts of inference. Although they look 
necessary from the standpoint of a formal, logical language game, acts 
of inference are arbitrary from the standpoint of reality's content. The 
order of inference and demonstration is not necessarily the order of 
being. However, the act of inference is here the only power that sets the 
content in motion. Therefore, from its own standpoint, the content is 
being moved arbitrarily. 
To contemplate that movement: The philosophical method demands that the 
philosopher be absorbed by the subject matter, that his thinking mind be 
assimilated with, or to, the thought that activates the subject matter itself. 
It thus follows the immanent movement of the subject matter-which 
becomes its own movement-and finally contemplates the structure that 
emerges from this process. This contemplation, as we have seen, is there-
fore retrospective or a posteriori. "The method is nothing but the struc-
ture of the whole as it is constituted in its pure essentiality" (p. 156). 

Text and Running Commentary 
177 
demolish it. 
0 To see that things are not so is a merely negative 
insight; it is a final point which does not go beyond itself to a new 
content; rather, in order to have a content, something else must be 
picked up somewhere. This [negative reasoning] is a reflection into 
the empty I, the vanity of its knowing. 
0 This means that not the 
content alone, but also the insight is vain; for that insight is the 
negative which fails to see the positive within itself. Because that 
reflection fails to win its own negativity as content, 
0 it never resides 
in the matter itself but is always outside and beyond it; hence, it 
deludes itself into believing that when it asserts the void, it always 
reaches farther than a content-rich insight does. By contrast, as 
indicated above, in conceptual thinking the negative belongs to the 
content itself, and is the positive-both as the immanent movement 
and specific determination of the content, but also as its totality. 
Grasped as a result, 
0 it is the determinate negative, and thereby 
equally a positive content. 
[60] (2) But considering that such thinking has content
0-a content 
of representations, thoughts, or a mix of the two-there is some-
thing else which keeps it from being treated conceptually. This is 
To refute and demolish it: In formal argumentative thinking, a refutation is 
conclusive. An argument is annihilated and nothing is preserved of it. 
There is no continuity of negation and affirmation. In order to retain 
something positive, we must turn to a new argument taken from else-
where. Not so with a dialectical refutation, which preserves an essential 
ingredient of that which has been negated, and makes it a moment of a 
new affirmation. 
The vanity of its knowing: See "arrogance," above. 
Fails to win its own negativity as content: Negation does not lead here to a 
definite new affirmation. The only thing one can see here is nothingness, 
the void which has been left after something had been refuted. 
Grasped as a result: Within the totality, the positive system of truths results 
from the system of negations. 
Such thinking has content: This is the positive side of its thinking; but its 
content is made of sense images and rigid thoughts. Therefore, it is pre-
cisely the positive side of that thinking which provides an obstacle to true 
comprehension. 

178 
Text and Running Commentary 
an extraordinary impediment, whose nature is connected to the 
essence of the Idea
0 as mentioned before; more precisely, it ex-
presses the Idea, s appearance as a movement of apprehension by 
thought [denkendes Auffassen]. 
In its negative attitude
0 just discussed, argumentative reasoning is 
itself the self into which the content returns;
0 whereas in its positive 
knowledge, 
0 the self is a represented subject, to which the content 
relates as accident and predicate. 
0 This subject is the basis to which 
the content is tied, and on which the movement back and forth takes 
place. Conceptual thinking is different. 
0 Because the Concept is the 
The essence of the Idea: Hegel seems here to be using "Idea,, in the system-
atic sense he will employ in the Logic: the dialectical unity of being and 
conceiving (whose movement he has outlined above). 
In its negative attitude: When using negative sentences. 
The self into which the content returns: The self ( Selbst) in general, or at least 
in the logical sense, is that to which the content Hreturns, as a result of 
its movement and evolution. In the case of argumentative thinking, be-
cause the negative sentence negates the content utterly and completely, 
it returns it to negation itself as the ironic ((self, of that content. 
Whereas in its positive knowledge: In using positive assertive sentences. 
As accident and predicate: Hegel returns to his analysis of predicative lan-
guage. In positive assertions, the self to which the content of the sentence 
is returned is its rigid subject, standing motionless at its base, while the 
predicates hang unilaterally on it, as accidents. Note that Hegel speaks 
interchangeably of the subject in the logical or grammatical sense (the 
subject of a sentence or proposition) and the mental sense (the knowing, 
or mental subject). The equivocation could be based on Hegel,s assimila-
tion of Kanfs view, that the knowing subject stands behind the unity of 
a judgment, as the principle that links its predicates. This is why Hegel 
says that in a merely analytic mode of thinking, the "motionless, logical 
subject results in a Hmotionless,, (merely abstract) human subject. But 
even if he meant to allude to this important implication, his practice of 
the equivocation (the two senses of '(subjece') is likely to confuse. 
Conceptual thinking is different: In Conceptual (dialectical) thinking, negation 
does not abolish the content; affirmation does not create a rigid, unilateral 
link between subject and predicate; and movement is not external to the 
subject but rather is its own movement-that is, it is the movement of the 
whole system of its predicates, which is identical with the subject. 

Text and Running Commentary 
179 
object's own self which presents itself as its becoming, it is not an 
immobile subject that upholds the accidents without moving, but is 
a self-moving Concept which takes its determinations back into it-
self. The immobile subject disintegrates in this movement; it passes 
over to the distinctions and content, and rather than continuing to 
confront the determinateness, that is, the differentiated content and 
its movement, it constitutes them. The solid ground which reason-
ing had in the immobile subject falters, 
0 and only that movement 
itself becomes the object. The subject which fills its content ceases 
to go beyond it, and can have no further predicates and accidents. 
0 
Thereby, on the other side, the content's dispersion is connected 
by the self;
0 the content is not something general that, free of the 
subject, 
0 would fit many others. Indeed, the content is no longer the 
The solid ground . .. falters: This is the Hegelian doctrine of the "collapse of 
the subject," an idea that gained currency in postmodern thinking of the 
late twentieth century. Still, Hegel abolishes only the fixed subject, whom 
he replaces with a different, flowing subject, patterned as a circular system. 
No further predicates and accidents: All its predicates, and only they, consti-
tute its specific peculiarity. To that extent the predicates are not accidents, 
but are all equally essential. Thereby, the entity in question is not a partic-
ular token of some universal form, but a true individual-a specific singu-
lar system. Incidentally, this idea has roots in Leibniz (whom Hegel had 
studied in Jena). Leibniz conceived of the predicates of a complex sub-
stance (even those describing its history as a singular entity) as being 
included in it a priori. In Hegel's interpretation, the substance is that 
system of predicates; but he argues that this way of thinking can hold 
water only if substance is understood as subject. 
The content's dispersion is connected by the self Its being an individual sub-
ject unifies its diverse contents into that specific singular system. 
Free of the subject: The element of generality is here shaped not as a univer-
sal (a genus, a species), but as a totality (a whole), which is a singular 
entity. A universal predicate (e.g., "animal") is not attached specifically to 
some singular subject but can freely adhere to many different entities 
(subjects)-an elephant, a Tyrolean dog, Napoleon's horse, and so forth. 
But in a totality, all the predicates refer exclusively to this one entity, as 
their single subject. God, world history, the spirit, are singular totalities. 
All the contents characterizing such an entity and its evolution belong to 

180 
Text and Running Commentary 
subject's predicate
0 but its very substance, it is the essence and Con-
cept of what is being spoken about. The representing mode of think-
ing, by its nature, follows the predicates and accidents and goes be-
yond them-and does so with right, since they are only predicates 
and accidents. But its progress is arrested
0 when that which in the 
proposition has the form of a predicate, is the subject itself Here it 
suffers, so to speak, a countershock. It starts from the subject as if 
the subject remained the ground; but since the predicate is actually 
the substance, it discovers that the subject has passed into the predi-
cate and has thereby been sublated. Thus, because what had ap-
peared to be a predicate turned out to be the whole independent 
mass, thinking cannot roam around freely
0 any longer, but is held 
fast by this weight. 
that singular subject only, in precisely the manner in which they have 
actually appeared and found their place in it. 
The content is no longer the subject's predicate: Thus understood, the predi-
cate is no longer a rigid content hanging on the subject as accident. 
Rather, the predicate (when taken in its dynamic relation to all the other 
predicates), is the essence and subject matter itself--it is the actual subject; 
and it discloses itself not as a fixed particular item, but as a detailed and 
comprehensive (yet singular) system. 
Its progress is arrested: The ordinary understanding starts from the subject 
as a rigid particular whose meaning is finished and given, and hangs on 
it some general predicate, which also fits many other subjects. But when 
pondering the matter more thoroughly, it is astonished to discover that 
the subject is the very substance, the issue at hand itself. Thereby its 
freedom of navigation between many possible predicates is suddenly re-
strained, and from sheer generality the mind is driven to think a compre-
hensive (holistic) individual. (Of course, for that arresting blow to occur, 
the thinking mind must have already digressed from its ordinary course: 
the inner blow accelerates a process whose nucleus already exists.) 
Roam around freely: In philosophical discourse we cannot attach any predi-
cate to a subject, or refer the predicate to several different subjects. In 
moving from sheer generality to a comprehensive (holistic) individual, 
we gain a subject to which certain predicates, and no others, are specifi-
cally bound, and they alone are necessary from its standpoint. Thus the 
"arrogant" freedom of the analytic Understanding is restrained. Also, the 
history of the subject acquires a necessary dimension, as belonging to 

Text and Running Commentary 
181 
Usually
0 one starts by (a) taking the subject as the ground and 
as the fixed and object-like [gegensti:indliche] self,
0 from which the 
necessary movement proceeds to the manifold of determinations, 
or predicates. At this point
0 (b) the knowing I enters and takes 
the place of that subject, constituting the connection between the 
predicates and the subject which hold them together. (c) But since 
the first subject passes into the determinations and constitutes their 
soul, the second, namely, the knowing subject, continues to find in 
the predicate that which it wants to be through with, 
0 and beyond 
that same subject's singularity. For example, one can no longer say that 
humans are characterized by rationality in general; one may only refer 
to the specific rationality that has been embodied in the life of humanity 
in its various periods and civilizations, which have actually evolved and 
taken shape. They all acquire a necessary status, not as mere C(accidents" 
of the subject (in this case: the human spirit), but as necessary attributes 
of it-a series of predicates constituting its very substance. 
Usually: From here to the end of the paragraph Hegel reviews the failure 
of ordinary thinking. The prime mover in its collapse was Kant's idealism. 
Despite its failure to draw all the necessary conclusions from its own 
principle, Kant's philosophy has nevertheless set rational thinking in a 
process that eventually overcame the limitations of both dogmatism and 
Kant himself. 
The fixed and object-like [gegenstiindliche] self This is the phase of dogmatic 
realism. Substance is here understood as a rigid object-like entity, in 
which thinking plays no role; and the dominant unit of discourse-the 
propositional form-is understood as imitating the object-like relation 
between substance and accidents. 
At this point: The point at which Kant entered the scene. This is the stage of 
idealism. Here the knowing subject (the I) emerges as the power linking 
together the predicates in the proposition, or linking the subject and its 
predicates. (See the "Transcendental Analytic" in The Critique of Pure Rea-
son, especially the section "On the Guideline for the Discovery of all the 
Pure Concepts of the Understanding.") Yet Kant still maintained a rigid 
relation between subject and predicates, even though self-consciousness 
became their connecting principle. 
That which it wants to be through with: In turning to the predicate, the 
mind turns away from the subject (whose meaning it believes to possess 
as Ha minted coin,'' p. 139), and is surprised to rediscover that subject in 
the predicate which it had expected to be quite different from. This sur-
prising discovery starts the move from Kantian to speculative idealism. 

182 
Text and Running Commentary 
which it wants to return to itself. Thus, instead of being able
0 to set 
the predicate in motion by an activity of reasoning, which checks 
whether this or that predicate fits the first subject, it now has to 
deal with the self of the content; it cannot be [any longer] for-itself, 
but must be together with that content. 
[ 61] The above can be expressed formally by saying that the nature 
of a judgment
0 or a proposition in general, which contains the 
difference between subject and predicate, is destroyed by the specu-
lative proposition.
0 The first turns into an identity-proposition, 
Instead of being able: In Kant, the knowing act still consists in examining 
whether a rigid predicate conforms to a rigid subject; even though the 
examination is now based on the subject's forms of thought rather than 
on object-like relations presumably existing in a Hthing in itsel£" The 
knowing subject fails in its attempt to merely engage in such compari-
sons, because it discovers itself in the object, and discovers the logical 
subject within its predicates. In this way, the predicative mode of thinking 
breaks down and calls for a speculative mode. 
The nature of a judgment: According to Hegel, judgment (Urteil) performs 
a separation between subject and predicate. This may be indicated by the 
German word Ur-Teil, Hprimary division." (Holder lin also made this a 
major point in his early thought; see the introduction.) 
The speculative proposition: A rare and rather enigmatic term in Hegel. Its 
meaning is widely debated. Actually, by the logic of Hegel's position, no 
single proposition of any form can express a speculative content. Hegel, 
therefore, cannot possibly be demanding that a speculative proposition 
replace the predicative proposition as the proper way of expressing philo-
sophical truth. That demand would project an ideal that can be neither 
realized, nor even exemplified, in the Hegelian system. I therefore tend 
to think that in speaking of H a speculative proposition" Hegel does not 
intend to establish a new, presumably dialectical form of discourse, but 
to indicate the collapse of the usual predicative sentence as a philosophical 
instrument. Proper philosophical discourse must consist in a whole sys-
tem of sentences, some of which are contradictory, whose mutual rela-
tionships are supposed to express the inner movement of the Concept. 
As for the examples Hegel gives later (sentences like cfGod is Being," and 
CCThe actual is the universal''), I think they illustrate a special kind of 
predicative proposition, those expressing identity or equivalence. The 
one-sided predicative form is incongruent in such a sentence with the 
intended content, and therefore prepares the ground for the collapse of 

Text and Running Commentary 
183 
which contains the countershock to that relation [of subject and 
predicate]. This conflict, 
0 between the form of a proposition in 
general and the unity of the Concept which destroys it, resembles 
the conflict which takes place in rhythm between meter and accent. 
Rhythm results from their unification and floating center. Similarly, 
the identity of subject and object in the philosophical proposition 
must not nullify their difference,
0 which the form of the proposi-
tion expresses; rather, this unity must emerge as harmony. The 
form of the proposition is the appearance of the determinate sense, 
or the accent which specifies its filling; whereas the fact that the 
this form of thinking and expression. Yet Hegel cannot regard such sen-
tences as a proper expression of philosophical truth. At best they may 
count as a means of transition, a lever leading from predicative to specula-
tive thinking, which neither attains nor even illustrates the latter. 
Since no single sentence can capture the process of speculative thinking 
in Hegel's sense, we may conclude that Hegel's examples serve to illus-
trate how a truly dialectical content cannot be forced into the ordinary 
propositional form. If so, it follows that, as levers of transition) Hspecula-
tive propositions" have relatively low standing in the process of Knowing. 
Hegel goes on to stress that his examples are identity-propositions lacking 
a sense of novelty. Their service to Knowledge consists in upsetting its 
ordinary way and hinting at a different way which they themselves are 
unable to realize. The speculative proposition heightens the sense of dis-
satisfaction we get from the subject/predicate proposition, and urges our 
thinking to go beyond it-not to another form of proposition but to the 
complete process of dialectical thinking, which no single sentence of any 
form can express. In addition, the speculative proposition has relative 
value at the end of the road, as an abbreviated heading that summarizes 
a speculative process which it cannot, however, contain in a live and 
meaningful way. The speculative process will be an explication of that 
abbreviation, orally or in writing. 
This conflict: Referring to the conflict between the speculative-conceptual 
content which breaks away from ordinary language, and the predicative 
form of that language. Hegel idealizes that conflict as harmony, compar-
ing it to music or poetry; yet it looks more like an unresolved difficulty 
in his system, that is, an antinomy. 
Must not nullify their difference: The predicates must have distinctive differ-
ences which add specificity and filling to the subject, rather than simply 
repeating it in general terms (as in C<God is Being,). 

184 
Text and Running Commentary 
predicate expresses the substance, and that the subject itself falls 
into the universal, is the unity in which the accent fades out. 
[62] Let us clarify this with examples. In the proposition God is being,
0 
the predicate is being; it has a substantive meaning in which the 
subject dissolves. Being is not meant to be a predicate here, but the 
essential thing; thereby God seems to cease to be that which he is 
by virtue of his place in the proposition, namely, the rigid subject. 
And since the subject is lost, thinking no longer moves from subject 
to predicate, but feels arrested and pushed back to the thought of 
the subject, because it misses that subject. In other words, since 
the predicate itself is expressed as subject, as being [als das Sein], as 
the essence which exhausts the subject, s nature, thinking there-
fore finds the subject immediately also in the predicate. Hence, 
instead of moving within itself in the predicate
0 and reaching the 
free attitude of reasoning, thinking now becomes absorbed in the 
content-or at least, is called upon to be so absorbed. Similarly, in 
saying the actual is the universal, the actual as subject vanishes in 
its predicate. The universal must not only have the meaning of a 
predicate, such that the proposition pronounces the actual to be 
universal, but the universal must express the essence of the actual. 
God is being: As mentioned, Hegel chose a special kind of proposition. He 
dubs it an Hidentity proposition,'' which defines something by its highly 
generalized essence. The predicate is so general and essential that in pass-
ing from subject to predicate we actually remain within the subject, and 
feel that no predication has been performed, but that the subject itself 
was reiterated as predicate. This sense of tautology embarrasses the 
mind, which fails to hold on to a specific predicate. Having left the subject 
behind, the mind comes upon it again in the place where it no longer 
expects to find the subject (but expects to find the predicate instead)-
and thus the subject ceases to be fixed for it in one rigid place. 
Instead of moving within itself in the predicate: By being thrust back from the 
predicate to the subject, the ordinary understanding cannot maintain its 
superior position: it cannot continue to compare different predicates with 
a rigid subject-term given in advance, and decide in the usual way whether 
they conform to it (analytically, synthetically, or not at all). Wherever it 
turns, it has the same general content. It is therefore unable to extract itself 
from the essential content but remains attached to it (one might say, ar-
rested by it), and cannot escape to the arbitrary freedom it possessed before. 

Text and Running Commentary 
185 
In this way, thinking loses the fixed object-like [gegenstdndlich] 
ground it had in the subject, each time that it is thrust back to it 
in the predicate; and in the predicate it returns not to itself, but to 
the subject of the content. 
[ 63] This unusual arrest is the main cause when people complain ° that 
philosophical writings are unintelligible, a complaint we hear even 
from those who otherwise possess the cultural prerequisites for un-
derstanding these works. This also accounts for a very specific re-
proach often made against philosophical texts-that many passages 
must be read over again before they can be understood-a reproach 
that is supposed to assert something so improper and final that, if 
well grounded, there is no defense against it. What we said above 
clarifies the issue. The philosophical proposition, because it is a prop-
osition, invokes the opinion that here is the usual relation of subject 
and predicate and the usual attitude of knowing. The philosophical 
content of the proposition destroys this usual attitude and the opin-
ion which comes with it. Opinion [Meinung] discovers that things 
are meant [gemeint] differently than in the way it has opined [meinte]; 
and this correction of its opinion requires of Knowing that it return 
to the proposition and apprehend it differently. 
[ 64] A difficulty to be avoided is to confuse the speculative and the 
argumentative mode [of philosophizing]. This confusion arises 
when what we say of the subject is meant at one time in the sense 
of its Concept, and at another time in the sense of its predicate or 
accident. One mode stands in the other's way; and only a philo-
sophical exhibition which strictly excludes the usual relation be-
tween the parts of the proposition will attain plasticity. 
0 
Complain: The arrest (or inner blow) described above is the reason why 
philosophy is hard to understand. The difficulty is not intellectual, but 
mental and educational. Ordinary thinking encounters impediments that 
shatter its routine expectations, and force upon it the need of adjusting 
to unexpected change. 
Plasticity: Lefebvre explains Hplastic" as "attached to the content," insepara-
ble from it. But one can also understand this adjective as the contrary of 
''rigid." 

186 
Text and Running Commentary 
[ 65] Actually, nonphilosophical thinking also has its right, 0 which is 
valid, although the speculative propositional mode fails to observe 
it. The [usual] form of the proposition must be sublated not only 
immediately, not merely by the content of the proposition; rather, 
the opposite movement must be verbalized [ausgesprochen]. An in-
ward arrest is not enough: the return of the Concept to itself must 
also be exhibited. 
0 This [textual] movement, which fulfills [in spec-
ulative thinking] the task formerly assigned to the demonstra-
tion, 
0 is the dialectical movement of the proposition itself. It alone 
is the actually speculative, and only the [verbal] expression of that 
[whole] movement is a speculative presentation. As proposition, 
the speculative is merely an inward arrest and a retreat of essence 
into itself which lacks existence. Indeed, philosophical presenta-
tions often relegate us to that inward intuition, and spare them-
Nonphilosophical thinking also has its right: This is a current motif in Hegel. 
Speculative thinking does not invalidate the other modes of thinking as 
long as they are confined to their own domain. 
Must also be exhibited: The passage to dialectical thinking requires a new 
mode of writing. One cannot make do with the inner arrest caused by 
predicative sentences whose form is incongruent with their intention, 
and one cannot overcome the limitations of predicative language by 
some inner light. The overcoming must find its own literary expres-
sion-by using language differently than in traditional philosophy. 
Hegel's unique kind of writing in the Phenomenology is, I think, intended 
to overcome both the argumentative mode of thinking and the mysti-
cism that pretends to replace it. His difficult, yet mostly intelligible, 
mode of writing, which unsympathetic critics called "foggy" and even 
"mystical," was actually fashioned against mysticism. Overcoming argu-
mentative thinking should yield a Concept, not a mystical experience, 
and must have a rational expression open to all, even if the language we 
possess can do this only in roundabout ways while offending the com-
mon understanding. 
The task formerly assigned to the demonstration: Having sublated the argu-
mentative mode of thinking, philosophical discourse grounds itself 
in dialectical circles, which negate their own point of departure and 
return to it on a new level. This dialectical circularity replaces the role 
that has formerly been assigned to demonstrations and formal proofs in 
philosophy. 

Text and Running Commentary 
187 
selves the exhibition of the dialectical movement of the proposi-
tion which is required. 
0 
[66] The proposition is supposed to express what the true is; but the 
true is essentially subject, and as such is but the dialectical move-
ment-that self-engendering march which leads itself forward and 
returns into itself. In nondialectical knowledge, it is the demonstra-
tion which fulfills this role-to verbalize the inwardness. But ever 
since dialectic and demonstration were separated, the Concept of 
a "philosophical demonstration"'' has actually been lost. 
Someone might call to our attention that dialectical movement, 
too, has propositions which form its own parts or elements. So it 
seems that the difficulty we mentioned above always recurs, 
0 and 
belongs to the matter itself. This resembles what occurs in ordi-
nary demonstrations, whose grounds need to be grounded in their 
turn, and so on to infinity. But this form of grounding and condi-
tioning belongs [specifically] to the demonstration, which [we saw 
to be] different from dialectical movement, and thus belongs to 
external knowledge. As for dialectical movement, it has the pure 
Concept for its element and therefore has a content which, in its 
very self, is a subject through and through. Here no content oc-
curs, 
0 which acts as an underlying subject and receives its meaning 
The dialectical movement of the proposition which is required: Hegel fulfilled 
this requirement only in the Phenomenology and the Logic, whose mode 
of writing is indeed unique. 
The difficulty . . . always recurs: Hegel practically admits he has no way 
of overcoming this problem. Dialectical thinking cannot use an artificial 
technical language, because philosophy must arise from the historical 
culture and language. Yet historical languages are irremediably predica-
tive in the inadequate sense. (The defect of predicative propositions is 
raised again by Hegel in The Science of Logic, book 1, part 1, chapter 1 
[rtBeing"], note 2). 
Here no content occurs: In cases like those cited (of very general 
primary propositions), the subject term has no predetermined fixed 
meaning to which one then adds predicates, but is a mere name. Its 
entire meaning comes from the series of predicates which give it con-
tent and particularization. 

188 
Text and Running Commentary 
by way of a predicate; the proposition here is only an empty form. 
0 
Apart from the self which is intuited or represented by the senses, 
0 
it is above all the name
0 as name which marks the pure subject-
the empty Conceptless One. We may therefore find it useful to 
avoid the name God, 
0 because this word is not directly also a Con-
cept but is a genuine name, a rigid stillness of an underlying sub-
ject; whereas other words, for example, being or the one, singularity, 
subject, and the like immediately also signify Concepts. About this 
subject [God], many speculative truths are indeed pronounced; but 
because the subject is given as static, these truths lack an imma-
nent Concept and easily assume the form of mere edification. 
0 In 
Only an empty form: The propositional form, connecting a rigid predicate 
to a pregiven fixed subject, is empty because it does not conform to any 
true philosophical content. (Indirectly, Hegel also takes aim at Kant, who 
deduced fundamental philosophical contents-the categories-from the 
forms of judgment). 
The self which is intuited or represented by the senses: The merely subjective 
sense of self. 
The name: An empty name, analogous to the empty I of sense certainty. 
(As is usual with him, Hegel speaks interchangeably of the knowing sub-
ject and the logical subject of the proposition.) 
To avoid the name God: No subject is more fixed and predetermined than 
the reference of the name "God." Tradition has packed into that name 
so many meanings and connotations, that almost no way exists to over-
come its predetermination. This situation is highlighted by the ontologi-
cal proof, which starts from a richly predetermined sense of ''God" and 
explicates what it already contains. (Another example is Descartes' guar-
antee of evident knowledge, based upon God's goodness.) Hegel says he 
prefers terms like 'being" or "subject" to rcGod/' because they are more 
conceptual; but his reason is not clear. Is he saying these are general 
terms while "God" is singular? But Hegel also prefers the term "one," 
which is no less singular. Hegel seems wavering on this question, perhaps 
because he is writing here in a polemical vein, which sometimes leads 
him to rhetorical exaggerations. 
Edification: Hegel said above that philosophy should beware of edification, 
that is, of creating a pious state of mind by elevated talk and uplifting 
exhortation rather than knowledge. And since the name "God" calls for this 
mood, it had better be avoided as the subject of philosophical explication. 

Text and Running Commentary 
189 
this respect, the obstacle due to the habit
0 of grasping a speculative 
predicate according to the [ordinary] propositional form (rather 
than as Concept or essence) can be decreased or increased by [fault 
of] the philosophical discourse we use. In order to faithfully ex-
press its insight about the nature of speculation, the [philosophical] 
presentation must maintain a dialectical form, and include nothing 
that is not a Concept and is not Conceptual. 
[67] The study of philosophy is hampered not only by the reasoning 
attitude, but also, and equally, by the unreasoning conceit of ready-
made truths, whose owner feels no need to go back to [and exam-
ine], but uses them as the ground and believes he can assert and 
use them for judging and condemning. From this direction a press-
ing need is felt to make philosophy a serious matter again. In every 
science, art, skill, and handiwork, it is evident that a manifold effort 
of learning and exercise is needed in order to master them. But 
when it comes to philosophy, the following prejudice seems to 
reign today, namely, that although not everyone can make shoes 
just because he has fingers and eyes and was given tools and 
leather-yet everyone possesses an immediate understanding and 
judgment of philosophy, because he carries its measure in his natu-
ral reason-as if he did not carry the measure of a shoe in his 
The obstacle due to the habit: Hegel here summarizes the issue. Since no 
way exists of avoiding subject/ predicate sentences, the philosophical 
mind should be trained to treat those sentences in a new way. It must 
learn to grasp the predicates not "according to the propositional form'"'-
not as one-sidedly attached to a subject that has a fully determined mean-
ing-but Has Concept and essence,,, namely, as a process that unfolds in 
a detailed dialectical manner and thereby constitutes its own essence. As 
such, the process of predication contructs the subject and becomes identi-
cal with it. The predicates, relation to the subject is one of dialectical 
equivalence rather than unilateral dependence. Such thinking disrupts 
intellectual habits and opposes the structure of ordinary language, so it 
must be illustrated by new literary means that break the atomic appear-
ance of singular propositions and set them C<in movement." Educating 
the mind to dialectical thinking depends therefore in large measure on 
the way in which philosophy is presented, orally and in writing. 

190 
Text and Running Commentary 
foot! Mastering philosophy is made to depend today on the lack of 
learning and cognitions, so that philosophy ceases where they 
begin. Often philosophy is considered to be devoid of content, a 
formal knowledge only; and the insight is badly lacking that [on 
the contrary,] if there is something true in a science or body of 
knowledge also with respect to content, 
0 it deserves this name only 
when it has been engendered by philosophy. Let the other sciences 
argue and reason without philosophy as much as they will: without 
it they can have neither life, nor spirit, nor truth. 
[68] Regarding genuine philosophy, we see that instead of the long 
road of cultural education, instead of the rich and profound move-
ment by which spirit attains to Knowing, there steps forward today 
a direct revelation of the divine, accompanied by a common sense 
that has never toiled and educated itself either in other sciences or 
in genuine philosophy, and presumes to offer an instant equivalent 
and a perfect substitute to the road of cultural education-as some 
people praise chicory as a substitute for coffee. It gives [me] no plea-
sure to remark, that ignorance-indeed, the most formless and taste-
less crudeness, 
0 which cannot frame its thinking in a single abstract 
proposition, let alone a string of propositions-assures us at one time 
that it is freedom and tolerance of thought, and at another time 
that it is genius. That genius which today rages in philosophy
0 has 
With respect to content: Hegel (with due modification) adopts Fichte' s idea 
that every science-mathematics, physics, law, political science-is based 
on a special Concept or category determined in philosophy. The system of 
these basic Concepts forms an U"Encyclopaedia of Philosophical Sciences." 
The most formless and tasteless crudeness: These adjectives refer to the phi-
losophy of common sense and the philosophy of genius-two opposites 
pretending to grasp philosophical truth immediately, without the neces-
sary philosophical formation and evolution. The superficiality of com-
mon sense and the alleged profundity of crude romantic genius are simi-
lar in that respect, except that common sense is open to everyone, while 
genius conceives of itself as the gift of a few. 
That genius which today rages in philosophy: CCGenius" was a current cate-
gory in German aesthetics of the end of the eighteenth century. Kant 
described any worthwhile artist (not only the towering ones) as pos-
sessing the faculty of genius. A genius (= true artist) exhibits "aesthetic 

Text and Running Commentary 
191 
previously, as we know, raged in poetry. But when its products made 
any sense, 
0 genius did not produce poetry but only trivial prose; and 
when it went beyond the latter, it produced crazy speeches. Similarly, 
today a natural philosophizing
0 steps forward, for which the Con-
cept is not good enough; and because it has the virtue of lacking 
the Concept, it takes itself to be poetic and intuiting thinking, 0 and 
dispatches to the market arbitrary combinations of the imagination 
which thought has only mixed up-creatures that are neither fish 
nor meat, neither poetry nor philosophy. 
[69] On the other hand, when natural philosophizing flows in the 
more peaceful bed of common sense, it provides, at best, a rhetoric 
of trivial truths; and if reproached because of the insignificance of 
those truths, it assures us that it bears their meaning and filling in 
its heart
0 (so they must be present in others, too), and thinks that 
ideas'' combining intuition, imagination, and reason in a work of art that 
is a singular embodiment of a universal principle, which can neither be 
generalized nor repeated and imitated. This theory established a link be-
tween genius and a kind of intellectual intuition. Later thinkers, including 
Hegel's friends Holderlin and Schelling, and his later rival Schopenhauer, 
gave this idea a romantic turn, as intuitive profundity which penetrates 
into the root of being. Schelling linked a form of genius to philosophy 
itself, thus giving philosophy the character of art, or of a semimystical 
disclosure. Varieties of this view of genius were "raging'' in Hegel's time 
(and, indeed, persisted in German thought up to Heidegger). 
Any sense: Any cognitive sense (other than as poetry). 
Today a natural philosophizing: Hegel assails the fashionable trend of relying 
on the simple person's na"ive or natural wisdom, as embodied in popular 
proverbs, common truths and conventions, and the like. Hegel rejects 
that wisdom not in itself, but as substitute philosophy, that is, as crude 
images which profess to be immediately true. 
Poetic and intuiting thinking: Using the style of the romantics who compose 
philosophical poetry, or who philosophize in poetic language. In his pri-
vate notes Hegel chided a few writers, now forgotten, who composed 
romantic philosophies of nature. Whether he also meant greater figures, 
like Holderlin, is unclear. (While Holderlin's poetry is often powerfully 
philosophical, he also wrote philosophy directly.) 
It bears their meaning and filling in its heart: In response to the charge that 
they utter banal truths, the partisans of sound, though trivial, common 

192 
Text and Running Commentary 
by invoking the "innocent heart" and the "purity of conscience'' 
and the like, it says final things which are immune to challenge 
and of which nothing further can be demanded. However, the best 
should not be left behind in the pits of inwardness, but called out 
to light. One could have long ago since spared oneself the trouble 
of putting forth ultimate truths like these, because they are already 
found in catechism, or in popular proverbs, and the like. It is not 
difficult to see the ambiguity and slant in these truths, and, quite 
often, to show to the consciousness holding them that it also holds 
the opposite truths. 
0 In attempting to pull itself out of the embar-
rassment into which it has fallen, consciousness is prone to fall into 
new disconcertments, and finally to explode and say decidedly that 
things are such and such, and the rest is sophistry-a slogan used 
by common sense against cultivated philosophy, just as ignorance 
uses the word reveries to stigmatize philosophy once and for all. 
In relying on feeling as its inner oracle, common sense has fin-
ished with whomever disagrees with it. It must declare that it has 
nothing to say to those who do not feel the same and cannot find 
the same things in themselves; in other words, it tramples on the 
root of humanity. For the nature of humanity is to press for concord 
with others, and it exists only within an actualized community of 
minds. Whereas the antihuman, the bestial, consists in persevering 
[in the mode of] feeling and communicating only through it. 
[70] Whoever asks for a royal road to Science
0 will find it most com-
fortable to rely on healthy common sense; and, in order to keep 
sense claim that originality does not reside in the content of a statement, 
but in the heart and subjective sincerity of those holding it. 
The opposite truths: A person holding fast to the views of common sense 
can be brought to realize-as Socrates has done-that he also holds oppo-
site views with the same solid confidence. The resulting embarrassment 
might liberate certain persons from their dogmatism. However, the ma-
jority (again, as the Socratic example shows) will become irritated and 
aggressive, and dig even deeper into their entrenched dogmatism. 
A royal road to Science: In the last part of the preface, Hegel again tries to 
show that there are no shortcuts to philosophical science. Hegel para-
phrases the saying attributed to Euclid that "there is no royal road to 
geometry." Philosophy, too, requires effort, labor, and many intermediary 

Text and Running Commentary 
193 
in step with the times and philosophy, to go over reviews of philo-
sophical works, and even read the prefaces and first paragraphs 
of such works. For these offer the general principles on which 
everything depends, while the reviews provide not only a histori-
cal notice but a judgment which, being a judgment, stands higher 
than what it judges. This common road can be followed while 
wearing a housedress, whereas the lofty feeling of the eternal, the 
sacred, the infinite, wears the apparel of a high priest as it strides 
a road which is [not really a road but] already the immediate Being 
at the center, 
0 the genius of profound, original ideas and of ele-
vated flashes of insight. Nonetheless, just as this profundity is not 
a revelation of the source of essence, 
0 so those fireworks are not 
the empyrean. 
0 True thoughts and scientific insights are gained 
only through the work of the Concept. The Concept alone can 
generate the universality of Knowing which [on the one hand] 
does not suffer from the deficiency and obscurity of ordinary [or, 
the crude, gemein] common sense,
0 but is cultivated and complete 
knowledge; and on the other hand is not the extraordinary univer-
sality of a gift of reason that corrupts itself by the laziness and 
stages, not as a technical but as an essential condition. Those seeking a 
royal road in philosophy fail to see that the process of discovery is equally 
a process of mental formation and education, in which the mind is trans-
formed and becomes more capable of the next stages of its understand-
ing. On the other hand, truth itself is a development; therefore the need 
to undergo a process on the way to truth is an objective requirement, 
deriving from the nature of truth itself, and not only from the limitations 
of the human mind. Whoever seeks a leap to philosophical truth shows 
she does not understand the nature of the truth she is seeking. 
The center: Hegel reiterates the same critique of Schelling expressed on 
pages 62, 93-94, and 164 above. 
Essence (Wesen): in the dual sense mentioned (of essence and being). 
The empyrean: The mythological residence of the gods and the sphere of 
fire. 
Ordinary [or the crude, gemein] common sense: Gemein means "the com-
monly shared," and also "crude'' or "vulgar." Hegel forms a pun with 
ungemein, meaning the .... not commonly shared," and also the "'not vulgar" 
(rather, the "esoteric" or "aristocratic"). His critique-in the name of 
universality-is aimed at both the vulgar and the esoteric. 

194 
Text and Running Commentary 
conceit of genius. Rather, this universality is truth which has ma-
tured to its native0 form, and can be possessed by every self-con-
scious reason. 
[71] According to me, that by which Science exists is the self-movement 
of the Concept. Yet current opinions about the nature and shape 
of truth are different from my position and even opposed to it, both 
in the ways discussed above and in more external respects. So an 
attempt to exhibit the system of Science according to my stand-
point cannot expect to be favorably received. Meanwhile I can pon-
der0 the fact that while the excellence of Plato's philosophy was 
placed in his scientifically worthless myths,0 there were also other 
times0 (even called times of enthusiasm), when Aristotle's philoso-
phy was revered on account of its speculative depth,0 and Plato's 
Parmenides, no doubt the greatest artwork of ancient dialectic, 0 was 
considered the positive expression and true disclosure of divine life; 
and despite the frequent obscurity which ecstasy0 generated, this 
Native: In the sense of authentic, originally destined. 
Ponder: And find comfort in this awareness. 
Placed in his scientifically worthless myths: That was a worthless period in 
the history of philosophy. 
There were also other times: Better philosophical times. Hegel seems to be 
thinking of the neoplatonic school and perhaps of its renewal during the 
Renaissance. 
On account of its speculative depth: Rather than on account of its formal 
logic (which, for Hegel, misses the dialectic), or its doctrine of natural 
science. Hegel betrays the hope that his own speculative depth will also 
gain recognition. 
The greatest artwork of andent dialectic (or: "the greatest achievement of 
the art of ancient dialectic"): Is Hegel suggesting that his Phenomenology 
should count as "the greatest achievement of the modern art of dialecticn? 
Ecstasy: A key concept in religious mysticism originating in neoplatonic 
teaching and its concept of being-outside-oneself. Besides the words En-
thusiasmus and Begeisterung, Germans often use (as Hegel does here) the 
word Schwiirmerei, which received a negative connotation when Kant 
used it to denote an irrational delusion. Hegel has taken the same nega-

Text and Running Commentary 
195 
misunderstood ecstasy
0 was supposed to be nothing but the pure 
Concept. And I also bear in mind that what is excellent in contem-
porary philosophy derives its value from being scientific; and even 
if other people construe that scientificity in a different way [than I 
do], philosophy still gains its validity from this. I therefore can hope 
that my attempt to vindicate Science for the Concept
0 and expose 
it in this element
0 will pave its way by virtue of the inner truth of 
the matter itself. We ought to have the conviction that the nature 
of truth is to break out when its time comes, and to appear only 
when its time has come. Therefore it never appears prematurely, 
0 
nor does it find the public unprepared for it. Also, the individual 
[author] needs a [public] effect in order to ascertain for himselfO 
tive attitude when speaking against the '"'"effervescent enthusiasm'' (Be-
geisterung) which replaces in Schelling the '"'cool progress" of the Concept 
(see page 78 above). However, changing his mood, Hegel now hints that 
some kind of ecstatic enthusiasm can be compatibJe with the Concept, 
as the spiritual energy stored in it. And, as we have seen (in the '"'Baccha-
nalian whirl" and elsewhere), the dialectical Concept translates the ec-
static form into the language of rationality. 
This misunderstood ecstasy: One must distinguish between ecstasy as a con-
ceptual structure expressing truth, and ecstasy as an emotional experience 
resembling drunkenness and consisting in the obliteration of all distinc-
tions. The adequate philosophical interpretation of ecstasy (self-transcen-
dence, or being-oneself-outside-of-oneself) means that every particular 
element in thought transcends itself toward another in a mutual process 
of negations, in virtue of which each of them regains its distinctive charac-
ter. This is also the strucnt.re of the dialectical system. Ecstasy, like the 
Bacchanalian whirl mentioned above, signifies a logical system which em-
bodies the pure Concept and is accessible to every thinking person. 
To vindicate Science for the Concept: To vindicate the philosophical science 
in the [dialectical] way characteristic of the Concept. 
In this element: Within the dialectical Concept. 
Therefore it never appears prematurely: Ironically, Hegel himself here starts 
tossing in a series of proverbs of folk wisdom, some grounded in his 
philosophy or his personal hopes as an author. 
To ascertain for himself Hegel puts on a philosophical shield even while 
speaking personally. Although he is personally convinced that his system 
is true, subjective certainty is not sufficient for truth; it must be universal-
ized and objectivized in culture and the spirit of the time. Who would 

196 
Text and Running Commentary 
that which is still his solitary affair-and to experience as universal 
the conviction which so far has been his own particular experience. 
But often we have to distinguish
0 between the public and those 
who act as its representatives and spokespersons. In certain respects 
the public acts differently than these people, even in opposition to 
them. When a philosophical work fails to find an echo, the public, 
in a good-natured way, blames itself; whereas those people who are 
so sure of their competence shift the blame to the author. The 
effect on the public is quieter than the activity of these dead when 
they bury their dead. 
0 The general outlook today has indeed be-
come more cultivated, 
0 its curiosity more vivid and its judgment 
quicker, so that the feet of those who are to carry you out
0 already 
believe that Hegel is seeking recognition only because of this metaphysi-
cal reason, and not as a simple human? Still, one must admit that for a 
philosopher like Hegel, the sociology of reception presents a real issue. 
And remembering his far-reaching ambition-to become the philosopher 
of the last historical era, and help bring it to consummation-we see 
the thirty-six-year-old Hegel identifying his personal aspirations with the 
central needs of mankind as he understands it. 
To distinguish: Anticipating a remedy to a possible literary failure, Hegel 
draws a line between the public and those who profess to speak in its 
name-the critics. If his book should be killed by the critics, that would 
not necessarily indicate that time and the public have not matured to it. 
These dead when they bury their dead: The critics who kill books while they 
themselves are spiritually dead (and usually so are the books, too). The 
allusion is to the Matthew 8:22: '"'But Jesus said unto him, follow me; and 
let the dead bury their dead." Knowingly or not, Hegel implies that those 
who will not follow the truth expounded in the Phenomenology are as 
good as dead and, like those who had rejected Jesus, will remain an empty 
historical shell. 
More cultivated: More sophisticated. The somewhat provincial Hegel seems 
to be concerned about a certain kind of urbane wit of literati who react 
superficially to novelties in the life of the mind. 
The feet of those who are to carry you out: Referring to Acts of the Apostles 
5:9: "Then Peter said unto her, how is it that ye have agreed together to 
tempt the spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of them which have buried 
thy husband are at the door, and shall carry thee ouf, (King James Ver-

Text and Running Commentary 
197 
stand at the door. Nevertheless, one must often distinguish be-
tween this, and the slower action ° which makes amends for the 
[initially] dismissive rebuke, 
0 and corrects the course of [public] 
attention, which has been forced
0 by impressive assurances. By this 
slow action, one person wins his public world [Mitwelt] only after 
a while, whereas the other has no other world [Nachwelt] beyond 
the present. 
0 
[72] In addition, we live in a time in which the universality of spirit 
has been greatly enhanced, and singularity
0 
[ = the individual], as 
is appropriate, 
0 is correspondingly treated with indifference. This 
sian). Hegel fears that the critics who kill everything will also probably 
bury his book. 
The slower action: An action which affects the true spirit of the time and 
corrects the distortions of fashion. 
The [initially] dismissive rebuke: Of which Hegel is afraid. 
Which has been forced: An allusion to Schelling, Fichte, and other fashion-
able philosophers who have '"'forced"'' the public's attention by groundless 
impressive assurances-their extortion should be corrected by the deeper 
evolution of the spirit of the time. 
No other world [Nachwelt] beyond the present: Hegel is playing with the idea 
of posterity as kind of a '"'next world," perhaps even in the consoling sense 
of granting reward and doing justice. Incidentally, the critics neither killed 
nor praised the Phenomenology but rather ignored it, especially for the first 
two years. The Phenomenology has since become a classic, one of the most 
influential works of modern philosophy. 
Singularity: Hegel seems to be referring to himself as an individual within 
his time. 
As is appropriate: Throughout this finale, Hegel changes his former assert-
ive mood and takes a rather modest turn of accepting his lot in advance. 
This is very far from the outspoken statements we have read in the 
beginning, when he declared his goal to help replace the love of knowl-
edge with actual knowledge. Hegel is caught in a natural tension be-
tween his grandiose ambition, his concern of failure, and the critical 
understanding which restrains his ambitions and reminds him of the 
individuar s limited power. This conflict shows that Hegel was no fanatic 
founder of religion, but a lucid critical thinker, very ambitious but none-
theless balanced. 

198 
Text and Running Commentary 
universality clings to its cultural richness and demands its full 
range for itself. 
0 In a time like that, the individuar s action can count 
as only a minute part in spirit's overall work; so he must forget 
himself even more-which already occurs anyway, because of the 
nature of Science. Of course, the individual must do whatever he 
can, and become that which he can become; yet one must demand 
less of him, as he must also reduce his expectations and demand 
less from himself. 
Demands its full range for itself. Spirit claims for itself all the ingredients 
which make it up: all the significant individuals, historical movements, 
and cultural traits-and holds onto them as part of itself. Hence no single 
individual can claim a monopoly over the spirit of the time; and certainly 
that spirit cannot be reduced to one of its trends. This conception is at 
the base of Hegel's dialectical pluralism. At the same time, Hegel takes 
a much too modest position (or pose) here, because his Phenomenology 
claims to be not one more trend or shade within the totality, but rather 
a clarified reformulation of the totality as a whole. In that respect, it 
claims to stand higher than any particular shape, shade, or trend. 

Works on Hegel 
THE FOLLOWING bibliographical survey and annotated selection of books 
in English are meant to illustrate some of the approaches to Hegel inter-
pretation. Works published in the last decade or so are mentioned in 
greater proportion, so as to illustrate the recent revival of interest in 
Hegel in the English-writing world. 
Hegel in English had been at first dominated by the more spiritualist (and 
religiously inspired) nineteenth-century appropriations of German ideal-
ism linked to the names ofT. M. Greene,J.M.E. McTaggart, andj. Royce, 
among others. At the beginning of the twentieth century, this was the 
current image of Hegel, accepted also by G. E. Moore and Bertrand Rus-
sell who, on its account, rejected Hegel so strongly and ridiculed him so 
poignantly that an anti-Hegel myth-indeed, a ritualistic Hegel-bashing 
and derision-has accompanied the growth of Anglo-American analytic 
philosophy through much of the twentieth century. A notable exception 
in America was John Dewey, who had been rather receptive to a version 
of Hegel stripped of the religious dimension and the notion of the abso-
lute, and appropriated from Hegel-as he did from Darwin-a secular, 
this-worldly notion of historicality and a "philosophy of change."1 
Hegel came into disrepute in Angolophone academia also because he 
has been used and abused-and wrongly associated with-the two des-
potic revolutions of the twentieth century, communism and fascism. This 
explains part of the literature after World War 11-and again after the de-
mise of communism-that insists on Heger s image as a rationalist liberal. 
In France, a ((new Hegel" was discovered between the two world wars 
through landmark works by Jean Hyppolite, jean Wahl, and especially 
Alexandre Kojeve. Hyppolite' s commentary of the Phenomenology remains 
1 See, among other things, Richard Rorty, "Dewey between Hegel and Dar-
win," in Rorty and Pragmatism, ed. Herman J. Saatkamp Jr. (Nashville, TN: Van-
derbilt University Press, 1995). 

200 
Works on Hegel 
very helpful today, and Kojeve's lectures, while sometimes overstated, are 
still fresh and thought-provoking. The "French" reading-this-worldly, 
nondogmatic, more historical, psychological, and existential in its orienta-
tion (rather than speculative or religious)-was opposed not only to the 
lofty British Idealists, but also to dogmatic Marxism, which saw in Hegel 
an upside-down precursor of Marx whose merit was to provide the Revo-
lution with a ''scientific'' method; and to the many romantic conserva-
tives and antidemocrats (and liberals, too) who misread Hegel's doctrine 
as German-nationalistic, and as culminating in an authoritarian, semi-
totalitarian state. 
2 
The "French" reading centered on the richer and pregnant Phenomenol-
ogy rather than the more rigid systematic works. It saw Hegel's main 
protagonist in the individual consciousness generating history through 
its drive to attain recognition and freedom, to overcome its inevitable 
self-splitting and alienation, and to be reconciled to society, the universe, 
and the universal element in both, in a way that enhances rather than 
suppresses its individuality. This and other emphases-the more "down-
to-earth" approach, avoiding a rigid, formalistic rationality, and recogniz-
ing the important role of contingency and particularity-made the 
"French" Hegel appealing to existentialist thinkers like Sartre, Jean Wahl 
(who had started as a student of Kierkegaard's reaction to Hegel), and 
Maurice Merleau-Ponty, and their respective generations. Sartre, in Being 
and Nothingness, combined Kojeve's Hegel with his own appropriations 
of Husserl, Heidegger, and Freud-all modifying each other. 
Beside Sartre, an impressive number of intellectuals who made their 
mark on the French scene after World War II had attended Kojeve's semi-
nars on the Phenomenology in the 1930s. They absorbed part of its vocabu-
lary and philosophical dynamic even when they weren't Hegelians. Fur-
thermore, excepting the structuralists, who rejected Hegel's historicism 
en bloc, Hegelian themes and modes of thought continued to inform-
critically, as background for inner debate and "deconstruction"-the next, 
poststructuralist French generation of Deleuze, Derrida, and Foucault. 
The accusation of "imperialism, they made against Hegel makes them 
rebels, but not foreigners. Thus, while Foucault thought of himself as a 
Nietzschean, actually his genealogy of social and cultural institutions is 
historicist in the Hegelian sense (while rejecting progress) rather than in 
Nietzsche's psychological sense. And Derrida, who attacks the Hegelian 
2 This view was famously imported to the Anglo-American scene by Karl 
Popper,s 1945 treatise, The Open Society and Its Enemies. 

Works on Hegel 
201 
bias which gives priority to unity, universality, and identity over their 
opposites, is nevertheless operating in a philosophical space that was 
made possible by Hegel and came into existence once Hegel was stripped 
of his claims of synthesis, closure, and alleged Hnecessity.,3 
Three further trends in France should be mentioned. One is the non-
dogmatic, Marxian inspired left-Hegelian reading of Jacques d'Hondt 
(Hegel, philosophe de l'histoire vivante, 1987, and Hegel in His Time, listed 
below), which portrays Hegel as a philosopher of historical change and 
transformation, a far more radical social critic than his heavy image sug-
gests; as well as related works by Guy Planty-Bonjour (Le Projet Hegelien, 
1993) and others. Recently d'Hondt also published a Hegel biography, 
not yet translated into English (but there is a new English biography by 
Terry Pinkard [Hegel, Cambridge University Press, 2003]). Another French 
approach, led by Eric Weil (Hegel et l'Etat; Philosophie politique) and echoed 
in E. Fleischmann's La philosophie politique de Hegel (Paris: Plan, 1969), 
linked Hegel to the realist, somewhat harsh political rationalism of 
Hobbes and Machiavelli, stressing that politics has its own logic indepen-
dently of other domains. A third, quite different line in France presents 
Hegel as primarily a religious thinker, for whom absolute spirit was the 
Christian God fashioned in Lutheran terms, and whose Christology was 
meant more seriously than as mere metaphor of philosophical truth. The 
stronger versions of this view are contained in works like Claude Bruaire' s 
Logique et religion chretienne dans la logique de Hegel, 1964, and Albert Cha-
pelle's massive Hegel et la Religion (4 vols., 1964-1971), and more recently, 
in Marie-Dominique Goutierre, Hegel, 1997; and Bernard Bourgeois, 
Etudes hegeliennes, 1992; Hegel a Francfort oujudaisme, Christianisme, hegelia-
nisme, 1970). Varieties (mostly softer) of this approach have certain En-
glish-language counterparts in the works (listed below) by Fackenheim, 
Yerkes, Quentin Lauer, Crites, and, to some degree, Houlgate and Taylor 
(though Taylor's reading has other distinctive dimensions). 
3 Notice also that, alone among the philosophers of reason, .Hegel insists that 
difference and self-severance are vital moments of identity: therefore, Derrida, De-
leuze, and other philosophers of difference radicalize a moment that Hegel was 
the first to highlight (Derrida, indeed, recognizes his debt to Hegel on several 
occasions). Similarly, existential thinkers from Kierkegaard to Sartre have radical-
ized the moment of contingent particularity, which Hegel also made important; 
although in the end, so they complained, contingent particularity is trivialized 
by the broader universality that mediates the emergence of the Hegelian singular 
individual. 

202 
Works on Hegel 
In Germany, the nineteenth-century right- and left-wing Hegelianism 
took extreme varieties in the next century. Left-Hegelianism was over-
taken (also outside Germany) by organized Marxism (the Marxist 
church), which subordinated its study of Hegel to the project of un-
earthing and justifying the genesis of its official truth (much as some 
Protestants study the Jewish HOld Testament"); while the right wing,s 
nationalist Hegel, the political romantic and alleged deifier of the authori-
tarian state, emerged as a protofascist dressed in brown. 
After World War II, this Hegel image receded, giving way to a variety 
of more sober approaches, too diverse to all be mentioned here-includ-
ing critical-Marxist, hermeneutical (in Dilthey's sense, renewed by Ga-
damer), liberal-protestant, historicist, and purely logical. In the 1950s, 
Joachim Ritter and his disciples repainted Hegel in liberal colors. Heger s 
influence on the Frankfurt School is particularly evidenced in works by 
Adorno (as in Drei Studien zu Hegel) and Herbert Marcuse (whose Hegel 
and Revolution remains a brilliant classic), and following them, Ji.irgen 
Habermas and Axel Honneth. Habermas stresses reason's embodiment 
in historical and linguistic forms, and reads Hegel's Habsolute spirif, as 
the horizon of universal reason looming beyond them; while Honneth 
and Ludwig Siep, following Kojeve, work out the diverse shapes of the 
desire for recognition, understood as driving and underlying all human 
life and society. 
It is noteworthy, however, that German scholarship turned away from 
the Phenomenology, which has remained central in France, and today domi-
nates in the United States. (Notable exceptions that highlight the rule are 
Werner Becker's Hegel.s Phiinomenologie des Geistes, and a collection about 
the Phenomenology edited by H. F. Fulda and D. Henrich, Materialien zu 
Hegels Phiinomenologie with interpretations by Kojeve, Hyppolite, Ga-
damer, and Poggeler. Part of the reason of the relative neglect of the 
Phenomenology may be the wish to distance the political Hegel in favor of 
a purely logical or hermeneutical reading. This is noticeable in works by 
Hans Friedrich Fulda, Klaus Hartmann, 4 and others of this generation, 
who (like the older British school, but with an opposite aim) preferred 
the Logic and the Encyclopedia as their dominant texts. Their opposite aim 
consists in reading the Logic nonmetaphysically, as a system of thoughts 
about pure thought, or a chain of hermeneutical categories, and also-
4 In the essay UHegel, a N onmetaphysical Reading,', whose title speaks for 
itself, and which became influential in the United States. 

Works on Hegel 
203 
as did Fulda-in giving metaphysics a new and different meaning (which 
explains why Hegel insisted that the Logic is a metaphysics). 
Fulda (especially in Das Problem einer Einleitung in Hegel's Wissenchaft 
der Logik [Frankfurt a. M.: Klostermann, 1965 I 1975]) sees Hegel's Logic 
as the core of his philosophy and as "genuine metaphysics." By this Fulda 
understands not a theory of beings or of being in general, but a pure 
"theory of meaning," designed to assess and recast our basic concepts in 
a way that transcends the fallacies of Western metaphysics, and can be 
applied to different modern domains of discourse and action. Fulda then 
links this "genuine metaphysics" with what he calls Han immanent theol-
ogy''-one that has little in common with ordinary theology since it 
does not describe the divine as a special being, but rather as a system of 
meaningfulness, of meaning-endowing forms. 
The ccflight from politics" in German scholarship was only partial, 
however. Frankfurt thinkers from Adorno to Habermas were pointedly 
political, seeking to replace metaphysics not by another form of cog-
nitive philosophy, but rather by concrete social thought. And many 
scholars in West Germany (not to mention the DDR) studied the Hegel-
Marx relationship, either approvingly or in the attempt to debunk the 
Marxist trend. Then there were theological readings of Hegel, notably 
heterodox Protestant, which stressed the cbecorning of God" and the 
inherence of the divine in human ethical life (now liberally conceived). 
And there was the complex and interesting attempt by Michael Theunis-
sen to link all three dimensions-logic, politics, and theology-by read-
ing the Logic as a theologico-political treatise. He did this in Hegels Lehre 
vom absoluten Geist als theologisch -politischer Traktat whose title deliber-
ately evokes Spinoza and also alludes to Carl Schmitt. (Later he partly 
revised his interpretation.) 
A major interpretative voice, also centering on speculative rather than 
social philosophy, is Dieter Henrich, whose life-long work sheds new light 
on Hegel's early years and Holderlin' s impact on Hegel's emerging views 
of being and consciousness (see the introduction). Unlike many others, 
Henrich seems to be much more committed to the historical Hegel and 
his milieu rather than to some contemporary agenda. 
It may be illustrative to compare some of the distinctive readings above. 
Both Fulda and Theunissen see Hegel's Logic as the core, and as summa-
rizing and overcoming Western metaphysics. Philosophy after Hegel can 
be transcended only by a kind of secularized, immanent theology, free 
of the old religious connotations. But Fulda sees this philosophical theol-

204 
Works on Hegel 
ogy as broadcasting meaning equally to every domain, while in Theunis~ 
sen it specifically creates the conceptual framework for a new social ethics, 
a modern transformation of Protestant theology. This transformation of 
speculative metaphysics (declared to have reached its end) into ethical 
practice recalls a similar move by Marx and the Frankfurt thinkers; but 
the parallel does not go much farther. Theunissen adopts a Marxist pat~ 
tern yet rejects Marx's specific content and proposals; instead, he seeks, 
via Hegel, to inform the modern social and ethical scene with a message 
recast from theology. 
Theology is absent from the work of most of the other socially con-
cerned scholars who, inspired by the Frankfurt program, are interested 
in Hegel's concept of" ethical life" per se, without the broader speculative 
context. (They therefore place special value on Hegel's Jena lectures prior 
to the Phenomenology.) The systematic context comes into play only-or 
mainly-in the form of Heger s critique of the merely epistemological 
subject of the Descartes-to-Kant tradition. This critique denies that an 
actual subject can be constituted by knowledge alone, or through merely 
abstract categories, as in Kant; it places primary importance, as conditions 
of individuality, on social media that have from the outset an intersubjec-
tive constitution-like language (Habermas accepts the "linguistic turn" 
and reads part of it into Hegel), work, family, rights, and various other 
forms of personal and institutional recognition. Thereby, social rationality 
takes the role of metaphysical reason in this mode of reading, which 
became influential also in parts of the Anglophone literature. 
WORKS ON HEGEL IN ENGLISH: AN ANNOTATED SELECTION 
The following annotated list is offered for the purpose of initiation and 
illustration. It is but a fraction of what is currently available on Hegel. 
Substantial bibliographies can be found in some of the works mentioned 
below.5 
Avineri, Shlomo. Hegel}s Theory of the Modern State. London: Cambridge) 
1972. 
Refuting Hegel's authoritarian and nationalist image, and stressing 
the elements of a classic modern liberal in him, this book helped revive 
interest in Hegel's political thought among English-language readers. 
5 A bibliographical essay (until about 1990) is given in Stephen Houlgate's 
listed book. 

Works on Hegel 
205 
Crites, Stephen. Dialectic and Gospel in the Development of Hegel's Thinking. 
University Park: Penn State University Press, 1998. 
A massive treatise on the early Hegel, stressing the role of Christian 
idiom, and the Gospel drama of Creation, Fall, Covenant, Incarnation, 
Crucifixion, and other major themes, as the "template" forming He-
ger s thought in other areas, too, and as the "sub text'' of absolute 
Knowing. About half the book concerns the underlying role of religion 
in the Phenomenology. 
Dickey, Laurence Winant. Hegel: Religion, Economics, and the Politics of 
Spirit 1770-1807. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
An influential study of one main aspect of Hegel's development 
and cultural milieu before the Phenomenology, focusing on religion and 
economics (but not on cognitive philosophy). The book stresses the 
influence of Protestant (and Pietistic) trends in the process ofliberaliza-
tion, and (like Lukacs) of Hegel's reading of Adam Smith and other 
Scottish economists. 
Fackenheim, Emil. The Religious Dimension in Hegel's Thought. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1967. 
A tone-setting book which, as the title suggests, analyzes the un-
derlying religious aspects of Hegel's thinking, and (similarly to Tay-
lor) brings out this important dimension without explicitly giving 
it precedence. 
Findlay, John. Hegel: A Re-Examination. 1958. Reprint, Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1976. 
The first book in English after World War II calling for a new look 
at Hegel. Its merit was to revise the rigid academic systematization 
favored by pious Hegelians (and by Stace and Mure). Hegel's dialectic 
cannot be construed as inflexibly as formal logic; its broad-lined neces-
sity leaves room for contingency, accidental features, and alternative 
secondary routes. 
Forster, Michael. Hegel's Idea of a Phenomenology of Spirit. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1998. 
Opposing the selective singling out of one aspect of Hegel's project 
in neglect of others, Forster studies the Phenomenology as a complex 
whole, stressing the "extraordinary" coherent integration of its several 
goals and moves. These include pedagogical, epistemological, and 
metaphysical tasks: preparing the modern mind for the new science; 
justifying this science against the skeptics; and recasting truth and 

206 
Works on Hegel 
knowledge as a communal enterprise. Thereby, the Phenomenology is 
coherent both in its own terms, and as part of the overall system. 
Franco, Paul. Hegel's Philosophy of Freedom. New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1999. 
A commentary on The Philosophy of Right and other texts. The Hege-
lian state is the modern ~ealization of human autonomy, Hegel's driving 
theme. Reuniting morality and legality, Hegel is a liberal who overcame 
the atomism and self-interest of liberalism. Franco also insists that Heg-
el's social theory is inseparable from his logic and metaphysics. 
Hardimon, Michael 0. Hegel's Social Philosophy: The Project of Reconcilia-
tion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994. 
Hegel's social philosophy sets to resolve the problem of alienation 
by reconciling modern man to his society (and making him at home 
in it), thereby also realizing the rationality that defines us. Hegers 
Philosophy of Right is read from this important angle. (The author does 
not, however, recognize the same problem in our relation to being 
and the universe.) 
Harris, H. S. Hegel's Ladder. Vol. 1, The Pilgrimage of Reason. Vol. 2, The 
Odyssey of Spirit. Indianapolis: Hackett Publications, 1997. 
A monument of learning and analysis, treating the Phenomenology as 
a living philosophy with existential, social, and religious dimensions, 
and richly situating it in its cultural context. In trying to make sense 
of the work as a whole, Harris offers (a) a concise paragraph-by-para-
graph commentary, and (b) a free flowing, multisided discussion of 
the main issues (and many side ones). The conclusion stresses that, 
beyond social activism, Comprehension (Harris' capitalization) is the 
highest form of self-realization in Hegel. 
Heidegger, Martin. Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1988. 
An ontological interpretation of the Phenomenology (in part). There 
is no epistemology in the Phenomenology. Hegel's aim was to bring the 
question, what is being? which drives Western philosophy, to comple-
tion. In the part on "Consciousness" he inquires into the objectivity 
(real being) of objects; and in ''"Self-Consciousness" he inquires into 
the being of the self--and finds it must be explicated as independence, 
or freedom (hence the transition to "practical philosophy"). Yet Hegel 
erred in trying to categorize being. (Heidegger,s teaching lectures, 

Works on Hegel 
207 
here as elsewhere, offer strikingly accurate insights alongside his typi-
cal idiosyncrasies.) 
Henrich, Dieter. The Course of Remembrance and Other Essays on Holderlin. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1997. 
Henrich's important work on Hegel and Holderlin is described in 
detail in the introduction.) 
Hondt, Jacques d'. Hegel in His Time: Berlin 1818-1831. Peterborough, On-
tario: Broadview Press, 1988. First published in French in 1968. 
A left-Hegelian portrait of Hegel and his milieu in the Berlin years. 
Joined to the author's French Hegel secret and his recent Hegel biogra-
phy, it pictures a more lively, critical intellectual and social reformer 
hiding behind the established Herr Professor and heavy writer, a 
thinker more at odds with his time, and incapable of speaking his mind 
too plainly. 
Houlgate, Stephen. Freedom, Truth, and History: An Introduction to Hegel's 
Philosophy. London: Routledge, 1991. 
An introduction (with a bibliographical essay) covering truth and its 
history, dialectic, logic and ontology, rights and freedom, art, philoso-
phy, and religion, with a strong emphasis on Hegel's Christianity (un-
derstood as the teaching of the church more than Christ's). 
Hyppolite, Jean. Genesis and Structure of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit. 
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1974. First published in 
French in Paris, 1946. 
A masterly section-by-section commentary, the most influential 
French interpretation next to Kojeve's. The structural analysis of the 
changing shapes of consciousness and their relative collapses is con-
ducted from the dual viewpoint of "for itself' and Hfor us"-the experi-
encing consciousness undergoing the process, and the investigating 
philosophical consciousness that already knows the end. 
Kaufmann, Walter. Hegel: A Reinterpretation. Garcfen City, NY: Doubleday, 
Anchor Books, 1966. 
Following Findlay in a different approach, Kaufmann offers a cultural 
mapping of Hegel that makes him fresh and interesting despite his flaws, 
a European intellectual in the line of Goethe and Nietzsche, and supe-
rior to Kant. Philosophically, however, Hegel emerges somewhat dif-
fuse. The brief commentary to the Preface of the Phenomenology is 
mostly valuable for its decoding of cultural allusions to Hegel's milieu. 

208 
Works on Hegel 
Kojeve, Alexandre. Introduction to the Reading of Hegel. New York: Basic 
Books, 1969. 
Secular and left-leaning, Kojeve,s lectures were most influential in 
stressing the drive for recognition that has become dominant in Hegel 
interpretations since. History is the comprehensive human horizon, 
and the motor generating history-the struggle for recognition with 
its asymmetrical results-creates the two alienated classes of masters 
and servants. Hegel's philosophical knowledge became possible only 
after the French Revolution, when mutual recognition came to be em-
bodied in modern institutions. 
Lukacs, George. The Young Hegel. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1975. 
A study of the early Hegel by a prominent European intellectual 
who had turned from idealism to Marxism when already wellknown; 
stressing the problem of alienation as central to the young Hegel; his 
exposure to economic writers like Smith and Ferguson; and the histori-
cal dimension of the Phenomenology, with its complex allusion to con-
crete historical periods. 
Marcuse, Herbert. Reason and Revolution. Boston: Beacon, 1960. 
A clear, instructive, overall review of Hegel serves Marcuse as starting 
point for creating, against Hegel's own conclusion, a critical theory in 
the Frankfurt style, suggesting that sociology and empirically oriented 
social thought replace philosophy in its classic, atemporal orientation. 
Marx, Werner. Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit. New York: Harper and Row, 
1975. 
Although described as a "commentary [on the Phenomenology] based 
on the Preface and Introduction," this short book is a series of related 
essays rather than a textual commentary. Marx, s reading tends to be 
Schellingian; world history realizes preestablished structures and ends, 
and spirit guides the process from the start, rather than being consti-
tuted by it. 
Mure, G.R.G. A Study of Hegel's Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1950. 
A standard commentary, in the general systematic tradition of the Brit-
ish Idealists, going beyond Stace in using the greater Logic in addition 
to the Encyclopedia, and stressing the dynamic nature of the categories 
as forms of a living process. The book elaborates on Mure's earlier, 
approachable introductory, The Philosophy of Hegel (1940, reprint, Lon-
don: Oxford University Press, 1965). 

Works on Hegel 
209 
Neuhauser, Frederick. Foundations of Hegel's Social Theory: Actualizing Free-
dom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000. 
Portraying Hegel as a liberal (against communitariansm), the author 
leans on Rousseau (who can, however, be read in two ways), and on 
Kant. Hegelian autonomy ('social freedom") requires free institutions 
recognized by individuals as emanating from their will. And Hegel 
valued personal morality and "subjective freedom" not much less than 
Kant. 
Patten, Allan. Hegel's Idea of Freedom. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1999. 
An interpretation of Hegel passages explicitly dealing with freedom, 
especially in The Philosophy of Right, arguing that civic freedom depends 
on the ethical elements embodied in historical institutions. 
Pinkard, Terry. Hegel's Phenomenology: The Sociality of Reason. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1994. 
A jargon-free redescription of the Phenomenology (and briefly the 
Philosophy of Right), in the post-Kantian trend in which the social di-
mension prevails. In detaching itself from Hegel's running text and 
several core ideas (with their ontological import), it constructs a re-
vised Phenomenology, which the author thinks fit for our time. The main 
focus is on how changing historical communities conceptualize and 
justify their forms of life and sources of authority. Self-consciousness 
is not an inner mental state but a participant in a "social space;'' to 
which Hspirit" and "absolute Knowing" are also translated. 
Pippin, Robert. Hegel's Idealism: The Satisfaction of Self-Consciousness. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge, 1989. 
This influential study triggered the reading known as "post-Kantian" 
which views Hegel as a nonmetaphysical thinker who mainly set out 
to complete Kanf s idealist move in the Transcendental Deduction and 
the Paralogism. Kant's problems and failures in dealing with self-con-
sciousness drove Hegel to a more coherent .. variety of idealism. Hegel 
also shared Kanf s attack on the metaphysics of transcendence and of 
substance. 
Redding, Paul. Hegel's Hermeneutics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1996. 
The author sees Hegel as "post-Kantian" and as a hermeneutical 
thinker (following K. Hartmann). Hegelian subjectivity is shaped her-
meneutically; and since it involves diverse forms of recognition, it is 

210 
Works on Hegel 
by "hermeneuticizing, Kant that Hegel completes Kanf s revolution in 
the political domain. Hegelianism is Hpostmetaphysical Kantianism., 
Smith, Steven B. Hegel's Critique of Liberalism. Chicago: Chicago Univer-
sity Press, 1989. 
As against the formal view of rights, this study, relying on Kojeve's 
emphasis on recognition, attributes to Hegel a "substantive" view of 
rights whose centerpiece is a "right to recognition.'' This allows He-
gel's version of liberalism to appear as a middle ground between the 
deontological (Kant, Rawls) and the communitarian. 
Solomon, Robert. In the Spirit of Hegel. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1983. 
Stating that the Phenomenology is disordered in structure, and de-
scribing its aim as a personal journey of an individual toward the self-
reshaping that enables truth to emerge, this vivid study, which is often 
discussed polemically, treats Hegel's work in a secular left-Hegelian 
vein which discounts his theological claims and has little room for the 
"religious dimension." 
Stace, W. T. The Philosophy of Hegel. 1924. Reprint, New York: Dover Publi-
cations, 1955. 
A classic in the older style, presenting the whole of Hegel's philoso-
phy (logic, nature, and spirit, following the Encyclopedia) as a chain of 
categories that derive from each other as if deductively, and trying to 
make sense of their transition. Though some moves are ingenious, 
Hegel emerges as an overly systematized and rigid dialectician-a 
more elaborate Fichte. 
Taylor, Charles. Hegel. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 
A groundbreaking study that helped legitimize Hegel to An-
glophone academia. Taylor covers the whole system. Opposing Ko-
jeve's secularist reduction of spirit to history, he insists on spirit's trans-
historical, antic, and religious dimension. And, linking Hegel to 
Herder and the romantics no less than to Kant, he suggests an "ex-
pressivist'' view of nature and a "communitarian" view of politics as 
correction to nonhistoricist, atomist liberalism. 
Westphal, Merold. History and Truth in Hegel's Phenomenology. Atlantic 
Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1979. Reprint, Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1998. 

Works on Hegel 
211 
A short, readable commentary to the Phenomenology, stressing the 
historicality of transcendental subjectivity and of absolute Knowing. 
Following Henrich, love rather than recognition (or as another form 
of it) is a key concept in understanding how Hegelian spirit is meant 
to surpass abstract rationality. 
Wood, Allen. Hegel's Ethical Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1990 
Against the belief that Hegel had no specific ethics (given his fierce 
attack on Kant's Ought), this study explores the ethical views underly-
ing Heger s social, political, and historical thought as an alternative to 
utilitarianism and Kantian deontology. Wood brackets the speculative 
and metaphysical context of these views and examines them as ethics 
per se. 
Yerkes, James. The Christology of Hegel. Albany: SUNY Press, 1983. 
A rich treatment of Hegel's religious Christian symbols, understood 
as ccimages' (Vorstellungen), in relation to theology and philosophy. 
Yovel, Yirmiyahu. Dark Riddle: Hegel, Nietzsche, and the jews. Cambridge: 
Polity Press; University Park: Penn State University Press, 1998. 
The book's first half is a comprehensive study of the evolution of 
Hegel's interpretation of Judaism and the Jews. The matter is ap-
proached philosophically, as a problem within the Hegelian system as 
well as for it. The analysis shows the issue to be more central than 
meets the eye. It also provides a prism through which other Hegelian 
themes-like Aufhebung, alienation, the absolute-as-subject, the un-
happy consciousness, or political modernity-acquire additional light 
and context. 

Index 
absolute: empty romantic conception 
of, 93-94; as result, 102-4; as sub-
ject (see absolute as subject). See 
also truth 
absolute as subject: central role in 
Hegers philosophy of, 16-17; objec-
tions to notion of, 95-97; ontologi-
cal significance of, 22; predicative 
language and, 107-10; as rejection 
of Holder lin, 48-49; as a result, 102 
absolute Knowing: criticism of, 61; as 
historical need, 73n; as living expe-
rience, 4-5, 7-8; objective idealism 
and, 137n; path to, 4, 8-9, 25; role 
of mediation in, 1 04; significance 
of, 24; systematic nature of, 110. 
See also Knowing 
absolute spirit: expressed as philoso-
phy, art, and religion, 26, 112n; nar-
row versus universal sense of, 1 0; 
as subject versus as person, 13n.10. 
See also spirit 
abstraction, formal logic and, 30 
acorn analogy, 84 
actuality (Wirklichkeit): Hactual is ratio-
nal," 33; Aristotle versus Hegel on, 
67n; development of being into, 18; 
existence versus, 66n, 85n; spirit as, 
112; unity of being and thought, 
69n 
adequatio rei et intellectus, 32 
alienation (Entfremdung): being and, 
24; defined, 101n; experience and, 
135; otherness versus, 101n; philos-
ophy as cure for, 6-7 
analogy; in interpretation of Hegel. 1? 
analytic philosophy, 61 
Anaxagoras, 172 
Anaximander, 154n 
antinomy of language, 1 08-9n 
aphorisms: inadequacy of, 14; para-
dox of, 14-16; value of, 14-16 
appearance (Erscheinung), 138, 153 
argumentative reasoning, Conceptual 
thinking versus, 176-80, 185-89 
Aristotle: on actuality, 67n; ancient ap-
preciation of, 194; categories in, 23; 
on ethical life, 7; genus and species 
in, 172n; God for, 18; Hegers incor-
poration of, 14; on nature and tele-
ology, 1 06; as rational philosopher, 
4; soul in, 136n; unmoved mover 
in, 106n 
art: absolute spirit and, 26; Hegel on 
history and essence of 40 nn. 23 
and 24 
assertion (Behauptung), 63, 170 
Aufhebung (sublation): absolute and, 
95n; dialectical, 86n, 155n; history 
of philosophy and, 32; Phenomenol-
ogy of Spirit as, 82n; reflection and, 
105; of religion, 3, 28; of representa-
tion, 124-30; science and, 39; of so-
cial and political institutions, 25; 
spirit and, 10, 25, 135; of thought, 
15, 43 
autonomy, defined, 6 
Bacchanalian whirl: ecstasy and, 195n; 
positive dialectic as, 39, 67n; the 
true as, 153-54; the whole as, 168n 
Bacon, Francis, 7Rn 

214 
beauty: versus kitsch, 128n; power-
less, 128n 
becoming: being as, 18, 23-24, 104n; 
of God, 3; mediation as, 104 
Begriff. See Concept 
being (Sein): as becoming, 18, 23-24, 
104n; development of, 18; essence 
versus, 145n; Holderlin on, 47; im-
mediacy and, 96n, 114-15, 131; in 
Logic, 9; mathematics and, 145n, 
152n; in Phenomenology of Spirit, 9; 
philosophy's role in development 
of, 24, 27-28; predicative language 
and concept of, 184; as starting 
point for philosophy, 47-48; sub-
ject-like character of, 48-49, 53; 
substance and, 96, 168n; thought 
and, 169. See also ontology 
Berkeley, George, 125n, 148n 
Berlin period in Heger s thought, 
41n, 160n 
Bestimmung (determination), 68n, 131, 
139, 152, 154, 161, 168 
Bible: Acts 5:9, 196n; Matthew 8:22, 
196n 
Bildung. See education 
binaries. See opposites 
Burbridge, John, 52n.37 
Calvinism, 5 
categories: a priori, 161n; Aristotle 
and, 23; Fichte and, 90n, 126n, 
190n; Hegelian, 133n; identity of 
subject and, 21; Kantian, 32, 52, 
54n, 71n, 90n, 159n; ontological, 22 
certainty (Gewissheit): defined, 116n; 
truth versus, 116n 
child development, as metaphor for 
development of spirit, 83-84 
Christianity: God of, 10; Hegers dia-
lectical version of, 3; spirit versus 
nature in, 27 
Index 
civil society, 5; as objective spirit, 25-
26. See also social world 
coherence theory of truth, 31 
common sense, philosophy of, 125n, 
126n, 189-93 
Concept (Begrijf): conceptual thinking 
versus argumentative reasoning, 
176-80, 185-89; defined, 132n, 
137n; definitions versus, 64n; intu-
ition and, 74n; knowing without, 
80-81; life of, 164-67; pure, 113-
14n; relation to things of, 32-34; Sci-
ence as expression of, 174-76; in Sci-
ence of Logic, 148n; simple, 85n; two 
senses of, 84n; universality of, 65n 
consciousness: development of, 85-
88; and dualism, 116-17n; experi-
encing versus philosophical, 112-
13n; philosophy and development 
of individual, 88n; as protagonist of 
Phenomenology, 115n, 134n; Science 
in relation to, 116-18; standpoint 
of, 116-l?n; substance and, 95-97; 
two moments of, 134 
Copernican revolution, Kantian, 9, 
12, 50-54, 132n 
critical philosophy, 57 
Croce, Benedetto, 58-59 
cultural education. See education 
culture: as development ofbeing, 19, 
24-25; individuals in relation to, 
119-24; as substance, 7 6n. See also 
social world 
cunning of reason: 170-71; Kant's an-
ticipation of, 55 
Darstellung. See exhibition 
Dasein, 66n, 85n, 152n, 171-72n, 173n 
death: as metaphor for negativity, 
128n; spirit and, 128-29 
definitions, Concepts versus, 64n 
Descartes, Rene: concept of subject 
in, 20, 115n, 131n; mathematical 

Index 
model for reasoning in, 143n, 14 7n; 
philosophical method of, ?On, 
159n; and simplicity, 85n; truth for, 
42 desire, 60 
determination. See Bestimmung 
dialectic: demonstration versus, 187-
88; exhibition in Hegel's writings 
of, 160n, 165n, 166-67n, 187n; for-
mal logic versus, 29; general charac-
teristics of, 35-38; and interioriza-
tion, 86n; language appropriate for, 
15, 187n, 189n; as logic, 36; love 
compared to, 1 OOn; monism and, 
26; negativity inherent in, 12n.9, 
36; no a priori rules for, 37; not a 
thesis-antithesis-synthesis formula, 
29,46,92n, 160n, 163n;philosophy 
conducted through, 30-31, 189; of 
Plato versus Hegel, 38-39; role of 
moments in, 67n; role of opposites 
in, 3 7; self-reflection and, 99n; sig-
nificance of, 60; spiral movement 
of, 14; as subjective education, 41-
42; as teleological, 37; unification 
as problem addressed by, 48 
dialectic-as-journey: dialectic-as-Sci-
ence versus, 38-40; and individual's 
education, 41-42; Phenomenology of 
Spirit as, 39-41 
dialectic-as-Science: dialectic-as-jour-
ney versus, 3 8-40; Science of Logic 
as, 39-41 
Difference between Fichte's and Schel-
ling's Systems, The, 46n 
Dilthey, Wilhelm, 142n 
discourse. See theory of discourse 
divine, and development of spirit, 
78-79 
dogmatism, 142, 158-59n, 170 
dualism, 116-17n, 14ln 
Ebreo, Leone, lOOn 
Eckhart, Meister, 1 OOn 
economics, 5 
ecstasy, 78, 194-95 
215 
edification (Erbauung): defined, 77n; 
philosophy versus, 77-78n, 79, 
lOOn, 188 
education (Bildung [also cultural educa-
tion]): ancient versus modern, 130; 
beginning of, 71; philosophy and, 
190; as retracing development of 
spirit, 119-24, 121n; self-certainty 
transformed through, 132n; self-edu-
cation ofhuman race, 119-20n 
eidos, 172 
Einstein, Albert, 15 On 
empiricism: and Berkeley's idealism, 
125n; dogmatism of, 131n; one-sid-
edness of, 79n, 89n; and simplicity, 
85n 
Encyclopaedia of Philosophical Sciences, 
40, 118n, 133n, 16ln, 166n, 190n 
energeia, 18 
Enlightenment: education and, 130; 
Hegelian philosophy and, 3, 82n, 
89n, 117n; and meaning of being, 2 
enthusiasm, 78, 79n, 93n, 119, 
159, 194 
episteme, 39, 11 On 
equality. See Gleichheit 
Erinnerung. See recollection 
essence (Wesen): being versus, 145n; 
consciousness and, 76 
eternity, end of philosophy and, 72n 
ethical life: defined, 7; as presupposi-
tion of absolute spirit, 25-26; role 
of, 7-8,' 25-26 
Euclid, 192n 
evil, 139-40 
excluded middle, law of, 3 8. See also 
non-contradiction, law of 
exhibition (Darstellung): of cultural ed-
ucation, 121-22; defined, 63n; Kant 
versus Hegel on, 70-71 n; of philo-
sophical truth, 7ln, 95, 155 

216 
existence: actuality versus, 66n, 85n; 
defined, 66n; substance versus, 
173n; Understanding and, 171-73 
Existentialism, 98n 
Existenz, 66n, 85n. See also eXIstence 
experience: consciousness and, 135; 
post-medieval philosophy on, 78-
79n; role in development of spirit 
of, 79 
externalization, dialectic of in-
wardness and, SOn 
falsity: defined, 37; role of, 
138-41, 146n 
familiar, the (Bekannte), 88, 125-26 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb: categories in, 
90n, 126n, 190n; concept of subject 
in, 16, 21n; and fusion of Kant and 
Spinoza, 46; Hegel's criticism of, 
45-46, 89-92, 99n, 126n, 127n, 
163n; Hegel's incorporation of, 16; 
Holderlin and, 47; influence of, 45-
46, 160n; nationalism of, 82n; and 
practical reason, 7; subject in, 53, 
90-91n, 95n, 97n; system of, 90n, 
91n, 110n, 190n; thesis-antithesis-
synthesis formula of, 29, 46, 92n, 
160n, 163n 
finitude, Kant versus Hegel on, 57 
formalism: critique of, 92-94, 161-64; 
in method, 161-64; as stage in de-
velopment of content, 174 
freedom: and being in-and-for-itself, 
112n; ontological and sociopolitical 
senses of, 24 
French Revolution, 82n, 175n 
Fulda, Hans Friedrich, 5 2n.3 7 
Galileo Galilei, 78n 
generalization, 64n 
genius, 163, 190-91 
geometrical method, 143-44 nn, 
146n, 147n 
German Idealism, 90n, 112n 
geschichtlich, 142n 
Index 
Gleichheit (equality): 94, 9 5, 9 8, 140, 
149 
God: Aristotle versus Hegel on, 18; 
becoming of, 3, 23-24; complex na-
ture of, 100-101; Hegelian synthe-
sis of Christian and Spinozan, 1 0; 
immanence in human history of, 
17, 18, 27, 56-57; for Kant, 56; and 
love, 100; as name versus Concept, 
188; in Spinoza, 10, 20, 28 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 27 
Harris, E. H., 52n.37 
Hegel, G.WF.: Berlin period of, 41n, 
160n; Jena period of, 7, 4ln, 179n; 
misconceptions about, 58; ecoid," 
58-62; significance of, 59-62 
Heidegger, Martin, 10n.4, 24n, 47, 
109n, 191n 
Henrich, Dieter, 45n, 48 
Herder, Johann Gottfried von, 119n 
historisch, 142n 
history: dialectical structure of, 36-38; 
empirical aspect of, 63n, 65n; God 
as embodied in, 17; historical 
truths, 142-43; Kant on, 55; role 
of, 12, 25, 60, 119n, 122-23; world-
spirit and world, 122-23 
history of philosophy: refutation in, 
111n, 138-39n; system of philoso-
phy and, 31-32, 73n 
Holderlin, Friedrich: cosmic love in, 
lOOn; as Hegel's classmate, 45; Heg-
el's criticism of, 45-46, 74-75n, 
99n, 105n, 191n; influence of, 45n, 
47-49; and language, 109n 
Husser!, Edmund, ?On 
idealism: empiricist, 125n; Hegelian, 
uobjective," 12, 112n, 136n, 137n; 
identity of being and thought in, 

Index 
169n; subjective, 33, 46. See also 
German Idealism 
identity: mathematics and, 149; of 
subject versus substance, 20, 29. 
See also Gleichheit 
image. See representation 
immanence: of God, 17, 18, 27, 56-
57; Hegel as philosopher of, 18, 27, 
78n; in Spinoza, 96n; transcen-
dence versus, 53 
immediacy: becoming and, 104n; of 
being, 96n, 114-15, 131; coerced, 
123; defined, 84n; of subject, 129 
in-and-for-itself (an und for sich), 112 
incommensurability, 15 On 
individuals: defined, 44n.26; develop-
ment through Science of, 115; edu-
cation of, 119-24; freedom of, 115-
16; in relation to spirit, 197-98; 
true, 179n; as universal, 119-20 
infinity, good versus bad, 150n 
intellectual intuition: criticism of, 97; 
genius and, 191n; Hegelian rational-
ist interpretation of, 49-50, ?On, 
74-75n; Kant on, 49-50, 74-75n, 
93n; Schelling on, 49, 74-75n, 93n, 
97n 
intention, meaning versus, 34-35 
interests of reason, Kant on, 55 
interiority. See inwardness 
interiorization, 38, 67n, 86n, 123-24n, 
154-55n, 165n 
intuition, 74-75, 79-81, 159. See also 
intellectual intuition 
inwardness, dialectic of externaliza-
tion and, BOn 
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich, 47, 74-
75nn, 99n, 105n 
Jena period in Hegers thought, 7, 
4ln, 179n 
judgment: Holderlin on, 47; and predi-
cative language, 182 
217 
judgment and Being (Holderlin), 47, 
182n 
Kabbala, lOOn 
Kant, Immanuel: and being, 9; catego-
ries, 23, 132n; concept of subject, 
16-17, 20-21; critique of religion, 
3; derivation of categories, 90n; 
dogmatism critiqued, 131n, 18ln; 
on enthusiasm, 79n; exhibition as 
concept, 63n, 70-71n; as founder of 
modern philosophy, 17; Hegel and, 
14, 16, 50-57; on history of philoso-
phy, 66n; on intellectual intuition, 
49-50, 7 4-75n, 93n; mathematical 
versus philosophical reasoning, 
143n, 149n, 157n; and metaphysics, 
51, 160n; and modernity, 82n; and 
nature, 11, 12n.7; and philosophical 
method, ?On, 15 6n; and practical 
reason, 7; and rationalism and em-
piricism, 89n; role of Concepts in, 
3 3; role of interest in, 55; self and 
other in, 54n.40; space in, 148n; 
subject in, 95n; and system, 90n, 
110n; thing-in-itself of, 135n; and 
triplicity, 159-60n; and universal in-
dividual, 119n. See also Copernican 
revolution, Kantian 
Kaufmann, Walter, 139n 
Kierkegaard, Seren, 43-44, 115n, 
13n.9 
kitsch, 128n 
Knowing (Wissen): defined, 118n; fa-
miliarity versus, 125-26. See also ab-
solute Knowing 
known. See familiar (Bekannte) 
Kojeve, Alexandre, 83n 
Krug, Professor, 22, 44n.27 
language. See theory of discourse 
law, interpretation in, 59 
Lectures on the History of Philosophy, 17 

218 
Lefebvre, Henri, 94n 
Left Young Hegelians, 17 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 92n, 
106n, 179n 
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, 139n 
Locke, john: on experience, 78n; phil-
osophical method of, ?On, 15 6n 
Logic. See Science of Logic 
logic: dialectical, 36; formal, validity 
of, 30; philosophical method and, 
156; subject-like character of, 29-
30; transcendental, 52-53 
logos: as constitutive versus descrip-
tive, 70n; dialectic and, 36; logic 
and, 29, 53, 138n; significance of 
Hegers view of, 60; as structure of 
reality, 17, 29, 53, 87n, 138n; as 
universal thought, 4 
love: defined, lOOn; dialectic com-
pared to, lOOn; God as, 100 
Luther, Martin: on ethical life, 7; on 
spirit in relation to world, 5 
magnitude, 148-49 
Maimonides, 18n 
Marx, Karl: and nature, 11; and union 
of substance and subject, 17 
mathematical knowledge, 143-52, 
156-58; limitations of, 147-51 
matter, thinking in relation to, 175-76 
meaning (Bedeutung): Enlightenment 
undermining of, 2; of existence, 61; 
intention versus, 34-35; modern ra-
tionality and, 6, 12; of statements, 
34-35, 108 
mediation (Vermittlung): as becoming, 
104; role in absolute Knowing of, 
103-4 
memory. See interiorization 
mental image. See representation 
metaphor, 3 
metaphysics, 2, 51; cntical, 53; dog-
matic (pre-Kantian), 9, 17, 33, 51-
Index 
53; history of, 54; idealist, 17; 
Kant's Copernican revolution and, 
51; of morals, 52n.36; as science, 
51; of substance, 53; of transcen-
dence, 53 
method. See philosophical method 
modernity: experience as significant 
concept in, 79n; Hegel and, 82-
83n, 111-12, 112n, 196n; Kant ver-
sus Hegel on, 57; negative aspects 
of, 5-6; and reconstruction of 
meaning, 2, 6, 12; subject-centered 
ontology and, 54 
moment(s): of consciousness, 134; de-
fined, 67n; falsity as, 153n; ofknow-
ing, 141; mutual necessity of, 68n; 
pure thinking as, 131 
monism, dialectical, 26 
morality, Kant on, 55-56 
multiculturalism, 3 7n 
mysticism: emptiness of, 79-81, 164n; 
Iiegeland, 4, 27-28, 81n, 186n 
Napoleon, 82n, 175n 
Nathan the Wise (Lessing), 139n 
nationalism, 46, 82n 
Nativity of Christ, 83-84n 
nature: dialectic and, 86-87n; panthe-
ism and, 26-27; social mediation 
and, 26; spirit in relation to, 11-12, 
2 7; teleology of, 106 
necessity: historical, 43; logical, 174n 
negation: double, 29, 38; and reten-
tion of negated stage, 36, 86n, 
155n; the subject and, 19-20; Un-
derstanding as, 127n, 128n. See also 
negativity 
negative dialectic. See dialectic-
as-journey 
negativity: death as metaphor for, 
128n; and falsity, 13 8-41; as mover, 
136; permanence of, 12n.9; signifi-
cance of, 60; spirit and, 129; subjec-

Index 
tivity as, 98n; substance as, 98. See 
also negation 
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 57, 59, 154n 
"night in which all cows are black, 
metaphor, 94, 164n 
noncontradiction, law of, 29, 38, 68n, 
9ln, 103-4n 
nostalgia, Hegel versus, 7 6-77n 
nous (Nus), 172 
oak tree analogy, 84 
objective spirit: defined, 111n; socio-
political world as, 25-26 
ontology: existence and actuality, 66n; 
journey of, 9; of infinite being, 22; 
Kanfs Copernican revolution and, 
50-54; Kant versus Hegel on, 
12n.7; in Logic, 22, 52n.37, 168n, 
173n; monism and, 26-27; and 
social philosophy, 1-4; of subject, 
22-23; truth and, 19, 32-33. See 
also being 
opinion (Meinung), 65, 185 
opposites, non-exclusiveness of, 37 
organic model of development, 66-67 
other: alienation versus, lOin; multi-
culturalism and, 37n; role in truth 
of, 37; self and, 54; self-identity 
achieved through, 20, 21 
pantheism, 26-27 
Parmenides, 127n, 169n 
Parmenides (Plato), 39 
particularization: 20, 68n, 90n, 1 08n, 
124n, 187n 
particulars: spirit and, 124n; subject in 
relation to, 22-23, 42, 44; universals 
in relation to, 65n, 165n 
phenomenology, Husserlian, ?On 
Phenomenology of Spirit: consciousness 
as protagonist of, 115n, 134n; dia-
lectic-as-journey and, 39-41; as his-
toricization of Plato,s theory of ed-
219 
ucation, 72n; and individuar s 
education, 41-42, 43-44, 115n; pur-
pose of, 119n; role in Hegelian sys-
tem of, 40-41; summary of, 8-9 
philosophical method, 15 5-64; guided 
by subject matter, 69-70n; logic 
and, 155; mathematical versus, 
156-58, 157n; triplicity in relation 
to, 159-60 
philosophy: absolute spirit and, 26; as 
actual versus love of knowing, 71-
73, 72n; ancient versus modern, 
130; conflicting doctrines in, 65-68; 
critical, 57; critique of contempo-
rary, 190-98; as development of 
being, 24, 27~28; development ver-
sus result of, 68-70; dialectical 
logic as method of, 30-31; dis-
course appropriate for, 15, 63-6 5, 
102-3n, 107-8, 108-9n, 182-83n, 
185-89; edification and, 77-78n, 79, 
lOOn, 188; education and, 190; end 
of, 71-72n; Hegel on history and es-
sence of, 40 nn. 23 and 24; histori-
cal diversity of, 65-68; history of, 
31-32, 73n, llln; and immanence, 
18, 27; individual conscience,s de-
velopment and, 88n; interpretation 
of past of, 59; justification of, 72-
73n; mathematics versus, 143n, 
145, 147, 149n, 152-53, 156-58, 
157n; method of (see philosophical 
method); ordinary perception of, 
189-90; -and other sciences, 190; 
path to, 41-42, 192-94; principles 
in, 110; as Science, 71-73; specula-
tive (see speculative philosophy); 
subjective nature of absolute and, 
28-31; system and history of, 73n 
philosophy of unity. See unification 
philosophy 
Pi co della Mirandola, Giovanni, 1 OOn 

220 
Plato: actual knowledge for, 72n; Hap-
pearances, in, 30; on becoming, 
104n; cosmic love in, lOOn; dialec-
tic of, 38-39; education in, 120n; 
Forms in, 49, 133n, 172n; and 
mysticism, 8ln; opinion in, 65n; as 
rational philosopher, 4; reception 
of philosophy of, 194; recollection 
in, 124n 
poetry: Holderlin on being and, 47; 
philosophy and, 1 09n 
polemics in preface, 45-50 
politics: Hegel on history and essence 
of, 40 nn. 23 and 24; Kant on, 55. 
See also objective spirit 
positing (Setzung): defined, 97n; Hegel 
and contemporaries on, 97-98n 
positivism: Hegel versus, 30; illusions 
of, 61; and simplicity, 85n 
postmodernism, 179n 
predicative language, 15-16, 103n, 
107-10, 178-85, 187-89 
presentation. See exhibition 
pre-Socratic philosophers, 154n 
principles: critique of basic, 110, 134n, 
158; derivation of system from, 
89-90n 
propositions, 15, 34, 107-8, 182-85, 
187, 190 
public, philosophy and, 195-97 
quality, 168-69n 
rationalism: dogmatism of, 13ln; 
Hegel and, 4; one-sidedness of, 
89n; rationality versus, 7 4n 
rationality: development of, 42-43; 
freedom of, 42-43; modern, 6, 89; 
other of, 36; "rational is actual,', 
33; versus rationalism, 74n; science 
and, 89; as substantive, 60 
reality, relation to Concepts of, 32-34 
Index 
Reason (Vernunft): Concept in relation 
to, 175-76; cunning of, 55, 170-71; 
teleology of, 106; Understanding 
versus, 27, 36, 64n, 65n, 87-88 
recollection (Erinnerung), 38, 86n, 
123-24n. See also interiorization 
reflection: internal versus external, 
98-99n; non-conscious, 99n; role in 
development of absolute of, 105. 
See also self-reflection 
refutation, 110-11, 138-39n, 176-77 
Reinhold, Karl Leonhard, 2ln 
religion: absolute spirit and, 26; as 
background for Hegel's philosophy, 
4, 22; Hegel on history and essence 
of, 40 nn. 23 and 24; Hegel's tran-
scendence of, 4; history of, 3-4; illu-
sions of, 61; interpretation in, 59; 
modernity and, 112; philosophy in 
relation to, 2-4 
representation (Vorstellung), 14n, 64, 
65n, 74, 82, 124-25, 127-28 
representational theory of truth, 33 
representational thinking, 8 
Republic (Plato), 38, 39 
romanticism, 46-47, 76n, 93-94, 103-
4n, 159n, 190-91 
Rorty, Richard, 58, 78n 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 43 
Sache, 69n 
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 11, 98n 
Schelling, F.WJ. von: concept of sub-
ject in, 16; cosmic love in, 1 oon; as 
Hegel's classmate, 45; Hegers criti-
cism of, 45-46, 74-75n, 89-90n, 
93-94, 162n, 164n, 191n, 193n, 
195n, 197n; and intellectual intu-
hion, 49, 74-75nn, 93n, 97n, 19ln; 
and nature, 27; subject in, 53, 97n; 
and teleology, 12 
schematism, 7ln, 166 
Schopenhauer, Authur, 17, 59, 19ln 

Index 
Schwdrmerei, 79n, 194n. See also enthu-
siasm 
Science (Wissenschaft): Concept ex-
pressed through, 174-76; conscious-
ness in relation to, 116-18; contem-
porary dilemma of, 89; defined, 
110n; first part of, 134; versus for-
malism, 164-67; knowing as, 110; 
misapplication of, 89-91; necessary 
movement of, 133-34; path to, 
118-24; and philosophy, 71~73, 190; 
as spirit knowing itself, 114. See 
also dialectic-as-Science; truth 
Science of Logic (Wissenschaft der 
Logik): as conceptual skeleton, 13; 
dialectic-as-Science and, 39-41; and 
existence, 171 n; history and, 54; 
and Kant's transcendental logic, 52; 
as metaphysics, 53-54; and 
method, 155-56n; and ontology, 9, 
22, 5 2n.3 7, 168n, 173n; and predica-
tive propositions, 18 7n; role of sub-
ject in, 17; spiritual essences in, 
133n 
self: absolute in relation to, 81n; devel-
opment of, 7-8, 107; ordinary con-
ception of, 181; other of, 54 
self-alienation. See alienation 
self-certainty, 117, 131, 1 70 
self-consciousness: development of, 9, 
129-32; as result of process, 36 
self-conscious spirit, current situation 
of, 75-78 
self-identity, 20-22; Fichte versus 
Hegel on, 90-91n; Kant and, 20-
21; as result of process, 36, 98n; 
substance and, 168-69 
self-particularization, 22-23, 124 n, 
165n 
self-reflection, 98n. See also reflection 
sense perception: 22, 124n, 129n, 137-
38n, 149, 161 
221 
senses, relation to Understanding of, 
130-32 
simplicity, 85n, 96n, 114-15, 168, 172 
social world, 1-2, 5, 7-8, 9-10, 25, 28, 
44. See also civil society; culture; ob-
jective spirit 
Socrates, 38, 192n 
sophia, 72n 
Sophist (Plato), 39 
space, 148, 148n 
speculative philosophy: defined, 
49-50; in Hegel and contemporar-
ies, 93n, 138n; scientific method 
and, 174 
speculative proposition, 182-83n 
Spinoza, Baruch: and being, 9, 47; 
causa sui in, 34, 113n; comparative 
thinking critiqued by, 69n; concept 
of substance in, 16-17; God for, 10, 
20, 28, 96, lOOn; Hegers incorpora-
tion of, 14, 16, 112n; and ccintellec-
tuallove of God," 28; on knowl-
edge and being, 13 7n; 
mathematical model for reasoning 
in, 143n, 147n; on method, 156n; 
and mysticism, 81n; naturalism of, 
27; and negation, 127n; as premod-
ern, 112n; as rational philosopher, 
4; substance in, 95n 
spiral: evolution of spirit as, 37; as 
model for dialectic, 14 
spirit: civil society as objective, 25-26; 
current situation of, 75-78, 82-84; 
death and, 128-29; defined, 10-11; 
development of, 83-85; as hallmark 
of modern era, 111-12; impover-
ishment of, 78-79; nature in rela-
tion to, 11-12, 27; and negativity, 
129; Science as development of, 
114; self-conscious, 75-78; worldly 
embodiment of, 4-5, 13. See also ab-
solute spirit; objective spirit 

222 
spiritual essentialities (geistige 
Wesenheiten), 132, 133n 
spiritual substance, 113n 
statements, truth and meaning of, 
34-35 
subject: absolute as, 16-17, 22, 95-97; 
absolute spirit as, 13n.10; collapse 
of, 179n; as constituted, 60; know-
ing, Hegel versus Fichte on, 90-
91n; ontological versus epistemo-
logical perspective on, 22; in predi-
cative language versus conceptual 
thinking, 178-80; self-negation of, 
19-20; substance and, 97-99, 129, 
136, 171n 
subjective idealism, 33, 46 
subject-like (structure, system, logic, 
character, etc.): 12, 27, 29, 30, 36, 
37, 86n, 106n, 108n, 132n, 136n, 
150n, 157n 
subject/ object, 22, 24, 25, 26, 95n, 
136n, 141n, 161 
sublation. See Aujhebung 
substance: existence versus, 173n; 
logic of, 20, 29; self-identity of, 
168-69; Spinoza on God as single, 
96; spiritual, 113n; subject in rela-
tion to, 95-97; subjective aspect of, 
97-99, 129, 136 
System of Science, The, 40 
teleology: of absolute, 99-lOOn; of 
being, 12; dialectic and, 37; of Rea-
son, 1 06; of subject, 98n; of world, 
55-56 
theodicy, 101 n 
theory of discourse, 34-35; philoso-
phy and, 15, 63-65, 102-3n, 107-8, 
1 08-9n, 182-83n, 185-89; predica-
tive language, 107-10, 178n, 182-
85; and speculative proposition, 
182-83n 
Index 
thesis-antithesis-synthesis formula, 29, 
46, 92n, 160n, 163n 
thing-in-itself (Ding an sich), 33, 69n, 
99n, 13ln, 135n, 136n 
things, relation to Concepts of, 32-34 
thought (Gedanke): 75, 127, 130, 131, 
133n, 134, 139, 154, 158 
time, 15Q-52; philosophy and, 72n, 
73n; spirit's development in, 85n 
transcendental logic, 52-53 
triplicity, 159-60 
"true is the who leu: result versus de-
velopment and, 64n, 102; three 
senses of, 31-32 
truth: certainty versus, 42, 116n; co-
herence theory of, 31; as confor-
mity of thing and intellect, 19, 32-
33; dialectical structure of, 36-38; 
discourse appropriate for exhib-
iting, 63-65; evidence and, 42; fal-
sity in relation to, 138-41, 153; 
form of, 137-38; historical, 142-43; 
mathematical, 143-52; antic charac-
ter of, 19, 32-33; philosophical ver-
sus non .. philosophical, 142-54; rep-
resentational theory of, 33; as 
science versus intuition, 73-75; of 
statements, 34; timeliness of, 195. 
See also absolute 
Understanding (Verstand): as absolute 
power, 127; defined, 3; existence 
and, 171-73; formalism of, 164--67; 
logic and, 30; and negation, 127n, 
128n; pure I and, 88n; Reason 
versus, 27, 36, 64n, 65n, 87-88; 
relation to senses of, 13Q-32; as 
trwondrous power of dissolution,""' 
127 
understanding, process of, 3 5 
unification philosophy, 48, 127n 

Index 
universals: concrete, 84n; emptiness 
of, 102, 130; immediate, 95; 
individuals as, 119-20; modernity 
and, 197; particulars in relation 
to, 65n 
unsociable sociability, Kant on, 55 
Vorstellung. See representation 
Wesen. See essence 
223 
will: centrality of, 60; Kant on, 55, 56; 
subject in relation to, 12 
Wirklichkeit. See actuality 
Wolff, Christian, 143n 
world, goal of, 55-56 
world-spirit, as subject of world his-
tory, 122-23 
Zeitgeist, 25, 38, 43, 122n 

