
oxford world’s classics
OUTLINES OF THE 
PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831) was born 
in Stuttgart and is the exact contemporary of Beethoven and
Wordsworth. In 1788 he entered the Theological Seminary (or Stift)
in Tübingen, where he studied both theology and philosophy and
shared a room with the future poet, Friedrich Hölderlin, and future
philosopher, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling. After leaving
Tübingen in 1793, he worked as a private tutor in Bern and
Frankfurt before joining Schelling at the University of Jena in 1801.
At Jena Hegel began to develop his philosophical system, lectured
on natural law for the ﬁrst time, and completed his monumental
Phenomenology of Spirit (1807). After leaving Jena in 1807 he worked
for a year in Bamberg as a newspaper editor, and then from 1808 to
1816 occupied the post of rector of a grammar school in Nuremberg,
during which time he was married and published the three-volume
Science of Logic (1812–16). In 1816 he was made professor at the
University of Heidelberg, and in 1817 he published the ﬁrst edition
of his Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences. In 1818 he was
called to a professorship in Berlin, where he would remain until his
death in November 1831. During his years in the city Hegel became
one of the most prominent public ﬁgures and the centre of a self-
consciously ‘Hegelian’ school of thought. His students included
Ludwig Feuerbach and David Friedrich Strauß. The Philosophy of
Right was published in 1820, though it is dated 1821. It is one of the
more widely studied of Hegel’s works, and has inﬂuenced gener-
ations of philosophers and political thinkers from Karl Marx to John
Rawls.
Stephen Houlgate is professor of philosophy at the University
of Warwick. He is the author of Hegel, Nietzsche and the Criticism of
Metaphysics (1986), An Introduction to Hegel: Freedom, Truth and
History (2nd edn. 2005), and The Opening of Hegel’s Logic: From
Being to Inﬁnity (2006). He is also the editor of Hegel and the
Philosophy of Nature (1998), The Hegel Reader (1998), and Hegel and
the Arts (2007). He has served as vice-president and president of the
Hegel Society of America and was editor of the Bulletin of the Hegel
Society of Great Britain from 1998 to 2007.

oxford world’s classics
For over 100 years Oxford World’s Classics have brought 
readers closer to the world’s great literature. Now with over 700
titles—from the 4,000-year-old myths of Mesopotamia to the 
twentieth century’s greatest novels—the series makes available 
lesser-known as well as celebrated writing.
The pocket-sized hardbacks of the early years contained 
introductions by Virginia Woolf, T. S. Eliot, Graham Greene, 
and other literary ﬁgures which enriched the experience of reading. 
Today the series is recognized for its ﬁne scholarship and 
reliability in texts that span world literature, drama and poetry, 
religion, philosophy, and politics. Each edition includes perceptive 
commentary and essential background information to meet the 
changing needs of readers.

OXFORD WORLD’S CLASSICS
G. W. F. HEGEL
Outlines of the
Philosophy of Right
Translated by
T. M. KNOX
Revised, edited, and introduced by
STEPHEN HOULGATE
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With oﬃces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press 
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States 
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
Translation © Oxford University Press 1952, 2008
Editorial matter © Stephen Houlgate 2008
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published as an Oxford World’s Classics paperback 2008
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, 
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction 
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, 
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover 
and you must impose the same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1770–1831.
[Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts. English]
Outlines of the philosophy of right / [G.W.F. Hegel]; translated by T.M. Knox; 
revised, edited, and introduced by Stephen Houlgate.
p. cm. — (Oxford world’s classics)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Law—Philosophy. 2. Natural law. 3. State, The. 4. Political science. 
5. Ethics. I. Houlgate, Stephen. II. Title
K230.H43G7813 2008
340′.11—dc22
2008000395
Typeset by Cepha Imaging Private Ltd., Bangalore, India
Printed in Great Britain by 
Clays Ltd., St Ives plc
ISBN 978–0–19–280610–9
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

CONTENTS
Introduction
vii
Excerpts from T. M. Knox’s Foreword
xxxiv
Note on the Text and Translation
xxxvii
Select Bibliography
xxxix
A Chronology of G. W. F. Hegel
xliii
OUTLINES OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT
Preface
3
introduction
17
first part: abstract right
53
(1) Property
57
(A) Taking Possession
67
(B) Use of the Thing
71
(C) Alienation of Property
77
(2) Contract
84
(3) Wrong
93
(A) Non-malicious Wrong
94
(B) Fraud
96
(C) Coercion and Crime
96
second part: morality
109
(1) Purpose and Responsibility
115
(2) Intention and Welfare
118
(3) Good and Conscience
126
third part: ethical life
154
(1) The Family
162
(A) Marriage
163

Contents
vi
(B) The Family’s Resources
171
(C) The Education of Children and the Dissolution 
of the Family
172
(2) Civil Society
180
(A) The System of Needs
186
(a) The Nature of Need and 
its Satisfaction
187
(b) The Nature of Work
190
(c) Resources
191
(B) The Administration of Justice
197
(a) Right as Law
198
(b) The Existence [Dasein] of the Law
203
(c) The Court of Law
208
(C) The Police and the Corporation
215
(a) Police [or the public authority]
215
(b) The Corporation
224
(3) The State
228
(A) Right within the State
235
1. The Internal Constitution for itself
256
(a) The Crown
263
(b) The Executive Power
277
(c) The Legislative Power
284
2. External Sovereignty
304
(B) Right between States
311
(C) World History
315
Explanatory Notes
324
Index
364

INTRODUCTION
Hegel’s Outlines of the Philosophy of Right is one of the greatest
works of moral, social, and political philosophy, comparable in scope
and profundity of insight to Plato’s Republic, Aristotle’s Politics,
Rousseau’s Social Contract, and, in the twentieth century, Rawls’s
Theory of Justice. It contains signiﬁcant ideas on justice, moral
responsibility, family life, economic activity, and the political struc-
ture of the state. In presenting these ideas Hegel draws on Plato,
Rousseau, Montesquieu, Smith, Kant, and Fichte, and on his broad
knowledge of events and conditions in Germany, France, and Britain,
to produce a wide-ranging and penetrating account of modern social
and political life.
Yet Hegel’s political philosophy is not one with which the public,
or even many professional philosophers, are intimately familiar. This
is due partly to the undeniable diﬃculty of the Philosophy of Right,
which has prevented Hegel’s text from gaining the wider popularity
enjoyed by the works of Marx or Nietzsche. (In addition to the con-
ceptual diﬃculty of Hegel’s thought, his text is designed to be a
handbook to accompany his lectures, rather than a fully worked-out
presentation of his ideas, and so is at times much more condensed
than one would like.)1 The relative obscurity in which Hegel’s polit-
ical philosophy still languishes is also due partly to the ill-informed
but inﬂuential prejudice of philosophers such as Karl Popper. In his
widely read book The Open Society and its Enemies, Popper accuses
Hegel of churning out ‘bombastic and mystifying cant’, of maintain-
ing that ‘the state is everything, and the individual nothing’ and of
thereby being ‘the missing link’ between Plato and modern totalitar-
ianism.2 Little wonder that many who hold Popper in high regard
have not felt much inclination to get to know Hegel’s philosophy
better. Popper’s diatribe against Hegel is based, however, on a shock-
ingly superﬁcial and selective reading of Hegel’s work, and leans
heavily on the intemperate grumblings of Hegel’s notoriously hostile
1 See G. W. F. Hegel, Outlines of the Philosophy of Right [henceforth PR], Preface,
3–4 below.
2 Karl Popper, The Open Society and its Enemies, 2 vols. (1945; London: Routledge,
1966), ii. 28, 31.

contemporary Arthur Schopenhauer, who accused Hegel of being a
paid agent of the Prussian government.3 Careful and attentive study
of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right reveals, by contrast, that Hegel’s text
is in fact one of the most subtle and perceptive accounts of human
freedom that we possess. Far from being a sinister forerunner of
Hitlerian fascism, Hegel emerges from the pages of his book—in the
judgement of the twentieth century’s greatest political philosopher,
John Rawls—as a ‘moderately progressive reform-minded liberal’.4
The aim of this edition of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right is to bring
Hegel’s text to a much wider audience than it has enjoyed hitherto,
so that more readers can discover for themselves that Rawls’s judge-
ment on Hegel is considerably nearer the mark than that of Popper.
Hegel’s Life and Political Sympathies
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel was born in Stuttgart in 1770, the
same year as Beethoven and Wordsworth. In his youth Hegel read
Rousseau, Lessing, Klopstock, and Wieland, and his diary, which he
wrote (partly in Latin) from 1785 to 1787, indicates that he could
read Greek as well as Latin, and even some Hebrew, and that at the
age of 8 he had received a multi-volume translation of Shakespeare’s
plays (some of which he would later read in English).5 In 1788 Hegel
entered the Theological Seminary (or Stift) in Tübingen, where he
studied both theology and philosophy. After 1790 he famously shared
a room with the future poet Friedrich Hölderlin, and future philoso-
pher Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling, though the room was
also occupied by seven other students. Hegel’s ‘hero’ at this time was
Rousseau, whose Émile, Social Contract, and Confessions were partic-
ular favourites. It is also likely that Hegel shared the general enthusi-
asm at the Seminary for the French Revolution of 1789, though the
often-repeated story that Hegel, Schelling, and other friends planted
a ‘freedom tree’ in a meadow outside Tübingen to commemorate the
storming of the Bastille may well be apocryphal.6
Introduction
viii
3 Ibid. 33.
4 John Rawls, Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 2000), 330.
5 Johannes Hoﬀmeister (ed.), Dokumente zu Hegels Entwicklung (1936; Stuttgart–Bad
Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1974), 12–13.
6 Walter Jaeschke, Hegel-Handbuch. Leben-Werk-Schule (Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler,
2003), 6–7.

After leaving Tübingen in 1793 Hegel worked as a private tutor in
Bern and Frankfurt, before joining Schelling at the University of
Jena in 1801. Hegel taught at the university as a Privatdozent (an
unsalaried lecturer paid by his students) until 1806, when he was
ﬁnally oﬀered a modest salary after the intervention of Goethe. It was
at Jena that Hegel began to develop his philosophical system and ﬁrst
lectured on natural law. He also ﬁnished his long manuscript on ‘The
German Constitution’, which he had started in Frankfurt, and wrote
his important essay ‘On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural
Law’ (1802–3).7 In October 1806 Hegel completed his monumental
Phenomenology of Spirit,8 and had to send his only copy of large sec-
tions of the manuscript by courier through the French lines outside
Jena. On 13 October 1806—the day before the battle of Jena—the
French occupied the city and Hegel saw the ‘Emperor [Napoleon]—
this world-soul [Weltseele]—riding out of the city on reconnaissance’.9
After leaving Jena in January 1807 Hegel worked for a year in
Bamberg as a newspaper editor, and then from 1808 to 1816 occu-
pied the post of rector of a grammar school in Nuremberg, during
which time he was married and published the three-volume Science
of Logic.10 In 1816 Hegel was appointed to a salaried professorship at
the University of Heidelberg. During his time in Heidelberg he pub-
lished the ﬁrst edition of his Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences
(1817)11 and once again lectured on natural law (1817–18). He also
wrote his manuscript on the ‘Proceedings of the Estates Assembly in
the Kingdom of Württemberg, 1815–1816’ (1817).12
In 1818 Hegel was called to a professorship in Berlin by the new
Prussian Minister for Spiritual, Educational, and Medical Aﬀairs,
Karl Siegmund Franz vom Stein zum Altenstein. He would remain 
Introduction
ix
7 See Laurence Dickey and H. B. Nisbet (eds.), G. W. F. Hegel: Political Writings
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 6–180.
8 Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A. V. Miller (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1977).
9 Hegel: The Letters, trans. Clark Butler and Christiane Seiler (Bloomington, Ind.:
Indiana University Press, 1984), 114.
10 Hegel’s Science of Logic, trans. A. V. Miller (Amherst, NY: Humanity Books, 1999).
See explanatory note to p. 4.
11 G. W. F. Hegel, Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in Outline [1817] and
Critical Writings, ed. E. Behler (New York: Continuum, 1990). See also ﬁrst explanatory
note to p. 3.
12 Hegel’s Political Writings, trans. T. M. Knox (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964),
246–94.

in Berlin until his death in 1831. During his years in the city Hegel
became one of the most prominent public ﬁgures and the centre of a
self-consciously ‘Hegelian’ school of thought. His students included
Ludwig Feuerbach and David Friedrich Strauß. Among his 
acquaintances were Karl August Varnhagen von Ense and Wilhelm
von Humboldt, and his relationship with Goethe (who lived in
Weimar) became particularly close. In Berlin Hegel published his
Philosophy of Right (1820, but dated 1821) and two further editions
of his Encyclopaedia (1827, 1830), and he lectured on (among other
topics) logic and metaphysics, philosophy of nature, philosophy of
history, aesthetics, and philosophy of religion. He gave a full course
of lectures on ‘natural law and political science or the philosophy 
of right’ ﬁve times: 1818–19, 1819–20, 1821–2, 1822–3, and 1824–5
(the last three lecture courses being based on the published text of
the Philosophy of Right).13 After 1825 Hegel left the task of lecturing
on the philosophy of right to his student and friend Eduard Gans,
but resumed lecturing on the topic himself in the autumn of 1831.
After only a few lectures, however, he died on 14 November 1831.
As noted above, Hegel was accused by his embittered contempor-
ary Schopenhauer—and then later by Popper—of being a paid
agent of the Prussian state. A similar charge was levelled in the 1850s
by Rudolf Haym, who asserted that Hegel’s philosophy was the
‘scientiﬁc home of the spirit of the Prussian restoration’.14 The fact that
Hegel was called to Berlin by a Prussian minister might seem to cor-
roborate these charges. The picture is, however, somewhat more
complicated than it at ﬁrst appears.
When Hegel moved to Berlin in 1818 Prussia was marked by a
tension between those who advocated civil, political, and military
reform (in the wake of the Enlightenment, the French Revolution,
and Napoleon’s Civil Code) and those who wished to resist ‘liberal’
ideas and restore (or rather, preserve) a patriarchal Prussian state in
which the king was responsible to God alone and supported by a
landowning, privileged aristocracy.
The high point of reform in Prussia under Freiherr vom Stein and
Karl von Hardenberg was now some years in the past. The October
Introduction
x
13 Several transcripts of Hegel’s lectures have now been published and are listed
below in the Select Bibliography.
14 Manfred Riedel (ed.), Materialien zu Hegels Rechtsphilosophie, 2 vols. (Frankfurt-
am-Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1975), i. 366.

Edict abolishing hereditary servitude had been issued in 1807; the
Municipal Ordinance allowing cities and towns to establish organs 
of self-government had been passed in 1808; Jews had gained a meas-
ure of emancipation in 1812 under the Edict Concerning the Civil
Condition of the Jews in the Prussian State; and in 1815 King
Friedrich Wilhelm III had made his promise to create a seat of 
‘territorial representation’—a national assembly—in Berlin.15
After the Congress of Vienna (also in 1815), however, the prevail-
ing concern of the ruling classes in Germany was ‘to preserve rather
than to change’.16 No national assembly was established; reformers,
such as Wilhelm von Humboldt, were dismissed; and the ‘party of
restoration’ around the king and the crown prince—including the
‘chief agent of reaction’, the head of the Prussian police Count 
W. L. G. von Wittgenstein—grew in strength and power. As a con-
sequence, universities became subject to increasingly conservative
and reactionary political supervision.
In 1817, however, the new ministry for ‘Spiritual, Educational 
and Medical Aﬀairs’ was established under the reform-minded
Altenstein, who was able to remove the universities from the direct
control of the party of restoration and dilute (or defer the implemen-
tation of) proposed restrictive measures. Altenstein also gave his
support to Hegel throughout the latter’s years in Berlin.
While it is true that Hegel was an employee of the Prussian state
(since all university professors, including those hostile to Hegel, such
as Friedrich Schleiermacher, were state employees), it is important to
note that Hegel was called to Berlin by a reform-minded minister in the
Prussian government. It should also be noted that Hegel was never
close to the king or to the party of restoration that surrounded him.
Nor did he have any special inﬂuence on the government: unlike many
colleagues, Hegel was never made a privy councillor. Furthermore,
though he was made rector of the university from autumn 1829 to
autumn 1830, in the last year of his life he was awarded only the Red
Eagle Third Class—a not especially high honour that indicates his dis-
tance from, rather than proximity to, the court.17 It is clear, therefore,
that Hegel was by no means as closely associated with the reactionary
Introduction
xi
15 Christopher Clark, Iron Kingdom: The Rise and Downfall of Prussia, 1600–1947
(London: Allen Lane, 2006), 328, 334, 337, 340.
16 Ralph Flenley, Modern German History (1953; London: J. M. Dent and Sons, 1964), 137.
17 See Jaeschke, Hegel-Handbuch, 45, 55.

ﬁgures in the Prussian state as Schopenhauer, Haym, and Popper
would have us believe.
Hegel in fact sympathized deeply with the advocates of reform,
and his distance from, indeed opposition to, the party of restoration
is evident from his scathing criticism of one of the latter’s chief
philosophical spokesmen, Karl Ludwig von Haller.18 Haller, Hegel
tells us, maintains that it is ‘the eternal, unalterable, ordinance of God,
that the mightier rules, must rule, and will always rule’. In Hegel’s
view, however, this exhibits Haller’s ‘virulent hatred of all laws and
legislation, of all formally and legally determined right’, and so shows
him to be at odds with the principles of modern freedom (note to PR
§ 258 Remark [pp. 231–2]). Popper accuses Hegel of proclaiming the
‘doctrine that might is right’.19 Hegel’s criticism of the party of restora-
tion, however, is precisely that it equates might with right by defend-
ing power and privilege against the modern insistence on the primacy
of freedom, right, and law.
A similar charge is levelled by Hegel against the proponents of the
new German nationalism, which had burgeoned during the wars of
liberation against Napoleon and found distinctive expression in the
Burschenschaften (or student fraternities). Hegel was no unwavering
supporter of French military might—he had experienced the
destructive consequences of the French occupation of Jena in 1806
at ﬁrst hand—but he considered Napoleon’s Civil Code to represent
a signiﬁcant, progressive step in the process of systematizing right
and clarifying the principles of right. He regarded it as particularly
‘sad’, therefore, that a copy of the Civil Code had been burned by
nationalists at the Wartburg festival in October 1817.20 Hegel was
also profoundly opposed to the anti-Semitism that was associated
with the new nationalistic ‘German freedom’. In his view, ‘the ﬁerce
outcry raised against the Jews [. . .] ignores the fact that they are,
above all, human beings; and humanity, so far from being a mere
superﬁcial, abstract quality [. . .], is on the contrary itself the basis of
the fact that civil rights arouse in their possessors the feeling of oneself
as counting in civil society as a person with rights’ (note to PR § 270
Remark [p. 247]).
Introduction
xii
18 See explanatory note to p. 208.
19 Popper, The Open Society and its Enemies, ii. 41.
20 Dieter Henrich (ed.), G. W. F. Hegel. Philosophie des Rechts. Die Vorlesung von
1819/20 in einer Nachschrift (Frankfurt-am-Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1983), 172.

Nationalism’s ‘hatred of all laws’ was evident above all in the
murder, in March 1819, of the playwright August von Kotzebue, by
Karl Ludwig Sand, a member of the Erlangen Burschenschaft. After
the murder Hegel’s colleague, the theologian Wilhelm de Wette,
wrote a letter of condolence to Sand’s mother. In it he stated that the
murder was carried out by a ‘pure pious youth’ in the belief that he
was doing the right thing, and so was ‘a beautiful testimonial of the
time’. The fact that the law had been broken and a life taken did not
seem to be of primary importance to de Wette; what mattered was
that Sand had acted in the conviction that he was in the right: ‘he held
it to be right, and so he did the right thing.’ When the letter became
public de Wette was quickly dismissed on the orders of the king, and
there ensued a heated debate among professors at the university
about whether the state had the right to remove someone from his
post in this way. Hegel argued that the state did have this right—
provided that it continue to pay the individual’s salary—and he was
promptly castigated by Schleiermacher for his ‘miserable’ attitude.
When the university refused to give de Wette his salary, however,
both Hegel and Schleiermacher contributed to a secret hardship
fund for him.21
One might be tempted to misinterpret Hegel’s response to the dis-
missal of de Wette as evidence of his support for the suppression by
the Prussian state of the rights of the individual. In fact, however, it
reﬂects Hegel’s uncompromising rejection of political violence and
murder in the name of national ‘freedom’. Hegel argues that genuine
freedom and good action entail respect for the law and for the rights
and lives of others; murdering people in the ‘conviction’ that one is
thereby doing good by extirpating the wicked is, in Hegel’s view,
‘evil rather than good’ (PR § 140 Remark [d] [p. 143]). The univer-
sity and the state thus had good reason to dismiss someone who was
eﬀectively endorsing politically motivated assassination.
Prompted by the Austrian foreign minister, Metternich, the gov-
ernments in Germany and the federal parliament in Frankfurt
responded to the murder of Kotzebue by passing, in the autumn of
1819, the ‘Karlsbad Decrees’, under which universities became sub-
ject to increasingly repressive scrutiny. Censorship was increased,
Introduction
xiii
21 Clark, Iron Kingdom, 401, Jaeschke, Hegel-Handbuch, 43, and Johannes Hoﬀmeister
(ed.), Briefe von und an Hegel, 4 vols. (1952–4; Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1961), ii. 445.

and lecturers or professors who were suspected of promoting 
‘demagogical’ or ‘liberal’ tendencies ran the real risk of losing their
posts. After his death Hegel was accused by Haym of providing a
‘scientiﬁcally formulated justiﬁcation of the Karlsbad police
system’,22 but this is far from the truth. In fact, in the period before
and after the passing of the Karlsbad Decrees not only Hegel him-
self, but also several of his students, fell under suspicion. In July
1819, for example, one student, Leopold von Henning, was arrested
on the basis of comments in letters sent to him and was held for seven
weeks. (On one occasion Hegel and some of his other students rowed
on the Spree river to a point by von Henning’s window and assured
him—in Latin, to avoid being understood by the guards—that they
were working to prove his innocence.) Then, in December 1819,
Hegel’s choice for his teaching assistant, Friedrich Wilhelm Carové,
was denounced by Count Wittgenstein as a subversive and there-
upon advised by Altenstein to leave Berlin.23 Hegel clearly felt under
threat himself and in October 1819 wrote to his friend, Friedrich
Creuzer: ‘I am about to be ﬁfty years old, and I have spent thirty 
of these ﬁfty years in these ever-unrestful times of hope and fear. 
I had hoped that for once we might be done with it. Now I must con-
fess that things continue as ever. Indeed, in one’s darker hours it
seems they are getting ever worse.’24 Hegel’s fears were by no means
unjustiﬁed, and at the time of Carové’s denunciation he was precar-
iously close to being denounced himself.
Hegel has been charged with supporting the conservative and
reactionary policies of the Prussian state, when in fact he was strongly
opposed to the party of restoration that instigated those policies, and
after 1819 felt (with justiﬁcation) threatened by them. He has also
been charged with preparing the way for twentieth-century totalitar-
ianism, when in fact he was profoundly hostile to nationalistic polit-
ical violence and deeply committed to the rule of law and respect for
freedom and rights. Close attention to the Philosophy of Right shows
that Hegel’s commitment to law, freedom, and right is not merely a
contingent personal preference, but a commitment rooted in his sys-
tematic philosophy of freedom.
Introduction
xiv
22 Riedel, Materialien zu Hegels Rechtsphilosophie, i. 371.
23 Terry Pinkard, Hegel: A Biography (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2000), 447–50.
24 Hegel: The Letters, 451.

Hegel’s Philosophical System
Hegel’s philosophical system, set out in his Encyclopaedia of the
Philosophical Sciences (as well as in his Science of Logic and his lec-
tures), comprises three disciplines: logic, the philosophy of nature,
and the philosophy of spirit. It is preceded by phenomenology, set
out in the famous Phenomenology of Spirit. Hegel’s philosophy
proper—that is, excluding phenomenology—lays out what he
understands to be the true character of being. It tells us what being,
by virtue of its very nature, must be. The assumption underlying
philosophy, for Hegel, is that thought is capable of understanding—
on its own, a priori—the fundamental structure of being. Philosophy
is thus not an empirical discipline that bases its comprehension of
things on observation of nature and human society; rather, it discov-
ers the fundamental character of being by examining the concept of
being itself (just as Spinoza sought to disclose the nature of the world
by examining the concept of substance). Philosophy certainly draws
on the empirical observations of scientists and historians to ﬂesh out
and enrich its account of things, but its basic understanding of the
world is developed a priori. As Hegel puts it in the Remark to § 2 of
the Philosophy of Right: ‘The truth is that in philosophical knowledge
the necessity of a concept is the principal thing’ (p. 19).
Hegel recognizes that ordinary, non-philosophical consciousness
is likely to ﬁnd the enterprise of philosophy perverse. From its per-
spective, thought cannot simply work out by itself what the world is
like; we have to go out into the world and look. Hegel argues in his
Phenomenology, however, that philosophy (as he understands it) is not
as alien to ordinary consciousness as the latter would like to believe:
for the commitments of ordinary consciousness themselves lead 
logically and inexorably to the standpoint of philosophy. Philosophy
is thus not a perversely presumptuous undertaking, but one that 
is made necessary by ordinary consciousness. This, Hegel claims, is
because the experience of ordinary consciousness itself issues in the
insight that thought is ultimately what opens the world—or ‘being’—
to view.25
The ﬁrst discipline of Hegel’s philosophy proper—his science of
logic—examines the most general features of being. It sets out what
Introduction
xv
25 See Stephen Houlgate, An Introduction to Hegel: Freedom, Truth and History (1991;
Oxford: Blackwell, 2005), 48–66.

it is to be as such, what it is to be something, to be ﬁnite and to have
quantity, what it is to have form, to be substantial and to exercise
causality, and what it is to be an object. In so doing, speculative logic
discloses the rich variety of ways of being that are exempliﬁed by
things in our world, and at the same time uncovers the fundamental
categories (such as ‘ﬁnitude’, ‘quantity’, ‘substance’, and ‘causality’)
in terms of which we must think.
Logic culminates in the thought that being is the rational process
of free self-determination. Hegel calls this process the ‘Idea’ [Idee],
and he contends not only that being as a whole is ‘Idea’ (since it has
no transcendent creator), but also that particular forms of being,
such as life, are ‘Idea’, too, insofar as they are self-determining and
self-moving. (For further remarks on the ‘Idea’, and on its relation 
to what Hegel calls the ‘concept’ [Begriﬀ], see the Excerpts from 
T. M. Knox’s Foreword, below.)
Logic considers being (and the various ways of being it encom-
passes) without reference to space and time. In the philosophy of
nature, however, Hegel discloses speciﬁcally what it is to be spatio-
temporal, as well as what it is to be a material, physical object. The
philosophy of nature culminates in the insight that the most complex
and most freely self-determining entity in nature is the animal organ-
ism. Of all the (non-human) things in nature, therefore, it is animals
that embody the ‘Idea’ most perfectly.
The philosophy of spirit—the largest section of Hegel’s philo-
sophical system—then considers the various forms taken by human
life or ‘spirit’ [Geist]. Spirit is also an embodiment of the ‘Idea’, since
it is implicitly or explicitly self-determining in all of its forms. In
spirit, indeed, the ‘Idea’ emerges from nature as (more or less) con-
scious or self-conscious self-determination. In the philosophy of subjec-
tive spirit, Hegel argues that human life and spirit involve sensation,
consciousness, self-consciousness, imagination, language, thought,
drive, and freedom of the will. The philosophy of objective spirit then
examines the various objective forms that human freedom must adopt.
This is the place at which Hegel’s philosophy of right—together with
his philosophy of history—is located (though the introduction to the
published text of the Philosophy of Right, comprising §§ 1–33, is in
part a recapitulation of the later sections of the philosophy of subjec-
tive spirit). The philosophy of right, therefore, is the discipline that
reveals what it is to be free, and, more particularly, what objective
Introduction
xvi

structures and institutions (such as civil society and the state) are
made necessary by the nature of freedom. The Philosophy of Right is
thus far from being a work that justiﬁes political repression. It is a
philosophical study of the meaning of freedom, and shows what 
freedom—when it is understood properly—necessarily entails. 
In so doing, it provides an a priori justiﬁcation—in the name of 
freedom—of right, property, moral conscience, family life, civil
society, and the state.
The philosophy of history then shows that freedom does not just
involve moral, social, and political life in the abstract, but also entails
living in history. Finally, the third section of Hegel’s philosophy of
spirit—his philosophy of absolute spirit—demonstrates that human
freedom requires art, religion, and philosophy itself, because it is
precisely in these three forms of human activity that we give the most
profound expression to our developing understanding of freedom
(and of the nature of being).
This brief sketch of Hegel’s philosophical system does little more
than hint at the richness of his thought. Yet it suﬃces to explain that,
for Hegel, being is the process of self-determination (or ‘Idea’), and
that in this process being develops from being nature pure and
simple to being self-conscious spirit. Such spirit is nothing mysteri-
ous or otherworldly, but is human self-consciousness. The world
becomes ‘spiritual’, therefore, with the emergence of human beings.
Human self-consciousness or ‘spirit’ is characterized above all by 
freedom—freedom of imagination, of thought, and of will. The task of
Hegel’s philosophy of right is thus set by the philosophical system of
which it forms part: it is to lay out the various objective—judicial,
moral, social, and political—forms that human freedom must take
on, if it is to be true freedom. It is to show that genuine human free-
dom must objectify itself in rights, laws, and institutions, not just in
the arbritrariness of self-will. As Hegel himself puts it in § 4 of the
Philosophy of Right: ‘the system of right is the realm of freedom made
actual, the world of spirit [Geist] brought forth out of itself as a
second nature’ (p. 26).
Hegel is sometimes thought to be the quintessential historicist
philosopher, for whom everything has to be understood as the prod-
uct of its historical context. The Philosophy of Right, however, does
not oﬀer a historical account of the modern state: it does not describe
the structures and institutions that just happen to be found in existing
Introduction
xvii

modern societies. Hegel’s philosophy of right provides, rather, a nor-
mative account of freedom: it tells us how freedom should be under-
stood and how it should objectify itself, if it is to be true to its own
nature. This does not mean that Hegel oﬀers us an essentially utopian
vision of freedom: he does not set out merely what he believes free-
dom (or the state) ought to be in an ideal world (see PR Preface,
p. 15). He shows us, rather, what freedom is in truth, what it is
according to its own nature or concept. This concept, far from being
an abstract utopian ideal, has been realized—albeit imperfectly—in
history itself. Indeed, Hegel argues that all the essential elements of
objective freedom are to be found in actual modern states—if not all
together in one state—and he draws widely on his knowledge of con-
temporary Britain, France, and Germany in order to enrich his pres-
entation of those elements. Nonetheless, Hegel’s account of objective
freedom is grounded in and made necessary by the concept of free-
dom, rather than the facts of history. His principal aim is to show
what that concept requires; his secondary concern is then to indicate
that that concept is best embodied and realized in modernity.
In setting out what is entailed by the concept of freedom, Hegel
employs a distinctive and unusual method. He does not start with
what he considers to be a rich and exhaustive deﬁnition of freedom
(nor does he begin from concrete historical examples of freedom). He
starts from what he takes to be the minimal concept of freedom. This
concept contains the least that freedom can be understood to be and,
indeed, the least that freedom can actually be. It is the thought of
freedom in its most abstract and undeveloped form: freedom as 
the simple ability to abstract from all that is given to us. From this
minimal starting point Hegel then derives further, more concrete
conceptions—and forms—of freedom.
Hegel derives each further form of freedom by rendering explicit
what is implicit in the form that precedes it. This is not to say that a
more concrete form of freedom (the state, for example) is already pres-
ent as such in a less concrete form (such as civil society). Rather, the
state is what emerges when what is implicit in civil society has become
explicit.
This activity of rendering explicit is undertaken by the philoso-
pher. What is to be rendered explicit, however, is determined by
what is implicit in a given form or conception of freedom. In that
sense, the process of rendering explicit or ‘unfolding’ the diﬀerent
Introduction
xviii

forms and conceptions of freedom is governed not by the philoso-
pher, but by the nature of freedom itself. This is what Hegel means
by saying that the science of right traces ‘the proper immanent devel-
opment of the thing itself’ (PR § 2 [p. 18]). Subsequent forms of free-
dom are not introduced ‘externally’ by the philosopher in order to
make up for deﬁciencies in earlier forms; rather, they are engendered
by those earlier forms themselves, whose own conceptual structures
implicitly point towards them. Ultimately, indeed, they are all engen-
dered by the abstract form of freedom with which the philosopher
begins. The philosophy of right, therefore, traces the process where-
by abstract freedom itself makes freedom in the state necessary.
This process is not a historical one: Hegel is not claiming that the
earliest historical form of freedom was abstract and that the other
forms of freedom—right, moral action, family life, civil society, and
the state—emerged in that order over the centuries. The process
Hegel describes is a logical one, in which one form of freedom is
shown to be demanded by the conceptual structure or form of the
preceding one. What Hegel sets out to show in the Philosophy of
Right is not how freedom has actually developed through history, but
what forms of freedom are inherent in, and so logically required by,
freedom itself. In this way he shows how freedom develops logically
from abstraction to concreteness.
Note that this development begins from the minimal, abstract 
concept of freedom and shows how this concept renders itself con-
crete, or determines itself. In determining itself, the concept of free-
dom proves to be the ‘Idea’ (because it proves to be the very process
of self-determination itself). At the start, the concept of freedom is
already the Idea of freedom, but in an abstract, undeveloped form.
The process of logical development described in the Philosophy of
Right is thus one in which the concept or abstract Idea of freedom
develops into the fully ﬂedged concrete Idea of freedom. As Hegel
himself puts it, it is ‘a development through which the concept deter-
mines the Idea, itself at ﬁrst abstract, until it becomes a systematized
whole’ (PR § 28 [p. 46]).
Towards the beginning of the Philosophy of Right Hegel describes
the free will that wills itself as ‘the abstract concept of the Idea of the
will’ (PR § 27 [p. 46]). Towards the end of his book he describes the
state as ‘the actuality of the ethical Idea’ (PR § 257 [p. 228]). What
happens in between is that the free will comes to be actually and
Introduction
xix

explicitly the Idea, or free self-determination, that it is abstractly and
implicitly at the start. The state is thus not something alien to free-
dom, but is rather the most concrete and genuinely self-determining
manifestation of freedom. It is what true freedom proves, through its
own logical development, to be.
Yet how exactly does freedom ‘develop’ logically, in Hegel’s view?
To answer this question we need to look more closely at the
Philosophy of Right itself.
Freedom
The ﬁrst and most abstract form of freedom that Hegel examines is
what he calls ‘negative freedom’—‘my ability to free myself from
everything, [. . .] abstract from everything’ (PR § 5 Addition [p. 29]).
This is my ability to set aside whatever deﬁnes and limits me—
my age, sex, needs, and desires—and to think of myself as a pure ‘I’.
I have this ability, in Hegel’s view, because I can think. It is thought,
therefore, that enables me to free myself from all that I am given (by
nature) to be.
Yet freedom also takes a more positive form: it consists in the abil-
ity to give myself a particular ‘content and object’, that is, to aﬃrm a
speciﬁc impulse or desire as mine (PR § 6 [p. 30]). In exercising this
freedom, I do not consider the desire to be something that is forced
upon me by nature, but know that I myself have aﬃrmed or ‘willed’
the desire. That means that I continue to think of myself as a pure ‘I’
that is not bound by nature to any particular desires. That means in
turn that in aﬃrming a desire I retain the sense that I can retract 
my aﬃrmation at any time and withdraw once again into the purity
of my ‘self’. The desire I aﬃrm is thereby regarded not as something
to which I am irrevocably tied, but as ‘a mere possibility [. . .] in
which it [the will] is conﬁned only because it has put itself in it’ 
(PR § 7 [pp. 31–2]). The desire is one that I actually aﬃrm; but it
remains a mere ‘possibility’ in the sense that it is no more than one
option among many—one that I happen to have settled on but could
just as easily give up in favour of another.
For Hegel, the act of aﬃrming an impulse or desire, while continu-
ing to view it as something that I did not have to aﬃrm and that 
I can renounce if I so will, is the act of freely choosing it. At its sim-
plest and most abstract, therefore, freedom is freedom of choice.
Introduction
xx

This, Hegel maintains, is ‘the idea which people most commonly
have of freedom’ (PR § 15 Remark [p. 37]). In the popular imagina-
tion freedom consists in not being forced or constrained to do some-
thing, but in being able to choose for oneself what one does, being
able to do what one pleases. Hegel calls this the freedom of ‘arbitrari-
ness’ or ‘caprice’ [Willkür] (PR § 15 [p. 37]).
Note that Hegel shows choice to be a necessary aspect of freedom:
as thinking beings, we immediately enjoy the freedom to choose.
Furthermore, Hegel argues that choice itself has a necessary struc-
ture. Since it combines both the ‘positive’ freedom to aﬃrm what is
given and the ‘negative’ freedom to abstract from what is given,
choice necessarily involves the consciousness that we are not bound
to, and so can always abandon, whatever we aﬃrm. Choosing always
brings with it the consciousness that we could have chosen
diﬀerently and could still choose diﬀerently in the future (provided,
of course, that we do not choose to sacriﬁce the freedom of choice
itself by committing suicide). Yet Hegel also goes on to argue that
freedom of choice is more problematic than it ﬁrst appears.
Hegel does not deny that we have genuine freedom of choice. Such
freedom is not an illusion: thought gives us the real power to abstract
from, settle on, and then again abstract from particular impulses and
desires. Choice, however, is not quite as unconstrained as we might
think, for it is in fact utterly dependent on what is given to it.
Choice, Hegel states, is grounded in the ‘indeterminacy of the I’,
that is, the abstract thought of oneself as a pure ‘I’ (PR § 15 Addition
[p. 38]). This abstract, indeterminate ‘I’ has no ‘content’ of its own—
it does not have any intrinsic needs and desires—but it is simply the
formal capacity to select between given desires. Moreover, the choos-
ing ‘I’, or will, does not itself determine which desires are given to it.
Such desires must, therefore, be given by something other than the
free will itself, namely nature. Free choice is thus less free than it
thinks it is, because it is wholly dependent on whatever desires nature
makes available to it. This, Hegel points out, is ‘the contradiction
lying in arbitrariness’ (PR § 15 Addition [p. 38])—a contradiction
that is a necessary, not simply an accidental, feature of choice.
We can, indeed, freely choose to do what we please; but we do not
freely determine what pleases us—nature does. (Hegel shows later in
the Philosophy of Right that our desires and interests are also formed
by those who seek to proﬁt from their creation, namely producers
Introduction
xxi

[PR § 191 Addition].) This, in a nutshell, is the dialectic at the heart
of choice. Dialectic, as Hegel explains in his Encyclopaedia Logic, is
the process whereby concepts and phenomena turn of their own
accord into their opposites and thereby ‘negate’ themselves.26 Choice
is dialectical, for Hegel, because it is freedom which, thanks to its
very structure, proves to be a form of dependence.
Hegel will go on to show that genuinely free human beings make
their choices in the concrete contexts of property-ownership, moral
action, family life, and economic and political activity. At the begin-
ning of the Philosophy of Right, however, he focuses on choice as such
and shows that it is not, as many people believe, the most complete
form of freedom. This is partly because it is a dialectical form of free-
dom that is also a form of profound dependence. It is also because
implicit within choice are the seeds of a deeper, more independent
freedom. This is the freedom that consists not merely in willing what
is given by nature, but in willing the free will itself.
When I choose to do something, I aﬃrm or ‘will’ a given desire. I am,
however, also implicitly aﬃrming my freedom of choice itself. Implicit
in every choice, therefore, is the aﬃrmation by the free will of itself
and its own freedom. When the free will makes itself the explicit
object of its own aﬃrmation, it becomes the truly free, rather than
just abstractly free, will. The ‘free will which wills the free will’ (PR
§ 27 [p. 46]) is truly free, because it is no longer dependent on the
givens of nature for its ‘content and object’ but ﬁnds that content
within itself. Such a free will, Hegel writes, ‘is related to nothing except
itself and so is released from every relation of dependence on anything
else. The will is then true, or rather truth itself’ (PR § 23 [p. 43]).
As Rawls points out, Hegel’s position here reveals his closeness to
Kant.27 Hegel is led to his conception of the self-willing will, how-
ever, by the logic inherent in freedom itself: the will must will itself
and so have itself as its object, for only in that way does it avoid the
contradiction besetting choice. The moment of necessity here is
especially important. The truly free will is not simply the will that
does actually will itself; it is the will that must will itself, if it is to be
free and independent. The will that wants to be truly free has no
Introduction
xxii
26 G. W. F. Hegel, The Encyclopaedia Logic: Part 1 of the Encyclopaedia of Philosoph-
ical Sciences with the Zusätze, trans. T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting, and H. S. Harris
(Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett Publishing, 1991), 128 [§ 81].
27 Rawls, Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy, 337–8.

choice in the matter: as Hegel puts it, it is ‘the absolute determin-
ation, or, if you like, the absolute impulse, of the free spirit [. . .] to
make its freedom its object’ (PR § 27 [p. 46], my emphasis). This
moment of necessity is the key to the emergence of a new and im-
portant idea in Hegel’s account of freedom: the idea of right [Recht].
All of us lay claim to various rights in our everyday lives. Some
people even claim that animals, as well as humans, have rights. But
what exactly is a ‘right’? Hegel’s answer is clear: a right is our freedom
understood as the object of our will. Or, to put it another way, right is
the objective ‘existence’ [Dasein] of our freedom (PR § 29 [p. 46]). As
such, right is ‘sacrosanct’ to the free will—that which the free will must
will and aﬃrm (PR § 30 [p. 47]). It is thus that which commands respect
from the free will. It should be clear why Hegel introduces this idea 
of right at this point in his account of freedom: for the free will that has
its own freedom as its object, and that must will and aﬃrm its freedom
if it is to be truly free, necessarily regards its freedom as its right.
Hegel’s argument here is subtle and important. What he shows is
that the very idea of right is generated by the logical development of
freedom. The will whose freedom consists solely in exercising choice
has no conception of ‘right’. This is because it has no (explicit) sense
that it is bound by necessity. For it, freedom is all about possibility:
it knows that it can choose this or that, but it does not feel that it must
will anything. The truly free will, by contrast, not only wills its own
freedom, but understands that it must do so if it is to be truly free. It
comprehends, therefore, that there is a necessity inherent in freedom
itself: the necessity that requires it to will its own freedom. It is this
idea that freedom is that which requires aﬃrmation and recognition
from the free will that generates the idea of ‘right’: for ‘right’ is noth-
ing but freedom-that-requires-recognition. The truly free will is
thus not the one that thinks it can do as it pleases, but the one that
considers freedom to constitute a realm of right that must be willed
and aﬃrmed by any truly free will. Accordingly, with the emergence
of this truly free will, Hegel’s philosophy of freedom turns into a 
philosophy of right.
Right
Since right is simply freedom understood as requiring respect, non-
human animals that are sentient but have no awareness of being
Introduction
xxiii

free—and so cannot make freedom their object—cannot lay claim to
rights. This does not mean that we should show no concern for the
welfare of non-human animals; but the only beings that can be the
bearers of rights are those that are conscious of their freedom (or at
least capable of being so conscious).
Furthermore, since right is freedom understood as requiring
respect, each form of freedom that Hegel shows to be necessary in
the Philosophy of Right constitutes a sphere of right. In Hegel’s
words: ‘every stage in the development of the Idea of freedom has its
own special right, since it is the existence of freedom in one of its
own determinations’ (PR § 30 Remark [p. 47]). All, therefore, must
be willed and aﬃrmed by the truly free will. This conﬁrms that
Hegel’s account of freedom is above all a normative account: it does
not just describe the diﬀerent forms that freedom has taken in his-
tory, but sets out the diﬀerent forms that are required for true freedom
and so constitute our right.
The ﬁrst form of right that Hegel discusses is what he calls
‘abstract right’. Such right is not earned or merited through virtue or
good behaviour. It belongs immediately to those who are, and know
themselves to be, free beings. Abstract right is the right to be treated
as a bearer of rights as such—or a person (PR § 36). More particu-
larly, it encompasses the right to own property (PR § 45), the right
to exchange such property with others and enter into contracts with
them (PR § 72), and the right not to suﬀer personal injury or be
enslaved (PR § 48 Remark). Note that the right, or freedom, to own
and exchange property allows plenty of room for freedom of choice.
Choice must, however, be exercised within the context of respect for
rights and so in that sense is restricted: I may take ownership only of
things that are not already the property of another (PR § 50).
Like choice, abstract right suﬀers its own dialectic, for it gives 
rise, in Hegel’s view, to wrong, or crime. This is because, even though
right commands respect, it is always a matter of contingency whether
the bearers of rights will actually respect the rights of others (PR
§ 81). This contingency is grounded in the fact that all who are and
know themselves to be free, immediately become the bearers of rights,
whether or not they are inclined to respect rights themselves.
The criminal’s violation of right, Hegel argues, requires that the
authority of right be restored through punishment or ‘retribution’
(PR § 101 [p. 103]). At this stage in the Philosophy of Right, however,
Introduction
xxiv

the institutions—courts of law—that are needed for properly judicial
punishment have not yet been derived from the concept of freedom.
Consequently, ‘the annulling of crime in this sphere where right is
immediate is initially revenge’ (PR § 102 [p. 106]). Yet Hegel is not
advocating revenge in particular. He is arguing for the justice of pun-
ishment; but he is also pointing out that ‘in that condition of society
when there are neither magistrates nor laws’—the condition produced
when people see themselves as no more than bearers of rights—
‘punishment always takes the form of revenge’ (PR § 102 Addition
[p. 106]).
Through the punishment of the criminal the authority of right is
re-established: right is accorded clear priority over the individual
will. When this priority is explicitly recognized and internalized by
the individual will itself, the latter becomes a moral [moralisch] will
(PR § 104). Moral freedom is thus the next form of freedom that we
encounter in the Philosophy of Right.
The moral will not only accepts the primacy of right, but also 
considers itself to be the embodiment and actualization of right and
freedom. It does not, however, equate freedom with its mere ‘imme-
diacy’ as a person or bearer of rights. It equates freedom with its self-
determining activity or ‘subjectivity’ (PR § 106 [p. 109]). That is to
say, it equates freedom with the actions it undertakes to fulﬁl its pur-
poses and intentions. The most basic right claimed by the moral will
is the right to consider as its own action only what it has undertaken
knowingly and deliberately (rather than unknowingly). In other
words, the moral will insists that ‘the deed can be imputed to me only
if my will is responsible for it’. This, Hegel states, is ‘the right to
know’ (PR § 117 [p. 116]).
Further rights claimed by the moral will include: the right to be
held accountable only for the kind of action I intended (e.g. mercy-
killing rather than murder) (PR § 120); the right to fulﬁl my inten-
tions in my actions and thereby to gain satisfaction through those
actions (PR § 121); the right to recognize as valid only what I judge
to be good (PR § 132); the (‘Kantian’) right to recognize as binding
on me only what I understand to be my duty (PR § 133); and the right
to recognize my conscience as ‘what alone has obligatory force for
me’ (PR § 136 Addition [p. 132]).
The dialectic suﬀered by the moral will is this: if my own con-
science or ‘conviction’ is what tells me whether or not an action is
Introduction
xxv

right and good, then my own ‘subjectivity [. . .] claims to be absolute’
(PR § 140 [p. 138]). I do not subject myself to any genuinely inde-
pendent, objective principle of action, but ‘it is the subjective con-
sciousness itself whose decision constitutes objectivity’ (PR § 140
Remark [d] [p. 142]). This means, however, that I have the power to
justify any actions I choose to undertake—including those that are
self-serving and ‘evil’—on the grounds that my conscience tells me
they are right and good. Such a moral will does not deliberately
commit acts it knows to be evil, but is ﬁrmly convinced of its own
righteousness. Nonetheless, it perverts itself into an evil will pre-
cisely by insisting that it alone determines what counts as the good.
The moral will identiﬁes the good with the dictates of its own sub-
jectivity. At the same time, it does not knowingly and wilfully indulge
its own desires, but wills what it takes to be genuinely good. In so
doing, it implicitly recognizes the good to be something ‘universal and
objective’ (PR § 141 [p. 151]) (even though it claims the power to
determine by itself what the objective good is). The will that explicitly
recognizes the good to be objective is the ethical [sittlich] will.
Ethical Life
The distinction between moral and ethical freedom is one of the most
important in the Philosophy of Right. The ethical will, for Hegel, does
not take the good to be simply what the inner voice of conscience tells
it to do. It understands freedom and the good to be realized in the
objective world around us. Speciﬁcally, it holds freedom and the
good to be embodied in the laws and institutions that constitute ‘ethi-
cal life’ (PR §§ 142, 144). From the ethical point of view, therefore,
we are free only when we are law-abiding participants in the institu-
tions of civil society and the state (as well as members of a loving
family).
If one reads Hegel’s paragraphs on ‘ethical life’ very selectively
and superﬁcially, it is (just about) possible to misunderstand him as
advocating unquestioning acceptance of prevailing customs and
unquestioning obedience to the laws of the state, whatever those cus-
toms and laws may be. He does, after all, say that all one needs to do
in an ‘ethical community’ to be virtuous is to ‘follow the well-known 
and explicit rules of his own situation’ (PR § 150 Remark [p. 157]).
Might this not suggest that, for Hegel, the ‘ethical’ individual just
Introduction
xxvi

does what is done and thinks no more about it? And isn’t this ‘ethi-
cal’ attitude precisely what allowed the Nazis to perpetrate their most
heinous crimes?
What this interpretation overlooks, however, is the fact that not
every social or political institution counts as ethical in Hegel’s sense,
and so not every institution deserves our respect and allegiance.
Ethical life, as Hegel understands it in the Philosophy of Right, is ‘the
concept of freedom developed into the existing world’ (PR § 142
[p. 154]). As such, it comprises certain speciﬁc structures and institu-
tions that are required for, and promote, freedom. These include:
family life founded on love (not violence) (PR § 158); civil society in
which the right to own and exchange property, and the freedom to
pursue the occupation of one’s own choice, are guaranteed (PR §§ 182,
206); courts of law in which justice is upheld in public and on the
basis of published laws (PR §§ 215, 219); a public authority and cor-
porations that protect members of society and defend their rights 
(PR §§ 230, 252); and a state in which the monarchical, executive, and
legislative powers are distinguished and assemblies (or ‘Estates’)
responsible for legislation are established (PR §§ 273, 300). Such an
ethical community is founded on the principle that ‘a human being
counts as a human being in virtue of his humanity, not because he is a
Jew, Catholic, Protestant, German, Italian, etc.’ (PR § 209 Remark
[p. 198]); and the goal of this community is nothing less than the ‘hap-
piness of the citizens’ (PR § 265 Addition [p. 240]). Hegelian ethical
life is thus clearly a liberal community of freedom and right and is
very far from the sinister ‘collectivist’, ‘totalitarian’ society attributed
to Hegel by, for example, Popper.
Hegel’s aim in the Philosophy of Right is to show that a state with
these speciﬁc structures and institutions is required by the concept 
of freedom and so commands our allegiance (insofar as we are free
beings). Such a state, it should be noted, incorporates the more
abstract freedoms of choice and property-ownership. It also incorpor-
ates the moral freedom to act responsibly and pursue one’s own 
satisfaction and welfare. The moral right to recognize as valid only
what one sees as good is also incorporated into ethical life, but in the
context of the latter it takes on a subtly diﬀerent form.
The moral will claims for itself and its own conscience the right to
decide what counts as good. The ethical will, by contrast, holds the
laws and institutions of the state to be good objectively, that is, to have
Introduction
xxvii

‘being in and for themselves’ (PR § 144 [p. 154]). The ethical will is
similar to the moral will in that it, too, recognizes as valid only what
it understands to be good. (In that sense, it remains a conscientious
will.) Unlike the moral will, however, the ethical will does not decide
by itself what counts as good, but rather accepts the objective good-
ness of the institutions in which it lives. (It is thus what Hegel calls
‘true conscience’, as opposed to mere formal, moral conscience [PR
§ 137 (p. 132)].) The ethical will accepts the authority of laws and
institutions because (as Hegel puts it) the subject ‘bears witness to
them as to its own essence’ (PR § 147 [p. 155]). In other words, the eth-
ical will sees in them the embodiment of, and necessary conditions
of, its own freedom. Such a will knows that the laws and institutions
of the free state do not inhibit or threaten the individual, but rather
provide the context within which alone individuals can ﬂourish.
The ethical will’s recognition and acceptance of laws and institu-
tions is expressed in the trust it has in them (or, indeed, in the rela-
tion it enjoys with them that is ‘closer to identity than even the
relation of faith or trust’, PR §§ 147, 268 [pp. 155, 240]). The moral
will puts its trust in nothing but its own conscience; the ethical will,
by contrast, trusts that the institutional world it inhabits is one of
freedom and well-being. As such, it is much more at home in the
world than the moral will and much less concerned to force the 
world to conform to its own demands. Precisely because it puts its
trust in laws and institutions, the ethical individual is prepared to
‘follow the well-known and explicit rules of his own situation’ (PR
§ 150 Remark [p. 157]) in a way that the moral will is not. It must be
remembered, however, that ethical individuals do not do this out 
of blindness: they follow such rules because they see in them the 
conditions of their own freedom (rather than the source of inauthen-
ticity). Such trust is appropriate, therefore, only when the institu-
tions are indeed ethical in Hegel’s sense and promote freedom and
right, rather than tyranny and oppression. In states that are not truly
ethical and free (such as the French state during the revolutionary
Terror), trust in government will be inappropriate and, indeed,
impossible. In such states, Hegel notes, ‘suspicion’—rather than
trust—‘is in the ascendant’.28
Introduction
xxviii
28 G. W. F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, trans. J. Sibree (New York: Dover
Publications, 1956), 450.

In Hegel’s view, freedom must take the form of ethical life with 
its speciﬁc institutions, as well as the accompanying trust in those
institutions. If the institutions in which we live are corrupt and
threaten our security and well-being, not only are we denied our
freedom but ‘the footing of the state itself is insecure’ (PR § 265
Addition [p. 240]). Equally, however, if we are constantly suspicious
of and hostile to well-functioning institutions (and one another),
there can be no freedom either: because an essential ingredient of
freedom is the ‘habit of feeling safe’ in the institutions of public life
(PR § 268 Addition [p. 241]).
This does not mean, by the way, that a free state is one in which
nothing is debated or questioned. Far from it. Hegel sees it as the
distinctive function of the legislative assemblies to provide a public
space for ‘knowledge, deliberations, and decisions concerning uni-
versal matters’ (PR § 314 [p. 298]); he also acknowledges that public
debates are carried on outside those assemblies and that public opin-
ion is a ‘great power’ in such debates. Indeed, debate and discussion
are so important in modern states that ‘what is to be authoritative
nowadays’ derives its authority above all from ‘insight and argument’
(PR § 316 Addition [p. 299]). Hegel’s point, however, is that such
public discussion itself presupposes a basic trust in the institutions of
the state and in one another. In other words, what makes it possible
for us to live together and discuss things freely and openly with one
another is ‘the fundamental sense of order which everyone possesses’
(PR § 268 Addition [p. 241]).
Does everyone today enjoy the beneﬁts of free and orderly ethical
life? No; it is obvious that not every state in our world, or Hegel’s, is
fully free and ethical. Hegel believed, however, that the basic ele-
ments of the ethical state were to be found in certain modern states,
such as Britain, France, the Netherlands, and (to a degree) Prussia
(though no single modern state mentioned by Hegel exactly matches
the state of the Philosophy of Right). To the extent that the elements
of ethical life are—or were—realized in at least some modern states,
Hegel can claim that ‘what is rational is actual; and what is actual is
rational’ (PR Preface, p. 14). We should not forget, however, that
many states in the post-Revolutionary world are far from rational and
free, and that even rational, ethical states are not rational and ethical
in every single respect: ‘the state is no ideal work of art; it stands on
earth and so in the sphere of caprice, chance, and error, and bad
Introduction
xxix

behaviour may disﬁgure it in many respects’ (PR § 258 Addition
[p. 234]). One should also recall that ethical life, like the other forms
of freedom Hegel considers, is subject to its own dialectic.
After the family, but prior to the derivation of the state proper,
Hegel examines ‘civil society’. This is the sphere of economic free-
dom and activity in which individuals work and cooperate to produce
the goods to meet their needs and satisfy their desires. Such eco-
nomic freedom undermines itself dialectically because it leads to the
emergence not only of great wealth, but also of poverty. This is pri-
marily due, Hegel argues, to the fact that a society geared towards
maximizing the free production and exchange of goods inevitably
ends up producing more than it can consume. Overproduction then
makes it necessary for workers to be laid oﬀand this plunges people
into poverty (PR § 245). Poverty, however, is not just a matter of
material deprivation. Hegel’s great insight is that it also involves a
profound sense of alienation from society. This in turn can lead to
the creation of a ‘rabble’ [Pöbel] animated by ‘an inner indignation
against the rich, against society, against the government, etc.’ (PR
§ 244 Addition [p. 221]).
Some commentators believe that Hegel oﬀers no solution to the
problem of poverty.29 Yet this is not in fact the case. Hegel does,
indeed, think that certain courses of action—including providing
charity or ‘welfare’ to the poor, creating new opportunities for work,
exporting the excess goods, or sending people to overseas colonies—
will only be partially successful. He clearly suggests, however, that
the way to avoid overproduction—and, therefore, poverty—is to
preserve the institutions called ‘corporations’. These are not individ-
ual companies, but guild-like associations of traders and manufac-
turers. They were abolished in France during the Revolution, but
Hegel thinks that they are essential elements in a truly free society.
Their role is twofold: ﬁrst, to foster an explicit concern for the wel-
fare of others in the same trade, and second, to regulate—and, if
necessary, limit—the production of goods (PR § 252). In this way,
economic activity becomes genuinely cooperative and overproduc-
tion is avoided. Poverty thus ceases to be a necessary consequence of
free economic activity.
Introduction
xxx
29 See, e.g. Shlomo Avineri, Hegel’s Theory of the Modern State (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1972), 153.

Introduction
xxxi
In this respect Hegel diﬀers noticeably from Karl Marx, who is
otherwise deeply indebted to him. For Marx, capitalist economic
activity necessarily leads to alienation and poverty, because of the
nature of wage labour. In capitalism goods are freely produced and
exchanged for one another. Labour is also exchanged for a wage.
This, however, turns human labour into a commodity that can be
bought and sold like anything else. Furthermore, once a worker’s
labour has been sold to an employer, it can be exploited by the latter
for his own, rather than the worker’s, beneﬁt. In this way, Marx
argues, the system of wage labour necessarily alienates workers from
their own labour and its products. This system, in Marx’s view, cannot
be reformed or redeemed. If human alienation is to be overcome,
therefore, the only alternative is the revolutionary restructuring of
the economy. The private ownership of the means of production
must be abolished and factories taken into public hands. Private indi-
viduals will thus no longer be able to buy the labour of others for a
wage and exploit it. Indeed, under communism not only will the
exchange of labour for a wage disappear, but all exchange of goods
for money will be abolished. Individuals will produce what they can,
freely and generously, and take what they need, without insisting on
an equal exchange of one for the other. As Marx famously puts it, the
principle of communist society will be ‘from each according to his
ability, to each according to his needs’.30
Marx likes to think of himself as more of a ‘materialist’ and less of
an ‘idealist’ than Hegel. As we have seen, however, Hegel under-
stands just as well as Marx does that human freedom takes the mater-
ial form of economic activity and labour. He is also just as aware as
Marx is of the problem of poverty and alienation in civil society. The
real diﬀerence between the two thinkers is this: Hegel believes that
an economy based on the free production and exchange of goods and
labour can be reformed so that it does not necessarily generate poverty,
whereas Marx does not. For Hegel there is nothing about being a pri-
vate employer that requires such employers to exploit their workers
and proﬁt excessively from the latter’s labour: it all depends on their
attitude of mind. The ruthless exploitation of workers can, therefore,
be avoided—and with it alienation and poverty—if members of a
30 David McLellan (ed.), Karl Marx. Selected Writings (1977; Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2000), 615 [Critique of the Gotha Programme].

trade work together towards a common end, namely, their common
welfare. This happens, Hegel argues, when traders and workers are
organized into corporations (and when they are informed by a sense
of common citizenship as members of the state). Poverty is to be
avoided, therefore, not by social and economic revolution, but by fos-
tering an explicitly ethical concern for one another among producers
and workers through membership of a corporation (and the state).
In his lectures Hegel is reported as saying that ‘the nature of evil
is that human beings may will it but need not’ (PR § 139 Addition
[p. 138]). The same is true of crime and poverty. If the sphere of free-
dom with which each is associated is taken by itself, then each arises
necessarily; it does not arise necessarily, however, if the respective
sphere is incorporated into a higher one. If abstract right is set in the
context of moral freedom, moral freedom set in the context of ethi-
cal freedom, and civil society set in the context of the corporations
and the rational state, then crime, evil, and poverty will no longer be
structural necessities (though due to the contingencies of life—its
‘caprice, chance, and error’—they will remain possibilities).
Towards the end of the Philosophy of Right Hegel points to one last
dialectic suﬀered by objective freedom: the state, which is the most
concrete embodiment of freedom, always faces the danger of war. In
Hegel’s view, no world state or federation of states would have the
authority to resolve disputes between states, in the way that the state
has the authority and power to resolve disputes between its citizens.
Consequently, ‘if states disagree and their particular wills cannot be
harmonized, the matter can only be settled by war’ (PR § 334 [p. 313]).
This is not to say that war is absolutely inevitable (let alone desirable):
through agreement, states can avoid it. War remains, however, more
than just a contingent possibility (as poverty is within a genuinely
free and rational state). War remains a structural—and therefore 
necessary—possibility, since its possibility is built into the very fabric
of the unregulated relations between sovereign states. The necessary
possibility of war thus reveals the essential fragility of freedom in the
state—a fragility of which Hegel had been made personally aware in
Jena in 1806.
In the concluding paragraphs of the Philosophy of Right Hegel
notes that freedom and the state have a common history. This history
of human freedom is what Hegel is referring to when he talks of the
‘actualization of the universal spirit’ (PR § 342 [p. 316]) or of the
Introduction
xxxii

‘activity of the world-spirit’ (PR § 344 [p. 317]). The world-spirit,
therefore, is not some cosmic consciousness beyond our own that
uses us for its own ends; it is simply humanity itself coming to an
ever clearer understanding of its own freedom and transforming the
social and political world in the process.
The stages of the historical development of freedom do not match
exactly the stages in the logical development of the concept of free-
dom that we have been tracing: in history, for example, the state and
the family both precede abstract right and morality. The history of
freedom culminates, however, in a group of modern—post-
Reformation, Western European—states in which the elements of
true freedom described in the Philosophy of Right are to be found. As
noted above, not every state today is a free and rational one.
Nonetheless, in Hegel’s view, it is in modernity (rather than ancient
Greece or Rome) that true freedom in the state is—more or less
imperfectly—realized. In at least parts of the modern world, there-
fore, the state is more or less as it should be. The Philosophy of Right
thus provides an account of both the free state and the genuinely
modern state, since the two are one and the same.
Introduction
xxxiii

EXCERPTS FROM 
T. M. KNOX’S FOREWORD
The original edition of T. M. Knox’s translation of the Philosophy of 
Right contained a Translator’s Foreword in which Knox discussed the
diﬃculties involved in translating Hegel’s sometimes idiosyncratic
German. Parts of that foreword are now outdated, but Knox’s remarks on
the meaning of certain key Hegelian terms, such as ‘concept’ and ‘Idea’,
are still of great value. What follows here are edited excerpts from Knox’s
Foreword.
(i) The thought [Gedanke] of a thing.
Philosophy is thinking, the thinking of the universal. The product 
of thinking is a thought, and this, viewed objectively, we call the
‘universal’. But we know that the universal in this sense is abstract
and diﬀerent from the particular. The universal is a form, and its
content, the particular, stands contrasted with it.
Now if we go no further than the thought of a thing, than this
abstract universal, we remain at the level of the understanding
[Verstand], the level of reﬂection. The understanding is abstract or
formal thinking, the thinking characteristic of the mathematical and
empirical sciences or of formal logic, as well as of those philosophies
which adhere to scientiﬁc method instead of abandoning it in favour
of reason [Vernunft] and the philosophical method of the concept
[Begriﬀ].
(ii) The concept.
The defect of the understanding is that while it correctly distin-
guishes between form and content, essential and inessential, univer-
sal and particular, it fails to synthesize these opposites. Held apart
from one another, however, each of these opposites becomes an
abstraction, and the living whole of reality has not been explained but
explained away and killed by being so analysed into its constituents.
What the understanding fails to recognize is that a ‘thought’ is not
something empty or abstract; it is a determinant, a determinant of
itself. The essence of thought is its concreteness, and the concrete
thought is what Hegel calls the concept. When the thought of a thing

is handled philosophically instead of scientiﬁcally, it is seen to be
inherently concrete, i.e. not a mere abstract form, but possessed of a
content which it has given to itself. In a sense it is right enough to say
that philosophy deals with abstractions, with thoughts abstracted from
the sense-perceptions which are sometimes called ‘concrete’; but in
another sense this is quite false, because when the sensuous content 
is separated from its universal form, it also becomes an abstraction.
Philosophy has to do not with these two abstractions, held apart from
one another, but with their concrete synthesis, the concept. Its con-
stituents are not self-subsistent entities, which is what the understand-
ing takes them to be, but only ‘moments’ in an organic whole.
The concept is the thought in so far as the thought determines
itself and gives itself a content; it is the thought in its vivacity and
activity. Again, the concept is the universal which particularizes
itself, the thought which actively creates and engenders itself. Hence
it is not a bare form for a content; it forms itself, gives itself a content
and determines itself to be the form. What is meant by ‘concrete’ is
the thought which does not remain empty but which is self-
determining and self-particularizing.
The concept is thus the inward living principle of all reality. (The
background of Hegel’s thought is theological, and the ‘concept’ is 
his philosophical equivalent for the wisdom and so for the creative
power of God.) It follows that it is one and the same concept whose
self-determining activity the philosopher studies whether in logic, or
nature, or human institutions.
(iii) The Idea [Idee].
(This word is spelt throughout the translation with a capital letter in
order to distinguish it from ‘idea’ [Vorstellung], i.e. from ‘whatsoever
is the object of the understanding’.)
Just as the thought of a thing, when viewed concretely, is the con-
cept, so the concept, viewed concretely (i.e. in its truth, in its full
development, and so in synthesis with the content which it gives to
itself), is the Idea. The Idea is the concept in so far as the concept
gives reality and existence to itself. To do this, the concept must
determine itself, and the determination is nothing external, but is the
concept itself, i.e. it is a self-determination. The Idea, or reason, or
truth, is the concept become concrete, the unity of subject and
object, of form and content.
Excerpts from T. M. Knox’s Foreword
xxxv

(iv) Development.
Since the concept determines itself, it is alive and active, and its life
is a development. The nature of mind [or spirit] [Geist] is an imma-
nent restless process; mind is self-productive and exists in and
through this self-production. Development is from implicit [an sich,
potentia, du´namiV] to explicit [ für sich, actus, e’ne´rgeia]. To illustrate
this process, Hegel frequently uses the analogy of organic growth.
The tree—trunk, branches, and fruit—is present in germ in the
seed. The seed is the whole life of the tree in its ‘immediacy’, and
that life becomes explicit as its immediacy is mediated through the
diﬀerent stages in the tree’s history. Hence as the tree grows, all that
happens is that what is implicit becomes explicit; but the develop-
ment is a genuine development and change, because trunk, branches,
etc., do not exist realiter in the seed—even a microscope will not
detect them there. As the seed grows, it diﬀerentiates itself into
trunk, branches, leaves, etc., but when its growth is complete, it is a
concrete unity (the tree as a whole) and not, as the seed was, an
abstract unity, because it is now a diﬀerentiated and not an immedi-
ate, undeveloped, immature, unity.
It is a development of this sort which we study in the Philosophy of
Right, and the process is always from immediate, undiﬀerentiated,
unity (i.e. bare abstract universality), through diﬀerence and particu-
larization, to the concrete unity and synthesis of universal and par-
ticular, subject and object, form and content. This synthesis is
individuality or concrete universality, or the concept in its truth as
Idea. Since the process of its life is a single process, the determin-
ations or particularizations which the concept gives to itself are an
organically connected series, and they follow one another in stages of
gradually increasing concreteness. The later stages cancel the earlier
ones, and yet at the same time the earlier ones are absorbed within
the later as moments or elements within them. Hence, although ‘eth-
ical life’ supersedes ‘abstract right’ and ‘morality’, both of these are
absorbed into ethical life as its constituents, just as family and civil
society are both superseded by and incorporated in the state.
Excerpts from T. M. Knox’s Foreword
xxxvi

NOTE ON THE TEXT AND TRANSLATION
Hegel’s Outlines of the Philosophy of Right is an immensely rich
study of freedom in its various forms. Readers should keep in mind,
however, that what they are studying is not a book intended for inde-
pendent scrutiny, but a handbook produced to accompany Hegel’s
lectures. Hegel included several paragraphs on the philosophy of
right in all three editions of his Encyclopaedia, which was published
to accompany lectures on his ‘encyclopaedic’ system as a whole. In
October 1820, however, he published the Philosophy of Right for use
in lectures devoted speciﬁcally to that topic.
The main paragraphs and the indented ‘Remarks’ in the Philosophy
of Right were written by Hegel himself. The ‘Additions’, on the other
hand, were compiled by Hegel’s student Eduard Gans, for the ﬁrst
posthumous edition of Hegel’s works (published in 1833). Gans drew
on Hegel’s own notes on the philosophy of right, as well as on tran-
scripts of Hegel’s lectures by two other students, Heinrich Gustav
Hotho (from Winter 1822–3) and Karl Gustav von Griesheim (from
Winter 1824–5). (These transcripts are published in K.-H. Ilting
(ed.), G. W. F. Hegel. Vorlesungen über Rechtsphilosophie, 1818–1831,
4 vols. (Stuttgart–Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1973– ),
vols. 3 and 4.) Since the Additions were not written by Hegel him-
self, they should be treated with some care. Nonetheless, they are a
valuable resource for understanding Hegel’s views and have been
retained in this new edition for that reason.
The text reproduced here is the translation originally published in
Hegel’s Philosophy of Right, trans. T. M. Knox (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1952). (This was reissued as a paperback by Oxford University
Press in 1967.) For this new edition numerous minor alterations have
been made (primarily in the interests of greater accuracy), but the
substance of the translation has not been changed. The Additions
have been placed immediately after the Paragraphs (abbreviated ‘§’)
or Remarks to which they apply (rather than, as in Knox’s edition, at
the end of the book). Indented text has been used for the Remarks
(see p. 17 below). Square brackets in the text of the Philosophy of
Right indicate an insertion by Knox or the present editor; round
brackets indicate an insertion by Hegel. Asterisks in the text refer to

the Explanatory Notes at the end of the book (pp. 324 ﬀ.). Footnotes,
unless speciﬁcally attributed to Hegel, are by Knox or the present
editor (the latter are indicated by [S.H.]). The number of Knox’s
original notes has been reduced, but new notes have also been added
by the present editor. Many of Knox’s notes have been extensively
revised.
Note on the Text and Translation
xxxviii

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Collected Works of Hegel
Moldenhauer, Eva, and Michel, Karl Markus (eds.), G. W. F. Hegel.
Werke, 20 vols. and Index (Frankfurt-am-Main: Suhrkamp Verlag,
1969–).
Translations of Hegel’s Outlines of the Philosophy of Right
Dyde, S. W. (trans.), Hegel’s Philosophy of Right (London: George Bell &
Sons, 1896).
Knox, T. M. (trans.), Hegel’s Philosophy of Right (1952; Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1967).
White, Alan, (trans.), G. W. F. Hegel: The Philosophy of Right
(Newburyport, Mass.: Focus Publishing, 2002).
Wood, Allen W. (ed.), and Nisbet, H. B. (trans.), G. W. F. Hegel: Elements
of the Philosophy of Right (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1991).
Transcripts of Hegel’s Lectures on the Philosophy of Right
Angehrn, Emil, Bondeli, Martin, and Seelman, Hoo Nam (eds.), 
G. W. F. Hegel. Vorlesungen über die Philosophie des Rechts. Berlin
1819/1820. Nachgeschrieben von Johann Rudolf Ringier (Hamburg: Felix
Meiner, 2000).
Becker, C., et al. (eds.), G. W. F. Hegel. Vorlesungen über Naturrecht und
Staatswissenschaft. Heidelberg 1817/18 mit Nachträgen aus der Vorlesung
1818/19. Nachgeschrieben von P. Wannenmann (Hamburg: Felix
Meiner, 1983).
Henrich, Dieter (ed.), G. W. F. Hegel. Philosophie des Rechts. Die Vorlesung
von 1819/20 in einer Nachschrift (Frankfurt-am-Main: Suhrkamp
Verlag, 1983).
Hoppe, Hansgeorg (ed.), G. W. F. Hegel. Die Philosophie des Rechts.
Vorlesung von 1821/22 (Frankfurt-am-Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 2005).
Ilting, K.-H. (ed.), G. W. F. Hegel. Vorlesungen über Rechtsphilosophie,
1818–1831, 4 vols. (Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog,
1973–).
Schilbach, Erich (ed.), G. W. F. Hegel. Philosophie des Rechts. Nachschrift
der Vorlesung von 1822/23 von Karl Wilhelm Ludwig Heyse (Frankfurt-
am-Main: Peter Lang, 1999).
Stewart, J. Michael, and Hodgson, Peter C. (trans.), G. W. F. Hegel: Lectures
on Natural Right and Political Science. The First Philosophy of Right.

Heidelberg 1817–1818 with Additions from the Lectures of 1818–1819.
Transcribed by Peter Wannenmann (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1995).
Letters and Other Works by Hegel
Behler, Ernst (ed.), G. W. F. Hegel: Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences
in Outline [1817] and Critical Writings (New York: Continuum, 1990).
Butler, Clark, and Seiler, Christiane (trans.), Hegel: The Letters
(Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 1984).
Dickey, Laurence, and Nisbet, H. B. (eds.), G. W. F. Hegel: Political
Writings (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
Geraets, T. F., Suchting, W. A., and Harris, H. S. (trans.), G. W. F. Hegel:
The Encyclopaedia Logic. Part 1 of the Encyclopaedia of Philosophical
Sciences with the Zusätze (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett Publishing, 1991).
Hoﬀmeister, Johannes (ed.), Briefe von und an Hegel, 4 vols. (1952–4;
Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1961).
—— (ed.), Dokumente zu Hegels Entwicklung (1936; Stuttgart-Bad
Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1974).
Houlgate, Stephen (ed.), The Hegel Reader (Oxford: Blackwell, 1998).
Knox, T. M. (trans.), Hegel’s Political Writings (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1964).
Miller, A. V. (trans.), Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature: Being Part Two of the
Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences (1830) (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1970).
—— (trans.), Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1977).
—— (trans.), Hegel’s Science of Logic (Amherst, NY: Humanity Books,
1999).
Sibree, J. (trans.), G. W. F. Hegel: The Philosophy of History (New York:
Dover Publications, 1956).
Wallace, W., and Miller, A. V. (trans.), Hegel’s Philosophy of Mind: Being
Part Three of the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences (1830)
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971).
Books on Hegel’s Life and/or his Philosophy as a Whole
Beiser, Frederick, Hegel (London: Routledge, 2005).
Houlgate, Stephen, An Introduction to Hegel: Freedom, Truth and History
(1991; Oxford: Blackwell, 2005).
Jaeschke, Walter, Hegel-Handbuch. Leben-Werk-Schule (Stuttgart:
J. B. Metzler, 2003).
Pinkard, Terry, Hegel: A Biography (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2000).
Plant, Raymond, Hegel: An Introduction (1972; Oxford: Blackwell, 1983).
Select Bibliography
xl

Taylor, Charles, Hegel (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975).
Books on Hegel’s Outlines of the Philosophy of Right
Avineri, Shlomo, Hegel’s Theory of the Modern State (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1972).
Brooks, Thom, Hegel’s Political Philosophy: A Systematic Reading of the
Philosophy of Right (Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh Press, 2007).
Hardimon, Michael O., Hegel’s Social Philosophy: The Project of
Reconciliation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994).
Knowles, Dudley, Hegel and the Philosophy of Right (London: Routledge,
2002).
Neuhouser, Frederick, Foundations of Hegel’s Social Theory: Actualising
Freedom (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000).
Patten, Alan, Hegel’s Idea of Freedom (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1999).
Pelczynski, Z. A. (ed.), Hegel’s Political Philosophy: Problems and
Perspectives (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971).
—— (ed.), The State and Civil Society: Studies in Hegel’s Political
Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984).
Peperzak, Adriaan T., Modern Freedom: Hegel’s Legal, Moral, and Political
Philosophy (Dordrecht and Boston: Kluwer, 2001).
Pippin, Robert B., and Höffe, Otfried (eds.), and Walker, Nicholas
(trans.), Hegel on Ethics and Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2004).
Riedel, Manfred (ed.), Materialien zu Hegels Rechtsphilosophie, 2 vols.
(Frankfurt-am-Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1975).
Ritter, Joachim, Hegel und die Französische Revolution (Frankfurt-am-
Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1965).
Siep, Ludwig (ed.), G. W. F. Hegel. Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts
(Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1997).
Waszek, Norbert, The Scottish Enlightenment and Hegel’s Account of ‘Civil
Society’ (Dordrecht and Boston: Kluwer, 1988).
Wood, Allen W., Hegel’s Ethical Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1990).
Williams, Robert R. (ed.), Beyond Liberalism and Communitarianism:
Studies in Hegel’s Philosophy of Right (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2001).
Williams, Robert R., Hegel’s Ethics of Recognition (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1997).
Other Works
Clark, Christopher, Iron Kingdom: The Rise and Downfall of Prussia,
1600–1947 (London: Allen Lane, 2006).
Select Bibliography
xli

Flenley, Ralph, Modern German History (1953; London: J. M. Dent &
Sons, 1964).
Fukuyama, Francis,
The End of History and the Last Man
(Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1992).
McLellan, David (ed.), Karl Marx: Selected Writings (1977; Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2000).
Popper, Karl, The Open Society and its Enemies, 2 vols. (1945; London:
Routledge, 1966).
Rawls, John, Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000).
Sagarra, Eda, An Introduction to Nineteenth Century Germany (Harlow:
Longman, 1980).
Further Reading in Oxford World’s Classics
Burke, Edmund, Reﬂections on the Revolution in France, ed. L. G. Mitchell.
Engels, Friedrich, The Condition of the Working Class in England, ed.
David McLellan.
Marx, Karl, Capital, ed. David McLellan.
—— and Engels, Friedrich, The Communist Manifesto, ed. David
McLellan.
Mill, John Stuart, On Liberty and Other Essays, ed. John Gray.
Paine, Thomas, Rights of Man, Common Sense, and other Political Writings,
ed. Mark Philp.
Rousseau, J.-J., Discourse on Political Economy and The Social Contract,
trans. Christopher Betts.
—— Discourse on the Origin of Inequality, trans. Franklin Philip, ed.
Patrick Coleman.
Smith, Adam, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations, ed. Kathryn Sunderland.
Select Bibliography
xlii

A CHRONOLOGY OF G. W. F. HEGEL
1770 27 August: Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel born in Stuttgart.
1776 American Declaration of Independence.
1781 Immanuel Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason published.
1783 20 September: Hegel’s mother dies.
1785 Hegel begins writing a diary, partly in Latin. Kant’s Groundwork for
the Metaphysics of Morals published.
1788 Kant’s Critique of Practical Reason published. October: Hegel begins
studies in theology and philosophy at the Tübinger Stift. He devel-
ops friendship with Friedrich Hölderlin and also with Friedrich
Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling (after the latter enters the Stift in
1790).
1789 14 July: the storming of the Bastille in Paris marks the beginning of
the French Revolution.
1790 Kant’s Critique of Judgement published.
1793 Louis XVI guillotined. Hegel graduates from the Tübinger Stift.
Autumn: he becomes house tutor with the family of Captain Karl
Friedrich von Steiger in Bern.
1794 Fall of Robespierre.
1796 Napoleon’s Italian campaign. First part of Johann Gottlieb Fichte’s
Foundations of Natural Right published.
1797 January: Hegel moves to Frankfurt-am-Main to take up a tutorship
with the family Gogel. Second part of Fichte’s Foundations of
Natural Right published.
1798 Hegel works on Kant’s Metaphysics of Morals (published the previ-
ous year). Napoleon’s Egyptian campaign. Fichte’s System of Ethics
published.
1799 14 January: Hegel’s father dies. Hegel completes the ﬁrst draft of his
manuscript on the ‘German Constitution’.
1801 January: Hegel joins Schelling at the University of Jena and starts
work as an unsalaried lecturer.
1802 Hegel lectures on natural law. He begins publication of the Critical
Journal of Philosophy with Schelling. Articles by Hegel published in
the journal include the essay ‘On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating
Natural Law’.

Chronology
xliv
1804 12 February: Kant dies. 2 December: Napoleon crowns himself
emperor.
1806 July: Hegel draws his ﬁrst regular stipend at Jena. October: He com-
pletes manuscript of the Phenomenology of Spirit. He sees Napoleon
riding out of the city on reconnaissance before the battle of Jena.
1807 Phenomenology of Spirit published. 5 February: Christiana
Burckhardt (née Fischer), Hegel’s landlady and housekeeper in Jena,
gives birth to his illegitimate son, Ludwig Fischer. (Ludwig is raised
in Jena by the sisters-in-law of Hegel’s friend, the publisher Karl
Friedrich Frommann, until he is taken into Hegel’s own home in
1817.) March: Hegel moves to Bamberg to become editor of a news-
paper. Autumn: period of reform begins in Prussia, initially under
Freiherr vom Stein, then under Karl von Hardenberg.
1808 November: Hegel moves to Nuremberg to become rector of the
Aegidiengymnasium.
1811 15 September: Hegel marries Marie von Tucher (b. 1791).
1812 Napoleon’s Russian campaign. Volume 1 of the Science of Logic (the
Doctrine of Being) published. 27 June: Hegel’s daughter, Susanna,
born. She dies on 8 August.
1813 7 June: Hegel’s son, Karl, born. Volume 2 of the Science of Logic (the
Doctrine of Essence) published. Søren Kierkegaard, Richard
Wagner, and Giuseppe Verdi born.
1814 29 January: Fichte dies. 25 September: Hegel’s son, Immanuel, born.
1815 Napoleon defeated at Waterloo.
1816 Volume 3 of the Science of Logic (the Doctrine of the Concept) pub-
lished. Hegel becomes Professor of Philosophy at the University of
Heidelberg, where he lectures on natural law in 1817–18.
1817 First edition of the Encyclopaedia published. Hegel writes manu-
script on the ‘Proceedings of the Estates Assembly in the Kingdom
of Württemberg, 1815–1816’.
1818 5 May: Karl Marx born in Trier. Hegel is recruited by the reform-
minded Prussian Minister, Altenstein, to become Professor of
Philosophy at the University of Berlin, where he remains until his
death.
1819 March: Murder of August von Kotzebue. August/September: the
Karlsbad Decrees are passed authorizing press censorship and closer
surveillance of universities in Germany.
1820 October: Outlines of the Philosophy of Right published (dated 1821).
1821 5 May: Napoleon dies.

Chronology
xlv
1822 Hegel lectures for the ﬁrst time on the philosophy of history.
1826 Hegel founds the Yearbooks for Scientiﬁc Criticism.
1827 Second edition of the Encyclopaedia published.
1830 Hegel is rector of the University of Berlin. Third edition of the
Encyclopaedia published. July Revolution in France.
1831 January: Hegel awarded Red Eagle, Third Class, by Friedrich
Wilhelm III of Prussia. April: he publishes ﬁrst three parts of his
essay ‘On the English Reform Bill’. 28 August: Ludwig Fischer dies
in the East Indies. 14 November: Hegel dies in Berlin (probably of 
a chronic gastrointestinal disease) without learning of his son’s fate.
24 December: a contract is signed by Hegel’s wife, students, and
friends for the publication of his collected works.
1832 22 March: Goethe dies.
1835–6 David Friedrich Strauß’s Life of Jesus is published, marking the
beginning of a conscious split between Left, Right, and Middle
Hegelians.
1841 Schelling called to the University of Berlin by Friedrich Wilhelm IV
to counter the inﬂuence of Hegelianism. Ludwig Feuerbach’s The
Essence of Christianity published.
1848 Marx and Engels publish the Communist Manifesto.
1857 Rudolf Haym publishes Hegel and his Time, in which he accuses
Hegel of embodying the spirit of the Prussian restoration.

This page intentionally left blank 

OUTLINES OF THE
PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT

This page intentionally left blank 

PREFACE
The immediate inducement to publish this manual is the need to put
into the hands of my audience a textbook for the lectures on the phil-
osophy of right which I deliver in the course of my professional
duties. This compendium is an enlarged and in particular a more sys-
tematic exposition of the same fundamental concepts which, in rela-
tion to this part of philosophy, are already contained in a book of
mine designed previously for my lectures—the Encyclopaedia of the
Philosophical Sciences (Heidelberg, 1817).*
The fact, however, that this manual was to appear in print, and 
so to come before a wider public, induced me to amplify here a 
good many of the Remarks* which were primarily meant in a brief
compass to indicate ideas related to my argument or at variance with
it, further inferences from it, and the like, i.e. material which would
receive its requisite elucidation in my lectures. The object of ampli-
fying them here was to clarify occasionally the more abstract parts of
the text and to take a more comprehensive look at current ideas
widely disseminated at the present time. Hence the result has been a
number of Remarks rather more extensive than is usually consistent
with the style and aim of a compendium. A proper compendium,
however, has as its subject-matter what is taken to be the closed circle
of a science; and what is appropriate in it, except perhaps for a small
addition here and there, is principally the assembly and arrangement
of the essential factors in a content which has long been familiar and
accepted, just as the form in which it is arranged has its rules and
conventions which have long been settled. Philosophical manuals are
not now expected to conform to such a pattern, if only because it is
supposed that what philosophy puts together is a work as ephemeral
as Penelope’s web,* one which must be begun afresh every day.
The primary diﬀerence between this manual and an ordinary 
compendium certainly lies in the method which constitutes its guid-
ing principle. But in this book I presuppose that philosophy’s mode
of progression from one topic to another and its mode of scientiﬁc
proof—this whole speculative way of knowing—is essentially distinct
from any other way of knowing. It is only insight into the necessity
of such a diﬀerence that can rescue philosophy from the shameful

decay in which it is immersed at the present time. It is true that the
forms and rules of the old logic, of deﬁnition, classiﬁcation, and syl-
logism, which include the rules governing knowledge that is attainable
by the understanding [Verstandeserkenntnis], have become recognized
as inadequate for speculative science; or rather their inadequacy has
not been recognized, it has only been felt. These rules have then been
thrown oﬀas if they were mere fetters in order to allow the heart, the
imagination, and contingent intuition to say what they pleased. Yet
since reﬂection and relations of thought must also enter the scene,
people relapse unconsciously into the very method of commonplace
deduction and argumentation [Räsonnement] that is despised.
Since I have fully expounded the nature of speculative knowing 
in my Science of Logic,* in this manual I have only added an explana-
tory note here and there about procedure and method. In dealing
with a topic which is concrete and intrinsically of so varied a charac-
ter, I have omitted to bring out and demonstrate the chain of logical
argument in each and every detail. For one thing, to have done this
might have been regarded as superﬂuous where acquaintance with
philosophical method is presupposed; for another, it will be obvious
from the work itself that the whole, like the formation of its parts,
rests on the logical spirit [dem logischen Geiste]. It is also from this
point of view above all that I should like my book to be taken and
judged. What we have to do with here is [philosophical] science, and
in such science content is essentially bound up with form.
We may of course hear from those who seem to be taking the most
profound view that the form is something external and indiﬀerent to
the subject-matter, that the latter alone is important; further, the task
of a writer, especially a writer on philosophy, may be said to lie in the
discovery of truths (in the plural), the statement of truths, the dissem-
ination of truths and sound concepts. Yet if we consider how this task
is as a rule actually discharged, what we ﬁnd in the ﬁrst place is that
the same old stew is continually warmed up again and again and
served round to everybody. This task may well have the merit of
educating and stimulating people’s hearts; but it might better be
regarded as the superﬂuous labour of a busybody—‘for they have
Moses and the Prophets; let them hear them’.1 Above all, we have
ample opportunity to marvel at the pretentious tone recognizable 
in these busybodies when they talk as if the world had wanted for
Preface
4
1 Luke 16: 29.

Preface
5
nothing except their energetic dissemination of truths, or as if their
reheated stew were productive of new and unheard-of truths and was
to be specially taken to heart before everything else ‘today’ and every
day. On the other hand, we ﬁnd that what are given out as truths of
this sort by one party are dislodged and brushed aside by truths of
just the same sort purveyed by other parties. If, therefore, in this
crush of truths, there is something neither new nor old but enduring,
how is this to be extracted from these reﬂections which oscillate
formlessly from this to that, how is it to be separated from them and
proved, if not by [philosophical] science?
However we look at it, the truth about right, ethical life, and the state
is as old as its recognition and formulation in public laws and in public
morality and religion. What more does this truth require, insofar as
the thinking mind [Geist] is not content to possess it in this manner
that is closest to us? It requires to be grasped in thought as well; the
content which is already rational in itself must win the form of ration-
ality, so that it may appear justiﬁed to free thinking. Such thinking
does not stop at the given, whether the given be supported by the
external positive authority of the state or agreement among people, or
by the authority of inward feeling and the heart and by the witness of
the spirit which immediately concurs with it. On the contrary,
thought which is free starts out from itself and thereupon demands to
know itself as united in its innermost being with the truth.
The unsophisticated heart takes the simple line of adhering with
trustful conviction to what is publicly accepted as true and then
building on this ﬁrm foundation its conduct and its set position in
life. Against this simple line of conduct there may at once be raised
the alleged diﬃculty of how it is possible, in an inﬁnite variety of
opinions, to distinguish and discover what is universally recognized
and valid. This perplexity may at ﬁrst sight be taken for a right and
genuine concern for the thing [Sache], but in fact those who boast of
this perplexity are in the position of not being able to see the wood
for the trees; the only perplexity and diﬃculty they are in is one of
their own making. Indeed, this perplexity and diﬃculty of theirs is
proof rather that they want something other than what is universally
recognized and valid, something other than the substance of right
and the ethical. If they had been serious about the latter, instead of
busying themselves with the vanity and particularity of opinions and
things, they would have clung to what is substantially right, namely

Preface
6
to the commands of ethical life and the state, and would have regu-
lated their lives in accordance with these.
A further diﬃculty arises, however, from the fact that human
beings think and try to ﬁnd in thinking both their freedom and the
basis of ethical life. But however lofty, however divine, the right of
thought may be, it is perverted into wrong if thinking counts as
thinking, and thinking knows itself to be free, only when it diverges
from what is universally recognized and valid and when it has discov-
ered how to invent for itself something particular.
At the present time, the idea that freedom of thought, and of spirit
[Geist] generally, evinces itself only in divergence from, indeed in
hostility to, what is publicly recognized, might seem to be most
ﬁrmly rooted in connection with the state; and it is for this reason
that a philosophy of the state might well seem essentially to have the
task of discovering and promulgating yet another theory, and a new
and distinctive one at that. In examining this idea and the activity in
conformity with it, we might suppose that no state or constitution
has ever existed in the world at all or is even in being at the present
time, but that now—and this ‘now’ lasts for ever—we have to start
all over again from the beginning, and that the ethical world has just
been waiting for such projects, investigations, and proofs as are
undertaken now. As far as nature is concerned, people grant that phil-
osophy must come to know it as it is, that the philosopher’s stone lies
concealed somewhere, somewhere within nature itself, that nature is
inherently rational, and that what knowledge has to investigate and
grasp in concepts is this actual reason present in it; not the forma-
tions and contingencies evident to the superﬁcial observer, but
nature’s eternal harmony, its harmony, however, in the sense of the
law and essence immanent within it. The ethical world, on the other
hand, the state (i.e. reason as it actualizes itself in the element of self-
consciousness), is not allowed to enjoy the good fortune which springs
from the fact that reason has come to be a force and power [Gewalt]
within that element and maintains itself and has its home there.
Addition: Laws are of two kinds—laws of nature and laws of right. The
laws of nature simply are what they are and are valid as they are; they are
not liable to wither away, though they can be infringed in individual cases.
To know the law of nature, we must learn to know nature itself, since its
laws are correct and it is only our ideas about them that can be false. The
measure of these laws is outside us; knowing them adds nothing to them

Preface
7
and does not assist their operation; our knowledge of them can expand, that
is all. Knowledge of right is in one way similar, but in another way not. We
learn to know its laws just as they exist; the citizen’s knowledge of them is
more or less of this sort, and the student of positive law [der positive Jurist]
equally stops at what is given. But the diﬀerence in the case of laws of right
is that they arouse the spirit of reﬂection, and their diversity at once draws
attention to the fact that they are not absolute. The laws of right
[Rechtsgesetze] are something posited [Gesetztes], something originated by
human beings. Between what is so originated and the voice within us there
may of necessity be a clash or agreement. The human being does not stop
short at the existent [Daseiendes], but claims to have in himself the measure
of what is right. He may be subjected to the compulsion and power of an
external authority, though never as he is to the necessity of nature, because
his inner self always tells him how things ought to be and he ﬁnds within
himself the conﬁrmation or denial of what passes as valid. In nature, the
highest truth is that there is a law at all; in the laws of right, the thing is not
valid simply because it exists; on the contrary, everyone demands that it
should comply with his own criterion. Here then an antagonism is possible
between what ought to be and what is, between right in and for itself [an
und für sich] which stands unaltered and the arbitrary determination of what
is to be recognized as right. A schism and a conﬂict of this sort is to be
found only in the territory of spirit, and because spirit’s privilege seems
therefore to lead to discontent and unhappiness, people are often thrown
back from the arbitrariness of life to the contemplation of nature and set
themselves to take nature as an example. But it is precisely in these clashes
between right in and for itself and what arbitrariness proclaims as right that
there lies the need to acquire a thorough knowledge of right. In right, the
human being must encounter his own reason; consequently, he must con-
sider the rationality of right, and this is the task of our science in contrast
with positive jurisprudence which often has to do only with contradic-
tions.* The world of today has in addition a more urgent need to acquire
this knowledge because, while amongst the ancients existing laws were still
respected and reverenced, nowadays the civilization of the age has taken a
new turn and thought has placed itself at the head of everything which is to
have validity. Theories [Theorien] are set over against what exists and are
meant to appear correct and necessary in and for themselves. From now on
there is a more special need for us to become acquainted with, and under-
stand, the thoughts of right. Since thought has risen to be the essential
form, we must try to grasp right too as thought. It seems to be opening wide
the door to contingent opinions to hold that thought is to be pre-eminent
over right; yet true thought is not an opinion about the thing but the con-
cept of the thing itself. The concept of the thing does not come our way by
nature. Anyone has ﬁngers and may take a brush and colours, but that does

Preface
8
not make him a painter. The same is true with thinking. The thought of
right is surely not the thought that everybody possesses at ﬁrst hand; on the
contrary, correct thinking is knowing and cognizing the thing, and our cog-
nition should therefore be scientiﬁc.
The spiritual universe is supposed rather to be left to the mercy of
contingency and caprice, to be God-forsaken, and the result is that,
according to this atheistic view [Atheismus] of the ethical world, truth
lies outside such a world, and at the same time, since even so reason
is supposed to be in it as well, truth becomes nothing but a problem
[Problema]. But it is this also that authorizes, indeed obliges, every
thinker to oﬀer his own solution—though not by searching for the
philosopher’s stone, for he is saved this search by our contemporary
philosophizing,* and everyone nowadays is assured that he has this
stone in his grasp just as he stands. Now admittedly it is the case that
those who live within the actuality of the state and ﬁnd satisfaction
there for their knowledge and volition (and of these there are many,
more in fact than think or know it, because ultimately this is the posi-
tion of everybody), or those at any rate who consciously ﬁnd their satis-
faction in the state, laugh at these initiatives and assurances and regard
them as an empty game, sometimes rather funny, sometimes rather
serious, now delightful, now dangerous. Thus this restless activity of
reﬂection and vanity, together with the reception and response it has
encountered, would be a thing on its own [eine Sache für sich], devel-
oping in itself in its own way, were it not that philosophy as such has
earned all kinds of scorn and discredit by its indulgence in this occu-
pation. The worst of these kinds of scorn is this, that, as I said just
now, everyone is convinced that he is in a position, just as he stands,
to know all about philosophy in general and to condemn it. No other
art or science is subjected to this last degree of scorn, to the supposi-
tion that we are all in immediate and complete possession of it.
In fact, what we have seen the philosophy of recent times* proclaim-
ing with the maximum of pretension about the state has really justiﬁed
anybody who wished to speak on such matters in this conviction that he
could just as easily do the same himself and so prove to himself that he
is in possession of philosophy. Besides, this self-styled ‘philosophy’ has
expressly stated that truth itself cannot be known, that that only is true
which each individual allows to rise out of his heart, emotion, and 
inspiration about ethical institutions, especially about the state, the gov-
ernment, and the constitution. In this connection what a lot of ﬂattery

Preface
9
has been talked, especially to the young! Certainly the young have lis-
tened to it willingly enough. ‘He giveth to his own in sleep’* has been
applied to science and hence every sleeper has numbered himself
among the elect, but the concepts he has acquired in sleep are them-
selves of course only the wares of sleep.
A ringleader of these hosts of superﬁciality, of these self-styled
‘philosophers’, Herr Fries,*2 did not blush, on a solemn public 
occasion* which has become notorious, to express the following ideas
in a speech on ‘The state and the constitution’: ‘In the people ruled
by a genuine communal spirit, life for the discharge of all public busi-
ness would come from below, from the people itself; living associ-
ations, indissolubly united by the holy chain of friendship, would be
dedicated to every single project of popular education and popular
service,’ and so on. This is the quintessence of shallow thinking: to
base philosophical science not on the development of thought and the
concept but on immediate perception and contingent imagination; to
take the rich inward articulation of ethical life, i.e. the state, the archi-
tectonic of its rationality—which, through determinate distinctions
between the circles of public life and their rights and through the
strict proportion in which every pillar, arch, and buttress is held
together, produces the strength of the whole out of the harmony of
the parts—to take this developed structure and let it dissolve in the
broth of ‘heart, friendship, and inspiration’. According to a view of
this kind, the ethical world (Epicurus,* holding a similar view, would
have said the ‘world as such’) should be given over—as in fact of
course it is not—to the subjective contingency of opinion and
caprice. By the simple household remedy of ascribing to feeling what
has been produced by the labour—stretching over many thousands
of years—of reason and its understanding, all the trouble of rational
insight and knowledge guided by the thinking concept is of course
saved. On this point, Goethe’s Mephistopheles—a good authority—
says something like this, a quotation I have used elsewhere* already:
‘Do but despise understanding and science, the highest of all human
gifts, and you have surrendered yourself to the devil and must surely
perish.’ The next thing is that such a view assumes even the guise of
piety, for this activity has used any and every expedient in its endeav-
our to give itself authority. With godliness and the Bible, however, it
2 Hegel’s note: I have borne witness before to the superﬁciality of his philosophy—see
Science of Logic (Nuremberg, 1812), Introduction, p. xvii [Miller trans., 52].

Preface
10
has arrogated to itself the highest of justiﬁcations for despising the
ethical order and the objectivity of law: for it is piety indeed to
envelop in the simpler intuition of feeling the truth which is articu-
lated in the world into an organic realm. If it is piety of the right sort,
however, it sheds the form of this [emotional] region as soon as it
leaves the inner life, enters upon the daylight of the Idea’s develop-
ment and revealed riches, and brings with it, out of its inner worship
of God, reverence for law and for a truth which is in and for itself and
which has been exalted above the subjective form of feeling.*
The particular form of bad conscience revealed by the type of elo-
quence in which such superﬁciality ﬂaunts itself may be brought to
your attention here; note above all that when it is at its most spiritless,
superﬁciality speaks most of spirit, when its talk is at its driest and
most dead [am totesten], its favourite words are ‘life’ and ‘enliven’, and
when it gives evidence of the pure selﬁshness of empty pride, the word
most on its lips is ‘people’ [Volk]. But the distinctive mark which it
carries on its brow is the hatred of law. Right and ethical life, and the
actual world of right and ethical life, are understood through thoughts;
through thoughts they are invested with a rational form, i.e. with uni-
versality and determinacy. This form is law; and this it is which the
feeling that reserves the right to do what it likes, the conscience that
places right in subjective conviction, has reason to regard as its chief
foe. The form of right as a duty and a law it feels as a dead, cold letter,
as a shackle; for it does not recognize itself in the law and so does not
recognize itself as free there, because law is the reason of the thing
[Vernunft der Sache], and reason refuses to allow feeling to bask in its
own particularity. Hence law, as I have remarked somewhere3 in the
course of this textbook, is par excellence the shibboleth which marks
out these false friends and comrades of what they call the ‘people’.
At the present time, the sophistry of wilfulness has usurped the
name of philosophy and succeeded in giving a wide public the opin-
ion that such triﬂings are philosophy. The result of this is that it has
now become almost a disgrace to go on speaking in philosophical
terms about the nature of the state, and honest men cannot be
blamed if they become impatient as soon as they hear mention of a
philosophical science of the state. Still less is it a matter for surprise
that governments have at last directed their attention to this kind of
3 See Hegel’s note to PR § 258 [p. 231 below].

Preface
11
philosophy, since, apart from anything else, philosophy with us is
not, as it was with the Greeks for instance, pursued as a private art,
but has an existence in the open, in contact with the public, and espe-
cially, or even only, in the service of the state.* Governments have
proven their trust in those scholars who have devoted themselves to
philosophy by leaving entirely to them the development [Ausbildung]
and contents of philosophy—though here and there, if you like, it
may not have been so much trust that has been shown as indiﬀerence
to science itself, and professorial chairs of philosophy have been
retained only as a tradition (in France, for instance, to the best of my
knowledge, chairs of metaphysics at least have been allowed to lapse).
Their trust, however, has very often been ill repaid, or alternatively,
if you preferred to see indiﬀerence, you would have to regard the
result, the decay of thorough knowledge, as the penalty for this
indiﬀerence. Prima facie, superﬁciality seems to be wholly compat-
ible with outward order and peace, because it fails to touch or even
to guess at the substance of things; no action, or at least no police
action,4 would thus have been taken against it in the ﬁrst instance,
had it not been that there still existed in the state a need for a deeper
education and insight, a need which the state required [philosoph-
ical] science to satisfy. But superﬁcial thinking about the ethical
order, about right and duty in general, leads automatically to the
principles which constitute superﬁciality in this sphere, i.e. to the
principles of the Sophists which are so clearly outlined for us by
Plato.* What is right these principles locate in subjective aims and
opinions, in subjective feeling and particular conviction, and from
them there follows the ruin of inner ethical life and the upright con-
science, of love and right between private persons, no less than the
ruin of public order and the law of the state. The signiﬁcance which
such phenomena must acquire for governments is not likely to be
diminished by those who feel entitled—by the trust granted to them
and by the authority of an oﬃcial position—to demand that the state
should uphold and give scope to what corrupts the substantial source
of deeds, namely universal principles, and so even give scope to
deﬁance of the state as if such deﬁance were quite proper. ‘If God
gives someone an oﬃce, he also gives him sense [Verstand]’ is an old
joke which in these days surely no one will take wholly in earnest.
4 For the wide meaning which Hegel gives to ‘police’ [Polizei], see PR §§ 231–49.

Preface
12
In the fresh importance which circumstances have led govern-
ments to attach to the character of philosophical work, there is one
element which we cannot fail to notice; this is the protection and sup-
port which the study of philosophy now seems to have come to need
in several other directions. Think of the numerous publications in the
ﬁeld of the positive sciences,* as well as edifying religious works and
vague literature of other kinds, which reveal to their readers the con-
tempt for philosophy I have already mentioned, in that, although the
thought in them is immature to the last degree and philosophy is
entirely alien to them, they treat the latter as something that can be
dismissed. More than this, they expressly rail against it and pro-
nounce its content, namely the conceptual [begreifend] knowledge of
God and of physical and spiritual nature, the knowledge of truth, to
be a foolish and even sinful presumptuousness, while reason, and
again reason, and reason repeated ad inﬁnitum, is arraigned, dispar-
aged, and condemned. At the very least such writings reveal to us
that, to a majority of those engaged in activities supposedly scientiﬁc,
the claims of the concept are an embarrassment which nonetheless
they cannot escape. I venture to say that anyone with such phenom-
ena before him may very well begin to think that, in this respect, tradi-
tion is no longer worthy of respect, nor suﬃcient to secure for the
study of philosophy either tolerance or a public existence.5
The arrogant declamations current in our time against philosophy
present the strange spectacle, on the one hand, of being in the right
by virtue of the superﬁciality to which that science has been
degraded, and, on the other, of being themselves rooted in this ele-
ment against which they turn so ungratefully. For by pronouncing
cognition of the truth to be a foolish endeavour, this self-styled phil-
osophizing has reduced all thoughts and all topics to the same level,
just as the despotism of the Roman Empire abolished the distinction
between nobles [Adel] and slaves, virtue and vice, honour and dishonour,
5 Hegel’s note: Similar views occurred to me on reading a letter of Johannes von
Müller* (Werke [Tübingen 1810–19], Part VIII, p. 56). In talking of the condition of Rome
in 1803 when the city was under French control, he says: ‘Asked how the public educational
institutions were faring, a professor replied: “They are tolerated, like brothels”.’*—One
can still even hear people recommending the so-called ‘Doctrine of Reason’, namely
logic, with the apparent conviction that it is such a dry and proﬁtless science that nobody
will busy himself with it, or that if here and there someone does take it up, he will
thereby acquire mere empty formulae, unproductive and innocuous, and that therefore
in either case the recommendation will do no harm, even if it does no good.

Preface
13
learning and ignorance. The result of this levelling process is that the
concepts of truth and the laws of ethical life likewise become nothing
more than opinions and subjective convictions. The maxims of the
worst of criminals, since they too are convictions, are put on the same
level of value as those laws;6 and at the same time any object, how-
ever bare and particular, any material, however dry, is given the same
worth as that which constitutes the interest of all thinking people and
the bonds of the ethical world.
It is therefore to be taken as a piece of luck for [philosophical] 
science—though in actual fact, as I have said,* it is the necessity of
the thing—that this philosophizing, which like scholastic wisdom
might have continued to spin its web within itself, has now been put
into closer touch and so into open variance with actuality, in which
the principles of rights and duties are a serious matter and which
lives in the light of its consciousness of these.
It is just this relation of philosophy to actuality which meets with
misunderstandings, and so I revert to what I have said before,*
namely that, since philosophy is the exploration of the rational, it is for
that very reason the comprehension of the present and the actual, not the
setting up of a beyond, supposed to exist, God knows where—or
rather a beyond, of which we can indeed say where it exists, namely
in the error of a one-sided, empty ratiocination. In the course of this
book,7 I have remarked that even Plato’s Republic, which passes
proverbially as an empty ideal, is in essence nothing but the grasping
of the nature of Greek ethical life. Plato was conscious that there was
breaking into that life a deeper principle which could appear in it
immediately only as a still unsatisﬁed longing, and so only as a source
of corruption. To combat it, he had to seek aid from that very long-
ing itself. But this aid had to come from on high and all that Plato
could do was to seek it initially in a particular external form of that
same Greek ethical life. By that means he thought to overcome this
corruption, and thereby he did the most profound injury to the
deeper impulse which underlay it, namely free inﬁnite personality.
Still, his greatness of spirit is proved by the fact that the principle on
which the distinctive character of his Idea [of the state] turns is pre-
cisely the pivot on which the impending world revolution turned.*
6 See the editor’s Introduction above, pp. xiii, xxv–xxvi [S.H.]
7 See the Remark to PR § 185.

Preface
14
What is rational is actual and what is actual is rational.* This convic-
tion is shared by every naive consciousness as well as by philosophy,
and from it philosophy starts in its study of the spiritual and the natural
universe. If reﬂection, feeling, or whatever form subjective conscious-
ness may take, looks upon the present as something vacuous and looks
beyond it with the eyes of superior wisdom, it ﬁnds itself in a vacuum,
and because it has actuality in the present alone, it is itself mere vacu-
ity [Eitelkeit]. If, on the other hand, the Idea is regarded as ‘only an
Idea’, as something represented [eine Vorstellung] in an opinion, philos-
ophy’s insight, by contrast, is that nothing is actual except the Idea.
The important thing, then, is to recognize in the semblance of the tem-
poral and transient the substance which is immanent and the eternal
which is present. For since rationality (which is synonymous with the
Idea) enters into external existence [Existenz] simultaneously with its
actualization,* it emerges with an inﬁnite wealth of forms, shapes, and
appearances. Around its core it throws a motley covering in which con-
sciousness is initially at home, a covering which the concept has ﬁrst to
penetrate before it can ﬁnd the inward pulse and feel it still beating in
the external shapes. Yet the inﬁnitely manifold relations which develop
in this externality by virtue of the appearance of the essence [das
Scheinen des Wesens] in it—this endless material and its organization—
are not the subject-matter of philosophy. To touch this at all would be
to meddle with things which do not concern philosophy, and it may
save itself the trouble of giving good advice on such topics. Plato might
have omitted his recommendation* to nurses to keep on the move with
infants and to rock them continually in their arms. And Fichte too*
need not have carried what has been called the ‘construction’ of his
passport regulations to such a pitch of perfection as to require suspects
not merely to sign their passports but to have their likenesses painted
on them. In such speciﬁcations all trace of philosophy is lost, and it can
abstain from such ultra-wisdom [Ultraweisheit] all the more readily,
since its attitude to precisely this inﬁnite multitude of topics should be
the most liberal [am liberalsten]. In adopting this attitude, [philosoph-
ical] science shows itself to be poles apart from the hatred with which
the vanity of superior wisdom regards a vast number of aﬀairs and 
institutions, a hatred in which pettiness takes the greatest delight
because only by venting it does it attain a feeling of its self-hood.
This book, then, containing as it does the science of the state, is to
be nothing other than the endeavour to apprehend and present the state

as something inherently rational. As a work of philosophy, it must be
removed as far as possible from any attempt to construct a state as it
ought to be. The instruction which it may contain cannot consist in
teaching the state what it ought to be; it can only show how the state,
the ethical universe, should be understood.8
’Ιδο`υ ‘Ρóδος, ι’δο`υ και` τò π ´ηδημα.
Hic Rhodus, hic saltus.*
To comprehend what is, this is the task of philosophy, because what
is, is reason. Whatever happens, every individual is a child of his time;
so philosophy too is its own time apprehended in thoughts. It is just as
absurd to fancy that a philosophy can transcend its contemporary
world as it is to fancy that an individual can overleap his own age,
jump over Rhodes. If his theory really goes beyond the world as it is
and builds a world as it ought to be, that world exists indeed, but only
in his opinions, a supple element in which anything you please may
be constructed by the imagination.
With hardly an alteration, the proverb just quoted would run:
Here is the rose, dance here.*
What lies between reason as self-conscious spirit and reason as pres-
ent actuality, what separates the former from the latter and prevents
it from ﬁnding satisfaction in the latter, is the fetter of some abstrac-
tion or other which has not been liberated [and so transformed] into
the concept. To recognize reason as the rose in the cross of the 
present* and thereby to enjoy the present, this is the rational insight
which reconciles us to actuality—the reconciliation which philosophy
aﬀords to those in whom there has once arisen an inner voice bidding
them to comprehend, and not only to preserve their subjective free-
dom in what is substantial, but also to stand with their subjective
freedom in that which is in and for itself rather than in something
particular and contingent.
It is this too which constitutes the more concrete meaning of 
what was described above [p. 4] rather abstractly as the unity of form and
content; for form in its most concrete signiﬁcation is reason as 
conceptual [begreifend] knowing, and content is reason as the substan-
tial essence of actuality, whether ethical or natural. The conscious iden-
tity of these two is the philosophical Idea.—It is a great obstinacy, the
8 See the editor’s Introduction above, p. xviii [S.H.]
Preface
15

obstinacy which does honour to humanity, to refuse to recognize in
one’s disposition anything not justiﬁed by thought. This obstinacy is
the characteristic of modern times, besides being the distinctive prin-
ciple of Protestantism. What began with Luther* as faith in [the form
of] feeling and the witness of the spirit, is precisely what spirit, since
become more mature, has striven to apprehend in the concept in order
to free itself, and so to ﬁnd itself, in the present. The saying has become
famous* that ‘a half-philosophy leads away from God’—and it is the
same half-philosophy that locates knowledge in an approximation to
truth—‘while true philosophy leads to God’; and the same is true of
philosophy and the state. Reason is not content with an approximation
which, as something ‘neither cold nor hot’, it will ‘spew out of its
mouth’;9 and it is as little content with the cold despair which concedes
that in this earthly life things are truly bad or at best indiﬀerent, but
since nothing better can be found here we should live at peace with the
world. It is a warmer peace with the world which knowledge supplies.
One word more about giving instruction as to what the world
ought to be. Philosophy in any case always comes on the scene too
late to give it. As the thought of the world, it appears only when actu-
ality has completed its process of formation and attained its ﬁnished
state. The teaching of the concept, which is also history’s inescapable
lesson, is that it is only when actuality is mature that the ideal [das
Ideale]* ﬁrst appears over against the real and that the ideal grasps
this same real world in its substance and builds it up for itself into the
shape of an intellectual realm. When philosophy paints its grey in
grey,* then has a shape of life grown old. By philosophy’s grey in
grey it cannot be rejuvenated but only understood. The owl of
Minerva begins its ﬂight only with the falling of dusk.*
But it is time to close this preface. After all, as a preface, its only
business has been to make some external and subjective remarks
about the standpoint of the book it introduces. If a topic is to be dis-
cussed philosophically, it spurns any but a scientiﬁc and objective
treatment, and so too if criticisms of the author take any form other
than a scientiﬁc discussion of the thing itself, they can count only as
a subjective postscript and as capricious assertion, and he must treat
them with indiﬀerence.
berlin, June 25th, 1820.
Preface
16
9 See Revelation 3: 16.

INTRODUCTION
1. The subject-matter of the philosophical science of right is the
Idea [Idee] of right, i.e. the concept of right together with the actual-
ization of that concept.
Philosophy has to do with Ideas, and therefore not with what are
commonly dubbed ‘mere concepts’. On the contrary, it exposes
such concepts as one-sided and without truth, while showing at
the same time that it is the concept [Begriﬀ] alone (not the mere
abstract category of the understanding [Verstand] which we often
hear called by that name) which has actuality, and further that it
gives this actuality to itself. All else, apart from this actuality
established through the working of the concept itself, is ephemeral
existence, external contingency, opinion, unsubstantial appear-
ance, untruth, illusion, and so forth. The shapes which the con-
cept assumes in the course of its actualization are indispensable for
the knowledge of the concept itself. They are the second essential
moment of the Idea, in distinction from the ﬁrst, i.e. from its form,
from its mode of being as concept alone.10
Addition: The concept and its existence are two sides of the same thing,
distinct and united, like soul and body. The body is the same life as the
soul and yet both may be spoken of as lying outside one another. A soul
without a body would not be a living thing, nor would a body without 
a soul. Hence the determinate existence [Dasein] of the concept is its 
body, while its body obeys the soul which brought it into being. The buds
have the tree implicit within them and contain the tree’s whole strength,
although they are not yet the tree itself. The tree corresponds in detail to
the simple image of the bud. If the body does not match the soul, it is a
poor sort of thing. The unity of determinate existence and the concept, of
body and soul, is the Idea. The unity is not a mere harmony, but rather a
complete interpenetration. Nothing is alive which is not in some way or
other Idea. The Idea of right is freedom, and if it is to be truly understood,
it must be known both in its concept and in the determinate existence of
that concept.
10 For more on the ‘concept’ and ‘Idea’, see the editor’s Introduction and the excerpts
from T. M. Knox’s Foreword, pp. xvi, xix, xxxiv–xxxv above. [S.H.]

2. The science of right is a section of philosophy. Consequently, its
task is to develop the Idea—the Idea being the rational factor in any
object of study—out of the concept, or, what is the same thing, to
look on at the proper immanent development of the thing itself. As a
section, it has a deﬁnite starting-point, i.e. the result and the truth of
what has preceded, and it is what has preceded that constitutes the
so-called ‘proof’ of the starting-point. Hence the concept of right, so
far as its coming to be is concerned, falls outside the science of right;
it is to be taken up here as given and its deduction is presupposed.*
Addition: Philosophy forms a circle. It has a beginning, a moment of
immediacy (for it must begin somewhere), something unproved which is
not a result. But the point from which philosophy begins is [also] imme-
diately relative, since it must appear at another end-point as a result.
Philosophy is a sequence which does not hang in the air; it is not some-
thing that begins immediately; on the contrary, it circles back into itself.
According to the abstract, non-philosophical, method of the sci-
ences, the ﬁrst thing sought and demanded is a deﬁnition, or at any
rate this demand is made for the sake of preserving the external
form of scientiﬁc procedure. (The positive science of right, how-
ever, cannot be very intimately concerned with deﬁnitions since it
aims primarily to state what is right and legal [Rechtens], i.e. what
the particular legal provisions are, and for this reason the warning
has been given: ‘in civil law, all deﬁnition is hazardous.’* Indeed, the
more disconnected and inherently contradictory are the provisions
giving determinate character to a right, the less are any deﬁnitions
in its ﬁeld possible, for deﬁnitions should be stated in universal
terms, but these would immediately expose in all its nakedness what
is contradictory—that is, in this instance, what is unjust. Thus in
Roman law, for example, there could be no deﬁnition of ‘human
being’, since ‘slave’ could not be brought under it—the very status of
slave indeed violates the concept of the human being; it would
appear just as hazardous to attempt a deﬁnition of ‘property’ and
‘proprietor’ in many cases.) The deduction of the deﬁnition [in the
non-philosophical sciences], however, may take its lead from ety-
mology, or proceed above all by abstracting from particular cases,
so that it is based on human feelings and ideas [Vorstellung]. The
correctness of the deﬁnition is then made to lie in its correspon-
dence with current ideas. This method neglects what is all-
essential for science—i.e. in respect of content, the necessity of the
Introduction
18

thing in and for itself (right, in this instance), and, in respect of
form, the nature of the concept.
The truth is that in philosophical knowledge the necessity of a
concept is the principal thing; and the process of its production as
a result is its proof and deduction. Then, once its content has been
shown in this way to be necessary on its own account, the second
step is to look round for what corresponds to it in our ideas and
language. But this concept as it is for itself in its truth not only
may be diﬀerent from our common idea of it, but in fact must be
diﬀerent from it in form and outline. If, however, the common
idea of it is not false in content also, the concept may be exhibited
as contained in it and as essentially present in it. In other words,
the common idea may be raised to the form of the concept. But the
common idea is so far from being the standard or criterion of the
concept (which is necessary and true on its own account) that it
must rather derive its truth from the latter, adjust itself to it, and
recognize its own nature by its aid.
But while the above-mentioned abstract way of knowing with
its formal deﬁnitions, syllogisms, proofs, and the like, is more or
less a thing of the past, still it is a poor substitute which a diﬀerent
artiﬁce has provided, namely to adopt and uphold Ideas in general
(and in particular the Idea of right and its further speciﬁcations) as
immediate ‘facts of consciousness’* and to make into the source of
right our natural or our worked up feelings and the inspirations of
our own hearts. This method may be the handiest of all, but it is
also the most unphilosophical—not to mention here other aspects
of such a view, which has a direct bearing on action and not simply
on knowledge.* While the old method, abstract as it is, does at
least insist on the form of the concept in its deﬁnition and the form
of necessary knowledge in its demonstration, the artiﬁce of feeling
and immediate awareness elevates into a guiding principle the
subjectivity, contingency, and arbitrariness of knowing. What
constitutes scientiﬁc procedure in philosophy is expounded in
philosophical logic and is here presupposed.11
3. Right is positive in general (a) when it has the form of being
valid in a particular state, and this legal authority is the guiding 
principle for the knowledge of right in this positive form, i.e. for the
Introduction
19
11 See PR Preface, pp. 3–4 above.

positive science of right. (b) Right in this positive form acquires a
positive element in its content
(α) through the particular national character of a people, its stage
of historical development, and the whole complex of relations con-
nected with the necessities of nature;*
(β) because a system of legal right must necessarily involve the
application of the universal concept to particular, externally given,
characteristics of objects and cases. This application lies outside
speculative thought and the development of the concept, and is the
subsumption by the understanding [of the particular under the 
universal];
(γ) through the ﬁnal determinations requisite for actually making
decisions [in court].
If inclination, caprice, and the sentiments of the heart are set up 
in opposition to positive right and the laws, philosophy at least
cannot recognize authorities of that sort.—That force and
tyranny may be an element in positive right is accidental to the
latter and has nothing to do with its nature. Later on in this book,
in §§ 211–14, it will be shown at what point right must become
positive. The details to be expounded there are being mentioned
here only to indicate the limits of the philosophical study of right
and to obviate at once any possible supposition, let alone demand,
that the outcome of its systematic development should be a code
of positive law, i.e. a code such as the one an actual state requires.
Natural law, or right from the philosophical point of view, is
distinct from positive right; but to pervert their diﬀerence into an
opposition and a contradiction would be a gross misunderstanding.
The relation between them is much more like that between
Institutes and Pandects.*
As for the historical element in positive right, mentioned above
in § 3, Montesquieu proclaimed the true historical view,* the genu-
inely philosophical position, namely that legislation both in general
and in its particular provisions is to be treated not as something
isolated and abstract but rather as a dependent moment of a whole,
interconnected with all the other features which make up the 
character of a nation and an epoch. It is in being so connected that
the various laws acquire their true meaning and therewith their
justiﬁcation.—To consider particular determinations of right as
Introduction
20

they appear and develop in time is a purely historical task. Like
acquaintance with what can be logically deduced from a compari-
son of these determinations with previously existing principles 
of right, this task is appreciated and rewarded in its own sphere
and has no relation whatever to the philosophical study of the 
subject—unless of course the derivation of particular aspects of
right from historical events is confused with their derivation from
the concept, and the historical explanation and justiﬁcation is
stretched to become a justiﬁcation that is valid in and for itself [an
und für sich]. This diﬀerence, which is very important and should
be ﬁrmly adhered to, is also very obvious. A particular determin-
ation of right may be shown to be wholly grounded in and consist-
ent with the circumstances and with existing institutions of right,
and yet it may be wrong and irrational in and for itself, like a
number of provisions in Roman private law which followed quite
logically from such institutions as Roman matrimony and Roman
paternal power.12 But even if particular determinations of right are
both right and reasonable, still it is one thing to prove that they
have that character—which cannot be truly done except by means
of the concept—and quite another to describe their appearance in
history or the circumstances, contingencies, needs, and events
which brought about their enactment. That kind of exposition and
(pragmatic) knowledge, based on proximate or remote historical
causes, is frequently called ‘explanation’ [Erklären] or preferably
‘comprehension’ [Begreifen], by those who think that to expound
history in this way is the only thing, or rather the essential thing,
the only important thing, to be done in order to comprehend law
or an institution of right;* whereas what is really essential, the
concept of the thing, they have not discussed at all. From the same
point of view, reference is commonly made also to the Roman or
the German ‘concepts’ of right, i.e. concepts of right as they might
be deﬁned in this or that legal code, whereas what is meant are not
concepts but only general determinations of right, propositions of
the understanding, maxims, positive laws, and the like.
By obscuring the diﬀerence between the historical and the
philosophical study of right, it becomes possible to shift the point
of view and slip over from the problem of the true justiﬁcation of
Introduction
21
12 See Remark and Addition to PR § 180.

a thing to a justiﬁcation by appeal to circumstances, to deductions
from presupposed conditions which in themselves may have no
higher validity, and so forth. To generalize, by this means the 
relative is put in place of the absolute and the external appearance
in place of the true nature of the thing. When those who try to jus-
tify things on historical grounds confound an origin in external
circumstances with one in the concept, they unconsciously achieve
the very opposite of what they intend. Once the origination of an
institution has been shown to be wholly to the purpose and neces-
sary in the circumstances of the time, the demands of the historical
point of view have been fulﬁlled. But if this is supposed to pass for
a general justiﬁcation of the thing itself, it turns out to be the oppo-
site, because, since those circumstances are no longer present, the
institution—far from being justiﬁed—has by their disappearance
lost its meaning and its right. Suppose, for example, that we accept
as a vindication of the monasteries their service in cultivating wilder-
nesses and populating them, in keeping learning alive by transcrib-
ing manuscripts and giving instruction, and so on, and suppose
further that this service has been deemed to be the ground and the
purpose of their continued existence, then what really follows
from considering this past service is that, since circumstances have
now entirely altered, the monasteries are at least in this respect
superﬂuous and inappropriate.
Since the historical meaning of coming to be [Entstehen]—the
historical method of portraying it and making it comprehensible—
is at home in a diﬀerent sphere from the philosophical survey of the
concept of the thing and of a thing’s coming to be, philosophy and
history are able to that extent to preserve an attitude of mutual
indiﬀerence. But they are not always at peace in this way, even in
scientiﬁc circles, and so I quote something, relevant to their con-
tact, which appears in Herr Hugo’s Textbook of the History of
Roman Law,* and which will at the same time lead to further elu-
cidation of the manner in which they can be opposed. Herr Hugo
says (ﬁfth edition, § 53) that ‘Cicero praises the Twelve Tables*
while looking askance at the philosophers . . . whereas the philoso-
pher Favorinus treats them exactly as many a great philosopher
since his day has treated positive right’. In the same context 
Herr Hugo provides his ﬁnal retort to a treatment of the subject
such as Favorinus’ when he explains that ‘Favorinus understood the
Introduction
22

Twelve Tables just as little as these philosophers have understood
positive right’.
As far as the correction of the philosopher Favorinus by the
jurist Sextus Caecilius in [Aulus] Gellius is concerned,*13 this is in
the ﬁrst place an expression of the enduring and true principle for
justifying what is merely positive. ‘You must be aware’,* Caecilius
happily retorts to Favorinus, ‘that the advantages and remedies
oﬀered by the laws vary and ﬂuctuate in accordance with contem-
porary customs, types of constitution, considerations of immedi-
ate advantage, and the violence of the ills to be remedied. Laws do
not persist unchanged in character; on the contrary, the storms of
circumstance and chance alter them as storms change the face of
the sea and the sky. Has anything ever seemed more salutary than
Stolo’s proposal . . . more advantageous than the decree . . . 
carried by Voconius as tribune? What has been taken to be so ne-
cessary . . . as the Licinian law? Yet, now that the state has grown
wealthy, all these regulations have been blotted out and buried.’
These laws are positive insofar as they have their meaning and
appropriateness in the circumstances, and their value is therefore
simply historical; they are for that reason of a transitory nature.
The wisdom of what legislators and governments did for the cir-
cumstances of their day or settled to meet the needs of the hour is
a separate matter. It is one properly to be assessed by history,
whose recognition of it will be all the deeper the more its assess-
ment is supported by philosophical points of view.
Of Caecilius’ further arguments in justiﬁcation of the Twelve
Tables against Favorinus, however, I will give an example, because
he introduces in them the eternally deceptive method and argu-
mentation of the understanding, namely the production of a good
reason for a bad thing and the supposition that the bad thing has
thereby been justiﬁed. Caecilius is discussing the horrible law that
gave a creditor the right after a ﬁxed period of time to kill his
debtor or sell him into slavery, or, if there were several creditors,
to cut pieces oﬀtheir debtor and divide him up amongst them-
selves; there was even a further proviso that if one of them cut oﬀ
too much or too little, no action was for that reason to be taken
against him—a clause which would have beneﬁted Shakespeare’s
Introduction
23
13 Hegel’s reference: Aulus Gellius, Attic Nights [Noctes Atticae], 20. 1.

Shylock in the Merchant of Venice* and of which he would most
gratefully have availed himself. For this law Caecilius adduces the
good reason that it rendered trust and credit all the more secure and
that because of its horrible character there was never to have been
any question of its application. In his thoughtlessness not only
does the reﬂection escape him that if the law could never have
been applied, then the aim of securing trust and credit by it was
frustrated, but he even goes on directly afterwards to give an 
example of how the law concerning false witness was made
ineﬀective owing to its immoderate penalties.
It is not clear, however, what Herr Hugo means when he says
that Favorinus did not understand the law. Any schoolboy is per-
fectly capable of understanding it, and Shylock would have under-
stood better than anyone else the clause, cited above, which would
have been so advantageous to him. By ‘understand’ Herr Hugo
must have meant only that level of understanding which in the
case of such a law is content if it can ﬁnd a good reason for it.
By the way, another misunderstanding of which Favorinus was
convicted by Caecilius in the same context is one to which a philoso-
pher may surely confess without exactly blushing. I mean the fail-
ure to understand that jumentum (which ‘as distinct from arcera’ is,
according to the law, the only conveyance to be provided for a sick
person who has to appear as a witness in court) is to be interpreted
to mean not only a horse but also a carriage or wagon.* From this
legal proviso Caecilius was able to derive a further proof of the
excellence and precision of the old laws by pointing out that, in
ﬁxing the terms of a summons to a sick witness to appear in court,
they carried precision so far as to distinguish not only between 
a horse and a wagon, but even between one wagon and another,
between one covered and ‘upholstered’, as Caecilius explains, and
one not so comfortable. Here, then, we would have the choice
between the severity of the law and the triviality of such distinc-
tions; but to describe such things, and still more their learned
interpretation, as ‘trivial’ would be one of the worst of insults to
erudition of this kind and others!
But in the textbook mentioned above Herr Hugo also comes to
speak of rationality in connection with Roman law, and what has
struck me in his remarks is the following. In his treatment of the
‘period from the origin of the state to the Twelve Tables’ (§§ 38–9)
Introduction
24

he says that (in Rome) ‘people had many wants and were compelled
to work and hence needed the assistance of draught and pack ani-
mals, such as we are familiar with ourselves; that in Roman terri-
tory hills and valleys alternated and that the city was built on a hill’
and so forth—remarks which were perhaps intended to fulﬁl
Montesquieu’s aims, but in which one will hardly ﬁnd that his
spirit has been caught. He goes on to say (§ 40) that in this period
‘the legal position was still very far from satisfying the highest
demands of reason’. (This is quite right: Roman law in respect of
the family, slavery, and so on, fails even to satisfy reason’s most
modest demands.) Yet in dealing with later periods of Roman hist-
ory, Herr Hugo forgets to tell us whether in any of them, and if so
in which, Roman law did ‘satisfy the highest demands of reason’.
Concerning the classical jurists in the period of the ‘highest matur-
ity of Roman law as a science’, however, Herr Hugo writes (§ 289)
that ‘it has long since been observed that the classical jurists were
educated through philosophy’, yet ‘few know’ (though more know
now, thanks to the numerous editions of Herr Hugo’s textbook)
‘that no class of writers is so well entitled as these same Roman
jurists to be compared with mathematicians in respect of the rig-
orous logic of their deductive reasoning or with the new founder
of metaphysics in respect of their quite strikingly distinctive method
of developing their concepts—a contention supported by the curi-
ous fact that nowhere are there to be found so many trichotomies
as there are in the classical jurists and in Kant’.—Now logical
deduction, a method commended by Leibniz,* is certainly an
essential characteristic of the science of right, as of mathematics
and any other science of the understanding, but this deductive
method of the understanding has nothing whatever to do with the
satisfaction of the demands of reason or with philosophical science.
Apart from that, however, it is the illogicality of the Roman jurists
and praetors that must be regarded as one of their chief virtues, 
for by being illogical they evaded unjust and detestable laws and
institutions—though in the process they found themselves 
compelled to devise empty verbal distinctions on the sly [callide]
(e.g. to call bonorum possessio what was nevertheless an inherit-
ance)* and downright foolish subterfuges (and folly also is 
illogicality) in order to preserve the letter of the Twelve Tables
(e.g. by the ﬁction or pretence that a daughter [ﬁlia] was a son
Introduction
25

[ﬁlius]).*14—It is ludicrous though to see the classical jurists com-
pared with Kant because of a few trichotomous divisions, especially
those cited as examples in Note 5 to Herr Hugo’s remarks, and to
see that kind of thing called the ‘development of concepts’.
4. The basis of right is, in general, the realm of spirit [das Geistige];
its precise place and point of origin is the will. The will is free, so that
freedom is both its substance and its goal, while the system of right
is the realm of freedom made actual, the world of spirit [Geist] brought
forth out of itself as a second nature.
Addition: The freedom of the will is best explained by a reference to phys-
ical nature. For freedom is just as fundamental a character of the will as
weight is of bodies. If we say: matter is ‘heavy’, we might mean that this
predicate is only contingent; but it is nothing of the kind, for nothing in
matter is without weight. Matter is rather weight itself. Heaviness consti-
tutes the body and is the body. The same is the case with freedom and the
will, since that which is free is the will. Will without freedom is an empty
word, while freedom is actual only as will, as subject.
The following points should be noted about the connection between the
will and thought. Spirit is thinking in general, and the human being is dis-
tinguished from the animal in virtue of thinking. But one must not 
imagine that the human being is, on the one hand, thought and, on the
other, will, and that he keeps thought in one pocket and will in another,
for this would be a foolish idea. The distinction between thought and will
is only that between the theoretical attitude and the practical. These, how-
ever, are surely not two faculties; the will is rather a particular way of
thinking, thinking translating itself into existence, thinking as the urge to
give itself existence.
This distinction between thought and will may be described as follows.
In thinking an object, I make it into thought and deprive it of its sensuous
aspect; I make it into something which is immediately and essentially
mine. Since it is only in thought that I am with myself [bei mir], I do not
penetrate an object until I understand it; it then ceases to stand over
against me and I have taken from it the character of its own which it had
in opposition to me. Just as Adam said to Eve: ‘Thou art ﬂesh of my ﬂesh
and bone of my bone,’15 so spirit says: ‘This is spirit of my spirit and its
foreign character has disappeared.’ An idea is always a generalization, and
Introduction
26
14 Hegel’s reference: J. G. Heineccius, Illustrated Treatise on Ancient Roman
Jurisprudence [Antiquitatum Romanarum jurisprudentiam illustrantium Syntagma] lib. I
[Frankfurt, 1771], tit. II, § 24.
15 See Genesis 2: 23.

generalization is a property of thinking. To generalize means to think. The
I is thought and so the universal. When I say ‘I’, I eo ipso abandon all my par-
ticular characteristics, my disposition, natural endowment, knowledge, and
age. The I is quite empty, a mere point, simple, yet active in this simplicity.
The variegated canvas of the world is before me; I stand over against it; by
my theoretical attitude to it I overcome its opposition to me and make its
content my own. I am at home in the world when I know it, still more so
when I have understood it. So much for the theoretical attitude.
The practical attitude, on the other hand, begins in thinking, in the 
I itself, and it appears ﬁrst as though opposed to thinking because it imme-
diately sets up a division. Insofar as I am practical or active, i.e. insofar as
I act, I determine myself, and to determine myself simply means to posit
a diﬀerence. But these diﬀerences which I posit are still mine all the same;
the determinations are mine and the aims to which I am driven belong to
me. If I now let these determinations and diﬀerences out, i.e. if I posit them
in the so-called external world, they nonetheless still remain mine. They
are what I have done, what I have made; they bear the trace of my spirit.
Such is the distinction between the theoretical attitude and the practical,
but now the relation between them must be described. The theoretical is
essentially contained in the practical; we must decide against the idea that
the two are separate, because we cannot have a will without intelligence.
On the contrary, the will contains the theoretical in itself. The will deter-
mines itself and this determination is in the ﬁrst place something inward,
because what I will I hold before my mind as an idea; it is the object of my
thought. An animal acts on instinct, is driven by an inner impulse and so
it too is practical, but it has no will, since it does not bring before its mind
the object of its desire. A human being, however, can just as little be the-
oretical or think without a will, because in thinking he is of necessity being
active. The content of something thought has the form of being; but this
being is something mediated, something established through our activity.
Thus these distinct attitudes cannot be divorced; they are one and the
same; and in any activity, whether of thinking or willing, both moments
are present.
In considering the freedom of the will, we may recall the old method
of cognition. The procedure was to presuppose the idea [Vorstellung]
of the will and to attempt to establish a deﬁnition of the will by
deriving it from that idea; then the so-called ‘proof’ of the will’s
freedom was extracted, in the manner of the old empirical psych-
ology, from the various feelings and phenomena of ordinary con-
sciousness, such as remorse, guilt, and the like, by maintaining that
they were to be explained only in the light of a will that was free.
Introduction
27

But it is more convenient of course to arrive at the same point by
taking the short cut of supposing that freedom is given as a ‘fact of
consciousness’ and that we must simply believe in it!
That the will is free and what the will and freedom are, can be
deduced (as has already been pointed out in § 2) only in the con-
text of the whole [of philosophy]. The fundamental premisses of
this deduction are that spirit to start with is intelligence, that the
phases through which it passes in its development from feeling,
through representational thinking [Vorstellen], to thinking proper
are the road along which it produces itself as will, and that will, as
practical spirit in general, is the truth of intelligence, the stage next
above it. These premisses I have expounded in my Encyclopaedia
of the Philosophical Sciences (Heidelberg, 1817), §§ 363–99, and 
I hope by and by to be able to elaborate them still further.* There
is all the more need for me by so doing to make my contribution
to what I hope is the deeper knowledge of the nature of spirit in
that, as I have said in the Encyclopaedia (Remark to § 367 [3rd edi-
tion § 444]), scarcely any philosophical science is so neglected and
in so bad a condition as the theory of spirit [or mind] which is usu-
ally called ‘psychology’. The moments in the concept of the will
which are dealt with in this and the following paragraphs of this
Introduction result from the premisses to which I have just referred,
but in addition anyone may ﬁnd help towards forming an idea of
them by calling on his own self-consciousness. In the ﬁrst place,
anyone can discover in himself the ability to abstract from every-
thing whatever, and in the same way to determine himself, to posit
any content in himself by his own eﬀort; and similarly the other
speciﬁc characteristics of the will are exempliﬁed for him in his
own consciousness.
5. The will contains (α) the element of pure indeterminacy or that
pure reﬂection of the I into itself which involves the dissolution of
every restriction and every content either immediately presented by
nature, by needs, desires, and impulses, or given and determined by
any means whatever. This is the unrestricted inﬁnity of absolute
abstraction or universality, the pure thought of oneself.
Those who regard thinking as one particular, distinctive faculty,
separate from the will as another distinctive faculty, and who even
proceed to contend that thinking is prejudicial to the will, especially
Introduction
28

the good will, reveal at the very outset their complete ignorance of
the nature of the will—a remark we shall have to make rather
often when dealing with this same subject.
In § 5, it is only one side of the will which is described, namely
this absolute possibility of abstraction from every determination in
which I may ﬁnd myself or which I may have set up in myself, my
ﬂight from every content as from a restriction. When the will’s
self-determination consists in this alone, or when representational
thinking regards this side by itself as freedom and clings fast to it,
then we have negative freedom, or freedom as the understanding
conceives it.—This is the freedom of the void which rises to a
passion and takes shape in the world; while still remaining theor-
etical, it takes shape in religion as the Hindu fanaticism of pure
contemplation, but when it turns to actual practice, it takes shape
in religion and politics alike as the fanaticism of destruction (of the
whole subsisting social order), as the elimination of individuals
who are objects of suspicion to a given social order, and as the
annihilation of any organization which tries to rise anew from the
ruins.* Only in destroying something does this negative will pos-
sess the feeling of itself as existent. Of course it imagines that it is
willing some positive state of aﬀairs, such as universal equality or
universal religious life, but in fact it does not will that this shall be
positively actualized, and for this reason: such actuality leads at
once to some sort of order, to a particularization of organizations
and individuals alike, while it is precisely out of the annihilation of
particularity and objective determination that the self-consciousness
of this negative freedom proceeds. Consequently, whatever nega-
tive freedom means to will can never be anything in itself but an
abstract idea, and giving eﬀect to this idea can only be the fury of
destruction.
Addition: In this element of the will is rooted my ability to free myself from
everything, abandon every aim, abstract from everything. The human being
alone can sacriﬁce everything, his life included; he can commit suicide. An
animal cannot; it always remains merely negative, in an alien determin-
ation to which it merely accustoms itself. The human being is the pure
thought of himself, and only in thinking is he this power to give himself
universality, i.e. to extinguish all particularity, all determinacy. This nega-
tive freedom, or freedom as the understanding conceives it, is one-sided;
but what is one-sided always contains an essential determination and
Introduction
29

therefore is not to be discarded. But the understanding is defective in
exalting a one-sided determination to be the sole and the supreme one.
In history this form of freedom is a frequent phenomenon. Amongst the
Hindus, for instance, the highest life is held to entail persisting in the bare
knowledge of one’s simple identity with oneself, remaining in this empty
space of one’s inner life, as light remains colourless in pure vision, and
sacriﬁcing every activity in life, every aim, and every idea. In this way the
human being becomes Brahman; there is no longer any distinction
between the ﬁnite human being and Brahman. In fact in this universality
every diﬀerence has disappeared.
This form of freedom appears more concretely in the active fanaticism
of both political and religious life. For instance, during the Terror in the
French Revolution all diﬀerences of talent and authority were supposed to
have been superseded. This period was an upheaval, an agitation, an intol-
erance of everything particular. Since fanaticism wills an abstraction only,
nothing articulated, it follows that, when distinctions appear, it ﬁnds them
antagonistic to its own indeterminacy and annuls them. For this reason,
the people during the French Revolution destroyed once more the institu-
tions which they had made themselves, since any institution whatever is
antagonistic to the abstract self-consciousness of equality.
6. (β) At the same time, the I is also the transition from un-
diﬀerentiated indeterminacy to the diﬀerentiation, determination, and
positing of a determinacy as a content and object. Now further, this
content may either be given by nature or engendered by the concept
of spirit. Through this positing of itself as something determinate,
the I steps into determinate existence [Dasein] in general. This is the
absolute moment of the ﬁnitude or particularization of the I.
This second moment—determination—is negativity and cancel-
lation [Aufheben] like the ﬁrst, i.e. it cancels the abstract negativity
of the ﬁrst. Since in general the particular is contained in the uni-
versal, it follows that this second moment is already contained in
the ﬁrst and is simply an explicit positing of what the ﬁrst already
is in itself [an sich]. The ﬁrst moment—namely as it is for itself—
is not true inﬁnity or concrete universality, not the concept, but only
something determinate, one-sided; i.e., being abstraction from all
determinacy, it is itself not without determinacy; and to be some-
thing abstract and one-sided constitutes its determinacy, its defec-
tiveness, and its ﬁnitude.
The determination and diﬀerentiation of the two moments
which have been mentioned is to be found in the philosophies of
Introduction
30

Fichte, Kant, and others; only, in Fichte—to conﬁne ourselves to
his exposition—the I, as that which is without limitation, is taken (in
the ﬁrst proposition of his Science of Knowledge) purely and simply
as something positive and so as the universality and identity of the
understanding. The result is that this abstract I by itself is supposed
to be the truth, and therefore the restriction—the negative in general,
whether as a given external limitation or as an activity of the I
itself—appears (in the second proposition) merely as an addition.*
To apprehend the negativity immanent in the universal or self-
identical, as in the I, was the next step which speculative philoso-
phy had to take—a step of whose necessity they have no inkling
who hold to the dualism of inﬁnite and ﬁnite and do not even grasp
it in that immanence and abstraction in which Fichte did.
Addition: This second moment appears as the moment opposed to the 
ﬁrst; it is to be grasped in its general character; it belongs to freedom,
although it does not constitute the whole of freedom. Here the I leaves
undiﬀerentiated indeterminacy and proceeds to diﬀerentiate itself, to posit
a content or object and so to give itself determinacy. My willing is not pure
willing but the willing of something. A will which, like that expounded in 
§ 5, wills only the abstract universal, wills nothing and is therefore no will
at all. The particular volition is a restriction, since the will, in order to be
a will, must restrict itself in some way or other. The fact that the will wills
something is restriction, negation. Thus particularization is what as a rule
is called ﬁnitude. Reﬂective thinking [Reﬂexion] usually takes the ﬁrst
moment, i.e. indeterminacy, as the higher and absolute moment, while it
regards restriction as a mere negation of this indeterminacy. But this inde-
terminacy is itself only a negation in contrast with the determinate, with
ﬁnitude; the I is this solitude and absolute negation.* The indeterminate
will is to this extent just as one-sided as the will rooted in sheer determinacy.
7. (γ) The will is the unity of both these moments. It is particular-
ity reﬂected into itself and so brought back to universality, i.e. it is
individuality. It is the self-determination of the I, which means that at
one and the same time the I posits itself as its own negative, i.e. as
restricted and determinate, and yet remains with itself, i.e. in its self-
identity and universality. It determines itself and yet at the same time
binds itself together with itself.—The I determines itself in so far as
it is the relating of negativity to itself. As this self-relation, it is equally
indiﬀerent to this determinacy; it knows it as something which is its
own, something which is only ideal [ideell],* a mere possibility by
Introduction
31

which it is not constrained and in which it is conﬁned only because
it has put itself in it.—This is the freedom of the will and it consti-
tutes the concept or substantiality of the will, its weight, so to speak,
just as weight constitutes the substantiality of a body.
Every self-consciousness knows itself (i) as universal, as the possi-
bility of abstracting from everything determinate, and (ii) as par-
ticular, with a determinate object, content, and aim. Still, both
these moments are only abstractions; what is concrete and true
(and everything true is concrete) is the universality which has the
particular as its opposite, but the particular which by its reﬂection
into itself has been equalized with the universal. This unity is indi-
viduality, not individuality in its immediacy as a unit, our ﬁrst idea
of individuality, but individuality in accordance with its concept;16
indeed, individuality in this sense is precisely the concept itself.
The ﬁrst two moments—(i) that the will can abstract from every-
thing, and (ii) that it is also determined in some speciﬁc way either
by itself or by something else—are readily admitted and grasped
because, taken independently, they lack truth and are moments of
the understanding. But the third moment, which is true and specu-
lative (and everything true must be thought speculatively if it is to
be comprehended) is the one into which the understanding
declines to advance, for it is precisely the concept which it persists
in calling the inconceivable. It is the task of logic as purely specu-
lative philosophy to prove and explain further this innermost
secret of speculation, of inﬁnity as negativity relating itself to
itself, this ultimate spring of all activity, life, and consciousness.—
Here attention can only be drawn to the fact that when people say
‘the will is universal, the will determines itself’, the words they use
to describe the will presuppose it to be a subject or substratum
from the start. But the will is not something complete and univer-
sal prior to its determining itself and prior to its superseding and
idealizing this determination. The will is not a will until it is this
self-mediating activity, this return into itself.
Addition: What is properly called the will includes in itself both the pre-
ceding moments. The I as such is in the ﬁrst place pure activity, the uni-
versal which is with itself [bei sich]. But this universal determines itself and
to that extent is no longer with itself but posits itself as an other and ceases
Introduction
32
16 Hegel’s reference: Encyclopaedia, §§ 112–14 [3rd edn. §§ 163–5].

to be the universal. Now the third moment is that, in its restriction, in this
other, the will is with itself; in determining itself it still remains with itself
and does not cease to keep hold of the universal. This moment, then, is the
concrete concept of freedom, while the two previous moments have been
found to be through and through abstract and one-sided.
Freedom in this sense, however, we already possess in the form of 
feeling—in friendship and love, for instance. Here we are not inherently
one-sided; we restrict ourselves gladly in relating ourselves to another, but
in this restriction know ourselves as ourselves. In this determinacy a human
being should not feel determined; on the contrary, by treating the other as
other he ﬁrst arrives at the feeling of his own selfhood. Thus freedom lies
neither in indeterminacy nor in determinacy; it is both of these at once.
The will which restricts itself simply to a this is the will of the stubborn
individual who supposes that he is not free unless he has this will. But the
will is not tied to something restricted; it must go beyond the restriction,
since the nature of the will is other than this one-sidedness and constraint.
Freedom is to will something determinate, yet in this determinacy to be
with oneself and to revert once more to the universal.
8. The more detailed process of particularization (see § 6) consti-
tutes the diﬀerence between the forms of the will: (a) If the will’s
determinate character lies in the formal opposition of its subjectivity
to the objectivity of external immediate existence, then this is the
formal will as self-consciousness which ﬁnds an external world con-
fronting it. As individuality returning in its determinacy into itself,
this will is the process of translating the subjective purpose into object-
ivity through the mediation of its own activity and some external
means. In spirit as it is in and for itself [wie er an und für sich ist], in
which its determinacy is true and simply its own,17 the relation of
consciousness constitutes only the appearance of the will, which is
not considered separately [für sich] any further here.*
Addition: The consideration of the will’s determinacy properly belongs to
the understanding and is in the ﬁrst instance not speculative. The will is
determined in two senses, i.e. in both content and form. Its determinacy
in form is its purpose and the fulﬁlment of its purpose. My purpose is 
at ﬁrst only something inward, something subjective, but it should also
become objective and cast aside the defect of mere subjectivity. At this
point you may ask why it has this defect. If what has a defect does not at
the same time stand above its defect, the defect is not for it a defect. An
animal is deﬁcient from our point of view, not from its own. My purpose,
Introduction
33
17 Hegel’s reference: Encyclopaedia, § 363 [3rd edn. § 440].

so far as it is still only mine, is felt by me as a defect since freedom and will
are for me the unity of the subjective and objective. Hence the purpose
must be established objectively and thereby it attains not a new one-sided
determination but only its realization.
9. (b) In so far as the determinations of the will are its own or, in
general, its particularization reﬂected into itself, they are its content.
This content, as content of the will, is, in accordance with the form
described in (a), its purpose,* either its inward or subjective purpose
when the will merely represents its object, or else its purpose actual-
ized and achieved by means of its activity of translating its subjective
purpose into objectivity.
10. This content, or the will’s distinct determination, is in the
ﬁrst place immediate. Consequently the will is free only in itself or for
us, or, to speak generally, it is the will in its concept. It is not until it
has itself as its object* that the will is for itself what it is in itself.*
Finitude consists therefore in this, that what something is in itself
or in accordance with its concept is one phenomenon or exists in
one way, while what it is for itself is a diﬀerent phenomenon or
exists in another way; so, for example, in itself the abstract exter-
nality of nature is space, but for itself it is time.* In this connection,
two things are to be noticed: (i) The true is the Idea and the Idea
alone, and hence if you take an object or a category only as it is 
in itself or in its concept, you have not yet grasped it in its truth.
(ii) A thing which is in itself or as concept is also existent in some
way and its existence in such a way is a shape proper to the thing
itself (as space is in the example just given). The gulf present in
the sphere of the ﬁnite between ‘being-in-itself’ [Ansichsein] and
‘being-for-itself’ [Fürsichsein] constitutes at the same time that
sphere’s mere existence or appearance. (Examples of this—in the
natural will and then in formal right, and so on—will be forth-
coming directly.)
The understanding goes no further than mere being-in-itself
and consequently calls the freedom which accords with this being-
in-itself a ‘capacity’ [Vermögen], because such freedom is indeed
mere possibility. But the understanding regards this determination
as absolute and perennial; and it takes the relation of freedom to
what it wills, or in general to the object in which it is realized, as
merely a matter of its application to a given material, not belonging
Introduction
34

to the essence of freedom itself. Thus it has to do with the abstract
only, not with its Idea and its truth.
Addition: The will which is a will only in accordance with its concept is
free in itself but at the same time it is also unfree, for it would become truly
free only as truly determinate content. At that point it is free for itself, has
freedom as its object, and is freedom. What is still only in accordance with
its concept, what is merely in itself [an sich], is only immediate, only natural.
In our ordinary ways of thinking we are familiar with this. The child is in
itself a human being. At ﬁrst it possesses reason only in itself [or implicitly];
it begins by being the possibility of reason and freedom, and so is free only
in accordance with its concept. Now what exists only in itself in this way
does not yet exist in its actuality. The human being is in himself [or impli-
citly] rational, but he must also become so for himself [or explicitly] by
working to create himself, not only by going outside himself but also by
developing himself internally.
11. The will which is free only in itself [an sich] is the immediate
or natural will.* The determinations of diﬀerence which the self-
determining concept posits within the will appear in the natural will
as an immediately existing content, i.e. as the impulses, desires, in-
clinations, whereby the will ﬁnds itself determined in the course of
nature. This content, together with the determinations developed
within it, arises from the rationality of the will and so is in itself
rational; but, poured out in this way into the mould of immediacy, it
still lacks the form of rationality. It is true that this content has for me
the general character of being mine; but this form is still diﬀerent
from the content, and hence the will is still a will ﬁnite in character.
Empirical psychology details and describes these impulses and
inclinations, and the needs arising from them, as it ﬁnds them, or
presumes it ﬁnds them, in experience, and it proceeds in the usual
way to classify this given material. Consideration is given below18
to the objective element in these impulses, both to its true charac-
ter stripped of the form of irrationality which it possesses as
impulse and also to the manner in which at the same time it is
shaped externally.
Addition: An animal too has impulses, desires, inclinations, but it has no
will and must obey its impulse if nothing external deters it. The human
being, however, the wholly undetermined, stands above his impulses and
Introduction
35
18 See PR §§ 19 and 150 with the Remarks thereto.

may make them his own, posit them in himself as his own. An impulse is
something natural, but to posit it in the I depends on my will which thus
cannot fall back on the plea that the impulse has its basis in nature.
12. The system of this content, as we ﬁnd it in its immediacy in
the will, is there only as a medley and multiplicity of impulses, each
of which as such is ‘mine’ but exists alongside others which are like-
wise all ‘mine’, and each of which is at the same time something uni-
versal and indeterminate, aimed at all kinds of objects and satiable in
all kinds of ways. When, in this twofold indeterminacy,* the will
gives itself the form of individuality (see § 7), this constitutes the 
resolution of the will, and it is only in so far as it resolves that the will
is an actual will at all.
To resolve on something is to cancel the state of indeterminacy 
in which one content is prima facie just as much of a possibility 
as any other. As an alternative to etwas beschliessen [to resolve on
something] the German language also contains the expression sich
entschliessen.* This expresses the fact that the indeterminate charac-
ter of the will itself, as itself neutral yet inﬁnitely proliﬁc, the ori-
ginal seed of all determinate existence, contains its determinations
and aims within itself and simply brings them forth out of itself.
13. By resolving, the will posits itself as the will of a speciﬁc indi-
vidual and as a will separating itself oﬀagainst another individual.
But apart from this ﬁnitude as consciousness (see § 8), the immediate
will is formal on account of the diﬀerence between its form and its
content (see § 11). It is capable only of abstract resolution [or deci-
sion] and its content is not yet the content and product of its freedom.
In so far as intelligence thinks, its object and content remain some-
thing universal, while its own behaviour consists of a universal
activity. In the will, ‘the universal’ also means in essence ‘mine’,
‘individuality’; and in the immediate will—the will which is only
a formal will—it means abstract individuality, individuality not
yet ﬁlled with its free universality. Hence it is in the will that the
intrinsic ﬁnitude of intelligence has its beginning; and it is only by
raising itself to become thought again, and endowing its aims with
immanent universality, that the will cancels the diﬀerence of form
and content and makes itself the objective, inﬁnite, will. Thus 
they understand little of the nature of thinking* and willing who
suppose that while, in willing as such, the human being is inﬁnite,
Introduction
36

in thinking, he, or even reason itself, is restricted. In so far as
thinking and willing are still distinguished, the opposite is rather
the truth, and will is thinking reason resolving itself to ﬁnitude.
Addition: A will which resolves on nothing is no actual will; a characterless
human being never reaches a decision. The reason for indecision may also
lie in a tenderness of feeling which knows that, in willing something deter-
minate, it is engaging with ﬁnitude, imposing a restriction on itself and
sacriﬁcing the inﬁnite; yet it will not renounce the totality after which it
hankers. However ‘beautiful’ such a disposition may be,* it is nevertheless
dead. As Goethe says: ‘Whoever wills something great must be able to
restrict himself.’* Only by resolving can a human being step into actuality,
however bitter this may be to him. Inertia lacks the will to abandon the
inward brooding which allows it to retain everything as a possibility. But
possibility is not yet actuality. The will which is sure of itself does not eo
ipso lose itself in its determinate volition.
14. The ﬁnite will as, in respect of its form, though only its form,
the self-reﬂecting, independent, and inﬁnite I (see § 5), stands over its
content, i.e. its various impulses, and also over the further separate
ways in which these are actualized and satisﬁed. At the same time,
since it is inﬁnite in form only, it is tied to this content (see §§ 6 and
11) as to the speciﬁc determinations of its nature and its external
actuality; though since it is indeterminate, it is not tied to this or that
speciﬁc content. From the point of view of the I reﬂected into itself,
this content is only a possible one, i.e. it may be mine or it may not;
and the I similarly is the possibility of determining myself to this or to
something else, of choosing between these speciﬁc determinations,
which at this point I regard as external to me.
15. According to this determination, the freedom of the will is
arbitrariness [Willkür] and this involves two factors: (a) free
reﬂection, abstracting from everything, and (b) dependence on a con-
tent and material given either from within or from without. Because
this content, necessary in itself as purpose, is at the same time
qualiﬁed in the face of free reﬂection as possible, it follows that arbi-
trariness is contingency manifesting itself as will.
The idea which people most commonly have of freedom is that it
is arbitrariness—the middle position of reﬂection between the
will wholly determined by natural impulses and the will that is free
in and for itself [an und für sich]. If we hear it said that the
Introduction
37

deﬁnition of freedom is the ability to do what we please, such an
idea can only be taken to reveal an utter immaturity of thought, for
it contains not even an inkling of the free will in and for itself, of
right, ethical life, and so forth. Reﬂection, the formal universality
and unity of self-consciousness, is the will’s abstract certainty of
its freedom, but it is not yet the truth of freedom, because it has
not yet got itself as its content and aim, and consequently the sub-
jective side is still other than the objective; the content of this self-
determination, therefore, also remains purely and simply ﬁnite.
Instead of being the will in its truth, arbitrariness is rather the will
as contradiction.
In the controversy carried on especially at the time of Wolﬀ’s
metaphysics* as to whether the will is really free or whether the
conviction of its freedom is only a delusion, it was arbitrariness
which was in view. In opposition to the certitude of this abstract
self-determination, determinism has rightly pointed to the content
which, as something encountered, is not contained in that certitude
and so comes to it from outside, although ‘outside’ in this case
means impulses, ideas, or, in general, consciousness so ﬁlled in one
way or another that its content is not intrinsic to its self-determining
activity as such. Since, then, arbitrariness has immanent in it only
the formal element in willing, i.e. free self-determination, while
the other element is something given to it, we may readily allow
that, if arbitrariness is supposed to be freedom, it may indeed be
called an illusion. In every philosophy of reﬂection, like Kant’s,
and Kant’s deprived of all its depth by Fries, freedom is nothing
else but this formal self-activity.
Addition: Since it is possible for me to determine myself in this way or that,
or in other words since I can choose, I possess the arbitrary will, and to
possess this is what is usually called freedom. The choice which I have is
grounded in the universality of the will, in the fact that I can make this or
that mine. This thing that is mine is particular in content and therefore not
adequate to me and so is separate from me; it is only possibly mine, while
I am the possibility of linking myself to it. Choice, therefore, is grounded
in the indeterminacy of the I and the determinacy of a content. Thus the will,
on account of this content, is not free, although it has an inﬁnite aspect in
virtue of its form. No single content is adequate to it and in no single con-
tent is it truly itself. Arbitrariness implies that the content is made mine
not by the nature of my will but by contingency. Thus I am dependent on this
content, and this is the contradiction lying in arbitrariness. The ordinary
Introduction
38

person thinks he is free if it is open to him to act as he pleases but his very
arbitrariness implies that he is not free. When I will what is rational, then
I am acting not as a particular individual but in accordance with the con-
cepts of ethical life in general. In an ethical action, what I vindicate is not
myself but the thing. But in doing a perverse action, it is my particularity
that I bring on to the centre of the stage. The rational is the high road
where everyone travels, where no one is conspicuous. When great artists
complete a work, we can say: that is how it must be; that is, the artist’s par-
ticularity has completely disappeared and no mannerism is detectable in it.
Pheidias has no mannerisms;* the shape itself lives and stands forth. But
the worse the artist is, the more we see in his work the artist, his particu-
larity, his arbitrariness. If you stop at the consideration that, having an
arbitrary will, a human being can will this or that, then of course his free-
dom consists in that ability. But if you keep ﬁrmly in view that the content
of his willing is a given one, then he is determined thereby and in that
respect at all events is free no longer.
16. What the will has decided to choose (see § 14) it can equally
easily renounce (see § 5). But its ability to go beyond any other choice
which it may substitute, and so on ad inﬁnitum, never enables it to get
beyond its own ﬁnitude, because the content of every such choice is
something other than the form of the will and therefore something
ﬁnite, while the opposite of determinacy, namely indeterminacy, i.e.
indecision or abstraction from any content, is only the other, equally
one-sided, moment of the will.
17. The contradiction, which the arbitrary will is (see § 15), comes
into appearance as a dialectic of impulses and inclinations; each of
them is in the way of every other—the satisfaction of one is unavoid-
ably subordinated or sacriﬁced to the satisfaction of another, and so
on. An impulse is simply a unidirectional urge and thus has no 
measuring-rod in itself, and so this determination of its subordin-
ation or sacriﬁce is the contingent decision of the arbitrary will
which, in deciding, may proceed either by using understanding 
to calculate which impulse will give most satisfaction, or else in
accordance with any other optional consideration.
Addition: Impulses and inclinations are in the ﬁrst instance a content of the
will, and reﬂection alone stands above them. But these impulses them-
selves begin to impel, they drive one another, stir each other, and all of
them demand satisfaction. Now if I neglect all the others and put myself
in one of them by itself, I ﬁnd myself under a restriction which destroys
me, since just by so doing I have surrendered my universality, which is 
Introduction
39

a system of all impulses. But it is just as little help to make a mere hier-
archy of impulses—a device to which the understanding usually resorts—
since no criterion for so ordering them is available here, and therefore the
demand for such a hierarchy runs out in the tedium of generalities.
18. In connection with the judging of impulses, this dialectic
appears in the following form: (a) As immanent and so positive, the
determinations of the immediate will are good; thus human beings are
said to be by nature good. (b) But, insofar as these determinations are
natural and thus are in general opposed to freedom and the concept
of spirit, and hence negative, they must be uprooted, and so human
beings are said to be by nature evil.—At this point a decision in
favour of either thesis depends equally on subjective arbitrariness.
Addition: The Christian doctrine that human beings are by nature evil is
superior to the other which takes them to be by nature good. This doctrine
is to be understood as follows in accordance with the philosophical exe-
gesis of it: As spirit, the human being is a free being who is in the position
of not allowing himself to be determined by natural impulses; when his
condition is immediate and undeveloped, the human being is in a situation
in which he ought not to be and from which he must free himself. This is
the meaning of the doctrine of original sin without which Christianity
would not be the religion of freedom.
19. In the demand for the puriﬁcation of impulses there lies the
general notion that they should be freed both from their form as
immediate and natural determinations, and also from the subjectiv-
ity and contingency of their content, and so brought back to their
substantial essence. The truth behind this vague demand is that the
impulses should become the rational system of the will’s volitions.
To grasp them like that, proceeding out of the concept of the will, is
the content of the philosophical science of right.
The content of this science through every single one of its moments,
e.g. right, property, morality, family, state, and so forth, may be
expounded in the form: human beings have by nature the impulse
towards right, also the impulse to property and morality, also the
impulse of love between the sexes, the impulse to sociability, and
so on. This form is to be found in empirical psychology. But if in
its stead the greater dignity of a philosophical dress is desired,
then according to what, as was remarked before,19 has passed in
Introduction
40
19 See Remarks to PR §§ 2 and 4.

recent times, and still passes, for philosophy, this dress may be
had cheap by the simple device of saying that the human being
discovers within himself as a ‘fact of his consciousness’ that right,
property, the state, and so on, are objects of his volition. Later in
the book,20 this same subject-matter, which appears here in the
shape of impulses, will come on the scene in another form, i.e. in
the shape of duties.
20. When reﬂection is brought to bear on impulses, they are
imaged, estimated, compared with one another, with their means of
satisfaction and their consequences, and so on, and with a sum of sat-
isfaction (i.e. with happiness). In this way reﬂection invests this ma-
terial with formal universality and in this external manner puriﬁes it
of its crudity and barbarity. This growth of the universality of
thought is the absolute value in education [Bildung] (compare § 187).
Addition: In happiness thought has already a mastery over the natural force
of impulses, since the thinker is not content with the momentary but
demands a whole happiness. This requirement is connected with educa-
tion in that it is education which vindicates a universal. In the ideal of hap-
piness, however, there are two moments: (i) a universal which is superior
to all particularity; but (ii) since the content of this universal is still only
universal pleasure, there appears here once again the singular, the particu-
lar, i.e. something ﬁnite, and a return must therefore be made to impulse.
Since the content of happiness lies in everyone’s subjectivity and feeling,
this universal end is for its part particular, and consequently there is still
not present in it any genuine unity of form and content.
21. The truth, however, of this formal universality, which is inde-
terminate for itself and ﬁnds its determinacy in the material men-
tioned in § 20, is self-determining universality, the will, freedom. In
having universality, or itself qua inﬁnite form,* for its object, con-
tent, and aim, the will is free not only in itself but for itself also; it is
the Idea in its truth.
(i) When the will’s self-consciousness takes the form of desire and
impulse, this self-consciousness is sensuous, just as sensation in
general denotes externality and therefore the condition in which
self-consciousness is external to itself. (ii) When the will is reﬂective,
it contains two elements—this sensuous moment and the univer-
sality of thought. (iii) When the will is will in and for itself, then it
Introduction
41
20 See PR § 148 and esp. Remark to PR § 150.

has for its object the will itself as such, and so the will in its sheer
universality—a universality which is what it is simply because it
has superseded [aufgehoben] in itself the immediacy of natural
desire and the particularity which is produced by reﬂection and
with which such desire eo ipso becomes imbued. But this process
of supersession or elevation to universality is what is called the
activity of thought. The self-consciousness which puriﬁes its object,
content, and aim, and raises them to this universality eﬀects this
as thinking asserting itself in the will. Here is the point at which it
becomes clear that it is only as thinking intelligence that the will is
genuinely a will and free. The slave does not know his essence, his
inﬁnity, his freedom; he does not know himself to be an essence;
and he lacks this knowledge of himself because he does not think
himself. This self-consciousness which apprehends itself through
thinking as an essence, and thereby frees itself from the contingent
and the untrue, is the principle of right, morality, and all ethical
life. Philosophical utterances about right, morality, and ethical life
from those who would banish thought and have recourse instead to
feeling, enthusiasm, the heart and the breast, are expressive of the
utterly contemptible position into which thought and philosophical
science have fallen, because what this amounts to is that even philo-
sophical science itself, plunged in self-despair and extreme exhaus-
tion, is taking as its principle barbarity and absence of thought, and
would do its best to rob humanity of all truth, worth, and dignity.
Addition: Truth in philosophy means that concept and reality correspond.
For example, the body is the reality, while the soul is the concept; but soul
and body ought to be adequate to one another. Therefore a corpse is still
an existent, but its existence is no true existence; the concept has left it;
and for this reason a dead body putreﬁes. So a will is truly a will only when
what it wills, its content, is identical with itself, when, that is to say, free-
dom wills freedom.
22. It is the will in and for itself which is truly inﬁnite, because its
object is itself and so is not for it an ‘other’ or a limitation; on the con-
trary, in its object this will has simply turned back into itself. Further
this will is not mere possibility, predisposition, capacity (potentia),
but the inﬁnite in actuality (inﬁnitum actu), since the concept’s exist-
ence or its objective externality is inwardness itself.
Thus, if anyone speaks simply of the ‘free will’ as such, without
speciﬁcally referring to the will which is free in and for itself, he is
Introduction
42

speaking only of the predisposition towards freedom, or of the nat-
ural and ﬁnite will (see § 11), and not by any means therefore of
the free will, despite his intention and the words he uses.
Since the understanding takes the inﬁnite only as something
negative and so as something ‘beyond’, it supposes that it is doing
all the more honour to the inﬁnite, the more it pushes it into the
distance away from itself and removes it from itself as something
alien. In the free will, the truly inﬁnite becomes actual and pres-
ent; the free will itself is this Idea whose nature it is to be present
here and now.
Addition: Inﬁnity has rightly been represented ﬁguratively as a circle,
because a straight line goes on and on for ever and denotes the purely
negative, bad inﬁnite which, unlike the true inﬁnite, has no return into
itself. The free will is truly inﬁnite, since it is not just a possibility and a
predisposition. On the contrary, its external existence is its own inward-
ness, is itself.
23. Only in freedom of this kind is the will with itself without
qualiﬁcation, because then it is related to nothing except itself and so
is released from every relation of dependence on anything else. The
will is then true, or rather truth itself, because its self-determination
consists in a correspondence between what it is in its existence (i.e.
what it is as objective to itself) and its concept; or in other words, the
pure concept of the will has the intuition of itself for its goal and its
reality.
24. The will is then universal, because all restriction and all 
particular individuality have been superseded within it. These lie
only in the diﬀerence between the concept and its content or object,
or, to put it otherwise, in the diﬀerence between its being-in-itself
[Ansichsein] and its subjective being-for-itself [Fürsichsein], or
between its universality and its exclusive individuality, the individu-
ality which resolves.
The various determinations of universality are developed in logic.21
In connection with this word ‘universality’, what strikes represen-
tational thinking [Vorstellen] ﬁrst is the idea of abstract and exter-
nal universality; but in connection with universality in and for
itself—and the universality here in question is of this character—
we have to think neither of the universality of reﬂection, i.e. ‘all-ness’
Introduction
43
21 Hegel’s reference: See Encyclopaedia, §§ 118–26 [3rd edn. §§ 169–78].

or the universal as a common characteristic, nor of the abstract
universality which stands outside and over against the individual,
the abstract identity of the understanding (see Remark to § 6). It is
the universality concrete in character and so universal for itself
which is the substance of self-consciousness, its immanent generic
essence, or its immanent Idea. This—the concept of the free will—
is the universal which embraces its object, thoroughly permeates
its determination and therein remains identical with itself. The
universal in and for itself is deﬁnable as what is called the ‘rational’,
and it can be apprehended only in this speculative way.
25. The subjective, in relation to the will in general, means the will’s
self-conscious side, its individuality (see § 7) in distinction from its
concept in itself. The subjectivity of the will means therefore
(α) the pure form of the will, the absolute unity of self-consciousness
with itself (a unity in which self-consciousness, as I = I, is purely and
simply inward and abstractly self-dependent), the pure certainty of
itself, as distinguished from the truth;
(β) the particularity of the will as the arbitrary will and the contin-
gent content of optional aims;
(γ) in general, the one-sided form of the will (see § 8) in which the
thing willed, whatever its content, is but a content belonging to self-
consciousness and an aim unfulﬁlled.
26. (α) The will is purely and simply objective insofar as it has
itself for its determination and so is in correspondence with its con-
cept and genuinely a will;
(β) but the objective will, without the inﬁnite form of self-
consciousness, is the will absorbed in its object or condition, what-
ever the content of these may be; it is the will of the child, the ethical
will,* also the will of the slave, the superstitious person, and so on;
(γ) objectivity, ﬁnally, is the one-sided form opposed to the 
subjective volition, and hence it is the immediacy of existence as
external reality; the will ﬁrst becomes objective to itself in this sense
through the fulﬁlment of its aims.
These logical categories—subjectivity and objectivity—have
been set forth in detail here primarily with a view to pointing out
expressly in relation to them, since they are often used in the
sequel, that they, like other distinctions and opposed determin-
ations of reﬂection, pass over into their opposites as a result of
Introduction
44

their ﬁnitude and their dialectical character. Other such opposed
determinations, however, retain a hard and fast meaning for repre-
sentational thinking and the understanding, because their identity
is still only something inward. In the will, on the other hand, the
opposed aspects are supposed to be at one and the same time
abstractions and determinations of the will, which can be known
only as something concrete, and so they lead by themselves to
their identity and to the confusion of their meanings—a confusion
into which the understanding slips quite unconsciously. Thus, for
example, the will as inward freedom is subjectivity itself; subject-
ivity therefore is the concept of the will and so its objectivity. But
its subjectivity contrasted with objectivity is ﬁnitude, and yet,
because of this very contrast, the will is not with itself but is entan-
gled with its object, and so its ﬁnitude consists quite as much 
in the fact that it is not subjective—and so on. Hence the mean-
ing to be attributed in what follows to ‘subjective’ or ‘objective’ in
respect of the will must each time appear from the context, which
deﬁnes their position in relation to the will as a whole.
Addition: It is usually supposed that subjective and objective stand rigidly
in opposition to one another. But this is not the case; it would be truer to
say that they pass over into each other, since they are not abstract categories
like positive and negative but already have a more concrete signiﬁcance.
Consider ﬁrst the word ‘subjective’. We may call ‘subjective’ an end
which is only the end of one speciﬁc subject. In this sense a very bad work
of art, one which is not quite the thing, is purely ‘subjective’. The word may
also be applied, however, to the content of the will, and it is then almost syn-
onymous with ‘arbitrary’; a ‘subjective’ content is that which belongs to the
subject alone. Hence bad actions, for example, are purely ‘subjective’. But,
further, it is just that pure empty I which may be called ‘subjective’, the I
which has itself alone for its object and possesses the power to abstract from
any other content. Thus subjectivity sometimes means something wholly
particular, and at other times something with the highest justiﬁcation, since
everything which I am to recognize has also the task of becoming mine and
attaining its validity in me. Subjectivity is insatiably greedy to concentrate
and drown everything in this simple spring of the pure I.
No less varied are the ways in which we may take ‘objective’. We may
understand by it everything which we make an object to ourselves, whether
actual existences or mere thoughts which we bring before our minds. 
We also include under this category the immediacy of existence in which
the end is to be realized; even if the end is itself wholly particular and 
subjective, we nonetheless call it ‘objective’ on its appearance. But the
Introduction
45

‘objective’ will is also that in which truth lies, and thus God’s will, the 
ethical will, is an ‘objective’ one. Finally, we may also call ‘objective’ the
will which is entirely absorbed in its object, as for example the will of the
child, which is rooted in trust without subjective freedom, and the will of
the slave, which does not yet know itself as free and on that account is a will-
less will. In this sense any will is ‘objective’ which acts under the guidance
of an alien authority and has not yet completed its inﬁnite return into itself.
27. The absolute determination, or, if you like, the absolute
impulse, of the free spirit (see § 21) is to make its freedom its object,
i.e. to make freedom objective, both in the sense that freedom is to
be the rational system of spirit and in the sense that this system is to
be the world of immediate actuality (see § 26). In making freedom its
object, spirit’s purpose is to be for itself, as Idea, what the will is in
itself. The abstract concept of the Idea of the will is in general the free
will which wills the free will.
28. The will’s activity consists in annulling [aufzuheben] the 
contradiction between subjectivity and objectivity and giving its aims
an objective instead of a subjective character, while at the same time
remaining with itself even in objectivity. Aside from the formal 
mode of consciousness (see § 8), where objectivity is present only as
immediate actuality, this activity is in essence the development of the 
substantial content of the Idea (see § 21)—a development through
which the concept determines the Idea, itself at ﬁrst abstract, until it
becomes a systematized whole. This whole, as what is substantial, is
independent of the opposition between a merely subjective aim and
its realization and is the same in both despite their diﬀerence in form.
29. Right [Recht] is any existence at all which is the existence
[Dasein] of the free will. Right therefore is by deﬁnition freedom as
Idea.
The crucial point in both the Kantian and the generally accepted
deﬁnition of right (see the Introduction to Kant’s Doctrine of
Right)* is the ‘restriction which makes it possible for my freedom
or self-will to coexist with the self-will of each and all according to
a universal law’. On the one hand, this deﬁnition contains only a
negative determination, that of restriction, while on the other
hand the positive factor—the universal law or the so-called ‘law of
reason’, the correspondence of the arbitrary self-will [Willkür] of
one individual with that of another—is tantamount to the principle
Introduction
46

of contradiction and the familiar notion of formal identity. The
deﬁnition of right which I have quoted involves that way of look-
ing at the matter, especially popular since Rousseau,* according to
which what is fundamental, substantial, and primary is supposed
to be the will of an individual in his own arbitrary self-will, not the
rational will in and for itself, and spirit as a particular individual,
not spirit as it is in its truth. Once this principle is adopted, of
course the rational can come on the scene only as a restriction on
the type of freedom which this principle involves, and so also not
as something immanently rational but only as an external, formal
universal. This view is devoid of any speculative thinking and is
repudiated by the philosophical concept. And the phenomena
which it has produced both in people’s heads and in the world are
of a frightfulness parallel only to the superﬁciality of the thoughts
on which they are based.*
30. It is precisely because right is the existence of the absolute
concept or of self-conscious freedom that it is something sacrosanct
[heilig].—The formalism of right (and of duty also, as we shall see 
[§§ 133–5]) arises, however, out of diﬀerences in the development of
the concept of freedom. By contrast with the right which is more
formal (i.e. more abstract) and so more restricted, a higher right
belongs to the sphere and stage of spirit in which spirit has deter-
mined and actualized within itself the further moments contained in
its Idea; and it belongs to this sphere as the sphere which is more
concrete, intrinsically richer, and more genuinely universal.
Every stage in the development of the Idea of freedom has its own
special right, since it is the existence of freedom in one of its own
determinations. When there is said to be a clash between the moral
or the ethical and right, the right in question is only the initial,
formal, right of abstract personality. Morality, ethical life, the
interest of the state, each of these is a distinctive right because each
of them is a speciﬁc determination and existence of freedom. They
can come into collision with each other only insofar as they are all
equally rights. If spirit’s moral standpoint were not also a right, or
freedom in one of its forms, it could not possibly come into colli-
sion with the right of personality or with any other right, because
any right whatever has inherent in it the concept of freedom, 
i.e. the highest category of spirit, in contrast with which anything
else is without substance. Yet at the same time collision involves
Introduction
47

another moment, namely the fact that it is restrictive, and so if 
two rights collide one is subordinated to the other. It is only the
right of the world-spirit [Weltgeist] which is absolute without
qualiﬁcation.
31. The method whereby, in philosophical science, the concept
develops itself out of itself is expounded in logic and is here likewise
presupposed.22 Its development is a purely immanent progress and
engendering of its determinations. Its advance is not eﬀected by the
assertion that various things ‘exist’ and then by the ‘application’ of the
universal to extraneous material of that sort culled from elsewhere.
The concept’s moving principle, which alike engenders and dis-
solves the particularizations of the universal, I call ‘dialectic’,
though I do not mean that dialectic which takes an object, propo-
sition, and so on, given to feeling or, in general, to immediate con-
sciousness, and explains it away, confuses it, pursues it this way
and that, and has as its sole task the deduction of the contrary of
that with which it starts—a negative type of dialectic commonly
appearing even in Plato.* Dialectic of this kind may regard as its
ﬁnal result either the contrary of the idea with which it begins, or,
if it is as incisive as the scepticism of the ancients, the contradict-
ory of this idea, or again, it may be feeble enough to be content
with an ‘approximation’ to the truth, a modern half-measure.23
The higher dialectic of the concept consists not simply in produ-
cing the determination as a contrary and a restriction, but in pro-
ducing and seizing upon the positive content and outcome of the
determination, because it is this which makes it solely a develop-
ment and an immanent progress. Moreover, this dialectic is not an
activity of subjective thinking applied to some matter externally,
but is rather the matter’s very soul putting forth its branches and
fruit organically. This development of the Idea is the proper activ-
ity of its rationality, and thinking, as something subjective, merely
looks on at it without for its part adding to it any ingredient of its
own. To consider a thing rationally means not to bring reason to
bear on the object from the outside and so to work on it, but to ﬁnd
that the object is rational on its own account [für sich]; here it is
spirit in its freedom, the culmination of self-conscious reason,
Introduction
48
22 See PR Preface, pp. 3–4 above. [S.H.]
23 See PR Preface, p. 16 above. [S.H.]

which gives itself actuality and engenders itself as an existing
world. The sole task of philosophical science is to bring into con-
sciousness this proper work of the reason of the thing itself.
32. The determinations of the concept in the course of its devel-
opment are from one point of view themselves concepts, but from
another they take the form of existents, since the concept is in
essence Idea. The series of concepts which this development yields
is therefore at the same time a series of shapes [Gestaltungen], and
philosophical science must treat them accordingly.
In a more speculative sense, a concept’s determinacy [Bestimmtheit]
and its mode of existence [Dasein] are one and the same thing. 
Yet it is to be noticed that the moments, whose result is a further
determined form of the concept, precede it in the philosophical
development of the Idea as determinations of the concept, but
they do not come before it in its temporal development as shapes.
Thus, for instance, the Idea determined as the family, presupposes
the determinations of the concept from which the family will later
on in this work be shown to result. But the explicit existence of
these inner presuppositions as shapes also, e.g. as the right of
property, contract, morality, and so forth, is the other aspect of the
development, and it is only in a higher and more complete civiliza-
tion that the development has gone so far as to endow its moments
with this distinctively shaped existence.*
Addition: The Idea must further determine itself within itself continually,
since in the beginning it is no more than an abstract concept. But this ori-
ginal abstract concept is never abandoned. It merely becomes continually
richer in itself and the ﬁnal determination is therefore the richest. In this
process its earlier determinations, which exist only in themselves [an sich],
attain their free self-subsistence but in such a way that the concept
remains the soul which holds everything together and attains its own
proper diﬀerentiation only through an immanent process. It therefore
cannot be said that the concept reaches anything new; on the contrary, its
ﬁnal determination coincides with its ﬁrst. Even if the concept seems in its
existence to have fallen apart, this is nothing but a semblance [Schein]
revealing itself in due course as a semblance, because all details revert at
last to the concept of the universal. In the empirical sciences one usually
analyses what is found in representation [Vorstellung], and when the single
instance has been brought back to the common character, the latter is then
called the concept. This is not our procedure; we only wish to look on at
the way in which the concept determines itself and to restrain ourselves
Introduction
49

from adding thereto anything of our thoughts and opinions. What we
acquire in this way, however, is a series of thoughts and another series of
existent shapes; to which I may add that the time order in which the latter
actually appear is other than the logical order. Thus, for example, we
cannot say that property existed before the family, yet, in spite of that,
property must be dealt with ﬁrst.
Consequently you might raise here the question why we do not begin at
the highest point, i.e. with the concretely true. The answer is that it is pre-
cisely the truth in the form of a result that we are looking for, and for this
purpose it is essential to start by grasping the abstract concept itself. What
is actual, the shape in which the concept is embodied, is for us therefore
the further thing and the sequel, even if it were itself ﬁrst in the actual
world. The development we are studying is that whereby the abstract
forms reveal themselves not as existing for themselves but as untrue.
Division of the Subject
33. According to the stages in the development of the Idea of the
absolutely free will, the will is:
A. immediate; its concept therefore is abstract, namely personal-
ity, and its existence [Dasein] is an immediate external thing—the
sphere of abstract or formal right;
B. reﬂected from its external existence into itself—it is then char-
acterized as subjective individuality in opposition to the universal.
The universal here is characterized as something inward, the good,
and also as something outward, a world presented to the will; both
these sides of the Idea are here mediated only by each other. This is
the Idea in its division or in its existence [Existenz] as particular; and
here we have the right of the subjective will in relation to the right of
the world and the right of the Idea, though only the Idea in itself—
the sphere of morality [Moralität];
C. the unity and truth of both these abstract moments—the Idea
of the good not only apprehended in thought but so realized both in
the will reﬂected into itself and in the external world that freedom
exists as substance, as actuality and necessity, no less than as subjective
will; this is the Idea in its universal existence in and for itself—
ethical life [Sittlichkeit].
But the ethical substance is likewise
(a) natural spirit, the family;
(b) in its division and appearance, civil society;
Introduction
50

(c) the state as freedom, freedom universal and objective even
in the free self-subsistence of the particular will. This actual and
organic spirit (α) of a people [Volk] (β) reveals and actualizes itself
through the interrelation of the particular national spirits until (γ) in
the process of world-history it reveals and actualizes itself as the uni-
versal world-spirit whose right is supreme.
The fact that when a thing or a content is posited ﬁrst of all in
accordance with its concept or as it is in itself, it then has the form
of immediacy or pure being, is the doctrine of speculative logic, here
presupposed;24 the concept which is for itself in the form of the con-
cept is a diﬀerent thing and no longer something immediate.
The principle which determines the division of the subject is
likewise here presupposed.25 The division may also be looked
upon as a predeclaration in historical form of the parts of the book,
since the various stages must engender themselves out of the subject-
matter itself as moments in the development of the Idea. A philo-
sophical division is far from being an external one, i.e. it is not an
external classiﬁcation of a given material in accordance with one or
more borrowed bases of division, but, on the contrary, is the
immanent self-diﬀerentiation of the concept.
‘Morality’ [Moralität] and ‘ethical life’ [Sittlichkeit],* which are
perhaps usually regarded as synonyms, are taken here in essen-
tially diﬀerent senses. Yet even commonplace thinking seems now
to be distinguishing them; Kant generally prefers to use the word
‘morality’ and, since the principles of action in his philosophy are
always limited to this conception, they make the standpoint of 
ethical life completely impossible, in fact they explicitly nullify and
spurn it. But even if ‘moral’ and ‘ethical’ meant the same thing 
etymologically, that would in no way hinder them, once they had
become diﬀerent words, from being used for diﬀerent conceptions.
Addition: In speaking of right [Recht] here, we mean not merely what is
generally understood by the word, namely civil right, but also morality,
ethical life, and world-history; these belong just as much to our topic,
because the concept brings thoughts together into a true system. If the free
will is not to remain abstract, it must in the ﬁrst place give itself an exist-
ence, and the ﬁrst sensuous material available for such existence are things,
Introduction
51
24 See Encyclopaedia (1830), §§ 84ﬀ. [S.H.]
25 See Encyclopaedia (1830), §§ 237–43.

i.e. objects outside us. This primary mode of freedom is the one which we
are to become acquainted with as property, the sphere of formal and
abstract right. To this sphere there also belong property in its mediated
form as contract, and right in its infringement as crime and punishment. The
freedom which we have here is what is called a person, i.e. the subject 
who is free, free indeed for himself, and who gives himself an existence in
things.
The sheer immediacy of existence, however, is not adequate to freedom,
and the negation of this determination is the sphere of morality. I am now
free, not merely in this immediate thing, but also after the immediacy has
been superseded, i.e. I am free in myself, in my subjectivity. In this sphere
the main thing is my insight, my intention, my purpose, because external-
ity has now been posited as indiﬀerent. Good, however, which here is the
universal end, should not simply remain in my inner life; it should realize
itself. That is to say, the subjective will demands that what is internal to it,
i.e. its end, shall acquire an external existence, that the good shall in this
way be consummated in the external world.
Morality and formal right are two abstract moments whose truth is eth-
ical life alone. Hence ethical life is the unity of the will in its concept with
the will of the individual, i.e. of the subject. Its ﬁrst existence is again
something natural, whose form is love and feeling—the family. Here the
individual has transcended his self-enclosed personality and ﬁnds himself
and his consciousness of himself in a whole. At the next stage, however,
we see substantial unity disappearing along with ethical life proper; the
family falls asunder and its members relate themselves to each other as
self-subsistent, since their only bond of connection is reciprocal need.
This stage—civil society—has often been looked upon as the state, but the
state is ﬁrst present at the third stage, the stage of ethical life and of spirit
in which the prodigious uniﬁcation of self-subsistent individuality with
universal substantiality has been achieved. The right of the state therefore
stands above the preceding stages; it is freedom in its most concrete shape
and as such is subordinate to one thing alone—the supreme absolute truth
of the world-spirit.
Introduction
52

first part
ABSTRACT RIGHT
34. The will that is free in and for itself, at the stage when its con-
cept is abstract, has the determinate character of immediacy.
Accordingly this stage is its abstractly self-related actuality, which is
negative in contrast with reality—the inherently individual will of a
subject. According to the moment of the particularity of the will it
has in addition a content consisting of determinate aims, and, as
exclusive individuality, it has this content at the same time as an exter-
nal world directly confronting it.
Addition: When I say that ‘the will that is free in and for itself, at the stage
when its concept is abstract, has the determinate character of immediacy’,
what I mean is this: when the concept has fully realized itself and when the
existence of the concept has become nothing but the unfolding of its own
self, then that state of aﬀairs is the fully developed Idea of the will. But at
the start the concept is abstract, which means that all its determinations
are contained within it, but still only contained within it; they are only
implicit [an sich] and not yet developed to be a totality in themselves. If 
I say ‘I am free’, the I is still this inwardness [Insichsein] without opposi-
tion. In morality, on the other hand, there is opposition from the start,
since I stand in the moral sphere as an individual will while the good is the
universal even though it is within myself. Thus at that level, the will has in
itself the diﬀerent moments of individuality and universality, and this
gives it its determinate character. But, to begin with, no such diﬀerence is
present, since at the ﬁrst stage, that of abstract unity, there is no advance
and no mediation and so the will has the form of immediacy, of mere
being. The essential point of view to be taken here then is that this original
indeterminacy is itself a determinacy. The indeterminacy lies in the fact
that there is as yet no diﬀerence between the will and its content; but inde-
terminacy, opposed to the determinate, acquires the character of being
something determinate. It is abstract identity which here constitutes
determinacy; the will therefore becomes an individual will, a person.
35. The universality of this will that is free for itself is formal uni-
versality, the self-conscious but otherwise contentless and simple
relation of itself to itself in its individuality, and from this point of
view the subject is a person [Person]. Personality implies that as this

person: (i) I am completely determined on every side (in my inner
caprice, impulse, and desire, as well as by immediate external 
existence) and so ﬁnite, yet (ii) nonetheless I am simply and solely
self-relation, and therefore in ﬁnitude I know myself as something
inﬁnite, universal, and free.
Personality begins not with the subject’s mere general conscious-
ness of himself as an I concretely determined in some way or
other, but rather with his consciousness of himself as a completely
abstract I in which every concrete restriction and value is negated
and without validity. In personality, therefore, knowledge is
knowledge of oneself as an object, but an object raised by thinking
to the level of simple inﬁnity and so an object that is purely self-
identical. Individuals and peoples have no personality until they
have achieved this pure thought and knowledge of themselves.
Spirit that is in and for itself diﬀers from spirit in its appearance
in this, that in the same respect in which the latter is only self-
consciousness—a consciousness of self but only in accordance with
the natural will and its still external oppositions26—the former has
itself, as the abstract and free I, for its object and aim, and so is a
person.
Addition: The will that is abstract or for itself is the person. The highest
thing for a human being is to be a person, and yet in spite of that the bare
abstraction, ‘person’, is somewhat contemptuous in its very expression.
‘Person’ is essentially diﬀerent from ‘subject’, since ‘subject’ is only 
the possibility of personality; every living thing of any sort is a subject. 
A person, then, is a subject aware of this subjectivity, since in personality
I am for myself as such. The person is the individuality of freedom in 
its pure being-for-self. As this person, I know myself to be free in 
myself. I can abstract from everything, since nothing confronts me 
save pure personality, and yet as this person I am something wholly 
determinate, e.g. I am of a certain age, a certain stature, I occupy this
space, and so on through whatever other details you like. Thus personal-
ity is at once the sublime and the trivial. It implies this unity of 
the inﬁnite with the purely ﬁnite, of the wholly limitless with determinate
limitation. It is the sublimity of personality that is able to sustain this 
contradiction, a contradiction which nothing merely natural contains or
could endure.
First Part: Abstract Right 
54
26 Hegel’s reference: See Phenomenology of Spirit (Bamberg and Würzburg, 1807),
101 ﬀ. [Miller trans., 104–5], and Encyclopaedia, § 344 [3rd edn. § 424]).

36. (1) Personality essentially involves the capacity for rights and
constitutes the concept and the basis (itself abstract) of the system of
abstract and therefore formal right. Hence the imperative of right is:
‘Be a person and respect others as persons.’
37. (2) The particularity of the will is a moment in the conscious-
ness of the will as a whole (see § 34), but it is not yet contained in
abstract personality as such. Therefore, it is present at this point, but
as still sundered from personality, from the character of freedom,
present as desire, need, impulse, casual whim, and so forth. In formal
right, therefore, it is not a matter of particular interests, of my advan-
tage or my welfare, any more than of the particular motive behind
my volition, of insight and intention.
Addition: Since, in personality, particularity is not present as freedom,
everything which depends on particularity is here a matter of indiﬀerence.
To have no interest except in one’s formal right may be pure obstinacy,
often a ﬁtting accompaniment of a cold heart and restricted sympathies:
for it is uncultured people who insist most on their rights, while noble
minds look on other aspects of the thing. Thus abstract right is nothing
but a bare possibility and in that respect something formal as compared
with the whole range of the situation. On that account, to have a right
gives one a warrant, but it is not absolutely necessary that one should insist
on one’s rights, because that is only one aspect of the whole situation. That
is to say, possibility is being which has the signiﬁcance of also not being.
38. In relation to action in the concrete and to moral and ethical
relations, abstract right is, in contrast with the further content which
these involve, only a possibility, and to have a right is therefore to
have only a permission or a warrant. The unconditional commands of
abstract right are restricted, once again because of its abstractness, to
the negative: ‘Do not infringe personality and what personality
entails.’ The result is that there are only prohibitions in the sphere of
right, and the positive form of any command in this sphere is based
in the last resort, if we examine its ultimate content, on prohibition.
39. (3) As immediate individuality, a person in making decisions is
related to a world of nature directly confronting him, and thus the
personality of the will stands over against this world as something
subjective. For personality, however, as inherently inﬁnite and uni-
versal, the restriction of being only subjective is a contradiction and
a nullity. Personality is that which acts to overcome [aufzuheben] this
First Part: Abstract Right 
55

restriction and to give itself reality, or in other words to claim that
external world as its own.
40. Right is in the ﬁrst place the immediate existence which free-
dom gives itself in an immediate way, i.e. (a) possession, which is
property-ownership. Freedom is here the freedom of the abstract will
in general or, eo ipso, the freedom of an individual person related only
to himself. (b) A person by distinguishing himself from himself
relates himself to another person, and it is only as owners that these
two persons really exist for each other. Their implicit [an sich seiend]
identity is realized through the transference of property from one to
the other in conformity with a common will and without detriment
to the rights of either. This is contract. (c) The will which is
diﬀerentiated not in the sense of (b) as being contrasted with another
person, but in the sense of (a) as related to itself, is as a particular will
at variance with and opposed to itself as a will that is in and for itself.
This opposition is wrongdoing and crime.
The classiﬁcation of the system of rights* into the right of persons
and the right to things, on the one hand, and the right of action, on
the other, like the many other similar classiﬁcations, has as its pri-
mary aim the imposition of an external order on the mass of unor-
ganized material confronting the classiﬁer. The striking thing about
this classiﬁcation is the confusion in it due to the disorderly inter-
mixture of rights which presuppose substantial relations, e.g. those
of family and state, and rights which only concern abstract person-
ality as such. This confusion is exempliﬁed in the classiﬁcation of
rights (adopted by Kant and since favoured by others)27 into rights
to things, rights of persons, and personal rights of a real [dinglich] kind.
To develop the perversity and lack of conceptual thought in the
classiﬁcation of rights into rights of persons and rights to things,
which lies at the root of Roman law (rights of action concern the
administration of justice and are of a diﬀerent order altogether),
would take us too far aﬁeld. Here this much at least is clear: it is
personality alone which can confer a right to things and therefore
the right of persons in its essence is a right to things, ‘thing’
[Sache] being taken here in its general sense as anything external
to my freedom, including even my body and my life. In this sense,
First Part: Abstract Right 
56
27 For the relevant passage in Kant’s Doctrine of Right, see § 10 [Gregor trans., 81].
For full bibliographical details see explanatory note to p. 46 [p. 334 below].

the right to things is the right of personality as such. From the point
of view of what is called the right of persons in Roman law, how-
ever, someone is reckoned a person only when he is treated as pos-
sessing a certain status.28 Hence in Roman law, even personality
itself is only a certain standing [Stand] or condition [Zustand] con-
trasted with slavery. Apart from the right over slaves (and chil-
dren, who also count roughly as ‘slaves’), as well as the status
(called capitis diminutio)* of having lost one’s rights, the so-called
Roman law of ‘personal’ rights is concerned with family relation-
ships. (In Kant, by the way, family relationships fall under personal
rights of a real kind.)29 The Roman right of persons is therefore not
the right of the person as person but at most the right of a person
in his particular capacity. (Later on in this book [§§ 163, 167–8], it
will be shown that the substantial basis of family relationships is
rather the sacriﬁce of personality.) It must now be obvious that it is
perverse to treat the right of a speciﬁc person in his particular
capacity before the universal right of personality as such.
Kant’s personal rights are the rights issuing from a contract
whereby I undertake to give something or to perform some-
thing30—the jus ad rem [right to a thing] conferred by an obligatio
in Roman law. To be sure, it is only a person who is required to
execute the covenants of a contract, just as it is also only a person
who acquires the right to their execution. But a right of this sort
cannot for this reason be called a ‘personal’ right; rights of every
sort belong to a person alone. Objectively considered, a right aris-
ing from a contract is never a right over a person, but only a right
over something external to a person or something which he can
alienate, always a right over a thing.
sub-section 1
PROPERTY
41. A person must translate his freedom into an external sphere in
order to exist as Idea. Personality is the ﬁrst, still wholly abstract,
Property
57
28 Hegel’s reference: J. G. Heineccius, Elements of Civil Law [Elementa Juris Civilis]
(1728), § 75.
29 See Kant, Doctrine of Right, § 22 [Gregor trans., 95].
30 These personal rights are treated by Kant under the heading of ‘contract right’; see
Kant, Doctrine of Right, §§ 18–21 [Gregor trans., 90–5].

determination of the inﬁnite will in and for itself, and therefore this
sphere distinct from the person, the sphere capable of embodying his
freedom, is likewise determined as what is immediately diﬀerent and
separable from him.
Addition: The rationale of property is to be found not in the satisfaction of
needs but in the supersession of the pure subjectivity of personality. In his
property a person exists for the ﬁrst time as reason. Even if my freedom is
here realized ﬁrst of all in an external thing, and so poorly realized, never-
theless abstract personality in its immediacy can have no other existence
save one characterized by immediacy.
42. What is immediately diﬀerent from free spirit is that which,
both for spirit and in itself, is the external pure and simple, a thing,
something not free, not personal, without rights.
‘Thing’ [Sache], like ‘the objective’, has two opposed meanings. If
we say ‘that’s the thing’ or ‘the thing is what matters, not the
person’, ‘thing’ means what is substantial. On the other hand,
when ‘thing’ is contrasted with ‘person’ as such, not with the par-
ticular subject, it means the opposite of what is substantial, i.e. that
whose determinate character lies in its pure externality. From the
point of view of free spirit, which must, of course, be distinguished
from mere consciousness, the external is external in and for itself
[an und für sich], and it is for this reason that the determinate char-
acter assigned to nature by the concept is inherent externality.
Addition: Since a thing lacks subjectivity, it is external not merely to the
subject but to itself. Space and time are external in this way. As sentient,
I am myself external, spatial, and temporal. In so far as I have sensuous
intuitions, I have them from something which is external to itself. An
animal can intuit, but the soul of an animal has for its object not its soul,
itself, but something external.
43. As the concept in its immediacy, and so as in essence an indi-
vidual, a person has a natural existence partly within himself and
partly of such a kind that he is related to it as to an external world.—
It is only these things* in their immediacy as things, not determin-
ations that become such through the mediation of the will, which are
in question here where the topic under discussion is personality,
itself at this point still in its initial immediacy.
Mental [geistig] aptitudes, erudition, artistic skill, even things
ecclesiastical (like sermons, masses, prayers, consecration of votive
First Part: Abstract Right 
58

objects), inventions, and so forth, become subjects of a contract,
brought to parity, through being bought and sold, with things rec-
ognized as things. It may be asked whether the artist, scholar, etc.,
is from the legal point of view in possession of his art, erudition,
ability to preach a sermon, sing a mass, etc., that is, whether such
attainments are ‘things’. We may hesitate to call such abilities,
attainments, aptitudes, etc., ‘things’, for while possession of these
may be the subject of business dealings and contracts, as if they
were things, there is also something inward and mental about it,
and for this reason the understanding may be in perplexity about
how to describe such possession in legal terms, because its ﬁeld of
vision is as limited to the dilemma that this is ‘either a thing or not
a thing’ as to the dilemma ‘either ﬁnite or inﬁnite’. Attainments,
erudition, talents, and so forth, belong, of course, to free spirit and
are something internal and not external to it, but even so, by
expressing them it may embody them in something external and
alienate [veräußern] them (see below [§§ 65ﬀ.]), and in this way
they are put into the category of ‘things’. Therefore they are not
immediate at the start but only acquire this character through the
mediation of spirit which reduces its inner possessions to immedi-
acy and externality. It was an unjustiﬁable and unethical proviso of
Roman law that children were from their father’s point of view
‘things’. Hence he was legally the owner of his children, although,
of course, he still also stood to them in the ethical relation of love
(though this relation must have been much weakened by the injus-
tice of his legal position). Here, then, the two qualities ‘being a
thing’ and ‘not being a thing’ were united, though quite wrongly.
In the sphere of abstract right, we are concerned only with the
person as person, and therefore with the particular (which is indis-
pensable if the person’s freedom is to have scope and reality) only
insofar as it is something separable from the person and immedi-
ately diﬀerent from him, no matter whether this separability con-
stitutes the essential nature of the particular, or whether the
particular receives it only through the mediation of the subjective
will. Hence in this sphere we are concerned with mental aptitudes,
erudition, etc., only insofar as they are possessions in a legal 
sense; we have not to treat here the possession of our body and
spirit which we can achieve through education, study, habit, etc.,
and which exists as an inward property of spirit. But it is not until
Property
59

we come to deal with alienation that we need begin to speak of the
transition of such spiritual property into the external world where
it falls under the category of property in the legal sense.
44. A person has as his substantial end the right of putting his will
into any and every thing and thereby making it his, because it has no
such end in itself and derives its determination and soul from his
will. This is the absolute right of appropriation which human beings
have over all ‘things’.
The so-called ‘philosophy’ which attributes reality in the sense of
self-subsistence and genuine being-for-and-within-itself [Für- und
Insichsein] to unmediated single things, to the non-personal, is
directly contradicted by the free will’s attitude to these things. The
same is true of the other philosophy which assures us that the mind
cannot apprehend the truth or know the nature of the thing-in-
itself.* While so-called ‘external’ things have a semblance [Schein]
of self-subsistence for consciousness, intuition, and representational
thinking, the free will idealizes such actuality and so is its truth.*
Addition: All things may become the property of a human being, because
the latter is free will and consequently is in and for itself, while what stands
over against him lacks this quality. Thus everyone has the right to make his
will the thing or to make the thing his will, or in other words to supersede
[aufzuheben] the thing and transform it into his own; for the thing, as exter-
nality, has no end in itself; it is not inﬁnite self-relation but something
external to itself. A living thing (an animal) is also external to itself in this
way and is so far itself a thing. Only the will is the inﬁnite, absolute in con-
trast with everything other than itself, while that other is on its side only
relative. Thus ‘to appropriate’ means at bottom only to manifest the pre-
eminence of my will over the thing and to prove that the latter is not
absolute [an und für sich], is not an end in itself. This is made manifest when
I endow the thing with some purpose not directly its own. When the living
thing becomes my property, I give to it a soul other than the one it had
before, I give to it my soul. The free will, therefore, is the idealism which
does not take things as they are to be in and for themselves, while realism
pronounces them to be absolute, even if they only exist in the form of
ﬁnitude. Even an animal has gone beyond this realist philosophy since it
devours things and so proves that they are not absolutely self-subsistent.
45. To have power over a thing ab extra constitutes possession. The
particular aspect of the matter, the fact that I make something my
own as a result of my natural need, impulse, and caprice, is the 
First Part: Abstract Right 
60

particular interest satisﬁed by possession. But I as free will am an
object to myself in what I possess and thereby also for the ﬁrst time
am an actual will, and this is the aspect which constitutes the deter-
mination of property, the true and rightful factor in possession.
If emphasis is placed on my needs, then the possession of property
appears as a means to their satisfaction, but the true position is
that, from the standpoint of freedom, property is the ﬁrst exist-
ence [Dasein] of freedom and so is in itself a substantial end.
46. Since my will, as the will of a person, and so as an individual
will, becomes objective to me in property, property acquires the
character of private property; and common property of such a nature
that it may be owned by separate persons acquires the character of an
inherently dissoluble partnership in which the retention of my share
is explicitly a matter of my arbitrary preference.
The nature of the elements* makes it impossible for the use of
them to become so particularized as to be the private possession of
anyone.
In the Roman agrarian laws* there was a clash between public
and private ownership of land. The latter is the more rational and
therefore had to be given preference even at the expense of other
rights.
One factor in family testamentary trusts* contravenes the right of
personality and so the right of private property. But the speciﬁc
characteristics pertaining to private property may have to be sub-
ordinated to a higher sphere of right (e.g. to a society or the state),
as happens, for instance, when private property is put into the
hands of a so-called ‘artiﬁcial’ person [moralische Person] and into
mortmain.* Still, such exceptions to private property cannot be
grounded in chance, in private caprice, or private advantage, but
only in the rational organism of the state.
The general principle that underlies Plato’s ideal state violates
the right of personality by forbidding the holding of private prop-
erty.* The idea of a pious or friendly and even a compulsory
brotherhood of men holding their goods in common and rejecting
the principle of private property may readily present itself to the
disposition which mistakes the true nature of the freedom of spirit
and right and fails to apprehend it in its determinate moments. 
As for the moral or religious view behind this idea, when Epicurus’
Property
61

friends proposed to form such an association holding goods in
common, he forbade them, precisely on the ground that their pro-
posal betrayed distrust and that those who distrusted each other
were not friends.31
Addition: In property my will is the will of a person; but a person is this
person and so property becomes the personal aspect of this speciﬁc will.
Since property is the means whereby I give my will existence, property
must also have the character of being ‘this’ or ‘mine’. This is the import-
ant doctrine of the necessity of private property. While the state may
cancel private ownership in exceptional cases, it is nevertheless only the
state that can do this; but frequently, especially in our day, private prop-
erty has been reintroduced by the state. For example, many states have
dissolved the monasteries, and rightly, for in the last resort no community
has so good a right to property as a person has.
47. As a person, I am myself an immediate individual; if we give
further precision to this expression, it means in the ﬁrst instance that
I am alive in this organic body which is my external existence, univer-
sal in content and undivided,* the real possibility of all further-
determined existence. But, all the same, as person, I possess my life
and my body, like other things, only insofar as my will is in them.
The fact that, considered as existing not as the concept that is 
for itself but only as the concept in its immediacy, I am alive and
have an organic body, depends on the concept of life and on the
concept of the spirit as soul—on moments which are taken over
here from the philosophy of nature32 and from [philosophical]
anthropology.33
I possess the members of my body, my life, only so long as I will
to possess them. An animal cannot maim or destroy itself, but a
human being can.
Addition: Animals are in possession of themselves; their soul is in posses-
sion of their body. But they have no right to their life, because they do not
will it.
48. Insofar as the body is an immediate existent, it is not in con-
formity with spirit. If it is to be the willing organ and soul-endowed
First Part: Abstract Right 
62
31 Hegel’s reference: Diogenes Laertius,* 10. 6.
32 Hegel’s reference: Encyclopaedia, §§ 259ﬀ.; cf. §§ 161, 164, 298 [3rd edn. §§ 336ﬀ.; cf.
§§ 213, 216, 376].
33 Hegel’s reference: Encyclopaedia, § 318 [3rd edn. §§ 388ﬀ.].

instrument of spirit, it must ﬁrst be taken into possession by spirit (see
§ 57). But from the point of view of others, I am in essence a free
entity in my body while my possession of it is still immediate.
It is only because I am alive as a free entity in my body that this
living existent ought not to be misused by being made a beast of
burden. While I am alive, my soul (the concept and, to use a
higher term, the free entity) and my body are not separated; my
body is the existence of my freedom and it is with my body that I
feel. It is therefore only sophistical understanding, devoid of the
Idea [ideelos], which can so distinguish body and soul as to hold
that the ‘thing-in-itself’, the soul, is not touched or attacked if the
body is maltreated and the existent embodiment [Existenz] of per-
sonality is subjected to the power of another. I can withdraw into
myself out of my bodily existence and make my body something
external to myself; particular feelings I can regard as something
outside me, and in chains I can still be free. But this is my will; so
far as others are concerned, I am in my body. To be free from the
point of view of others is identical with being free in my determin-
ate existence [Dasein].34 If another does violence to my body, he does
violence to me.
If my body is touched or suﬀers violence, then, because I feel, 
I am touched myself actually, here and now. This creates the 
distinction between personal injury and damage to my external
property, for in such property my will is not actually present in
this direct fashion.
49. In relation to external things, the rational aspect is that I pos-
sess property, but the particular aspect comprises subjective aims,
needs, arbitrariness, abilities, external circumstances, and so forth
(see § 45). On these mere possession as such depends, but this par-
ticular aspect has in this sphere of abstract personality not yet been
posited as identical with freedom. What and how much I possess,
therefore, is a matter of indiﬀerence so far as rights are concerned.
If at this stage we may speak of more persons than one, although
no such distinction has yet been made, then we may say that in
Property
63
34 Hegel’s reference: See my Science of Logic (1st edn. 1812), i. 49ﬀ. [Miller trans.,
116ﬀ.]. [The Miller translation is a translation of the second edn. (1832), in which the
passage in question was revised. S.H.]

respect of their personality persons are equal. But this is an empty
tautology, for the person, as something abstract, has not yet been
particularized or posited as distinct in some speciﬁc way.
‘Equality’ is the abstract identity of the understanding;
reﬂective thought and all kinds of intellectual mediocrity stumble
on it at once when they are confronted by the relation of unity to
a diﬀerence. At this point, equality could only be the equality of
abstract persons as such, and therefore the whole ﬁeld of posses-
sion, this terrain of inequality, falls outside it.
The demand sometimes made for an equal division of land, and
other available resources too, is an intellectualism all the more
empty and superﬁcial in that at the heart of particular diﬀerences
there lies not only the external contingency of nature but also the
whole compass of spirit, endlessly particularized and diﬀerenti-
ated, and its rationality developed into an organism.*
We may not speak of the injustice of nature in the unequal dis-
tribution of possessions and resources, since nature is not free and
therefore is neither just nor unjust. That everyone ought to have
subsistence enough for his needs is a moral wish and thus vaguely
expressed is well enough meant, but like anything that is only well
meant it lacks objectivity. On the other hand, subsistence is not
the same as possession and belongs to another sphere, i.e. to civil
society.35
Addition: The equality which might be set up, e.g. in connection with the
distribution of goods, would soon be destroyed again anyway, because
wealth depends on diligence. But if a project cannot be executed, it ought
not to be executed. Of course people are equal, but only qua persons, that
is, with respect only to the source from which possession springs; the
inference from this is that everyone must have property. Hence, if you
wish to talk of equality, it is this equality which you must have in view. But
this equality is something apart from the ﬁxing of particular amounts,
from the question of how much I own. From this point of view it is false
to maintain that justice requires everyone’s property to be equal, since it
requires only that everyone shall own property. The truth is that particu-
larity is just the sphere where there is room for inequality and where
equality would be wrong. True enough, people often covet the goods of
others, but that is just doing wrong, since right is that which remains
indiﬀerent to particularity.
First Part: Abstract Right 
64
35 See PR §§ 199ﬀ., 230, 237ﬀ.

50. The principle that a thing belongs to the person who happens
to be the ﬁrst in time to take it into his possession is immediately self-
explanatory and superﬂuous, because a second person cannot take
into his possession what is already the property of another.
Addition: The points made so far have been mainly concerned with the
proposition that personality must have existence in property. Now the fact
that the ﬁrst person to take possession of a thing should also be its owner
is an inference from what has been said. The ﬁrst is the rightful owner,
however, not because he is the ﬁrst but because he is a free will, for it is
only by another’s succeeding him that he becomes the ﬁrst.
51. Since property is the existence of personality, my inward idea
and will that something is to be mine are not enough to make it my
property; to secure this end I must take possession of it. The existence
which my willing thereby attains entails its capacity to be recognized
by others.—The fact that a thing of which I can take possession
should be without an owner [herrenlos] is (see § 50) a self-explanatory
negative condition of taking possession, or rather it bears on the
anticipated relation to others.*
Addition: That a person puts his will into a thing is just the concept of
property, and the next step is the realization of this concept. The inner act
of will which consists in saying that something is mine must also become
recognizable by others. If I make a thing mine, I give to it a predicate,
‘mine’, which must appear in it in an external form and must not simply
remain in my inner will. It often happens that children lay stress on their
prior willing in preference to the seizure of a thing by others. But for
adults this willing is not suﬃcient, since the form of subjectivity must be
removed and must work its way beyond the subjective to objectivity.
52. Taking possession makes the matter of the thing my property,
since matter in itself [für sich] does not belong to itself.
Matter oﬀers resistance to me—and matter is nothing except the
resistance it oﬀers to me—that is, it presents itself to me as some-
thing abstractly independent, only when my spirit is taken
abstractly as sensation. (Sense-perception perversely takes spirit’s
sensuous being to be concrete and reason to be abstract.) In rela-
tion to the will and property, however, this independence
[Fürsichsein] of matter has no truth. Taking possession, as an 
external activity whereby we actualize our universal right of 
appropriating natural objects, comes to be conditioned by physical
Property
65

strength, cunning, dexterity, the means of one kind or another
whereby we take physical possession of things. Owing to the 
qualitative diﬀerences between natural objects, mastery and occu-
pancy of these has an inﬁnite variety of meanings and involves a
restriction and contingency that is just as inﬁnite. Apart from that,
a ‘kind’ of thing, or an element as such, is not the correlative object
of an individual person. Before it can become such and be appropri-
ated, it must ﬁrst be individualized into a breath of air or a drink
of water. In the fact that it is impossible to take possession of an
external ‘kind’ of thing as such, or of an element, it is not the
external physical impossibility which must be looked on as 
ultimate, but the fact that a person, as will, is characterized as 
individual, while as person he is at the same time immediate indi-
viduality; hence as person he is related to the external world as to
individual things (see Remark to § 13 and § 43).
Thus the mastery and external possession of things becomes, 
in ways that again are inﬁnite, more or less indeterminate and
incomplete. Yet matter is never without an essential form of its
own and only because it has one is it anything. The more I appro-
priate this form, the more do I enter into actual possession of 
the thing. The consumption of food is an out and out alteration 
of its qualitative character, the character on the strength of which
it was what it was before it was eaten. The training of my body 
in dexterity, like the education of my spirit, is likewise a more or
less complete occupancy and penetration of it. It is my spirit
which of all things I can make most completely my own. Yet actu-
ally taking possession is diﬀerent from property as such because
property is completed by the free will. In face of the free will, the
thing retains nothing proper to itself even though in possession, as
an external relation to an object, there still remains something
external. The empty abstraction of a matter without properties
which, when a thing is my property, is supposed to remain outside
me and the property of the thing, is something which thought
must overcome.
Addition: Fichte has raised the question whether the matter too belongs
to me if I impose a form on it.* On his argument, after I had made a golden
cup, it would have to be open to someone else to take the gold provided
that in so doing he did no damage to my work. However separable the
matter may be in thought [Vorstellung], still in reality this distinction is an
First Part: Abstract Right 
66

empty subtlety, because, if I take possession of a ﬁeld and plough it, it is
not only the furrow that is my property, but the rest as well, the furrowed
earth. That is to say, I will to take this matter, the whole thing, into 
my possession; the matter therefore does not remain without an owner 
nor does it remain its own property. Further, even if the matter remains
external to the form which I have given to the object, the form is precisely
a sign that I claim the thing as mine. The thing therefore does not remain
external to my will or outside what I have willed. Hence there is nothing
left to be taken into possession by someone else.
53. The more precise determinations of property are to be found
in the will’s relation to the thing. This relation is
(A) taking possession of the thing directly (here it is in the thing qua
something positive that the will has its existence);
(B) use (the thing is negative in contrast with the will and so it is
in the thing as something to be negated that the will has its exist-
ence);
(C) alienation [Veräußerung], the reﬂection of the will out of the
thing back into itself.
These three are respectively the positive, negative, and inﬁnite
judgements* of the will on the thing.
A. Taking Possession
54. We take possession of a thing (α) by directly grasping it phys-
ically, (β) by forming it, and (γ) by merely marking it as ours.
Addition: These modes of taking possession involve the advance from the
category of individuality to that of universality. It is only of an individual
thing that we can take possession physically, while marking a thing as mine
is taking possession of it in idea [Vorstellung]. In the latter case I have an
idea of the thing and mean that the thing as a whole is mine, not simply
the part which I can take into my possession physically.
55. (α) From the point of view of sensation, to grasp a thing phys-
ically is the most complete of these modes, because then I am directly
present in this possession, and therefore my will is recognizable in it.
But at bottom this mode is only subjective, temporary, and seriously
restricted in scope, as well as by the qualitative nature of the things
grasped.—As a result of the connection which I may eﬀect between
something and things which have already become my property in
other ways, or into which something may otherwise be accidentally
Property
67

brought, the scope of this method is somewhat enlarged, and the
same result is produced by other means also.
Mechanical forces, weapons, tools, extend the range of my power.
Connections between my property and something else may be
regarded as making it more easily possible for me than for another
owner, or sometimes possible for me alone, to take possession of
something or to make use of it. Instances of such connections are
that my land may be on the seashore, or on a river bank; or my
estate may border on hunting country or pasture or land useful for
some other purpose; stone or other mineral deposits may be under
my ﬁelds; there may be treasure in or under my ground, and so on.
The same is true of connections arising only in the course of time
and by chance, like some of what are called ‘natural accessions’
such as alluvial deposits, etc., and jetsam. (Young born to animals
in my possession [foetura] constitute an accession to my wealth
too, but the connection here is an organic one, it is not a case of a
thing being added ab extra to another thing already in my posses-
sion; and therefore foetura is of a type quite diﬀerent from the
other accessions.) Alternatively, the addition to my property may
be looked upon as a non-self-subsistent accident of the thing to
which it has been added. In every case, however, these are external
conjunctions whose bond of connection is neither life nor the concept.
It devolves, therefore, on the understanding to adduce and weigh
their pros and cons, and on positive legislation to make decisions
about them in accordance with the extent to which the relation
between the things conjoined has or has not any essentiality.
Addition: Taking possession is always piecemeal in type; I take into posses-
sion no more than what I touch with my body. But here comes the second
point: external objects extend further than I can grasp. Therefore, whatever
I have in my grasp is linked with something else. It is with my hand that I
manage to take possession of a thing, but its reach can be extended. What
I hold in my hand—that magniﬁcent tool which no animal possesses—
can itself be a means to gripping something else. If I am in possession of
something, understanding immediately draws the inference that it is not
only the immediate object in my grasp which is mine but also what is con-
nected with it. At this point positive right must enact its statutes since
nothing further on this topic can be deduced from the concept.*
56. (β) When I impose a form on something, the thing’s deter-
minate character as mine acquires an independent [für sich bestehend]
First Part: Abstract Right 
68

externality and ceases to be restricted to my presence here and now
and to the presence of my knowledge and will.
To impose a form on a thing is the mode of taking possession most
in conformity with the Idea [Idee] to this extent, that it implies a
union of subject and object, although it varies endlessly with the
qualitative character of the objects and the variety of subjective
aims. Under this head there also falls the formation of the organic.
What I do to the organic does not remain external to it but is
assimilated by it. Examples are the tilling of the soil, the cultiva-
tion of plants, the taming and feeding of animals, the preservation
of game, as well as contrivances for utilizing raw materials or the
forces of nature and processes for making one material produce
eﬀects on another, and so forth.
Addition: Empirically, this forming of an object may assume the most 
various guises. In farming land I impose a form on it. Where inorganic
objects are concerned, the imposition of a form is not always direct. 
For example, if I build a windmill, I have not imposed a form on the air,
but I have formed something for utilizing the air, which latter cannot 
be taken away from me just because I have not formed it myself. Further,
the preserving of game may be regarded as a way of forming game, for 
it is a mode of behaviour directed towards maintaining the object in 
question. [The same is true of] the training of animals, only of course that
is a more direct way of forming them and it depends on me to a greater
extent.
57. The human being, in his immediate existence in himself, is
something natural, external to his concept. It is only through the
development of his own body and spirit, essentially through his self-
consciousness’s apprehension of itself as free, that he takes possession of
himself and becomes his own property and no one else’s. This taking
possession of oneself, looked at from the opposite point of view, is
the translation into actuality of what one is according to one’s con-
cept, i.e. a possibility, capacity, predisposition. In that translation
one’s self-consciousness is posited for the ﬁrst time as one’s own, as
one’s object also and distinct from self-consciousness pure and
simple, and thereby capable of taking the form of a ‘thing’ (compare
Remark to § 43).
The alleged justiﬁcation of slavery (with all its more speciﬁc ex-
planations through physical force, capture in war, the saving and
preservation of life, sustenance, education, philanthropy, the slave’s
Property
69

own acquiescence, and so forth), as well as the justiﬁcation of
slave-ownership as simple lordship in general, and all historical
views of the justice of slavery and lordship, depend on regarding
the human being as a natural entity pure and simple, as an existent
not in conformity with its concept (an existent also to which arbi-
trariness is appropriate). The argument for the absolute injustice
of slavery, on the other hand, adheres to the concept of the human
being as spirit, as something inherently [an sich] free. This view is
one-sided in so far as it regards the human being as free by nature,
or, in other words, takes the concept as such in its immediacy, not
the Idea, as the truth. This antinomy rests, like all others, on the
formal thinking which asserts both the moments of an Idea in 
separation from one another and clings to each of them in its inde-
pendence and so in its inadequacy to the Idea and in its untruth.
Free spirit consists precisely (see § 21) in its being no longer
implicit [an sich] or concept alone, but in its superseding this
formal stage of its being and eo ipso its immediate natural exist-
ence, until the existence which it gives to itself is one which is
solely its own and free. The side of the antinomy which asserts 
the concept of freedom therefore has the merit of containing the
absolute starting-point, though only the starting-point, for the
discovery of truth, while the other side goes no further than exist-
ence without the concept and therefore excludes the outlook of
rationality and right altogether. The position of the free will, with
which right and the science of right begin, is already beyond the
untrue point of view, which sees the human being, as a natural
entity and only the implicit [an sich seiend] concept, as capable of
being enslaved. This earlier, untrue phenomenon of slavery is one
which befalls spirit when spirit is only at the level of conscious-
ness. The dialectic of the concept and of the purely immediate
consciousness of freedom brings about at that point the struggle for
recognition and the relationship of master and slave.36
Objective spirit, the content of right, should not itself be appre-
hended in its subjective concept alone, and the fact that the human
being in and for himself is not destined to be a slave should not
itself be understood as a mere ‘ought’. These demands are fulﬁlled,
First Part: Abstract Right 
70
36 Hegel’s reference: See Phenomenology, 115 ﬀ. [Miller trans., 111 ﬀ.], and
Encyclopaedia, §§ 352ﬀ. [3rd edn. §§ 430ﬀ.].

however, only when we recognize that the Idea of freedom is actual
only as the state.
Addition: To hold fast to the idea that the human being is free in and 
for himself is eo ipso to condemn slavery. Yet if someone is a slave, his 
own will is responsible for his slavery, just as it is its will which is re-
sponsible if a people is subjugated. Hence the wrong of slavery lies at 
the door not simply of enslavers or conquerors but of the slaves and the 
conquered themselves. Slavery occurs in humanity’s transition from the
state of nature to genuinely ethical conditions; it occurs in a world where
a wrong is still right. At that stage wrong has validity and so is necessarily
in place.
58. (γ) The mode of taking possession which in itself [für sich] is
not actual but is only representative of my will is to mark the thing
with a sign, whose meaning is supposed to be that I have put my will
into the thing. In its objective scope and its meaning, this mode of
taking possession is very indeterminate.
Addition: To take possession by marking a thing with a sign is of all the
ways of taking possession the most complete, since the sign is implicitly at
work to some extent in the other ways too. When I grasp a thing or form
it, this is also in the last resort a sign, a sign given to others in order to
exclude them and show that I have put my will into the thing. The con-
cept of the sign, that is to say, is that the thing does not count as the thing
which it is but as what it is supposed to signify. A cockade, for instance,
signiﬁes citizenship of a state, though the colour has no connection with
the nation and represents not itself but the nation. Precisely by being able
to mark things with a sign and thereby to acquire them, the human being
shows his mastery over things.
B. Use of the Thing
59. By being taken into possession, the thing acquires the predi-
cate ‘mine’ and my will is related to it positively. Within this iden-
tity, the thing is equally posited as something negative, and my will
in this situation is a particular will, i.e. need, inclination, and so forth.
Yet my need, as the particular aspect of one will, is the positive ele-
ment which ﬁnds satisfaction, and the thing, as something negative
in itself, exists only for my need and is at its service.—The use of the
thing is my need being externally realized through the change,
destruction, and consumption of the thing. The thing thereby stands
revealed as naturally selﬂess and so fulﬁls its destiny [Bestimmung].
Property
71

The fact that property is realized and actualized only in use ﬂoats
before the minds of those who look upon property as derelict and
ownerless if it is not being put to any use, and who excuse its
unlawful occupancy on the ground that it has not been used by its
owner. But the owner’s will, in accordance with which a thing is
his, is the primary substantial basis of property; use is a further
modiﬁcation of property, secondary to that universal basis, and is
only its manifestation and particular mode.
Addition: While in marking a thing with a sign I am taking possession in 
a universal way of the thing as such, the use of it implies a still more uni-
versal relation to the thing, because, when it is used, the thing in its 
particularity is not recognized but is negated by the user.* The thing is
reduced to a means to the satisfaction of my need. When I and the thing
meet, an identity is established and therefore one or other must lose its
qualitative character. But I am alive, a being who wills and is truly
aﬃrmative; the thing on the other hand is something natural. Therefore
the thing must be destroyed while I preserve myself. This, in general
terms, is the prerogative and the rationality [Vernunft] of the organic.
60. The use of a thing by grasping it directly is in itself [für sich]
an individual act of taking possession. But if my use of it is grounded
on a persistent need, and if I make repeated use of a product which
continually renews itself, restricting my use if necessary to safeguard
that renewal, then these and other circumstances transform the
immediate individual seizure of the thing into a sign, intended to
indicate that I am taking it into my possession in a universal way, and
thereby taking possession of the elemental or organic basis of such
products, or of anything else that conditions them.
61. Since the substance of the thing which is my property is, if we
take the thing by itself, its externality, i.e. its non-substantiality—in
contrast with me it is not an end in itself (see § 42)—and since in my
use or employment of it this externality is realized, it follows that my
full use or employment of a thing is the thing in its entirety, so that
if I have the full use of the thing I am its owner. Over and above the
entirety of its use, there is nothing left of the thing which could be
the property of another.
Addition: The relation of property to use is the same as that of substance to
accident, inner to outer, force to its manifestation. Just as force exists only
in manifesting itself, so arable land is arable land only in bearing crops.
First Part: Abstract Right 
72

Thus he who has the use of arable land* is the owner of the whole, and it is
an empty abstraction to recognize still another property in the object itself.
62. My merely partial or temporary use of a thing, like my partial
or temporary possession of it (a possession which itself is simply the
partial or temporary possibility of using it) is therefore to be distin-
guished from ownership of the thing itself. If the whole and entire
use of a thing were mine, while the abstract ownership was supposed
to be someone else’s, then the thing as mine would be penetrated
through and through by my will (see §§ 52 and 61), and at the same
time there would remain in the thing something impenetrable by me,
namely the will, the empty will, of another. As a positive will, I
would be at one and the same time objective and not objective to
myself in the thing—an absolute contradiction. Ownership there-
fore is in essence free and complete.
To distinguish between the right to the entire use of a thing and
ownership in the abstract is the work of the empty understanding for
which the Idea—i.e. in this instance, the unity of (a) ownership (or
even the person’s will as such) and (b) its realization—is not the
truth, but for which these two moments in their separation from one
another pass as something which is true. This distinction, then, as an
actual relation, is that of an empty mastery, and this might be called
an ‘insanity of personality’ (if we may mean by ‘insanity’ not merely
the immediate contradiction between a person’s purely subjective
ideas and his actuality), because ‘mine’ as applied to one object would
have to mean the direct presence in it of both my individual exclu-
sive will and the individual exclusive will of someone else.
In the Institutes [of Justinian], Book 2, chapter 4, we read:
‘usufruct is the right of using another’s property, of enjoying its
fruits while preserving its substance. . . . Nevertheless, in order that
properties should not become useless through the permanent cessa-
tion of usufruct, the law has resolved [placuit] that in certain cir-
cumstances the right of usufruct shall be annulled and that the
land shall revert to the proper owner.’* ‘Has resolved’—as if it
were in the ﬁrst instance a whim or a ﬁat to make this proviso and
thereby give some sense to that empty distinction! A property
which suﬀered ‘the permanent cessation of usufruct’ [proprietas
semper abscendente usufructu] would not merely be ‘useless’
[inutilis], it would no longer be a ‘property’ [proprietas] at all.
Property
73

To examine other distinctions in property itself, e.g. between
res mancipi and nec mancipi, dominium quiritarium and bonitarium,*
etc., is inappropriate here since they have no bearing on any of the
modiﬁcations of property determined by the concept and are
merely titbits culled from the history of the right of property. The
empty distinction discussed above, however, is in a way contained
in the relations of dominium directum and dominium utile, in the
emphyteutic contract,* and in the further relations involved in
estates held in ﬁef with their hereditary rents and other taxes,
dues, feudal tributes, etc. in their sundry modiﬁcations, in cases
where such burdens are irredeemable. But from another point of
view, these relations preclude that distinction. They preclude it
insofar as dominium utile is associated with burdens, with the result
that dominium directum becomes at the same time a dominium utile.*
Were there nothing in these relations except that distinction in its
rigid abstraction, then in them we would not have two overlords
(domini) in the strict sense, but an owner on the one hand and an
overlord who was the overlord of nothing on the other. But on
account of the burdens imposed there are two owners standing in
relation to each other. Although their relation is not that of being
common owners of a property, still the transition from it to common
ownership is very easy—a transition which has already begun when,
under dominium directum, the yield of the property is calculated
and looked upon as the essential thing, so that the incalculable
factor in the overlordship of a property, which has perhaps been
regarded as the noble thing about property, is subordinated to the
utile [the usefulness of property] which here is the rational factor.*
It is about a millennium-and-a-half since the freedom of per-
sonality began through the spread of Christianity to blossom and
gain recognition as a universal principle from a part, though still a
small part, of the human race. But it was only yesterday, we might
say, that the principle of the freedom of property became recognized
in some places. This example from history may serve to rebuke the
impatience of opinion and to show the length of time that spirit
requires for progress in its self-consciousness.
63. A thing in use is an individual thing determined quantitatively
and qualitatively and related to a speciﬁc need. But its speciﬁc util-
ity, being quantitatively determinate, is at the same time comparable
First Part: Abstract Right 
74

with [the speciﬁc utility of] other things of like utility. Similarly, the
speciﬁc need which it satisﬁes is at the same time need in general and
thus is comparable on its particular side with other needs, while the
thing in virtue of the same considerations is comparable with things
meeting other needs. This, the thing’s universality, whose simple
determinate character arises from the particularity of the thing, in
such a way that it is at the same time abstracted from the thing’s
speciﬁc quality, is the thing’s value, wherein its genuine substantial-
ity becomes determinate and an object of consciousness. As full
owner of the thing, I am eo ipso owner of its value as well as of its use.
The distinctive character of the property of a feudal tenant is that
he is supposed to be the owner of the use only, not of the value of
the thing.
Addition: The qualitative disappears here in the form of the quantitative;
that is to say, when I speak of ‘need’, I use a term under which the most
various things may be brought; they share it in common and so become
commensurable. The advance of thought here therefore is from a thing’s
speciﬁc quality to a character which is indiﬀerent to quality, i.e. quantity.
A similar thing occurs in mathematics. The deﬁnition of a circle, an
ellipse, and a parabola reveals their speciﬁc diﬀerence. But, in spite of this,
the distinction between these diﬀerent curves is determined purely quan-
titatively, i.e. in such a way that the only important thing is a purely quan-
titative diﬀerence which rests on their coeﬃcients alone, on purely
empirical magnitudes. In property, the quantitative character which
emerges from the qualitative is value. Here the qualitative provides the
quantity with its quantum and in consequence is as much preserved in the
quantity as superseded by it. If we consider the concept of value, we must
look on the thing itself only as a sign; it counts not as itself but as what it
is worth. A bill of exchange, for instance, does not represent what it really
is—paper; it is only a sign of another universal—value. The value of a
thing may be very heterogeneous; it depends on need. But if you want to
express the value of a thing not in its speciﬁcity but in the abstract, then it
is money which expresses this. Money represents any and every thing,
though since it does not portray the need itself but is only a sign of it, it is
itself controlled by the speciﬁc value [of the commodity]. Money, as some-
thing abstract, merely expresses this value. It is possible in principle to be
the owner of a thing without at the same time being the owner of its value.
If a family can neither sell nor pawn its goods, it is not the owner of their
value. But since this form of property is not in accordance with the con-
cept of property, such restrictions on ownership (feudal tenure, testament-
ary trusts) are mostly in course of disappearing.
Property
75

64. The form given to a possession and the sign it presents are
themselves externalities but for the subjective presence of the will
which alone constitutes their meaning and value. This presence,
however, which is use, employment, or some other mode in which
the will expresses itself, falls within time, and what is objective in
time is the continuance of this expression of the will. Without this
the thing becomes ownerless, because it has been deprived of the
actuality of the will and possession. Therefore I gain or lose posses-
sion of property through prescription [Verjährung].*
Prescription, therefore, has not been introduced into right solely
from an external consideration running counter to right in the
strict sense, i.e. with a view to truncating the disputes and confu-
sions which old claims would introduce into the security of prop-
erty. On the contrary, prescription rests at bottom on the speciﬁc
character of property as ‘real’,* on the fact that the will to possess
something must express itself.
Public memorials are national property, or, more precisely, like
works of art in general so far as their enjoyment is concerned, they
have life and count as ends in themselves so long as they enshrine
the spirit of remembrance and honour. If they lose this spirit, they
become in this respect ownerless in the eyes of a nation and the
private possession of the ﬁrst comer, like e.g. the Greek and
Egyptian works of art in Turkey.
The right of private property which the family of an author has
in his publications dies out for a similar reason; such publications
become ownerless in the sense that like public memorials, though in
an opposite way,* they become public property, and their particular
handling of their topic can become the private property of anyone.
Vacant land consecrated for a burial ground, or even to lie
unused in perpetuity, embodies an empty absent arbitrary will. If
such a will is infringed, nothing actual is infringed, and hence
respect for it cannot be guaranteed.
Addition: Prescription rests on the presumption that I have ceased to
regard the thing as mine. If a thing is to remain mine, my will must con-
tinue in it, and using it or keeping it safe shows this continuance. That
public memorials may lose their value was frequently shown during the
Reformation in the case of foundations, endowments, etc., for the Mass.
The spirit of the old faith, i.e. of these foundations, had ﬂed, and conse-
quently they could be seized as private property.
First Part: Abstract Right 
76

C. Alienation of Property
65. The reason I can alienate my property is that it is mine only
insofar as I put my will into it. Hence I may abandon (derelinquiere)
as ownerless anything that I have or yield it to the will of another and
so into his possession, provided always that the thing in question is a
thing external by nature.
Addition: While prescription is an alienation with no direct expression of
the will to alienate, alienation proper is an expression of my will, of my will
no longer to regard the thing as mine. The whole matter may also be so
viewed that alienation is seen to be a true mode of taking possession. To
take possession of the thing immediately is the ﬁrst moment in property.
Use is likewise a way of acquiring property. The third moment then is the
unity of these two, taking possession of the thing through alienation.
66. Therefore those goods, or rather substantial characteristics,
which constitute my very own person and the universal essence of
my self-consciousness are inalienable and my right to them is impre-
scriptible. Such characteristics are my personality as such, my uni-
versal freedom of will, my ethical life, my religion.
The fact that what spirit is in accordance with its concept or
implicitly [an sich] it also should be explicitly [für sich] and in exist-
ence (the fact that thus spirit should be a person, be capable of
holding property, should have an ethical life, a religion) is the Idea
which is itself the concept of spirit. As causa sui, i.e. as free causal-
ity, spirit is that ‘whose nature cannot be conceived except as
existing’.*37
It is just in this concept of spirit, as that which is what it is only
through itself and as inﬁnite return into itself out of the natural
immediacy of its existence, that there lies the possibility of a clash:
i.e. what it is only in itself [an sich] it may not be for itself [für sich]
(see § 57), and vice versa what it is only for itself may be other than
what it is in itself (as with evil in the case of the will). Herein lies
the possibility of the alienation of personality and its substantial
being, whether this alienation occurs unconsciously or intention-
ally. Examples of the alienation of personality are slavery, serf-
dom, disqualiﬁcation from holding property, encumbrances on
property, and so forth. Alienation of intelligence and rationality,
Property
77
37 Hegel’s reference: Spinoza, Ethics, Part 1, Deﬁnition 1.

of morality, ethical life, and religion, is exempliﬁed in superstition,
in ceding to someone else full power and authority to ﬁx and pre-
scribe what actions are to be done (as when an individual binds
himself expressly to steal or to murder, etc., or to a course of
action that may involve crime), or what duties are binding on one’s
conscience or what religious truth is, etc.
The right to what is in essence inalienable is imprescriptible,
since the act whereby I take possession of my personality, of my
substantial essence, and make myself a responsible being, capable of
possessing rights and with a moral and religious life, takes away
from these characteristics of mine just that externality which alone
made them capable of passing into the possession of someone else.
When I have thus annulled their externality, I cannot lose them
through lapse of time or from any other reason drawn from my prior
consent or willingness to alienate them. This return of mine into
myself, whereby I make myself existent as Idea, as a person with
rights and moral principles, annuls the previous position and the
wrong done to my concept and my reason by others and myself when
the inﬁnite existence [Existenz] of self-consciousness has been treated
as something external and has been allowed to be so treated. This
return into myself makes clear the contradiction in supposing that I
have given into another’s possession my capacity for rights, my eth-
ical life and religious feeling; for either I have given up what I myself
did not possess, or I am giving up what, so soon as I possess it, exists
in essence as mine alone and not as something external.
Addition: It is in the nature of the case that a slave has an absolute right to
free himself and that if anyone has prostituted his ethical life by hiring
himself to thieve and murder, this is a nullity in and for itself and every-
one has a warrant to repudiate this contract. The same is the case if I place
my religious feeling at the disposal of a priest who is my confessor, for
such an inward matter a person has to settle with himself alone. A religious
feeling which is partly under the control of someone else is no proper reli-
gious feeling at all. The spirit is only one [Einer] and should dwell in me.
The uniﬁcation of being-in-and-for-itself should belong to me.
67. Single products of my particular physical and mental [geistig]
skill and of my power to act I can alienate to someone else and I can
give him the use of my abilities for a restricted period, because, on
the strength of this restriction, my abilities acquire an external 
relation to the totality and universality of my being. By alienating the
First Part: Abstract Right 
78

whole of my time, as crystallized in my work, and everything I pro-
duced, I would be making into another’s property the substance of
my being, my universal activity and actuality, my personality.
The relation here between myself and the exercise of my abilities
is the same as that between the substance of a thing and its use (see
§ 61). It is only when use is restricted that a distinction between
use and substance arises. So here, the use of my powers diﬀers
from my powers and therefore from myself, only insofar as it is
quantitatively restricted. Force is the totality of its manifestations,
substance of its accidents, the universal of its particulars.
Addition: The distinction here explained is that between a slave and a
modern domestic servant or day-labourer. The Athenian slave perhaps
had an easier occupation and more intellectual [geistigere] work than is
usually the case with our servants, but he was still a slave, because the
whole range of his activity had been alienated to his master.
68. What is peculiarly mine in a product of my spirit may, owing
to the method whereby it is expressed, turn at once into something
external like a ‘thing’ which eo ipso may then be produced by other
people. The result is that by taking possession of a thing of this kind,
its new owner may make his own the thoughts communicated in it or
the technical invention which it contains, and it is the ability to do
this which sometimes (i.e. in the case of books) constitutes the value
of these things and the only purpose of possessing them. But besides
this, the new owner at the same time comes into possession of the
universal methods of so expressing himself and producing numerous
other things of the same sort.
In the case of works of art, the form—the portrayal of thought in
an external medium—is, regarded as a thing, so peculiarly the
property of the individual who produces it that a copy of a work of
art is essentially a product of the copyist’s own mental [geistig] and
technical ability. In the case of a literary work, the form in virtue
of which it is an external thing is of a mechanical kind, and the
same is true of the invention of a technical device; for in the ﬁrst
case the thought is presented not in a concrete image, like a statue,
but in a series of distinct abstract signs, while in the second case
the thought has a mechanical content throughout. The ways and
means of producing things of that mechanical kind as things are
commonplace accomplishments.
Property
79

But between the work of art at one extreme and the routine
products of craft at the other there are transitional stages which to
a greater or lesser degree partake of the character of one or other
of the extremes.
69. Since the owner of such a product, in owning a copy of it, 
is in possession of the entire use and value of that copy qua an
individual thing, he has complete and free ownership of that copy qua
an individual thing, even if the author of the book or the inventor of the
technical device remains the owner of the universal ways and means of
reproducing such products and things. Qua universal ways and means
of expression, he has not immediately alienated them, but may reserve
them to himself as means of expression which belong to him.
The substance of an author’s or an inventor’s right is not to be
sought in the ﬁrst instance in the idea that when he disposes of a
single copy of his work, he arbitrarily makes it a condition that the
power to produce facsimiles as things, a power which thereupon
passes into another’s possession, should not become the property
of the other but should remain his own. The ﬁrst question is
whether such a separation between ownership of the thing and the
power to produce facsimiles which is given with the thing is com-
patible with the concept of property, or whether it does not cancel
complete and free ownership (see § 62)—so that it depends on the
arbitrariness of the original producer of intellectual [geistig]
work whether he will reserve to himself the power to reproduce,
or part with this power as a thing of value, or attach no value to it
at all and surrender it together with the single exemplar of his
work. I reply that this power to reproduce has a special character,
viz. it is that in virtue of which the thing is not merely a posses-
sion but a resource [Vermögen] (see §§ 170ﬀ.); the fact that it is 
such a resource depends on the particular way in which the thing
is put to external use, a way distinct and separable from the use to
which the thing is immediately destined (the resource here is not
what people call a ‘natural accession’ [accessio naturalis] like young
born to animals in my possession [foetura]). Since, then, this 
distinction falls into the sphere of that whose nature entails its
divisibility, into the sphere of external use, to retain part of a
thing’s use while alienating another part is not to retain propri-
etorship without use [utile].*
First Part: Abstract Right 
80

The purely negative, though the primary, means of advancing
the sciences and arts is to guarantee scientists and artists against
theft and to enable them to beneﬁt from the protection of their
property, just as it was the primary and most important means 
of advancing trade and industry to guarantee it against highway
robbery.
There is, however, a further point: the purpose of a product of
the intellect is that people other than its author should understand
it and make it the possession of their ideas, memory, thinking, etc.
Their mode of expression, whereby in turn they make what they
have learnt (for ‘learning’ means more than ‘learning things by
heart’, ‘memorizing them’; the thoughts of others can be appre-
hended only by thinking, and this rethinking the thoughts of
others is learning too) into a ‘thing’ which they can alienate, very
likely has some special form of its own in every case. The result is
that they may regard as their own property the resource accruing
from their learning and may claim for themselves the right to
reproduce their learning in books of their own. Those engaged in
the propagation of knowledge of all kinds, in particular those
whose appointed task is teaching, have as their speciﬁc function
and duty (above all in the case of the positive sciences, the doctrine
of a church, jurisprudence, etc.) the repetition of well-established
thoughts, taken up ab extra and all of them given expression
already. The same is true of writings devised for teaching pur-
poses and the spread and propagation of the sciences. Now to what
extent does the new form which arises when something is
expressed again and again transform the available stock of knowl-
edge, and in particular the thoughts of others who still retain exter-
nal property in those intellectual productions of theirs, into a
special intellectual property of the individual reproducer and
thereby give him or fail to give him the right to make them his
external property as well? To what extent is such repetition of
another’s material in one’s book a plagiarism? There is no precise
principle of determination available to answer these questions, and
therefore they cannot be ﬁnally settled either in principle or by
law. Hence plagiarism would have to be a matter of honour and be
held in check by honour.
Thus copyright legislation attains its end of securing the prop-
erty rights of author and publisher only to a very restricted extent,
Property
81

though it does attain it within limits. The ease with which we may
deliberately change something in the form of what we are
expounding or invent a triﬂing modiﬁcation in a large body of
knowledge or a comprehensive theory which is another’s work,
and even the impossibility of sticking to the author’s words in
expounding something we have learnt, all lead of themselves
(quite apart from the particular purposes for which such repeti-
tions are required) to an endless multiplicity of alterations which
more or less superﬁcially stamp someone else’s property as one’s
own. For instance, the hundreds and hundreds of compendia,
selections, anthologies, etc., arithmetics, geometries, devotional
tracts, etc., show how every new idea in a review or annual or
encyclopedia, etc., can be forthwith repeated over and over again
under the same or a diﬀerent title, and yet may be claimed as
something peculiarly the writer’s own. The result of this may
easily be that the proﬁt promised to the author, or the projector of
the original undertaking, by his work or his original idea becomes
negligible or reduced for both parties or lost to all concerned.
But as for the eﬀectiveness of honour in checking plagiarism,
what has happened is that nowadays we scarcely hear the word
‘plagiarism’, nor are scholars accused of stealing each other’s
results. It may be that honour has been eﬀective in abolishing pla-
giarism, or perhaps plagiarism has ceased to be dishonourable and
feeling against it is a thing of the past; or possibly a trivial idea, and
a change in external form, is rated so highly as originality and a
product of independent thinking that the thought of plagiarism
never dawns on anyone.
70. The comprehensive totality of external activity, i.e. life, is not
external to personality which is itself immediate and a this. The dis-
posal [Entäußerung] or sacriﬁce of life is not the existence of 
this personality but the very opposite. I have, therefore, no right
whatsoever to dispose of my life. Only an ethical Idea,* in which this
immediately individual personality is, in itself, immersed and to
whose power it is actually subjected, has such a right [to dispose of
my life]. Just as life as such is immediate, so death is its immediate
negativity and hence must come from without, either by natural
causes, or else, in the service of the Idea, by the hand of a foreigner
[von fremder Hand].
First Part: Abstract Right 
82

Addition: An individual person is certainly something subordinate, and as
such he must dedicate himself to the ethical whole. Hence if the state
claims life, the individual must surrender it. But may a human being take
his own life? Suicide may at a ﬁrst glance be regarded as an act of courage,
but only the false courage of tailors and servant girls. Or again it may be
looked upon as a misfortune, since it is inward distraction which leads to
it. But the fundamental question is: Have I a right to take my life? The
answer will be that I, as this individual, am not master of my life, because
life, as the comprehensive totality of my activity, is nothing external to
personality, which itself is immediately this personality. Thus when a
person is said to have a right over his life, the words are a contradiction,
because they mean that a person has a right over himself. But he has no
such right, since he does not stand over himself and he cannot pass judge-
ment on himself. When Hercules destroyed himself by ﬁre and when
Brutus fell on his sword,* this was the conduct of a hero against his per-
sonality. But as for the simple right to suicide, this may be denied even to
heroes.
Transition from Property to Contract
71. Existence [Dasein] as determinate being is in essence being 
for another (see Remark to § 48). One aspect of property is that it is
an existent as an external thing, and in this respect property exists for
other external things and is connected with their necessity and con-
tingency. But it is also the existence of the will, and from this point
of view the ‘other’ for which it exists can only be the will of another
person. This relation of will to will is the true and proper ground in
which freedom has existence.—The sphere of contract is made up of
this mediation whereby I hold property not merely by means of a
thing and my subjective will, but by means of another person’s will
as well and so hold it in virtue of my participation in a common will.
Reason makes it just as necessary for human beings to enter into
contractual relationships—gift, exchange, trade, etc.—as to pos-
sess property (see Remark to § 45). All they are conscious of is that
they are led to make contracts by need in general, by benevolence,
advantage, etc.; implicitly [an sich], however, they are led to do
this by reason, i.e. by the Idea of the real existence of free person-
ality, ‘real’ [reell] here meaning ‘present in the will alone’.
Contract presupposes that the parties entering it recognize each
other as persons and property owners. It is a relationship at 
Property
83

the level of objective spirit, and so contains and presupposes from
the start the moment of recognition (compare § 35 and Remark 
to § 57).
Addition: In a contract I hold property on the strength of a common will;
that is to say, it is the interest of reason that the subjective will should
become universal and raise itself to this degree of actualization. Thus in
contract my will still has the character of being this will, though it has it in
community with another will. The universal will, however, still appears
here only in the form and shape of community [Gemeinsamkeit].
sub-section 2
CONTRACT
72. Contract brings into existence the property whose external
side, its side as an existent, is no longer a mere ‘thing’ but contains
the moment of a will (and consequently the will of a second person).
Contract is the process in which there is revealed and mediated the
contradiction that I am and remain the independent owner of 
something from which I exclude the will of another only insofar as in
identifying my will with the will of another I cease to be an owner.
73. I have power to alienate a property as an external thing (see 
§ 65); but more than this, the concept compels me to alienate it qua
property in order that thereby my will may become objective to me
as determinately existent [daseiend]. In this situation, however, my
will as alienated is at the same time another’s will.* Consequently this
situation wherein this necessity of the concept is realized is the unity
of diﬀerent wills and so a unity in which both surrender their
diﬀerence and their own special character. Yet this identity of their
wills implies also (at this stage) that each will still is and remains not
identical with the other but retains from its own point of view a spe-
cial character of its own.
74. This contractual relationship, therefore, is the means whereby
one identical will persists within the absolute diﬀerence between
independent property-owners. It implies that each, in accordance
with the common will of both, ceases to be an owner and yet remains
and becomes one. It is the mediation of the will to give up a property,
an individual property, and the will to take up another, i.e. another
belonging to someone else; and this mediation takes place when the
First Part: Abstract Right 
84

two wills are associated in an identity in the sense that one of them
comes to its decision only in the presence of the other.
75. The two contracting parties are related to each other as imme-
diate self-subsistent persons. Therefore (α) contract arises from the
arbitrary will. (β) The identical will which is brought into existence
by the contract is only one posited by the parties, and so is only a will
shared in common and not a will that is universal in and for itself. (γ)
The object about which a contract is made is an individual external
thing, since it is only things of that kind which the parties’ purely
arbitrary will has it in its power to alienate (see §§ 65ﬀ.).
To subsume marriage under the concept of contract is thus quite
impossible; this subsumption—though shameful is the only word
for it—is propounded in Kant’s Doctrine of Right.38 It is equally
far from the truth to ground the nature of the state on the contrac-
tual relation, whether the state is supposed to be a contract of all
with all, or of all with the monarch and the government.
The intrusion of this contractual relation, and relationships
concerning private property generally, into the relation between
the individual and the state has been productive of the greatest
confusion in both constitutional law and actuality. Just as at one
time* political rights and duties were considered and maintained
to be an immediate private property of particular individuals,
something contrasted with the right of the monarch and the state,
so also in more recent times the rights of the monarch and the state
have been regarded as the subjects of a contract and as grounded
in contract, as something embodying merely a common will and
resulting from the arbitrariness of parties united into a state.
However diﬀerent these two points of view may be, they have this
in common, that they have transferred the characteristics of pri-
vate property into a sphere of a quite diﬀerent and higher nature.
(See below [esp. §§ 258, 278, 294], ethical life and the state.)
Addition: It has recently become very popular to regard the state as a con-
tract of all with all. Everyone makes a contract with the monarch, so the
argument runs, and he again with his subjects. This point of view arises
from thinking superﬁcially only of one unity of diﬀerent wills. In contract,
however, there are two identical wills who are both persons and wish to
remain property-owners. Thus contract springs from a person’s arbitrary
Contract
85
38 See Kant, Doctrine of Right, §§ 24–7 [Gregor trans., 96–8].

will, an origin which marriage too has in common with contract. But the
case is quite diﬀerent with the state; it does not lie with an individual’s
arbitrary will to separate himself from the state, because we are already citi-
zens of the state by birth. The rational end of humanity is life in the state,
and if there is no state there, reason at once demands that one be founded.
Permission to enter a state or leave it must be given by the state; this then
is not a matter which depends on an individual’s arbitrary will and there-
fore the state does not rest on contract, for contract presupposes arbitrari-
ness. It is false to maintain that the foundation of the state is dependent on
the arbitrary will of all. On the contrary, it is absolutely necessary for every
individual to be a citizen of a state. The great advance of the state in
modern times is that it remains an end in and for itself; it is no longer open
to individuals, as it was in the Middle Ages, to make private stipulations
in connection with it.
76. Contract is formal when the double consent whereby the
common will is brought into existence is apportioned between the
two contracting parties so that one of them has the negative
moment—the alienation of a thing—and the other the positive
moment—the appropriation of the thing. Such a contract is gift. But
contract may be called real [reell] when each of the two contracting
wills is the totality of these mediating moments and therefore in such
a contract becomes a property owner and remains so. This is a con-
tract of exchange.
Addition: Contract implies two consenting parties and two things. That is
to say, in a contract my purpose is both to acquire property and to surren-
der it. Contract is real when the action of both parties is complete, i.e.
when both surrender and both acquire property, and when both remain
property-owners even in the act of surrender. Contract is formal where
only one of the parties acquires property or surrenders it.
77. Since in real contract each party retains the same property
with which he enters the contract and which at the same time he sur-
renders, what remains identical throughout as the intrinsic [an sich
seiend] property in the contract is distinct from the external things
whose owners change when the exchange is made. What remains
identical is the value, in respect of which the objects of the contract
are equal to one another whatever the qualitative external diﬀerences
of the things exchanged. Value is their universal aspect (see § 63).
The legal provision that excessive damage (laesio enormis)* annuls
the obligation arising out of the making of a contract has its source,
First Part: Abstract Right 
86

therefore, in the concept of contract, particularly in this moment
of it, that the contracting party by alienating his property still
remains a property owner and, more precisely, an owner of the
quantitative equivalent of what he alienates. But the damage is 
not merely excessive (as it is taken to be if it exceeds one-half of
the value) but inﬁnite, if someone has entered on a contract or
made a stipulation of any sort for the alienation of inalienable
goods (see § 66).
A stipulation, moreover, diﬀers from a contract, ﬁrst, in its con-
tent, because it signiﬁes only some single part or moment of the
whole contract, and secondly, because it is the form in which the
contract is settled (a point on which more will be said later [§ 217]).
So far as its content is concerned, it comprises only the formal
determination of the contract, i.e. the willingness of one party to
give something and the willingness of the other to accept it; for
this reason, the stipulation has been enumerated amongst so-
called ‘unilateral’ contracts. The distinction between unilateral
and bilateral contracts, and distinctions in Roman law between
other types of contract,* are sometimes superﬁcial juxtapositions
made from an isolated and often external point of view such as that
of the diﬀerent types of contractual form; or sometimes they con-
fuse determinations intrinsic to contract itself with others which
only arise later in connection with the administration of justice
(actiones) and the legal processes giving eﬀect to positive laws, and
which are often derived from quite external circumstances and
contravene the concept of right.
78. The distinction between property and possession, the sub-
stantial and external aspects of ownership (see § 45), appears in 
the sphere of contract as the distinction between a common will and
its actualization, or between a covenant and its performance. Once
made, a covenant taken by itself in distinction from its performance
is something held before the mind [ein Vorgestelltes], something
therefore to which a particular determinate existence must be given
in accordance with the distinctive mode of giving determinate 
existence to ideas through signs.39 This is done, therefore, by
expressing the stipulation in formalities such as gestures and other
symbolic actions, particularly by declaring it with precision in 
Contract
87
39 Hegel’s reference: Encyclopaedia, §§ 379ﬀ. [3rd edn. §§ 458ﬀ.].

language, the most worthy medium for the expression of intellectual
representations.
The stipulation accordingly is the form given to the content of a
contract, i.e. to what is agreed in it, whereby this content attains
its determinate existence as something as yet only represented. But
this representation is only a form, and does not mean that the con-
tent [itself] is still something subjective, a desire or a wish for so
and so. On the contrary, the content is what has ﬁnally been
decided by the will concerning such matters.
Addition: Just as in the theory of property we had the distinction between
ownership and possession, between the substance of the matter and its
purely external side, so here in contract we have the diﬀerence between a
common will—covenant—and a particular will—performance. It lies in
the nature of contract that it should be an expression of both the common
and the particular will of the parties, because in it will is related to will.
The covenant, made manifest in a sign, and its performance are quite dis-
tinct from each other amongst civilized peoples, though amongst savages
they may coincide. In the forests of Ceylon there is a tribe of traders who
put down their property and wait quietly until others come to put theirs
down opposite. Here there is no diﬀerence between the dumb declaration
of will and the performance of what is willed.
79. In contract it is the will, and therefore the substance of what is
right in contract, that the stipulation enshrines. In contrast with this
substance, the possession which is still being retained while the con-
tract remains unfulﬁlled is in itself only something external, depend-
ent for its determination on the will alone. By making the stipulation,
I have given up a property and withdrawn my particular arbitrary
will from it, and it has eo ipso become the property of another. If,
therefore, I agree to stipulated terms, I am immediately bound by
right to carry them out.
The diﬀerence between a mere promise and a contract lies in the
fact that a promise is a statement that I will give or do or perform
something in the future, and a promise still remains a subjective
volition which because it is subjective I can still alter. A stipulation
in a contract, on the other hand, is itself already the existence of the
will’s decision in the sense that by making the stipulation I have
alienated my property, it has now ceased to be mine, and I already
recognize it as the property of another. The distinction in Roman
law between pactum and contractus is a bad one.*
First Part: Abstract Right 
88

Fichte at one time40 maintained that my obligation to keep a
contract begins only when the other party starts fulﬁlling his side
of it; his reason was that up to that point I am uncertain whether
the other party’s declarations are seriously meant. In that case it
would follow that the obligation to keep a contract before it was
carried out would only be a moral one, not an obligation by
rights.—But the expression of the stipulation is not simply a dec-
laration of a general character; it embodies a common will which
has been brought into existence and which has superseded the
arbitrary and alterable dispositions of the parties. The question
therefore is not whether the other party could have had diﬀerent
inner intentions when the contract was made or afterwards, but
whether he had any right to have them. Even if the other party
begins to fulﬁl his side of the contract, it is equally open to me to
do wrong if I like. The nullity of Fichte’s view is also shown by the
fact that it would base contractual rights on the bad inﬁnite, i.e. on
the progress ad inﬁnitum* involved in the inﬁnite divisibility of
time, matter, action, etc. The existence of the will in formal ges-
tures or in explicit and precise language is already the complete
existence of the will as an intelligent entity, and the performance
of the covenant so embodied is only the selﬂess [selbstlos] conse-
quence.
It is true that in positive right there are so-called ‘real’ contracts
[Real-Kontrakte] as distinguished from ‘consensual’ contracts, in
the sense that the former are looked upon as fully valid only when
the actual performance (res, traditio rei) of the undertaking super-
venes upon the willingness to perform it; but this has nothing to
do with the thing at issue. For one thing, these ‘real’ contracts
cover particular cases where it is only this delivery by the other
party which puts me in a position to fulﬁl my side of the bargain,
and where my obligation to do my part relates only to the thing
after it has come into my hands, as happens for instance in loans,
contracts of lease, or deposits. (The same may also be the case in
other contracts.) But this is a matter which concerns not the
nature of the relation of the stipulation to performance but only
the manner of performance.—For another thing, it is always open
Contract
89
40 See J. G. Fichte, An Attempt to Correct the Public’s Judgements Concerning the French
Revolution [Beitrag zur Berichtigung der Urteile des Publicums über die französische
Revolution], in Fichtes Werke, ed. I. H. Fichte (Berlin, 1845), vi. 111ﬀ.

to the parties at their discretion to stipulate in any contract that 
the obligation of one party to perform his side shall not lie in the
making of the contract itself as such, but shall arise only from the
performance by the other party of his side.
80. The classiﬁcation of contracts and an intelligent treatment of
their various species once classiﬁed is not here to be derived from
external circumstances but from distinctions lying in the very nature
of contract. These distinctions are those between formal and real
[reell] contracts,* between ownership and possession and use,
between value and speciﬁc thing, and they yield contracts of the fol-
lowing sorts (the classiﬁcation given here agrees on the whole with
that of Kant’s Metaphysical First Principles of the Doctrine of Right,
120ﬀ.,41 and one would have expected that the usual humdrum
classiﬁcation of contracts as real [Real-] and consensual, nominate
and innominate,* etc., would have been long since abandoned in
favour of this rational classiﬁcation):
A. Gift.
(1) Gift of a thing—gift properly so called.
(2) Loan [Leihen] of a thing—i.e. the gift of a portion of it or of
restricted use and enjoyment of it; here the lender remains the owner
of the thing (mutuum and commodatum without payment of interest).*
Here the thing lent is either a speciﬁc thing, or, even though it be
something speciﬁc, it may still be looked on as universal, or it may be
a thing which counts (like money) as a thing universal in itself.
(3) Gift of service of any sort, e.g. the mere safe-keeping of a
property (depositum). The gift of a thing on the special condition 
that its recipient shall not become its owner until the date of the
donor’s death, i.e. the date at which he ceases in any case to be an
owner of property, is testamentary disposition; this is not contained
in the concept of contract but presupposes civil society and positive
legislation.42
B. Exchange.
(1) Exchange as such:
(α) exchange of a thing pure and simple, i.e. exchange of one
speciﬁc thing for another of the same kind;
First Part: Abstract Right 
90
41 See Kant, Doctrine of Right, § 31 [Gregor trans., 102–3].
42 See PR §§ 179ﬀ.

(β) purchase or sale (emtio, venditio); exchange of a speciﬁc thing
for one characterized as universal, one which counts as value alone
and which lacks the other speciﬁc determination of utility—i.e. for
money.
(2) Letting (locatio, conductio); alienation of the temporary use of
a property in return for rent:
(α) letting of a speciﬁc thing—letting in the proper sense; or
(β) letting of a universal thing, so that the lessor remains only the
owner of this universal, or in other words of the value—loan
[Anleihe] (mutuum, or even commodatum since rent is charged).*
The additional empirical characteristics of the thing (which may
be, e.g., a ﬂat, furniture, a house, res fungibilis or non fungibilis, etc.)
entail (as in A.2 above) other particular though unimportant subdiv-
isions.
(3) Contract for wages (locatio operae)—alienation of my 
productive capacity or my services so far, that is, as these are 
alienable, the alienation being restricted in time or in some other way
(see § 67).
Akin to this are mandates and other contracts whose fulﬁlment
depends on character, good faith, or superior gifts, and where an
incommensurability arises between the services rendered and a
value in terms of cash. (In such cases the cash payment is called
not ‘wages’ but an ‘honorarium’.)
C. Completion of a contract (cautio) through giving a pledge.
In the contracts whereby I part with the use of a thing, I am no
longer in possession of the thing though I am still its owner, as for
example when I let a house. Further, in gifts or contracts for
exchange or purchase, I may have become the owner of a thing
without as yet being in possession of it, and the same cleavage
between ownership and possession arises in respect of the imple-
menting of any undertaking which is not completed in one go.
Now what the pledge eﬀects is that in the one case I remain, and 
in the other case I am put, in actual possession of the value
as that which is still or has already become my property, without
in either case being in possession of the speciﬁc thing which I am
handing over or which is to be mine. The pledge is a speciﬁc
thing but one which is my property only to the extent of the 
Contract
91

value of the property which I have handed over into another’s 
possession or which is due to me; its speciﬁc character as a thing
and any excess value it may have still belong to the person who
gave the pledge. Giving a pledge, therefore, is not itself a contract
but only a stipulation (see [Remark to] § 77), i.e. it is the moment
which brings a contract to completion so far as the possession of
the property is concerned.* Mortgage and surety are particular
forms of pledge.
Addition: In contract we drew the distinction between the covenant or 
stipulation (which made the property mine though it did not give me pos-
session) and performance (which ﬁrst gave me possession). Now if I am
already the out-and-out owner of the property, the object of the pledge is
to put me simultaneously in possession of the value of the property and
thereby to guarantee the covenant’s performance at the very time the
covenant is made. Surety is a particular kind of pledge whereby someone
gives his promise or pledges his credit as a guarantee for my performance.
Here a person fulﬁls the function which is fulﬁlled by a mere thing in the
case of a pledge proper.
81. In any relation of immediate persons to one another, their
wills, while in themselves [an sich] identical and in contract posited
by them as common, are yet particular. Because they are immediate
persons, it is a matter of chance whether or not their particular wills
actually correspond with the will in itself, although it is only through
the former that the latter has its real existence. If the particular will
is for itself [für sich] at variance with the universal, it assumes a way
of looking at things and a volition that are capricious and fortuitous
and comes on the scene in opposition to that which is right in itself
[an sich Recht]. This is wrong.
The transition to wrong is made by the logical higher necessity
that the moments of the concept—here right in itself or the will
as universal, and right in its existence [Existenz], which is just the
particularity of the will—should be posited as explicitly diﬀerent.
This happens when the concept is realized abstractly. But this par-
ticularity of the will for itself is arbitrariness and contingency, and
in contract I have surrendered these only as arbitrariness in the
case of an individual thing and not as the arbitrariness and contin-
gency of the will itself.
First Part: Abstract Right 
92

Addition: In contract we had the relation of two wills as a common will.
But this identical will is only relatively universal, posited as universal, and
so is still opposed to the particular will. In contract, to be sure, making a
covenant entails the right to require its performance. But this performance
is dependent again on the particular will which qua particular may act in
contravention of right in itself. At this point then the negation, which was
already present at the start in the will in itself, comes into view, and this
negation is just what wrong is. The overall progression entails purifying
the will of its immediacy and thereby summoning from the common will
particularity which then comes on the scene as opposed to the common
will. In contract the parties still retain their particular wills; contract there-
fore is not yet beyond the stage of arbitrariness, with the result that it
remains at the mercy of wrong.
sub-section 3
WRONG
82. In contract right in itself is present as something posited, while
its inner universality is there as something common in the arbitrari-
ness and particular will of the parties. This appearance [Erscheinung]
of right, in which right and its essential existence, the particular will,
correspond immediately, i.e. fortuitously, proceeds in wrong to
become a semblance [Schein],* an opposition between right in itself
and the particular will as that in which right becomes a particular
right. But the truth of this semblance is its nullity and the fact that right
reasserts itself by negating this negation of itself. In this process right
is mediated by returning into itself out of the negation of itself; it
thereby makes itself actual and valid, while at the start it was only in
itself [an sich] and something immediate.
Addition: Right in itself, the universal will, is essentially determined
through the particular will, and so is in relation with something which is
inessential. This is the relation of essence to its appearance. Even if the
appearance corresponds with the essence, still, looked at from another
point of view, it fails to correspond with it, since appearance is the stage of
contingency, essence related to the inessential. In wrong, however, 
appearance proceeds to become a semblance. A semblance is a determinate
existence inadequate to the essence, the empty detachment and posited-
ness [Gesetztsein] of the essence, so that in both essence and semblance the 
distinction of the one from the other is present as sheer diﬀerence.
Wrong
93

The semblance, therefore, is the untrue which disappears in claiming to be
for itself; and in the course of the semblance’s disappearance the essence
reveals itself as essence, i.e. as the power over semblance. The essence has
negated its own negation and so is corroborated. Wrong is a semblance of
this kind, and, when it disappears, right acquires the character of some-
thing ﬁxed and valid. What is here called the essence is just right in itself,
and in contrast with it the particular will annuls itself as untrue. Hitherto
the being of right has been immediate only, but now it becomes actual
because it returns out of its negation. The actual is what is eﬀective; in its
otherness it still preserves itself, while anything immediate remains sus-
ceptible of negation.
83. When right is something particular and therefore manifold in
contrast with its intrinsic [an sich seiend] universality and simplicity,
it acquires the form of a semblance. (a) This semblance of right is in
itself or immediate—non-malicious wrong or a civil oﬀence; (b)
right is posited as a semblance by the subject—fraud; (c) it is posited
by the subject as altogether null and void—crime.
Addition: Wrong is thus the semblance of the essence that posits itself as
self-subsistent. If the semblance is only in itself or implicit [an sich] and
not also for itself or explicit [für sich], i.e. if the wrong passes in my eyes
as right, the wrong is non-malicious. The semblance here is a semblance
from the point of view of right but not from my point of view.
The second type of wrong is fraud. Here the wrong is not a semblance
from the point of view of right in itself. The position is that I create a sem-
blance to deceive the other party. In fraud right is in my eyes only a sem-
blance. In the ﬁrst case, the wrong was a semblance from the point of view
of right. In the second case, from my own point of view, from the point of
view of wrong, right is only a semblance.
Finally, the third type of wrong is crime. This is wrong both in itself
and for me. But here I will the wrong and make no use of even the 
semblance of right. I do not intend the other against whom the crime 
is committed to regard as right what is wrong in and for itself. The 
distinction between crime and fraud is that in the latter the form of 
acting still implies a recognition of right, and this is just what is lacking in
crime.
A. Non-malicious Wrong
84. Taking possession (see § 54) and contract—both for them-
selves and in their particular species—are in the ﬁrst instance
diﬀerent expressions and consequences of my willing pure and
First Part: Abstract Right 
94

simple; but since the will is the inherently universal, they are,
through their recognition by others, grounds of title [Rechtsgründe].
Such grounds are external to one another and multiple, and this
implies that diﬀerent persons may have them in relation to one 
and the same thing. Each person may look upon the thing as his
property on the strength of the particular ground on which he bases
his title. It is in this way that one person’s right may clash with
another’s.
85. This clash which arises when a thing has been claimed on
some ground, and which comprises the sphere of civil suits, entails
the recognition of right as the universal and decisive factor, so that it
is common ground that the thing in dispute should belong to the party
who has the right to it. The suit is concerned only with the 
subsumption of the thing under the property of one or other of the
parties—a straightforward negative judgement, where, in the predi-
cate ‘mine’, only the particular is negated.*
86. The recognition of right by the parties is bound up with their
opposed particular interests and points of view. In opposition to this
semblance of right, yet within this semblance itself (see the preced-
ing Paragraph), right in itself arises as something kept in view
[vorgestellt] and demanded by the parties. But at ﬁrst it arises only as
an ‘ought-to-be’ because the will is not yet present here as a will so
freed from the immediacy of interest as, despite its particularity, to
have the universal will for its aim; nor is it yet at this point deter-
mined as a recognized actuality of such a sort that in face of it the
parties would have to renounce their particular interest and point of
view.
Addition: There is a determinate ground for what is right in itself, and the
wrong which I hold to be right I also defend on some ground or other. The
nature of the ﬁnite and particular is to allow room for contingencies. Thus
here collisions must occur, because here we are on the level of the ﬁnite.
This ﬁrst type of wrongdoing negates the particular will only, while uni-
versal right is respected. Consequently this is the most venial of the types
of wrongdoing. If I say ‘a rose is not red’, I still recognize that it has a
colour. Hence I do not deny the genus; all that I negate is the particular
colour, red. Similarly, right is recognized here. Each of the parties wills
what is right, and each is supposed to receive only what is right. The
wrong of each consists simply in his holding that what he wants is right.
Wrong
95

B. Fraud
87. Right in itself, as distinct from right as particular and as deter-
minately existent, is determined as what is demanded, as the essential
thing; but as such, it is still only something demanded and from that
point of view something merely subjective, and so inessential—a mere
semblance. When the universal is reduced to a mere semblance by the
particular will, as happens initially when the universal is reduced, in
contract, to a merely external community of wills, we have fraud.
Addition: At this second level of wrongdoing, the particular will is
respected, but universal right is not. In fraud, the particular will is not
infringed, because the party defrauded is given to believe that he is receiv-
ing his right. Thus the right which he demands is posited as something
subjective, as a mere semblance, and it is this which constitutes fraud.
88. In contract I acquire a property for the sake of its particular
characteristics and at the same time in light of the inner universality
which it possesses partly through its value and partly through having
been the property of another. If the other so wills, a false semblance
may be given to the thing I acquire, so that the contract is right
enough so far as it is an exchange, voluntary on both sides, of this
thing in its immediacy and uniqueness, but still the aspect of intrin-
sic [an sich seiend] universality is lacking. (Here we have an inﬁnite
judgement expressed positively or as a tautology.)* 43
89. Here again all there is, is the demand* that the objective or uni-
versal element—as opposed to the acceptance of the thing simply as
this thing and to the mere opinions and arbitrariness of the will—be
recognizable as value and have validity as right, and that the subjective
arbitrary will, opposing itself to right, be superseded [aufgehoben].
Addition: In the case of civil and non-malicious wrong no punishment is
imposed, because in such cases the wrongdoer has willed nothing in oppo-
sition to right. In the case of fraud, on the other hand, punishments come
in, because here it is a matter of the infringement of right.
C. Coercion and Crime
90. In owning property I place my will in an external thing, and
this implies that my will, just by being thus reﬂected in the object,
First Part: Abstract Right 
96
43 Hegel’s reference: Encyclopaedia, § 121 [3rd edn. § 173].

may be seized in it and brought under compulsion. It may simply be
subjected in the thing to force as such, or it may be constrained to
sacriﬁce something or to do some action as a condition of retaining
one or other of its possessions or embodiments—it may be coerced.
Addition: Wrong in the full sense of the word is crime, where there is no
respect either for right in itself or for what seems right to me, where, then,
both sides, the objective and the subjective, are infringed.
91. As a living thing a human being may be coerced, i.e. his body
or anything else external about him may be brought under the power
of others; but the free will cannot be coerced at all (see § 5), except in
so far as it fails to withdraw itself out of the external object in which it
is held fast, or rather out of its idea of that object (see § 7). Only the
will which allows itself to be coerced can in any way be coerced.
92. Since it is only insofar as the will has an existence in some-
thing determinate that it is Idea or actually free, and since the exist-
ent in which it has laid itself is freedom in being [Sein der Freiheit],
it follows that force or coercion is in its concept immediately self-
destructive because it is an expression of a will which annuls the
expression or determinate existence of a will. Hence force or coer-
cion, taken abstractly, is wrong.
93. That coercion is in its concept self-destructive is exhibited in
reality by the fact that coercion is annulled by coercion; coercion is thus
shown to be not only right under certain conditions but necessary,
i.e. as a second act of coercion which is the annulment of one that has
preceded.
Breaking a contract by failing to carry out its stipulated terms, or
neglect of duty rightly owed to family or state, or action in
deﬁance of that duty, is the ﬁrst act of coercion or at least force, in
that it involves depriving another of his property or evading a
service due to him.
Coercion by a schoolmaster, or coercion directed against sav-
agery and brutishness, seems at ﬁrst sight to be an initial act of
coercion, not a second following on one that has preceded. But the
merely natural will is in itself a force against the intrinsic [an sich
seiend] Idea of freedom which must be protected against such an
uncivilized will and be made to prevail in it. Either an ethical insti-
tution has already been established in family or government, and
Wrong
97

the natural will is a mere display of force against it; or else there is
only a state of nature, a state of aﬀairs where mere force prevails
and against which the Idea establishes a right of heroes.
Addition: Once the state has been founded, there can no longer be any
heroes. They come on the scene only in uncivilized conditions. Their aim
is right, necessary, and political, and this they pursue as their own aﬀair.
The heroes who founded states, introduced marriage and agriculture, did
not do this as their recognized right, and their conduct still has the appear-
ance of being their particular will. But as the higher right of the Idea
against nature, this heroic coercion is a rightful coercion. Mere goodness
can achieve little against the power of nature.
94. Abstract right is a right to coerce, because the wrong which
transgresses it is an exercise of force against the existence of my 
freedom in an external thing. The maintenance of this existence
against the exercise of force therefore itself takes the form of an
external act and an exercise of force annulling the force originally
brought against it.
To deﬁne abstract right, or right in the strict sense, at the very
outset as a right in the name of which coercion may be used, is to
interpret it in light of a consequence that arises only through the
indirect route of wrong.
Addition: Special attention must be paid at this point to the diﬀerence
between the right and the moral. In morality, i.e. when I am reﬂected into
myself, there is also a duality, because the good is my aim and I ought to
determine myself by reference to that Idea. The good is given existence in
my decision and I actualize the good in myself. But this existence is purely
inward and therefore cannot be coerced. The laws of the state therefore
cannot possibly seek to reach as far as a person’s disposition, because, in
the moral sphere, I exist for myself alone, and force in that context is
meaningless.
95. The initial act of coercion as an exercise of force by the free
agent, an exercise of force which infringes the existence of freedom
in its concrete sense, infringes right as right, is crime—a negatively
inﬁnite judgement in its full sense,* 44 whereby not only the particular
(i.e. the subsumption of a thing under my will—see § 85) is negated,
but also the universality and inﬁnity in the predicate ‘mine’ (i.e. my
capacity for rights). Here the negation does not come about through
First Part: Abstract Right 
98
44 Hegel’s reference: See my Science of Logic, ii. 99 [Miller trans., 641–3].

the mediation of my opinion (as it does in fraud—see § 88) but in
deﬁance of it. This is the sphere of criminal law [peinliches Recht].
Right, the infringement of which is crime, has so far only those
formations which we have seen in the preceding Paragraphs;
hence crime also, to begin with, has its more precise signiﬁcance
in relation to these speciﬁc rights. But the substance of these forms
is the universal which remains the same throughout its further
development and formation, and consequently its infringement,
crime, also remains the same and accords with its concept. Thus the
speciﬁc characteristic of crime [in general] to be noticed in the next
Paragraph is characteristic also of the particular, more determinate,
content in e.g. perjury, treason, counterfeiting, forgery, etc.
96. It is only the existent [daseiend] will that can suﬀer injury. In
becoming existent in something, however, the will enters the sphere
of quantitative extension and qualitative determinations, and hence
varies accordingly. For this reason, it makes a diﬀerence to the objec-
tive aspect of crime whether the will so objectiﬁed and its speciﬁc
quality is injured throughout its entire extent, and so in the inﬁnity
which is equivalent to its concept (as in murder, slavery, enforced
religious observance, etc.), or whether it is injured only in a single
part or in one of its qualitative determinations, and if so, in which of
these.
The Stoic view* that there is only one virtue and one vice, the laws
of Draco* which prescribe death as a punishment for every
oﬀence, the crude formal code of honour which takes any insult as
an oﬀence against the inﬁnity of personality, all have this in
common, that they go no further than the abstract thought of the
free will and personality and fail to apprehend it in the concrete
and determinate existence which it must possess as Idea.
The distinction between robbery and theft is qualitative; when
I am robbed, personal violence is done to me and I am injured in
my character as consciousness existing here and now and so as this
subjective inﬁnity.
Many qualitative characteristics of crime, e.g. its danger to public
safety,45 have their basis in more concrete circumstances, but they
are often apprehended only indirectly through their consequences
Wrong
99
45 See PR § 218 and Remark to PR § 319.

rather than through the concept of the thing. Thus the crime which
taken by itself is the more dangerous in its immediate character is an
injury of a more serious type in its range or its quality.
The subjective, moral quality of crime rests on the higher dis-
tinction implied in the question how far an event or deed is at all
an action, and concerns the subjective character of the action itself,
on which see below [§§ 113ﬀ.].
Addition: How any given crime is to be punished cannot be settled by mere
thinking; positive determinations are necessary. But with the advance of
education, opinions about crime become less harsh, and today a criminal
is not so severely punished as he was a hundred years ago. It is not exactly
crimes or punishments which change but the relation between them.
97. The infringement of right as right is something that happens
and has positive existence in the external world, though inherently it
is null and void. The manifestation of its nullity is that the annihilat-
ion of the infringement also comes into existence. This is right actu-
alized, the necessity of right mediating itself with itself by annulling
what has infringed it.
Addition: A crime alters something in some way, and the thing has its exist-
ence in this alteration. Yet this existence is a self-contradiction and to that
extent is inherently a nullity. The nullity is that the crime has cancelled
[aufgehoben] right as such. For right, as something absolute, cannot be
cancelled, and so committing a crime is in itself a nullity and this nullity is
the essence of what a crime eﬀects. A nullity, however, must reveal itself
to be such, i.e. manifest itself as vulnerable. A crime, as an act, is not some-
thing positive, not a ﬁrst thing, on which punishment would supervene as
a negation. It is something negative, so that its punishment is only a nega-
tion of the negation. Right in its actuality, then, annuls what infringes it
and therein displays its validity and proves itself to be a necessary, medi-
ated, existence.
98. Insofar as the infringement of right is only an injury to a pos-
session or to something which exists externally, it is something bad,
or damage, done to some kind of property or resource. The annulling
of the infringement, so far as the infringement is productive of
damage, is the satisfaction given in a civil suit, i.e. compensation for
the wrong done, so far as any such compensation can be found.
Concerning such satisfaction, the universal character of the
damage, i.e. its value, must here again take the place of its speciﬁc
First Part: Abstract Right 
100

qualitative character in cases where the damage done amounts to
destruction and is quite irreparable.
99. But the injury which has befallen the will in itself (and this
means the will of the injuring party as well as that of the injured and
everyone else) has as little positive existence in this will as such as it
has in the mere state of aﬀairs which it produces. For itself this will
in itself (i.e. right or law in itself) is rather that which has no exter-
nal existence and which for that reason cannot be injured. Equally,
the injury from the point of view of the particular will of the injured
party and of onlookers is only something negative. The positive exist-
ence of the injury consists solely in the particular will of the criminal.*
Hence to injure this particular will as a determinately existent will is
to annul the crime, which otherwise would be held valid, and to restore
right.
The theory of punishment is one of the topics which have come oﬀ
worst in the recent study of the positive science of right, because
in this theory the understanding is insuﬃcient; the essence of the
matter depends on the concept.
If crime and its annulment [Aufhebung] (which will be further
determined as punishment [see § 220]) are treated as if they were
unqualiﬁed evils [Übel], it must, of course, seem quite unreason-
able to will an evil merely because another evil is there already.46 To
give punishment this superﬁcial character of an evil is, amongst
the various theories of punishment, the fundamental presupposi-
tion of those which regard it as a preventive measure, a deterrent,
a threat, as reformative, etc., and what on these theories is sup-
posed to result from punishment is characterized equally
superﬁcially as a good. But it is not merely a question of an evil or
of this, that, or the other good; the precise point at issue is wrong
and the righting of it, that is, justice [Gerechtigkeit]. If you adopt
that superﬁcial attitude to punishment, you brush aside the objec-
tive consideration of justice, which is the primary and fundamen-
tal point of view in relation to crime; and the natural consequence
is that you take as essential the moral point of view, i.e. the subjec-
tive aspect of crime, intermingled with trivial psychological ideas
Wrong
101
46 Hegel’s reference: [E. F.] Klein, Principles of Common German and Prussian Penal
Law* [Grundsätze des gemeinen deutschen und preußischen peinlichen Rechts] (Halle, 1796),
§§ 9ﬀ.

of stimuli, impulses too strong for reason, and psychological fac-
tors coercing and working on our ideas (as if freedom were not
equally capable of thrusting an idea aside and reducing it to some-
thing contingent). The various considerations which are relevant
to punishment as a phenomenon and to the bearing it has on the
particular consciousness, and which concern its eﬀects (deterrent,
reformative, etc.) on the imagination, are an essential topic for
examination in their place, especially in connection with the
modality of punishment, but all these considerations presuppose
as their foundation the fact that punishment is in and for itself just.
In discussing this matter the only important things are, ﬁrst, that
crime is to be annulled, not because it is the producing of an evil,
but because it is an infringement of right as right, and secondly,
the question of what that positive existence is which crime possesses
and which must be annulled; it is this existence which is the real evil
to be removed, and the essential point is the question of where it lies.
So long as the concepts here at issue are not clearly apprehended,
confusion must continue to reign in the theory of punishment.
Addition: Feuerbach bases his theory of punishment on threat* and thinks
that if anyone commits a crime despite the threat, punishment must 
follow because the criminal was aware of it beforehand. But what about 
the justiﬁcation of the threat? A threat presupposes that a person is not
free, and its aim is to coerce him by the idea of an evil. But right and 
justice must have their seat in freedom and the will, not in the lack of 
freedom on which a threat turns. To base a justiﬁcation of punishment on
threat is to liken it to the act of someone who lifts a stick to a dog. It is to
treat a human being like a dog instead of with the freedom and respect due
to him as a human being. But a threat, which may ultimately rouse a
person to demonstrate his freedom in spite of it, discards justice alto-
gether.—Coercion by psychological factors can concern only diﬀerences
of quantity and quality in crime, not the nature of crime itself, and there-
fore any legal codes that may be products of this doctrine lack their proper
foundation.
100. The injury which falls on the criminal is not merely just in
itself—as just, it is eo ipso his will as it is in itself, an existence of his
freedom, his right—but it is also a right posited in the criminal him-
self, i.e. in his objectively existent will, in his action. For his action is
the action of a rational being and this implies that it is something uni-
versal and that by doing it the criminal has set up a law which he has
First Part: Abstract Right 
102

explicitly recognized in his action and under which in consequence
he should be subsumed as under his right.
As is well known, Beccaria* denied to the state the right of
inﬂicting capital punishment. His reason was that it could not be
presumed that the readiness of individuals to allow themselves to
be executed was included in the social contract, and that in fact the
contrary would have to be assumed. But the state is not a contract
at all (see [Remark to] § 75) nor is its fundamental essence the
unconditional protection and guarantee of the life and property of
individuals as such. On the contrary, it is that higher entity which
even lays claim to this very life and property and demands its
sacriﬁce. Further, what is involved in the action of the criminal is
not only the concept of crime—the rational aspect present in crime
as such whether the individual wills it or not, the aspect which the
state has to vindicate—but also the formal rationality of the indi-
vidual’s volition. Since that is so, punishment is regarded as con-
taining the criminal’s right, and hence by being punished he is
honoured as a rational being. He does not receive this due of
honour unless the concept and measure of his punishment are
derived from his own act. Still less does he receive it if he is treated
either as a harmful animal who has to be made harmless, or with a
view to deterring and reforming him.
Furthermore, apart from these considerations, the form in
which justice exists in the state, namely punishment, is not its only
form, nor is the state the pre-condition of justice in itself.
Addition: Beccaria’s requirement that people should give their consent to
being punished is right enough, but the criminal gives his consent already
by his very act. The nature of the crime, no less than the criminal’s own
will, requires that the injury initiated by the criminal should be annulled.
However that may be, Beccaria’s endeavour to have capital punishment
abolished has had beneﬁcial eﬀects. Even if neither Joseph II* nor the
French ever succeeded in entirely abolishing it, still we have begun to see
which crimes deserve the death penalty and which do not. Capital punish-
ment has in consequence become rarer, as in fact should be the case with
this most extreme punishment.
101. The annulment [Aufheben] of the crime is retribution insofar
as (a) retribution according to its concept is the ‘injury of an injury’
and (b), since as existent a crime is something determinate in its
scope both qualitatively and quantitatively, its negation as existent is
Wrong
103

similarly determinate. This identity rests on the concept, but it is not
an equality between the speciﬁc character of the crime and that of its
negation; on the contrary, the two injuries are equal only in respect
of their intrinsic [an sich seiend] character, i.e. in respect of their
value.
Empirical science requires that the deﬁnition of a concept (pun-
ishment in this case) shall be drawn from ideas universally present
to conscious psychological experience. This method would prove
that the universal feeling of peoples and individuals about crime is
and has been that it deserves punishment, that as the criminal has
done, so should it be done to him. (It is not clear how these sci-
ences, which ﬁnd the source of their concepts in ideas universally
shared, come on other occasions to take for granted propositions
contradictory of such universal ‘facts of consciousness’.)
But a point of great diﬃculty has been introduced into the idea
of retribution by the category of equality, though it is still true that
the justice of speciﬁc types or amounts of punishment is a further
matter, subsequent to the substance of the thing itself. Even if to
determine the later question of speciﬁc punishments we had to
look round for principles other than those determining the univer-
sal character of punishment, still the latter remains what it is. Yet
the concept itself must in general contain the fundamental prin-
ciple for determining the particular too. But the determinate char-
acter given by the concept to punishment is just that necessary
connection between crime and punishment already mentioned:
crime, as the will which is null in itself, eo ipso contains its nega-
tion in itself and this negation is manifested as punishment. It is
this inner identity whose reﬂection in external existence appears to
the understanding as ‘equality’. Now the qualitative and quantita-
tive characteristics of crime and its annulment fall into the sphere
of externality, and in this sphere no absolute determinacy is in any
case possible (compare § 49). In the ﬁeld of the ﬁnite, absolute
determinacy [thus] remains only a demand, a demand which the
understanding has increasingly to delimit—a fact of the greatest
importance—but which continues ad inﬁnitum and which allows
only of perennially approximate satisfaction.
If we overlook this nature of the ﬁnite and then into the bargain
refuse to go beyond abstract and specific equality, we are faced with
the insuperable diﬃculty of ﬁxing punishments (especially if 
First Part: Abstract Right 
104

psychology adduces in addition the strength of sensual impulses
and consequentially either the greater strength of the evil will or
the greater weakness, or the restricted freedom, of the will as
such—we may choose which we please). Furthermore, it is easy
enough from this point of view to exhibit the retributive character
of punishment as an absurdity (theft for theft, robbery for robbery,
an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth47—and then you can go on to
suppose that the criminal has only one eye or no teeth). But the 
concept has nothing to do with this absurdity, for which indeed
the introduction of this speciﬁc equality is solely to blame. Value, as
the inner equality of things which in their outward existence are
speciﬁcally diﬀerent from one another in every way, is a category
which has appeared already in connection with contracts (see 
§ 77), and also in connection with injuries that are the subject of
civil suits (see Remark to § 98);48 and by means of it our idea of a thing
is raised above its immediate character to its universality. In crime,
whose basic determination is the inﬁnite aspect* of the deed, the
purely external speciﬁc character disappears all the more obvi-
ously, and equality remains the basic rule determining what the
criminal essentially deserves, though not the speciﬁc external 
form that it should take. It is only in respect of that form that there
is a plain inequality between theft and robbery on the one hand,
and ﬁnes, imprisonment, etc., on the other. In respect of their
value, however, i.e. in respect of their universal property of 
being injuries, they are comparable. Thus, as was said above, it is
a matter for the understanding to look for something approxi-
mately equal to their value in this sense. If the intrinsic intercon-
nection of crime and its negation, and if also the thought of value
and the comparability of crime and punishment in respect of their
value are not apprehended, then it may become possible to see in
a punishment proper only an arbitrary connection of an evil with
an unlawful action.49
Addition: Retribution is the inner connection and the identity of two deter-
minations which are diﬀerent in appearance and which also have a
diﬀerent external existence in relation to one another. Retribution is
Wrong
105
47 See Exodus 21: 24. [S.H.]
48 All editions have ‘§ 95’. For ‘§ 77’ just preceding, all editions have simply ‘see
above’.
49 Hegel’s reference: Klein, Principles of Common German and Prussian Penal Law, § 9.

inﬂicted on the criminal and so it has the look of an alien destiny
[Bestimmung], not intrinsically his own. Nevertheless punishment, as we
have seen, is only crime made manifest, i.e. is the second half which ne-
cessarily presupposes the ﬁrst. Prima facie, the objection to retribution is
that it looks like something immoral, i.e. like revenge, and that thus it may
pass for something personal. Yet it is not something personal, but the 
concept itself, which carries out retribution. ‘Vengeance is mine, saith the
Lord’, as the Bible says.50 And if something in the word ‘retribution’
[Wiedervergeltung] calls up the idea of a particular caprice of the subjective
will, it must be pointed out that what is meant is only that the form which
crime takes is turned round against itself. The Eumenides sleep,* but
crime awakens them, and hence it is one’s own deed that asserts itself.
Now although requital cannot simply be made speciﬁcally equal to the
crime, the case is otherwise with murder, which is of necessity liable to the
death penalty; the reason is that since life is the full compass of [a human
being’s] existence, the punishment here cannot simply consist in a value,
for none is great enough, but can consist only in taking away a second life.
102. The annulling of crime in this sphere where right is imme-
diate is initially revenge, which is just in its content insofar as it is re-
tributive. But in its form it is an act of a subjective will which can
place its inﬁnity in every act of transgression and whose justice,
therefore, is in all cases contingent, while to the other party too it
appears as only particular. Hence revenge, because it is a positive
action of a particular will, becomes a new transgression; as thus con-
tradictory in character, it falls into an inﬁnite progression and
descends from one generation to another ad inﬁnitum.
In cases where crimes are prosecuted and punished not as public
crimes [crimina publica] but as private crimes* [crimina privata]
(e.g. in Jewish law and Roman law, theft and robbery; in English
law to this day, certain crimes, etc.) punishment is still, at least to
some extent, revenge. There is a diﬀerence between private
revenge and the revenge of heroes, knights-errant, etc., which is
part of the founding of states.
Addition: In that condition of society when there are neither magistrates
nor laws, punishment always takes the form of revenge; revenge remains
defective inasmuch as it is the act of a subjective will and therefore does
not correspond with the content. Members of a court of law are, indeed,
also persons, but their will is the universal will of the law and they aim to
First Part: Abstract Right 
106
50 See Romans 12: 19.

import into the punishment nothing except what is implied in the nature
of the thing. The person wronged, however, views the wrong not as some-
thing qualitatively and quantitatively limited but only as wrong pure and
simple, and in requiting the injury he may go too far, and this would lead
to a new wrong. Amongst uncivilized peoples, revenge is undying;
amongst the Arabs, for instance, it can be checked only by superior force
or by the impossibility of its satisfaction. A residue of revenge still lingers
in comparatively modern legislation in those cases where it is left to the
option of individuals whether to prosecute or not.
103. The demand that this contradiction, which is present here in
the manner in which wrong is annulled, be resolved like contradic-
tions in the case of other types of wrong (see §§ 86, 89), is the demand
for a justice freed from subjective interest and a subjective form and
no longer contingent on power, i.e. it is the demand for justice not as
revenge but as punishment. Therein lies, initially, the demand for a
will which, though particular and subjective, yet wills the universal as
such. But this concept of morality is not simply something
demanded; it has emerged in the course of this movement itself.
Transition from Right to Morality
104. That is to say, crime, and justice in the form of revenge, dis-
play (i) the shape which the will’s development takes when it has
passed over into the distinction between the universal will in itself
[an sich] and the individual will that is for itself [für sich] in opposi-
tion to the universal; and (ii) the fact that the will that is in itself,
returning into itself through superseding this opposition, has now
itself come to be for itself and actual. In this way, right, upheld in face
of the individual will that is merely for itself, is and is recognized as
actual by virtue of its necessity.—At the same time, however, the
shape that the will has here is eo ipso a step forward in the inner
determination of the will by the concept. The will’s immanent actu-
alization in accordance with its concept is the process whereby it
supersedes its being-in-itself [Ansichsein] and the form of immediacy
in which it begins and which is the shape it assumes in abstract right
(see [Remark to] § 21). This means that it ﬁrst posits itself in the
opposition between the universal will in itself and the individual will
that is for itself; and then, through the supersession of this opposi-
tion (through the negation of the negation), it determines itself as
will in its existence [Dasein], so that it is a free will not only in itself
Wrong
107

but for itself also, i.e. it determines itself as self-related negativity. It
now has its personality—in abstract right the will is personality and
no more—for its object; the inﬁnite subjectivity of freedom, a subjec-
tivity that has come to be for itself in this way, is the principle of the
moral [moralisch] standpoint.
Let us look back more closely over the moments through which
the concept of freedom develops itself from the will’s determinate
character as originally abstract to its character as self-related, and
so to its self-determination as subjectivity. In property this determin-
ate character is the abstract one, ‘mine’, and is therefore found in
an external thing. In contract, ‘mine’ is mediated by the wills of
the parties and means only something common. In wrong the will
of the sphere of right has its abstract being-in-itself or immediacy
posited as contingency by the individual will that is itself contin-
gent. At the moral standpoint, the abstract determinacy of the will
in the sphere of right has been so far overcome that this contin-
gency itself is, as reﬂected into itself and self-identical, the inﬁnite
inward contingency of the will, i.e. its subjectivity.
Addition: Truth entails that the concept shall be, and that this existence
shall correspond with the concept. In the sphere of right, the will is 
existent in something external, but the next requirement is that the will
should be existent in something inward, in itself. It must be for itself, 
be subjectivity, and have itself over against itself. This relation to itself is
the moment of aﬃrmation, but it can attain it only by superseding its
immediacy. The immediacy superseded in crime leads, then, through
punishment, i.e. through the nullity of this nullity, to aﬃrmation, i.e. to
morality.
First Part: Abstract Right 
108

second part
MORALITY
105. The standpoint of morality is the standpoint of the will
which is inﬁnite not merely in itself but for itself (see § 104). This
reﬂection of the will into itself and its identity for itself, in contrast
to its being-in-itself and immediacy and the determinate characteris-
tics developed therein, makes the person into the subject.
106. Since subjectivity now constitutes the determinacy of the
concept and is distinct from the concept as such, i.e. from the will in
itself, and, indeed, since the will of the subject—as that of the 
individual that is for itself—at the same time is [ist] (i.e. still has
immediacy in it), subjectivity constitutes the existence [Dasein] of the
concept. In this way a higher ground has been determined for free-
dom; the Idea’s aspect of existence [Existenz], or its moment of 
reality, is now the subjectivity of the will. Only in the will as subjec-
tive can freedom or the will in itself be actual.
The second sphere, morality, therefore throughout portrays the
real aspect of the concept of freedom, and the movement of this
sphere is as follows: the will, which initially is only for itself and is
immediately identical only in itself with the universal will or the
will that is in itself, is superseded and raised above its diﬀerence
from the universal will, above this situation in which it sinks
deeper and deeper into itself, and so is posited as identical for itself
with the will that is in itself.* This process is accordingly the 
cultivation of the ground in which freedom is now set, i.e. subjec-
tivity. What happens is that subjectivity, which is abstract at the
start, i.e. distinct from the concept, is equated with it, and the Idea
thereby acquires its genuine realization. The result is that the 
subjective will determines itself as objective too and so as truly
concrete.
Addition: So far as right in the strict sense was concerned, it was of no
importance what my intention or my principle was. This question about the
self-determination and motive of the will, like the question about its pur-
pose, now enters at this point in connection with morality. Since the human
being wishes to be judged in accordance with his own self-determination,

he is free in this relation to himself whatever the external situation may
impose upon him. No one can break in upon this inner conviction of
humanity, no violence can be done to it, and the moral will, therefore, is
inaccessible. The worth of a human being is estimated by reference to his
inward action and hence the standpoint of morality is that of freedom that
is for itself.
107. The self-determination of the will is at the same time a
moment in the concept of the will, and subjectivity is not merely its
existential aspect but its own determination (see § 104). The will that
is free for itself and determined as subjective is at the start concept
alone, but itself has determinate existence [Dasein] in order to exist as
Idea. The moral standpoint therefore takes shape as the right of the
subjective will.* In accordance with this right, the will recognizes
something and is something, only insofar as that thing is its own and
as the will is present to itself there as something subjective.
The same process through which the moral standpoint develops
(see the Remark to the preceding Paragraph) takes the form, from
this point of view, of the development of the right of the subjective
will, or of the mode of its existence. In this process the subjective
will further determines what it recognizes as its own in its 
object [Gegenstand], so that this becomes the will’s own true con-
cept, becomes objective [objektiv] in the sense of the will’s own
universality.*
Addition: This entire determination of the subjectivity of the will is once
again a whole which, as subjectivity, must also have objectivity. It is in a
subject that freedom can ﬁrst be realized, since the subjective is the true
material for this realization. But this existence of the will which we have
called subjectivity is diﬀerent from the will which is in and for itself. That
is to say, the will must free itself from this second one-sidedness of pure
subjectivity in order to become the will in and for itself. In morality, it is
the human being’s distinctive interest that comes into question, and the
high worth of this interest consists precisely in the fact that the human
being knows himself as absolute and determines himself. The uneducated
person allows himself to be constrained in everything by brute force and
natural factors; children have no moral will but leave their parents to
decide things for them. The educated person, however, develops an inner
life and wills that he himself shall be in everything he does.
108. The subjective will, as immediately for itself and distin-
guished from the will in itself (see Remark to § 106), is therefore
Second Part: Morality
110

abstract, restricted, and formal. But not merely is subjectivity itself
formal; in addition, as the inﬁnite self-determination of the will, it
constitutes the formal aspect of the will. In this, its ﬁrst appearance
in the individual will, this formal aspect has not yet been posited as
identical with the concept of the will, and therefore the moral point
of view is that of relation, of the ought-to-be, or demand. And since
the diﬀerence [Diﬀerenz] of subjectivity involves at the same time the
character of being opposed to objectivity as external existence, it fol-
lows that the point of view of consciousness comes on the scene here
too (see § 8). The general point of view here is that of the will’s
diﬀerence, ﬁnitude, and appearance.
The moral is not determined initially as that which is opposed to
the immoral, just as right is not immediately the opposite of
wrong. The point is rather that the general standpoint of morality
and immorality alike rests on the subjectivity of the will.
Addition: In morality, self-determination is to be thought of as the pure
restlessness and activity which can never arrive at anything that is. It is in
the sphere of ethical life that the will is for the ﬁrst time identical with the
concept of the will and has this concept alone as its content. In the moral
sphere the will still relates itself to what is in itself and consequently its
standpoint is that of diﬀerence. The process through which this stand-
point develops is that whereby the subjective will becomes identiﬁed with
its concept. Therefore the ‘ought-to-be’ which is still present in the moral
sphere is fulﬁlled only in ethical life. Further, this ‘other’ in relation to
which the subjective will stands is two-sided: ﬁrst, it is what is substantial,
the concept; secondly, it is that which exists externally. Even if the good
were posited in the subjective will, that still would not mean that it was
achieved.
109. This formal aspect of the will initially involves, in accord-
ance with its general determination, (a) the opposition of subjectivity
and objectivity, and (b) the activity (see § 8) related to this opposition.
Now existence [Dasein] and determinacy are identical in the concept
of the will (see § 104), and the will as subjective is itself this concept.
Hence the moments of this activity consist more precisely in (a) dis-
tinguishing between objectivity and subjectivity and even ascribing
independence to them both, and (b) positing them as identical.* In
the will which is self-determining, (α) its determinacy is in the ﬁrst
place posited in the will by the will itself as its inner particularization,
as a content which it gives to itself. This is the ﬁrst negation, and the
Second Part: Morality
111

formal limitation [Grenze] of this negation is that of being only some-
thing posited, something subjective. (β) As inﬁnitely reﬂected into
itself, this limitation exists for the will, and the will is the struggle to
overcome this restriction [Schranke], i.e. it is the activity of translat-
ing this content in some way or other from subjectivity into objectiv-
ity, into an immediate existence. (γ) The simple identity of the will
with itself in this opposition is the content or purpose [Zweck] which
remains self-identical in both these opposites and indiﬀerent to these
diﬀerences of form.
110. But, at the standpoint of morality, where freedom—this
identity of the will with itself—is for the will (see § 105), this identity
of content acquires its more precise and distinctive determination.
(a) The content is determined for me as ‘mine’ in such a way 
that, in its identity, it contains my subjectivity for me not only as 
my inner purpose, but also inasmuch as it has acquired external objec-
tivity.
Addition: The content of the subjective or moral will contains a determin-
ation of its own, i.e. even when it has acquired the form of objectivity, it
must still continue to enshrine my subjectivity, and the deed is to count
only if on its inward side it has been determined by me, if it was my pur-
pose, my intention. Beyond what lay in my subjective will I recognize
nothing in its expression as mine. What I wish to see in my deed is my sub-
jective consciousness over again.
111. (b) Though the content does have in it something particular,
whencesoever it may be derived, still it is the content of the will
reﬂected into itself in its determinacy and thus of the self-identical and
universal will; and therefore:
(α) the content has the inner determination of being adequate to
the will in itself or of possessing the objectivity of the concept; but
(β) since the subjective will, insofar as it is for itself, is at the same
time still formal (see § 108), the content’s adequacy to the concept is
still only something demanded, and hence this entails the possibility
that the content may not be adequate to the concept.
112. (c) While I retain my subjectivity in carrying out my aims
(see § 110), during this process of objectifying them I simultaneously
supersede the immediacy of this subjectivity as well as its character as
my individual subjectivity. But the external subjectivity which is
Second Part: Morality
112

thus identical with me is the will of others (see § 73). The will’s
ground of existence [Existenz] is now subjectivity (see § 106) and the
will of others is that existence which I give to my aim and which is at
the same time other to me. The achievement of my aim, therefore,
implies this identity of my will with the will of others, it has a 
positive relation to the will of others.
The objectivity of the aim achieved thus involves three meanings,
or rather it has three moments present within it at once; it is:
(α) something existing externally and immediately (see § 109);
(β) adequate to the concept (see § 111); 51
(γ) universal subjectivity.
The subjectivity which maintains itself in this objectivity consists:
(α) in the fact that the objective aim is mine, so that in it I main-
tain myself as this individual (see § 110);
(β) and (γ), in moments which coincide with the moments (β)
and (γ) of objectivity above.
At the standpoint of morality, subjectivity and objectivity are
distinct from one another, or united only as contradictory. It is
this fact more particularly which constitutes the ﬁnitude of this
sphere or its character as appearance (see § 108), and the develop-
ment of this standpoint is the development of these contradictions
and their resolutions—resolutions, however, which within this
ﬁeld can be no more than relative.
Addition: In dealing with formal right, I said [see § 38] that it contained
prohibitions only, that hence a right action, strictly so called, was purely
negative in character in respect of the will of others. In morality, on the
other hand, my will has a positive character in relation to the will of others,
i.e. the will in itself is inwardly present within what the subjective will
eﬀects. To eﬀect something is to produce something or to alter what
already exists, and such changes have a relation to the will of others. The
concept of morality is the inner relation of the will to itself. But here there
is not only one will; on the contrary its objectiﬁcation implies at the same
time that the individual will supersedes itself. In addition therefore, since
the determination of one-sidedness falls away, two wills with a positive
relation to each other are posited. So far as right is concerned, it makes no
diﬀerence whether someone else’s will may want something relating to my
will when I give my will an existence in property. In morality, however,
Second Part: Morality
113
51 All editions have ‘§ 112’.

the welfare of others too is in question, and this positive relation cannot
come on the scene before this point.
113. The externalization of the subjective or moral will is action.
Action contains the determinations here indicated:
(α) in its externality it must be known to me as my action;
(β) it has an essential relation to the concept as an ‘ought’ [see 
§ 131];
(γ) it has an essential relation to the will of others.
Only with the externalization of the moral will do we come to
action. The existence which the will gives to itself in the sphere of
formal right is existence in an immediate thing and is itself imme-
diate; to start with, it neither has in itself any express relation to
the concept, which is at that point not yet contrasted with the sub-
jective will and so is not distinguished from it, nor has it a positive
relation to the will of others; in the sphere of right, command in
its fundamental character is only prohibition (see § 38). In contract
and wrong, there is the beginning of a relation to the will of others;
but the correspondence established in contract between one will
and another is grounded in arbitrariness, and the essential relation
which the will has there to the will of the other is, as a matter of
right, something negative, i.e. one party retains his property (the
value of it) and allows the other to retain his. On the other hand,
crime insofar as it issues from the subjective will, and the question
of the mode of its existence in that will, come before us now for
consideration for the ﬁrst time.
The content of a legal [gerichtlich] action (actio), as something
determined by regulations, is not imputable to me. Consequently,
such an action contains only some of the moments of a moral
action proper, and contains them only in an external manner. The
aspect of an action in virtue of which it is properly moral is there-
fore distinct from its legal aspect.
114. The right of the moral will involves three aspects:
(a) The abstract or formal right of action, the right that the con-
tent of the action, as carried out in immediate existence, shall be
entirely mine, that thus the action shall be the purpose [Vorsatz] of the
subjective will.
Second Part: Morality
114

(b) The particular aspect of the action is its inner content, (α) i.e.
the way in which its general character is determined for me; this con-
stitutes the value of the action and the reason I think it valid—in
short my intention [Absicht]. (β) Its content as my particular aim, the
aim of my particular, subjective existence, is welfare [Wohl].
(c) This content, as something which is inward and which yet at
the same time is raised to its universality and thus to objectivity in
and for itself, is the absolute end of the will, the good. In the sphere
of reﬂection it is opposed to subjective universality, which is now evil
and now conscience.
Addition: If an action is to be moral, it must in the ﬁrst place correspond
with my purpose, since the moral will has the right to recognize in the
resulting state of aﬀairs only what was present inwardly as purpose.
Purpose concerns only the formal principle that the external will shall be
within me as something inward. On the other hand, in the second moment
of the moral sphere, questions may be asked about the intention behind 
the action, i.e. about the relative value of the action in relation to me. 
The third and last moment is not the relative value of the action but its
universal value, the good.
In a moral action, then, there may be a breach ﬁrst between what is pur-
posed and what is really eﬀected and achieved; secondly, between what is
there externally as a universal will and the particular inner determination
which I give to it. The third and last point is that the intention should be
in addition the universal content of action. The good is the intention
raised to the concept of the will.
sub-section 1
PURPOSE AND RESPONSIBILITY
115. The ﬁnitude of the subjective will in the immediacy of acting
consists immediately in the fact that its action presupposes an external
object in manifold circumstances. The deed [Tat] posits an alteration
in this existence confronting the will, and my will has responsibility
[schuld] in general for its deed insofar as the abstract predicate ‘mine’
belongs to the existence so altered.
An event, a situation which has been produced, is a concrete exter-
nal actuality which because of its concreteness has in it an indeter-
minable multiplicity of circumstances. Any and every individual
element which appears as the condition, ground, or cause of one
Purpose and Responsibility
115

such circumstance, and so has contributed its share to the event in
question, may be looked upon as responsible for the event, or at
least as sharing the responsibility for it. Hence, in the case of a
complex event (e.g. the French Revolution) it is open to the formal
understanding to choose which of an endless number of circum-
stances it will maintain to be responsible for it.
Addition: I am chargeable with what lay in my purpose and this is the most
important point in connection with crime. But responsibility contains only
the quite external judgement whether I have or have not done some thing.
It does not follow that, because I am responsible [schuld], the thing done
may be imputed to me.
116. It is, admittedly, not my own doing if damage is caused to
others by things whose owner I am and which as external objects
stand and are eﬀective in manifold connections with other things (as
may also be the case with myself as a mechanical body or as a living
thing). This damage, however, is more or less my fault because the
things that cause it are, indeed, mine, although it is true that they are
subject to my control, vigilance, etc., only to an extent varying with
their distinctive nature.
117. The freely acting will, in directing its aim on the existence
confronting it, has an idea [Vorstellung] of the attendant circum-
stances. But because the will is ﬁnite, since this existence is presup-
posed, the objective phenomenon is contingent so far as the will is
concerned, and may contain something other than what is contained
in the will’s idea of it. The will’s right, however, is to recognize as its
action [Handlung], and to accept responsibility for, only those pre-
suppositions of the deed of which it was conscious in its aim, those
aspects of the deed which were contained in its purpose. The deed can
be imputed to me only if my will is responsible for it—this is the
right to know.
Addition: The will has confronting it an existence upon which it acts. But
in order to know what this existence is I must have an idea of it, and the
responsibility is truly mine only insofar as I had knowledge of the situation
confronting me. Such a situation is a presupposition of my volition and my
will is therefore ﬁnite, or rather, since my will is ﬁnite, it has a 
presupposition of this kind. Insofar as my thinking and willing is rational,
I am no longer at this level of ﬁnitude, since the object on which I act is 
no longer an ‘other’ to me. Finitude, however, implies ﬁxed limits and
Second Part: Morality
116

restrictions. I have confronting me an ‘other’ which is only contingent,
something necessary in a purely external way; its path and mine may meet
or diverge. Nevertheless, I am nothing except in relation to my freedom,
and my will is responsible for the deed only insofar as I know what I am
doing. Oedipus, who killed his father without knowing it,* cannot be
accused of parricide. The ancient penal codes, however, attached less
weight to the subjective side of action, to imputability, than we do now-
adays. That is why sanctuaries were instituted in ancient times for har-
bouring and protecting the fugitive from vengeance.
118. Further, action is translated into external existence, and
external existence has connections in the ﬁeld of external necessity
through which it develops itself in all directions. Hence action has a
multitude of consequences. These consequences are the outward form
whose inner soul is the aim of the action, and thus they are the conse-
quences of the action, they belong to the action. At the same time, how-
ever, the action, as the aim posited in the external world, becomes the
prey of external forces which attach to it something totally diﬀerent
from what it is for itself and drive it on into alien and distant conse-
quences. Thus the will has the right to accept responsibility only for
the ﬁrst set of consequences, since they alone were purposed.
The distinction between consequences that are contingent and
those that are necessary is indeterminate, because the necessity
internal to the ﬁnite comes into determinate existence as an exter-
nal necessity, as a relation of individual things to one another,
things which as self-subsistent are conjoined in indiﬀerence to one
another and externally. The maxim: ‘Ignore the consequences of
actions’ and the other: ‘Judge actions by their consequences and
make these the criterion of right and good’ are both alike maxims
of the abstract understanding. The consequences, as the shape
proper to the action and immanent within it, exhibit nothing but
its nature and are simply the action itself; therefore the action can
neither disavow nor ignore them. On the other hand, however,
among the consequences there is also comprised something inter-
posed from without and introduced by chance, and this is quite
unrelated to the nature of the action itself.
The development in external existence of the contradiction
involved in the necessity of the ﬁnite is just the conversion of neces-
sity into contingency and vice versa. From this point of view,
therefore, acting means submitting oneself to this law. It is because
Purpose and Responsibility
117

of this that it is to the advantage of the criminal if his action has
comparatively few bad consequences (just as a good action must
accept that it may have no consequences or very few), and that the
fully developed consequences of a crime are counted as part of the
crime.
The self-consciousness of heroes (like that of Oedipus and
others in Greek tragedy) had not advanced out of its primitive
simplicity either to reﬂection on the distinction between deed and
action, between the external event and the purpose and knowledge
of the circumstances, or to the subdivision of consequences. On
the contrary, they accepted responsibility for the whole compass
of the deed.
Addition: The transition to intention depends on the fact that I accept
responsibility only for what I had an idea of. That is to say, there can be
imputed to me only what I knew of the circumstances. On the other hand,
there are inevitable consequences linked with every action, even if I am
only bringing about some individual, immediate state of aﬀairs. The con-
sequences in such a case represent the universal contained within that state
of aﬀairs. Of course I cannot foresee the consequences that might be pre-
vented, but I must be aware of the universal character of my individual
deed. The important element here is not the individual aspect but the
whole, and that concerns not the speciﬁcity of the particular action, but its
universal nature. Now the transition from purpose to intention lies in the
fact that I ought to be aware not simply of my individual action but also of
the universal which is conjoined with it. The universal which comes on the
scene here in this way is what I have willed, my intention.
sub-section 2
INTENTION AND WELFARE
119. The external existence of an action is a complex of connected
parts which may be regarded as divided into individual units ad
inﬁnitum, and the action may be treated as having touched in the ﬁrst
instance only one of these units. The truth of the individual, how-
ever, is the universal; and what gives action its explicit determinate
character is not an isolated content limited to an external unit, but a
universal content, comprising in itself the complex of connected
parts. Purpose, as issuing from a thinker, comprises more than the
mere unit; essentially it comprises that universal side of the action,
i.e. the intention.
Second Part: Morality
118

Etymologically, Absicht [intention] implies abstraction,* either the
form of universality or the extraction of a particular aspect of the
concrete thing. The endeavour to justify an action by the intention
behind it involves the isolation of one or other of its individual
aspects which is alleged to be the essence of the action on its sub-
jective side.
To judge an action as an external deed without yet determining
its rightness or wrongness is simply to bestow on it a universal
predicate, i.e. to describe it as arson, killing, etc.
The individuated character of external actuality shows what the
nature of that actuality is, namely a chain of external relations.
Actuality is touched in the ﬁrst instance only at a single point
(arson, for instance, directly concerns only a tiny section of the
ﬁrewood, i.e. is describable in a proposition, not a judgement),*
but the universal nature of this point entails its expansion. In a
living thing, the individual part is there in its immediacy not as a
mere part, but as an organ in which the universal is really present
as the universal; hence in murder, it is not a piece of ﬂesh, as
something individual, which is injured, but life itself which is
injured in that piece of ﬂesh. On the one hand, it is subjective
reﬂection, ignorant of the logical nature of the individual and the
universal, which indulges in the subdivision of individual parts
and consequences; on the other hand, it is the nature of the ﬁnite
deed itself to contain such separable contingencies. The device of
dolus indirectus* has its basis in these considerations.
Addition: It happens, of course, that circumstances may intervene in an
action to a greater or lesser degree. In a case of arson, for instance, the ﬁre
may not catch or alternatively it may take hold further than the incendiary
intended. In spite of this, however, we must not distinguish here between
good and ill fortune, since in acting a human being must engage with
externality. The old proverb is correct: ‘A ﬂung stone is the devil’s.’ To
act is to expose oneself to misfortune. Thus misfortune has a right over me
and is an existence of my own volition.
120. The right of intention is that the universal quality of the
action shall not merely be what it is in itself but shall be known by the
agent, and so shall have lain from the start in his subjective will. Vice
versa, what may be called the right of the objectivity of action is the
right of the action to assert itself as known and willed by the subject
as a thinker.
Intention and Welfare
119

This right to insight of this kind entails the complete, or almost
complete, lack of responsibility of children, imbeciles, lunatics,
etc., for their actions.—But just as actions on their external side
as events include contingent consequences, so there is involved in
the subjective agent an indeterminacy whose degree depends on the
power and strength of his self-consciousness and circumspection.
This indeterminacy, however, may not be taken into account except
in connection with childhood or imbecility, lunacy, etc., since it is
only such well marked states of mind that nullify [aufheben] the trait
of thought and freedom of will, and permit us to treat the agent as
devoid of the dignity of being a thinker and a will.
121. The universal quality of the action is the manifold content of
the action as such, reduced to the simple form of universality. But
the subject, an entity reﬂected into himself and so particular in rela-
tion to objective particularity, has in his end his own particular con-
tent, and this content is the soul of the action and determines its
character. The fact that this moment of the particularity of the agent
is contained and realized in the action constitutes subjective freedom
in its more concrete sense, the right of the subject to ﬁnd his satisfac-
tion in the action.
Addition: I, for myself, reﬂected into myself, am a particular in relation to
the externality of my action. My end constitutes the content of the action,
the content determinant of the action. Murder and arson, for example, are
universals and so are not the positive content of my action qua the action
of a subject. If one of these crimes has been committed, its perpetrator
may be asked why he committed it. The murder was not done for the sake
of murdering; the murderer had in view some particular positive end. But
if we were to say that he murdered for the mere pleasure of murdering,
then the purely positive content of the subject would surely be pleasure,
and if that is the case then the deed is the satisfaction of the subject’s will.
Thus the motive [Beweggrund] of a deed is, more particularly, what is
called the ‘moral’ factor, and this has in that case the double meaning of
the universal inherent in the purpose and the particular aspect of the inten-
tion. It is a striking modern innovation to enquire continually about the
motives of human actions. Formerly, the question was simply: ‘Is he an
upright man? Does he do his duty?’ Nowadays we insist on looking into
people’s hearts and so we presuppose a gulf between the objectivity of
actions and their inner side, the subjective motives. To be sure, the sub-
ject’s determination must be considered: he wills something and the
reason for what he wills lies within himself; he wills the satisfaction of his
Second Part: Morality
120

desire, the gratiﬁcation of his passion. Nonetheless, the good and the right
are also a content of action, a content not purely natural but put there by
my rationality. To make my freedom the content of what I will is a pure
determination of my freedom itself. Therefore the higher moral stand-
point consists in ﬁnding satisfaction in the action and advancing beyond
the gulf between the self-consciousness of a human being and the objec-
tivity of his deed, even though to treat action as if it involved such a gulf
is a way of looking at the matter characteristic of certain epochs in world
history and in individual biography.
122. It is on the strength of this particular aspect that the action
has subjective value or interest for me. In contrast with this end—the
content of the intention—the immediate character of the action in its
further content is reduced to a means. Insofar as such an end is some-
thing ﬁnite, it may in its turn be reduced to a means to some further
intention and so on ad inﬁnitum.
123. For the content of these ends nothing is available at this
point except (α) formal activity itself, i.e. the activity present owing
to the fact that the subject puts himself into whatever he is to look
upon and promote as his end. People are willing to be active in pur-
suit of what interests them, or should interest them, as something
which is their own. (β) The still abstract and formal freedom of sub-
jectivity has a more determinate content, however, only in its natural
subjective existence, i.e. in needs, inclinations, passions, opinions, fan-
cies, etc. The satisfaction of these is welfare or happiness, both in gen-
eral and in its particular determinations—the ends of ﬁnitude as such.
Here—the standpoint of relation (see § 108), when the subject is
characterized by his diﬀerences and so counts as a particular—is
the place where the content of the natural will (see § 11) comes on
the scene. But the will here is not as it is in its immediacy; on the
contrary, this content now belongs to a will reﬂected into itself and
so is elevated to become a universal end, the end of welfare or hap-
piness.52 This happens at the level of thinking which does not yet
apprehend the will in its freedom but reﬂects on its content as on
something natural and given—the level, for example, of the time
of Croesus and Solon.*
Addition: Insofar as the determinations of happiness are given, they are not
true determinations of freedom, because freedom is not genuinely free in
Intention and Welfare
121
52 Hegel’s reference: Encyclopaedia, §§ 395ﬀ. [3rd edn. §§ 478ﬀ.].

its own eyes except in the good, i.e. except when it is its own end.
Consequently we may raise the question whether a human being has the
right to set before himself ends not freely chosen but resting solely on the
fact that the subject is a living being. The fact that a human being is a
living being, however, is not contingent, but in conformity with reason,
and to that extent he has a right to make his needs his end. There is noth-
ing degrading in being alive, and there is no higher spirituality in which
existence would be possible. It is only the raising of the given to something
self-created which yields the higher orbit of the good, although this dis-
tinction implies no incompatibility between the two levels.
124. Since the subjective satisfaction of the individual himself
(including the recognition which he receives by way of honour and
fame) is also part and parcel of the achievement of ends that are valid
in and for themselves, it follows that the demand that such an end
alone shall appear as willed and attained, like the view that, in will-
ing, objective and subjective ends are mutually exclusive, is an empty
assertion of the abstract understanding. And this assertion is more
than empty, it is pernicious if it passes into the assertion that because
subjective satisfaction is present, as it always is when any task is
brought to completion, it is what the agent intended in essence to
secure and that the objective end was in his eyes only a means to
that.—What the subject is, is the series of his actions. If these are a
series of worthless productions, then the subjectivity of his willing is
just as worthless. But if the series of his deeds is of a substantial
nature, then the same is true also of the individual’s inner will.
The right of the subject’s particularity, his right to be satisﬁed, or
in other words the right of subjective freedom, is the pivot and
centre of the diﬀerence between antiquity and modern times. This
right in its inﬁnity is given expression in Christianity and it has
become the universal eﬀective principle of a new form of the
world. Amongst the more speciﬁc shapes which this right assumes
are love, romanticism, the quest for the eternal salvation of the
individual, etc.; next come moral convictions and conscience; and,
ﬁnally, the other forms, some of which come into prominence in
what follows as the principle of civil society and as moments in the
constitution of the state, while others appear in the course of 
history, particularly the history of art, science, and philosophy.
Now this principle of particularity is, to be sure, one moment 
of the antithesis, and in the ﬁrst place at least it is just as much
Second Part: Morality
122

identical with the universal as distinct from it. Abstract reﬂection,
however, ﬁxes this moment in its distinction from and opposition
to the universal and so produces a view of morality as nothing but
a bitter, unending struggle against one’s own satisfaction, as the
command: ‘Do with abhorrence what duty commands’* [mit Abscheu
zu tun, was die Pﬂicht gebeut].
It is just this type of understanding which produces that famil-
iar psychological view of history which knows how to belittle and
disparage all great deeds and great individuals by transforming
into the main intention and operative motive of actions the in-
clinations and passions which likewise found their satisfaction in
the achievement of something substantial, along with fame and
honour, etc., and other consequences, in a word their particular
aspect, the aspect which it decreed in advance to be something in
itself pernicious. Such understanding assures us that, while great
actions and the activity which consisted in a series of such actions
have produced greatness in the world and have had as their conse-
quences for the individual agent power, honour, and fame, what
belongs to the individual is not the greatness itself but only those
particular and external consequences which accrued to him from
it; since this particular aspect is a consequence, it is therefore
supposed to have been the agent’s end and even his sole end.
Reﬂection of this sort stops short at the subjective side of great
individuals, since it itself stands on purely subjective ground, and
consequently it overlooks what is substantial in this emptiness of
its own making. This is the view of those valet psychologists ‘for
whom there are no heroes, not because the latter are not heroes,
but because these psychologists are only valets’.53
Addition: ‘In great things, it is enough to have willed’* is right in the sense
that we ought to will something great. But we must also be able to achieve
it, otherwise the willing is nugatory. The laurels of mere willing are dry
leaves that never were green.
125. The subjective element of the will with its particular con-
tent—welfare—is reﬂected into itself and inﬁnite and so stands
related to the universal element, to will in itself. This moment of 
universality, posited ﬁrst of all within this particularity itself, is 
the welfare of others also, or, in its complete though quite empty
Intention and Welfare
123
53 Hegel’s reference: Phenomenology, 616 [Miller trans., 404].

determination, the welfare of all. The welfare of many other particu-
lars in general is thus also an essential end and right of subjectivity.
But since the universal that is in and for itself, in distinction from
such a particular content, has not so far been further determined
than as ‘right’, it follows that these ends of particularity, diﬀering as
they do from the universal, may be in conformity with it, but they
also may not.
126. My particularity, however, like that of others, is only a right
at all insofar as I am a free being [ein Freies]. Therefore it may not
make claims for itself in contradiction to this its substantial basis, and
an intention to secure my welfare or that of others (and it is particu-
larly in this latter case that such an intention is called ‘moral’) cannot
justify an action which is wrong [unrechtlich].
It is one of the most prominent of the corrupt maxims of our time
to enter a plea for the so-called ‘moral’ intention behind wrong
actions and to imagine bad subjects with well-meaning hearts, i.e.
hearts willing their own welfare and perhaps that of others also.
This doctrine is rooted in the ‘benevolence’ [guten Herzen] of the
pre-Kantian philosophers* and constitutes, e.g., the quintessence
of well-known touching dramatic productions;* but today it has
been resuscitated in a more extravagant form, and inner enthusi-
asm and the heart, i.e. the form of particularity as such, have been
made the criterion of right, rationality, and excellence. The result
is that crime and the thoughts that lead to it, be they fancies how-
ever trite and empty, or opinions however wild, are to be regarded
as right, rational, and excellent, simply because they issue from
people’s hearts and enthusiasms. (See the Remark to § 140, where
more details are given.)
Incidentally, however, attention must be paid to the point of
view from which right and welfare are being treated here. We are
considering right as formal right and welfare as the particular wel-
fare of the individual. The so-called ‘general good’, the welfare of
the state, i.e. the right of actual, concrete spirit, is quite a diﬀerent
sphere, a sphere in which formal right is a subordinate moment
like particular welfare and the happiness of the individual. As was
remarked above,54 it is one of the commonest blunders of abstract
Second Part: Morality
124
54 This has not been said before, but it is implicit in what is said in the Remark to 
PR § 29.

thinking to make private rights and private welfare count as valid
in and for themselves in opposition to the universality of the state.
Addition: The famous answer: ‘I do not see the need for it,’* given to the
libeller who excused himself with the words: ‘But I have to live,’ is appo-
site at this point. Life ceases to be necessary in face of the higher realm of
freedom. When St Crispin stole leather to make shoes for the poor,* his
action was moral but wrong and so invalid.
127. The particularity of the interests of the natural will, taken in
their entirety as a simple whole, is personal existence or life. In
extreme danger and in conﬂict with the rightful property of someone
else, this life may claim (as a right, not a mercy) a right of distress
[Notrecht], because in such a situation there is, on the one hand, an
inﬁnite injury to someone’s existence and the consequent loss of
rights altogether, and, on the other hand, an injury only to a single
restricted existence of freedom, whereby both right as such and 
the injured person’s capacity for rights continue to be recognized,
since the injury aﬀects only this property of his.
The right of distress is the basis of the ‘beneﬁt of competence’
[beneﬁcium competentiae]* whereby a debtor is allowed to retain of
his tools, farming implements, clothes, or, in short, of his
resources, i.e. of his creditor’s property, so much as is regarded as
indispensable if he is to continue to support life—to support it, of
course, on his own social level.
Addition: Life as the totality of ends has a right against abstract right. If for
example it is only by stealing bread that the wolf can be kept from the door,
the action is of course an encroachment on someone’s property, but it
would be wrong to treat this action as an ordinary theft. To refuse to allow
someone in jeopardy of his life to take such steps for self-preservation
would be to regard him as being without rights, and since he would be
deprived of his life, his freedom would be annulled altogether. Many
diverse details have a bearing on the preservation of life, and when we have
our eyes on the future we have to engage ourselves in these details. But the
only thing that is necessary is to live now; the future is not absolute but
ever exposed to contingency. Hence it is only the necessity of the imme-
diate present which can justify a wrong action, because not to do the action
would in turn be to commit an oﬀence, indeed the most wrong of all
oﬀences, namely the complete negation of the existence of freedom.
Beneﬁcium competentiae is relevant here, because kinship and other close
relationships imply the right to demand that no one shall be sacriﬁced
altogether on the altar of right.
Intention and Welfare
125

128. This distress reveals the ﬁnitude and therefore the contin-
gency of both right and welfare—of right as the abstract existence of
freedom without being the existence of the particular person, and of
welfare as the sphere of the particular will without the universality 
of right. In this way they are posited as one-sided and ideal, the 
character which in their concept they already possessed. Right has
already (see § 106) determined its existence as the particular will; and
subjectivity, in its comprehensive particularity, is itself the existence
of freedom (see § 127), while as the inﬁnite relation of the will to
itself, it is in itself the universal aspect of freedom. The two moments
present in right and subjectivity, thus integrated and attaining their
truth, their identity, though in the ﬁrst instance still remaining 
relative to one another, are (a) the good (as the fulﬁlled universal that
is determinate in and for itself), and (b) conscience (as inﬁnite subjec-
tivity inwardly knowing and inwardly determining its content).
sub-section 3
GOOD AND CONSCIENCE
129. The good is the Idea as the unity of the concept of the will
with the particular will. In this unity, abstract right, welfare, the sub-
jectivity of knowing and the contingency of external existence, have
their independent self-subsistence superseded [aufgehoben], though
at the same time they are still contained and retained within it in
their essence. The good is thus freedom realized, the absolute end and
aim of the world.
Addition: Every stage is really the Idea, but the earlier stages contain it only
in more abstract form. Thus for example, even the I, as personality, is
already the Idea, though in its most abstract shape. The good, therefore, is
the Idea further determined, the unity of the concept of the will with the
particular will. It is not something abstractly right, but something concrete
whose content is made up of both right and welfare alike.
130. In this Idea, welfare has no validity for itself as the existence
of the individual particular will but only as universal welfare and
essentially as universal in itself, i.e. as according with freedom.
Welfare without right is not a good. Similarly, right without welfare
is not the good; ﬁat justitia should not be followed by pereat mundus.*
Consequently, since the good must of necessity be actualized through
the particular will and is at the same time its substance, it has absolute
Second Part: Morality
126

right in contrast with the abstract right of property and the particu-
lar aims of welfare. If either of these moments becomes distinguished
from the good, it has validity only insofar as it accords with the good
and is subordinated to it.
131. For the subjective will, the good and the good alone is the
essential, and the subjective will has value and dignity only insofar as
its insight and intention accord with the good. Inasmuch as the good
is at this point still only this abstract Idea of good, the subjective will
has not yet been posited as taken up into it and as in accordance with
it. Consequently, it stands in a relation to the good, and the relation is
that the good ought to be substantial for it, i.e. it ought to make the
good its aim and realize it completely, while the good on its side has
in the subjective will its only means of stepping into actuality.
Addition: The good is the truth of the particular will, but the will is only
what it posits itself to be; it is not good by nature but can become what it
is only by its own labour. On the other hand, the good itself, apart from
the subjective will, is only an abstraction without that reality which it is to
acquire for the ﬁrst time through the eﬀorts of that will. Accordingly, the
development of the good has three stages: (i) The good should present
itself to my volition as a particular will and I should know it. (ii) One
should say what is good and develop its particular determinations. (iii)
Finally, the good must be determined for itself and particularized as
inﬁnite subjectivity that is for itself. This inward determining [of the
good] is conscience.
132. The right of the subjective will is that whatever it is to rec-
ognize as valid shall be seen by it as good, and that an action, as its
aim entering upon external objectivity, shall be imputed to it as right
or wrong, good or evil, legal or illegal, in accordance with its knowl-
edge of the value which the action has in this objectivity.
The good is in general the essence of the will in its substantiality
and universality, i.e. of the will in its truth, and therefore it exists
simply and solely in thinking and by means of thinking. Hence
assertions such as ‘humanity cannot know the truth but has to do
only with phenomena’, or ‘thinking injures the good will’, are
assertions depriving spirit not only of intellectual but also of all
ethical worth and dignity.
The right of giving recognition only to what my insight sees as
rational is the highest right of the subject, although owing to its
Good and Conscience
127

subjective character it remains a formal right; against it the right
which reason qua the objective possesses over the subject remains
ﬁrmly established.
On account of its formal character, insight is capable equally of
being true and of being mere opinion and error. The individual’s
acquisition of this right of insight is, from the standpoint of what is
still the moral sphere, part and parcel of his particular subjective
education. I may demand from myself, and regard it as one of my
subjective rights, that my insight into an obligation shall be based on
good reasons, that I shall be convinced of the obligation and even
that I shall apprehend it from its concept and fundamental nature.
But whatever I may demand for the satisfaction of my conviction
that an action is good, permitted, or forbidden, and so in this respect
imputable, this in no way detracts from the right of objectivity.
This right of insight into the good is distinct from the right of
insight in respect of action as such (see § 117). The right of objectiv-
ity which corresponds to the latter has the following form: since
action is an alteration which is to take place in an actual world and so
seeks recognition in it, it must in general accord with what has valid-
ity there. Whoever wills to act in this world of actuality has eo ipso
submitted himself to its laws and recognized the right of objectivity.
Similarly, in the state as the objectivity of the concept of reason,
legal responsibility cannot stop at what an individual may hold to be
or not to be in accordance with his reason, or at his subjective
insight into what is right or wrong, good or evil, or at the demands
which he makes for the satisfaction of his conviction. In this objec-
tive ﬁeld, the right of insight applies to insight into what is legal or
illegal, i.e. into what is recognized as right, and the term ‘insight’ is
restricted to its elementary meaning, i.e. to knowledge in the sense
of acquaintance with what is legal and to that extent obligatory. By
means of the publicity of the laws and the universality of customs
[Sitten], the state removes from the right of insight its formal
aspect and the contingency which it still retains for the subject at
the level of morality. The subject’s right to know action in its
speciﬁc character as good or evil, legal or illegal, has the result of
diminishing or cancelling in this respect too the responsibility of
children, imbeciles, and lunatics,55 although it is impossible to
Second Part: Morality
128
55 See Remark to PR § 120.

delimit precisely either childhood, imbecility, etc., or their degree
of responsibility. But to turn momentary blindness, the goad of
passion, intoxication, or, in a word, what is called the strength of
sensual impulse (excluding impulses which are the basis of the
right of distress—see § 127)56 into reasons when the imputation,
speciﬁc character, and culpability of a crime are in question, and
to look upon such circumstances as if they took away the crim-
inal’s guilt, again means (compare § 100 and the Remark to § 120)57
failing to treat the criminal in accordance with the right and
honour due to him as a human being; for the nature of human
beings consists precisely in the fact that they are essentially some-
thing universal, not beings whose knowledge is an abstractly
momentary and piecemeal aﬀair.
Just as what the incendiary really sets on ﬁre is not the isolated
square inch of wooden surface to which he applies his torch, but
the universal in that square inch, e.g. the house as a whole, so, as
subject, he is neither the individual of this moment of time nor this
isolated hot feeling of revenge. If he were, he would be an animal
which would have to be knocked on the head as dangerous and
unsafe because of its liability to ﬁts of madness.
The claim is made that the criminal in the moment of his action
must have had a ‘clear idea’ of the wrong and its culpability before
it can be imputed to him as a crime. At ﬁrst sight, this claim seems
to preserve the right of his moral subjectivity, but the truth is that
it deprives him of his indwelling nature as intelligent, a nature
whose active presence is not conﬁned to the ‘clear ideas’ [deutliche
Vorstellungen] of Wolﬀ’s psychology* and only in cases of lunacy
is so deranged as to be divorced from the knowing and doing of
individual things.
The sphere in which these circumstances come into consider-
ation as grounds for the mitigation of punishment is a sphere other
than that of right, the sphere of pardon [Gnade] [see § 282].
133. The particular subject is related to the good as to the essence
of his will, and hence his will’s obligation arises directly in this rela-
tion.* Since particularity is distinct from the good and falls within
the subjective will, the good is characterized to begin with only as the
Good and Conscience
129
56 Most editions have ‘§ 120’.
57 Most editions have ‘§ 119’.

universal abstract essentiality of the will, i.e. as duty. Since duty is thus
abstract and universal in character, it should be done for duty’s sake.
Addition: The essence of the will for me is duty. Now if my knowledge
stops at the fact that the good is my duty, I am still going no further than
the abstract character of duty. I should do my duty for duty’s sake, and
when I do my duty it is in a true sense my own objectivity which I am
bringing to realization. In doing my duty, I am with myself and free. To
have emphasized this meaning of duty constitutes the merit of Kant’s
practical philosophy and its loftiness of outlook.58
134. Since every action for itself requires a particular content and
a deﬁnite end, while duty as an abstraction entails nothing of the
kind, the question arises: what is my duty? As an answer nothing is
so far available except: (a) to do right, and (b) to promote welfare,
one’s own welfare, and welfare in universal terms, the welfare of
others (see § 119).
Addition: This is the same question as was put to Jesus when someone
wished to learn from him what he should do to inherit eternal life.59 Good
as a universal is abstract and cannot be accomplished so long as it remains
abstract. To be accomplished it must acquire in addition the character of
particularity.
135. These determinations, however, are not contained in the
deﬁnition of duty itself; but since both of them are conditioned and
restricted, they eo ipso bring about the transition to the higher 
sphere of the unconditioned, the sphere of duty. All that is left to duty,
therefore—insofar as in moral self-consciousness it is the essence or
the universality of that consciousness, the way in which it is inwardly
related to itself alone—is abstract universality, and for its deter-
minate character it has identity without content, or the abstractly 
positive, the indeterminate.
However essential it is to give prominence to the pure uncondi-
tioned self-determination of the will as the root of duty, and to the
way in which knowledge of the will, thanks to Kant’s philosophy,
has won its ﬁrm foundation and starting-point for the ﬁrst time
Second Part: Morality
130
58 See I. Kant, Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785), trans. M. J. Gregor,
in I. Kant, Practical Philosophy, ed. M. J. Gregor (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1996), 52–3. [S.H.]
59 See Luke 10: 25.

through the thought of its inﬁnite autonomy, still to adhere to the
merely moral position, without making the transition to the con-
cept of ethical life, is to reduce this gain to an empty formalism, and
the science of morals to the preaching of duty for duty’s sake.
From this point of view, no immanent doctrine of duties is pos-
sible; of course, material may be brought in from outside and par-
ticular duties may be arrived at accordingly, but if the deﬁnition of
duty is taken to be the absence of contradiction, formal corres-
pondence with itself—which is nothing but the establishment of
abstract indeterminacy—then no transition is possible to the
speciﬁcation of particular duties nor, if some such particular con-
tent for acting comes under consideration, is there any criterion in
that principle for deciding whether it is or is not a duty. On the
contrary, by this means any wrong or immoral mode of conduct
may be justiﬁed.
The further Kantian formulation—the possibility of envis-
aging an action as a universal maxim*—does lead to the more con-
crete representation of a situation, but in itself it contains no
principle beyond formal identity and the ‘absence of contradic-
tion’ already mentioned.
The absence of property contains in itself just as little contra-
diction as the non-existence of this or that people, family, etc., or
the death of the whole human race. But if it is already established
on other grounds and presupposed that property and human life
are to exist and be respected, then indeed it is a contradiction to
commit theft or murder; a contradiction must be a contradiction
of something, i.e. of some content presupposed from the start as a
ﬁxed principle. It is to a principle of that kind alone, therefore,
that an action can be related either by correspondence or contra-
diction. But if duty is to be willed simply for duty’s sake and not
for the sake of some content, it is only a formal identity whose
nature it is to exclude all content and determination.
The further antinomies and conﬁgurations of this never-ending
ought-to-be, in which the merely moral standpoint—the stand-
point of relation—just wanders to and fro without being able to
resolve them and get beyond the ought-to-be, I have developed in
my Phenomenology of Spirit, 550ﬀ. [Miller trans., 365ﬀ.].60
Good and Conscience
131
60 Hegel’s reference: Cf. Encyclopaedia, §§ 420ﬀ. [3rd edn. §§ 507ﬀ.].

Addition: While we laid emphasis above on the fact that the outlook of
Kant’s philosophy is a high one in that it propounds a correspondence
between duty and rationality, still we must notice here that this point of
view is defective in lacking all articulation. The proposition: ‘Consider
whether your maxim can be laid down as a universal principle,’ would 
be very good if we already had determinate principles of conduct. That 
is to say, to demand of a principle that it shall be able to serve in addition
as a determinant of universal legislation is to presuppose that it already
possesses a content. Given the content, then of course the application of
the principle would be a simple matter. In Kant’s case, however, the 
principle itself is still not available and his criterion of non-contradiction
is productive of nothing, since where there is nothing, there can be no 
contradiction either.
136. Because of the abstract constitution of the good, the other
moment of the Idea—particularity in general—falls within subjec-
tivity. Subjectivity in its universality reﬂected into itself is the 
subject’s absolute inward certainty [Gewißheit] of himself, that which
posits the particular and is the determining and decisive element in
him, his conscience [Gewissen].
Addition: We may speak in a very lofty strain about duty, and talk of the
kind is uplifting and broadens the human heart, but if it never comes to
anything speciﬁc it ends in being wearisome. Spirit demands particularity
and is entitled to it. But conscience is that deepest inward solitude with
oneself where everything external and every restriction has disappeared—
this complete withdrawal into oneself. As conscience, the human being is
no longer shackled by the aims of particularity, and consequently in attain-
ing that position he has risen to a higher standpoint, the standpoint of the
modern world, which for the ﬁrst time has attained this consciousness,
achieved this descent into oneself. The more sensuous consciousness of
earlier epochs had something external and given confronting it, either reli-
gion or right. But conscience knows itself as thinking and knows that what
alone has obligatory force for me is this thinking of mine.
137. True conscience is the disposition to will what is good in and
for itself. It therefore has ﬁxed principles* and these are for it deter-
minations and duties that are objective for themselves. In distinction
from this its content (i.e. truth), conscience is only the formal side of
the activity of the will, which as this will has no special content of its
own. But the objective system of these principles and duties, and the
union of subjective knowing with this system, is not present until we
come to the standpoint of ethical life. Here at the formal standpoint
Second Part: Morality
132

of morality, conscience lacks this objective content and so its charac-
ter for itself is that of inﬁnite formal self-certainty, which at the same
time is for this very reason the self-certainty of this subject.
Conscience is the expression of the absolute title of subjective self-
consciousness to know in itself and from within itself what is right
and obligatory, to give recognition only to what it thus knows as
good, and at the same time to maintain that whatever in this way
it knows and wills is in truth right and obligatory. Conscience as
this unity of subjective knowing with what is in and for itself is a
sanctuary which it would be sacrilege to violate. But whether the
conscience of a speciﬁc individual corresponds with this Idea of
conscience, whether what it takes or declares to be good is actually
so, is ascertainable only from the content of the good it seeks to
realize. What is right and obligatory is the element that is rational
in and for itself in the will’s volitions and therefore it is not in
essence the particular property of an individual, and its form is not
that of feeling or any other individual (i.e. sensuous) type of know-
ing, but essentially that of universal determinations of thought, i.e.
the form of laws and principles. Conscience is therefore subject 
to the judgement of its truth or untruth, and when it appeals only to
itself for a decision, it is directly at variance with what it wishes to
be, namely the rule for a mode of conduct which is rational, valid in
and for itself, and universal. For this reason, the state cannot give
recognition to conscience in its distinctive form as subjective know-
ing, any more than science can grant validity to subjective opinion,
assertion, and the appeal to a subjective opinion. In true conscience,
its elements are not diﬀerent, but they may become so, and it is the
determining element, the subjectivity of willing and knowing,
which can sever itself from the true content of conscience, establish
its own independence, and reduce that content to a form and a sem-
blance. The ambiguity in connection with conscience lies therefore
in this: it is presupposed to mean the identity of subjective knowing
and willing with the true good, and so is claimed and recognized to
be something sacrosanct; and yet at the same time, as the mere sub-
jective reﬂection of self-consciousness into itself, it still claims for
itself the title due, solely on the strength of its rational content which
is valid in and for itself, to that identity alone.
At the level of morality, distinguished as it is in this treatise from
the level of ethics, it is only formal conscience that is to be found.
Good and Conscience
133

True conscience has been mentioned only to indicate its distinc-
tion from the other and to obviate the possible misunderstanding
that here, where it is only formal conscience that is under consid-
eration, the argument is about true conscience. The latter is part
of the ethical disposition* which comes before us for the ﬁrst time
in the following section.—The religious conscience, however,
does not belong to this sphere at all.
Addition: When we speak of conscience, it may easily be thought that, in
virtue of its form, which is abstract inwardness, conscience is at this point
already true conscience in and for itself. But true conscience determines
itself to will what is in and for itself good and obligatory. So far, however,
it is only with good in the abstract that we have to do and conscience is still
without this objective content and is but the inﬁnite certainty of oneself.
138. This subjectivity, qua abstract self-determination and pure
certainty of oneself alone, as readily evaporates into itself the whole
determinate character of right, duty, and existence, as it remains
both the power to judge, to determine from within itself alone, what
is good in respect of any content, and also the power to which the
good, at ﬁrst only an ideal [vorgestellt] and an ought-to-be, owes its
actuality.
The self-consciousness which has attained this absolute reﬂection
into itself knows itself in this reﬂection to be the kind of conscious-
ness which is and should be beyond the reach of every existent and
given determination. As one of the commoner features of history
(e.g. in Socrates, the Stoics, and others),* the tendency to look
deeper into oneself and to know and determine from within one-
self what is right and good appears in ages when what is recog-
nized as right and good in contemporary customs cannot satisfy
the better will. When the existing world of freedom has become
faithless to the better will, that will fails to ﬁnd itself in the duties
there recognized and must try to ﬁnd in the ideal world of the
inner life alone the harmony which actuality has lost. Once self-
consciousness has grasped and secured its formal right in this way,
everything depends on the character of the content which it gives
to itself.
Addition: If we look more closely at this process of evaporation and see how
all speciﬁc determinations disappear into this simple concept and then
have to be condensed out of it again, what we ﬁnd is that it is primarily due
Second Part: Morality
134

to the fact that everything recognized as right and duty may be proved by
thought to be nugatory, restricted, and in all respects not absolute. On the
other hand, just as subjectivity evaporates every content into itself, so it
may develop it out of itself once more. Everything which arises in the eth-
ical sphere is produced by this activity of spirit. The moral point of view,
however, is defective because it is purely abstract. When I am aware of my
freedom as the substance within me, I am inactive and do nothing. But if I
proceed to act and look for principles on which to act, I reach for some-
thing determinate and there is then the requirement that this be deduced
from the concept of the free will. While, therefore, it is right enough to
evaporate right and duty into subjectivity, it is wrong if this abstract
groundwork does not then in turn develop itself. It is only in times when
the world of actuality is hollow, spiritless, and unstable, that an individual
may be allowed to take refuge from actuality in his inner life. Socrates
lived at the time of the ruin of the Athenian democracy. His thought
vaporized the world around him and he withdrew into himself to search
there for the right and the good. Even in our day there are cases in which,
to a greater or lesser degree, reverence for the established order is lacking,
and people insist that what is authoritative is their will, that to which they
have granted recognition.
139. Once self-consciousness has reduced all otherwise valid
determinations to emptiness and itself to the sheer inwardness of the
will, it has become the potentiality of either making what is univer-
sal in and for itself into its principle, or equally well of elevating
above the universal the self-will of its own particularity, taking that as
its principle and realizing it through its actions, i.e. it has become
potentially evil [böse].
To have a conscience, if conscience is only formal subjectivity, is
simply to be on the verge of slipping into evil; in independent [für
sich seiend] self-certainty, with its independence of knowledge and
decision, both morality and evil have their common root.
The origin of evil in general is to be found in the mystery of
freedom (i.e. in the speculative aspect of freedom), the mystery
whereby freedom of necessity arises out of the natural level of the
will and is something inward in comparison with that level.* It is
this natural level of the will which comes into existence as a 
self-contradiction, as incompatible with itself in this opposition,
and so it is just this particularity of the will which later makes 
itself evil. That is to say, particularity is always duality; here it is
the opposition of the natural level and the inwardness of the will.
Good and Conscience
135

In this opposition, the latter is only a relative and formal subjec-
tivity which can draw its content only from the determinate 
content of the natural will, from desire, impulse, inclination, etc.
Now it is said of these desires, impulses, etc., that they may be
either good or evil. But since the will here makes into a determin-
ant of its content both these impulses in the contingent character
which they possess as natural, and also, therefore, the form which
it has at this point, the form of particularity itself, it follows that it
is set in opposition to the universal as inner objectivity, to the
good, which comes on the scene as the opposite extreme to imme-
diate objectivity, the natural pure and simple, as soon as the will is
reﬂected into itself and consciousness is a knowing consciousness.
It is in this opposition that this inwardness of the will is evil. The
human being is therefore evil both in himself or by nature and at
the same time through reﬂection into himself; and therefore evil
belongs neither to nature as such by itself—unless nature were
supposed to be the natural character of the will which rests in its
particular content—nor to introverted reﬂection by itself, i.e. cog-
nition in general, unless this were to maintain itself in that oppo-
sition to the universal.
With this facet of evil, its necessity, there is inevitably com-
bined the fact that this same evil is determined as that which of
necessity ought not to be, i.e. the fact that evil ought to be annulled.
It is not that there ought never to be a diremption of any sort in 
the will—on the contrary, it is just this level of diremption which
distinguishes the human being from the unreasoning animal. The
point is that the will should not rest at that level and cling to the 
particular as if that and not the universal were the essential thing; it
should overcome the diremption as a nullity. Further, as to this
necessity of evil, [one should note that] it is subjectivity, as inﬁnite
self-reﬂection, which is confronted by and present in this opposition
of universal and particular. If it rests in this opposition, i.e. if it is
evil, then it is eo ipso for itself, retains its separate individuality, and
is itself this arbitrary will. Therefore if the individual subject as such
does evil, the evil is purely and simply his own responsibility.
Addition: The abstract self-certainty which knows itself as the basis of
everything has in it the potentiality either of willing the universality of the
concept or alternatively of taking a particular content as a principle and
realizing that. The second alternative is evil, which therefore always
Second Part: Morality
136

includes the abstraction of self-certainty. It is only the human being who
is good, and he is good only because he can also be evil. Good and evil are
inseparable, and their inseparability is rooted in the fact that the concept
becomes an object to itself, and as object it eo ipso acquires the character of
diﬀerence. The evil will wills something opposed to the universality of the
will, while the good will acts in accordance with its true concept.
The diﬃculty of the question as to how the will can be evil as well as
good usually arises because we think of the will as related to itself purely
positively and because we represent its volition as something determinate
confronting it, as the good. But the problem of the origin of evil may be
more precisely put in the form: ‘How does the negative come into the posi-
tive?’ If we begin by presupposing that in the creation of the world God is
the absolutely positive, then, turn where we will, we shall never discover
the negative within that positive, since to talk of God’s ‘permitting’ evil is
to ascribe to him a passive relation to evil which is unsatisfactory and
meaningless. In the representational thinking [Vorstellung] of religious
mythology there is no comprehension of the origin of evil; i.e. the positive
and the negative are not discovered in one another; there is only a repre-
sentation of their succession and juxtaposition, so that it is from outside
that the negative comes to the positive. But this cannot satisfy thought,
which demands a reason and a necessity and insists on apprehending the
negative as itself rooted in the positive. Now the solution of the problem,
the way the concept treats the matter, is already contained in the concept,
since the concept, or to speak more concretely, the Idea, has it in its
essence to diﬀerentiate itself and to posit itself negatively. If we adhere
simply to the positive, i.e. if we rest in the pure good which is supposed to
be good at its source, then we are accepting an empty category of the
understanding which clings to abstractions and one-sided categories of
this kind and which, by the very asking of this question, makes it a diﬃcult
one. If we begin with the standpoint of the concept, however, we appre-
hend the positive as activity and as the distinguishing of itself from itself.
Evil and good alike have their origin in the will and the will in its concept
is both good and evil.
The natural will is in itself the contradiction of self-diﬀerentiation, of
being inward and for itself. To maintain then that evil implies the further
point that the human being is evil insofar as his will is natural would be to
contradict the usual idea that it is just the natural will which is guiltless
and good. But the natural will stands in opposition to the content of free-
dom, and the child and the uneducated person, whose wills are only nat-
ural, are for that very reason liable to be called to account for their actions
only to a lesser degree. Now when we speak of the human being, we mean
not the child but the self-conscious human being, and when we speak of
Good and Conscience
137

the good, we mean the knowledge of it. It is doubtless true that the natural
is in itself innocent, neither good nor bad, but when it is drawn into the
orbit of the will which is free and knows that it is free, it acquires the char-
acter of not being free and is therefore evil. When the human being wills
what is natural, it is no longer merely natural, but the negative opposed to
the good, i.e. to the concept of the will.
On the other hand, if it is now objected that since evil is rooted in the
concept and inevitable, a human being would be guiltless if he committed
it, our reply must be that a person’s decision is his own act, and his own
act is freely chosen and his own responsibility. In the religious myth it is
said that the human being is as God when he knows good and evil;61 and
this likeness to God is indeed present in such knowledge in that the neces-
sity here is no natural necessity but the decision is precisely the supersed-
ing [Aufhebung] of this duality of good and evil. When both good and evil
are placed before me, I have a choice between the two; I can decide
between them and endow my subjective character with either. Thus the
nature of evil is that human beings may will it but need not.
140. In every end of a self-conscious subject, there is a positive
aspect (see § 135) necessarily present because the end is what is pur-
posed in an actual concrete action. This aspect he knows how to
highlight, and he may then proceed to regard it as a duty or a ﬁne
intention. By so interpreting it, he is able to pass oﬀhis action as good
in the eyes both of himself and others, despite the fact that, owing to
his reﬂection into himself and his consciousness of the universal
aspect of the will, the essentially negative content of the action stands
within him in contrast to this universal. To assert in this way that the
action is good for others is hypocrisy; while to assert that it is good for
oneself is to proceed to the even further extreme of subjectivity that
claims to be absolute.
This ﬁnal, most abstruse, form of evil, whereby evil is perverted
into good and good into evil, and consciousness, in being aware of
its power to eﬀect this perversion, knows itself to be absolute, is
the highwater mark of subjectivity at the level of morality; it is the
form into which evil has blossomed in our present epoch, a result
due to philosophy, i.e. to a shallowness of thought which has
twisted a profound concept into this shape and usurped the name
of philosophy, just as it has arrogated to evil the name of good.
Second Part: Morality
138
61 See Genesis 3: 5.

In this Remark I will indicate brieﬂy the chief forms of this sub-
jectivity which have become current.
(a) In hypocrisy the following moments are contained: (α)
knowledge of the true universal, whether knowledge in the form
merely of a feeling for right and duty, or of a more extensive
acquaintance with and knowledge of them; (β) volition of the par-
ticular which conﬂicts with this universal; (γ) conscious compari-
son of both moments (α) and (β), so that the conscious subject is
aware in willing that his particular volition is evil in character.
[Yet by themselves] these determinations characterize acting
with a bad conscience, not yet hypocrisy as such.
At one time great importance was attached to the question
whether an action was evil only insofar as it was done with a bad
conscience, i.e. with the developed consciousness of the three
moments just speciﬁed. The inference from an aﬃrmative answer
is admirably drawn by Pascal: ‘They will all be damned, these
half-sinners, who retain some love for virtue. But as for the frank
and open sinners, the hardened sinners, the undiluted, complete
and consummate sinners, hell cannot hold them: they have
deceived the devil by surrendering to him.’* 62
The subjective right of self-consciousness to know whether an
action is in and for itself good or evil in character must not be
thought of as so colliding with the absolute right of the objectivity
of this character that the two rights are represented as separable,
indiﬀerent to one another, and related only contingently. It was
such a conception of their relation that lay in particular at the root
of the old questions about eﬃcacious grace* [wirksame Gnade].
Good and Conscience
139
62 Hegel’s note: In the same context, Pascal also quotes Christ’s intercession on the
Cross for his enemies: ‘Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do’ [Luke 
23: 34]—a superﬂuous prayer if the fact that they did not know what they did made
their action innocent and so took away the need of forgiveness. Pascal quotes there too
Aristotle’s distinction* [Nicomachean Ethics, 1110b27] between the one who acts ο’υκ
ε’ιδ ′ως and the one who acts ’αγνοωˆν; in the former type of ignorance, the person’s action
is involuntary [unfreiwillig] (here the ignorance depends on external circumstances, see
above, § 117) and his action is not imputable to him. But of the latter Aristotle says:
‘Every wicked person is ignorant of what he ought to do and what he ought to refrain
from doing; and it is this kind of failure (‘αμαρτ´ια) which makes people unjust and in
general bad. An ignorant choice between good and evil is the cause not of the action’s
being involuntary’ (of its being non-imputable) ‘but only of its being wicked’. Aristotle
evidently had a deeper insight into the connection between knowing and willing than has
become common in a superﬁcial philosophy which teaches that ignorance, the heart and
enthusiasm, are the true principles of ethical action.

On its formal side, evil is most peculiarly the individual’s own,
since it is precisely his subjectivity positing itself purely and
simply for itself, and for that reason it is purely and simply the
individual’s own responsibility (see § 139 and the Remark thereto);
on his objective side the human being accords with his concept
inasmuch as he is spirit, in a word a rational being, and has in his
own nature as such the character of self-knowing universality.
Therefore it means failing to treat him with the respect due to his
concept if his good side is divorced from him, so that the charac-
ter of his evil action as evil is divorced from him too and is not
imputed to him as evil. How determinate is the consciousness of
these moments in distinction from one another, or to what extent
it has developed or failed to develop in clarity so as to become a
recognition of them, and to what degree an evil action has been
done with a conscience more or less downright evil—all these
questions are the less important aspect of the matter,* the aspect
mainly concerned with the empirical.
(b) Evil and doing evil with a bad conscience, however, is not
quite hypocrisy. Into hypocrisy there enters in addition the formal
aspect of untruth, that is, of holding up evil in the ﬁrst place as
good in the eyes of others, of setting oneself up to all appearance as
good, conscientious, pious, and so on—conduct which in these
circumstances is only a trick to deceive others. Further, however,
the evil person may ﬁnd in his good conduct on other occasions,
or in his piety, or, in a word, in good reasons, a justiﬁcation in his
own eyes for the evil he does, since he can use these reasons to per-
vert that evil into good. His ability to do this resides in the subjec-
tivity which, as abstract negativity, knows that all determinations
are subordinate to itself and issue from its own will.
(c) In this perversion of evil into good we must ﬁrst of all
include the shape known as probabilism.* Its guiding principle is
that an action is permissible, and may be done with an easy con-
science, if the agent can come up with any good reason for it, be it
only the authority of one theologian, and even if other theologians
are known by the agent to dissent ever so widely from that author-
ity. Even in this idea there is still present the correct apprehension
that authority and a reason based on authority gives probability
only, although this is supposed to be enough to produce an easy
conscience; it is granted in probabilism that a good reason is
Second Part: Morality
140

inevitably of such a character that there may exist along with it
diﬀerent reasons at least as good. Even here we must recognize a
vestige of objectivity in the admission that it is a reason [Grund]
which should be the determining factor. But since the discrimin-
ation between good and evil is made to depend on the various good
reasons, including also theological authorities, despite the fact that
they are so numerous and contradictory, the implication is that it
is not this objectivity of the thing, but subjectivity, which has the
last word. This means that caprice and arbitrary will are made the
arbiters of good and evil, and the result is that ethical life, as well
as religious feeling, is undermined. But the fact that it is one’s own
subjectivity to which the decision falls is one which probabilism
does not openly avow as its principle; on the contrary, as has
already been stated, it gives out that it is some reason or other
which is decisive, and probabilism is to that extent still a form of
hypocrisy.
(d) The next stage in ascending order is the view that the good-
ness of the will consists in its willing the good;* this willing of the
abstract good is supposed to suﬃce, in fact to be the sole requisite,
to make its action good. As the willing of something determinate,
action has a content, but good in the abstract determines nothing,
and hence it devolves on particular subjectivity to give this content
its determination and constituents. Just as, in probabilism, anyone
who is not himself a learned ‘Reverend Father’ [Révérend Père]
may call on the authority of such a theologian in order to subsume
a determinate content under the universal predicate ‘good’, so
here every subject is immediately invested with this honour of
giving a content to good in the abstract, or in other words subsum-
ing a content under a universal. This content is only one of the
many aspects of an action as a concrete whole, some of which may
perhaps justify its description as ‘criminal’ and ‘bad’. That deter-
minate content which I, as subject, give to the good, however, is
the good known to me in the action, i.e. it is my good intention
(see § 114 [and § 120]). Thus there arises a contradiction between
descriptions: according to one the action is good, according to 
the other it is criminal. Hence also there seems to arise, in connec-
tion with a concrete action, the question whether in such circum-
stances the intention behind it is actually good. It may not only be
generally the case, however, that the good is what is actually intended;
Good and Conscience
141

it must in fact always be the case if it is held that good in the
abstract is the subject’s determining motive. Where wrong is done
through an action which is well intentioned but in other respects
criminal and evil, the wrong so done must, of course, also be good,
and the important question would seem to be: which of these sides
of the action is really the essential one? This objective question,
however, is here out of place, or rather it is the subjective con-
sciousness itself whose decision constitutes objectivity at this
point. Besides, ‘essential’ and ‘good’ mean the same thing; one is
just as much an abstraction as the other. Good is that which is
essential in respect of the will; and the essential in this respect
should be precisely this, that my action be characterized as good in
my eyes. But the subsumption under the good of any content one
pleases is the immediate and explicit result of the fact that this
abstract good is totally devoid of content and so is simply reduced
to meaning something positive, i.e. to something which is valid in
some respect and which in its immediate character may even be
valid as an essential end, as for example to do good to the poor, to
take thought for myself, my life, my family, and so forth. Further,
just as the good is the abstract, so the bad too must be without con-
tent and derive its speciﬁcation from my subjectivity; and it is in
this way also that there arises the moral end of hating and uproot-
ing the bad, the nature of the bad being left unspeciﬁed.
Theft, cowardice, murder, and so forth, as actions, i.e. as
achievements of a subjective will, have the immediate character of
being satisfactions of such a will and therefore of being something
positive. In order to make the action a good one, it is only a ques-
tion of recognizing this positive aspect of the action as my inten-
tion. This positive aspect becomes the essential element in virtue of
which the action is made good, because I know it to be what is
good in my intention. Theft in order to do good to the poor, theft
or ﬂight from battle for the sake of fulﬁlling one’s duty to care for
one’s life or one’s family (a poor family perhaps into the bargain),
murder out of hate or revenge (i.e. in order to satisfy one’s sense
of one’s own right or of right in general, or one’s sense of another’s
wickedness, of wrong done by him to oneself or to others or to the
world or the nation at large, by extirpating this wicked individual
who is wickedness incarnate, and thereby contributing at least
one’s quota to the project of uprooting the bad)—all these actions
Second Part: Morality
142

are made well intentioned and therefore good by taking account in
this way of the positive aspect of their content. Only the bare min-
imum of intelligence is required to discover in any action, as those
learned theologians can, a positive side and so a good reason for it
and a good intention behind it. Hence it has been said that in the
strict sense there are no evil people, since no one wills evil for 
the sake of evil, i.e. no one wills the purely negative as such. On the
contrary, everyone always wills something positive, and therefore,
on the view we are considering, something good. In this abstract
good the distinction between good and evil has vanished together
with all concrete duties; for this reason, simply to will the good
and to have a good intention in acting is evil rather than good,
because the good willed is only this abstract form of good and the
task of giving it determinacy thus falls to the arbitrary will of the
subject.
To this context there also belongs the notorious maxim: ‘The
end justiﬁes the means.’ In itself and prima facie this expression is
trivial and vacuous. Quite so, one may retort in terms equally gen-
eral, a just end of course justiﬁes the means, while an unjust end
does not. The phrase: ‘If the end is right, so is the means’ is a tau-
tology, since the means is precisely that which is nothing in itself
but is for the sake of something else, and therein, i.e. in the end, has
its purpose and worth—provided of course it be truly a means.
But the meaning of the above proposition is not just its formal
signiﬁcance; something more determinate is to be understood,
namely that to use as means to a good end something which in
itself is simply not a means at all, to violate something in itself
sacrosanct, in short to commit a crime as a means to a good end, is
permissible and even one’s bounden duty. (i) There ﬂoats before
the minds of those who say that the end justiﬁes the means a vague
consciousness of the dialectic of the aforesaid positive element in
isolated legal or ethical principles, or of such equally vague general
maxims as: ‘Thou shalt not kill,’ or ‘Take care for your welfare and
the welfare of your family’. Courts of law and soldiers have not
merely the right but the duty to kill people, though there it is pre-
cisely determined what kind of people and what circumstances
make the killing permissible and obligatory. So also my welfare
and the welfare of my family must be subordinated to higher ends
and so reduced to a means. (ii) Yet what bears the mark of crime
Good and Conscience
143

is not something general of that kind, left vague and still subject to
a dialectic; on the contrary, its determinate character is already
objectively delimited. What is now placed over against this deter-
mination—the sacred end that is supposed to deprive the crime of
its criminal nature—is nothing other than a subjective opinion
about what is good and better. What happens here is the same as
what happens when the will stops at willing good in the abstract,
namely that every determinate characteristic of good and evil,
right and wrong, that has being and validity in and for itself, is
entirely swept away and the determination of them is assigned
instead to the individual’s feeling, imagination, and caprice.
(e) Subjective opinion is at last expressly acknowledged to be the
measuring-rod of right and duty, when it is supposed that the
conviction which holds something to be right is to decide the ethical
character of an action. Since the good we will to do is here still
without content, the principle of conviction only adds the further
speciﬁcation that the subsumption of an action under the category
of good is the responsibility of the subject. In this way, any sem-
blance of ethical objectivity has totally disappeared. A doctrine
like this is directly connected with the self-styled philosophy,
often mentioned already, which denies that the truth is knowable.*
(The truth of spirit qua will, the rationality of spirit in its self-actu-
alizing process, is to be found in the commandments of ethical life.)
Asserting, as such philosophizing does, that the knowledge of the
true is an empty vanity, transcending the territory of knowledge
(which is supposed to be mere appearance), it must in the matter of
action at once ﬁnd its principle also in appearance; the ethical is
thereby reduced to the distinctive view of the world held by the
individual and to his particular conviction. The degradation into
which philosophy has thus sunk appears doubtless at a ﬁrst glance
to be only an aﬀair of supreme indiﬀerence, an occurrence conﬁned
to the trivial ﬁeld of academic futilities; but such a view necessar-
ily makes itself at home in ethics, an essential part of philosophy;
and it is then that the true meaning of these views makes its ﬁrst
appearance in and is apprehended by the world of actuality.
The result of the dissemination of the view that subjective con-
viction, and it alone, decides the ethical character of an action is
that the charge of hypocrisy, once so frequent, is now rarely heard;
you can qualify evil as hypocrisy only on the assumption that 
Second Part: Morality
144

certain actions are in and for themselves misdeeds, vices, and
crimes, and that the defaulter is necessarily aware of them as such,
because he is aware of and recognizes the principles and outward
acts of piety and honesty even in the pretence in which he misap-
plies them. In other words, it was generally assumed as regards
evil that it is a duty to know the good and to be aware of its dis-
tinction from evil. At any rate, however, there was an absolute
injunction which forbade the commission of vicious and criminal
actions and which insisted on such actions being imputed to the
agent, insofar as he was a human being and not a beast. But if a
good heart, a good intention, a subjective conviction are declared
to be the sources from which actions derive their worth, then there
is no longer any hypocrisy or evil at all; for whatever someone
does, he can always turn it into something good through reﬂecting
on his good intentions and motives, and so the moment of his con-
viction renders it good.63 Thus there is no longer anything
absolutely vicious or criminal in and for itself; and instead of the
above mentioned frank and free, hardened and unperturbed
sinner,64 we have the person who is conscious of being fully
justiﬁed by intention and conviction. My good intention in my
action and my conviction of its goodness make it good. We speak of
judging and evaluating an action; but on this principle it is only
the intention and conviction of the agent, his faith [Glauben], by
which he ought to be judged. Not, however, his faith in the sense
in which Christ requires faith in objective truth, so that on one who
has a bad faith, i.e. a conviction evil in its content, the judgement
to be pronounced must be condemnation, i.e. one in conformity
with this content. On the contrary, faith here means ﬁdelity to
conviction, and the question to be asked about action is: ‘Has the
agent in his acting kept true to his conviction?’ Formal subjective
Good and Conscience
145
63 Hegel’s note: ‘That he feels completely convinced I have not the least doubt. But how
many people are led by such feelings of conviction into the worst of misdeeds. Thus, if
everything may be excused on this ground, then there can no longer be any rational
judgement of good and evil, honourable and shameful, decisions. Lunacy in that case
would have equal rights with reason; or in other words reason would have no rights
whatever, it would no longer be held to be valid. Its voice would be an absurdity
[Unding]; truth would be the possession of the one with no doubts! I tremble at the results of
such toleration, for it would be exclusively to the advantage of unreason.’ (F. H. Jacobi
to Count Holmer, on Count Stolberg’s change of faith,* Eutin, 5 Aug. 1800, in Brennus
[Berlin, Aug. 1802].)
64 See the quotation from Pascal in Remark (a) to this Paragraph [p. 139 above].

ﬁdelity [to one’s own conviction] is thus alone held to contain what
accords with duty.
This principle, under which conviction is equally determined as
something subjective, cannot but thrust upon us the thought of the
possibility of error, with the further implied presupposition of a
law that is in and for itself. But the law does not act; it is only the
actual human being who acts. And, on the aforesaid principle, the
only question, in estimating the worth of human actions, is how
far he has taken up the law into his conviction. But if on this theory
it is not actions which are to be judged, i.e. measured in any way,
by that law, it is impossible to see what the law is for and what end
it is to serve. Such a law is degraded to a mere external letter, in
fact to an empty word, for it is only my conviction which makes it
a law and a binding duty for me.
Such a law may have behind it the authority of God or the state,
or even the authority of millennia during which it was the bond
which gave people, with all their deeds and destiny, coherence and
subsistence—authorities which enshrine the convictions of count-
less individuals. If I now set against these the authority of my indi-
vidual conviction—as my subjective conviction its validity lies only
in its authority—this at ﬁrst seems to be a piece of monstrous self-
conceit; but this appearance of self-conceit is removed by the very
principle that subjective conviction is to be the measuring-rod.
Even if reason and conscience—which shallow science and bad
sophistry can never altogether expel—admit with a noble illogic-
ality that error is possible, by describing crime, and evil generally,
as only an error, we minimize the fault. For to err is human*—
who has not been mistaken on one point or another, whether he
had fresh or pickled cabbage for dinner yesterday, and about innu-
merable other things of greater or lesser importance? But the
diﬀerence between what is important and unimportant vanishes if
everything depends on the subjectivity of conviction and on
adherence to it. The said noble illogicality which admits the pos-
sibility of error is inevitable then in the nature of the case, but
when it comes round to say that a bad conviction is only an error,
it only falls into a further illogicality, the illogicality of dishonesty.
At one moment conviction is made the basis of ethics and of the
supreme value of humanity, and is thus pronounced supreme and
sacrosanct; at another, all we have to do with is error, and my 
Second Part: Morality
146

conviction is something trivial and contingent, in fact something
strictly external, which may turn out this way or that. Indeed, my
being convinced is something supremely trivial if I cannot know
the truth; for then it is a matter of indiﬀerence how I think, and all
that is left to my thinking is that empty good, the abstraction to
which the understanding reduces the good.
One other point. It follows further, on this principle of justi-
ﬁcation by conviction, that, in dealing with the way others act in
relation to my action, logic requires me to admit that they are quite
right to maintain in accordance with their faith and conviction that
my actions are criminal. On such logic, not merely do I gain noth-
ing, but I am reduced from a position of freedom and honour to a
situation of slavery and dishonour. Justice, which in itself is also
mine, I experience only as an alien subjective conviction, and
when it is executed on me, I believe myself to be acted on only by
an external force.
(f ) Finally, the supreme form in which this subjectivity is
completely comprehended and expressed is the phenomenon
which has been called by a name borrowed from Plato—‘irony’.
Only the name, however, is taken from Plato. He used it to
describe a way of speaking employed by Socrates, who applied it in
conversation when defending the Idea of truth and justice against
the conceit of the uneducated and the sophistical consciousness,
but who treated ironically only this consciousness, not the Idea
itself. Irony is only a manner of conversing with people. Without
this personal direction, the essential movement of thought is
dialectic, but Plato was so far from taking the dialectical by itself
[für sich], still less irony, to be the last word in thought and to be
the Idea itself, that on the contrary he put a stop to the toing and
froing of thought, and especially of subjective opinion, by sub-
merging it in the substantiality of the Idea.65
Good and Conscience
147
65 Hegel’s note: My colleague, the late Professor Solger,* adopted the word ‘irony’,
which Friedrich von Schlegel brought into use at a comparatively early period of his lit-
erary career and extended to include the said principle of subjectivity knowing itself as
supreme. But Solger’s ﬁner sense was far from such exaggeration; he had philosophical
insight and so seized upon and retained only that part of Schlegel’s view which was
dialectic in the strict sense, i.e. dialectic as the animating pulse of speculative enquiry.
His last publication, a solid piece of work, a thorough Critique of August Wilhelm von
Schlegel’s Lectures on Dramatic Art and Literature* [Kritik über die Vorlesungen des Herrn
August Wilhelm von Schlegel über dramatische Kunst und Literatur] (Wiener Jahrbuch, vol.
VII, pp. 90ﬀ.), I ﬁnd somewhat obscure, however, and I cannot agree with the argument

The culminating form of this subjectivity which conceives itself
as the ﬁnal court of appeal—our topic here—can be nothing except
what was already present in itself in its preceding forms, namely
subjectivity knowing itself as the arbiter and judge of truth, right,
and duty. It consists then in this, that it knows the objective 
ethical principles, but fails to immerse itself in their seriousness in
Second Part: Morality
148
which he develops. ‘True irony’, he says (p. 92), ‘arises from the view that so long as
human beings live in this present world, it is only in this world that they can fulﬁl their
destiny, even in the highest sense of that word. Any hope we may have of transcending
ﬁnite ends is foolish and empty conceit. Even the highest exists for our action only in a
shape that is limited and ﬁnite.’ Rightly understood, this is Platonic doctrine, and very
true as a rejection of what he referred to earlier, namely the empty striving towards the
(abstract) inﬁnite. But to say that the highest exists in a limited and ﬁnite shape, like the
ethical order (and that order is in essence actual life and action), is very diﬀerent from
saying that the highest thing is a ﬁnite end. The outward shape, the form of ﬁnitude, in
no way deprives the content of ethical life of its substantiality and the inﬁnity inherent
within it. Solger continues: ‘And just for this reason the highest is in us as negligible as
the lowest and perishes of necessity with us and our nugatory thoughts and feelings. The
highest is truly existent in God alone, and as it perishes in us it is transﬁgured into some-
thing divine, a divinity in which we would have no share but for its immediate presence
revealed in the very disappearance of our actuality; now the mood to which this process
immediately becomes clear in human aﬀairs is tragic irony.’ The arbitrary name ‘irony’
would be of no importance, but there is an obscurity here when it is said that it is the
highest which perishes with our nothingness and that it is in the disappearance of our
actuality that the divine is ﬁrst revealed. We ﬁnd the same again on p. 91: ‘We see heroes
beginning to wonder whether they have erred in the noblest and ﬁnest elements of their
feelings and sentiments, not only in regard to their successful issue, but also to their
source and their worth; indeed, we are elevated by the destruction of the best itself.’ The
tragic destruction of ﬁgures whose ethical life is on the highest plane can interest and ele-
vate us and reconcile us to its occurrence only insofar as they come on the scene in oppo-
sition to one another together with equally justiﬁed but diﬀerent ethical powers which
have come into collision through misfortune, with the result that then these ﬁgures
acquire guilt through their opposition to an ethical law. (The just destruction of utter
scoundrels and criminals who ﬂaunt their villainy—the hero of a modern tragedy, Die
Schuld,* is one—has an interest for criminal law, but none at all for art proper which is
what is in question here.) Out of this situation there arises the right and wrong of both
parties and therefore the true ethical Idea, which, puriﬁed and in triumph over this one-
sidedness, is thereby reconciled in us. Accordingly, it is not the highest in us which per-
ishes; we are elevated not by the destruction of the best but by the triumph of the true. This
it is which constitutes the true, purely ethical, interest of ancient tragedy (in romantic
tragedy the character of the interest undergoes a certain modiﬁcation).* All this I have
worked out in detail in my Phenomenology of Spirit (pp. 404ﬀ.; cf. pp. 683ﬀ. [Miller
trans., 279ﬀ.; cf. 443ﬀ.]). But the ethical Idea is actual and present in the ethical world
without the misfortune of tragic clashes and the destruction of individuals overcome by this
misfortune. And this Idea’s (the highest’s) revelation of itself in its actuality as anything
but a nullity is what the external existence of ethical life, the state, has as its aim and puts
into eﬀect, and what the ethical self-consciousness possesses, intuits, and knows in the
state and what thinking cognition comprehends there.

self-forgetfulness and self-renunciation and to base action upon
them. Although related to them, it holds itself aloof from them
and knows itself as that which wills and decides thus, although it
may equally well will and decide otherwise.—You actually accept
a law, it says, and honestly respect it as absolute [an und für sich
seiend]. So do I, but I go further than you, because I am beyond
this law and can make it to suit myself. It is not the thing that is
excellent, but I who am so; as the master of law and thing alike, I
simply play with them as with my caprice, and in this ironic 
consciousness in which I let the highest things perish, I enjoy
only myself. This type of subjectivism not only substitutes a void
for the whole content of ethics, right, duties, and laws—and 
so is evil, indeed inherently and quite universally evil—but in
addition its form is a subjective void [Eitelkeit], i.e. it knows itself
as this contentless void and in this knowledge knows itself as
absolute.
In my Phenomenology of Spirit, 605ﬀ. [Miller trans., pp. 397ﬀ.]
I have shown how this absolute self-complacency does not rest in
a solitary worship of itself but may form a community whose bond
and substance consist in, e.g., mutual assurances of conscientious-
ness and good intentions, the enjoyment of this mutual purity, but
above all the refreshment derived from the glory of this self-
knowledge and self-expression, from the glory of fostering and
cherishing this experience. I have shown also how what has been
called a ‘beautiful soul’66—that still nobler type of subjectivism
which empties the objective of all content and fades away through
its lack of actuality—is, like other shapes, a variety [of subject-
ivism] related to the stage we are considering here. What is said
here may be compared with the entire section (C), ‘Conscience’, in
the Phenomenology, especially the part dealing with the transition to
a higher stage—a stage, however, there diﬀerent in character.*
Addition: Representational thinking [Vorstellung] may go further and per-
vert the evil will into a semblance of goodness. Although it cannot alter the
nature of evil, it can invest it with a semblance of goodness. Since every
action has a positive aspect, and since the category of good as opposed to
evil is likewise reduced to positivity, I may claim that my action in relation
to my intention is good. Thus evil is linked with the good not only in my
Good and Conscience
149
66 See ﬁrst explanatory note to p. 37 [p. 333 below]. [S.H.]

consciousness but in its positive aspect. When self-consciousness pre-
tends, to others only, that its action is good, this form is that of hypocrisy.
But if it goes so far as to claim that the deed is good in its own eyes also,
then we have a still higher peak of the subjectivity that knows itself as
absolute. For this type of spirit good and evil in and for themselves have
both vanished, and the subject is therefore at liberty to pass oﬀas good or
evil anything he likes. This is the position of the absolute sophistry which
usurps the oﬃce of lawgiver and rests the distinction between good and
evil on its own caprice. The chief hypocrites are the religious ones (the
Tartuﬀes)* who submit themselves to all ceremony and may even be pious
in their own eyes [für sich], while yet they do just as they please. There is
little mention of hypocrites nowadays, partly because the accusation of
hypocrisy seems to be too harsh; partly, however, because hypocrisy in its
immediate form has more or less disappeared. This downright lie, this
veneer of goodness, has now become too transparent not to be seen
through, and the divorce between doing good with one hand and evil with
the other no longer occurs, since advancing culture has weakened the
opposition between these categories.
Instead, hypocrisy has now assumed the subtler form of probabilism,
which involves the agent’s attempt to represent a transgression as some-
thing good from the point of view of his own conscience. This doctrine can
only arise when the moral and the good are determined by authority, with
the result that there are as many reasons as there are authorities for sup-
posing that evil is good. Casuist theologians, Jesuits especially, have
worked up these cases of conscience and multiplied them ad inﬁnitum.
These cases have now been elaborated to such a high degree of subtlety
that numerous clashes have arisen between them, and the opposition
between good and evil has become so weak that in individual instances
they appear to turn into one another. The only desideratum now is prob-
ability, i.e. something approximately good, something which may be sup-
ported by any single reason or authority. Thus the special characteristic of
this standpoint is that its content is purely abstract; it presents the con-
crete content as something inessential or rather abandons it to bare opin-
ion. On this principle, anyone may have committed a crime and yet have
willed the good. For example, if an evil character is murdered, the positive
side of the action may be proclaimed to be the withstanding of evil and the
will to diminish it.
Now the next step beyond probabilism is that it is no longer a question
of someone else’s statement or authority; it is a question only of the 
subject himself, i.e. of his own conviction—a conviction which alone is
able to make a thing good. The defect here is that everything is supposed
to fall within the orbit of conviction alone and that right in and for itself,
Second Part: Morality
150

for which this conviction should be only the form, no longer exists. It is
certainly not a matter of indiﬀerence whether I do something by habit and
custom or because I am actuated throughout by the truth which underlies
these. But objective truth is also diﬀerent from my conviction, because
conviction lacks the distinction between good and evil. Conviction always
remains conviction, and the bad could only be that of which I am not con-
vinced.
Now while this standpoint is the highest example of the obliteration of
good and evil, it entails the admission that it is subject to error, and to that
extent it is brought down from its pedestal into mere contingency and
seems undeserving of respect. This form is now irony, the consciousness
that this principle of conviction is not worth much and that, highest criter-
ion though it be, it is only caprice that governs it. This standpoint is really
a product of Fichte’s philosophy, which proclaims that the I is absolute,
i.e. is absolute certainty, the universal selfhood [Ichheit] which advances
through a course of further development to objectivity. Of Fichte himself
it cannot properly be said that he made subjective caprice a guiding prin-
ciple in the sphere of the practical, but, later on, this principle of the mere
particular, in the sense of ‘particular selfhood’, was deiﬁed by Friedrich
von Schlegel with reference to the good and the beautiful. As a result, he
made objective goodness only an image produced by my conviction,
receiving support from my eﬀorts alone, and dependent for its appearance
and disappearance on me as its lord and master. If I relate myself to some-
thing objective, it vanishes at the same moment before my eyes, and so I
hover over an immense space, summoning shapes from the depths and
annihilating them. This supreme standpoint of subjectivity can emerge
only in a period of advanced culture when faith has lost its seriousness, and
its essence is simply ‘all is vanity’.
Transition from Morality to Ethical Life
141. For the good as the substantial universal of freedom, but as
something still abstract, therefore, determinations of some sort and
the principle for determining them are required (though a principle
identical with the good itself). For conscience similarly, as the purely
abstract principle of determination, it is required that its determin-
ations shall be universal and objective. If good and conscience are
each elevated to independent totalities, then both become the inde-
terminate which ought to be determined.—But the integration of
these two relative totalities into an absolute identity has already been
implicitly [an sich] achieved in that this very subjectivity of pure 
Good and Conscience
151

self-certainty, aware in its vacuity of its gradual evaporation, is iden-
tical with the abstract universality of the good. The concrete identity
of the good with the subjective will, an identity which is therefore the
truth of them, is ethical life [Sittlichkeit].
The details of such a transition of the concept are made intelligible
in logic. Here, however, it need only be said that it is the nature of
the restricted and the ﬁnite (i.e. here the abstract good which only
ought to be, and the equally abstract subjectivity which only ought
to be good) to have its opposite present within it, the good its actu-
ality, and subjectivity (the moment in which ethical life is actual)
the good; but since they are one-sided they are not yet posited as
what they are in themselves. They become so posited in their nega-
tivity. That is to say, in their one-sidedness, when each is bent on
declining to have in it what is in itself [an sich] present in it—when
the good is without subjectivity and a determinate character, and
the determining principle, subjectivity, is without that which has
being-in-itself [das Ansichseiende]—and when both build them-
selves into independent totalities, they annul themselves and
thereby reduce themselves to moments, to moments of the con-
cept which becomes manifest as their unity and, having acquired
reality precisely through this positing of its moments, is now pres-
ent as Idea—as the concept which has developed its determin-
ations to reality and at the same time is present in their identity as
their essence in itself.
The existence of freedom which was (α) ﬁrst of all immediate as
right, is (β) determined in the reﬂection of self-consciousness as
the good. (γ) The third stage, originating here, in its transition
from (β) to ethical life, as the truth of the good and subjectivity, is
therefore the truth both of subjectivity and right. Ethical life is a
subjective disposition, but one imbued with what is right in itself.
The fact that this Idea is the truth of the concept of freedom is
something which, in philosophy, must be proved, not presupposed,
not adopted from feeling or elsewhere. This demonstration is con-
tained only in the fact that right and the moral self-consciousness
both display in themselves their return to this Idea as their result.
Those who hope to be able to dispense with proof and demon-
stration in philosophy show thereby that they are still far from 
knowing the ﬁrst thing about what philosophy is. On other topics
Second Part: Morality
152

argue they may, but in philosophy they have no right to join in the
argument if they wish to argue without the concept.
Addition: Each of the two principles hitherto discussed, namely good in
the abstract and conscience, is defective in lacking its opposite. Good in
the abstract evaporates into something completely powerless, into which I
may introduce any and every content, while the subjectivity of spirit
becomes just as empty because it lacks any objective signiﬁcance. Thus a
longing may arise for an objectivity in which the human being gladly
degrades himself to servitude and total subjection, if only to escape the
torment of vacuity and negativity. Many Protestants have recently gone
over to the Roman Catholic Church,67 and they have done so because they
found their inner life empty and grasped at something ﬁxed, at a support,
an authority, even if it was not exactly the stability of thought which they
caught.
The unity of the subjective with the objective good in and for itself is
ethical life, and in it we ﬁnd the reconciliation which accords with the con-
cept. Morality is the form of the will in general on its subjective side.
Ethical life is more than the subjective form and the self-determination of
the will; in addition it has as its content the concept of the will, namely
freedom. The spheres of right and morality cannot exist independently
[für sich]; they must have the ethical as their support and foundation, for
right lacks the moment of subjectivity, while morality in turn alone pos-
sesses that moment, and consequently both right and morality lack actual-
ity by themselves. Only the inﬁnite, the Idea, is actual. Right exists only as
a branch of a whole or like the plant which twines itself round a tree that
is ﬁrmly rooted in and for itself.
Good and Conscience
153
67 See explanatory notes to pp. 145, 253 [pp. 347, 356 below]. [S.H.]

third part
ETHICAL LIFE
142. Ethical life is the Idea of freedom in that, on the one hand, it
is the living good—the good endowed in self-consciousness with
knowing and willing and actualized by self-conscious action—while,
on the other hand, self-consciousness has in the ethical realm its
foundation in and for itself and its motivating end. Thus ethical life
is the concept of freedom developed into the existing world and the
nature of self-consciousness.
143. Since this unity of the concept of the will with its exist-
ence—i.e. the particular will—is knowing, consciousness of the dis-
tinction between these two moments of the Idea is present, but
present in such a way that now each of these moments is for itself the
totality of the Idea and has the latter as its foundation and content.
144. (α) The objective ethical order, which comes on the scene in
place of good in the abstract, is substance made concrete by subjectiv-
ity as inﬁnite form. Hence it posits within itself distinctions whose
speciﬁc character is thereby determined by the concept,* and which
endow the ethical order with a stable content which is necessary for
itself and whose existence [Bestehen] is exalted above subjective opin-
ion and caprice. These distinctions are laws and institutions that have
being in and for themselves.
Addition: In the whole of ethical life the objective and subjective moments
are alike present, but both of them are only its forms. Its substance is 
the good, i.e. the objective is ﬁlled with subjectivity. If we consider ethical
life from the objective standpoint, we may say that in it we are ethical
unselfconsciously. In this sense, Antigone proclaims that ‘no one knows
whence the laws come; they are everlasting’,* i.e. they are the determin-
ation that is in and for itself and has its source in the nature of the thing.
Nonetheless, however, the substance of ethical life has a consciousness
also, though the status of this consciousness is never higher than that of
being one moment.
145. It is the fact that the ethical order is the system of these
speciﬁc determinations of the Idea which constitutes its rationality.
Hence the ethical order is freedom or the will in and for itself as what

is objective, a circle of necessity whose moments are the ethical
powers which govern the life of individuals. To these powers indi-
viduals are related as accidents to substance, and it is in individuals
that these powers are represented, have the shape of appearance, and
become actualized.
Addition: Since the determinations [i.e. the laws and institutions] of the
ethical order make up the concept of freedom, they are the substance or
universal essence of individuals, who are thus related to them as accidents
only. Whether the individual exists or not is all one to the objective ethical
order. It alone is permanent and is the power governing the life of individ-
uals. Thus the ethical order has been represented by peoples as eternal jus-
tice, as gods existing in and for themselves, in contrast with which the
empty business of individuals is only a ﬂuctuating play.
146. (β) The substantial order, in this its actual self-consciousness,
knows itself and so is an object of knowledge. This ethical substance
and its laws and powers are, on the one hand, an object over against
the subject, and from the latter’s point of view they are—‘are’ in the
highest sense of self-subsistent being. This is an absolute authority
and power inﬁnitely more ﬁrmly established than the being of nature.
The sun, the moon, mountains, rivers, and the natural objects of
all kinds by which we are surrounded, are. For consciousness they
have the authority not only of mere being but also of possessing a
particular nature which it accepts and to which it adjusts itself in
dealing with them, using them, or in being otherwise concerned
with them. The authority of ethical laws is inﬁnitely higher,
because natural objects conceal rationality under the cloak of con-
tingency and exhibit it only in their utterly external and individu-
ated way.
147. On the other hand, they are not something alien to the subject.
On the contrary, his spirit bears witness to them as to its own essence,
the essence in which he has a feeling of his selfhood, and in which he
lives as in his own element which is not distinguished from himself.
The subject is thus directly linked to the ethical order by a relation
which is closer to identity than even the relation of faith or trust.
Faith and trust emerge along with reﬂection; they presuppose the
power of forming ideas and making distinctions. For example, it is one
thing to be a pagan, a diﬀerent thing to believe in a pagan religion.
That relation, or rather this relationless identity, in which the 
Third Part: Ethical Life
155

ethical order is the actual life of self-consciousness, can no doubt
pass over into a relation of faith and conviction and into a relation
produced by means of further reﬂection, i.e. into an insight due 
to reasoning starting perhaps from some particular purposes,
interests, and considerations, from fear or hope, or from historical
conditions. But adequate knowledge of this identity depends on
thinking in terms of the concept.
148. As substantial in character, these laws and institutions are
duties binding on the will of the individual, because as subjective, as
inherently undetermined, or determined as particular, he distin-
guishes himself from them and hence stands related to them as to the
substance of his own being.
The ethical ‘doctrine of duties’ (I mean the objective doctrine,
not that which is supposed to be contained in the empty principle
of moral subjectivity, because that principle determines nothing—
see § 134) is therefore comprised in the systematic development of
the circle of ethical necessity which follows in this Third Part. The
diﬀerence between the exposition in this book and the form of a
‘doctrine of duties’* lies solely in the fact that, in what follows, the
speciﬁc types of ethical life emerge as necessary relationships, but
that there the exposition ends, without being supplemented in
each case by the addition that ‘this determination is therefore a
duty for human beings’.
A ‘doctrine of duties’ which is other than a philosophical sci-
ence takes its material from existing relationships and shows its
connection with one’s own ideas or with commonly encountered
principles and thoughts, purposes, impulses, feelings, etc.; and as
reasons for accepting each duty in turn, it may tack on the further
consequences which this duty may have in reference to the other
ethical relationships or to welfare and opinion. But an immanent
and logical ‘doctrine of duties’ can be nothing except the develop-
ment of the relationships which are necessitated by the Idea of
freedom and are therefore actual in their entirety, to wit in the
state.
149. The bond of duty can appear as a restriction only on inde-
terminate subjectivity or abstract freedom, and on the impulses
either of the natural will or of the moral will which determines its
indeterminate good arbitrarily. The truth is, however, that in duty
Third Part: Ethical Life
156

the individual ﬁnds his liberation; ﬁrst, liberation from dependence
on mere natural impulse and from the depression which as a particu-
lar subject he cannot escape in his moral reﬂections on what ought to
be and what might be; secondly, liberation from the indeterminate
subjectivity which, never reaching reality or the objective determin-
acy of action, remains self-enclosed [in sich] and devoid of actuality.
In duty the individual liberates himself so as to acquire his substan-
tial freedom.
Addition: Duty is a restriction only on the arbitrary will of subjectivity. It
stands in the way only of that abstract good to which subjectivity adheres.
When we say: ‘We want to be free,’ the primary meaning of the words is
simply: ‘We want abstract freedom,’ and every institution and every organ
of the state passes as a restriction on freedom of that kind. Thus duty 
is a restriction not on freedom, but only on freedom in the abstract, i.e. 
on unfreedom. Duty is the attainment of our essence, the winning of
aﬃrmative freedom.
150. Virtue [Tugend] is the ethical order reﬂected in the individ-
ual character so far as that character is determined by nature. When
virtue displays itself solely as the individual’s simple conformity with
the duties of the circumstances to which he belongs, it is rectitude
[Rechtschaﬀenheit].
In an ethical community, it is easy to say what someone must do,
what are the duties he has to fulﬁl in order to be virtuous: he has
simply to follow the well-known and explicit rules of his own situ-
ation. Rectitude is the general character which may be demanded
of him by law or custom. But from the standpoint of morality, rec-
titude often seems to be something comparatively inferior, some-
thing beyond which still higher demands must be made on oneself
and others, because the craving to be something special is not
satisﬁed with what is universal and has being in and for itself; it
ﬁnds consciousness of distinctiveness only in what is exceptional.
The various facets of rectitude may equally well be called
virtues, since they are also properties of the individual, although
not specially of him in contrast with others. Talk about virtue as
such, however, readily borders on empty rhetoric, because it is
only about something abstract and indeterminate; furthermore,
such talk with its reasons and expositions is addressed to the 
individual as a being of caprice and subjective inclination. In an
Third Part: Ethical Life
157

existing ethical order in which a complete system of ethical rela-
tions has been developed and actualized, virtue proper is in place
and actually appears only in exceptional circumstances or when
one obligation clashes with another. The clash, however, must be
a genuine one, because moral reﬂection can manufacture clashes of
all sorts to suit its purpose and give itself a consciousness of being
something special and having made sacriﬁces. It is for this reason
that the phenomenon of virtue proper is commoner when societies
and communities are uncivilized, since in those circumstances
ethical conditions and their actualization are more a matter of indi-
vidual preference or the distinctive natural genius of an individual.
For instance, it was especially to Hercules that the ancients
ascribed virtue. In the states of antiquity, ethical life had not grown
into this free system of an objective order self-subsistently devel-
oped, and consequently it was by the distinctive genius of individ-
uals that this defect had to be made good. It follows that if a
‘doctrine of virtues’ is not a mere ‘doctrine of duties’, and if there-
fore it embraces the particular aspects of character that are
grounded in nature, it will be a natural history of spirit.
Since virtues are ethical principles applied to the particular, and
since in this their subjective aspect they are something indeter-
minate, there emerges here for determining them the quantitative
principle of ‘more or less’. The result is that consideration of them
introduces their corresponding defects or vices, as in Aristotle,
who deﬁned each particular virtue as strictly a mean between an
excess and a deﬁciency.68
The content which assumes the form of duties and then virtues
is the same as that which also has the form of impulses (see Remark
to § 19). Impulses have the same basic content as duties and virtues,
but in impulses this content still belongs to the immediate will 
and to natural feeling; it has not been developed to the point of
becoming ethical. Consequently, impulses have in common with
the content of duties and virtues only the abstract object on 
which they are directed, an object indeterminate in itself, and so
devoid of anything to discriminate them as good or evil. Or in
other words, impulses, considered abstractly in their positive
Third Part: Ethical Life
158
68 See Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, 1106a24ﬀ. [S.H.]

aspect alone, are good, while, considered abstractly in their nega-
tive aspect alone, they are evil (see § 18).
Addition: If someone performs this or that ethical action, this does not
make him virtuous; he is virtuous only when this mode of behaviour is a
constant feature of his character. Virtue is rather like ethical virtuosity,*
and the reason why we speak of virtue less nowadays than formerly is that
ethical living is no longer so much the form of a particular individual. The
French are par excellence the people who speak most of virtue, and 
the reason is that amongst them the individual is characterized more by his
idiosyncrasies or by a natural mode of conduct. The Germans, on the
other hand, are more thoughtful, and amongst them the same content
acquires the form of universality.
151. But in simple identity with the actuality of individuals eth-
ical life [das Sittliche] appears as their general mode of conduct, i.e.
as custom [Sitte], while the habitual practice of ethical living appears
as a second nature which, put in the place of the initial, purely natural
will, is the soul of custom permeating it through and through, the
signiﬁcance and the actuality of its existence. It is spirit living and
present as a world, and the substance of spirit thus exists now for the
ﬁrst time as spirit.
Addition: Just as nature has its laws, and as animals, trees, and the sun fulﬁl
their law, so custom [Sitte] is that which belongs to the spirit of freedom.
Right and morality are not yet what custom [Sitte] is, namely spirit. In
right, particularity is still not the particularity of the concept, but only that
of the natural will. So, too, at the standpoint of morality, self-consciousness
is not yet spiritual consciousness. At that level it is only the worth of the
subject in himself that is in question—that is to say, the subject who
determines himself by reference to good in contrast with evil still has the
arbitrary will as the form of his willing. Here, however, at the standpoint
of ethical life, the will is the will of the spirit and it has a content which is
substantial and in conformity with itself.
Education is the art of making people ethical. It considers them as nat-
ural beings and shows them the way to a second birth, the way to change
their original nature into a second, spiritual, nature, and makes this spir-
itual level habitual to them. At this point the opposition between the nat-
ural and the subjective will disappears, the subject’s internal struggle dies
away. To this extent, habit is part of ethical life as it is of philosophical
thought also, since such thought demands that mind be trained against
capricious fancies, and that these be broken and overcome to leave the 
way clear for rational thinking. The human being also dies from habit, 
Third Part: Ethical Life
159

i.e. when he has once come to feel completely at home in life, when he has
become spiritually and physically dull, and when the opposition between
subjective consciousness and spiritual activity has disappeared; for the
human being is active only insofar as he has not attained his end and wants
to produce and assert himself in the eﬀort to attain it. When this has been
fully achieved, activity and vitality are at an end, and the result—loss of
interest in life—is spiritual or physical death.
152. In this way ethical substantiality has attained its right, and its
right its validity. That is to say, the self-will of the individual has
vanished together with his personal conscience which would like to
exist for itself and opposed itself to the ethical substance. For, when
his character is ethical, he recognizes as the end which moves him to
act the universal which is itself unmoved but is disclosed in its
speciﬁc determinations as rationality actualized. He knows that his
own dignity and the whole stability of his particular ends are
grounded in this same universal, and it is therein that he actually
attains these. Subjectivity is itself the absolute form and existent
actuality of the substantial order, and the distinction between sub-
ject, on the one hand, and substance, on the other, as the object, end,
and controlling power of the subject, is the same as, and has vanished
directly along with, the distinction between them in form.
Subjectivity is the ground of the existence [Existenz] of the con-
cept of freedom (see § 106). At the level of morality, subjectivity is
still distinct from this its own concept; but at the level of ethical
life it is the existence of the concept in a way that is adequate to
the concept itself.
153. The right of individuals to be subjectively determined as free is
fulﬁlled when they belong to an actual ethical order, because their
certainty of their freedom ﬁnds its truth in such an objective order,
and it is in an ethical order that they are actually in possession of
their own essence or their own inner universality (see § 147).
When a father inquired about the best method of educating his son
in ethical conduct, a Pythagorean replied: ‘Make him a citizen of a
state with good laws.’* (The phrase has also been attributed to
others [e.g. Socrates].)
Addition: The educational experiments, advocated by Rousseau in Émile,*
of withdrawing people from the common life of every day and bringing
them up in the country, have turned out to be futile, since no success can
Third Part: Ethical Life
160

attend an attempt to estrange people from the laws of the world. Even if
the young have to be educated in solitude, one should still not imagine that
the fragrance of the spiritual world will not ultimately permeate this soli-
tude or that the power of the world spirit is too feeble to gain the mastery
of those outlying regions. It is by becoming a citizen of a good state that
the individual ﬁrst comes into his right.
154. The right of individuals to their particularity is also contained
in the ethical substantial order, since particularity is the outward
appearance of the ethical order*—a mode in which that order exists.
155. Hence in this identity of the universal will with the particu-
lar will, right and duty coalesce, and by being in the ethical order a
human being has rights insofar as he has duties, and duties insofar as
he has rights. In the sphere of abstract right, I have the right and
another has the corresponding duty. In the moral sphere, the right of
my own knowledge and will, as well as of my welfare, has not, but
only ought to have, coalesced with duties and become objective.
Addition: A slave can have no duties; only a free human being has them. If
all rights were put on one side and all duties on the other, the whole would
be dissolved, since their identity alone is the fundamental thing, and it is
to this that we have here to hold fast.
156. The ethical substance, as containing self-consciousness that
is for itself and united with its concept, is the actual spirit of a family
and a people.
Addition: Ethical life is not abstract like the good, but is intensely actual.
Spirit has actuality, and individuals are accidents of this actuality. Thus in
dealing with ethical life, only two views are possible: either we start from
the substantiality of the ethical order, or else we proceed atomistically and
build on the basis of individuality. This second point of view lacks spirit
because it leads only to an aggregation, whereas spirit is not something
individual, but is the unity of the individual and the universal.
157. The concept of this Idea has being only as spirit, as some-
thing knowing itself and actual, because it is the objectiﬁcation of
itself, the movement running through the form of its moments. It is
therefore
(A) ethical spirit in its natural or immediate phase—the family.
This substantiality loses its unity, passes over into division, and into
the phase of relation, i.e. into:
Third Part: Ethical Life
161

(B) civil society—an association of members as self-subsistent
individuals in a universality which, because of their self-subsistence,
is only formal. Their association is brought about by their needs, by
the legal system—the means to security of person and property—and
by an external organization for attaining their particular and common
interests. This external state
(C) is brought back to and welded into unity in the constitution of
the state which is the end and actuality of both the substantial universal
order and the public life devoted thereto.
sub-section 1
THE FAMILY
158. The family, as the immediate substantiality of spirit, is
speciﬁcally characterized by love, which is spirit’s feeling of its own
unity. Hence in a family, one’s disposition is to have self-consciousness
of one’s individuality within this unity as the essentiality that has
being in and for itself, with the result that one is in it not as an inde-
pendent person but as a member.
Addition: Love means in general terms the consciousness of my unity with
another, so that I am not in isolation by myself but win my self-consciousness
only through the renunciation of my independence [Fürsichsein] and
through knowing myself as the unity of myself with another and of the
other with me. Love, however, is feeling, i.e. ethical life in the form of
something natural. In the state, feeling disappears; there we are conscious
of unity as law; there the content must be rational and known to us. 
The ﬁrst moment in love is that I do not wish to be a self-subsistent and
independent person and that, if I were, then I would feel defective and
incomplete. The second moment is that I ﬁnd myself in another person,
that I count for something in the other, while the other in turn comes to
count for something in me. Love, therefore, is the most tremendous con-
tradiction; the understanding cannot resolve it since there is nothing more
stubborn than this point [Punktualität] of self-consciousness which is
negated and which nevertheless I ought to possess as aﬃrmative. Love is
at once the producing and the resolving of this contradiction. As the
resolving of it, love is unity of an ethical type.
159. The right which the individual enjoys thanks to the unity of
the family, and which is in the ﬁrst place simply the individual’s 
life within this unity, takes on the form of right (as the abstract moment
of determinate individuality) only when the family begins to dissolve.
Third Part: Ethical Life
162

At that point those who should be family members both in their 
disposition and in actuality begin to be self-subsistent persons, and
whereas they formerly constituted one speciﬁc moment within the
whole, they now receive their share separately and so only in an
external fashion by way of money, food, educational expenses, and
the like.
Addition: The right of the family properly consists in the fact that its 
substantiality should have determinate existence. Thus it is a right 
against externality and against secession from the family unity. On the
other hand, to repeat, love is a feeling, something subjective, against which
unity cannot make itself eﬀective. The demand for unity can be sustained,
then, only in relation to such things as are by nature external and not con-
ditioned by feeling.
160. The family is completed in these three phases:
(a) marriage, the form assumed by the concept of the family in its
immediate phase;
(b) family property and assets (the external existence of the con-
cept) and attention to these;
(c) the education of children and the dissolution of the family.
A. Marriage
161. Marriage, as the immediate ethical relationship, contains ﬁrst,
the moment of natural life; and since marriage is a substantial rela-
tionship, the life involved in it is life in its totality, i.e. as the actual-
ity of the species [Gattung] and its life-process.69 But, secondly, in
self-consciousness the natural sexual union—a union which is
purely inward or in itself and whose existence [Existenz] is for that
very reason purely external—is changed into a spiritual union, into
self-conscious love.
Addition: Marriage is in essence an ethical relationship. Formerly, espe-
cially in most systems of natural law, attention was paid only to the phys-
ical side of marriage or to its natural character. Consequently, it was
treated only as a sexual relationship, and this completely barred the way 
to its other characteristics. This is crude enough, but it is no less so to
think of it as only a civil contract, and even Kant does this.* On this view,
The Family
163
69 Hegel’s reference: See Encyclopaedia, §§ 167ﬀ. and §§ 288ﬀ. [3rd edn. §§ 220ﬀ. and 
§§ 366ﬀ.].

the parties are bound by a contract of mutual caprice, and marriage is thus
degraded to the level of reciprocal use governed by contract. A third view
of marriage is that which bases it on love alone, but this must be rejected
like the other two, since love is only a feeling and so is exposed in every
respect to contingency, a shape which ethical life may not assume.
Marriage, therefore, is to be more precisely characterized as rightfully eth-
ical [rechtlich sittliche] love, and this eliminates from marriage the tran-
sient, ﬁckle, and purely subjective aspects of love.
162. On the subjective side, marriage may have a more obvious
source in the particular inclination of the two persons who are enter-
ing upon the marriage relationship, or in the foresight and con-
trivance of the parents, and so forth. But its objective source lies in
the free consent of the persons, especially in their consent to make
themselves one person, to renounce their natural and individual per-
sonality to this unity of one with the other. From this point of view,
their union is a self-restriction, but in fact it is their liberation,
because in it they attain their substantial self-consciousness.
Our objective determination and so our ethical duty is to enter the
married state. The external origin of any particular marriage is in
the nature of the case contingent, and it depends principally on the
extent to which reﬂective thought has been developed. At one
extreme, the ﬁrst step is that the marriage is arranged by the con-
trivance of benevolent parents; the appointed end of the parties is a
union of mutual love, and their inclination to marry arises from the
fact that each grows acquainted with the other from the ﬁrst as a
destined partner. At the other extreme, it is the inclination of the
parties which comes ﬁrst, appearing in them as these two inﬁnitely
particularized individuals. The more ethical way to matrimony may
be taken to be the former extreme or any way at all whereby the
decision to marry comes ﬁrst and the inclination to do so follows, so
that in the actual wedding both decision and inclination coalesce. In
the latter extreme, it is inﬁnitely particular distinctiveness
[Eigentümlichkeit] which makes good its claims in accordance with
the subjective principle of the modern world (see Remark to § 124).
But those works of modern art, dramatic and other, in which
the love of the sexes is the main interest, are pervaded by a chill
despite the heat of passion they portray, for they associate the 
passion with contingency throughout and represent the entire 
Third Part: Ethical Life
164

dramatic interest as if it rested solely on the characters as these
individuals; what rests on them may indeed be of inﬁnite import-
ance to them, but is of none whatever in itself.
Addition: Amongst peoples who hold the female sex in scant respect, mar-
riages are arranged by the parents at will without consulting the individ-
uals concerned. The latter raise no objection, since the particularity of
feeling does not yet make any claims for itself. For the woman it is only a
matter of getting a husband, for the man, of getting a wife. In other 
circumstances, considerations of wealth, connections, political ends, may
be the determining factor. In such circumstances, great hardships may
arise through making marriage a means to other ends. Nowadays, how-
ever, the subjective origin of marriage, the state of being in love, is
regarded as the only important originating factor. Here the position is rep-
resented to be that each must wait until his hour has struck and that one
can bestow one’s love only on one speciﬁc individual.
163. The ethical aspect of marriage consists in the parties’ con-
sciousness of this unity as their substantial aim, and so in their love,
trust, and common sharing of their entire existence as individuals.
When the parties have this disposition and their union is actual, their
natural drive sinks to the level of a natural moment, destined to be
extinguished in its very satisfaction. On the other hand, the spiritual
bond of union secures its rights as the substance of marriage and thus
rises, as indissoluble in itself, to a plane above the contingency of
passion and the transience of particular caprice.
It was noted above (in § 75) that marriage, so far as its essential
basis is concerned, is not a contractual relation. On the contrary,
though marriage begins in contract, it is precisely a contract to
supersede [aufheben] the standpoint of contract, the standpoint
from which persons are regarded in their individuality as self-
subsistent units. The identiﬁcation of personalities, whereby the
family becomes one person and its members become its accidents
(though substance is in essence the relation of accidents to itself),70
is the ethical spirit. Taken by itself and stripped of the manifold
externals of which it is possessed owing to its existence in these
individuals and the interests of the phenomenal realm, interests
determined in time and in numerous other ways, this spirit
emerges as a shape for representational thinking [Vorstellung] and
The Family
165
70 Hegel’s reference: See Encyclopaedia, § 98 [3rd edn. § 150].

has been revered as the Penates, etc.; and in general it is in this
spirit that the religious character of marriage and the family, or
pietas,* is grounded. It is a further abstraction still to separate the
divine, or the substantial, from its existence, and then to stamp it,
together with the feeling and consciousness of spiritual unity, as
what is falsely called ‘Platonic’ love. This separation is in keeping
with the monastic doctrine which characterizes the moment of
natural life as purely negative and which, precisely by thus separ-
ating the natural from the spiritual, endows the former by itself
with inﬁnite importance.
Addition: The distinction between marriage and concubinage is that the
latter is chieﬂy a matter of satisfying natural desire, while this satisfaction
is made secondary in the former. It is for this reason that natural occur-
rences may be mentioned in married life without a blush, although outside
the marriage tie their mention would produce a sense of shame. But it is
on this account, too, that marriage must be regarded as in itself indissol-
uble, for the end of marriage is the ethical end, an end so lofty that every-
thing else is manifestly powerless against it and made subject to it.
Marriage is not to be dissolved because of passion, since passion is subor-
dinate to it. But it is only indissoluble in itself, since, as Christ says, divorce
is permitted, though only ‘for the hardness of your heart’. 71 Since mar-
riage has feeling for one of its moments, it is not absolute but subject to
ﬂuctuations and potentially dissoluble. Legislators, however, must make
its dissolution as diﬃcult as possible and uphold the right of the ethical
order against caprice.
164. By itself the stipulation of a contract contains the genuine
transfer of the property in question (see § 79). Similarly, the solemn
declaration by the parties of their consent to enter the ethical bond of
marriage, and its corresponding recognition and conﬁrmation by
their family and community, constitutes the formal completion and
actuality of marriage. (The fact that the church comes in in this con-
nection is a further point, but not one for discussion here.) The knot
is tied and made ethical only after this ceremony, whereby through the
use of signs, i.e. of language (the most spiritual existence of spirit—see
§ 78), the substantial aspect of the marriage is brought completely into
being. As a result, the sensuous moment, the one proper to natural 
life, is put into its ethical place as something only consequential and
Third Part: Ethical Life
166
71 See Matthew 19: 8.

accidental, belonging to the external existence of the ethical bond,
which indeed can subsist exclusively in reciprocal love and support.
If with a view to framing or criticizing legal determinations, the
question is asked: what should be regarded as the chief end of mar-
riage?, the question may be taken to mean: which single facet of
marriage in its actuality is to be regarded as the most essential one?
No one facet by itself, however, makes up the whole range of its
content in and for itself, i.e. of its ethical character, and one or
other of its facets may be lacking in an existing marriage without
detriment to the essence of marriage itself.
It is in the actual conclusion of a marriage, i.e. in the ceremony,
that the essence of the tie is expressed and established beyond dis-
pute as something ethical, raised above the contingency of feeling
and particular inclination. If this ceremony is taken as an external
formality, a mere so-called ‘civil requirement’, it is thereby
stripped of all signiﬁcance except perhaps that of serving the pur-
pose of ediﬁcation and attesting the civil relation of the parties. It
is reduced indeed to a mere ﬁat of a civil or ecclesiastical author-
ity. As such it appears as something not merely indiﬀerent to the
true nature of marriage, but actually alien to it. The heart is con-
strained by the law to attach a value to the formal ceremony and
the latter is looked upon merely as a condition which must precede
the complete mutual surrender of the parties to one another. As
such it appears to bring disunion into their loving disposition and,
as an alien factor, to run counter to the inwardness of their union.
Such a doctrine pretends to oﬀer the highest conception of the
freedom, inwardness, and perfection of love; but in fact it is a trav-
esty of the ethical aspect of love, the higher aspect which restrains
purely natural impulse and puts it in the background. Such restraint
is already present at the natural level in shame, and it rises to
chastity and modesty as consciousness becomes more speciﬁcally
spiritual. In particular, the view just criticized casts aside mar-
riage’s speciﬁcally ethical character. This consists in the fact that
the consciousness of the parties emerges from its natural and 
subjective mode to concentrate on what is substantial; instead of
continually reserving to itself the contingency and caprice of sensu-
ous inclination, it removes the marriage bond from the province of
this caprice, surrenders to the substantial, and swears allegiance to
the Penates; it subordinates the sensuous moment until the latter
The Family
167

becomes something wholly conditioned by the true and ethical
character of the marriage relation and by the recognition of the
bond as an ethical one. It is eﬀrontery and its buttress, the under-
standing, which cannot apprehend the speculative character of the
substantial relationship; nevertheless, both ethical purity of heart
and the legislation of Christian peoples are in accord with this
speculative character.
Addition: Friedrich von Schlegel in his Lucinde, and a follower of his in the
anonymous Letters* (Lübeck and Leipzig, 1800), have put forward the
view that the wedding ceremony is superﬂuous and a formality which
might be discarded. Their reason is that love is, so they say, the substance
of marriage and that the celebration therefore detracts from its worth.
Surrender to sensual impulse is here represented as necessary to prove the
freedom and inwardness of love—an argument not unknown to seducers.
It must be noticed in connection with relations between men and
women that a girl in surrendering her body loses her honour. With a man,
however, this is not so much the case, because he has a ﬁeld for ethical
activity outside the family. A girl is destined in essence only for the mar-
riage relationship; it is therefore demanded of her that her love shall take
the form of marriage and that the diﬀerent moments in love shall attain
their true rational relation to each other.
165. The diﬀerence in the natural characteristics of the two sexes
has a rational basis72 and consequently acquires an intellectual and
ethical signiﬁcance. This signiﬁcance is determined by the diﬀerence
into which the ethical substantiality, as the concept in itself, sunders
itself in order that, through this diﬀerence, its vitality may become a
concrete unity.
166. Thus one sex is spirit in its self-diremption into personal
self-subsistence for itself and the knowledge and volition of free uni-
versality, i.e. the self-consciousness of conceptual thought and the
volition of the objective ﬁnal end. The other sex is spirit maintaining
itself in unity as knowledge and volition of the substantial, but
knowledge and volition in the form of concrete individuality and feeling.
In relation to externality, the former is powerful and active, the latter
passive and subjective. It follows that man has his actual 
substantial life in the state, in learning [Wissenschaft], and so forth, 
as well as in labour and struggle with the external world and with
Third Part: Ethical Life
168
72 See Encyclopaedia (1830), §§ 369–70. [S.H.]

himself so that it is only out of his diremption that he ﬁghts his way
to self-subsistent unity with himself. In the family he has a tranquil
intuition of this unity, and there he lives a subjective ethical life on
the plane of feeling. Woman, on the other hand, has her substantial
vocation in the family, and her ethical disposition is to be imbued
with family piety.
For this reason, family piety is declared in Sophocles’ Antigone—
one of the most sublime presentations of this virtue—to be prin-
cipally the law of woman and the law of a substantiality at once
subjective and on the plane of feeling, the law of the inward life, a
life which has not yet attained its full actualization; it is declared
to be the law of the ancient gods, the gods of the underworld, an
everlasting law of which no one knows whence it appeared.73 This
law is there displayed as a law opposed to public law, to the law of
the state. This is the supreme opposition in ethics and therefore in
tragedy; and it is individualized in the same play in the opposing
natures of man and woman.74
Addition: Women are capable of education, but they are not made for
activities which demand a universal faculty such as the more advanced sci-
ences, philosophy, and certain forms of artistic production. Women may
have happy ideas [Einfälle], taste, and elegance, but they cannot attain to
the ideal [das Ideale].* The diﬀerence between men and women is like that
between animals and plants. Animals correspond more to the character of
men, while plants correspond more to women because the latter’s devel-
opment is more peaceful and the principle that underlies it is the more
indeterminate unity of feeling. When women hold the helm of govern-
ment, the state is at once in jeopardy, because women regulate their
actions not by the demands of universality but by contingent inclinations
and opinions. Women are educated—one knows not how—by, as it were,
breathing in ideas, by living rather than by acquiring knowledge. The
status of manhood, on the other hand, is attained only through the
achievement of thought and much technical exertion.
167. In essence marriage is monogamy because it is personality—
immediate exclusive individuality—which enters into this relation-
ship and surrenders itself to it; and hence the relationship’s truth 
and inwardness (i.e. the subjective form of its substantiality) pro-
ceeds only from the mutual, undivided, surrender of this personality.
The Family
169
73 See second explanatory note to p. 154 [p. 348 below]. [S.H.]
74 Hegel’s reference: See Phenomenology, 383ﬀ., 417ﬀ. [Miller trans., 267ﬀ., 286ﬀ.].

Personality attains its right of being conscious of itself in another only
insofar as the other is in this identical relationship as a person, i.e. as
an atomic individual.
Marriage, and especially monogamy, is one of the absolute prin-
ciples on which the ethical life of a community depends. Hence
marriage comes to be recorded as one of the moments in the
founding of states by gods or heroes.
168. Further, marriage results from the free surrender by both
sexes of their personality—a personality inﬁnitely unique in each of
the parties. Consequently, it ought not to be concluded within the
naturally identical circle of people who are already acquainted and
perfectly known to one another; for individuals in the same circle of
relationship have no distinctive personality of their own in contrast
with that of others in the same circle. On the contrary, the parties
should be drawn from separate families and their personalities
should be diﬀerent in origin. Since the very concept of marriage is
that it is a freely undertaken ethical action, not a bond grounded in
immediate nature and its desires, it follows that the marriage of
blood-relations runs counter to this concept and so also to genuine
natural feeling.
Marriage itself is sometimes said to be grounded not in natural law
but simply in natural sexual impulses; or again it is treated as a
contract with an arbitrary basis. External arguments in support of
monogamy have been drawn from physical considerations such as
the number of men and women. Dark feelings are advanced as the
sole ground for prohibiting consanguineous marriage. The basis of
all these views is the fashionable idea of a state of nature and a nat-
ural origin for rights, and the lack of the concept of rationality and
freedom.
Addition: A sense of shame is initially already a bar to consanguineous mar-
riage. But this repugnance ﬁnds justiﬁcation in the concept of the thing.
For what is already united cannot be united for the ﬁrst time by marriage.
It is a commonplace of stock-breeding that the oﬀspring are comparatively
weak when animals of the same stock are mated, since if there is to be
uniﬁcation there must ﬁrst be division. The force of generation, as of
spirit, is all the greater, the greater the oppositions out of which it is
reestablished. Familiarity, close acquaintance, the habit of common pur-
suits, should not precede marriage; they should be found only within it.
Third Part: Ethical Life
170

And the process of their discovery has all the more value, the richer it is
and the more facets it has.
169. The family, as person, has its external reality in property;
and only when this property takes the form of resources [Vermögen]
does it become the existence of the substantial personality of the
family.
B. The Family’s Resources
170. It is not merely property which a family possesses; as a uni-
versal and enduring person, the family requires possessions specif-
ically determined as permanent and secure, i.e. it requires resources.
The arbitrariness of a mere individual’s particular needs is one
moment in property taken abstractly; but this moment, together with
the selﬁshness of desire, is here transformed into something ethical,
into care and acquisition for a common purpose.
In the sagas of the founding of states, or at least of a social and
orderly life, the introduction of permanent property is linked with
the introduction of marriage. The nature of these resources, how-
ever, and the proper means of their consolidation will appear in
the section on civil society.75
171. The family as a legal [rechtlich] person in relation to others
must be represented by the husband as its head. Further, it is his
prerogative to go out and work for its living, to attend to its needs,
and to control and administer its resources. These are common prop-
erty so that, while no member of the family has property of his own,
each has his right in the common stock. This right, however, may
come into collision with the head of the family’s right of administra-
tion owing to the fact that the ethical disposition of the family is still
only at the level of immediacy (see § 158) and so is exposed to particu-
larization and contingency.
172. A marriage brings into being a new family which is self-
subsistent and independent of the clans or ‘houses’ from which its
members have been drawn. The tie between these and the new
family has a natural basis—consanguinity—but the new family is
based on ethical love. Thus an individual’s property too has an 
The Family
171
75 See PR §§ 199ﬀ. and 253.

essential connection with his marital relationship and only a compar-
atively remote one with his relation to his clan or ‘house’.
The signiﬁcance of marriage settlements which impose a restriction
on the couple’s common ownership of their goods, of arrangements
to secure continued legal assistance for the woman, and so forth, lies
in their being provisions in case of the dissolution of the marriage,
either naturally by death, or by divorce, etc. They are also safe-
guards for securing that in such an eventuality the diﬀerent mem-
bers of the family shall secure their share of the common stock.
Addition: In many legal codes the wider circle of the clan is adhered to, and
this is regarded as the essential bond, while the other bond, that of each
particular family, appears less important in comparison. Thus in older
Roman law, the wife in the easily dissolved type of marriage* stood in a
closer relation to her kinsfolk than to her husband and children. Under
feudal law, again, the maintenance of the ‘splendour of the family’ [splen-
dor familiae] made it necessary for only the males of the family to be reck-
oned members and for the clan as a whole to count as the important thing,
while the newly founded family disappeared in comparison. Nevertheless,
each new family is the essential thing in contrast with the more remote
connections of clan-kinship, and parents and children form the nucleus
proper as opposed to the clan, which is also in a certain sense called a
‘family’. Hence an individual’s ﬁnancial aﬀairs must have a more essential
connection with his marriage than with the wider circle of his blood 
relations.
C. The Education of Children and the Dissolution of the Family
173. In substance marriage is a unity, though only a unity of
inwardness or disposition; in outward existence, however, the unity
is sundered in the two parties. It is only in the children that the unity
itself exists for itself, objectively, and as a unity, because the parents
love the children as their love, as the existence of their own sub-
stance. From the natural point of view, the presupposition—persons
immediately existent (as parents)—here becomes a result,* a process
which runs away into the inﬁnite series of generations, each produ-
cing the next and presupposing the one before. This is the mode in
which the simple spirit of the Penates reveals its existence as a species
in the ﬁnite sphere of nature.
Addition: The relation of love between husband and wife is not yet 
objective, because even if their feeling is their substantial unity, still this
Third Part: Ethical Life
172

unity has no objectivity. Such an objectivity parents ﬁrst acquire in their
children, in whom they can see objectiﬁed the entirety of their union. In
the child, a mother loves its father and he its mother. Both have their love
objectiﬁed for them in the child. While in their resources their unity is
embodied only in an external thing, in their children it is embodied in a
spiritual one in which the parents are loved and which they love.
174. Children have the right to maintenance and education at the
expense of the family’s common resources. The right of the parents
to their children’s services, as services, is based upon and is restricted
to the common task of looking after the family generally. Similarly,
the right of the parents over the arbitrary will of their children is
determined by the object in view—discipline and education. The
punishment of children does not aim at justice as such; the aim is
more subjective and moral in character, i.e. to deter them from exer-
cising a freedom still in the toils of nature and to lift the universal
into their consciousness and will.
Addition: A human being has to acquire for himself the position which he
ought to attain; he is not already in possession of it through instinct. It is
on this fact that the child’s right to education is based. Peoples under
patriarchal government are in the same position as children; they are fed
from central stores and not regarded as self-subsistent and adults. The
services which may be demanded from children should therefore have
education as their sole end and be relevant thereto; they must not be ends
in themselves, since a child in slavery is in the most unethical of all situ-
ations whatever. One of the chief factors in education is discipline, the 
purpose of which is to break the child’s self-will and thereby eradicate
what is merely sensuous and natural. We must not expect to achieve this
by mere goodness, for the immediate will is precisely one that acts on
immediate fancies and caprices, rather than on reasons and ideas
[Vorstellungen]. If we advance reasons to children, we leave it open to them
to decide whether the reasons are weighty or not, and thus we make every-
thing depend on their whim. So far as children are concerned, universal-
ity and the substance of things reside in their parents, and this implies that
children must be obedient. If the feeling of subordination, producing the
longing to grow up, is not fostered in children, they become forward and
impertinent.
175. Children are free in themselves and their life is only the imme-
diate existence of this freedom. Consequently they are not things and
cannot be the property either of their parents or others. In respect of
his relation to the family, the child’s education has the positive aim of
The Family
173

instilling ethical principles into him in the form of an immediate feel-
ing without opposition, so that thus equipped with the foundation of
an ethical life, his heart may live its early years in love, trust, and obe-
dience. In respect of the same relation, this education has the nega-
tive aim of raising children out of the natural immediacy in which
they originally ﬁnd themselves to self-subsistence and freedom of
personality and so to the level at which they are able to leave the 
natural unity of the family.
One of the blackest marks against Roman legislation is the law
whereby children were treated as slaves. This oﬀence against the
ethical order in its innermost and most tender life is one of the
most important clues for understanding the place of the Romans
in the history of the world and their tendency towards legal 
formalism.
The necessity for education is present in children as their own
feeling of dissatisfaction with themselves as they are, as the desire
to belong to the adult world whose superiority they sense, as the
longing to grow up. The play theory of education* assumes that
what is childish is itself already something of inherent worth and
presents it as such to the children; in their eyes it lowers serious
pursuits, and education itself, to a form of childishness for which
the children themselves have scant respect. The advocates of this
method represent the child, in the immaturity in which he feels
himself to be, as really mature and they struggle to make him
satisﬁed with himself as he is. But they corrupt and distort his
genuine and proper need for something better, and create in him
a blind indiﬀerence to the substantial relationships of the spiritual
world, a contempt for people because they have presented them-
selves to him, a child, in a contemptible and childish fashion, and
ﬁnally a vanity and conceit which feeds on the notion of its own
superiority.
Addition: As a child, a human being must have lived with his parents encir-
cled by their love and trust, and rationality must appear in him as his very
own subjectivity. In the early years it is education by the mother especially
which is important, since ethical principles must be implanted in the 
child in the form of feeling. It is noteworthy that on the whole children
love their parents less than their parents love them. The reason for this is
that they are gradually increasing in strength, and are learning to stand on
their own feet, and so are leaving their parents behind them. The parents,
Third Part: Ethical Life
174

on the other hand, possess in their children the objective embodiment of 
their union.
176. Marriage is but the ethical Idea in its immediacy and so has
its objective actuality only in the inwardness of subjective feeling and
disposition. In this fact is rooted the initial contingency of its exist-
ence. There can be no compulsion on people to marry; and, on the
other hand, there is no merely legal or positive bond which can hold
the parties together once their dispositions and actions have become
hostile and contrary. A third ethical authority,* however, is called for
to maintain the right of marriage—an ethical substantiality—
against the mere whims of hostile disposition or the contingency of a
purely passing mood, and so forth. Such an authority distinguishes
these from the total estrangement of the two parties and may not
grant divorce until it is satisﬁed that the estrangement is total.
Addition: It is because marriage rests only on subjective, contingent 
feeling that it may be dissolved. The state, on the other hand, is not 
subject to partition, because it rests on law. To be sure, marriage ought to
be indissoluble, but this remains merely an ‘ought’. Yet, since marriage is
an ethical institution, it cannot be dissolved at will but only by an ethical
authority, whether the church or the law-court. If the parties are com-
pletely estranged, e.g. owing to adultery, then even the religious authority
must permit divorce.
177. The ethical dissolution of the family consists in this, that
once the children have been educated to freedom of personality, and
have come of age, they become recognized as persons in the eyes of
the law and as capable of holding free property of their own and
founding families of their own, the sons as heads of new families, the
daughters as wives. They now have their substantial destiny in the
new family; by contrast, the old family falls into the background as
merely the initial ground and origin, while a fortiori the clan, as an
abstraction, is devoid of rights.
178. The natural dissolution of the family by the death of the par-
ents, particularly the father, has inheritance as its consequence so far
as the family resources are concerned. The essence of inheritance is
the transfer to individual ownership of what are in themselves
common resources. When comparatively remote degrees of kinship
are in question, and when persons and families are so dispersed in civil
society that they have begun to gain self-subsistence, this transfer
The Family
175

becomes all the more indeterminate as the sense of family unity fades
away and as every marriage leads to the renunciation of previous
family relationships and the founding of a new self-subsistent family.
One might think that the basis of inheritance lies in the fact that,
by a person’s death, his property becomes wealth without an owner
[herrenloses Gut], and as such falls to the ﬁrst person who takes
possession of it. Since of course it is the relatives who are normally
closest to hand and so are generally the ﬁrst to take possession, 
this customary occurrence might be made into a rule by positive
legislation in the interests of orderliness.—This notion [Einfall],
however, disregards the nature of the family relationship.
179. The result of this disintegration of the family is that an indi-
vidual may at will either squander his resources altogether, mainly in
accordance with his individual caprices, opinions, and ends, or else
look upon a circle of friends and acquaintances, etc., as if they were
his family and make a will embodying a declaration to that eﬀect,
with the result that they become his rightful heirs.
The ethical justiﬁcation of the freedom to dispose of one’s
resources by will to a circle of friends would depend on the forma-
tion of such a circle; but there goes to its formation so much acci-
dent, arbitrariness, and shrewd self-seeking, etc.—especially
since testamentary hopes played a role in that formation—that the
ethical moment in it is something very vague. Further, the recog-
nition of a person’s entitlement to bequeath his property arbitrar-
ily is much more likely to be an occasion for breach of ethical
obligations and for base exertions and equally base subservience;
and it also provides opportunity and justiﬁcation for the folly,
caprice, and malice of attaching to professed benefactions and gifts
vain, tyrannical, and vexatious conditions operative after the tes-
tator’s death and so in any case after his property ceases to be his.
180. The principle that the members of the family grow up to be
self-subsistent persons in the eyes of the law (see § 177) lets into the
circle of the family something of the same arbitrariness and discrim-
ination among the natural heirs, though its exercise there must be
restricted to a minimum in order to prevent injury to the basic family
relationship.
The simple direct arbitrariness of the deceased cannot be made the
principle underlying the right to make a will, especially if it runs
Third Part: Ethical Life
176

counter to the substantial right of the family. For after all no respect
would be forthcoming for his wishes after his death, if not from the
family’s love and veneration for its deceased fellow-member. Such
arbitrariness by itself contains nothing worthy of higher respect
than the right of the family as such—on the contrary.
The other ground for the validity of testamentary disposition
would lie simply in its arbitrary recognition by others.* But such
an argument may primarily be admitted only when family ties, to
which testamentary disposition is intrinsic, become remoter and
more ineﬀective. If they are actually present, however, without
being eﬀective, the situation is unethical; and to give extended
validity to arbitrary dispositions at the expense of family ties eo
ipso weakens the ethical character of the latter.
To make the arbitrary will within the family the main principle
of inheritance was part of the harsh and unethical legal system of
Rome to which reference has been made already. That system even
gave a father power to sell his son, and if the son was given his free-
dom by others, he came under his father’s authority once more. Not
until he had been given his freedom for the third time was he actu-
ally and ﬁnally free. The son never attained his majority de jure nor
did he become a person in law; the only property he could hold was
booty won in war (peculium castrense). If he passed out of his father’s
authority after being thrice sold and set free, he did not inherit along
with those who had continued in bondage to the head of the family,
unless the will speciﬁcally so provided.* Similarly, a wife (i.e. a
matrona, not a wife who in manum conveniret, in mancipio esset* and
whose marriage was a slavery to her husband) remained attached to
her family of origin rather than to the new family which by her mar-
riage she had helped to found, and which was now properly her own,
and she was therefore precluded from inheriting any share of the
resources of those who were actually her own family, just as the
latter could not inherit from their wife and mother.
Later, with the growing feeling for rationality, the unethical
provisions of laws [Rechte] such as these and others were evaded in
the course of their administration, for example with the help of the
expression bonorum possessio instead of hereditas [inheritance],
and through the ﬁction of naming a daughter [ﬁlia] a son [ﬁlius].76
(The fact that there is a further distinction between bonorum
The Family
177
76 See explanatory note to p. 26 [p. 331 below]. [S.H.]

possessio and possessio bonorum belongs to the kind of erudition that
makes one a legal expert.)* This was referred to above (see Remark
to § 3 [p. 25]) as the sad necessity to which the judge was reduced in
the face of bad laws—the necessity of smuggling reason into them
on the sly, or at least into some of their consequences. Connected
with this were the terrible instability of the chief political institutions
and a riot of legislation to stem the outbreak of resulting evils.
From Roman history and the writings of Lucian and others,*
we are suﬃciently familiar with the unethical consequences which
this right of arbitrariness in testamentary dispositions had among
the Romans.
Marriage is ethical life at the level of immediacy; in the very
nature of the case, therefore, it must be a mixture of a substantial
relationship with natural contingency and inner arbitrariness.
Now when by the slave-status of children, by legal provisions such
as those mentioned above as well as others consequential upon
them, and in addition by the ease of Roman divorce, pride of place
is given to arbitrariness instead of to the right of the substantial (so
that even Cicero—and what ﬁne writing about honestum and de-
corum there is in his On Duties* and in all sorts of other places!—
even Cicero divorced his wife as a business speculation in order 
to pay his debts with his new wife’s dowry), then a legal road is
paved to the corruption of manners, or rather the laws themselves
necessitate such corruption.
The institution of the law of inheritance with a view to preserv-
ing the family and its splendour by means of ﬁdeicommissa and
substitutiones* (in order to favour sons by excluding daughters
from inheriting, or to favour the eldest son by excluding the other
children) is an infringement of the principle of the freedom of
property (see § 62), like the admission of any other inequality in
the treatment of heirs. And besides, such an institution depends
on an arbitrariness which in and for itself has no right to recogni-
tion, or more precisely on the thought of wishing to preserve
intact not so much this family but rather this clan or ‘house’. Yet it
is not this clan or ‘house’, but the family as such which is the Idea
and which therefore possesses the right to recognition, and both
the ethical disposition and families are much more likely to be 
preserved by freedom of resources [Freiheit des Vermögens] and
equality of inheritance than by their opposites.
Third Part: Ethical Life
178

Institutions of the kind just described, like the Roman, wholly
ignore the right that belongs to marriage by virtue of the fact that
the latter completes the foundation of a distinctive and actual
family (see § 172), and that, in contrast with the new family, what
is called the family in the wide sense, i.e. the stirps or gens, becomes
only an abstraction (see § 177) growing less and less actual the fur-
ther it recedes into the background as one generation succeeds
another. Love, the ethical moment in marriage, is by its very
nature a feeling for actual living individuals, not for an abstrac-
tion.—The abstraction of the understanding appears in history as
the principle underlying the contribution of the Roman Empire to
world history (see § 357).77—In the higher sphere of the state, a
right of primogeniture arises together with resources rigidly
entailed; it arises, however, not arbitrarily but as the inevitable
outcome of the Idea of the state. On this point see below, § 306.
Addition: In earlier times, a Roman father had the right to disinherit his
children and even kill them. Later he lost both these rights. Attempts were
made to forge into a legal system this incoherence between unethical insti-
tutions and devices to render them ethical, and it is the retention of this
incoherence which constitutes the deﬁciency and diﬃculty of the German
law of inheritance. To be sure, the right to make a will must be conceded;
but in conceding it our point of view must be that this right of arbitrari-
ness arises or is magniﬁed with the dispersion and remoteness of the 
members of the family. Further, the so-called ‘family of friends’ which
testamentary disposition brings with it may be admitted only in the
absence of members of the family proper, i.e. of spouse and children. To
make a will at all entails something obnoxious and disagreeable, because in
making it I reveal the names of my favourites. Favour, however, is arbi-
trary; it may be gained surreptitiously by a variety of expedients, it may
depend on all sorts of foolish reasons, and as a condition of having his
name included in a will, a beneﬁciary may be required to subject himself
to the most abject servilities. In England, the home of all sorts of eccen-
tricity, there is no end to the folly and whimsicality of bequests.
Transition of the Family into Civil Society
181. The family disintegrates (both essentially, through the 
working of the principle of personality, and also in the course of
nature) into a plurality of families, each of which conducts itself as in
The Family
179
77 All editions have ‘§ 356’.

principle a self-subsistent concrete person and therefore as externally
related to its neighbours. In other words, the moments bound
together in the unity of the family, since the family is the ethical Idea
still in its concept, must be released from the concept to self-subsistent
reality. This is the stage of diﬀerence. This gives us, to use abstract
language initially, the determination of particularity which is related
to universality but in such a way that universality is its basic prin-
ciple, though still only an inward principle; for that reason, the uni-
versal merely appears in the particular as its form. Hence this relation
of reﬂection initially represents the loss of ethical life or, since this life
as the essence necessarily appears,78 this relation constitutes the world
of appearance [Erscheinungswelt] of the ethical—civil society.
The expansion of the family, as its transition into a new principle,
is in existence [Existenz] sometimes its peaceful expansion until it
becomes a people, i.e. a nation, which thus has a common natural
origin, or sometimes the coming together of scattered groups of
families under the inﬂuence of an overlord’s power or as a result
of a voluntary association produced by the tie of needs and the 
reciprocity of their satisfaction.
Addition: The starting-point for the universal here is the self-subsistence
of the particular, and the ethical order seems therefore to be lost at this
point, since it is precisely the identity of the family which consciousness
takes to be the primary thing, the divine, and the source of obligation.
Now, however, a situation arises in which the particular is to be my 
primary determining principle, and thus my ethical determination is
superseded [aufgehoben]. But I am in fact mistaken about this, since, while
I suppose that I am adhering to the particular, the universal and the neces-
sity of the connection between particulars remains the primary and essen-
tial thing. I am thus altogether on the level of semblance [Schein], and
while my particularity remains my determining principle, i.e. my end, 
I am for that very reason the servant of the universal which actually retains
power over me in the last resort.
sub-section 2
CIVIL SOCIETY
182. The concrete person, who as a particular person is his own
end, is, as a totality of needs and a mixture of caprice and natural
Third Part: Ethical Life
180
78 Hegel’s reference: Encyclopaedia, §§ 64ﬀ., §§ 81ﬀ. [3rd edn. §§ 112ﬀ., §§ 131ﬀ.].

necessity, one principle of civil society. But the particular person is
essentially so related to other particular persons that each asserts
himself and ﬁnds satisfaction by means of the others, and at the same
time simply by means of the form of universality, the second prin-
ciple here.
Addition: Civil society is the [stage of] diﬀerence which intervenes between
the family and the state, even if its formation follows later in time than that
of the state, because, as [the stage of] diﬀerence, it presupposes the state; to
subsist itself, it must have the state before it as something self-subsistent.
Moreover, the creation of civil society is the achievement of the modern
world which has for the ﬁrst time given all determinations of the Idea their
due. If the state is represented as a unity of diﬀerent persons, as a unity
which is only a community, then what is really meant is only civil society.
Many modern constitutional theorists have been able to attain no other
view of the state but this. In civil society each individual is his own end,
everything else is nothing to him. But except in contact with others he
cannot attain the whole compass of his ends, and therefore these others are
means to the end of the particular individual. A particular end, however,
assumes the form of universality through this relation to other people, and
it is attained in the simultaneous attainment of the welfare of others. Since
particularity is inevitably conditioned by universality, the whole sphere of
civil society is the territory of mediation where there is free play for every
idiosyncrasy, every talent, every accident of birth and fortune, and where
waves of every passion gush forth, regulated only by reason shining
through them. Particularity, restricted by universality, is the only standard
whereby each particular individual promotes his welfare.
183. In the course of the actual attainment of selﬁsh ends—an
attainment conditioned in this way by universality—there is formed
a system of complete interdependence, wherein the livelihood, wel-
fare, and rightful existence [rechtliches Dasein] of one individual are
interwoven with the livelihood, welfare, and rights of all. On this
system, individual welfare, etc., depend, and only in this connected
system are they actualized and secured. This system may initially be
regarded as the external state, the state based on need, the state as the
understanding envisages it.
184. The Idea in this its stage of division grants to each of its
moments a distinctive existence; to particularity it gives the right to
develop and launch forth in all directions; and to universality the right
to prove itself not only the ground and necessary form of particularity,
Civil Society
181

but also the power over it and its ﬁnal end. It is the system of ethical
life, split into its extremes and lost, which constitutes the Idea’s
abstract moment, its moment of reality. Here the Idea is present only
as a relative totality* and as the inner necessity behind this outward
appearance.
Addition: Here ethical life is split into its extremes and lost; the immediate
unity of the family has fallen apart into a plurality. Reality here is exter-
nality, the dissolution of the concept, the self-subsistence of its moments
which have now won their freedom and their determinate existence.
Though in civil society universal and particular have fallen apart, yet both
are still reciprocally bound together and conditioned. While each of them
seems to do just the opposite of the other and supposes that it can exist
only by keeping the other at arm’s length, nonetheless each still conditions
the other. Thus, for example, most people regard the paying of taxes as
injurious to their particular interest, as something inimical and obstructive
of their own ends. Yet, however true this seems, particular ends cannot be
attained without the help of the universal, and a country where no taxes
were paid could not be singled out as strengthening particularity.
Similarly, it might seem that universal ends would be more readily attain-
able if the universal absorbed the strength of the particular in the way
described, for instance, in Plato’s Republic. But this, too, is only an illu-
sion, since both universal and particular turn into one another and exist
only for and by means of one another. If I further my ends, I further the
ends of the universal, and this in turn furthers my ends.
185. Particularity by itself [für sich], given free rein in every direc-
tion to satisfy its needs, contingent caprices, and subjective desires,
destroys itself and its substantial concept in this process of
gratiﬁcation. At the same time, the satisfaction of need, necessary
and contingent alike, is contingent because it arouses [new desires]
without end, is in thoroughgoing dependence on arbitrariness and
external contingency, and is held in check by the power of universality.
In these contrasts and their complexity, civil society aﬀords a spectacle
of extravagance and want as well as of the physical and ethical degen-
eration common to them both.
The independent development of particularity (compare Remark
to § 124) is the moment which appeared in the states of the ancient
world as an invasion of ethical corruption and as the ultimate cause
of that world’s downfall. Some of these ancient states were built
on the patriarchal and religious principle, others on the principle
Third Part: Ethical Life
182

of an ethical order which was more explicitly spiritual, though still
comparatively simple; in either case they rested on original natural
intuition. Hence they could not withstand the division which
arose in this state of mind when self-consciousness was inﬁnitely
reﬂected into itself; when this reﬂection began to emerge, they
succumbed to it, ﬁrst in disposition and then in actuality, because
the simple principle underlying them lacked the truly inﬁnite
power to be found only in that unity which allows the opposition
within reason to develop to its full strength and which has so over-
come the opposition that it maintains itself in it and integrates it
into itself.
In his Republic, Plato presents substantial ethical life in its ideal
beauty and truth; but he could only cope with the principle of self-
subsistent particularity, which in his day had forced its way into
Greek ethical life, by setting up in opposition to it his purely sub-
stantial state. He completely excluded such particularity from his
state, even in its very beginnings in private property79 (see Remark
to § 46) and the family, as well as in its more developed form as sub-
jective will, the choice of a social position [des Standes], and so
forth. It is this defect which is responsible both for the misunder-
standing of the deep and substantial truth of Plato’s state and also
for the usual view of it as a dream of abstract thinking, as what is
often called a ‘mere ideal’. The principle of the self-subsistent
inherently inﬁnite personality of the individual, the principle of
subjective freedom, is denied its right in the purely substantial
form which Plato gave to spirit in its actuality. This principle
dawned in an inward form in the Christian religion and in an exter-
nal form (and therefore in one linked with abstract universality) in
the Roman world. It is historically subsequent to the Greek world,
and the philosophical reﬂection which descends to its depth is like-
wise subsequent to the substantial Idea of Greek philosophy.
Addition: Particularity by itself is measureless excess, and the forms of this
excess are themselves measureless. By means of their ideas and reﬂections
human beings expand their desires, which are not a closed circle like
animal instinct, and extend them into a bad inﬁnity.80 At the other end 
of the scale, however, want and destitution are measureless too, and the
Civil Society
183
79 See ﬁfth explanatory note to p. 61 [p. 335 below]. [S.H.]
80 See explanatory note to p. 89 [p. 339 below]. [S.H.]

confusion of this situation can be brought into a harmony only by the state
which has powers over it. Plato wished to exclude particularity from his
state, but this is no help, since help on these lines would contravene the
inﬁnite right of the Idea to allow freedom to the particular. It was in the
Christian religion principally that the right of subjectivity arose, together
with the inﬁnity of being-for-self, and while granting this right, the whole
order must at the same time retain strength enough to bring particularity
into harmony with the unity of ethical life.
186. But in developing itself independently to totality, the prin-
ciple of particularity passes over into universality, and only there does
it attain its truth and the right to which its positive actuality is 
entitled. This unity is not that of ethical identity, because at this
level, that of division (see § 184), both principles are self-subsistent.
It follows that this unity is present here not as freedom but as the
necessity whereby the particular must rise to the form of universality
and seek and gain its stability in that form.
187. Individuals in their capacity as citizens [Bürger] of this 
state are private persons whose end is their own interest. This end is
mediated through the universal which thus appears as a means to its
realization. Consequently, individuals can attain their ends only in so 
far as they themselves determine their knowing, willing, and acting
in a universal way and make themselves links in this chain of social
connections. In these circumstances, the interest of the Idea—an
interest of which these members of civil society are as such uncon-
scious—lies in the process whereby their individuality and their 
natural condition are raised, both by the necessities of nature and by
the arbitrariness of their needs, to formal freedom and the formal
universality of knowing and willing—the process whereby subjec-
tivity in its particularity is educated.
The idea that the state of nature is one of innocence, and that there
is a simplicity of manners in uncivilized [ungebildet] peoples,
implies treating education [Bildung] as something purely external,
the ally of corruption. Similarly, the feeling that needs, their sat-
isfaction, the pleasures and comforts of one’s particular life, and so
forth, are absolute ends, implies treating education as a mere
means to these ends. Both these views display lack of acquaintance
with the nature of spirit and the end of reason. Spirit attains its
actuality only by creating a division within itself, by submitting
Third Part: Ethical Life
184

itself to natural needs and the network of these external neces-
sities, and so imposing on itself this limitation and this ﬁnitude,
and ﬁnally by developing itself inwardly under these limitations
until it overcomes them and attains its objective existence in them.
The end of reason, therefore, is neither the natural simplicity of
manners mentioned above, nor, as particularity develops, the
pleasure for pleasure’s sake which education procures. On the
contrary, its end is to work to eliminate natural simplicity,
whether the passivity which is the absence of the self, or the crude
type of knowing and willing, i.e. immediacy and individuality, in
which spirit is absorbed. It aims in the ﬁrst instance at securing for
this, its externality, the rationality of which it is capable, i.e. the
form of universality or the understanding [Verständigkeit]. By this
means alone does spirit come to be at home with itself in this pure
externality. There, then, spirit’s freedom has existence and spirit
comes to be for itself in this element which in itself is alien to
spirit’s appointed end, freedom; it has to do there only with what
it has itself produced and stamped with its seal. It is in this way
then that the form of universality comes into existence for itself in
thought, and this form is the only worthy element for the exist-
ence of the Idea. Education in its absolute determination is, there-
fore, liberation and work towards a higher liberation still;
education is the absolute transition from an ethical substantiality
which is immediate and natural to the one which is spiritual and
inﬁnitely subjective and which has been raised to the shape of uni-
versality. In the individual subject, this liberation is hard labour
against the pure subjectivity of demeanour, against the immediacy
of desire, against the empty subjectivity of feeling and the arbi-
trariness of inclination. The disfavour showered on education is
due in part to its being this hard labour; but it is through this edu-
cational labour that the subjective will itself attains objectivity
within itself, an objectivity in which alone it is for its part capable
and worthy of being the actuality of the Idea.
Moreover, this form of universality—the understanding—to
which particularity has worked its way and developed itself, brings
it about at the same time that particularity comes to be the genuine
being-for-itself [Fürsichsein] of individuality. And since it is from
this particularity that the universal derives the content which ﬁlls
it as well as its inﬁnite self-determination, particularity itself is
Civil Society
185

present in ethical life as subjectivity that is inﬁnitely free and for
itself. This is the position which reveals education as a moment
immanent in the Absolute and which makes plain its inﬁnite value.
Addition: By educated people, we may initially understand those who
without the obtrusion of their particularity can do what others do. It is
precisely this particularity, however, which uneducated people display,
since their behaviour is not governed by the universal characteristics of the
object. Similarly, an uneducated person is apt to hurt the feelings of
others. He simply lets himself go and does not reﬂect on the sensitivities
of others. It is not that he intends to hurt them, but his conduct is not con-
sonant with his intention. Thus education rubs the edges oﬀparticular
characteristics until a person conducts himself in accordance with the
nature of the thing. Genuine originality, which produces the real thing,
demands genuine education, while false originality shows the kind of bad
taste that only enters the heads of the uneducated.
188. Civil society contains three moments:
(A) The mediation of need and the satisfaction of the individual
through his work and through the work and satisfaction of the needs
of all others—the system of needs.
(B) The actuality of the universal of freedom therein contained—
the protection of property through the administration of justice.
(C) Provision against contingencies still lurking in systems (A)
and (B), and care for the particular interest as a common interest, by
means of the police and the corporation.
A. The System of Needs
189. Particularity is in the ﬁrst instance characterized in general
by its contrast with the universal of the will and thus is subjective need
(see § 59).81 This attains its objectivity, i.e. its satisfaction, by means
of (α) external things, which at this stage are likewise the property
and product of the needs and wills of others, and (β) the activity and
work that mediate between the two sides. The aim here is the satis-
faction of subjective particularity, but the universal asserts itself in
the relation which this satisfaction has to the needs of others and
their free arbitrary wills. The appearance [Scheinen] of rationality
thus produced in this sphere of ﬁnitude is the understanding, and this
Third Part: Ethical Life
186
81 All editions have ‘§ 60’.

is the aspect which is of most importance in considering this sphere
and which itself constitutes the reconciling element within it.
Political economy is the science which starts from this view of
needs and labour but then has the task of explaining mass-
relationships and mass-movements in their complexity and their
qualitative and quantitative character. This is one of the sciences
which have arisen out of the conditions of the modern world. Its
development aﬀords the interesting spectacle (as in Smith, Say,
and Ricardo)* of thought working upon the endless mass of details
which confront it at the outset and extracting therefrom the simple
principles of the thing, the understanding eﬀective in the thing and
directing it. It is to ﬁnd reconciliation here to discover in the
sphere of needs this appearance [Scheinen] of rationality lying in
the thing and eﬀective there; but if we look at it from the opposite
point of view, this is the ﬁeld in which the understanding with its
subjective aims and moral opinions vents its discontent and moral
frustration.
Addition: There are certain universal needs such as food, drink, clothing,
etc., and it depends entirely on contingent circumstances how these are
satisﬁed. The fertility of the soil varies from place to place, harvests vary
from year to year, one person is industrious, another indolent. But this
medley of arbitrariness generates universal determinations by its own
working; and this apparently scattered and thoughtless sphere is upheld
by a necessity which automatically enters it. To discover this necessary
element here is the object of political economy, a science which is a credit
to thought because it ﬁnds laws for a mass of contingencies. It is an inter-
esting spectacle here to see all the connections acting on one another; par-
ticular spheres of action fall into groups, inﬂuence others, and are helped
or hindered by others. The most remarkable thing here is this mutual
interlocking of particulars, which is what one would least expect because
at ﬁrst sight everything seems to be given over to the arbitrariness of 
the individual, and it has a parallel in the solar system which displays to
the eye only irregular movements, though its laws may nonetheless be
ascertained.
(a) The Nature of Need and its Satisfaction
190. An animal’s needs and its ways and means of satisfying them
are both alike restricted in scope. Though the human being is subject
to this restriction too, yet at the same time he evinces his transcend-
ence of it and his universality, ﬁrst by the multiplication of needs and
Civil Society
187

means of satisfying them, and secondly by the diﬀerentiation and
division of concrete need into individual parts and aspects which in
turn become diﬀerent needs, particularized and so more abstract.
In [abstract] right, what we had before us was the person; in the
sphere of morality, the subject; in the family, the family member; in
civil society as a whole, the citizen [Bürger] or bourgeois. Here at the
standpoint of needs (compare Remark to § 123) what we have
before us is the concrete idea [Vorstellung] which we call the human
being. Thus this is the ﬁrst time, and indeed properly the only
time, to speak of the human being in this sense.
Addition: An animal is something particular. It has its instincts and means
of satisfying them, means which are limited and which it cannot overstep.
Some insects are parasitic on a certain kind of plant; some animals have a
wider range and can live in diﬀerent climates, but there is always a restric-
tion preventing them from having the range open to human beings. The
need for shelter and clothing, the necessity of no longer leaving food raw
but making it ﬁt to eat and of destroying its natural immediacy, both mean
that the human being has less comfort than an animal, and indeed, as
spirit, he ought to have less. Understanding, with its grasp of distinctions,
multiplies these human needs, and since taste and utility become criteria
of judgement, even the needs themselves are aﬀected thereby. Finally, it is
no longer need but opinion which has to be satisﬁed, and it is precisely the
educated person who analyses the concrete into its particulars. The very
multiplication of needs involves a check on desire, because when people
use many things, the urge to obtain any one thing which might be needed
is less strong, and this is a sign that want altogether is not so imperious.
191. Similarly, the means to particularized needs and all the vari-
ous ways of satisfying these are themselves divided and multiplied
and so in turn become relative ends and abstract needs. This multi-
plication goes on ad inﬁnitum; taken as a whole, it is reﬁnement, i.e. a
discrimination between these multiplied needs, and judgement on
the suitability of means to their ends.
Addition: What the English call ‘comfortable’ is something inexhaustible
and inﬁnitely extendable, for every comfort can be shown to have its dis-
comforts, and these discoveries never come to an end. Hence a need is pro-
duced not so much by those who immediately experience it, but by those
who hope to make a proﬁt from its creation.
192. Needs and means, as really existing [reelles Dasein], become
something which has being for others by whose needs and work 
Third Part: Ethical Life
188

satisfaction is reciprocally conditioned. When needs and means
become abstract in quality (see § 191), abstraction also becomes a
determination of the reciprocal relation of individuals to one another.
This universality, as the quality of being recognized, is the moment
which makes concrete and social the isolated and abstract needs and
their ways and means of satisfaction.
Addition: The fact that I must direct my conduct by reference to others
introduces here the form of universality. It is from others that I acquire the
means of satisfaction and I must accordingly accept their views. At the
same time, however, I am compelled to produce means for the satisfaction
of others. We play into each other’s hands and so hang together. To this
extent everything particular becomes something social. In dress fashions
and hours of meals, there are certain conventions which we have to accept
because in these things it is not worth the trouble to insist on displaying
one’s own discernment. The wisest thing here is to do as others do.
193. This moment thus becomes a particular end-determinant for
means in themselves and their acquisition, as well as for the manner
in which needs are satisﬁed. Further, it directly involves the demand
for equality of satisfaction with others. The need for this equality and
for emulation [Nachahmung], which is the equalizing of oneself with
others, as well as the other need also present here, the need of the
particular to assert itself in some distinctive way, become themselves
a fruitful source of the multiplication of needs and their expansion.
194. Since in social needs, as the conjunction of immediate or nat-
ural needs with spiritual needs arising from ideas, it is needs of the
latter type which because of their universality make themselves 
preponderant, this social moment has in it the aspect of liberation,
i.e. the strict natural necessity of need is obscured and the human
being is concerned with his own opinion, indeed with an opinion
which is universal, and with a necessity of his own making alone,
instead of with an external necessity, an inner contingency, and mere
arbitrariness.
The idea has been advanced that in respect of his needs the human
being lived in freedom in the so-called ‘state of nature’ when his
needs were supposed to be conﬁned to what are known as the
simple necessities of nature, and when he required for their satis-
faction only the means which the contingencies of nature directly
assured to him. This view takes no account of the moment of 
Civil Society
189

liberation intrinsic to work, on which see the following Paragraphs.
And apart from this, it is untrue, because to be conﬁned to mere
natural needs as such and their immediate satisfaction would
simply be the condition in which the spirit is submerged in nature
and so would be one of savagery and unfreedom, while freedom
itself is to be found only in the reﬂection of the spirit into itself, in
the spirit’s distinction from nature and its reﬂection upon the
latter.
195. This liberation is formal since the particularity of the ends
remains their basic content. When social conditions tend to multiply
and subdivide needs, means, and enjoyments indeﬁnitely—a process
which, like the distinction between natural and reﬁned* needs, has
no limits—this is luxury. In this same process, however, dependence
and want increase ad inﬁnitum, and the material to meet these is per-
manently barred to the needy because it consists of external objects
with the special character of being the property of the free will of
others, and hence from their point of view its recalcitrance is absolute.
Addition: The entire Cynical mode of life adopted by Diogenes* was noth-
ing more nor less than a product of Athenian social life, and what deter-
mined it was the way of thinking against which his whole manner
protested. Hence it was not independent of social conditions but simply
their result; it was itself a rude product of luxury. When luxury is at its
height, distress and depravity are equally extreme, and in such circum-
stances Cynicism is the outcome of opposition to reﬁnement.
(b) The Nature of Work
196. The means of acquiring and preparing the particularized
means appropriate to our similarly particularized needs is work.
Through work the raw material directly supplied by nature is
speciﬁcally adapted to these numerous ends by all sorts of diﬀerent
processes. Now this formative change confers value on means and
gives them their utility, and hence human beings in what they con-
sume are mainly concerned with the products of human beings. It is
the products of human eﬀort which human beings consume.
Addition: There is hardly any raw material which does not need to be
worked on before use. Even air has to be worked for because we have to
warm it. Water is perhaps the only exception, because we can drink it as
we ﬁnd it. It is by the sweat of their brows and the toil of their hands that
human beings obtain the means to satisfy their needs.
Third Part: Ethical Life
190

197. The multiplicity of objects and situations which excite inter-
est is the stage on which theoretical education develops. This educa-
tion consists in possessing not simply a multiplicity of ideas and bits
of knowledge [Kenntnisse], but also a ﬂexibility and rapidity of mind,
an ability to pass from one idea to another, to grasp complex and gen-
eral relations, and so on. It is the education of the understanding as
such, and so also the building up of language.—Practical education,
acquired through working, consists ﬁrst in the self-perpetuating
need for something to do and the habit of simply being busy; next, in
the strict adaptation of one’s activity according not only to the nature
of the material worked on, but also, and especially, to the arbitrary
will of others; and ﬁnally, in a habit, produced by this discipline, of
objective activity and universally applicable skills.
Addition: The barbarian is lazy and is distinguished from the educated
person by his dull brooding, because practical education is precisely edu-
cation in the need and habit of being busy. A clumsy person always pro-
duces a result he does not intend; he is not master of his own activity. The
skilled worker, on the other hand, may be said to be the person who pro-
duces the thing as it ought to be and who encounters in his subjective
activity no resistance to the aim he is pursuing.
198. The universal and objective element in work, on the other
hand, lies in the process of abstraction which eﬀects the subdivision
of needs and means and thereby eo ipso subdivides production and
brings about the division of labour. By this division, the work of the
individual becomes less complex, and consequently his skill at his
abstract work increases, as does the volume of his output. At the
same time, this abstraction of skill and means of production com-
pletes and makes necessary everywhere the dependence of people on
one another and their reciprocal relation in the satisfaction of their
other needs. Further, the abstraction of production makes work
more and more mechanical, until ﬁnally the human being is able to
step aside and let a machine take his place.
(c) Resources
199. When people are thus dependent on one another and recip-
rocally related to one another in their work and the satisfaction 
of their needs, subjective self-seeking turns into a contribution to 
the satisfaction of the needs of everyone else. That is to say, by a
Civil Society
191

dialectical advance, subjective self-seeking turns into the mediation
of the particular through the universal, with the result that each
person in earning, producing, and enjoying on his own account is eo
ipso producing and earning for the enjoyment of everyone else. This
necessity, which is rooted in the complex interdependence of each on
all, now presents itself to each individual as the universal permanent
resources (see § 170) which give each the opportunity, by the exercise
of his education and skill, to draw a share from it and so be assured
of his livelihood, while what he thus earns by means of his work
maintains and increases the general resources.
200. A particular person’s resources, or in other words his oppor-
tunity of sharing in the general resources, are conditioned, however,
partly by his own immediate assets (his capital), and partly by his
skill; this in turn is itself dependent not only on his capital, but also
on contingent circumstances whose multiplicity introduces
diﬀerences in the development of natural, bodily, and spiritual apti-
tudes, which were already in themselves [für sich] unequal. In this
sphere of particularity, these diﬀerences are conspicuous in every
direction and on every level, and, together with the arbitrariness and
contingency which this sphere contains as well, they have as their
inevitable consequence inequalities in the resources and skills of 
individuals.
The objective right of the particularity of spirit is contained in the
Idea. People are made unequal by nature, where inequality is in 
its element, and in civil society the right of particularity is so 
far from cancelling this natural inequality that it produces it out 
of spirit and raises it to an inequality of skill and resources, and
even to one of moral and intellectual education. To oppose to this
right a demand for equality is a folly of the empty understanding
which takes as real and rational its abstract equality and its 
‘ought-to-be’.
This sphere of particularity, which fancies itself the universal,
is still only relatively identical with the universal, and conse-
quently it still retains in itself both natural and arbitrary particu-
larity, or in other words the remnants of the state of nature.
Further, it is reason, immanent in the restless system of human
needs, which articulates it into an organic whole comprising
diﬀerent members (see the following Paragraph).
Third Part: Ethical Life
192

201. The inﬁnitely complex, crisscross, movements of reciprocal
production and exchange, and the equally inﬁnite multiplicity of
means therein employed, converge, owing to the universality inher-
ent in their content, and become distinguished into general groups. As
a result, the entire complex is built up into particular systems of needs,
means, and types of work relative to these needs, modes of satisfac-
tion and of theoretical and practical education, i.e. into systems, to
one or other of which individuals are assigned—in other words, into
diﬀerent estates [Stände].
Addition: The ways and means of sharing in the resources of society are left
to the particularity of individuals, but the subdivision of civil society into
diﬀerent general branches is a necessity. The family is the primary basis of
the state, but the estates are the second. The importance of the latter is due
to the fact that although private persons are self-seeking, they are 
compelled to direct their attention to others. Here then is the root which
connects self-seeking to the universal, to the state, whose care it must be
that this connection is solid and ﬁrm.
202. The estates are speciﬁcally determined in accordance with
the concept* as (a) the substantial or immediate [or agricultural]
estate; (b) the reﬂecting or formal [or business] estate; and ﬁnally,
(c) the universal estate [the estate of civil servants].
203. (a) The substantial [or agricultural] estate has its resources
in the natural products of the soil which it cultivates—soil which is
capable of exclusively private ownership and which demands forma-
tion in an objective way and not mere haphazard exploitation. In face
of the connection of [agricultural] work and its fruits with separate
and ﬁxed times of the year, and the dependence of harvests on the
variability of natural processes, the aim of need in this estate turns
into provision for the future; but owing to the conditions here, the
agricultural mode of subsistence remains one which owes compara-
tively little to reﬂection and one’s own will, and this mode of life 
is in general such that this estate has the substantial disposition of 
an ethical life which is immediate, resting on the family relationship
and trust.
The real beginning and original foundation of states has been
rightly ascribed to the introduction of agriculture along with mar-
riage, because the principle of agriculture brings with it the forma-
tion of the land and in consequence exclusively private property
Civil Society
193

(compare Remark to § 170); the nomadic life of savages, who seek
their livelihood from place to place, it brings back to the tranquil-
lity of private rights and the assured satisfaction of their needs.
Along with these changes, sexual love is restricted to marriage,
and this bond in turn grows into an enduring union, inherently
universal, while needs expand into care for a family, and personal
possessions into family goods. Security, consolidation, lasting 
satisfaction of needs, and so forth—things which are the most
obvious recommendations of marriage and agriculture—are noth-
ing but forms of universality, modes in which rationality, the ﬁnal
end and aim, asserts itself in these spheres.
In this matter, nothing is of more interest than the ingenious
and learned explanations which my distinguished friend, Herr
Creuzer,* has given (notably in the fourth volume of his Mythology
and Symbolism) of the agrarian festivals, images, and sanctuaries of
the ancients. He shows that it was because the ancients themselves
had become conscious of the divine origin of agriculture and other
institutions associated with it that they held them in such religious
veneration. In course of time, the character of this estate as ‘sub-
stantial’ undergoes modiﬁcations through the working of the civil
law, in particular the administration of justice, as well as through
the working of education, instruction, and religion. These
modiﬁcations, which occur in the other estates also, do not aﬀect
the substantial content of the estate but only its form and the
development of its power of reﬂection.
Addition: In our day the [agricultural] economy is also conducted on meth-
ods devised by reﬂective thinking, i.e. like a factory. This has given it a
character like that of industry and contrary to its natural one. Still, the
agricultural estate will always retain a mode of life which is patriarchal and
the substantial disposition proper to such a life. The human being here
accepts with immediate feeling what is given him and takes what he gets,
thanking God for it and living in faith and trust that this goodness will
continue. What comes to him suﬃces him; once it is consumed, more
comes again. This is the simple attitude of mind not directed towards the
acquisition of riches. It may be described as the attitude of the old nobility
which consumed just what there was. So far as this estate is concerned,
nature does the major part, while individual eﬀort is secondary. In the
business estate, however, it is understanding which is the essential thing,
and natural products can be treated only as raw materials.
Third Part: Ethical Life
194

204. (b) The business estate has the task of giving form to the
products of nature, and for its means of livelihood it is thrown back
on its work, on reﬂection and understanding, and essentially on the
mediation of one person’s needs and work with those of others. For
what this estate produces and enjoys, it has mainly itself, its own
activity, to thank. The task of this estate is subdivided into:
(α) work to satisfy individual needs in a comparatively concrete
way and to supply individual orders—craftsmanship;
(β) work of a more abstract kind, mass-production to satisfy indi-
vidual needs, but needs in more universal demand—manufacture;
(γ) the business of exchange, whereby separate commodities are
exchanged the one for the other, principally through the use of the
universal medium of exchange, money, in which the abstract value of
all goods is actualized—trade.
Addition: In the business estate, the individual is thrown back on himself,
and this feeling of self-hood is most intimately connected with the demand
for a condition in which right is respected. The sense of freedom and order
has therefore arisen above all in towns. The agricultural estate, on the
other hand, has little occasion to think for itself;* what it obtains is the gift
of a stranger, of nature. Its feeling of dependence is fundamental to it, and
with this feeling there is readily associated a willingness to submit to what-
ever may befall it at other people’s hands. The agricultural estate is thus
more inclined to subservience, the business estate to freedom.
205. (c) The universal estate [the estate of civil servants] has for
its task the universal interests of society. It must therefore be freed
from direct labour to meet its needs, either by having private means
or by receiving an allowance from the state which claims its industry,
with the result that private interest ﬁnds its satisfaction in its work
for the universal.
206. The estates, as particularity become objective to itself, are
thus distinguished in this general way in accordance with the con-
cept. But the question of the particular estate to which an individual
is to belong is one on which natural capacity, birth, and other 
circumstances have their inﬂuence, though the essential and ﬁnal
determining factors are subjective opinion and one’s particular arbi-
trary will, which win in this sphere their right, their merit, and their
dignity. Hence what happens here by inner necessity occurs at the
Civil Society
195

same time by the mediation of the arbitrary will, and to the conscious
subject it has the shape of being the work of his own will.
In this respect too there is a conspicuous diﬀerence, in relation to
the principle of particularity and the subject’s arbitrary will,
between the political life of the east and the west, and also between
that of the ancient and the modern world. In the former, the divi-
sion of the whole into estates came about objectively of its own
accord, because it is rational in itself; but the principle of subjec-
tive particularity was at the same time denied its rights, in that, for
example, the allotment of individuals to estates was left to the
rulers, as in Plato’s Republic, Book III [415a–d], or to the accident
of birth, as in the Indian caste-system. Thus subjective particular-
ity was not incorporated into the organization of society as a
whole; it was not reconciled in the whole, and therefore—since as
an essential moment it emerges there in any event—it shows itself
there as something hostile, as a corruption of the social order (see
Remark to § 185). Either it overthrows society, as happened in the
Greek states and in the Roman Republic; or else, should society
preserve itself in being as a force or as a religious authority, for
instance, it appears as inner corruption and complete degener-
ation, as was the case to some extent in Sparta and is now 
altogether the case in India.
But when subjective particularity is upheld by the objective
order in conformity with it and is at the same time allowed its
rights, then it becomes the animating principle of the entire civil
society, of the development alike of thoughtful activity, merit, and
dignity. The recognition and the right that what is made necessary
by reason in civil society and the state shall at the same time be
eﬀected by the mediation of the arbitrary will is the more precise
deﬁnition of what is primarily meant by the general idea
[Vorstellung] of freedom (see § 121).
207. An individual actualizes himself only by entering into exist-
ence [Dasein] as such and hence into determinate particularity; this
means restricting himself exclusively to one of the particular spheres
of need. In this system of estates, the ethical disposition therefore is
that of rectitude and the honour of one’s estate, i.e. the disposition to
make oneself a member of one of the moments of civil society by
one’s own act, through one’s energy, industry, and skill, to maintain
Third Part: Ethical Life
196

oneself in this position, and to provide for oneself only through this
process of mediating oneself with the universal, while in this way
gaining recognition both in one’s own eyes and in the eyes of others.—
Morality has its proper place in this sphere where reﬂection on one’s
doings, as well as the aims of particular need and of welfare, are para-
mount, and where the contingency in satisfying these also makes
contingent and individual acts of assistance into a duty.
At ﬁrst (i.e. especially in youth) an individual chafes at the idea of
deciding upon a particular estate, and looks upon this as a restric-
tion on his universal character and as a necessity imposed on him
purely ab extra. This is because his thinking is still of that abstract
kind which refuses to move beyond the universal and so never
reaches the actual. It does not realize that if the concept is to be
determinate, it must ﬁrst of all proceed to the distinction between
the concept and its reality and thereby into determinacy and 
particularity (see § 7). It is only thus that the concept can win 
actuality and ethical objectivity.
Addition: When we say that a human being must be ‘somebody’ [etwas], we
mean that he should belong to a speciﬁc estate, since to be a somebody
means to have substantial being. A person with no estate is a mere private
person and does not enjoy actual universality. On the other hand, the indi-
vidual in his particularity may take himself as the universal and presume
that by entering an estate he is surrendering himself to an indignity. This
is the false idea that in attaining a determinacy necessary to it, a thing is
restricting and surrendering itself.
208. The principle of this system of needs, which is that of the
personal particularity of knowledge and volition, contains universal-
ity in and for itself, the universality of freedom, only abstractly and
therefore as the right of property. At this point, however, this right is
no longer merely a right in itself but has attained its recognized 
actuality in the protection of property through the administration of
justice.
B. The Administration of Justice
209. The relativity of the reciprocal relation between needs 
and the work to satisfy these is ﬁrst of all reﬂected into itself in
inﬁnite personhood, in abstract right. But it is this very sphere of 
Civil Society
197

relativity—as that of education—which gives abstract right deter-
minate existence as something universally recognized, known, and
willed, and as having a validity and an objective actuality mediated by
this known and willed character.
It is part of education, of thinking as the consciousness of the indi-
vidual in the form of universality, that the I comes to be appre-
hended as a universal person in which all are identical. A human
being counts as a human being in virtue of his humanity, not
because he is a Jew, Catholic, Protestant, German, Italian, etc.
This consciousness, for which thought is what is valid, is of inﬁnite
importance. It is defective only when it becomes ﬁxed—e.g. as
cosmopolitanism—in opposition to the concrete life of the state.
Addition: From one point of view, it is through the working of the system
of particularity that right comes to be externally necessary as protection
for particular interests. Even though its source is the concept, right none-
theless only becomes something existent because this is useful for people’s
needs. To become conscious in thought of his right, one must be trained
to think and not remain attached to the merely sensuous. We must invest
objects with the form of universality and similarly we must direct our will-
ing according to a universal principle. It is only after human beings have
devised numerous needs and after their acquisition has become inter-
twined with satisfaction, that laws can be framed.
210. The objective actuality of right consists, ﬁrst, in its existence
for consciousness, in its being known in some way or other; secondly,
in its possessing the power which the actual possesses, in its being
valid, and so also in its becoming known as universally valid.
(a) Right as Law
211. What is right in itself [an sich] becomes law [Gesetz] when it
is posited [gesetzt] in its objective existence, i.e. when thinking makes
it determinate for consciousness and makes it known as what is right
and valid; and in acquiring this determinate character, right becomes
positive right as such.
To posit something as universal, i.e. to bring it before conscious-
ness as universal, is, I need hardly say, to think (compare Remarks
to §§ 13 and 21). Thereby its content is reduced to its simplest
form and so is given its ﬁnal determinacy. In becoming law, what
is right acquires for the ﬁrst time not only the form proper to its
Third Part: Ethical Life
198

universality, but also its true determinacy. Hence making a law is
not to be represented as merely the expression of a rule of behav-
iour valid for everyone, though that is one moment in legislation;
the more important moment, the inner essence of the matter, is
knowledge of the content in its determinate universality.
Since it is only animals which have their law as instinct, while
human beings alone have law as custom, even customary rights con-
tain the moment of being thoughts and being known. Their
diﬀerence from law consists in the fact that they are known only in
a subjective and contingent way, with the result that in themselves
they are less determinate and the universality of thought is less
clear in them; in addition, knowledge of this or that aspect of right,
or of right as such, is the contingent property of the few. The sup-
position that customary right, on the strength of its character as
custom, possesses the privilege of having become part of life is a
delusion, since the valid laws of a nation do not cease to be its 
customs by being written and codiﬁed—and besides, it is as a rule
precisely those versed in the deadest of topics and the deadest of
thoughts who talk nowadays of ‘life’ and of ‘becoming part of life’.
When a people begins to acquire even a little education, its cus-
tomary rights must soon come to be collected and put together.
Such a collection is a legal code, but one which, as a mere collec-
tion, is markedly formless, indeterminate, and fragmentary. The
main diﬀerence between it and a code properly so-called is that in
the latter the principles of right in their universality, and so in their
determinacy, have been apprehended in terms of thought and
expressed. The law of the land, or common law, of England is con-
tained, as is well known, in statutes (formal laws) and in so-called
‘unwritten’ laws. This unwritten law, however, is likewise written,
and knowledge of it may, and indeed must, be acquired simply by
reading the numerous quartos which it ﬁlls. The monstrous con-
fusion, however, which prevails both in English law and its
administration is graphically portrayed by those acquainted with
the matter.* In particular, they comment on the fact that, since
this unwritten law is contained in court verdicts and judgements,
the judges are continually legislators. The authority of precedent is
binding on them, since their predecessors have done nothing but
give expression to the unwritten law; and yet they are just as 
much exempt from its authority, because they are themselves
Civil Society
199

repositories of the unwritten law and so have the right to criticize
previous judgements and pronounce whether they accorded with
the unwritten law or not.
A similar confusion might have arisen in the legal system of the
later Roman Empire owing to the diﬀerent but authoritative
judgements of all the famous jurists. An Emperor* met the situ-
ation, however, by an ingenious expedient when, by what was
called the Law of Citations, he set up a kind of college of jurists
who were long deceased. There was a President, and the majority
vote was accepted.82
No greater insult* could be oﬀered to a civilized people or to its
lawyers than to deny them ability to codify their law; for such abil-
ity cannot be that of constructing a legal system with a novel con-
tent, but only that of apprehending, i.e. grasping in thought, the
content of existing laws in its determinate universality and then
applying them to particular cases.
Addition: The sun and the planets have their laws too, but they do not
know them. Barbarians are governed by impulses, customs, and feelings,
but they have no consciousness of this. When right is posited [as law] and
is known, every contingency of feeling and opinion vanishes together with
the form of revenge, sympathy, and selﬁshness, and in this way right
attains for the ﬁrst time its true determinacy and is given its due honour.
Only through the discipline of being apprehended does right ﬁrst become
capable of universality. In the course of applying the laws, collisions occur,
and in dealing with these the judge’s understanding has its proper scope;
this is quite inevitable, because otherwise carrying out the law would be
something thoroughly mechanical. But to go so far as to get rid of colli-
sions altogether by leaving much to the judge’s discretion is a far worse
solution, because collisions are also intrinsic to thought, to conscious
thinking and its dialectic, while the mere decision of a judge would be
arbitrary.
It is generally alleged in favour of customary right that it is ‘living’, but
this vitality, i.e. the identity of the determination with the subject, is not
the whole essence of the matter. Right must be known by thought, it must
be a system in itself, and only as such can it be recognized in civilized
nations. The recent denial that peoples have a vocation to codify their laws
is not only an insult; it also implies the absurdity of supposing that not a
single individual has been endowed with skill enough to bring into a
Third Part: Ethical Life
200
82 Hegel’s reference: See Hugo, Textbook of the History of Roman Law [1799 edn.],
§ 354.

coherent system the endless mass of existing laws. The truth is that it is
just systematization, i.e. elevation to the universal, which our time is
pressing for without any limit. A similar view is that collections of judge-
ments, like those available in the Corpus Juris,* are far superior to a legal
code worked out in the most general way. The reason alleged is that such
judgements always retain a certain particularity and a certain reminiscence
of history which people are unwilling to sacriﬁce. But the mischievousness
of such collections is made clear enough by the practice of English law.
212. Due to this identity of being-in-itself [Ansichsein] and posited
being [Gesetztsein], the only right that is binding is what is law
[Gesetz]. In being posited [as law], right acquires determinate exist-
ence. Into such existence there may enter the contingency of self-will
and other particular circumstances; hence there may be a discrepancy
between the content of the law and what is right in itself.
In positive right, therefore, what is legal [gesetzmäßig] is the
source of our knowledge of what is right, or, more exactly, of our
legal rights [Rechtens]. Thus the science of positive right is to that
extent a historical science with authority as its guiding principle.
Anything over and above this historical study is matter for the
understanding and concerns the collection of laws, their
classiﬁcation on external principles, deductions from them, their
application to fresh details, etc. When the understanding meddles
with the nature of the thing itself, its theories, e.g. of criminal law,
show what its deductive argumentation can concoct.
The science of positive right has not only the right, but even the
inescapable duty, to study given determinations of right, to
deduce from their positive data their progress in history, their
applications and subdivisions, down to the last detail, and to
exhibit their implications. On the other hand, if, after all these
deductions have been proved, the further question about the
rationality of a speciﬁc determination of right is raised, those who
busy themselves with these pursuits should at least not be
absolutely astonished, even if the question may seem to them to be
beside the point.
With this Remark, compare what was said in the Remark to § 3
about ‘understanding’ the law.
213. Right gains determinate existence [Dasein] in the ﬁrst place
when it has the form of being posited [as law]; it also becomes 
Civil Society
201

determinate in content by being applied both to the material of civil
society (i.e. to the endlessly growing complexity and subdivision of
social relations and the diﬀerent species of property and contract
within the society) and also to ethical relations based on the heart, on
love and trust, though only insofar as these involve abstract right as
one of their aspects (see § 159). Morality and moral commands con-
cern the will in its most personal subjectivity and particularity, and
so cannot be a matter for positive legislation. Further material for the
determinate content of law is provided by the rights and duties
which have their source in the administration of justice itself, in the
state, and so forth.
Addition: In the higher relationships of marriage, love, religion, and the
state, the only aspects which can become the subject of legislation are
those whose nature is such that they are capable of having an external
dimension. Still, in this respect there is a wide diﬀerence between the laws
of diﬀerent peoples. The Chinese, for instance, have a law requiring a hus-
band to love his ﬁrst wife more than his other wives. If he is convicted of
doing the opposite, corporal punishment follows. Similarly, the legislation
of the ancients in earlier times was full of precepts about loyalty and
integrity which are unsuited by nature to legal enactment because they fall
wholly within the ﬁeld of the inner life. It is only in the case of the oath,
whereby things are left to conscience, that integrity and loyalty must be
taken into account as something substantial.
214. But apart from being applied to the particular, right by being
posited [as law] becomes applicable to the individual case. Hence 
it enters the sphere where quantity, not the concept, is the principle
of determination. This is the sphere of the quantitative for itself or
of the quantitative as the determination of value in the exchange of
qualitative items. In this sphere, the concept merely lays down a gen-
eral limit, within which vacillation is still possible. This vacillation
must be terminated, however, in the interest of getting something
done, and for this reason there is a place within that limit for contin-
gent and arbitrary decisions.
The purely positive side of law lies chieﬂy in this focusing of the
universal not merely on the particular, but on the individual case,
i.e. in its immediate application. Reason cannot determine, nor can
the concept provide any principle whose application could decide,
whether justice requires for an oﬀence (i) a corporal punishment
of forty lashes or thirty-nine, or (ii) a ﬁne of ﬁve dollars [Taler] or
Third Part: Ethical Life
202

four dollars and twenty-three groschen, etc.,* or (iii) imprison-
ment of a year or three hundred and sixty-four, three, etc., days,
or a year and one, two, or three days. And yet injustice is done at
once if there is one lash too many, or one dollar or one cent, one
week in prison or one day, too many or too few.
Reason itself requires us to recognize that contingency, contra-
diction, and semblance have a sphere and a right of their own,
restricted though it be, and it is irrational to strive to resolve and
rectify contradictions within that sphere. Here the only interest
present is that something be actually done, that the matter be set-
tled and decided somehow, no matter how (within a certain limit).
This decision belongs to abstract subjectivity, to formal self-cer-
tainty, which may simply rely either on its ability to terminate
deliberation and settle the matter so that it is thereby settled, or on
such reasons for decision as keeping to round numbers or always
adopting, say, thirty-nine.*
It makes no diﬀerence if the law does not provide the ultimate
determinacy required by actual life but leaves this to the judge’s
discretion, while limiting him by a maximum and minimum: 
for each maximum and minimum is itself a round number of this
kind and so does not exempt the judge from making a ﬁnite,
purely positive, decision, but of necessity leaves such a decision 
to him.
Addition: There is one essential element in law and the administration of
justice which contains a measure of contingency and which arises from the
fact that the law is a universal determination which has to be applied to the
individual case. If you wished to declare yourself against this contingency,
you would be talking in abstractions. The magnitude of a person’s punish-
ment, for example, cannot be made to correspond to any determination of
the concept [of punishment], and the decision made, whatever it be, is
from this point of view always arbitrary. But this contingency is itself 
necessary, and if you argue against having a code at all on the ground that
any code is incomplete, you are overlooking just that element of law in
which completion is not to be achieved and which therefore must just be
accepted as it stands.
(b) The Existence [Dasein] of the Law
215. If laws are to have a binding force, it follows that, in view of
the right of self-consciousness (see § 132 and the Remark thereto)
they must be made universally known.
Civil Society
203

To hang the laws so high that no citizen could read them (as
Dionysius the Tyrant did)* is injustice of one and the same kind
as to bury them in row upon row of learned tomes, collections of
dissenting judgements and opinions, records of customs, etc., and
in a dead language too, so that knowledge of the law of the land is
accessible only to those who have made it their professional study.
Rulers who have given a law of the land to their peoples in the
form of a well-arranged and clear-cut legal code—or even a mere
formless collection of laws, like Justinian’s83—have been the
greatest benefactors of their peoples and have received thanks and
praise for their beneﬁcence. But the truth is that their work was at
the same time a great act of justice.
Addition: The legal profession, possessed of a special knowledge of the 
law, often claims this knowledge as its monopoly and refuses to allow 
any layman to discuss the subject. Physicists similarly have taken 
amiss Goethe’s theory of colours* because he did not belong to 
their craft and was a poet into the bargain. But we do not need to be shoe-
makers to know if our shoes ﬁt, and just as little have we any need to 
be professionals to acquire knowledge of matters of universal interest.
Right is concerned with freedom, the worthiest and holiest thing in
humanity, the thing a human being must know if it is to have obligatory
force for him.
216. For a public legal code, simple universal determinations are
required, and yet the nature of the ﬁnite material to which law is
applied leads to further determinations ad inﬁnitum. On the one
hand, the law ought to be a comprehensive whole, closed and 
complete; and yet, on the other hand, the need for further determin-
ations is continual. But since this antinomy arises only through the
specialization of universal principles, which remain ﬁxed and
unchanged, the right to a complete legal code remains unimpaired,
like the right that these simple general principles should be capable
of being laid down and understood apart and in distinction from
their specialization.
A principal source of complexity in legislation is the gradual intru-
sion of reason, of what is rightful in and for itself, into primitive
institutions which contain unjust features and so are purely histor-
ical survivals. This occurred in Roman law, as was remarked above
Third Part: Ethical Life
204
83 See explanatory notes to pp. 20, 201 [pp. 329, 352 below]. [S.H.]

(see Remark to § 180), in medieval feudal law, etc. It is essential to
notice, however, that the very nature of the ﬁnite material to which
law is applied entails that the application to it even of inherently
universal determinations that are rational in and for themselves
entails an inﬁnite progression.84
It is misunderstanding which has given rise alike to the demand—
one that is chieﬂy a German sickness—that a legal code should be
something absolutely complete, incapable of any further determin-
ation, and also to the argument that because a code is incapable of
such completion, therefore we ought not to produce something
‘incomplete’, i.e. we ought not to produce a code at all. The mis-
understanding rests in both cases on a misconception of the nature
of a ﬁnite subject-matter like civil law [Privatrecht], whose so-
called ‘completeness’ is a perennial approximation to complete-
ness, on a misconception of the diﬀerence between the universal of
reason and the universal of the understanding, and also on the appli-
cation of the latter to the material of ﬁnitude and individuality
which goes on for ever.—‘The greatest enemy of the good is the
better’* is the utterance of healthy common sense [Menschenverstand]
against the common sense of vain argumentation and abstract
reﬂection.
Addition: Completeness means the exhaustive collection of every single
thing pertaining to a given ﬁeld, and no science or branch of knowledge
can be complete in this sense. Now if we say that philosophy or any one of
the sciences is incomplete, we are not far from holding that we must wait
until the deﬁciency is made up, since the best part may still be wanting.
But take up this attitude and advance is impossible, either in geometry,
which seems to be a closed science although new propositions do arise, or
in philosophy, which is always capable of further specialization even
though its subject is the universal Idea. In the past, the universal law
always consisted of the Ten Commandments; now we can see at once that
not to lay down the law ‘Thou shalt not kill’, on the ground that a legal
code cannot be complete, is an obvious absurdity. Any code could be still
better—no eﬀort of reﬂection is required to justify this aﬃrmation; we can
think of the best, ﬁnest, and noblest as still better, ﬁner, and nobler. But a
big old tree puts forth more and more branches without thereby becoming
a new tree; though it would be silly to refuse to plant a tree at all simply
because it might produce new branches.
Civil Society
205
84 See explanatory note to p. 89 [p. 339 below]. [S.H.]

217. Right in itself passes over in civil society into law. My indi-
vidual right, whose existence has hitherto been immediate and
abstract, now acquires the signiﬁcance of being recognized, of having
its existence in the existent will and knowledge of everyone. Hence
property acquisitions and transfers must thus be undertaken and
concluded only in the form which that existence gives to them. In
civil society, property rests on contract and on the formalities which
make ownership capable of proof and valid in law.
Original, i.e. immediate, titles and means of acquisition (see § 54ﬀ.)
are in fact discarded in civil society and appear only as individual
contingencies or as limited moments. It is either feeling, refusing
to move beyond the subjective, or reﬂection, clinging to its abstract
essences, which casts formalities aside, while the dead understand-
ing may for its part cling to formalities instead of the real thing and
multiply them indeﬁnitely.
Moreover, the course of education is the long and hard labour
to free a content from its sensuous and immediate form, endow it
with its appropriate form of thought, and thereby give it simple
and adequate expression. It is because this is the case that when
the development of right is just beginning, ceremonies and for-
malities are highly elaborate and count rather as the thing itself
than as its symbol. Thus even in Roman law, a number of deter-
minations and especially phrases were retained from old-fashioned
ceremonial usages, instead of being replaced by determinations of
thought and phrases adequately expressing them.*
Addition: Law is right posited as what it is in itself. I possess something,
own a property, which I occupied when it was ownerless. This possession
must now further be recognized and posited as mine. Hence in civil soci-
ety formalities arise in connection with property. Boundary stones are
erected as a sign for others to recognize. Entries are made in mortgage and
property registers. Most property in civil society is held on contract, and
contractual forms are ﬁxed and determinate. Now we may have an antip-
athy to formalities of this kind and we may suppose that they only exist to
bring in money to the authorities; we may even regard them as something
oﬀensive and a sign of mistrust because they impair the validity of the
saying: ‘A man is as good as his word.’ But the formality is essential
because what is right in itself must also be posited as right. My will is a
rational will; it has validity, and its validity should be recognized by others.
At this point, then, my subjectivity and that of others must be set aside
Third Part: Ethical Life
206

and the will must achieve the security, stability, and objectivity which can
be attained only through such formalities.
218. Since property and personality have legal recognition and
validity in civil society, wrongdoing now becomes an infringement,
not merely of what is subjectively inﬁnite, but of the universal thing
[Sache] whose existence is inherently stable and strong. Hence a new
attitude arises: the action is seen as a danger to society and thereby
the magnitude of the wrongdoing is increased.85 On the other hand,
however, the fact that society has become strong and sure of itself
diminishes the external importance of the injury and so leads to a
greater leniency in its punishment.
The fact that an injury to one member of society is an injury to all
others does not alter the nature of the crime according to its con-
cept, but it does alter it in respect of its outward existence as an
injury done, an injury which now aﬀects the ideas [Vorstellung]
and consciousness of civil society as a whole, not merely the exist-
ence of the person who is immediately injured. In heroic times, as
we see in the tragedy of the ancients,* the citizens did not feel
themselves injured by wrongs which members of the royal houses
did to one another.
In itself, crime is an inﬁnite injury [see § 95]; but as an existence
[Dasein] it must be measured in quantity and quality (see § 96),
and since its existence is determined as aﬀecting the idea and con-
sciousness of the validity of the laws, its danger to civil society is a
determinant of the magnitude of a crime, or even one of its quali-
tative characteristics.
Now this quality or magnitude varies with the state of civil soci-
ety; and this is the justiﬁcation for sometimes attaching the penalty
of death to a theft of a few pence or a turnip, and at other times a
light penalty to a theft of a hundred or more times that amount. If
we consider its danger to society, this seems at ﬁrst sight to aggra-
vate the crime; but in fact it is just this which has been the prime
cause of the lessening of its punishment. A penal code, then, is pri-
marily the child of its age and the state of civil society at the time.
Addition: It seems to be a contradiction that a crime committed in society
appears more heinous and yet is punished more leniently. But while it
Civil Society
207
85 Compare Remarks to PR §§ 96 and 319.

would be impossible for society to leave a crime unpunished, since that
would be to posit it as right, still since society is sure of itself, a crime must
always be something singular in comparison, something unstable and
exceptional. The very stability of society gives a crime the status of some-
thing purely subjective which seems to be the product rather of natural
impulse than of a deliberate will. In this light, crime acquires a milder
status, and for this reason its punishment too becomes milder. If society is
still unstable in itself, then an example must be made by inﬂicting punish-
ments, since punishment is itself an example over against the example of
crime. But in a society which is internally strong, the commission of 
crime is something so feeble that its annulment must be commensurable
with its feebleness. Harsh punishments, therefore, are not unjust in and
for themselves but are related to contemporary conditions. A criminal
code cannot hold good for all time, and crimes are only semblances of 
reality [Scheinexistenzen] which may draw on themselves a greater or lesser
degree of repudiation.
(c) The Court of Law
219. By taking the form of law, right steps into existence [Dasein].
It is then something on its own account [für sich], and in contrast
with particular willing and opinion about what is right, it is self-
subsistent and has to assert itself as something universal. The task of
knowing and actualizing what is right in particular cases without the
subjective feeling of particular interest falls to a public authority—
the court of law.
The historical origin of the judge and his court may have had the
form of a patriarchal relationship or of force or free choice; but this
makes no diﬀerence to the concept of the thing. To regard the intro-
duction of a legal system as no more than an optional act of grace or
favour on the part of monarchs and governments (as Herr von
Haller does in his Restoration of Political Science)* is a piece of the
mere thoughtlessness which has no inkling of the point at issue in a
discussion of law and the state. The point is that legal and political
institutions are rational and therefore necessary in and for them-
selves, and the question of the form in which they arose or were
introduced is irrelevant to a consideration of their rational basis.
At the other extreme from this view is the crude notion that the
administration of justice is now, as it was in the days when might
was right, an improper exercise of force, a suppression of freedom,
and a despotism. The administration of justice must be regarded
Third Part: Ethical Life
208

as a duty, just as much as a right, of the public authority; and as a
right, it does not depend at all on whether or not individuals
choose to entrust it to an authority.
220. When the right against crime has the form of revenge (see
§ 102), it is only right in itself, not right in the form of what is lawful
[Rechtens], i.e. it is not just [gerecht] in its existence. Instead of the
injured party, the injured universal now comes on the scene, and this
has its proper actuality in the court of law. It takes over the pursuit
and the penalizing of crime, and this pursuit consequently ceases to
be the subjective and contingent retribution of revenge and is trans-
formed into the genuine reconciliation of right with itself, i.e. into
punishment. Objectively, this is the reconciliation of the law with
itself; through the annulment [Aufheben] of the crime, the law
restores itself and thereby actualizes its authority. Subjectively, it is
the reconciliation of the criminal with himself, i.e. with the law
known by him as his own and as valid for him and his protection;
when this law is executed upon him, he himself ﬁnds in this process
the satisfaction of justice and nothing save his own act.
221. A member of civil society has the right to stand in a court of
law and, correspondingly, the duty to acknowledge the jurisdiction
of the court and accept its decision as ﬁnal when his own rights are
in dispute.
Addition: Since any individual has the right to stand in court, he must also
know what the law is or otherwise this privilege would be useless to him.
But it is also his duty to stand trial. Under the feudal system, the power-
ful often refused to stand trial. They deﬁed the court and alleged that the
court was wrong to demand their appearance. These conditions, however,
contravened the very idea of a court. Nowadays monarchs have to recog-
nize the jurisdiction of the court in their private aﬀairs, and in free states
they commonly lose their case.
222. In court the speciﬁc character which rightness acquires is
that it must be demonstrable. When parties go to law, they are put in
the position of having to make good their evidence and their claims
and to make the judge acquainted with the facts. These steps in a legal
process are themselves rights, and their course must therefore be ﬁxed
by law. They also constitute an essential part of jurisprudence.
Addition: A person may be indignant if a right which he knows he has is
refused him because he cannot prove it. But if I have a right, it must at the
Civil Society
209

same time be a posited right. I must be able to explain and prove it, and its
validity can only be recognized in society if its rightness in itself is also
posited.
223. These steps in a legal process are subdivided continually
within no ﬁxed limits into more and more actions, each being distinct
in itself and a right. Hence a legal process, in itself in any case a
means, now begins to be something external to its end and contrasted
with it. This long course of formalities is a right of the parties at law
and they have the right to traverse it from beginning to end. Still, it
may be turned into an evil, and even an instrument of injustice, and
for this reason it must by law be made the duty of the parties to
submit themselves to a simple court (a court of arbitration or court
of the ﬁrst instance* [Schieds-, Friedensgericht]) and to the attempt to
reconcile their diﬀerences out of court, in order that they—and right
itself, as the substance of the thing and so the thing really at issue—
may be protected against legal processes and their misuse.
Equity involves a departure from formal rights owing to moral or
other considerations and is concerned primarily with the content
of the lawsuit. A court of equity, however, comes to mean a 
court which decides in an individual case without insisting on the
formalities of a legal process or, in particular, on the objective evi-
dence which the letter of the law may require. Further, it decides
on the merits of the individual case as a unique one, not in the
interest of making a legal disposition that would be universal.
224. Amongst the rights of the subjective consciousness are not
only the publication of the laws (see § 215) but also the possibility of
knowing that the law has been actualized in a particular case (of
knowing the course of the proceedings, the legal argument, etc.).
This is the right to the public administration of justice.* The reason for
this is that a trial is in itself an event of universal validity, and
although the particular content of the action aﬀects the interests of
the parties alone, its universal content, i.e. the right at issue and the
judgement thereon, aﬀects the interests of everybody.
If the members of the bench deliberate amongst themselves about
the judgement which they are to deliver, such deliberations express
particular opinions and views and so naturally are not public.
Addition: It is straightforward common sense to hold that the public
administration of justice is right and just. A strong reason against such
Third Part: Ethical Life
210

publicity has always been the elevated status of justices; they are unwilling
to sit in public and they regard themselves as a sanctuary of right which
laymen are not to enter. But an integral part of right and justice is the
conﬁdence which citizens have in them, and it is this which requires 
that legal proceedings shall be public. The right of publicity depends on
the fact that (i) the aim of the court is justice, which as universal should
come before the universal (i.e. before the public), and (ii) it is through pub-
licity that the citizens become convinced that the judgement is actually
just.
225. By the judgement of the court, the law is applied to an indi-
vidual case, and the work of judgement has two distinct aspects: ﬁrst,
ascertainment of the nature of the case as an immediate individual
occurrence (e.g. whether a contract, etc., has been made, whether an
oﬀence has been committed, and if so by whom) and, in criminal
cases, reﬂection to determine the substantial, criminal, character of
the deed (see Remark to § 119); secondly, the subsumption of the
case under the law that right must be restored. Punishment in 
criminal cases falls under this law. Decisions on these two diﬀerent
aspects are diﬀerent functions.*
In the Roman judicial system, this distinction of functions
appeared in that the praetor pronounced judgement on the
assumption that the facts were so and so, and then appointed a
special judex to inquire into the facts.*
In English law, it is left to the insight or option of the prosecu-
tor to determine the precise character of a criminal act (e.g.
whether it is murder or manslaughter) and the court is powerless
to alter the indictment if it ﬁnds the prosecutor’s choice wrong.86
226. First, the conduct of the entire process of enquiry and of the
legal actions between the parties (these themselves being rights—see
§ 222), and then also the second of the aspects of the work of judge-
ment mentioned in the previous Paragraph, are tasks which properly
belong to the judge at law. He is the organ of the law, and the case
must be prepared for him in such a way as to make possible its sub-
sumption under some principle; that is to say, it must be stripped of
its apparent, empirical, character and raised to a recognized fact of a
general type.
Civil Society
211
86 See W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England (1765–9), iv. 333.

227. The ﬁrst aspect of the work of judgement, i.e. the knowledge
of the facts of the case as an immediate individual occurrence, and
the description of its general character, involves in itself no pro-
nouncement on points of law. This is knowledge attainable by any
educated person. In settling the character of an action, the subjective
moment, i.e. the agent’s insight and intention (see the Second Part
[esp. § 119]), is the essential thing; and apart from this, the proof
depends not on objects of reason or abstractions of the understand-
ing, but only on individual details and circumstances, objects of sen-
suous intuition and subjective certainty, and therefore does not
contain in itself any absolutely objective determination. It follows
that judgement on the facts lies in the last resort with subjective con-
viction and conscience (animi sententia),* while the proof, resting as it
does on the statements and assurances of others, receives its ﬁnal
though subjective veriﬁcation from the oath.
In this matter it is of the ﬁrst importance to ﬁx our eyes on the
type of proof here in question and to distinguish it from knowl-
edge and proof of another sort. To establish by proof a determin-
ation of reason, like the concept of right itself, means to apprehend
its necessity, and so demands a method other than that requisite
for the proof of a geometrical theorem. Further, in this latter case,
the ﬁgure is determined by the understanding and made abstract
in advance according to a rule. But in the case of something empir-
ical in content, such as a fact, the material of knowledge is a given
sensuous intuition and subjective sense-certainty, and statements
and assurances about such material. It is then a question of 
drawing conclusions and putting two and two together out of 
depositions of that kind, attestations and other details, etc. The
objective truth which emerges from material of this kind and 
the method appropriate to it leads, when attempts are made to
determine it objectively for itself, to half-proofs and then—as a
perfectly logical consequence, which at the same time involves
formal illogicality—to extraordinary punishments. But such objec-
tive truth means something quite diﬀerent from the truth of a
determination of reason or a proposition whose content the under-
standing has already determined abstractly for itself. To show that
the strictly legal character of a court covers competence to ascer-
tain this sort of truth about empirical events and thereby properly
Third Part: Ethical Life
212

qualiﬁes a court for this task and so both gives it an exclusive right
in itself to perform it and lays on it the necessity of performing it—
this was a principal factor in the consideration of how far decisions
on points of fact, as well as on points of law, should be assigned to
formal courts of law.
Addition: No grounds can be adduced for supposing that the judge, i.e. the
legal expert, should be the only person to establish how the facts lie, for
ability to do so depends on general, not on purely legal, education.
Determination of the facts of the case depends on empirical details, on
depositions about what happened, and on similar perceptions, or again on
facts from which inferences can be drawn about the deed in question and
which make it probable or improbable. Here then, it is a certainty which
should be attained, not truth in the higher sense which is something
utterly eternal. Here such certainty is subjective conviction, or conscience,
and the problem is: What form should this certainty take in a court of law?
The demand, commonly made in German law, that a criminal should con-
fess his guilt, has this to be said for it, that the right of self-consciousness
thereby attains a measure of satisfaction; consciousness must chime in
with what the judges pronounce, and it is only when the criminal has con-
fessed that the judgement loses its alien character so far as he is concerned.
But a diﬃculty arises here, because the criminal may deny his guilt, and
the interest of justice may be jeopardized. If, on the other hand, the sub-
jective conviction of the judge is to hold good, some hardship is once more
involved, because the accused is no longer being treated as a free human
being. Now the middle term between these extremes is trial by jury, which
meets the demand that the declaration of guilt or innocence shall spring
from the soul of the criminal.*
228. When judgement is pronounced—so far as the function of
judgement is the subsumption under the law of the qualiﬁed case—
the right due to the parties on the score of their self-consciousness is
preserved in relation to the law because the law is known and so is
the law of the parties themselves, and in relation to the subsumption,
because the trial is public. But when a decision is made concerning
the particular, subjective, and external content of the case (knowl-
edge of which falls under the ﬁrst of the aspects described in § 225),
this right is satisﬁed by the conﬁdence which the parties feel in the
subjectivity of those who make the decision. This conﬁdence is based
primarily on the equality between them and the parties in respect of
their particularity, i.e. their social position [Stand], etc.
Civil Society
213

The right of self-consciousness, the moment of subjective freedom,
may be regarded as the fundamental thing to keep before us in
considering the necessity for publicity in legal proceedings and for
the so-called jury-courts* [Geschworenengerichte], and this in the
last resort is the essence of what may be advanced in favour of
these institutions on the score of their utility. Other points of view
and reasoning about their several advantages and disadvantages
may give rise to arguments and counter-arguments, but reasoning
of this kind, like all reasoning from grounds, is either secondary
and inconclusive, or else drawn from other and perhaps higher
spheres. It may be the case that if the administration of justice
were in the hands of purely professional courts, and there were no
other institutions [such as juries], it would in theory be managed
just as well, if not better. This may be so, but even if this possibil-
ity could be raised to probability, or even necessity, it still does 
not matter, for on the other side there is always the right of self-
consciousness, which insists on its claims and would ﬁnd that they
are not satisﬁed.
Owing to the character of the entire body of the laws, knowl-
edge both of what is right and also of the course of legal proceed-
ings may become, together with the capacity to pursue one’s
rights, the property of a profession [Stand] which makes itself an
exclusive clique by the use of a terminology like a foreign tongue
to those whose rights are at issue. If this happens, the members of
civil society, who depend for their livelihood on their activity, on
their own knowledge and will, are kept strangers to the law, not only
to those parts of it aﬀecting their most personal and intimate
aﬀairs, but also to its substantial and rational basis, right itself, and
the result is that they become the wards, or even in a sense the
bondsmen, of the legal profession. They may indeed have the
right to appear in court in person and to ‘stand’ there (in judicio
stare), but their bodily presence is a triﬂe if their spirits are not to
be there also, if they are not to follow the proceedings with their
own knowledge, and if the justice they receive remains in their
eyes a fate pronounced ab extra.
229. In civil society, the Idea is lost in particularity and has fallen
asunder with the separation of inward and outward. In the adminis-
tration of justice, however, civil society returns to its concept, to the
Third Part: Ethical Life
214

unity of the universal in itself with subjective particularity, although
here the latter is only the particularity of the individual case and the
universality in question is that of abstract right. The actualization of
this unity through its extension to the whole range of particularity is
(i) the speciﬁc function of the police, though the uniﬁcation which it
eﬀects is only relative; (ii) the corporation actualizes the unity as a
limited but concrete totality.*
Addition: In civil society, universality is necessity only. When we are dealing
with human needs, right as such is the only ﬁrm point. But this right—a
merely restricted sphere—relates only to the protection of what I have; wel-
fare is something external to right as such. This welfare, however, is an
essential end in the system of needs. Hence the universal, which in the ﬁrst
instance is right only, has to be extended over the whole ﬁeld of particular-
ity. Justice is a big thing in civil society. Given good laws, a state can
ﬂourish, and freedom of property is a fundamental condition of its prosper-
ity. Still, since I am inextricably involved in particularity, I have a right to
claim that, in this association with other particulars, my particular welfare
too shall be promoted. Regard should be paid to my welfare, to my particu-
larity, and this is done through the police and the corporation.
C. The Police and the Corporation
230. In the system of needs, the livelihood and welfare of every
individual is a possibility whose actual attainment is just as much con-
ditioned by his arbitrary and particular nature as by the objective
system of needs. Through the administration of justice, oﬀences
against property or personality are annulled. But the right actually
present in the particular requires, ﬁrst, that contingent hindrances to
one aim or another be removed, and undisturbed safety of person
and property be attained; and secondly, that the securing of every
individual’s livelihood and welfare be treated and actualized as a
right, i.e. that particular welfare as such be so treated.
(a) Police [or the public authority]
231. Inasmuch as the particular will is still the principle govern-
ing the choice of this or that end, the universal authority by which
security is ensured remains in the ﬁrst instance, (a) restricted to the
sphere of contingencies, and (b) an external organization.
232. Crime is contingency as the arbitrary willing of evil, and 
this is what the universal authority must prevent or bring to justice.
Civil Society
215

But, crime apart, the permissible arbitrary willing in actions that are
rightful for themselves and in the private use of property also comes
into external relation with other individuals, as well as with other
public organizations established for realizing a common end. This
universal aspect makes private actions a matter of contingency which
escapes my control and which either does or may injure others and
wrong them.
233. There is here only a possibility of injury; but the fact that no
harm is done is, as a contingency, equally no more than a possibility.
This is the aspect of wrong that is inherent in such actions; it is the
ultimate reason for police control and penal justice.
234. The relations between external existents fall into the inﬁnite
of the understanding; there is, therefore, no intrinsic boundary
between what is and what is not injurious, even where crime is con-
cerned, or between what is and what is not suspicious, or between
what is to be forbidden or subjected to supervision and what is to be
exempt from prohibition, from surveillance and suspicion, from
enquiry and the demand to render an account of itself. These details
are determined by custom, the spirit of the rest of the constitution,
contemporary conditions, the crisis of the hour, and so forth.
Addition: Here nothing hard and fast can be laid down and no absolute
boundaries can be drawn. Everything here is personal; subjective opinion
enters in, and the spirit of the constitution and the dangers of the time
have to provide precision of detail. In time of war, for instance, many a
thing, harmless at other times, has to be regarded as harmful. As a result
of this presence of contingency, of personal arbitrariness, the public
authority acquires a measure of odium. When reﬂective thinking is very
highly developed, the public authority may tend to draw into its orbit
everything it possibly can, for in everything some aspect may be found
which might make it dangerous. In such circumstances, the public author-
ity may set to work very pedantically and inconvenience the day-to-day
life of people. But however great this annoyance, no objective line can be
drawn here.
235. In the indeﬁnite multiplication and interconnection of 
day-to-day needs, (a) the acquisition and exchange of the means to
their satisfaction—on whose unhindered possibility everyone relies—
and (b) the need to make the related enquiries and transactions as
short as possible give rise to factors which are of common interest,
Third Part: Ethical Life
216

and when one person occupies himself with these his work is at the
same time done for all. This situation also produces means and
arrangements which may be of use to the community as a whole.*
These universal activities and arrangements of common utility call
for oversight and care on the part of the public authority.
236. The diﬀering interests of producers and consumers may
come into collision with each other; and although the right relation
between them on the whole comes about automatically, still its adjust-
ment also requires a control which stands above both and is con-
sciously undertaken. The right to exercise such control in individual
cases (e.g. in the ﬁxing of the prices of the commonest necessaries of
life) depends on the fact that, by being publicly oﬀered for sale,
goods in quite universal daily demand are oﬀered not so much to an
individual as such but rather to a universal purchaser, the public; and
thus both the defence of the public’s right not to be defrauded, and
also the management of goods inspection, may lie, as a common con-
cern, with a public authority. But public care and direction are most
of all necessary in the case of the larger branches of industry, because
these are dependent on conditions abroad and on combinations of
distant circumstances which cannot be grasped as a whole by the
individuals tied to these industries for their living.
At the other extreme to freedom of trade and commerce in civil
society is public organization to provide for everything and deter-
mine everyone’s labour—take, for example, in ancient times the
labour on the pyramids and the other huge monuments in Egypt
and Asia which were constructed for public ends, labour that was
not mediated by the individual worker’s particular arbitrary will
and particular interest. Such particular interest invokes freedom
of trade and commerce against control from above; but the more
blindly it sinks into self-seeking aims, the more it requires such
control to bring it back to the universal. Control is also necessary
to diminish the danger of upheavals arising from clashing interests
and to abbreviate the period in which their tension might be eased
through the working of a necessity of which they themselves know
nothing.
Addition: The oversight and care exercised by the public authority aims at
being a middle term between an individual and the universal possibility
[aﬀorded by society] of attaining individual ends. It has to undertake
Civil Society
217

street-lighting, bridge-building, the pricing of daily necessities, and the
care of public health. In this connection, two main views predominate at
the present time. One asserts that the superintendence of everything prop-
erly belongs to the public authority, the other that the public authority has
nothing at all to settle here because everyone will direct his conduct
according to the needs of others. The individual must have a right to work
for his bread as he pleases, but the public also has a right to insist that
essential tasks shall be properly done. Both points of view must be
satisﬁed, and freedom of trade should not be such as to jeopardize the 
general good.
237. Now while the possibility of sharing in the general wealth is
open to individuals and is assured to them by the public authority,
still it is subject to contingencies on the subjective side (quite apart
from the fact that this assurance must remain incomplete), and the
more it presupposes skill, health, capital, and so forth as its condi-
tions, the more is it so subject.
238. Initially, the family is the substantial whole whose function it
is to provide for the individual on his particular side by giving him
either the means and the skill necessary to enable him to earn his
living out of the resources of society, or else subsistence and mainten-
ance in the event of his incapacity. But civil society tears the individ-
ual from his family ties, estranges the members of the family 
from one another, and recognizes them as self-subsistent persons.
Further, for the paternal soil and external inorganic nature from
which the individual formerly derived his livelihood, it substitutes its
own soil and subjects the permanent existence of the entire family
itself to dependence on itself and to contingency. Thus the individ-
ual becomes a son of civil society which has as many claims upon him
as he has rights against it.
Addition: To be sure, the family has to provide bread for its members, 
but in civil society the family is something subordinate and only lays 
the foundations; its eﬀective range is no longer so comprehensive. Civil
society is rather the tremendous power which draws people into itself 
and claims from them that they work for it, owe everything to it, and 
do everything by its means. If a human being is to be a member of civil
society in this sense, he has rights and claims against it just as he had 
rights and claims in the family. Civil society must protect its members 
and defend their rights, while its rights impose duties on every one of its
members.
Third Part: Ethical Life
218

239. In its character as a universal family, civil society has the
right and duty of superintending and inﬂuencing education, inas-
much as education bears upon the child’s capacity to become a
member of society. Society’s right here is paramount over the arbi-
trary and contingent preferences of parents, particularly in cases
where education is to be completed not by the parents but by others.
Likewise, society must make communal arrangements to this end so
far as is practicable.
Addition: The line which demarcates the rights of parents from those of
civil society is very hard to draw here. Parents usually suppose that in the
matter of education they have complete freedom and may arrange every-
thing as they like. The chief opposition to any form of public education
usually comes from parents and it is they who talk and make an outcry
about teachers and schools because they have a faddish dislike of them.
Nonetheless, society has a right to act on tested principles and to compel
parents to send their children to school, to have them vaccinated, and so
forth. The disputes that have arisen in France* between the advocates of
state supervision and those who demand that education shall be free, i.e.
at the option of the parents, are relevant here.
240. Similarly, society has the right and duty of acting as trustee
to those whose extravagance destroys the security of their own or
their families’ subsistence. It must substitute for extravagance the
pursuit of the ends of society and the individuals concerned.
Addition: There was an Athenian law compelling every citizen to give an
account of his source of livelihood.87 Nowadays we take the view that this
is nobody’s business but one’s own. Of course every individual is from one
point of view independent [für sich], but he is also a member of the system
of civil society, and while everyone has the right to demand subsistence
from it, it must at the same time protect him from himself. It is not simply
starvation which is at issue; the further end in view is to prevent the for-
mation of a pauperized rabble [Pöbel]. Since civil society is responsible for
feeding its members, it also has the right to press them to provide for their
own livelihood.
241. Not only caprice, however, but also contingencies, physical
conditions, and factors grounded in external circumstances (see 
§ 200) may reduce people to poverty. The poor still have the needs
common to civil society, and yet since society has withdrawn from
Civil Society
219
87 See Herodotus, Histories, 2. 177.

them the natural means of acquisition (see § 217) and broken the
bond of the family—in the wider sense of the clan (see § 181)—their
poverty leaves them more or less deprived of all the advantages of
society, the opportunity of acquiring skill or education of any kind,
as well as the administration of justice, health-care, and often even
the consolations of religion, and so forth. The public authority takes
the place of the family where the poor are concerned in respect not
only of their immediate want but also of laziness of disposition,
malignity, and the other vices which arise out of their plight and
their sense of injustice.
242. Poverty and, in general, the distress of every kind to which
every individual is exposed, even in his natural environment, has a
subjective side which demands similarly subjective aid, arising both
from the special circumstances of a particular case and also from love
and sympathy. This is the place where morality ﬁnds plenty to do
despite all public organization. Subjective aid, however, both in itself
and in its operation, is dependent on contingency and consequently
society strives to make it less necessary, by discovering the general
causes of penury and general means of its relief, and by organizing
relief accordingly.
Casual almsgiving and casual endowments, e.g. for the burning of
lamps before holy images, etc., are supplemented by public poor-
houses, hospitals, street-lighting, and so forth. There is still quite
enough left over and above these things for charity to do on its
own account. A false view is implied both when charity insists on
having this poor relief reserved solely to the particularity of 
feeling and the contingency of its knowledge and charitable 
disposition, and also when it feels injured or oﬀended by univer-
sal regulations and ordinances which are obligatory. Public 
social conditions are on the contrary to be regarded as all the more
perfect the less (in comparison with what is arranged publicly) is
left for an individual to do by himself according to his particular
opinion.
243. When civil society is in a state of unimpeded activity, it is
engaged in expanding internally in population and industry. The
amassing of wealth is intensiﬁed by generalizing (a) the linkage of
people by their needs and (b) the methods of preparing and distrib-
uting the means to satisfy these needs, because it is from this double
Third Part: Ethical Life
220

process of generalization that the largest proﬁts are derived. That is
one side of the picture. The other side is the subdivision and restric-
tion of particular work. This results in the dependence and distress of
the class [Klasse] tied to work of that sort, and these again entail the
inability to feel and enjoy the broader freedoms and especially the
spiritual beneﬁts of civil society.
244. When the standard of living of a large mass of people falls
below a certain subsistence level—a level regulated automatically as
the one necessary for a member of the society—and when there is a
consequent loss of the sense of right and wrong, of integrity and of
honour in maintaining oneself by one’s own activity and work, the
result is the creation of a rabble of paupers [Pöbel]. At the same time
this brings with it, at the other end of the social scale, conditions
which greatly facilitate the concentration of disproportionate wealth
in a few hands.
Addition: The lowest subsistence level, that of a rabble of paupers, is ﬁxed
automatically, but the minimum varies considerably in diﬀerent countries.
In England, even the very poorest believe that they have rights; this is
diﬀerent from what satisﬁes the poor in other countries. Poverty in itself
does not turn people into a rabble; a rabble is created only when there is
joined to poverty a disposition of mind, an inner indignation against the
rich, against society, against the government, etc. A further consequence
of this attitude is that through their dependence on chance people become
frivolous and idle, like the Neapolitan lazzaroni for example.* In this way
there is born in the rabble the evil of lacking suﬃcient honour to secure
subsistence by its own labour and yet at the same time of claiming the right
to receive subsistence. Against nature a human being can claim no right,
but once society is established, poverty immediately takes the form of a
wrong done to one class [Klasse] by another. The important question of
how poverty is to be abolished is one that agitates and torments modern
society in particular.
245. When the masses begin to decline into poverty, (a) the
burden of maintaining them at their ordinary standard of living
might be directly laid on the wealthier class, or they might receive
the means of livelihood directly from other public sources of wealth
(e.g. from rich hospitals, monasteries, and other foundations). In
either case, however, the needy would receive subsistence directly,
not by means of their work, and this would violate the principle of
civil society and the feeling of individual independence and honour
Civil Society
221

in its individual members. (b) As an alternative, they might be given
subsistence indirectly through being given work, i.e. the opportunity
to work. In this event the volume of production would be increased,
but the evil consists precisely in an excess of production and in the
lack of a proportionate number of consumers who are themselves also
producers, and thus it is simply intensiﬁed by both of the methods
(a) and (b) by which it is sought to alleviate it. It hence becomes
apparent that despite an excess of wealth civil society is not rich
enough, i.e. its own resources are insuﬃcient, to check excessive
poverty and the creation of a penurious rabble.
In the example of England we may study these phenomena on a
large scale and also in particular the results of poor-rates, immense
foundations, unlimited private beneﬁcence, and above all the abo-
lition [Aufheben] of the corporations. There, particularly in
Scotland, the most direct measure against poverty and especially
against the loss of shame and honour—the subjective bases of
society—as well as against laziness and extravagance, etc., the
begetters of the rabble, has turned out to be to leave the poor to
their fate and instruct them to beg from the public.
246. This inner dialectic of civil society thus drives it—or at any
rate drives a speciﬁc civil society—to push beyond its own limits and
seek markets, and so its necessary means of subsistence, in other
lands which are either deﬁcient in the goods it has overproduced, or
else generally backward in creative industry, etc.
247. The condition of the principle of family life is the earth, the
ﬁrm and solid ground. Similarly, the natural element for industry,
animating its outward movement, is the sea. In pursuit of gain, by
exposing such gain to danger industry at the same time rises above it;
instead of remaining rooted to the soil and the limited circles of civil
life with its pleasures and desires, it embraces the element of ﬂuidity,
danger, and destruction. Further, the sea is the greatest means of
communication, and trade by sea creates commercial connections
between distant countries and so relations involving contractual
rights. At the same time, commerce of this kind is the most potent
instrument of education [Bildung], and through it trade acquires its
world-historical signiﬁcance.
Rivers are not natural boundaries, which is what they have been
accounted to be in modern times. On the contrary, it is truer to say
Third Part: Ethical Life
222

that they, and the sea likewise, link people together. Horace is
wrong when he says: ‘A prudent god has sundered the lands by the
estranging sea.’* The proof of this is provided not merely by river
basins which are inhabited by a tribe or people, but also, for ex-
ample, by the earlier relations between Greece, Ionia, and Magna
Graecia, between Brittany and Britain, between Denmark and
Norway, Sweden, Finland, Livonia,* etc., relations, further, which
are especially striking in contrast with the comparatively slight
intercourse between the inhabitants of the coastal territories and
those of the interior. To realize what an instrument of education
lies in the link with the sea, consider countries where creative indus-
try ﬂourishes and contrast their relation to the sea with that of
countries which have eschewed seafaring and which, like Egypt
and India, have become stagnant and immersed in the most fright-
ful and scandalous superstition. Notice also how all great and
enterprising peoples press onward to the sea.
248. This far-ﬂung connecting link aﬀords the means for the col-
onizing activity—sporadic or systematic—to which the mature civil
society is driven and by which it supplies to a part of its population
a return to the family principle in a new land and so also supplies
itself with a new demand and ﬁeld for its industry.
Addition: Civil society is thus driven to found colonies. Increase of popu-
lation alone has this eﬀect, but it is due in particular to the appearance of
a number of people who cannot secure the satisfaction of their needs by
their own labour once production exceeds the needs of consumers.
Sporadic colonization is particularly characteristic of Germany. The
colonists move to America or Russia and remain there with no connections
to their fatherland [Vaterland], to which therefore they aﬀord no beneﬁt.
The second and entirely diﬀerent type of colonization is the systematic;
the state initiates it, is aware of the proper method of carrying it out and
regulates it accordingly. This type was common amongst the ancients,
particularly the Greeks. Hard work was not the business of the citizens in
Greece, since their energy was directed rather to public aﬀairs. So if the
population increased to such an extent that there might be diﬃculty in
providing for it, the young people would be sent away to a new district,
sometimes speciﬁcally chosen, sometimes left to chance discovery. In
modern times, colonists have not been allowed the same rights as the
inhabitants of the motherland [Mutterland], and the result of this situation
has been wars and ﬁnally independence, as may be seen in the history of
the English and Spanish colonies. Colonial emancipation proves to be of
Civil Society
223

the greatest advantage to the mother country [Mutterstaat], just as the
emancipation of slaves turns out to the greatest advantage of the owners.
249. While the public authority must also undertake the higher
directive function of providing for the interests which lead beyond
the borders of its society (see § 246), its primary purpose is to actu-
alize and maintain the universal contained within the particularity of
civil society, and its control takes the form of an external system and
organization for the protection and security of particular ends and
interests en masse, inasmuch as these interests subsist only in this
universal. In accordance with the Idea, particularity itself makes this
universal, which is present in its immanent interests, the end and
object of its own willing and activity. In this way the ethical returns to
civil society as something immanent in it; this constitutes the speciﬁc
character of the corporation [Korporation].
(b) The Corporation
250. In virtue of the substantiality of its natural and family life,
the agricultural estate has immediately within itself the concrete uni-
versal in which it lives. The estate of civil servants is universal in
character and so has the universal for itself as its ground and as the
aim of its activity. The estate between them, the business estate, is
essentially concentrated on the particular, and hence it is to it that
corporations are specially appropriate.
251. Work in civil society is divided, in accordance with its par-
ticular nature, into diﬀerent branches. The inherent [an sich] likeness
of particulars to one another comes into existence in an association, as
something common to its members. Hence a selﬁsh purpose,
directed towards its particular self-interest, apprehends and evinces
itself at the same time as universal; and a member of civil society is
in virtue of his own particular skill a member of a corporation, whose
universal purpose is thus wholly concrete* and no wider in scope
than the purpose involved in the [particular] trade, its distinctive
business and interest.
252. In accordance with this determination, a corporation has the
right, under the surveillance of the public authority, (a) to look after
its own interests within its own sphere, (b) to admit members,
qualiﬁed objectively by the requisite skill and rectitude, to a number
Third Part: Ethical Life
224

determined by the general context, (c) to protect its members against
particular contingencies, (d) to provide the education requisite to ﬁt
others to become members. In short, its right is to come on the scene
as a second family for its members, while civil society can only be an
indeterminate sort of family because it is universal and farther
removed from individuals and their particular exigencies.
The corporation member is to be distinguished from a day
labourer or from a person who is prepared to undertake casual
employment on a single occasion. The former who is, or will
become, master of his craft, is a member of the association not for
casual gain on single occasions but for the whole range and univer-
sality of his particular livelihood.
Privileges [Privilegien], in the sense of the rights of a branch of
civil society organized into a corporation, are distinct in meaning
from privileges proper in the etymological sense.* The latter are
contingent exceptions to the universal law; the former, however,
are just legally established determinations that lie in the particular
nature of an essential branch of society itself.
253. In the corporation, the family has its stable basis in the sense
that its livelihood is assured there, conditionally upon capability, i.e.
it has stable resources (see § 170). In addition, both the capability and
livelihood are recognized, with the result that the corporation
member needs no further external evidence to demonstrate his 
skill and his regular income and subsistence, i.e. the fact that he is
somebody.88 It is also recognized that he belongs to a whole which is
itself an organ of society in general, and that he is interested and
actively engaged in promoting the less selﬁsh end of this whole. Thus
he has his honour in his estate [Stand].
The institution of corporations corresponds, on account of its
securing of resources, to the introduction of agriculture and pri-
vate property in another sphere (see Remark to § 203).
When complaints are made about the luxury of the business
classes [Klassen] and their passion for extravagance—which have
as their concomitant the creation of a rabble of paupers (see § 244)—
we must not forget that besides its other causes (e.g. increasing
mechanization of labour) this phenomenon has an ethical ground,
Civil Society
225
88 See Addition to PR § 207.

as was implied in what was said above. Unless he is a member of
an authorized corporation (and it is only by being authorized that
an association becomes a corporation), an individual is without the
honour of his estate [Standesehre], his isolation reduces his business
to mere self-seeking, and his livelihood and satisfaction become
insecure. Consequently, he has to try to gain recognition for him-
self by giving external proofs of success in his business, and to
these proofs no limits can be set. He cannot live in the manner 
of his estate, for no estate really exists for him, since in civil 
society that which is common to particular persons really exists
only if it is legally constituted and recognized. Hence he cannot
achieve for himself a way of life that is appropriate to his estate and
more universal.
Within the corporation the help which poverty receives loses its
contingent character and the unjust humiliation associated with it.
The wealthy perform their duties to their fellow associates and
thus riches cease to inspire either pride or envy, pride in their
owners, envy in others. In these conditions rectitude obtains its
proper recognition and honour.
254. The so-called ‘natural’ right of exercising one’s skill 
and thereby earning what there is to be earned is restricted within 
the corporation only insofar as that skill is therein made rational.
That is to say, it becomes freed from personal opinion and contin-
gency, saved from endangering either oneself or others, recognized,
guaranteed, and at the same time elevated to conscious activity for a
common end.
255. As the family was the ﬁrst, so the corporation is the second
ethical root of the state, the one planted in civil society. The former
contains the moments of subjective particularity and objective uni-
versality in a substantial unity. But these moments are sundered in
civil society to begin with: on the one side there is the particularity
of need and satisfaction, reﬂected into itself, and on the other side the
universality of abstract right. In the corporation these moments are
united in an inward fashion, so that in this union particular welfare
is present as a right and is actualized.
The sanctity of marriage and the honour of corporation member-
ship are the two moments around which the disorganization of
civil society revolves.*
Third Part: Ethical Life
226

Addition: The consideration behind the abolition of corporations in recent
times is that the individual should fend for himself. But we may grant this
and still hold that corporation membership does not alter an individual’s
obligation to earn his living. In modern states, the citizens have only a
restricted share in the universal business of the state, yet it is essential to
provide ethical individuals with a universal activity over and above their
private business. This universal activity, which the modern state does not
always oﬀer people, is found in the corporation. We saw earlier [§ 199] that
in fending for himself a member of civil society is also working for others.
But this unconscious necessity is not enough; it is in the corporation that
it ﬁrst changes into a known and thoughtful ethical mode of life. Of course
corporations must fall under the higher surveillance of the state, because
otherwise they would ossify, build themselves in, and decline into a mis-
erable system of guilds. In and for itself, however, a corporation is not a
closed guild; its purpose is rather to bring an isolated trade into the ethical
order and elevate it to a sphere in which it gains strength and honour.
256. The end of the corporation is restricted and ﬁnite, while the
public authority was an external organization involving a separation
and merely relative identity [of universal and particular]. The end of
the former and the externality and relative identity of the latter ﬁnd
their truth in the end which is universal in and for itself and its
absolute actuality. Hence the sphere of civil society passes over into
the state.
The town is the seat of the civil life of business. There reﬂection
arises, turns in upon itself, and pursues its individuating task; each
individual maintains himself in and through his relation to others
who, like himself, are persons possessed of rights. The country, on
the other hand, is the seat of an ethical life resting on nature and the
family. Town and country thus constitute the two—still ideal
[ideell]—moments from which the state emerges as their true ground.
The scientiﬁc proof of the concept of the state is this development of
ethical life from its immediacy through the divisions of civil society
to the state, which then reveals itself as their true ground. A proof in
philosophical science can only be a development of this kind.
Since the state appears as a result in the development of the
scientiﬁc concept through displaying itself as the true ground [of
the earlier phases], that mediation and semblance cancel them-
selves in favour of immediacy. In actuality, therefore, the state as
such is rather what is ﬁrst. It is within the state that the family is
Civil Society
227

ﬁrst developed into civil society, and it is the Idea of the state itself
which divides itself into these two moments. Through the devel-
opment of civil society, the substance of ethical life acquires 
its inﬁnite form, which contains in itself these two moments: 
(1) inﬁnite diﬀerentiation to the point at which the interiority
[Insichsein] of self-consciousness is for itself [für sich], and (2) the
form of universality involved in education, the form of thought
whereby spirit is objective and actual to itself as an organic total-
ity in laws and institutions which are its will as thought.
sub-section 3
THE STATE
257. The state is the actuality of the ethical Idea. It is ethical spirit
as the substantial will manifest and clear to itself, knowing and think-
ing itself, accomplishing what it knows and insofar as it knows it.
The state exists immediately in custom [Sitte], mediately in individual
self-consciousness, knowledge, and activity, while self-consciousness in
virtue of its disposition ﬁnds in the state, as its essence and the end
and product of its activity, its substantial freedom.
The Penates are inward gods, gods of the underworld; the spirit of
a people [Volksgeist] (Athena for instance) is the divine, knowing
and willing itself. Family piety is feeling, ethical behaviour
directed by feeling; political virtue is the willing of the end that is
thought and that is in and for itself.
258. The state is rational in and for itself inasmuch as it is the
actuality of the substantial will which it possesses in the particular
self-consciousness that has been raised to its universality. This sub-
stantial unity is an absolute unmoved end in itself, in which freedom
comes into its supreme right. On the other hand, this ﬁnal end has
supreme right against the individual, whose supreme duty is to be a
member of the state.
If the state is confused with civil society, and if its speciﬁc end is
laid down as the security and protection of property and personal
freedom, then the interest of individuals as such becomes the 
ultimate end of their association, and it follows that membership
of the state is something optional. But the state’s relation to the
individual is quite diﬀerent from this. Since the state is objective
Third Part: Ethical Life
228

spirit, it is only as one of its members that the individual himself
has objectivity, truth, and ethical life. Uniﬁcation as such is itself
the true content and aim, and the individual’s destiny is to live a
universal life. His further particular satisfaction, activity, and
mode of conduct have this substantial and universally valid life as
their starting point and their result.
Rationality, taken generally and in the abstract, consists in the
thoroughgoing unity of the universal and the individual.
Rationality, concrete in the state, consists (a) so far as its content
is concerned, in the unity of objective freedom (i.e. freedom of the
universal or substantial will) and subjective freedom (i.e. freedom
of the individual in his knowing and in his volition of particular
ends); and consequently, (b) so far as its form is concerned, in
self-determining action in accordance with laws and principles
which are thoughts and so universal. This Idea is the being of spirit
that is eternal and necessary in and for itself.
But if we ask what is or has been the historical origin of the state
in general, still more if we ask about the origin of any particular
state, of its rights and institutions, or again if we enquire whether
the state originally arose out of patriarchal conditions or out of fear
or trust, or out of corporations, etc., or ﬁnally if we ask in what
light the basis of the state’s rights has been conceived and con-
sciously established, whether this basis has been supposed to be
positive divine right, or contract, custom, etc.—all these ques-
tions are no concern of the Idea of the state. We are here dealing
exclusively with the philosophical science of the state, and from
that point of view all these things are mere appearance and there-
fore matters for history. So far as the authority of any existing state
has anything to do with reasons, these reasons are derived from
the forms of right authoritative within it.
The philosophical treatment of these topics is concerned only
with their inward side, with the thought of their concept. The merit
of Rousseau’s89 contribution to the search for this concept is that,
by adducing the will as the principle of the state, he is adducing a
principle which has thought both for its form and its content, a
principle which is indeed thinking itself, not a principle, like the
social instinct, for instance, or divine authority, which has thought
The State
229
89 See ﬁrst explanatory note to p. 47 [p. 334 below]. [S.H.]

as its form only. Unfortunately, however, as Fichte90 did later, he
takes the will only in the determinate form of the individual will,
and he regards the universal will not as the will’s rationality in and
for itself, but only as a ‘general’ will which proceeds from this
individual will as from a conscious will. The result is that he
reduces the union of individuals in the state to a contract and
therefore to something based on their arbitrary wills, their opin-
ion, and their capriciously given express consent; and the under-
standing proceeds to draw further consequences which destroy
the divine aspect of the state, which has being in and for itself,
together with its majesty and absolute authority. For this reason,
when these abstract conclusions came into power, they aﬀorded
for the ﬁrst time in human history the prodigious spectacle of the
overthrow of the constitution of an actual great state and its com-
plete reconstruction ab initio on the basis of pure thought alone,
after the overthrow of all existing and given conditions. The will
of its re-founders was to give it what they intended to be a purely
rational basis, but it was only abstractions that were being used, in
which the Idea was lacking, and the experiment was turned into
the most terrible and drastic event.*
Confronted with the principle of the individual will, we must
remember the fundamental conception that the objective will is
that which is rational in itself or in its concept, whether or not it is
recognized by individuals and aﬃrmed by their arbitrary wills. We
must remember that its opposite, i.e. knowing and willing, or sub-
jective freedom (the only thing contained in the principle of the
individual will) comprises only one moment, and therefore a one-
sided moment, of the Idea of the rational will, i.e. of the will which
is rational solely because what it is in itself it also is for itself.
The opposite to thinking of the state as something to be known
and apprehended as rational for itself is taking the externality of
appearance—i.e. the contingencies of want, the need for protec-
tion, strength, riches, etc.—not as moments in the state’s histor-
ical development, but as its substance. Here again what constitutes
the principle of cognition is the individual in isolation—yet not
the thought of this individuality, but instead only empirical indi-
viduals, with all their contingent characteristics, their strength and
Third Part: Ethical Life
230
90 See Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Foundations of Natural Right (1796–7), trans. M. Baur
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), § 17 [pp. 165–82]. [S.H.]

weakness, riches and poverty, etc. This notion of ignoring that
which is inﬁnite and rational in and for itself in the state and
excluding thought from apprehension of its inward nature has
assuredly never been put forward in such an unadulterated form
as in Herr von Haller’s Restoration of Political Science.91 I say
‘unadulterated’ [unvermischt], because in all other attempts to grasp
the essence of the state, no matter on what one-sided or superﬁcial
principles, this very intention of comprehending the state ration-
ally has brought with it thoughts, i.e. universal determinations.
Herr von Haller, however, has not only consciously renounced the
rational content of the state, as well as the form of thought, but he
has even gone on with passionate fervour to inveigh against the
form and the content so set aside. Part of what Herr von Haller
assures us is the ‘widespread’ eﬀect of his principles, this
Restoration undoubtedly owes to the fact that, in his exposition, he
has deliberately dispensed with thought altogether, and has delib-
erately kept his whole book all of a piece with its lack of thought.
For in this way he has eliminated the confusion and disorder which
lessen the force of an exposition in which the contingent is treated
along with hints of the substantial, in which the purely empirical
and external are mixed with a reminiscence of the universal and
rational, and in which in the midst of wretched inanities the reader
is now and again reminded of the loftier sphere of the inﬁnite. For
the same reason again his exposition is consistent. He takes as the
essence of the state, not what is substantial but the sphere of con-
tingency, and consistency in dealing with a sphere of that kind
amounts to the complete inconsistency of utter thoughtlessness
which jogs along without heed, and is just as much at home now
with the exact opposite of what it approved a moment ago.92
The State
231
91 See explanatory note to p. 208 [p. 353 below]. [S.H.]
92 Hegel’s note: I have described the book suﬃciently to show that it is of an original
kind. There might be something noble in the author’s indignation taken by itself, since
it was kindled by the false theories, mentioned above, emanating principally from
Rousseau, and especially by the attempt to realize them in practice. But to save himself
from these theories, Herr von Haller has gone to the other extreme by dispensing with
thought altogether and consequently it cannot be said that there is anything of intrinsic
value in his virulent hatred of all laws and legislation, of all formally and legally deter-
mined right. The hatred of law, of right made determinate in law, is the shibboleth
whereby fanaticism, imbecility, and the hypocrisy of good intentions are clearly and
infallibly recognized for what they are, disguise themselves as they may.

Addition: The state in and for itself is the ethical whole, the actualization
of freedom; and it is an absolute end of reason that freedom should be
actual. The state is spirit on earth and consciously realizing itself there. 
In nature, on the other hand, spirit actualizes itself only as its own other,
Third Part: Ethical Life
232
Originality like Herr von Haller’s is always a curious phenomenon, and for those of
my readers who are not yet acquainted with his book I will quote a few specimen passages.
This is how he lays down (vol. I, pp. 342ﬀ.) his most important basic proposition: ‘Just
as, in the inorganic world, the greater dislodges the less and the mighty the weak, . . . so
in the animal kingdom, and then amongst human beings, the same law recurs in nobler’
(often, too, surely in ignobler?) ‘forms’, and ‘this, therefore, is the eternal, unalterable,
ordinance of God, that the mightier rules, must rule, and will always rule.’ It is clear
enough from this, let alone from what follows, in what sense ‘might’ [Macht] is taken
here. It is not the might of justice and ethics, but only the contingent force of nature. Herr
von Haller then goes on (vol. I, pp. 365ﬀ.) to support this doctrine on various grounds,
amongst them that ‘nature with amazing wisdom has so ordered it that the mere sense of
personal superiority irresistibly ennobles the character and encourages the development
of just those virtues which are most necessary for dealing with subordinates’. He asks
with a great elaboration of scholastic rhetoric ‘whether it is the strong or the weak in the
kingdom of science who more misuse their trust and their authority in order to achieve
their petty selﬁsh ends and the ruin of the credulous; whether to be a past master in legal
learning is not to be a pettifogger, a leguleius,* one who cheats the hopes of unsuspecting
clients, who makes white black and black white, who misapplies the law and makes it a
vehicle for wrongdoing, who brings to beggary those who need his assistance and rends
them as the hungry vulture rends the innocent lamb’, etc., etc. Herr von Haller forgets
here that the point of this rhetoric is to support his proposition that the rule of the might-
ier is an everlasting ordinance of God; so presumably it is by the same ordinance that the
vulture rends the innocent lamb, and that hence those who are mighty through knowl-
edge of the law are quite right to treat the credulous people who need their protection as
the weak and to empty their pockets. It would be too much, however, to ask that two
thoughts should be put together where there is really not a single one.
It goes without saying that Herr von Haller is an enemy of codes of law. In his view, civil
laws are, on the one hand, in principle ‘unnecessary, because they follow self-evidently
from the laws of nature’. If people had remained satisﬁed with ‘self-evidence’ as the 
basis of their thinking, then they would have been spared the endless labour devoted,
since ever there were states, to legislation and legal codes, and which is still devoted
thereto and to the study of legal right. ‘On the other hand, laws are not exactly promul-
gated for private individuals, but as instructions to lower judges, acquainting them with
the will of the high court.’ Apart from that, the provision of law-courts is (vol. I, pp.
297ﬀ. and all over the place) not a state duty, but a favour, help rendered by the more
powerful, and ‘quite supererogatory’; it is not the most perfect method of guaranteeing
people’s rights; on the contrary, it is an insecure and uncertain method, ‘the only one left
to us by our modern lawyers. They have deprived us of the other three methods, of 
just those which lead most swiftly and surely to the goal, those which, unlike law- 
courts, friendly nature has given to humanity for the safeguarding of our rightful free-
dom.’ And these three methods are—what do you suppose?—‘(1) Personal acceptance
and inculcation of the law of nature; (2) Resistance to injustice; (3) Flight, when there is
no other remedy.’ Lawyers are unfriendly indeed, it appears, in comparison with the
friendliness of nature! ‘But’ (vol. I, p. 292) ‘the natural, divine, law, given to everyone
by nature the all-bountiful, is: Honour everyone as your equal’ (on the author’s prin-
ciples this should read ‘Honour not the person who is your equal, but the one who is

as spirit asleep. Only when it is present in consciousness, when it knows
itself as a really existent object, is it the state. In considering freedom, the
starting-point must be not individuality, the individual self-consciousness,
but only the essence of self-consciousness; for whether people know it or
not, this essence realizes itself as a self-subsistent power in which single
individuals are only moments. It is God’s way in the world that the state
The State
233
mightier’); ‘oﬀend no one who does not oﬀend you; demand from him nothing but what
he owes’ (but what does he owe?); ‘nay more, love your neighbour and serve him when
you can’. The ‘implanting of this law’ is to make legislation and a constitution
superﬂuous. It would be curious to see how Herr von Haller makes it intelligible why
legislation and constitutions have appeared in the world despite this ‘implanting’.
In vol. III, pp. 362ﬀ., the author comes to the ‘so-called national liberties’, by which
he means the laws and constitutions of nations. Every legally constituted right is in this
wide sense of the word a ‘liberty’. Of these laws he says, inter alia, that ‘their content is
usually very insigniﬁcant, although in books a high value may be placed on documentary
liberties of that kind’. When we then realize that the author is speaking here of the
national liberties of the German Imperial Estates, of the English nation (e.g. Magna
Carta ‘which is little read, and on account of its archaic phraseology still less under-
stood’, the Bill of Rights,* and so forth), of the Hungarian nation, etc., we are surprised
to ﬁnd that these possessions, formerly so highly prized, are only insigniﬁcant; and no
less surprised to learn that it is only in books that these nations place a value on laws
whose cooperation has entered into every coat that is worn and every crust that is eaten,
and still enters into every day and hour of the lives of everyone.
To carry quotation further, Herr von Haller speaks particularly ill (vol. I, pp. 185ﬀ.) of
the Prussian General Legal Code,* because of the ‘incredible’ inﬂuence on it of unphilo-
sophical errors (though in this instance at any rate the fault cannot be ascribed to Kant’s
philosophy, a topic on which Herr von Haller is at his most bitter), especially where it
speaks of the state, the resources of the state, the end of the state, the head of the state, his
duties, and those of civil servants, and so forth. Herr von Haller ﬁnds particularly mischiev-
ous ‘the right of defraying the expenses of the state by levying taxes on the private wealth
of individuals, on their businesses, on goods produced or consumed. Under those circum-
stances, neither the king himself (since the resources of the state belong to the state and are
not the private property of the king), nor the Prussian citizens can call anything their own,
neither their person nor their property; and all subjects are bondslaves to the law, since
they may not withdraw themselves from the service of the state.’
In this welter of incredible crudity, what is perhaps most comical of all is the emotion
with which Herr von Haller describes his unspeakable pleasure in his discoveries (vol. I,
Preface)—‘a joy such as only the friend of truth can feel when after honest searching he
is certain that he has found as it were’ (yes indeed: ‘as it were’ is right!) ‘the voice of
nature, the very word of God’. (The truth is that the word of God very clearly distin-
guishes its revelations from the voices of nature and natural humanity.) ‘The author
could have sunk to the ground in sheer wonderment, a stream of joyful tears burst from
his eyes, and living religious feeling sprang up in him there and then.’ Herr von Haller
might have discovered by his ‘religious feeling’ that he should rather bewail his condi-
tion as the hardest chastisement of God. For the hardest thing which humanity can
experience is to be so far excluded from thought and reason, from respect for the laws,
and from knowing how inﬁnitely important and divine it is that the duties of the state
and the rights of the citizens, as well as the rights of the state and the duties of the citi-
zens, should be deﬁned by law—to be so far excluded from all this that absurdity can
foist itself upon him as the word of God.

should exist. The basis of the state is the power of reason actualizing itself
as will. In considering the Idea of the state, we must not have our eyes on
particular states or on particular institutions. Instead we must consider the
Idea, this actual God, by itself. On some principle or other, any state may
be shown to be bad, this or that defect may be found in it; and yet, at any
rate if one of the developed states of our epoch is in question, it has in it
the moments essential to its existence. But since it is easier to ﬁnd defects
than to understand the aﬃrmative, we may readily fall into the mistake of
looking at individual aspects of the state and so forgetting its inward
organic life. The state is no ideal work of art; it stands on earth and so in
the sphere of caprice, chance, and error, and bad behaviour may disﬁgure
it in many respects. But the ugliest person, or a criminal, or an invalid, or
a cripple, is still always a living human being. The aﬃrmative, life, subsists
despite such defects, and it is this aﬃrmative factor which is our theme
here.
259. The Idea of the state
(a) has immediate actuality and is the individual state as a self-
relating organism—the constitution or right within the state [inneres
Staatsrecht];
(b) passes over into the relation of the individual state to other
states—right between states [äußeres Staatsrecht];
(c) is the universal Idea as a genus and as an absolute power in
relation to individual states—the spirit which gives itself its actual-
ity in the process of world-history.
Addition: The state in its actuality is essentially an individual state, and
beyond that a particular state. Individuality is to be distinguished from
particularity. The former is a moment in the very Idea of the state, while
the latter belongs to history. States as such are independent of one
another, and therefore their relation to one another can only be an exter-
nal one, so that there must be a third thing standing above them to bind
them together. Now this third thing is the spirit which gives itself actual-
ity in world-history and is the absolute judge of states. Several states may
form an alliance to be a sort of court with jurisdiction over others, and
there may be confederations of states, like the Holy Alliance* for example,
but these are always relative only and restricted, like any ‘perpetual
peace’.* 93 The one and only absolute judge, which makes itself authorita-
tive against the particular and at all times, is the spirit in and for itself
which manifests itself in the history of the world as the universal and as
the genus there operative.
Third Part: Ethical Life
234
93 See Remark and Addition to PR § 324 and Remark to PR § 333.

A. Right within the State
260. The state is the actuality of concrete freedom. But concrete
freedom consists in this, that personal individuality and its particular
interests not only achieve their complete development and gain recog-
nition of their right for itself (as they do in the sphere of the family
and civil society) but, for one thing, they also pass over of their own
accord into the interest of the universal, and, for another thing, they
know and will the universal; they even recognize it as their own sub-
stantial spirit; they take it as their end and aim and are active in its
pursuit. The result is that the universal does not prevail or achieve
completion except along with particular interests and through the
cooperation of particular knowing and willing; and individuals like-
wise do not live as private persons for their own ends alone, but in the
very act of willing these they will the universal for the sake of the uni-
versal, and their activity is consciously aimed at the universal end.
The principle of modern states has prodigious strength and depth
because it allows the principle of subjectivity to progress to its culmin-
ation in the self-suﬃcient extreme of personal particularity, and yet at
the same time brings it back to the substantial unity and so maintains
this unity in the principle of subjectivity itself.
Addition: The Idea of the state in modern times has a special character in
that the state is the actualization of freedom not in accordance with subjec-
tive whim but in accordance with the concept of the will, i.e. in accordance
with its universality and divinity. Imperfect states are those in which the
Idea of the state is still veiled and where its particular determinations have
not yet attained free self-subsistence. In the states of classical antiquity,
universality was indeed present, but particularity had not yet been released,
given free scope, and brought back to universality, i.e. to the universal end
of the whole. The essence of the modern state is that the universal be bound
up with the complete freedom of particularity and with the well-being of
individuals, that thus the interests of family and civil society must concen-
trate themselves on the state, although the universal end cannot be
advanced without the personal knowledge and will of its particular mem-
bers, whose own rights must be maintained. Thus the universal must be
activated, but subjectivity on the other hand must attain its full and living
development. It is only when both these moments subsist in their strength
that the state can be regarded as articulated and genuinely organized.
261. In contrast with the spheres of private right and private wel-
fare (the family and civil society), the state is from one point of view
The State
235

an external necessity and their higher authority; its nature is such
that their laws and interests are subordinate to it and dependent on
it. On the other hand, however, it is the end immanent within them,
and its strength lies in the unity of its own universal end and aim
with the particular interest of individuals, in the fact that individuals
have duties to the state to the extent that they also have rights against
it (see § 155).
In the Remark to § 3 above, reference was made to the fact that it
was Montesquieu above all who, in his famous work The Spirit of
the Laws,94 kept in sight and tried to work out in detail both the
thought of the dependence of laws—in particular, laws concern-
ing the rights of persons—on the speciﬁc character of the state,
and also the philosophical notion of always treating the part in its
relation to the whole.
Duty is primarily a relation to something which from my point
of view is substantial, universal in and for itself. A right, on the
other hand, is simply the existence of this substance and thus is the
particular aspect of it and enshrines my particular freedom. Hence
at a formal level, right and duty appear as allocated to diﬀerent
sides or to diﬀerent persons. In the state, as something ethical, 
as the interpenetration of the substantial and the particular, my
obligation to what is substantial is at the same time the existence of
my particular freedom. This means that in the state duty and right
are united in one and the same relation. But further, since nonethe-
less the distinct moments acquire in the state the shape and reality
peculiar to each, and since therefore the distinction between right
and duty enters here once again, it follows that while they are in
themselves, i.e. in form, identical, they at the same time diﬀer in
content. In the spheres of private right and morality, the relation of
right and duty to one another lacks actual necessity; and hence
there is at that point only an abstract equality of content between
them, i.e. in those abstract spheres, what is one person’s right
ought also to be another’s, and what is one person’s duty ought
also to be another’s. That absolute identity of right and duty is
present only as an identity of content, because in them this content
is determined as quite universal and is simply the one principle of
Third Part: Ethical Life
236
94 See third explanatory note to p. 20 [p. 329 below]. [S.H.]

both right and duty, i.e. the principle that human beings, as per-
sons, are free. Slaves, therefore, have no duties because they 
have no rights, and vice versa. (Religious duties are not here under
discussion.)
In the course of the inward development of the concrete Idea,
however, its moments become distinguished and their speciﬁc
determinacy becomes at the same time a diﬀerence of content. In
the family, the content of a son’s duties to his father diﬀers from
the content of his rights against him; the content of the rights of a
member of civil society is not the same as the content of his duties
to his prince and government.
This concept of the union of duty and right is a point of vital
importance and in it the inner strength of states is contained.
The abstract aspect of duty goes no farther than the persistent
neglect and proscription of particular interest, on the ground that
it is the inessential, even unworthy, moment in life. But the con-
crete point of view—that of the Idea—reveals the moment of
particularity as itself essential and so regards its satisfaction as
indisputably necessary. In fulﬁlling his duty the individual must at
the same time in some way attain his own interest and satisfaction
or settle his account. Out of his position in the state, a right must
accrue to him whereby the universal concern becomes his own
particular concern. Particular interests should in truth not be set
aside or, indeed, suppressed; instead, they should be harmonized
with the universal, so that both they and the universal are upheld.
The individual, so far as his duties are concerned, is a subject
[Untertan]; but as a member of civil society he ﬁnds that in fulﬁlling
his duties he gains protection of his person and property, regard
for his particular welfare, the satisfaction of his substantial being,
the consciousness and feeling of himself as a member of the whole;
and, insofar as he fulﬁls his duties by performing tasks and ser-
vices for the state, the state itself is upheld and preserved. Taken
abstractly, the universal’s interest would consist simply in the
completion as duties of the tasks and services which it exacts.
Addition: In the state everything depends on the unity of universal and par-
ticular. In the states of antiquity, the subjective end simply coincided with
the state’s will. In modern times, however, we lay claim to our own views,
our own willing and our own conscience. The ancients had none of these
in the modern sense; the ultimate thing with them was the will of the state.
The State
237

Whereas under the despots of Asia the individual had no inner life and no
justiﬁcation in himself, in the modern world people insist on respect being
paid to their inner life. The conjunction of duty and right has a twofold
aspect: what the state demands from us as a duty is eo ipso our right as indi-
viduals, since the state is nothing but the organization of the concept of
freedom. The determinations of the individual will are given an objective
existence through the state and thereby they attain their truth and their
actualization for the ﬁrst time. The state is the sole prerequisite of the
attainment of particular ends and welfare.
262. The actual Idea is spirit, which, sundering itself into the two
ideal spheres of its concept, family and civil society, enters into its
ﬁnitude, but it does so in order to emerge from its ideality as inﬁnite
actual spirit for itself. It is therefore to these ideal spheres that the
actual Idea allocates the material of this its ﬁnite actuality, viz. 
individuals as a mass, in such a way that in any individual case this
allocation appears as mediated by circumstances, the individual’s
arbitrary will and his personal choice of vocation (see § 185 and the
Remark thereto).
Addition: In Plato’s state, subjective freedom does not yet count, because
people have their occupations assigned to them by the Guardians.95 In
many oriental states, this assignment is determined by birth. But subjec-
tive freedom, which must be respected, demands that individuals should
have free choice in this matter.
263. In these spheres in which its moments, particularity and
individuality, have their immediate and reﬂected reality, spirit is
present as their objective universality appearing in them as the power
of reason in necessity (see § 184), i.e. as the institutions considered
above.
Addition: The state, as spirit, sunders itself into the particular determin-
ations of its concept, of its mode of being. We might use here an illustra-
tion drawn from nature. The nervous system is the sensitive system
proper; it is the abstract moment, the moment of being with oneself 
[bei sich] and therein having identity with oneself. But analysis of sensation
reveals that it has two aspects and these are distinct in such a way that each
of them appears as a whole system. The ﬁrst is feeling in the abstract,
keeping oneself self-contained, the dull movement which goes on inter-
nally, reproduction, internal self-nutrition, growth, and digestion. The
second moment is that this being-with-oneself has over against it the
Third Part: Ethical Life
238
95 See Plato, Republic, 415a–d. [S.H.]

moment of diﬀerence, a movement outwards. This is irritability, sensation
moving outwards. This constitutes a system of its own, and there are some
of the lower types of animals which have developed this system alone,
while they lack the soul-charged [seelenvoll] unity of inner sensation. If we
compare these natural relations with those of spirit, then the family must
be paralleled with sensibility and civil society with irritability. Now the
third is the state, the nervous system itself, internally organized; but this
lives only insofar as both moments (in this case family and civil society) are
developed within it. The laws regulating family and civil society are the
institutions of the rational order which appears in them. But the ground
and ultimate truth of these institutions is spirit, their universal end and
known object. The family too is ethical, only its end is not a known end,
while it is the separation between individuals which makes civil society
what it is.
264. Individuals en masse are themselves spiritual natures and
therefore contain two moments: (i) at one extreme, individuality
knowing and willing for itself, and (ii) at the other extreme, univer-
sality which knows and wills what is substantial. Hence they attain
their right in both these respects only insofar as they are actual 
both as private and as substantial persons. Now in the family and
civil society they acquire their right in the ﬁrst of these respects
directly, and in the second insofar as (i) they ﬁnd their essential self-
consciousness in institutions which are the universal aspect of their
particular interests which has being in itself, and (ii) the corporation
supplies them with an occupation and an activity directed towards a
universal end.
265. These institutions form the constitution (i.e. developed and
actualized rationality) in the sphere of particularity. They are, there-
fore, the ﬁrm foundation not only of the state but also of the citizen’s
trust in it and disposition towards it. They are the pillars of public
freedom since in them particular freedom is realized and rational,
and therefore in them the union of freedom and necessity is present
in itself.
Addition: As was remarked earlier on [§ 255], the sanctity of marriage and
the institutions in which civil society appears as ethical life constitute the
stability of the whole, i.e. stability is secured when the universal is the con-
cern of each individual in his particular capacity. What is of the utmost
importance is that the laws of reason and of particular freedom should per-
meate one another, and that my particular end should become identiﬁed
The State
239

with the universal end, or otherwise the state is left in the air. The state is
actual only when its individual members have a feeling of their own self-
hood and it is stable only when the aims of the universal and of particular
individuals are identical. It has often been said that the end of the state is
the happiness of the citizens. That is perfectly true. If all is not well with
them, if their subjective aims are not satisﬁed, if they do not ﬁnd that the
state as such is the means to their satisfaction, then the footing of the state
itself is insecure.
266. But spirit is objective and actual to itself not merely as this
necessity and as a realm of appearance, but also as the ideality and the
inner nature of these. Only in this way is this substantial universality
its own object and end, with the result that the necessity is for itself
in the shape of freedom as well.
267. The necessity in ideality is the development of the Idea within
itself. As subjective substantiality, it is [the individual’s] political 
disposition; in distinction therefrom, as objective substantiality, it is
the organism of the state, i.e. it is the properly political state and its
constitution.
Addition: The unity of the freedom which knows and wills itself is present
ﬁrst of all as necessity. Here substance is present as the subjective exist-
ence of individuals. Necessity’s other mode of being, however, is the
organism, i.e. spirit is a process within itself, it articulates itself within,
posits diﬀerences in itself, and thereby completes the cycle of its life.
268. The political disposition, patriotism pure and simple, is cer-
tainty based on truth—mere subjective certainty is not the outcome
of truth but is only opinion—and volition which has become habitual.
As such, it is simply a product of the institutions subsisting in the
state, since rationality is actually present in the state, while action in
conformity with these institutions gives rationality practical expres-
sion. This disposition is, in general, trust (which may pass over into
a greater or lesser degree of educated insight), or the consciousness
that my interest, both substantial and particular, is contained and
preserved in another’s (i.e. in the state’s) interest and end, i.e. in the
other’s relation to me as an individual. In this way, this very other is
immediately not an other in my eyes, and in being conscious of this
fact, I am free.
Patriotism is often understood to mean only a readiness for 
exceptional sacriﬁces and actions. Essentially, however, it is the
Third Part: Ethical Life
240

disposition which, in the relationships of our daily life and under
ordinary conditions, habitually recognizes that the community is
one’s substantial basis and end. It is out of this consciousness,
which during life’s daily round stands the test in all circumstances,
that there subsequently also arises the readiness for extraordinary
exertions. But just as people would often rather be magnanimous
than law-abiding, so do they readily persuade themselves that they
possess this exceptional patriotism in order to exempt themselves
from the genuine disposition or to excuse their lack of it. If again
this disposition is looked upon as that which may begin of itself
and arise from subjective ideas and thoughts, it is being confused
with opinion, because so regarded it is deprived of its true ground,
objective reality.
Addition: Uneducated people delight in argumentation and fault-ﬁnding,
because it is easy enough to ﬁnd fault, though hard to see the good and its
inner necessity. The learner always begins by ﬁnding fault, but the edu-
cated person sees the positive in everything. In religion, this or that is
quickly dismissed as superstitious, but it is inﬁnitely harder to apprehend
the truth contained therein. Hence the apparent disposition of people
towards the state is to be distinguished from what they truly will; inwardly
they really will the thing [Sache], but they cling to details and take delight
in the vanity of pretending to know better. We trust that the state must
subsist and that in it alone particular interests can be secured. But habit
blinds us to that on which our whole existence depends. When we walk the
streets at night in safety, it does not strike us that this might be otherwise.
This habit of feeling safe has become second nature, and we do not reﬂect
on just how this is due solely to the working of particular institutions.
Representational thought [Vorstellung] often has the impression that force
holds the state together, but in fact its only bond is the fundamental sense
of order which everyone possesses.
269. The patriotic disposition acquires its speciﬁcally determined
content from the various aspects of the organism of the state. This
organism is the development of the Idea to its diﬀerences and 
their objective actuality. Hence these diﬀerent aspects are the 
various powers of the state with their functions and spheres of 
action, by means of which the universal continually engenders 
itself, and engenders itself in a necessary way because their speciﬁc
character is determined by the nature of the concept. Throughout
this process the universal maintains its identity, since it is itself the
The State
241

presupposition of its own production. This organism is the political
constitution.
Addition: The state is an organism, i.e. the development of the Idea into 
its diﬀerences. Thus these diﬀerent sides of the state are its various 
powers with their functions and spheres of action, by means of which the
universal continually engenders itself in a necessary way; in this process it
maintains its identity since it is presupposed even in its own production.
This organism is the political constitution; it is produced perpetually by
the state, while it is through it that the state maintains itself. If the state
and its constitution fall apart, if the diﬀerent aspects of the organism break
free, then the unity produced by the constitution is no longer established.
This tallies with the fable about the belly* and the other members. The
nature of an organism is such that unless each of its parts is brought into
identity with the others, unless each of them is prevented from achieving
independence, the whole must perish. By listing attributes, principles,
etc., no progress can be made in assessing the nature of the state; it must
be apprehended as an organism. One might as well try to understand the
nature of God by listing his attributes, while the truth is that we must
intuit God’s life in that life itself.
270. (1) The abstract actuality or the substantiality of the state
consists in the fact that its end is the universal interest as such and
the conservation therein of particular interests since the universal
interest is the substance of these. (2) But this substantiality of the
state is also its necessity, since its substantiality divides itself into the
distinct spheres of its activity which correspond to the moments of
its concept, and these spheres, owing to this substantiality, are thus
actually ﬁxed determinations of the state, i.e. its powers. (3) But this
very substantiality of the state is spirit knowing and willing itself
after passing through the forming process of education. The state,
therefore, knows what it wills and knows it in its universality, i.e. as
something thought. Hence it works and acts in accordance with
known ends, known principles, and laws which are laws not merely
in themselves but also for consciousness; and further, it acts with
determinate knowledge of existing conditions and circumstances,
inasmuch as its actions have a bearing on these.
This is the place to touch on the relation of the state to religion,
because it is often reiterated nowadays* that religion is the basis 
of the state, and because those who make this assertion even pre-
sume that, once it is made, political science has said its last word.
Third Part: Ethical Life
242

No doctrine is more ﬁtted to produce so much confusion, more
ﬁtted indeed to exalt confusion itself to be the constitution of the
state and the proper form of knowledge.
In the ﬁrst place, it may seem suspicious that religion is 
principally sought and recommended for times of public misery,
disorder, and oppression, and that people are referred to it as a
solace in face of injustice or as a hope in compensation for loss.
Furthermore, if religion is seen as commanding indiﬀerence to
worldly interests, the march of events, and current aﬀairs, while
the state is spirit that is present in the world, the suggestion that
people turn to religion does not seem to be the way to exalt 
the interest and business of the state into the fundamental and
serious aim of life. On the contrary, this suggestion seems to assert
that politics is wholly a matter of caprice and indiﬀerence, either
because the way it is formulated implies that only the aims of 
passion and lawless force, etc., hold sway in the state, or because
recommending religion is meant to be valid for itself and to be
suﬃcient to determine and administer the law. It would seem to 
be a bitter jest to stiﬂe all feeling against tyranny by asserting that
the oppressed ﬁnd their consolation in religion; it must equally not
be forgotten that religion itself may take a form leading to the
harshest bondage in the fetters of superstition and the degradation
of human beings to a level below that of animals. (The Egyptians
and the Hindus, for instance, revere animals as beings higher than
themselves.) This phenomenon may at least make it evident that
we ought not to speak of religion in wholly general terms and 
that we rather need a power to protect us from it in some of its
forms and to espouse against them the rights of reason and self-
consciousness.
The essence of the relation between religion and the state can be
determined, however, only if we recall the concept of religion. The
content of religion is absolute truth, and consequently the most
elevated of all dispositions is to be found in religion. As intuition,
feeling, representational knowledge [vorstellende Erkenntnis], its con-
cern is with God as the unrestricted principle and cause on which
everything hangs. It thus involves the demand that everything else
shall be seen in this light and depend on it for corroboration,
justiﬁcation, and veriﬁcation. It is in being thus related to religion
that state, laws, and duties all alike acquire for consciousness their
The State
243

supreme conﬁrmation and their supreme obligatoriness, because
even the state, laws, and duties are in their actuality something
determinate which passes over into a higher sphere and so into
that on which it is grounded.96 It is for this reason that in religion
there lies the place where human beings are always assured of
ﬁnding a consciousness of the unchangeable, of the highest free-
dom and satisfaction, even within all the mutability of the world
and despite the frustration of their aims and the loss of their inter-
ests and possessions.97 Now if religion is in this way the founda-
tion which includes the ethical realm in general, and the nature of
the state—the divine will—in particular, it is at the same time
only a foundation; and it is at this point that state and religion begin
to diverge. The state is the divine will, in the sense that it is spirit
present on earth, unfolding itself to be the actual shape and organ-
ization of a world. Those who insist on stopping at the form of
religion in opposition to the state are acting like those who, in cog-
nition, think they are right if they continually stop at the essence
and refuse to advance beyond that abstraction to existence
[Dasein], or like those (see Remark to § 140) who will only good in
the abstract and leave it to caprice to determine what is good.
Religion is a relation to the Absolute, a relation which takes the
form of feeling, representation [Vorstellung], faith, and brought
within its all-embracing centre everything becomes only acciden-
tal and transient. Now if, in relation to the state, we cling to this
form and make it the authority for the state and its essential deter-
minant, the state as the organism in which enduring diﬀerences,
laws, and institutions have been developed, must become a prey to
instability, insecurity, and disorder. Set against the form of reli-
gion, which shrouds everything determinate and so comes to be
Third Part: Ethical Life
244
96 Hegel’s reference: See Encyclopaedia, § 453 [3rd edn. § 553].
97 Hegel’s note: Religion, knowledge, and science have as their principle a form pecu-
liar to each and diﬀerent from that of the state. They therefore enter the state partly as
means to education and a [higher] disposition, partly insofar as they are in essence ends
in themselves to the extent that they have an external existence. In both these respects
the principles of the state have, in their application, a bearing on them. A comprehen-
sive, concrete treatise on the state would also have to deal with those spheres of life as
well as with art and merely natural conditions, and to consider their place in the state
and their bearing on it. In this treatise, however, it is the principle of the state in its own
special sphere which is being fully expounded in accordance with the Idea, and it is only
in passing that reference can be made to the principles of religion, etc., and to the appli-
cation of the right of the state to them.

something subjective, the objective and universal element in the
state, i.e. the laws, acquires a negative instead of a stable and
authoritative character, and the result is the production of maxims
of conduct like the following: ‘To the righteous person no law is
given; only be pious, and for the rest, practise what you will; yield
to your own caprice and passion, and if thereby others suﬀer injus-
tice, commend them to the consolations and hopes of religion, or
better still, call them irreligious and condemn them to perdition.’
This negative attitude, however, may not conﬁne itself to an inner
disposition and attitude of mind; it may turn instead to actuality
and assert its authority there, and thereby give rise to the religious
fanaticism which, like fanaticism in politics, discards all political
institutions and legal order as barriers cramping the inner life of
the heart and incompatible with its inﬁnity, and at the same time
proscribes private property, marriage, the relations and work
involved in civil society, etc., as degrading to love and the freedom
of feeling. But since even then decisions must somehow be made
for everyday life and practice, the same doctrine which we had
before (see Remark to § 140, where we dealt generally with the
subjectivity of the will which knows itself to be absolute) turns up
again here, namely that subjective ideas, i.e. opinion and capri-
cious inclination, are to do the deciding.
In contrast with the truth thus shrouded in subjective ideas and
feelings, the genuine truth is the prodigious transfer of the inner
into the outer, the building of reason into reality, and this has been
the task of the world during the whole course of its history. It is by
working at this task that civilized humanity has actually given
reason an existence in laws and the institutions of the state and
achieved consciousness of the fact. Those who ‘seek guidance
from the Lord’ and are assured that the whole truth is immedi-
ately present in their unschooled opinions, fail to apply themselves
to the task of raising their subjectivity to consciousness of the
truth and to knowledge of duty and objective right. The only pos-
sible fruits of their attitude are folly, abomination, and the demo-
lition of the whole ethical order, and these fruits must inevitably
be reaped if the religious disposition holds ﬁrmly and exclusively to
its own form and so turns against actuality and the truth present
in it in the form of the universal, i.e. of laws. Yet, there is no
necessity for this disposition to turn outward and actualize itself in
The State
245

this way. With its negative standpoint, it is of course also open to
it to remain something inward, to accommodate itself to institu-
tions and laws, and to acquiesce in these with sneers and idle long-
ings, or with a sigh of resignation. It is not strength but weakness
which has turned religious feeling nowadays into piety of a polem-
ical kind, whether the polemic be connected with some genuine
need or simply with unsatisﬁed vanity. Instead of subduing one’s
opinions through the labour of study, and subjecting one’s will to
discipline and so elevating it to free obedience, the line of least
resistance is to renounce knowledge of objective truth. Along this
line we may preserve a feeling of grievance and so also of self-
conceit, and claim to have ready to hand in godliness everything
requisite for seeing into the heart of the law and the institutions of
the state, for passing judgement on them, and laying down what
their character should and must be; and of course if we take this
line, the source of our claims is a pious heart, and they are therefore
infallible and unimpeachable, and the upshot is that since we make
religion the basis of our intentions and assertions, they cannot be
criticized on the score of their shallowness or their injustice.
But if religion be religion of a genuine kind, it does not run
counter to the state in a negative or polemical way like the kind
just described. It rather recognizes the state and upholds it, and
furthermore it has a position and an external expression of its own.
The practice of its worship consists in actions and in doctrinal
instruction, and for this purpose possessions and property are
required, as well as individuals dedicated to the service of the
community. There thus arises a relation between the state and 
the church. To determine this relation is a simple matter. In the
nature of the case, the state discharges a duty by aﬀording every
assistance and protection to the church in the furtherance of its
religious ends; and, in addition, since religion is the moment that
integrates the state at the deepest level of disposition, the state
should even require all its citizens to belong to a church—
a church is all that can be said, since the state cannot interfere with
the content of faith insofar as it depends on the inner realm of rep-
resentation [Vorstellung]. A state which is strong because its organ-
ization is mature may be all the more liberal in this matter; it may
entirely overlook individual details [of religious practice] which
aﬀect it, and may even tolerate communities (though, of course, 
Third Part: Ethical Life
246

all depends on their numbers) which on religious grounds decline
to recognize even their direct duties to the state. The state can do
this because it hands over the members of such communities to civil
society and its laws, and is content if they fulﬁl their direct duties 
to the state passively, for instance by such means as commutation
or the performance of a diﬀerent service.98
But since the church owns property and otherwise performs acts
of worship, and since therefore it must have people in its service,
it steps out of the inner realm into worldly life, and so enters the
domain of the state and thereby immediately places itself under its
laws. It is true that the oath and the ethical realm in general, like
the marriage bond, entail that inner permeation and elevation of
disposition which acquires its deepest conﬁrmation through reli-
gion; [but] since ethical relations are in essence relations of actual
The State
247
98 Hegel’s note: Quakers, Anabaptists, etc., may be said to be active members only of
civil society, and they may be regarded as private persons standing in merely private
relations to others. Even after this position has been allowed them, they have been
exempted from taking the oath. They fulﬁl their direct duties to the state in a passive
way; one of the most important of these duties, the defence of the state against its en-
emies, they refuse outright to fulﬁl, and their refusal may perhaps be admitted provided
they perform some other service instead. To sects of this kind, the state’s attitude is tol-
eration [Toleranz] in the strict sense of the word,* because since they decline to recog-
nize their duty to the state, they may not claim the rights of citizenship. On one occasion
when the abolition of slavery* was being pressed with great vigour in the American
Congress, a member from one of the Southern States made the striking retort: ‘Give us
our slaves, and you may keep your Quakers.’ Only if the state is otherwise strong can it
overlook and tolerate such anomalies, because it can then rely principally on the strength
of custom and the inner rationality of its institutions to diminish and overcome the dis-
crepancy if the state does not strictly assert its rights in this respect. Thus formally it
may have been right to refuse a grant of even civil rights to the Jews on the ground that
they should be regarded as belonging not merely to a particular religious group but to a
foreign people. But the ﬁerce outcry raised against the Jews, from that point of view and
others, ignores the fact that they are, above all, human beings; and humanity, so far from
being a mere superﬁcial, abstract quality (see Remark to § 209), is on the contrary itself
the basis of the fact that civil rights arouse in their possessors the feeling of oneself as
counting in civil society as a person with rights. This feeling of selfhood, inﬁnite and free
from all restrictions, is in turn the root from which the desired similarity in disposition
and ways of thinking comes into being. To exclude the Jews from civil rights, on the
other hand, would rather be to conﬁrm the isolation with which they have been
reproached—a result for which the state that excludes them would rightly be blameable
and reproachable, because by such exclusion, it would have misunderstood its own basic
principle, its nature as an objective and powerful institution (compare the end of the
Remark to § 268). The exclusion of the Jews from civil rights has been supposed to be a
right of the highest kind and been demanded on that ground; but experience has shown
that so to exclude them is the silliest folly, and the way in which governments now treat
them has proved itself to be both wise and digniﬁed.*

rationality, the ﬁrst thing is to aﬃrm within them the rights of this
rationality. Conﬁrmation of these rights by the church is second-
ary and is only the inward, comparatively abstract, side of the
matter.
As for the other ways in which an ecclesiastical community
gives expression to itself, so far as doctrine is concerned the inward
preponderates over the outward to a greater extent than is the case
with acts of worship and other lines of conduct connected with
these, in which the legal side at least appears at once to be a matter
for the state. (It is true, of course, that churches have managed to
exempt their ministers and property from the power and jurisdic-
tion of the state, and they have even arrogated to themselves juris-
diction over laymen in matters in which religion cooperates, such
as divorce and the taking of the oath, etc.)—Public control of
actions of this kind is indeterminate in extent, but this is due to the
nature of public control itself and obtains similarly in purely civil
transactions (see § 234). When individuals, holding religious views
in common, form themselves into a community, a corporation,
they fall under the general control and oversight of the state.—
Doctrine as such, however, has its domain in conscience and falls
within the right of the subjective freedom of self-consciousness,
the sphere of the inner life, which as such is not the domain of the
state. Yet the state, too, has a doctrine, since its institutions and
whatever is authoritative in it with regard to rights and the consti-
tution exist essentially in the form of thought as law. And since the
state is not a mechanism but the rational life of self-conscious free-
dom, the system of the ethical world, it follows that an essential
moment in the actual state is the disposition of the citizens and 
so also the consciousness of this disposition that is expressed in
principles. Moreover, the doctrine of the church is in turn not
purely and simply an inward concern of conscience. As doctrine it
is rather the expression of something, in fact the expression of a
content which is most closely linked, or even immediately con-
cerned, with ethical principles and the laws of the state. Hence at
this point the paths of church and state either coincide or oppose one
another. The diﬀerence of their two domains may be pushed by
the church into sheer antagonism since, by regarding itself as
enshrining the content of religion—a content which is absolute—
it may claim as its own the spiritual as such [das Geistige überhaupt]
Third Part: Ethical Life
248

and so the whole ethical sphere, and conceive the state as a mere
mechanical framework for the attainment of external, non-spiritual,
ends. It may take itself to be the Kingdom of God, or at least the
road to it or its vestibule, while it regards the state as the kingdom
of this world, i.e. of the transient and the ﬁnite. In a word, it may
think that it is an end in itself, while the state is a mere means.
These claims produce the demand, in connection with doctrinal
instruction, that the state should not only allow the church to do
as it likes with complete freedom, but that it should pay uncondi-
tional respect to the church’s doctrines as doctrines, whatever
their character, because their determination is supposed to be the
task of the church alone. The church bases this claim on the
extended ground that the domain of spirit as such is its property.
But science and knowledge in general also have a footing in that
domain and, like a church, build themselves into a totality with a
distinctive principle of its own, and they may, with even better
justiﬁcation, regard themselves as occupying the position which
the church claims. Hence science also may in the same way
demand to be independent of the state, which is then supposed to
be a mere means with the task of providing for science as though
science were an end in itself.
By the way, it makes no diﬀerence to this relationship between
church and state whether the leaders of congregations or individ-
uals ordained to the service of the church feel impelled to with-
draw from the state and lead a sort of secluded life of their own, so
that only the other church members are subject to the state’s con-
trol, or whether they remain within the state except in their cap-
acity as ecclesiastics, a capacity which they take to be but one side
of their life. The most striking thing about such a conception of
the church’s relation to the state is that it implies the idea that the
state’s speciﬁc function consists in protecting and securing every-
one’s life, property, and arbitrary will, insofar as these do not
encroach upon the life, property, and arbitrary will of others. The
state from this point of view is treated simply as an organization to
meet people’s needs. In this way the element of truth in and for
itself, of spirit in its higher development, is placed, as subjective
religious feeling or theoretical science, beyond the reach of 
the state. The state, as the laity in and for itself, is conﬁned to
showing respect to this element and so is entirely deprived of any
The State
249

properly ethical character. Now it is, of course, a matter of history
that in times and under conditions of barbarism, all higher forms
of spiritual life had their seat only in the church, while the state
was a mere secular regime of force, caprice, and passion. At such
times it was the abstract opposition of state and church which was
the main underlying principle of history (see § 359).99 But it is a far
too blind and shallow way of proceeding to declare that this situ-
ation is the one which truly corresponds with the Idea. The devel-
opment of this Idea has proved this rather to be the truth, that
spirit, as free and rational, is ethical in itself, while the Idea in its
truth is rationality actualized; and this it is which exists as the
state. Further, it has emerged no less clearly from this Idea that
the ethical truth in it is present to thinking consciousness as a con-
tent worked up into the form of universality, i.e. as law—in short,
that the state knows its aims, and apprehends and implements
them with determinate consciousness and in accordance with
principles. Now, as I said earlier, religion has the truth as its uni-
versal subject-matter, but it possesses it only as a given content
which has not been apprehended in its fundamental characteristics
through thought and the use of concepts. Similarly, the relation of
the individual to this subject-matter is an obligation grounded on
authority, while the witness of one’s own spirit and heart, i.e. that
wherein the moment of freedom resides, is faith and feeling. It is
philosophical insight which sees that while church and state diﬀer
in form, they do not stand opposed in content, for truth and ration-
ality are the content of both. Thus when the church begins to teach
doctrines (though there are and have been some churches with a
ritual only, and others in which ritual is the chief thing, while doc-
trine and a more educated consciousness are only secondary), and
when these doctrines touch on objective principles, on thoughts of
the ethical and the rational, then their expression eo ipso brings the
church into the domain of the state. In contrast with the church’s
faith and authority in matters aﬀecting ethical life, right, laws,
institutions, in contrast with the church’s subjective conviction, the
state is the one that knows [das Wissende]. Its principle is such that
its content is in essence no longer clothed with the form of feeling
and faith but belongs to determinate thought.
Third Part: Ethical Life
250
99 All editions have ‘§ 358’.

If the content in and for itself appears in the form of religion as
a particular content, i.e. as the doctrines peculiar to the church as
a religious community, then these doctrines remain out of the
reach of the state (in Protestantism there is no laity, so there is
likewise no priesthood to be an exclusive depository of church
doctrine). Since ethical principles and the organization of the state
in general are drawn into the domain of religion and not only may,
but also should, be established by reference thereto, this reference
gives religious credentials to the state itself. On the other hand,
however, the state retains the right and the form of self-conscious,
objective, rationality, the right to make this form count and to
maintain it against assertions springing from the subjective shape of
truth, no matter how such truth may girdle itself with certitude
and authority.
The state is universal in form, a form whose essential principle
is thought. This explains why it was in the state that freedom of
thought and science had their origin. It was a church, on the other
hand, which burnt Giordano Bruno,* forced Galileo to recant on
his knees his exposition of the Copernican view of the solar
system,* and so forth.100 Science too, therefore, has its place on the
The State
251
100 Hegel’s note: ‘When Galileo published the discoveries about the phases of Venus,
etc., which he had made with the aid of the telescope, he showed that they incontestably
proved the motion of the earth. But this idea of the motion of the earth was declared heret-
ical by an assembly of Cardinals, and Galileo, its most famous advocate, was summoned
before the Inquisition and compelled to recant it, under pain of severe imprisonment. One
of the strongest of passions is the love of truth in a man of spirit. Convinced of the
motion of the earth as a result of his own observations, Galileo meditated a long while
on a new work in which he had resolved to develop all the proofs in its favour. But in
order at the same time to escape from the persecution of which otherwise he would
inevitably have been the victim, he hit upon the device of expounding them in the form
of dialogues between three speakers. It is obvious enough in them that the advantage lies
with the advocate of the Copernican system; but since Galileo did not decide between
the speakers, and gave as much weight as possible to the objections raised by the parti-
sans of Ptolemy, he might well have expected to be left to enjoy undisturbed the peace
to which his advanced age and his labours had entitled him. In his seventieth year he was
summoned once more before the tribunal of the Inquisition. He was imprisoned 
and required to recant his opinions a second time under threat of the penalty ﬁxed for 
a relapse into heresy. He was made to sign an abjuration in the following terms: 
“I, Galileo, appearing in person before the court in my seventieth year, kneeling, and
with my eyes on the holy Gospels which I hold in my hands, abjure, damn, and execrate
with my whole heart and true belief the absurd, false, and heretical doctrine of the motion
of the earth.” What a spectacle! An aged, venerable man, famous throughout a long life
exclusively devoted to the study of nature, abjuring on his knees, against the witness 
of his own conscience, the truth which he had demonstrated so convincingly! By the

side of the state since it has one element, its form, in common with
the state, and its aim is knowledge, knowledge of objective truth and
rationality in terms of thought. Such knowledge may, of course,
fall from the heights of science into opinion and reasoning from
grounds, and, turning its attention to ethical matters and the
organization of the state, set itself against their basic principles.
And it may perhaps do this while making the same claim as the
church makes for its own distinctive sphere, namely that its opin-
ion is rational and that it enjoys the right of subjective self-con-
sciousness to freedom of opinion and conviction.
This principle of the subjectivity of knowing has been dealt
with above (see Remark to § 140). It is here only necessary to add
a note on the twofold attitude of the state towards opinion. On the
one hand, insofar as opinion is mere opinion, a purely subjective
matter, it is without any genuine inherent force or power, plume
itself as it may; and from this point of view the state may be as
totally indiﬀerent to it as the painters who stick to the three pri-
mary colours on their palettes are indiﬀerent to the academic
wisdom which tells them there are seven. On the other hand, how-
ever, when this opinion based on bad principles gives itself a uni-
versal existence that corrodes the actual order, the state must
protect objective truth and the principles of ethical life (and it
must do the same in face of the formalism of unconditioned sub-
jectivity, if the latter claims to be grounded in a scientiﬁc point of
departure and seeks to turn state educational institutions against
the state by encouraging them to make pretentious claims against
it akin to those of a church). Equally, in face of a church claiming
unrestricted and unconditional authority, the state has in general
to make good the formal right of self-consciousness to its own
insight, its own conviction, and, in short, its own thought of what
is to hold good as objective truth.
Mention may also be made of the unity of state and church—a
favourite topic of modern discussion and held up by some as the
Third Part: Ethical Life
252
judgement of the Inquisition he was condemned to perpetual imprisonment. A year later
he was set at liberty through the intercession of the Grand Duke of Florence. He died
in 1642. Europe mourned his loss. It had been enlightened by his labours and was exas-
perated by the judgement passed by a detested tribunal on a man of his greatness.’
(Laplace, Exposition of the System of the World* [Exposition du système du monde] [1796],
Book V, chap. 4.)

highest of ideals.* While state and church are essentially united by
the truth of their principles and disposition, it is no less essential
that, despite this unity, the distinction between their forms of con-
sciousness should be given particular existence. This often desired
unity of church and state is found under oriental despotisms,101
but an oriental despotism is not a state, or at any rate not the self-
conscious form of state which is alone worthy of spirit, the form
which is organically developed and where there are rights and a
free ethical life. Further, if the state is to come into existence as the
self-knowing ethical actuality of spirit, it is essential that its form
should be distinct from that of authority and faith. But this distinc-
tion emerges only insofar as the church itself is subjected to inward
division. It is only thereafter that the state, in contrast with the particu-
lar churches, attains universality of thought—its formal principle—
and brings this universality into existence. (In order to understand
this, it is necessary to know not only what universality is in itself,
but also what its existence [Existenz] is.) Hence so far from its being
or its having been a misfortune for the state that the church is
divided, it is only as a result of that division that the state has been
able to reach its appointed end as a self-consciously rational and eth-
ical organization. Moreover, this division is the best piece of good
fortune which could have befallen either the church or thought so
far as the freedom and rationality of either is concerned.
Addition: The state is actual, and its actuality consists in this, that the
interest of the whole is realized in and through particular ends. Actuality
is always the unity of universal and particular, the universal articulated in
the particulars which appear to be self-subsistent, although they really are
upheld and contained only in the whole. Where this unity is not present,
a thing is not actual even though it may have acquired existence
[Existenz].102 A bad state is one which merely exists; a sick body exists too,
but it has no genuine reality. A hand which is cut oﬀstill looks like a hand,
and it exists, but without being actual.103 Genuine actuality is necessity;
what is actual is inherently necessary. Necessity consists in this, that the
whole is sundered into the diﬀerences of the concept and that this divided
whole yields a ﬁxed and permanent determinacy, though one which is not
fossilized but perpetually recreates itself in its dissolution.
The State
253
101 See PR § 355. [S.H.]
102 See ﬁrst explanatory note to p. 14 [pp. 326‒7 below]. [S.H.]
103 See Aristotle, Politics, 1253a19.

To a mature state there essentially belong thought and consciousness.
Therefore the state knows what it wills and knows it as something
thought. Now since knowing has its seat in the state, the seat of science
must be there too and not in the church. Despite this, it is often said now-
adays that the state must grow out of religion. The state is developed spirit
and it exhibits its moments in the daylight of consciousness. Now the fact
that what is contained in the Idea steps forth into objectivity gives the state
the appearance of something ﬁnite, and so the state reveals itself as a
domain of worldliness, while religion displays itself as a domain of the
inﬁnite. If this be so, the state seems to be the subordinate, and since what
is ﬁnite cannot stand on its own, the state is therefore said to need the
church as its basis. As ﬁnite, it lacks justiﬁcation, and it is only through
religion that it can become sacrosanct and belong to the inﬁnite. This view
of the matter, however, is supremely one-sided. Of course the state is
essentially worldly and ﬁnite; it has particular ends and particular powers;
but its worldly character is only one of its aspects, and it is only to a spir-
itless perception that it is ﬁnite and nothing more. For the state has a life-
giving soul, and the soul which animates it is subjectivity, which creates
diﬀerences and yet at the same time holds them together in unity. In the
realm of religion too there are distinctions and ﬁnitude. God, it is said, is
three in one; thus there are three determinations whose unity alone is
spirit. Therefore to apprehend the nature of God concretely is to appre-
hend it through distinctions alone. Hence in the kingdom of God there is
ﬁnitude, just as there is in the world, and to hold that the worldly spirit,
i.e. the state, is only a ﬁnite spirit, is a one-sided view, for actuality is not
irrational. Of course a bad state is worldly and ﬁnite and nothing else, but
the rational state is inherently inﬁnite.
Secondly, it is averred that the state must derive its justiﬁcation from
religion. In religion, the Idea is spirit in the inwardness of the heart, but it
is this same Idea which gives itself a worldly form as the state and fashions
for itself an existence and an actuality in knowing and willing. Now if you
say that the state must be grounded on religion, you may mean that it
should rest on rationality and arise out of it; but your statement may also
be misunderstood to mean that people are most adroitly schooled to obe-
dience if their spirits are shackled by an unfree religion. (The Christian
religion, however, is the religion of freedom, though it must be admitted
that this religion may become changed in character and perverted from
freedom to bondage when it is infected with superstition.) Now if you
mean that people must have religion so that their spirits, already shackled,
may the more easily be oppressed by the state, then the purport of your
statement is bad. But if you mean that people ought to respect the state,
this whole whose limbs they are, then of course the best means of eﬀecting
Third Part: Ethical Life
254

this is to give them philosophical insight into the essence of the state,
though, in default of that, a religious frame of mind may lead to the same
result. For this reason, the state may have need of religion and faith. But
the state remains essentially distinct from religion, since whatever it
claims, it claims in the form of a rightful duty, and it is a matter of
indiﬀerence to it in what spirit that duty is performed. The ﬁeld of reli-
gion, on the other hand, is inwardness, and just as the state would jeop-
ardize the right of inwardness if it made demands in a religious manner, so
also when the church acts like a state and imposes penalties, it degenerates
into a religion of tyranny.
A third diﬀerence which is connected with the foregoing is that the con-
tent of religion is and remains shrouded [eingehüllt], and consequently
religion’s place is in the ﬁeld of the heart, feeling, and representation. In
this ﬁeld everything has the form of subjectivity. The state, on the other
hand, actualizes itself and gives its determinations a stable existence. Now
if religious feeling wished to assert itself in the state in the same way as it
is wont to do in its own ﬁeld, it would overturn the organization of the
state, because the diﬀerent organs of the state have latitude to pursue their
several distinct paths, while in religion everything is always referred back
to the totality. If this totality, then, wished to embrace all the relations of
the state, this would be fanaticism; the wish to have the whole in every
particular could be fulﬁlled only by the destruction of the particular, and
fanaticism is just the refusal to give scope to particular diﬀerences. Hence
to say: ‘To the pious no law is given’ is nothing but an expression of this
same fanaticism. Once piety usurps the place of the state, it cannot toler-
ate the determinate but simply destroys it. It is quite consistent with this
if piety leaves decisions to conscience, to the inner life, and is not governed
by reasons: for this inner life does not develop into reasoned argument or
give an account of itself. Hence if piety is to pass for the actuality of the
state, all laws are cast to the winds and subjective feeling is the legislator.
This feeling may be pure caprice, and whether it is or not can only be
learnt from its actions. But by becoming actions and precepts, its actions
assume the guise of laws, and this is just the very opposite of the subjec-
tive feeling with which we started. This feeling has God for its object, and
we might make him the determinant of everything. But God is the univer-
sal Idea and in feeling remains indeterminate and so is too immature to
determine what is existent in the state in a developed form. It is precisely
the fact that everything in the state is ﬁxed and secure which is the bul-
wark against caprice and positive opinion. Religion as such, then, ought
not to be the governor.
271. The political constitution is, in the ﬁrst place, the organiza-
tion of the state and the self-related process of its organic life, a process
The State
255

whereby it diﬀerentiates its moments within itself and develops them
to self-subsistence. Secondly, the state is an individual, unique and
exclusive, and therefore related to others. Thus it turns its
diﬀerentiating activity outward and accordingly establishes within
itself the ideality of its subsisting inward diﬀerences.
Addition: Just as irritability in the living organism is itself from one point
of view something inward, something belonging to the organism as such,
so here the outward reference is also an inner-directedness. The inner side
of the state as such is the civil power, while its outward direction is the
military power, although this has a determinate place inside the state itself.
Now to have both these powers in equilibrium constitutes an important
factor in the history [Geschichte] of the state.* Sometimes the civil power
is wholly eﬀaced and rests entirely on the military power, as was the case,
for instance, in the time of the Roman Emperors and the Praetorians.* At
other times, nowadays for example, the military power is solely the prod-
uct of the civil power, as when all the citizens are eligible for conscription.
1. The Internal Constitution for itself
272. The constitution is rational insofar as the state inwardly
diﬀerentiates and determines its activity in accordance with the
nature of the concept. The result of this is that each of these powers is
in itself the totality, because each contains the other moments and
has them eﬀective in itself, and because the moments, being expres-
sions of the diﬀerentiation of the concept, remain utterly within its
ideality and constitute nothing but a single individual whole.
In our day there has come before the public an endless amount of
babble about the constitution, as about reason itself, and the stalest
babble of all has been produced in Germany, thanks to those* who
have persuaded themselves that they have the best understanding
of what a constitution is, to the exclusion of everyone else and in
particular of governments. These people are convinced that they
have an unassailable justiﬁcation for what they say because they
claim that religion and piety are the basis of all this shallow think-
ing of theirs. It is no wonder that this babble has made reasonable
men just as sick of the words ‘reason’, ‘enlightenment’, ‘right’,
etc., as of the words ‘constitution’ and ‘freedom’, and one might
well be ashamed now to go on discussing the constitution of the
state at all! However, we may at least hope that this surfeit will be
eﬀective in producing the general conviction that philosophical
Third Part: Ethical Life
256

knowledge of such topics cannot arise from argumentation, reasons
[Gründe], and calculations of purpose and utility, still less from the
heart, love, and inspiration, but only from the concept. We may
also hope that those who hold that the divine is inconceivable*
[unbegreiﬂich] and the knowledge of truth a wild-goose chase will
feel themselves bound to refrain from taking part in the discus-
sion. The products of their hearts and their inspirations are either
undigested chatter or mere ediﬁcation, and whatever the worth of
these neither can lay claim to the attention of philosophy.
Amongst current ideas, mention may be made (in connection
with § 269) of the necessity for a division of powers within the
state.104 This point is of the highest importance and, if taken in its
true sense, may rightly be regarded as the guarantee of public free-
dom. It is an idea, however, with which the very people who pre-
tend to talk out of their inspiration and love neither have, nor
desire to have, any acquaintance, since it is precisely there that the
moment of rational determinacy lies. That is to say, the principle
of the division of powers contains the essential moment of
diﬀerence, of rationality realized. But when the abstract under-
standing handles it, it reads into it the false doctrine of the absolute
self-subsistence of each of the powers against the others, and then
one-sidedly interprets their relation to each other as negative, as a
mutual restriction. This view implies that the attitude adopted by
each power to the others is hostile and apprehensive, as if the
others were evils, and that their function is to oppose one another
and as a result of this counterpoise to bring about a general equilib-
rium, but not a living unity. It is only the inner self-determination
of the concept, not any other consideration, whether of purpose or
advantage, that is the absolute source of the division of powers,
and in virtue of this alone is the organization of the state some-
thing inherently rational and the image of eternal reason.
How the concept and then, more concretely, how the Idea,
determine themselves inwardly and so posit their moments—uni-
versality, particularity, and individuality—in abstraction from
one another, is discoverable from logic, though not of course from
the logic commonly in vogue.105 To take the merely negative as a
The State
257
104 See Charles Louis de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws
(1748), Part 2, Book 11, chap. 6.
105 See Encyclopaedia (1830), §§ 163 ﬀ. [S.H.]

starting-point and to make the willing of evil and the mistrust of
such willing the primary factor, and then on the basis of this pre-
supposition slyly to construct dikes whose eﬃciency simply neces-
sitates corresponding dikes over against them, is characteristic in
thought of the negative understanding and in disposition of the
outlook of the rabble (see § 244).
If the powers (e.g. what are called the ‘executive’ and the ‘legis-
lature’) become self-subsistent, then as we have seen on a grand
scale,* the destruction of the state is immediately posited; or, if the
state is maintained in its essentials, it is strife which, through the
subjection by one power of the others, initially produces unity of
one form or another, and so alone secures what is essential, the
maintenance of the state.
Addition: We should desire to have in the state nothing except what is an
expression of rationality. The state is the world which spirit has made for
itself; the course it follows, therefore, is one that is determinate and has
being in and for itself. How often we talk of the wisdom of God in nature!
But we are not to assume for that reason that the physical world of nature
is a loftier thing than the world of spirit. As high as spirit stands above
nature, so high does the state stand above physical life. One must there-
fore venerate the state as an earthly divinity [Irdisch-Göttliches], and
observe that if it is diﬃcult to comprehend nature, it is inﬁnitely harder to
understand the state. It is a fact of the highest importance that nowadays
we have gained determinate intuitions about the state in general and have
been so much engaged in discussing and making constitutions. But by get-
ting so far we have not yet settled everything. In addition, it is necessary
to bring to bear on a rational topic the reason of intuition [Vernunft der
Anschauung], to know what the essence of the matter is and to realize that
the obvious is not always the essential.
The powers of the state, then, must certainly be distinguished, but each
of them must form a whole in itself and contain within itself the other
moments. When we speak of the distinct activities of these powers, we
must not slip into the monstrous error of so interpreting their distinction
as to suppose that each power should subsist independently [für sich] in
abstraction from the others. The truth is that the powers are to be distin-
guished only as moments of the concept. If instead they subsist independ-
ently in abstraction from one another, then it is as clear as day that two
independent units cannot constitute a unity but must of course give rise to
strife, whereby either the whole is destroyed or else unity is restored by
force. Thus in the French Revolution, the legislative power sometimes
engulfed the so-called ‘executive’, the executive sometimes engulfed the
Third Part: Ethical Life
258

legislative, and in such a case it is absurd to formulate e.g. the moral
demand for harmony.
Leave the thing to the heart if you like and be saved all trouble; but even
if ethical feeling is indispensable, it has no right to determine the powers
of the state by reference to itself alone. The vital point, then, is that since
the determinations of the powers are in themselves the whole, so also all
the powers in their existence constitute the concept as a whole. Mention is
usually made of three powers: the legislative, the executive, and the 
judiciary. Of these the ﬁrst corresponds to universality and the second to
particularity, but the judiciary is not the third moment of the concept,
since the individuality of the judiciary lies outside the above spheres.
273. The state as a political entity is thus divided into three 
substantial elements:
(a) the power to determine and establish the universal—the 
legislative power;
(b) the subsumption of individual cases and the spheres of particu-
larity under the universal—the executive power;
(c) subjectivity, as the will with the power of ultimate decision—
the crown [or princely power]. In the crown, the diﬀerent powers are
bound into an individual unity which is thus at once the apex and
beginning of the whole, i.e. of a constitutional monarchy.
The development of the state to constitutional monarchy is the
achievement of the modern world, a world in which the substan-
tial Idea has gained inﬁnite form. The history of this inner deep-
ening of the spirit of the world—or in other words this free
development in the course of which the Idea, realizing rationality
[in the external], releases its moments (and they are only its
moments) from itself as totalities, and in so doing retains them in
the ideal unity of the concept—the history of this genuine forma-
tion of ethical life is the content of universal world-history.
The ancient division of constitutions into monarchy, aristocracy,
and democracy, is based upon the notion of substantial, still undi-
vided, unity, a unity which has not yet come to its inner
diﬀerentiation (to a developed, internal organization) and which
therefore has not yet attained depth or concrete rationality. From
the standpoint of the ancient world, therefore, this division is the
true and correct one, since for a unity of that still substantial type,
a unity that has not achieved its absolute unfolding [Entfaltung]
The State
259

within itself, diﬀerence is essentially an external diﬀerence and
appears at ﬁrst as a diﬀerence in the number 106 of those in whom
that substantial unity is supposed to be immanent.* These forms,
which on this principle belong to diﬀerent wholes, are reduced in
constitutional monarchy to moments of the whole. The monarch
is one person; the few come on the scene with the executive power,
and the many in general with the legislative power. But, as has
been indicated [§ 214], purely quantitative distinctions like these
are only superﬁcial and do not aﬀord the concept of the thing.
Equally inadequate is the mass of contemporary talk about the
democratic and aristocratic elements in monarchy, because when
the elements speciﬁed in such talk are found in monarchy they are
no longer democratic or aristocratic in character.
There are notions [Vorstellungen] of constitutions in which the
mere abstraction of the state is placed at the top to rule and com-
mand, and how many individuals are at the head of such a state,
whether one or a few or all, is a question left undecided and
regarded as a matter of indiﬀerence. ‘All these forms’, says Fichte,
‘are justiﬁed, provided there be an ephorate [Ephorat]’ (a scheme
devised by Fichte to be a counterpoise to the chief power in the
state), ‘and may be the means of introducing universal rights into
the state and maintaining them there.’* A view of this kind—and
the device of the ephorate also—is begotten by the superﬁcial
conception of the state to which reference has just been made. It is
true enough that in quite simple social conditions these diﬀerences
of constitutional form have little or no meaning. For instance, in
the course of his legislation Moses prescribed that, in the event of
his people’s desiring a king, its institutions should remain
unchanged except for the new requirement that the king should not
‘multiply horses to himself . . . nor wives . . . nor silver and gold’.107
Furthermore, in a sense one may of course say that the Idea is also
indiﬀerent to these forms (including monarchy, but only when it
is restricted in meaning by being deﬁned as an alternative to aris-
tocracy and democracy). But the Idea is indiﬀerent to them, not in
Fichte’s but in the opposite sense, because all three are inadequate
to it in its rational development (see § 272) and in none of them,
Third Part: Ethical Life
260
106 Hegel’s reference: See Encyclopaedia § 82 [3rd edn. § 132]. [‘§ 82’ is probably a mis-
print. It should read: ‘§ 52 [3rd edn. § 99]’. S.H.]
107 Deuteronomy 17: 16–17.

taken singly, could the Idea attain its right and its actuality.
Consequently, it is quite idle to enquire which of the three is most
to be preferred. Such forms must be discussed historically or not
at all.
Still, here again, as in so many other places, we must recognize
the depth of Montesquieu’s insight in his now famous treatment
of the principles of these forms of government. To recognize the
accuracy of his account, however, we must not misunderstand it.
As is well known, he held that ‘virtue’108 was the principle of
democracy, since it is indeed the case that that type of constitution
rests on the disposition [of the citizens], i.e. on the purely substan-
tial form in which the rationality of the will that is in and for itself
still exists in democracy. Montesquieu goes on to say that in the
seventeenth century England provided ‘a ﬁne spectacle of the way
in which eﬀorts to found a democracy were rendered ineﬀective by
a lack of virtue in the leaders’. And again he adds: ‘when virtue
vanishes from the republic, ambition enters hearts which are cap-
able of it and greed masters everyone . . . so that the state becomes
everyone’s booty and its strength now consists only in the power
of a few individuals and the licence of all alike’. These quotations
call for the comment that in more mature social conditions and
when the powers of particularity have developed and become free,
a form of rational law other than the form of disposition is
required, because virtue in the heads of the state is not enough if
the state as a whole is to gain the power to hold itself together and
to bestow on the powers of developed particularity both their posi-
tive and their negative rights. Equally, we must remove the mis-
understanding of supposing that because the disposition of virtue
is the substantial form of a democratic republic, it is evidently
superﬂuous in monarchy or even absent from it altogether; and,
ﬁnally, we may not suppose that there is an opposition and an
incompatibility between virtue and the legally determinate activ-
ity of a state whose organization is fully articulated.
The fact that ‘moderation’109 is cited as the principle of aristoc-
racy implies the beginning at this point of a divorce between
The State
261
108 See Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws, Part 1, Book 3, chap. 3. The quotations
which follow immediately are from the same chapter.
109 See Ibid., chap. 4.

public authority and private interest. And yet at the same time
these touch each other so immediately that this constitution by its
very nature stands on the verge of lapsing forthwith into tyranny
or anarchy—the harshest of political conditions—and so into
self-annihilation. See Roman history, for example.*
The fact that Montesquieu discerns ‘honour’110 as the principle
of monarchy at once makes it clear that by ‘monarchy’ he under-
stands, not the patriarchal or any ancient type, nor, on the other
hand, the type organized into an objective constitution,* but only
feudal monarchy, the type in which the relationships of right within
the state are crystallized into the rights of private property and the
privileges of individuals and corporations. In this type of constitu-
tion, political life rests on privileged persons and a great part of
what must be done for the maintenance of the state is settled at
their pleasure. The result is that their services are the objects not
of duty but only of ideas and opinions. Thus it is not duty but only
honour which holds the state together.
Another question readily presents itself here: ‘Who is to frame
the constitution?’ This question seems clear, but closer inspection
shows at once that it is meaningless, for it presupposes that there is
no constitution there, but only an atomistic aggregate of individuals.
How an aggregate of individuals could acquire a constitution,
whether through itself or through someone else’s aid, whether
through benevolence or through force or through thought, would
have to be left to it to determine, since the concept has nothing to
do with any aggregate. But if the question presupposes an already
existent constitution, then it is not about framing, but only about
altering the constitution, and the very presupposition of a constitu-
tion immediately implies that its alteration may come about only by
constitutional means. In any case, however, it is absolutely essential
that the constitution should not be regarded as something made, even
though it has come into being in time. It must be treated rather as
something simply existent in and for itself, as divine therefore, and
constant, and so as exalted above the sphere of things that are made.
Addition: The principle of the modern world as such is freedom of subjec-
tivity, the principle that all the essential aspects present in the spiritual
Third Part: Ethical Life
262
110 See Ibid., chaps. 6–7.

totality are now coming into their right in the course of their development.
Starting from this point of view, we can hardly raise the idle question:
Which is the better form of government, monarchy or democracy? We
may only say that all constitutional forms are one-sided unless they can
sustain in themselves the principle of free subjectivity and know how to
correspond with a developed rationality.
274. Spirit is actual only as that which it knows itself to be, and the
state, as the spirit of a people, is both the law permeating all relation-
ships within the state and also at the same time the customs and con-
sciousness of its citizens. It follows, therefore, that the constitution of
any given people depends in general on the character and develop-
ment of its self-consciousness. In its self-consciousness its subjective
freedom is rooted and so, therefore, is the actuality of its constitution.
The proposal to give a constitution—even one more or less
rational in content—to a people a priori is an idea [Einfall] which
overlooks precisely that moment through which a constitution is
more than a product of thought. Hence every people has the con-
stitution appropriate to it and suitable for it.
Addition: The state in its constitution must permeate all relationships
within the state. Napoleon, for instance, wished to give the Spaniards a
constitution a priori,* but the project turned out badly enough. A consti-
tution is not just something manufactured; it is the work of centuries, it is
the Idea, the consciousness of rationality so far as that consciousness is
developed in a particular people. No constitution, therefore, is just the
creation of its subjects. What Napoleon gave to the Spaniards was more
rational than what they had before, and yet they recoiled from it as from
something alien, because they were not yet educated up to its level. 
A people’s constitution must embody its feeling for its rights and its con-
dition, otherwise there may be a constitution there in an external way, but
it is meaningless and valueless. Individuals may indeed often feel the need
and the longing for a better constitution, but it is quite another thing, and
one that does not arise till later, for the mass of the people to be animated
by such an idea. The principle of morality, of Socratic inwardness, was a
necessary product of his age, but time was required before it could become
part and parcel of the general self-consciousness.
(a) The Crown
275. The power of the crown contains in itself the three moments
of the totality (see § 272), viz. (α) the universality of the constitution
The State
263

and the laws; (β) counsel, which refers the particular to the universal;
and (γ) the moment of ultimate decision, as the self-determination to
which everything else reverts and from which everything else derives
the beginning of its actuality. This absolute self-determination con-
stitutes the distinctive principle of the power of the crown as such,
and this is the ﬁrst thing to be expounded.
Addition: We begin with the power of the crown, i.e. with the moment of
individuality, since this includes the state’s three moments as a totality in
itself. The I, that is to say, is at once the most individual thing and the
most universal. In nature, there is also initially individuality, but reality—
non-ideality and externality—is not being-with-itself [das Beisichseiende].
On the contrary, in nature the various individual things subsist alongside
one another. In spirit, on the other hand, variety exists only as something
ideal and as a unity. The state, then, as something spiritual, is the exposi-
tion of all its moments, but individuality is at the same time its inner soul
and its life-giving principle, i.e. the sovereignty which contains all
diﬀerences in itself.
276. (1) The fundamental determination of the political state is
the substantial unity, i.e. the ideality,111 of its moments. (α) In this
unity, the particular powers and their activities are dissolved and yet
retained. They are retained, however, only insofar as they have no
independent justiﬁcation but one whose nature and extent are deter-
mined by the Idea of the whole; from its authority [Macht] they ori-
ginate, and they are its ﬂuid members while it is their simple self.
Addition: Much the same thing as this ideality of the moments in the state
occurs with life in the organic body. Life is present at every point. There
is only one life at all points and nothing withstands it. Separated from that
life, every point dies. This is also the ideality of all individual estates,
powers, and corporations, however much they have the impulse to subsist
and be independent [für sich]. It is with them as it is with the belly in the
organism.112 It, too, asserts its independence, but at the same time its inde-
pendence is superseded and sacriﬁced and it passes over into the whole.
277. (β) The particular activities and agencies of the state are its
essential moments and therefore are proper to it. The individual
functionaries and agents are attached to their oﬃce not on the
strength of their immediate personality, but only on the strength of
their universal and objective qualities. Hence it is in an external and
Third Part: Ethical Life
264
111 See third explanatory note to p. 31 [p. 331 below]. [S.H.]
112 See ﬁrst explanatory note to p. 242 [p. 355 below]. [S.H.]

contingent way that these oﬃces are linked with particular persons,
and therefore the functions and powers of the state cannot be private
property.
Addition: The activity of the state is in the hands of individuals. But their
authority to conduct its aﬀairs is based not on nature but on their 
objective qualities. Ability, skill, character, all belong to an individual in
his particular capacity. He must be educated and be trained to a particular
task. Hence an oﬃce may not be saleable or hereditary. In France, seats in
parliament were formerly saleable, and in the English army oﬃcers’
commissions up to a certain rank are saleable to this day.* This saleabil-
ity of oﬃce, however, was or is still connected with the medieval constitu-
tion of certain states, and such constitutions are nowadays gradually
disappearing.
278. These two determinations (α) and (β) constitute the sover-
eignty of the state. That is to say, sovereignty depends on the fact that
the particular functions and powers of the state are not self-subsistent
or ﬁrmly grounded either on their own account or in the particular
will of individuals, but have their roots ultimately in the unity of the
state as their simple self.
This is the internal sovereignty of the state. Sovereignty has another
side, i.e. external sovereignty, on which see below [§§ 321 ﬀ.].
In the former feudal monarchy, the state was certainly sover-
eign vis-à-vis other states; internally, however, not only was the
monarch not sovereign at all, but the state itself was not sovereign
either. On the one hand, the particular functions and powers of
the state and civil society were vested (compare Remark to § 273)
in independent corporations and communities, so that the state as
a whole was rather an aggregate than an organism; and, on the
other hand, oﬃce was the private property of individuals, and
hence what they were to do in relation to the whole was left to
their own opinion and caprice.
The idealism which constitutes sovereignty is the same determin-
ation as that in accordance with which the so-called ‘parts’ of an
animal organism are not parts but members, moments in an
organic whole, whose isolation and independence spell disease.113
The principle here is the same as that which came before us (see 
§ 7) in the abstract concept of the will as self-relating negativity,
The State
265
113 Hegel’s reference: See Encyclopaedia, § 293 [3rd edn. § 371].

and therefore as universality determining itself to individuality and
so superseding all particularity and determinacy: it is that of the
absolute self-determining ground (see Remark to § 279). To
understand this, one must have mastered the whole concept of
substance and of the genuine subjectivity of the concept.114
The fact that the sovereignty of the state is the ideality of 
all particular authorities within it gives rise to the easy and 
also very common misunderstanding that this ideality is mere
power [Macht] and empty arbitrariness while ‘sovereignty’ is a
synonym for ‘despotism’. But despotism means any condition of
lawlessness in which the particular will as such, whether of a
monarch or the people (ochlocracy), counts as law or rather takes
the place of law; while it is precisely under lawful, constitutional
conditions that sovereignty is to be found as the moment of ideal-
ity—the ideality of the particular spheres and functions. That is
to say, sovereignty brings it about that each of these spheres is not
something independent, self-subsistent in its aims and modes of
working, something immersed solely in itself, but that instead,
even in these aims and modes of working, each is determined by
and dependent on the aim of the whole (the aim which has 
been denominated in general terms by the rather vague expression
‘welfare of the state’).
This ideality manifests itself in a twofold way:
(i) In times of peace, the particular spheres and functions
pursue the path of satisfying their particular functions and aims,
and it is in part only by way of the unconscious necessity of the
thing that their self-seeking is turned into a contribution to recip-
rocal support and to the support of the whole (see § 183). In part,
however, it is by the direct inﬂuence of higher authority that they
are not only continually brought back to the aim of the whole and
restricted accordingly (see § 289), but are also constrained to per-
form direct services for the support of the whole.
(ii) In a situation of exigency [Not], however, whether in inter-
nal or external aﬀairs, the organism of which these particular
spheres are members fuses into the simple concept of sovereignty.
The sovereign is entrusted with the salvation of the state at the
sacriﬁce of these particular authorities whose powers are otherwise
Third Part: Ethical Life
266
114 See Encyclopaedia (1830), §§ 150 ﬀ. [S.H.]

valid, and it is then that that ideality comes into its proper actual-
ity (see § 321).
279. (2) Sovereignty, at ﬁrst simply the universal thought of this
ideality, comes into existence only as subjectivity certain of itself, as
the will’s abstract and to that extent ungrounded self-determination
in which ﬁnality of decision is rooted. This is the strictly individual
aspect of the state, and in virtue of this alone is the state one. The
truth of subjectivity, however, is attained only in a subject, and 
the truth of personality only in a person; and in a constitution which
has progressed to real rationality, each of the three moments of 
the concept has its separate shape which is actual for itself. Hence
this absolutely decisive moment of the whole is not individuality in
general, but one individual, the monarch.
The immanent development of a science, the derivation of its
entire content from the concept in its simplicity (a science other-
wise derived, whatever its merit, does not deserve the name of a
philosophical science), exhibits this peculiarity, that one and the
same concept—the will in this instance—which begins by being
abstract (because it is at the beginning) maintains itself even while
it consolidates its speciﬁc determinations, and that too solely by its
own activity, and in this way gains a concrete content. Hence it is
the basic moment of personality, abstract at the start in immediate
right, which has developed itself through its various forms of 
subjectivity, and now—at the stage of absolute right, of the state,
of the completely concrete objectivity of the will—has become the
personality of the state, its certainty of itself. This last reabsorbs
[aufhebt] all particularity into its simple self, cuts short the weigh-
ing of pros and cons between which it lets itself oscillate perpetu-
ally now this way and now that, and by saying ‘I will’ makes its
decision and so inaugurates all activity and actuality.
Further, however, personality, like subjectivity in general, as
inﬁnitely self-relating, has its truth (to be precise, its initial, imme-
diate, truth) only in a person, in a subject existing for himself, and
what exists for itself is also simply one. It is only as a person, the
monarch, that the personality of the state is actual.—Personality
expresses the concept as such; but the person enshrines the actu-
ality of the concept, and only when the concept is determined as
person is it the Idea or truth.—A so-called ‘moral person’, be it a
society, a community, or a family, however inherently concrete it
The State
267

may be, contains personality only abstractly, as one moment of
itself. In a ‘moral person’, personality has not achieved its true
mode of existence. The state, however, is precisely this totality in
which the moments of the concept have attained actuality in
accordance with their distinctive truth. All these determinations,
both for themselves and in the shapes they assume, have been dis-
cussed in the whole course of this treatise. They are repeated here,
however, because while their existence in their particular shapes is
readily granted, it does not follow at all that they are recognized
and apprehended again when they appear in their true place, not
isolated, but in their truth as moments of the Idea.
The concept of the monarch is therefore of all concepts the
hardest for ratiocination [Räsonnement], i.e. for the method of
reﬂection employed by the understanding. This method refuses to
move beyond isolated determinations and hence here again knows
only reasons [Gründe], ﬁnite points of view, and derivation from
such reasons. Consequently it exhibits the dignity of the monarch
as something derived, not only in its form, but in its determination.
The truth is, however, that to be something not derived but purely
self-originating is precisely the concept of monarchy. Closest to
this concept, therefore, is the idea of treating the monarch’s right
as grounded in the authority of God, since the unconditional 
character of that right is contained in its divinity.* We are famil-
iar, however, with the misunderstandings connected with this
idea, and it is precisely this ‘divine’ element which it is the task of
a philosophical treatment to comprehend.
We may speak of the ‘sovereignty of the people’ in the sense
that a people is self-subsistent vis-à-vis other peoples, and consti-
tutes a state of its own, like the British people for instance. But the
peoples of England, Scotland, or Ireland, or the peoples of Venice,
Genoa, Ceylon, etc., are no longer sovereign peoples now that they
have ceased to have rulers or supreme governments of their own.
We may also speak of internal sovereignty residing in the
people, provided that we are speaking generally about the whole
and meaning only what was shown above (see §§ 277, 278), namely
that it is to the state that sovereignty belongs.
The usual sense, however, in which one has recently begun to
speak* of the ‘sovereignty of the people’ is that it is something
opposed to the sovereignty existent in the monarch. So opposed to
Third Part: Ethical Life
268

the sovereignty of the monarch, the sovereignty of the people is
one of the confused notions based on the wild idea of the ‘people’.
Taken without its monarch and the articulation of the whole
which is the necessary and immediate concomitant of monarchy,
the people is a formless mass and no longer a state. It lacks every
one of those determinations—sovereignty, government, courts of
law, public authorities [Obrigkeit], estates, etc.—which are to be
found only in a whole which is inwardly organized. By the very
emergence into a people’s life of moments of this kind which relate
to an organization, to life in the state, a people ceases to be that
indeterminate abstraction which, when represented in a quite 
general way, is called the ‘people’.
If by ‘sovereignty of the people’ is understood a republican form
[of government], or to speak more speciﬁcally (since under ‘repub-
lic’ are comprised all sorts of other empirical combinations which
are in any case irrelevant in a philosophical treatise) a democratic
form, then all that is needed in reply has been said already (in the
Remark to § 273); and besides, such a notion cannot be further 
discussed in face of the Idea of the state in its full development.
If the ‘people’ is represented neither as a patriarchal clan, nor as
living under the undeveloped conditions which make democracy
or aristocracy possible as forms of government (see Remark to 
§ 273), nor as living under some other unorganized and haphazard
conditions, but instead as an inwardly developed, genuinely
organic, totality, then sovereignty is there as the personality of the
whole, and this personality is there, in the reality adequate to its
concept, as the person of the monarch.
At the stage at which constitutions are divided, as above men-
tioned [in the Remark to § 273], into democracy, aristocracy, and
monarchy, the point of view taken is that of a still substantial
unity, abiding in itself, without having yet attained its inﬁnite
diﬀerentiation and immersion in itself. At that stage, the moment
of the ﬁnal, self-determining decision of the will does not come on
the scene for itself in its own distinctive actuality as an organic
moment immanent in the state. Nonetheless, even in those com-
paratively undeveloped shapes of the state, there must always be
individuals at the head. Leaders must either be available already,
as they are in monarchies of that type, or, as happens in aristocracies,
but more particularly in democracies, they may rise to the top, 
The State
269

as statesmen or generals, by chance and in accordance with the
particular needs of the hour. This must happen, since all action and
actuality has its beginning and completion in the decisive unity of
a leader. But comprised in a union of powers which remains
undiﬀerentiated, this subjectivity of decision is inevitably either
contingent in its origin and emergence, or else is in one way or
another subordinate to something else. Hence in such states, the
power of the leaders was conditioned, and only in something
beyond them could there be found a pure unambiguous decision,
a fatum, determining aﬀairs from without. As a moment of the
Idea, this decision had to come into existence, though rooted in
something outside the circle of human freedom with which the
state is concerned. Herein lies the origin of the need for deriving
the last word on great events and important aﬀairs of state from
oracles, a ‘daemon’ (in the case of Socrates),* the entrails of ani-
mals, the feeding and ﬂight of birds, etc. It was when people had
not yet grasped the depths of self-consciousness or risen out of
their undiﬀerentiated unity of substance to their being-for-self
[Fürsichsein] that they lacked strength to look within their own
being for the ﬁnal word.
In the ‘daemon’ of Socrates (compare Remark to § 138) we see
the will which formerly had simply displaced itself beyond itself
now beginning to turn in on itself and to recognize itself within
itself. This is the beginning of a self-knowing and so genuine free-
dom. This real freedom of the Idea consists precisely in giving to
each of the moments of rationality its own self-conscious, present
actuality. Hence it is this freedom which makes the ultimate 
self-determining certainty—the culmination of the concept of 
the will—the function of a single consciousness. This ultimate
self-determination, however, can fall within the sphere of human
freedom only insofar as it has the position of a pinnacle, isolated
for itself and raised above all that is particular and conditional, for
only so is it actual in a way adequate to its concept.
Addition: In the organization of the state—which here means in constitu-
tional monarchy—we must have nothing before our minds except the
inherent necessity of the Idea. All other points of view must vanish. 
The state must be treated as a great architectonic structure, as a hiero-
glyph of the reason which reveals itself in actuality. Everything to do 
with mere utility, externality, and so forth, must be eliminated from the
Third Part: Ethical Life
270

philosophical treatment of the subject. Now our ordinary ideas can quite
well grasp the conception of the state as a self-determining and completely
sovereign will, as the ultimate source of decision. What is more diﬃcult is
to apprehend this ‘I will’ as a person. To do so is not to say that the
monarch may act capriciously. Rather, he is bound by the concrete con-
tent of the counsel he receives, and if the constitution is stable, he has
often no more to do than sign his name. But this name is important. It is
the point beyond which it is impossible to go. It might be said that an
organic, articulated, constitution was present even in the beautiful democ-
racy of Athens, and yet we cannot help noticing that the Greeks derived
their ﬁnal decisions from the observation of quite external phenomena
such as oracles, the entrails of sacriﬁcial animals, and the ﬂight of birds.
They treated nature as a power which in those ways revealed and
expressed what was good for humanity. At that time, self-consciousness
had not yet advanced to the abstraction of subjectivity, not even so far as
to understand that, when a decision is to be made, an ‘I will’ must be pro-
nounced by man himself. This ‘I will’ constitutes the great diﬀerence
between the ancient world and the modern, and in the great ediﬁce of the
state it must therefore have its distinctive existence. Unfortunately, how-
ever, this determination is regarded as only external and optional.
280. (3) This ultimate self in which the will of the state is concen-
trated is, when thus taken in abstraction, a simple self and therefore
is immediate individuality. Hence the determination of naturalness is
contained in its very concept. The monarch, therefore, is essentially
determined as this individual, in abstraction from all other content,
and this individual is raised to the dignity of monarchy in an imme-
diate, natural, fashion, i.e. through his natural birth.
This transition of the concept of pure self-determination into the
immediacy of being and so into the realm of nature is of a purely
speculative character, and cognition of it therefore belongs to
logic.115 Moreover, this transition is on the whole the same as that
familiar to us in the nature of willing, and there the process is to
translate something from subjectivity (i.e. some purpose held
before the mind) into existence (see § 8). But the distinctive form
of the Idea and of the transition here under consideration is the
immediate conversion of the pure self-determination of the will
(i.e. of the simple concept itself) into this natural existence with-
The State
271
115 See Encyclopaedia (1830), § 244. [S.H.]

out the mediation of a particular content (like a purpose in the case
of action).
In the so-called ‘ontological’ proof of the existence of God, we
have the same conversion of the absolute concept into being. This
conversion has constituted the depth of the Idea in the modern
world, although recently it has been declared inconceivable,* with
the result that knowledge of truth has been renounced, since truth
is simply the unity of concept and existence (see § 23). Since the
consciousness of the understanding does not have this unity
within itself and refuses to move beyond the separation of these
two moments of the truth, it may perhaps, so far as God is con-
cerned, still permit a ‘faith’ in this unity. But since the idea of the
monarch is regarded as being quite familiar to ordinary conscious-
ness, the understanding clings here all the more tenaciously to its
separation [of the two moments] and the conclusions which its
astute reasoning deduces therefrom. As a result, it denies that the
moment of ultimate decision in the state is linked in and for itself
(i.e. in the rational concept) with the immediate and natural.
Consequently it infers, ﬁrst, that this link is a matter of contingency,
and further—since it has claimed that the absolute diﬀerence of
these moments is what is rational—that such a link is irrational,
and then there follow the other consequences that disrupt the Idea
of the state.*
Addition: It is often alleged against monarchy that it makes the welfare of
the state dependent on contingency, for, it is urged, the monarch may be
badly educated, he may perhaps be unworthy of the highest position in the
state, and it is senseless that such a state of aﬀairs should be regarded as
rational. But all this rests on a presupposition which is nugatory, namely
that everything depends on the monarch’s particular character. In a com-
pletely organized state, it is only a question of the culminating point of
formal decision (and a natural bulwark against passion. It is wrong there-
fore to demand objective qualities in a monarch);116 he has only to say ‘yes’
and dot the ‘i’; for the pinnacle [of the state] should be such that its par-
ticular character is not what is signiﬁcant. (This determination of the
monarch is rational because it corresponds with the concept, but since this
is hard to grasp, we often fail to see the rationality of monarchy. Monarchy
must be inherently stable and) whatever else the monarch may have in
Third Part: Ethical Life
272
116 The bracketed passages in this Addition are translated from the second edition of
the Philosophy of Right (1840); they did not appear in the ﬁrst.

addition to this power of ﬁnal decision belongs to his particular character
and should be of no consequence. Of course there may be circumstances
in which this particular character alone has prominence, but in that event
the state is either not fully developed, or else is badly constructed. In a
well-organized monarchy, the objective aspect belongs to law alone, to
which the monarch has only to add the subjective ‘I will’.
281. Both moments in their undivided unity—(a) the will’s ulti-
mate ungrounded self, and (b) therefore its similarly ungrounded
existence [Existenz] (as the determination that belongs to nature)—
constitute the Idea of something unmoved by caprice:* the ‘majesty’
of the monarch. In this unity lies the actual unity of the state, and it
is only through this, its inward and outward immediacy, that the
unity of the state is saved from the risk of being drawn down into the
sphere of particularity and its caprices, ends, and opinions, and saved
too from the war of factions round the throne and from the enfeeble-
ment and overthrow of the power of the state.
The rights of birth and inheritance constitute the basis of legit-
imacy, the basis of a right not purely positive but contained in the
Idea.
If succession to the throne is rigidly determined, i.e. if it is nat-
ural [and hereditary], then faction is obviated when the throne
falls vacant; this is one aspect of hereditary succession and it has
long been rightly stressed as a point in its favour. This aspect,
however, is only a consequence, and to make it the reason for
hereditary succession is to drag down the majesty of the throne
into the sphere of argumentation [Räsonnement], to ignore its true
character as ungrounded immediacy and ultimate inwardness, and
to base it not on the Idea of the state immanent within it, but on
something external to itself, on some extraneous notion such as the
‘welfare of the state’ or the ‘welfare of the people’. Once it has
been so based, its hereditary character may of course be deduced
by the use of middle terms [medios terminos]. But other middle
terms are equally available, and so therefore are diﬀerent conse-
quences, and it is only too well known what consequences have in
fact been drawn from this ‘welfare of the people’ (salut du peuple).*
Hence the majesty of the monarch is a topic for thoughtful treat-
ment by philosophy alone, since every method of enquiry, other
than the speculative method of the inﬁnite Idea which is purely
self-grounded, annuls the nature of majesty in and for itself.
The State
273

An elective monarchy seems of course to be the most natural
idea, i.e. the idea which superﬁcial thinking ﬁnds the handiest.
Because it is the concerns and interests of his people for which a
monarch has to provide, so the argument runs, it must be left to
the people to entrust with its welfare whomsoever it chooses, and
only with the grant of this trust does his right to rule arise. This
view, like the notion of the monarch as the highest oﬃcial in the
state, or the notion of a contractual relation between him and his
people, etc., is grounded on the will interpreted as the whim,
opinion, and caprice of the many.117 A will of this character counts
as the ﬁrst thing in civil society (as was pointed out some time
ago)118 or rather it tries to count as the only thing there, but it is
not the guiding principle of the family, still less of the state, and in
short it stands opposed to the Idea of ethical life.
It is truer to say that elective monarchy is the worst of institu-
tions, and its consequences suﬃce to reveal this to ratiocination.
To ratiocination, however, these consequences have the appear-
ance of something merely possible and probable, though they are
in fact inherent in the very essence of this institution. For in an
elective monarchy the nature of the situation is such that the 
ultimate decision is left with the particular will, and hence the con-
stitution becomes an electoral contract* [Wahlkapitulation], i.e. a
surrender of the power of the state to the discretion of the particu-
lar will. The result of this is that the particular powers of state turn
into private property, the sovereignty of the state is enfeebled and
lost, and ﬁnally the state disintegrates within and is overthrown
from without.*
Addition: If we are to grasp the Idea of the monarch, we cannot be content
with saying that God has appointed kings to rule over us, since God has
made everything, even the worst of things. The point of view of utility
does not get us very far either, and it is always possible to point out coun-
terbalancing disadvantages. Still less does it help to regard monarchy as a
positive right. That I should hold property is necessary, but my holding of
this particular property is contingent; and, in the same way, the right that
one person must stand at the head of the state seems contingent too if it is
treated as abstract and positive. This right, however, is present both as 
a felt need and as a requirement of the matter in and for itself. Monarchs
are not exactly distinguished by their bodily prowess or intellectual gifts,
Third Part: Ethical Life
274
117 See Remark to PR § 301.
118 In the section on civil society; see e.g. PR §§ 183 and 206.

and yet millions submit to their rule. Now to say that people allow them-
selves to be ruled counter to their own interests, ends, and intentions is
preposterous. People are not so stupid. It is their need, it is the inner power
of the Idea, which, even against their apparent consciousness, constrains
them to accept this rule and keeps them in that relation.
The monarch comes on the scene as the head and a part of the constitu-
tion, but it has to be said that there is no constitutional identity between a
conquered people and its prince. A rebellion in a province conquered in war
is a diﬀerent thing from a rising in a well-organized state. It is not against
their prince that the conquered are in rebellion, and they are committing
no crime against the state, because their connection with their master is not
a connection within the Idea or one within the inner necessity of the consti-
tution. In such a case, there is only a contract, no political tie. ‘I am not your
prince, I am your master,’* Napoleon retorted to the envoys at Erfurt.
282. The right to pardon criminals arises from the sovereignty of
the monarch, since it alone is empowered to actualize spirit’s power
of making undone what has been done and wiping out a crime by 
forgiving and forgetting it.
The right of pardon is one of the highest acknowledgements of the
majesty of spirit. Moreover it is one of those cases where a deter-
mination which belongs to a higher sphere is applied to or reﬂected
in the sphere below.* Applications of higher determinations to a
lower sphere, however, concern the particular science which has to
handle its subject-matter in all its empirical details (see footnote
[97] to the Remark to § 270). Another instance of the same kind of
thing is the subsumption under the concept of crime (which came
before us earlier—see §§ 95–102) of injuries against the state in
general, or against the sovereignty, majesty, and person of the
prince. In fact these acquire the character of crime of the highest
order, requiring a special procedure, etc.
Addition: Pardon is the remission of punishment, but it does not cancel
right. On the contrary, right stands and the one who is pardoned remains
a criminal as before. Pardon does not mean that he has not committed a
crime. This annulment of punishment may take place through religion,
since something done may be made undone in spirit by spirit itself. But
the power to accomplish this on earth resides in [the sovereign’s] majesty
alone and must belong solely to his groundless decision.
283. The second moment in the power of the crown is the moment
of particularity, or the moment of a determinate content and its sub-
sumption under the universal. Insofar as this acquires a particular
The State
275

existence, it does so in the highest advisory oﬃces and the individ-
uals who hold them. They bring before the monarch for his decision
the content of current aﬀairs of state or the legal provisions required
to meet existing needs, together with their objective aspects, i.e. the
grounds on which decision is to be based, the relevant laws, circum-
stances, etc. The individuals who discharge these duties are in imme-
diate contact with the person of the monarch and therefore their
choice and dismissal alike rest with his unrestricted arbitrary will.
284. It is only for the objective side of decision, i.e. for knowledge
of the content and the attendant circumstances, and for the legal and
other determining grounds, that people are answerable; in other
words, it is these alone which are capable of objective proof. It is for
this reason that these may fall within the province of advisory oﬃces
which are distinct from the personal will of the monarch as such.
Hence it is only such advisory oﬃces or their individual incumbents
that are made answerable. The personal majesty of the monarch, on
the other hand, as the ultimately decisive subjectivity, is above all
answerability for acts of government.
285. The third moment in the power of the crown concerns the
universal in and for itself which subsists subjectively in the con-
science of the monarch and objectively in the whole of the constitution
and the laws. Hence the power of the crown presupposes the other
moments in the state just as it is presupposed by each of them.
286. The objective guarantee of the power of the crown, of the
hereditary right of succession to the throne, and so forth, consists in
the fact that just as monarchy has its own actuality in distinction
from that of the other rationally determined moments in the state, so
these others possess for themselves the rights and duties appropriate
to their character. In the rational organism of the state, each member,
by maintaining itself as itself, eo ipso maintains the others in their 
distinctive character.
One of the results of more recent history is the development of a
monarchical constitution with succession to the throne ﬁrmly
ﬁxed on hereditary principles in accordance with primogeniture.
With this development, monarchy has been brought back to the
patriarchal principle in which it had its historical origin, but its
determination is now higher, because the monarch is the absolute
Third Part: Ethical Life
276

apex of an organically developed state. This historical result is of
the utmost importance for public freedom and for rationality in
the constitution, but, as was remarked above,119 it is often grossly
misunderstood despite the respect paid to it.
The history of despotisms, as of the former, purely feudal, mon-
archies, is a tale of the vicissitudes of revolt, monarchical tyranny,
civil war, the ruin of princes and of dynasties, and, consequentially,
the general devastation and overthrow of the state in both its inter-
nal and external aﬀairs. This is all due to the fact that, in monarchies
of that type, the division of the business of the state is purely
mechanical, the various parts being merely handed over to pashas,
vassals, etc. The diﬀerence between the parts is simply one of greater
or lesser power instead of being one of form and speciﬁc character.
Hence each part maintains itself and in doing so is productive only of
itself and not of the others at the same time; each incorporates in itself
all the moments required for independence and autonomy. When
there is an organic relation subsisting between members, not parts,
then each member by fulﬁlling the functions of its own sphere is 
eo ipso maintaining the others; what each fundamentally aims at and
achieves in maintaining itself is the maintenance of the others.
The guarantees in question here for the maintenance of the suc-
cession to the throne or for the power of the crown generally, or
for justice, public freedom, etc., are secured by means of institu-
tions. For subjective guarantees we may look to the aﬀection of the
people, to character, oaths of allegiance, power, and so forth, but,
when the constitution is being discussed, it is only objective guar-
antees that are at issue. And such guarantees are institutions, i.e.
mutually conditioning moments, organically interconnected.
Hence public freedom in general and a hereditary monarchy guar-
antee each other; their connection is absolute, because public 
freedom means a rational constitution, while the hereditary char-
acter of the power of the crown is, as has been shown [see § 280],
a moment lying in the concept of that power.
(b) The Executive Power
287. There is a distinction between the monarch’s decisions and
their execution and application, or in general between his decisions
The State
277
119 See Remarks to PR §§ 279 and 281.

and the continued execution or maintenance of past decisions, exist-
ing laws, regulations, organizations for the securing of common ends,
and so forth. This task of subsumption in general is comprised in the
executive power, which also includes the powers of the judiciary and
the police [or public authority]. The latter have a more immediate
bearing on the particular concerns of civil society and assert the 
universal interest in these particular aims.
288. There are particular interests common to everyone which
fall within civil society and lie outside the universal interest in and
for itself of the state proper (see § 256). The administration of these
is in the hands of corporations (see § 251), which represent commu-
nities and various professions and estates, and their oﬃcials, direc-
tors, administrators, and the like. It is the business of these oﬃcials
to manage the private property and interests of these particular
spheres and, from that point of view, their authority rests on the
conﬁdence of their peers and fellow-citizens. On the other hand,
however, these circles of particular interests must be subordinated to
the higher interests of the state, and hence the ﬁlling of positions of
responsibility in corporations, etc., will generally be eﬀected by a
mixture of popular election by those interested with conﬁrmation
and determination by a higher authority.
289. The maintenance of the state’s universal interest, and of
legality, in this sphere of particular rights, and the work of bringing
these rights back to the universal, require to be superintended by
delegates of the executive power, by (a) the executive civil servants,
and (b) the higher advisory oﬃcials (who are organized into commit-
tees). These converge in their supreme heads who are in direct con-
tact with the monarch.
Just as civil society is the battleﬁeld where everyone’s individual
private interest meets everyone else’s, so here we have the strug-
gle (a) of private interests against particular matters of common
concern and (b) of both of these together against the organization
of the state and its higher outlook. At the same time the spirit of
the corporation, engendered when the particular spheres gain
their rightful recognition, is now inwardly converted into the
spirit of the state, since it ﬁnds in the state the means of maintain-
ing its particular ends. This is the secret of the patriotism of the
citizens in the sense that they know the state as their substance,
Third Part: Ethical Life
278

because it is the state that maintains their particular spheres of
interest together with the justiﬁcation, authority, and welfare of
these. The spirit of the corporation immediately entails the root-
ing of the particular in the universal, and for this reason it is in this
corporate spirit that the depth and strength of disposition which
the state possesses resides.
The administration of a corporation’s business by its own oﬃcials
is frequently clumsy, because although they keep before their minds
and are acquainted with its special interests and aﬀairs, they have a
far less complete appreciation of the connection of those aﬀairs with
more remote conditions and universal points of view. In addition,
other circumstances contribute to the same result, e.g. close private
relationships and other factors putting oﬃcials on a footing of equal-
ity with those who should be their subordinates, the rather numer-
ous ways in which oﬃcials lack independence, and so on. This
personal sphere, however, may be regarded as one left to the
moment of formal freedom, one which aﬀords a playground for per-
sonal knowledge, personal decisions and their execution, petty pas-
sions and conceits. This is all the more permissible, the more trivial,
from the point of view of the more universal aﬀairs of state, is the
intrinsic worth of the business which in this way comes to ruin or is
managed less well or more laboriously, etc. And further, it is all the
more permissible, the more this laborious or foolish management of
such trivial aﬀairs stands in direct relation with the self-satisfaction
and vanity derived therefrom.
290. Division of labour (see § 198) occurs in the business of the
executive also. For this reason, the organization of oﬃcial bodies has
the formal though diﬃcult task of so arranging things that (a) civil
life shall be governed in a concrete manner from below where it is
concrete, but that (b) nonetheless the business of government shall be
divided into abstract branches managed by special bodies, and fur-
ther that (c) the operations of these diﬀerent centres of administra-
tion shall converge again at the lowest level and in concrete
supervision by the supreme executive.*
Addition: The point of special importance in the executive is the division
of functions. The executive is concerned with the transition from the 
universal to the particular and the individual, and its functions must 
be divided in accordance with the diﬀerences between its branches. 
The diﬃculty, however, is that these diﬀerent branches meet again at both
The State
279

the top and the bottom. The police and the judiciary, for instance, diverge,
but in any particular case they coincide again. The usual expedient
adopted to meet this diﬃculty is to appoint a Chancellor, a Prime
Minister, or a Ministerial Council to simplify the upper level of govern-
ment. But the result of this is that once more everything may be controlled
from above and have its source in the Minister’s power, and the business
of the state is, as we say, centralized. This entails the maximum of
simpliﬁcation, speed, and eﬃciency in fulﬁlling the universal interests of
the state. A regime of this kind was introduced by the French revolution-
aries, elaborated by Napoleon, and still exists in France today. On the
other hand, France lacks corporations and communes, i.e. circles wherein
particular and universal interests meet. It is true that these circles won too
great a measure of independence in the Middle Ages, when they were
states within states and obstinately congealed into independent corporate
bodies. But while that should not be allowed to happen, we may nonethe-
less aﬃrm that the proper strength of the state lies in its communities. In
them the executive meets with legitimate interests which it must respect,
and insofar as the administration can only further such interests, though it
must also supervise them, the individual ﬁnds protection in the exercise of
his rights and so links his particular interest with the maintenance of the
whole. For some time past organizations have been framed with a view to
controlling these particular spheres from above, and eﬀort has chieﬂy been
expended on organizations of that type, while the lower levels, the mass of
the population, have been left more or less unorganized. And yet it is of
the utmost importance that the masses should be organized, because only
so do they become a power or force. Otherwise they are nothing but a
heap, an aggregate of separate atoms. Only when the particular spheres are
organized, are they possessed of legitimate power.
291. The nature of the executive functions is that they are objective
and that in their substance they have been explicitly ﬁxed by previous
decisions (see § 287); these functions have to be fulﬁlled and carried
out by individuals. Between an individual and his oﬃce there is no
immediate natural link. Hence individuals are not appointed to oﬃce
on account of their birth or natural personality. The objective factor
in their appointment is knowledge and proof of ability. Such proof
guarantees that the state will get what it requires; and since it is the
sole condition of appointment, it also guarantees to every citizen the
chance of joining the universal estate [or estate of civil servants].
292. Since the objective qualiﬁcation for the civil service is not
genius (as it is for work as an artist, for example), there is of necessity
Third Part: Ethical Life
280

an indeﬁnite plurality of eligible candidates whose relative excellence
is not determinable with absolute precision. The selection of one of
the candidates, his nomination to oﬃce, and the grant to him of full
authority to transact public business—all this, as the linking of two
things, an individual and his oﬃce, which in relation to each other
must always be fortuitous—is the subjective aspect of election to
oﬃce, and it must lie with the crown as the power in the state which
is sovereign and has the last word.
293. The particular public functions which the monarch entrusts
to oﬃcial bodies constitute one part of the objective aspect of the sov-
ereignty residing in the crown. Their speciﬁc diﬀerences are there-
fore given in the nature of the thing. And while the actions of the
oﬃcial bodies are the fulﬁlment of their duty, their oﬃce is also a
right exempt from contingency.
294. Once an individual has been appointed to his oﬃcial position
by the sovereign’s act (see § 292), the tenure of his post is conditional
on his fulﬁlling its duties. Such fulﬁlment is the very substance of 
his appointment, and it is as a consequence of this that he ﬁnds in his
oﬃce his resources and the assured satisfaction of his particular
interests (see § 264), and further that his external circumstances and
his oﬃcial work are freed from other kinds of subjective dependence
and inﬂuence.
The state does not count on optional, discretionary, services (e.g.
on justice administered by knights errant). It is just because such
services are optional and discretionary that the state cannot rely on
them, for casual servants may fail for subjective reasons to fulﬁl
their duties completely, or they may arbitrarily decide not to fulﬁl
them at all but pursue their subjective ends instead. The opposite
extreme to a knight errant, so far as the service of the state goes,
would be an oﬃcial who clung to his oﬃce purely out of necessity
without any real sense of duty and so without any real right to go
on holding it.
What the service of the state really requires is that oﬃcials shall
forgo the selﬁsh and capricious satisfaction of their subjective
ends; by this very sacriﬁce, they acquire the right to ﬁnd their 
satisfaction in, but only in, the dutiful discharge of their public
functions. In this fact, so far as public business is concerned, there
lies the link between universal and particular interests which 
The State
281

constitutes both the concept of the state and its inner stability (see
§ 260).
It follows that tenure of a civil service post is not contractual
(see § 75), although appointment involves a consent and an under-
taking on both sides. A civil servant is not appointed, like an agent
[Mandatarius], to perform a single casual act of service; on the
contrary, he concentrates his main interests (not only his particu-
lar interests but his spiritual interests also) on his relation to his
work. Similarly, the work imposed upon him and entrusted to him
is not a purely particular thing, external in character. The value of
such a thing is something inward and therefore distinct from its
outward character, so that it is not impaired if what has been stipu-
lated is not fulﬁlled (see § 77). The work of a civil servant, how-
ever, is in its immediacy a value in and for itself. Hence the wrong
committed through its non-performance or positive infringement
(i.e. through an action contrary to oﬃcial duty, and both of these
are of that type) is an infringement of the universal content itself
(i.e. is a negatively inﬁnite judgement—see § 95)120 and so is a mis-
demeanour or even a crime.
The assured satisfaction of particular needs removes the exter-
nal necessity [Not] which may tempt an individual to seek ways
and means of satisfying them at the expense of his oﬃcial duties.
Those who are entrusted with aﬀairs of state ﬁnd in its universal
power the protection they need against another subjective phe-
nomenon, namely the personal passions of the governed, whose
private interests, etc., suﬀer injury as the interest of the state is
made to prevail against them.
295. The security of the state and its subjects against the misuse
of power by oﬃcial bodies and their members lies immediately in
their hierarchical organization and their answerability; but it lies too
in the authority given to communities and corporations, because in
itself this is a barrier against the intrusion of subjective caprice into
the power entrusted to a civil servant, and it completes from below
the control from above which does not extend as far as the conduct
of individuals.
The conduct and education of oﬃcials is the point at which the
laws and the government’s decisions come into contact with 
Third Part: Ethical Life
282
120 See explanatory notes to pp. 67, 98 [pp. 337, 342 below]. [S.H.]

individuals and are actually made good. Hence it is on the conduct
of oﬃcials that there depend not only the contentment of citizens
and their trust in the government, but also the execution—or
alternatively the distortion and frustration—of state projects; at
any rate, this is the case in the sense that feeling and disposition
may easily rate the manner of execution as highly as the content of
the command to be executed, even though the content may in fact
be the imposition of a burden. Owing to the immediate and per-
sonal nature of this contact with individuals, control from above
can attain its ends in this respect only to a rather incomplete extent.
Moreover, its ends may also be hindered by interests common to
oﬃcials who form a clique [Stand] over against their inferiors on
one side and their superiors on the other. In states whose institu-
tions may perhaps be imperfectly developed in other respects also,
the removal of hindrances like these requires and justiﬁes the
higher intervention of the sovereign (as for example of Frederick
the Great in the notorious aﬀair of Arnold the miller).*
296. But the fact that a dispassionate, upright, and polite demean-
our becomes customary [in civil servants] is (i) partly a result of
direct education in thought and ethical conduct. Such an education
is a spiritual counterpoise to the mechanical and semi-mechanical
activity involved in acquiring the so-called ‘sciences’ of matters con-
nected with administration, in the requisite business training, in the
actual work done, etc. (ii) The size of the state, however, is an import-
ant factor in producing this result, since it diminishes the weight of
family and other personal ties, and also makes less potent and so less
keen such passions as hatred, revenge, etc. In those who are occupied
with the important interests of a great state, these subjective aspects
automatically disappear, and the habit is generated of adopting uni-
versal interests, points of view, and activities.
297. Civil servants and the members of the executive constitute
the greater part of the middle class [Mittelstand], in which the con-
sciousness of right and the developed intelligence of the mass of the
people is found. Sovereignty working on the middle class from
above, and rights of corporations working on it from below, are the
institutions which eﬀectually prevent it from acquiring the isolated
position of an aristocracy and using its education and skill as means
to arbitrary domination.
The State
283

At one time the administration of justice, which is concerned with
the proper interests of all members of the state, was in this way
turned into an instrument of proﬁt and domination, when the
knowledge of the law was buried in scholarship and a foreign
tongue, and knowledge of legal processes was similarly buried in
involved formalities.
Addition: The middle class, to which civil servants belong, is politically
conscious and the one in which education is most prominent. For this
reason it is also the pillar of the state so far as integrity and intelligence are
concerned. A state without a middle class must therefore remain on a low
level. Russia, for instance, has a mass of serfs on the one hand and a mass
of rulers on the other. It is a prime concern of the state that a middle class
should be developed, but this can be done only if the state is an organic
unity like the one described here, i.e. it can be done only by giving author-
ity to particular spheres, which are relatively independent, and through a
realm of civil servants whose personal arbitrariness breaks against such
authorized bodies. Action in accordance with universal right, and the habit
of such action, is a consequence of the counterpoise to oﬃcialdom which
independent and self-subsistent circles create.
(c) The Legislative Power
298. The legislative power is concerned (a) with the laws as such in
so far as they require fresh and extended determination; and (b) with
those internal aﬀairs whose content is wholly universal. The legisla-
tive power is itself a part of the constitution which is presupposed by
it and to that extent lies in and for itself outside the sphere directly
determined by it; nonetheless, the constitution undergoes further
development in the course of the further elaboration of the laws and
the advancing character of the universal business of government.
Addition: The constitution must be in and for itself the ﬁxed and recog-
nized ground on which the legislative power stands, and for this reason it
must not ﬁrst be constructed. Thus the constitution is, but just as essen-
tially it becomes, i.e. it advances and matures. This advance is an alteration
which is imperceptible and which lacks the form of alteration. For ex-
ample, the wealth of the German princes and their families began by being
private property but then without any struggle or opposition it was con-
verted into crown lands, i.e. into resources of the state. This came about
because the princes felt the need of integrating their possessions and
demanded property guarantees from their country and its Estates; the
latter thus became involved in the conservation of the resources so that
Third Part: Ethical Life
284

they ceased to be at the sole disposal of the princes. An analogous case is
that [in the Holy Roman Empire] the Emperor was formerly a judge and
travelled the Empire dispensing justice, and then, owing to the purely
superﬁcial results of cultural progress, external reasons made it necessary
for him to delegate more and more of his judicial functions to others, with
the result that the judicial power was transferred from the person of the
monarch to groups of judges. Hence the advance from one state of aﬀairs
to another is tranquil in appearance and unnoticed. In this way a constitu-
tion changes over a long period of time into something quite diﬀerent from
what it was originally.
299. These matters are more precisely determined, in relation to
individuals, under these two heads: (α) provision by the state for
their well-being and happiness, and (β) the exaction of services from
them. The former comprises the laws dealing with all sorts of private
rights, the rights of communities, corporations, and organizations of
a wholly universal character, and further it indirectly (see § 298)
comprises the whole of the constitution. As for the services to be
exacted, it is only if these are reduced to terms of money, the really
existent and universal value of both things and services, that they can
be ﬁxed justly and at the same time in such a way that any particular
tasks and services which an individual may perform come to be
mediated through his own arbitrary will.
The proper object of universal legislation may be distinguished in
a general way from the proper function of administrative oﬃcials
or of state regulation, in that the content of the former is wholly
universal, i.e. legal determinations, while what is particular in con-
tent falls to the latter, together with ways and means of implement-
ing the law. This distinction, however, is not a hard and fast one,
because a law, in order to be a law and not just a mere command-
ment in general (such as ‘Thou shalt not kill’—compare Remark
(d) to § 140), must be determinate in itself; but the more determinate
it is, the more readily are its terms capable of being carried out as
they stand. At the same time, however, to give to laws such a fully
detailed determinacy would give them empirical features subject
inevitably to alteration in the course of their being actually carried
out, and this would contravene their character as laws. The
organic unity of the powers of the state itself implies that it is one
spirit which both ﬁrmly establishes the universal and also brings it
into its determinate actuality and carries it out.
The State
285

In the state it may at ﬁrst seem remarkable that the numerous
aptitudes, possessions, pursuits, and talents of its citizens,
together with the inﬁnitely varied living resources intrinsic to
these—all of which are at the same time linked with their owner’s
disposition—are not subject to direct levy by the state. It lays
claim only to one resource, namely money. (Services requisitioned
for the defence of the state against enemies arise for the ﬁrst time
in connection with the duty considered in the next subdivision of
this book [see §§ 324–6].) In fact, however, money is not one par-
ticular type of resource amongst others, but the universal aspect of
all of them so far as they are expressed in an external existence and
so can be taken as ‘things’. Only at this extreme point of external-
ity can services exacted by the state be determined quantitatively
and so justly and equitably.
In Plato’s Republic, the Guardians are left to allot individuals to
their particular estates and impose on them their particular ser-
vices (compare Remark to § 185).121 Under the feudal monarchies
the services required from vassals were equally indeterminate, but
they had also to serve in their particular capacity, e.g. as judges.
The same particular character pertains to services imposed in the
East and in Egypt in connection with colossal architectural under-
takings,* and so forth. In these circumstances the principle of sub-
jective freedom is lacking, i.e. the principle that the individual’s
substantial activity—which in any case is something particular in
content in services like those mentioned—shall be mediated
through his particular volition. This is a right which can be secured
only when the demand for service takes the form of a demand for
something of universal value, and it is this right which has brought
with it this conversion [of the state’s demands into demands for
money].
Addition: The two sides of the constitution relate respectively to the rights
and the services of individuals. Services are now almost entirely reduced
to money payments, and military service is now almost the only personal
one exacted. In the past, far more claims were made directly on individ-
uals, and they used to be called upon for work according to their ability.
In our day, the state purchases what it requires. This may at ﬁrst sight
seem an abstract, heartless, and dead state of aﬀairs, and for the state to be
satisﬁed with abstract services may also look like decadence in the state.
Third Part: Ethical Life
286
121 See Plato, Republic, 415a–d. [S.H.]

But the principle of the modern state requires that the whole of an indi-
vidual’s activity shall be mediated through his will. By means of money,
however, the justice of equality can be achieved much more eﬃciently.
Otherwise, if assessment depended on concrete ability, a talented person
would be more heavily taxed than an untalented one. But nowadays
respect for subjective freedom is publicly recognized precisely in the fact
that the state lays hold of someone only by that which is capable of being
taken hold of.
300. In the legislative power as a totality the other two moments
are eﬀective from the outset: (i) the monarchy as that to which ulti-
mate decisions belong; (ii) the executive as the advisory body since it
is the moment possessed of (α) a concrete knowledge and oversight
of the whole in its numerous facets and the actual principles ﬁrmly
established within it, and (β) a knowledge in particular of what the
state’s power needs. The last moment in the legislature is the Estates
[das ständische Element].*
Addition: The proposal to exclude members of the executive from legisla-
tive bodies, as for instance the Constituent Assembly did,* is a conse-
quence of false views of the state. In England, ministers must be members
of parliament, and this is right, because executive oﬃcers should be 
linked with and not opposed to the legislature. The idea of the so-called
‘independence of powers’ 122 contains the fundamental error of supposing
that the powers, though independent, are to check one another. This
independence, however, destroys the unity of the state, which is the chief
requirement.
301. The Estates have the function of bringing the universal
interest into existence not only in itself [an sich], but also for itself [für
sich], i.e. of bringing into existence the moment of subjective formal
freedom, public consciousness as the empirical universality of the
thoughts and opinions of the many.
The phrase ‘the many’ (o‘i polloi′) denotes empirical universality
more strictly than ‘all’, which is in current use. If it is said to be
obvious that this ‘all’ prima facie excludes at least children,
women, etc., then it is surely still more obvious that the quite
deﬁnite word ‘all’ should not be used when something quite
indeﬁnite is meant.
The State
287
122 See PR § 272 and Remark and Addition. [S.H.]

Current opinion has put into general circulation such a host of
perverse and false ideas and ways of speaking about the ‘people’,
‘constitution’, and ‘Estates’ that it would be a waste of energy to
try to specify, expound, and correct them. The idea uppermost in
people’s minds when they speak about the necessity or the expe-
diency of ‘summoning the Estates’ is generally something of this
sort: (i) The deputies of the people, or even the people themselves,
must know best what is in their best interest, and (ii) they undoubt-
edly have the will that is best suited to promote this best interest.
So far as the ﬁrst of these points is concerned, however, the truth
is that if ‘the people’ means a particular section of the members of
the state, then it means precisely that section which does not know
what it wills. To know what one wills, and still more to know what
the will in and for itself, reason, wills, is the fruit of profound cog-
nition and insight, precisely the things which are not characteris-
tic of ‘the people’.
The Estates are a guarantee of the general welfare and public
freedom. A little reﬂection will show, however, that this guarantee
does not lie in their particular insights, because the highest civil
servants necessarily have a deeper and more comprehensive
insight into the nature of the state’s organization and require-
ments. They are also more habituated to the business of govern-
ment and have greater skill in it, so that even without the Estates
they are able to do what is best, just as they also continually have
to do while the Estates are in session. No, the guarantee lies on the
contrary (α) in the additional insight of the deputies, insight in the
ﬁrst place into the activity of such oﬃcials as are not immediately
under the eye of the higher functionaries of state, and in particu-
lar into the more pressing and more specialized needs and
deﬁciencies which are directly in their view; (β) in the fact that the
anticipation of criticism from the many, particularly of public criti-
cism, has the eﬀect of inducing oﬃcials to devote their best atten-
tion beforehand to their duties and the schemes under
consideration, and to deal with these only in accordance with the
purest motives. This same compulsion is eﬀective also on the
members of the Estates themselves.
As for the conspicuously good will for the general welfare which
the Estates are supposed to possess, it has been pointed out already
(in the Remark to § 272) that to presuppose that the will of the
Third Part: Ethical Life
288

executive is bad, or less good [than that of the ruled], is character-
istic of the rabble or of the negative outlook generally. This pre-
supposition might at once be answered on its own ground by the
countercharge that the Estates start from individuals, from a pri-
vate point of view, from particular interests, and so are inclined to
devote their activities to these at the expense of the general inter-
est, while on the other hand the other moments in the power of the
state by their very nature take up the standpoint of the state and
devote themselves to the universal end.
As for the general guarantee which is supposed to lie peculiarly
in the Estates, each of the other political institutions shares with
the Estates in being a guarantee of public welfare and rational free-
dom, and some of these institutions, as for instance the sover-
eignty of the monarch, hereditary succession to the throne, the
judicial system, etc., guarantee these things far more eﬀectively
than the Estates can.
Hence the speciﬁc function which the concept assigns to the
Estates is to be sought in the fact that in them the subjective
moment in universal freedom—the personal insight and personal
will of the sphere called ‘civil society’ in this book—comes into
existence in relation to the state. This moment is a determination of
the Idea once the Idea has developed to totality, a moment arising
as a result of an inner necessity not to be confused with external
necessities and expediencies. The proof of this follows, like all the
rest of our account of the state, from adopting the philosophical
point of view.
Addition: The attitude of the executive to the Estates should not be essen-
tially hostile, and a belief in the necessity of such hostility is a sad mistake.
The executive is not a party standing over against another party in such a
way that each has continually to steal a march on the other and wrest
something from the other. If such a situation arises in the state, that is a
misfortune and cannot be called health. The taxes approved by the
Estates, moreover, are not to be regarded as a present given to the state.
On the contrary, they are approved in the best interests of those who
approve them. The real signiﬁcance of the Estates lies in the fact that it is
through them that the state enters the subjective consciousness of the
people and that the people begins to participate in the state.
302. Regarded as a mediating organ, the Estates stand between
the government in general, on the one hand, and the people broken
The State
289

up into particular spheres and individuals on the other. Their func-
tion requires them to possess a sense for and disposition toward the
state and government, as well as the interests of particular circles and
of individuals. At the same time the signiﬁcance of their position is
that, in common with the organized executive, they are a middle
term preventing both the extreme isolation of the power of the
crown, which otherwise might seem a mere arbitrary tyranny, and
also the isolation of the particular interests of communities, corpora-
tions and individuals. Further, and more important, they prevent
individuals from having the appearance of a mass or an aggregate and
so from acquiring an unorganized opinion and volition and from
crystallizing into a powerful bloc in opposition to the organized state.
It is one of the most important insights of logic that a speciﬁc
moment which, by standing in an opposition, has the position of
an extreme, ceases to be such and is a moment in an organic whole
by being at the same time a middle term.123 In connection with our
present topic it is all the more important to emphasize this aspect
of the matter because of the frequent, but most dangerous, preju-
dice which regards the Estates principally from the point of view
of their opposition to the executive, as if that were their essential
attitude. The Estates prove themselves to be organic—that is, taken
up into the totality—solely through their mediating function. In
this way their opposition to the executive is reduced to a sem-
blance. There may indeed be an appearance of opposition between
them, but if they were opposed, not merely superﬁcially, but actu-
ally and in substance, then the state would be in the throes of
destruction. The sign that the conﬂict is not of this kind is evident
from the nature of the thing, if the matters in dispute are not 
the essential elements in the organism of the state, but only more
specialized and triﬂing matters, and if the passion which even
these arouse spends itself in party cravings in connection with
purely subjective interests such as appointments to the higher
oﬃces of state.
Addition: The constitution is essentially a system of mediation. In despotic
states, where there are only rulers and people, the people is eﬀective, if at
all, only as a mass destructive of the organization of the state. When the
Third Part: Ethical Life
290
123 For Hegel’s theory of the syllogism (to which this remark refers), see
Encyclopaedia (1830), §§ 181ﬀ. [S.H.]

multitude enters the state in an organic way, it achieves its interests by
legal and orderly means. But if these means are lacking, the voice of the
masses will always be wild. Hence, in despotic states, the despot always
indulges the people and keeps his wrath for his entourage. For the same
reason too the people in such states pay only a few taxes. Taxes rise in a
constitutionally governed state simply owing to the people’s own con-
sciousness. In no country are so many taxes paid as in England.
303. The universal estate, or, more precisely, the estate that
devotes itself to the service of government, must, purely in virtue of 
its character as universal, have the universal as the end of its essen-
tial activity. In the Estates, as an element in the legislative power, the
private estate [Privatstand] acquires its political signiﬁcance and
eﬃcacy; it appears, therefore, in the Estates neither as a mere
undiﬀerentiated multitude nor as an aggregate dispersed into its
atoms, but as what it already is, namely as divided into two, one part
[the agricultural estate] being based on the substantial relationship,
and the other part [the business estate] on particular needs and the
work whereby these are met (see § 201ﬀ.). It is only in this way that
there is a genuine link between the particular which is eﬀective in the
state and the universal.
This runs counter to another prevalent idea, the idea that since it
is in the legislature that the private estate rises to the level of par-
ticipating in the universal interest, it must appear there in the
form of individuals, be it that individuals are to choose representa-
tives for this purpose, or indeed that every single individual is
thereby to have a vote himself. This atomistic and abstract point
of view vanishes at the stage of the family, as well as that of civil
society where the individual is in evidence only as a member of a
general group. The state, however, is essentially an organization
whose members constitute circles in their own right [für sich], and
hence no one of its moments should appear as an unorganized
aggregate. The many, as individuals—a favourite interpretation of
‘the people’—are of course something connected, but they are
connected only as an aggregate, a formless mass whose commotion
and activity can therefore only be elementary, irrational, wild, and
frightful. When we hear speakers on the constitution expatiating
about the ‘people’—as this unorganized collection—we know
from the start that we have nothing to expect but generalities and
perverse declamations.
The State
291

The circles of association in civil society are already communities.
To picture these communities as once more breaking up into a
mere conglomeration of individuals as soon as they enter the ﬁeld
of politics, i.e. the ﬁeld of the highest concrete universality, is eo
ipso to hold civil and political life apart from one another and as it
were to hang the latter in the air, because its basis could then only
be the abstract individuality of caprice and opinion, and hence it
would be grounded on contingency and not on what is stable and
justiﬁed in and for itself.
So-called ‘theories’ of this kind involve the idea that the estates
[Stände] of civil society and the Estates [Stände] in the political
sense stand far apart from each other. But the German language,
by calling them both Stände has still maintained the unity which
they certainly possessed in former times.
304. The Estates, as an element in political life, still retain within
their very determination the distinctions between estates already
present in the preceding spheres of civil life. The position of the
Estates is initially abstract, i.e. in contrast with the principle of
monarchy or the crown in general their position is that of the
extreme of empirical universality. This position implies the possibil-
ity, though no more, of harmonization, and the equally likely possi-
bility of hostile opposition. This abstract position changes into a
rational relation (into a syllogism, see Remark to § 302) only if its
mediation comes into existence. From the point of view of the crown,
the executive already fulﬁls this function (see § 300). From the point
of view of the estates, one moment in them must also be adapted to
the task of existing as in essence the moment of mediation.
305. The principle of one of the estates of civil society is in itself
capable of adaptation to this political position. The estate in question
is the one whose ethical life is natural, whose basis is family life and,
so far as its livelihood is concerned, the possession of land. So far as
its particularity is concerned, this estate has in common with the
crown a will that rests on itself alone and the moment of natural
determinacy that is also contained in the crown.
306. This estate is more particularly ﬁtted for political position
and signiﬁcance in that its resources are independent alike of the
state’s resources, the uncertainty of business, the quest for proﬁt,
Third Part: Ethical Life
292

and any sort of ﬂuctuation in possessions. It is likewise independent
of favour, whether from the executive or the masses. It is even
fortiﬁed against its own arbitrary will, because those members of this
estate who are called to political life are not entitled, as other citizens
are, either to dispose of their entire property at will, or to the assur-
ance that it will pass to their children in proportion to the equal
degree of love they feel for them. Hence their wealth becomes
inalienable inherited property, burdened with primogeniture.
Addition: This estate has a volition of a more independent character. On
the whole, the estate of landed property-owners is divided into an edu-
cated section and a section of farmers. But over against both of these sorts
of people there stands the business estate, which is dependent on needs
and concentrated on their satisfaction, and the civil service estate, which is
essentially dependent on the state. The security and stability of the agri-
cultural estate may be still further increased by the institution of primo-
geniture, though this institution is desirable only from the political point
of view, since it entails a sacriﬁce for the political end of giving the eldest
son a life of independence. Primogeniture is grounded on the fact that the
state should be able to count on a disposition [towards politics] not just as
a bare possibility but as something necessary. Now such a disposition is of
course not bound to wealth, but there is a relatively necessary connection
between the two, because a person with independent means is not hemmed
in by external circumstances and so there is nothing to prevent him from
entering politics and working for the state. Where political institutions are
lacking, however, the foundation and encouragement of primogeniture is
nothing but a fetter on the freedom of private rights, and either political
meaning must be given to it, or else it will in due course disappear.
307. The right of this section of the substantial [or agricultural]
estate is thus indeed based on the natural principle of the family. But
this principle is at the same time given a new twist by the hard
sacriﬁces that are made for political ends, so the activity of this estate
is essentially directed towards those ends. As a consequence of this,
this estate is summoned and entitled to its political vocation by birth
without the hazards of election. It therefore has the ﬁxed, substantial
position between the subjective arbitrariness or contingency of both
extremes; and while it mirrors in itself (see § 305) the moment of
monarchical power, it also shares the otherwise equal needs and
rights of the other extreme [i.e. civil society] and hence it becomes a
support at once of the throne and society.
The State
293

308. The second section of the Estates comprises the mobile ele-
ment in civil society. This element can enter politics only through its
deputies; the multiplicity of its members is an external reason for this,
but the essential reason is the nature of its determination and activ-
ity. Since these deputies are the deputies of civil society, it follows as
an immediate consequence that their appointment is made by the
society as it is. That is to say, in making the appointment, society is
not dispersed into atomic individuals, collected to perform only a
single and temporary act, and kept together for a moment and no
longer. On the contrary, it makes the appointment as a society, ar-
ticulated into associations, communities, and corporations, which
although constituted already for other purposes, acquire in this way
a connection with politics. The existence of the Estates and their
assembly ﬁnds a distinctive constitutional guarantee in the fact that
this estate is entitled to send deputies at the summons of the crown,
while members of the ﬁrst estate are entitled to present themselves in
person in the Estates (see § 307).
To hold that all individuals should share in deliberating and
deciding on the universal aﬀairs of the state on the grounds that all
are members of the state, that its concerns are their concerns, and
that it is their right that what is done should be done with their
knowledge and volition, is tantamount to a proposal to put the
democratic element without any rational form into the organism of
the state, although it is only in virtue of the possession of such a
form that the state is an organism at all. This idea comes readily to
mind because it does not go beyond the abstraction of ‘being a
member of the state’, and it is superﬁcial thinking which clings to
abstractions. The rational consideration of a topic, the conscious-
ness of the Idea, is concrete, and to that extent coincides with genu-
ine practical sense. Such sense is itself nothing but the sense of
rationality or the Idea, though it is not to be confused with mere
business routine or the horizon of a restricted sphere. The con-
crete state is the whole, articulated into its particular groups. The
member of a state is a member of such a group, i.e. of an estate,
and only as determined in this objective way does he come into
consideration in relation to the state. His universal determination
as such implies that he is at one and the same time both a private
person and also a thinking consciousness, a will which wills 
the universal. This consciousness and will, however, lose their
Third Part: Ethical Life
294

emptiness and acquire a content and a living actuality only when
they are ﬁlled with particularity, and this is to be found in the par-
ticular estate and vocation; or, to put the matter otherwise, the
individual is a genus [Gattung], but it has its immanent universal
actuality in the next genus.—Hence the individual fulﬁls his actual
and living vocation for universality only when he becomes a
member of a corporation, a community, etc. (see § 251), and
thereby it becomes open to him, on the strength of his skill, to enter
any estate for which he is qualiﬁed, including the universal estate.
Another presupposition of the idea that all should participate in
the business of the state is that everyone has an understanding of this
business—a ridiculous notion, however commonly we may hear it
put forward. Yet in public opinion (see § 316) a ﬁeld is open to
everyone in which they can express and assert their subjective
opinions concerning the universal.
309. Since deputies are selected to deliberate and decide on uni-
versal matters, the point is to select individuals who are trusted to
have a better understanding of these matters than those who select
them and who are also trusted to assert essentially the universal
interest, not the particular interest of a community or a corporation
in preference to that universal interest. Hence their relation to those
that select them is not that of agents with a commission or speciﬁc
instructions. A further bar to their being so is the fact that their
assembly is meant to be a living body in which all members deliber-
ate in common and reciprocally instruct and convince each other.
Addition: The introduction of representation [Repräsentation] means that
consent is given not directly by all but only by authorized deputies, since
under a representative system the individual, qua inﬁnite person, no
longer comes into the picture. Representation is grounded on trust, but
trusting another is something diﬀerent from giving my vote in person.
Majority voting also runs counter to the principle that I should be person-
ally present in anything which is to be obligatory for me. We have trust in
someone when we take him to have the insight to treat my aﬀairs as if they
were his own and to treat them conscientiously and to the best of his
knowledge. Thus the principle of the individual subjective will disappears,
since trust is placed in a thing, in a person’s principles, or his demeanour
or his conduct or his concrete sense generally. The important thing, then,
is that a member of the Estates shall have a character, insight, and will ade-
quate to his task of concentrating on universal aﬀairs. In other words, it is
not important that an individual should have a say as abstract individual.
The State
295

The point is rather that his interests are made good in an assembly whose
business is with the general interest. The electors [die Wählenden] require
a guarantee that their deputy will further and secure this general interest.
310. The guarantee that deputies will have the qualiﬁcations and
disposition that accord with this end—since independent resources
already demand their right in the ﬁrst section of the Estates—is to
be found so far as the second section is concerned—the section
drawn from the mobile and changeable element in civil society—
above all in the knowledge (of the organization and interests of the
state and civil society), the disposition, and the skill which a deputy
acquires as a result of the actual transaction of business in positions
of authority or political oﬃce and then evinces in his actions. As a
result, he also acquires and develops a sense of authority and a polit-
ical sense, tested by his experience, and this is a further guarantee of
his suitability as a deputy.
Subjective opinion, naturally enough, ﬁnds superﬂuous and even
perhaps oﬀensive the demand for such guarantees, if the demand
is made with reference to what is called the ‘people’. The state,
however, is characterized by objectivity, not by subjective opinion
and its self-conﬁdence. Hence it can recognize in individuals only
what is objectively recognizable and tested, and it must be all the
more careful on this point in connection with the second section
of the Estates, since this section is rooted in interests and activities
directed towards the particular, i.e. in the sphere where chance,
mutability, and caprice enjoy their right of free play.
The external condition of having certain resources appears, if
taken merely by itself, to be just as one-sided in its externality as,
at the other extreme, are purely subjective conﬁdence and the
opinion of the electorate. Both alike are abstractions in contrast
with the concrete qualiﬁcations requisite for deliberation on aﬀairs
of state and comprised in the points indicated in § 302. Nonetheless,
in the choice of individuals for positions of authority and other
oﬃces in associations and communities, a property qualiﬁcation
has a sphere where it may work eﬀectively, especially if many of
these posts are unpaid, and it is directly relevant to the business of
the Estates if the members draw no salary.
311. Furthermore, since deputies are selected from within civil
society, the deputies should themselves be familiar with and 
Third Part: Ethical Life
296

participate in its special needs, diﬃculties, and particular interests.
Owing to the nature of civil society, its deputies are the deputies of
the various corporations (see § 308), and this simple mode of appoint-
ment removes any confusion that may arise from conceiving the elec-
torate abstractly and as an agglomeration of atoms. Hence it
immediately fulﬁls the demand set out above, and elections are there-
fore either something wholly superﬂuous or else reduced to a trivial
play of opinion and caprice.
It is obviously of advantage that the deputies should include rep-
resentatives of each particular main branch of society (e.g. trade,
manufacture, etc.)—representatives who are thoroughly conver-
sant with it and who themselves belong to it. The idea of a free and
indeterminate election leaves this important consideration entirely
at the mercy of contingency. All such branches of society, how-
ever, have equal rights of representation. If deputies are regarded
as ‘representatives’, they are this in an organic, rational sense only
if they are representatives not of individuals or a conglomeration
of them, but of one of the essential spheres of society and its large-
scale interests. Hence representation cannot now be taken to mean
simply the substitution of one person for another; the point is
rather that the interest itself is actually present in its representative,
while he himself is there to present the objective element of his
own being.
As for mass elections, it may be further remarked that especially
in large states it leads inevitably to electoral indiﬀerence, since the
casting of a single vote is of no signiﬁcance where there is a multi-
tude of electors. Even if a voting qualiﬁcation is highly valued and
esteemed by those who are entitled to it, they still do not enter the
polling booth. Thus the result of an institution of this kind is more
likely to be the opposite of what was intended; election actually
falls into the power of a few, of a faction [Partei], and so of the par-
ticular and contingent interest which is precisely what was to have
been neutralized.
312. Each of the two sections of the Estates (see § 305 and 308)
contributes something particular to the process of deliberation.
Further, one of the moments concerned has the distinctive function
of mediation in the sphere of politics,* mediation between two 
existing things. Hence this moment must likewise acquire a separate
The State
297

existence of its own. For this reason the assembly of the Estates is
divided into two houses.
313. This division, by providing more than one instance [Instanz],
is a surer guarantee of mature decisions, and it removes the contin-
gency which decisions made on the spur of the moment and deci-
sions passed by majority vote may have. But the principal advantage
of this arrangement is that there is less chance of the Estates being in
direct opposition to the executive; or, if the mediating moment is at
the same time on the side of the second Estate, i.e. the lower house,
the weight of the lower house’s opinion is all the stronger, because it
appears less partisan and its opposition appears neutralized.
314. The purpose of the Estates as an institution is not to ensure
that the business of the state in itself is considered and decided in the
best way possible, since in this respect their role is merely supple-
mentary (see § 301). Their distinctive purpose is that through their
participation in knowledge, deliberations, and decisions concerning
universal matters, the moment of formal freedom shall come into its
right in respect of those members of civil society who are without any
share in the executive. Consequently, knowledge of universal aﬀairs
is extended above all by the publicity of Estates debates.
315. The opening of this opportunity to know has a more univer-
sal aspect because by this means public opinion ﬁrst reaches thoughts
that are true and attains insight into the situation and concept of the
state and its aﬀairs, and so ﬁrst acquires the ability to judge these more
rationally. By this means also, it becomes acquainted with and learns
to respect the work, abilities, virtues, and skills of oﬃcial bodies and
civil servants. While such publicity provides these abilities with a
powerful opportunity to develop and a theatre in which to attain high
honour, it is at the same time an antidote to the self-conceit of indi-
viduals and of the masses, and a means—indeed one of the chief
means—of their education.
Addition: Estates assemblies, open to the public, are a great spectacle and
an excellent education for the citizens, and it is from them that the people
learn best how to recognize the true character of its interests. The idea
usually dominant is that everyone knows from the start what is best for the
state and that the assembly debate is a mere discussion of this knowledge.
In fact, however, the precise contrary is the truth. It is here that there 
ﬁrst begin to develop the virtues, abilities, skills, which have to serve as
Third Part: Ethical Life
298

examples to the public. Of course such assemblies are irksome to minis-
ters, who have to equip themselves with wit and eloquence to meet the
criticisms there directed against them. Nonetheless, publicity here is the
chief means of educating the public in the aﬀairs of state. A people which
has such public sittings is far more vitally related to the state than one
which has no Estates assembly or one which meets in private. It is only
because their every step is made known publicly in this way that the two
Houses remain in touch with the range of public opinion, and it then
becomes clear that a man’s castle building at home with his wife and his
friends is one thing, while what happens in a great assembly, where one
shrewd idea devours another, is something quite diﬀerent.
316. The formal subjective freedom of individuals consists in
their having and expressing their own judgements, opinions, and rec-
ommendations on matters of universal concern. This freedom is col-
lectively manifested as what is called ‘public opinion’, in which what
is universal in and for itself, the substantial and the true, is linked
with its opposite, the purely particular and distinctive opinions of the
many. Public opinion as it exists is thus a standing self-contradiction,
knowledge as appearance, the essential just as immediately present as
the inessential.
Addition: Public opinion is the unorganized way in which a people’s opin-
ions and wishes are made known. Whatever gains authority in the state
must operate in an organized manner, as the parts of the constitution do.
But at all times public opinion has been a great power and it is particularly
so in our day when the principle of subjective freedom has such import-
ance and signiﬁcance. What is to be authoritative nowadays derives its
authority, no longer from force, only to a small extent from habit and
custom, but really from insight and argument.
317. Public opinion, therefore, is a repository not only of the genu-
ine needs and correct tendencies of actuality, but also—in the form
of common sense (i.e. all-pervasive fundamental ethical principles in
the shape of prejudices)—of the eternal, substantial principles of
justice, the true content and result of legislation, the whole constitu-
tion, and the universal condition in general. At the same time, when
this inner truth emerges into consciousness and, embodied in general
maxims, enters representational thinking [Vorstellung]—whether it
be there on its own account or in support of concrete arguments about
events, arrangements and relations within the state, or felt needs—it
becomes infected by all the contingencies of opinion, by its ignorance
The State
299

and perversity, by its mistakes and falsity of judgement. Since what
matters to people here is their consciousness of the distinctive charac-
ter of their views and knowledge, the worse the content of an opinion
is, the more distinctive it is, because the bad is that which is wholly
particular and distinctive in its content; the rational, on the other
hand, is that which is universal in and for itself, while it is on distinc-
tiveness that opinion prides itself.
Hence it is not simply due to a subjective diﬀerence of view that
we ﬁnd it said, on the one hand, that ‘the voice of the people is the
voice of God’* and, on the other hand, as Ariosto has it, that ‘the
ignorant populace reproves everyone and talks most of what it
understands least’.*124 Both are true at one and the same time of
public opinion, and since it is such a hotchpotch of truth and end-
less error, it cannot be genuinely serious about either. What it is
serious about can seem hard to determine; and indeed it will be
hard if we cling simply to the words in which public opinion is
immediately expressed. The substantial, however, is the heart of
public opinion, and therefore it is with that alone that it is truly
serious. What the substantial is, though, is not discoverable from
public opinion, because its very substantiality implies that it is
known in and from itself alone. The passion with which an opin-
ion is urged or the seriousness with which it is maintained or
attacked and disputed is no criterion indicating what it is really
about; and yet the last thing which opinion could be made to see
is that its seriousness is nothing serious.
A great spirit* propounded as a problem for a public essay com-
petition the question ‘whether it be permissible [erlaubt] to deceive
a people’. The answer had to be that a people does not allow itself
to be deceived about its substantial basis, the essence and speciﬁc
character of its spirit. On the other hand, it deceives itself about the
manner of its knowledge of these things and about its correspond-
ing judgement of its actions, experiences, etc.
Addition: The principle of the modern world requires that what anyone is
to recognize shall reveal itself to him as something entitled to recognition.
Apart from that, however, everyone wishes to have some share in 
discussion and deliberation. Once he has had his say and so his share of
Third Part: Ethical Life
300
124 Hegel’s note: Or, as Goethe puts it, ‘the masses can ﬁght, they’re respectable at
that; but their judgements are miserable’.*

responsibility, his subjectivity has been satisﬁed and he puts up with a lot.
In France freedom of speech has always seemed far less dangerous than
silence, because with the latter the fear is that people bottle up their objec-
tions to a thing, whereas argument gives them an outlet and a measure of
satisfaction, and this is in addition a means whereby the thing can be
pushed ahead more easily.
318. Public opinion therefore deserves to be as much respected as
despised—despised for its concrete expression and for the concrete
consciousness it expresses, respected for its essential basis, a basis
which only appears more or less dimly in that concrete expression.
But in itself it has no criterion of discrimination, nor has it the abil-
ity to extract the substantial element it contains and raise it to precise
knowledge. Thus to be independent of public opinion is the ﬁrst
formal condition of achieving anything great or rational whether in
actuality or in science. Great achievement is assured, however, of
subsequent recognition and grateful acceptance by public opinion,
which in due course will make it one of its own prejudices.
Addition: Public opinion contains all kinds of falsity and truth, but it takes
a great man to ﬁnd the truth in it. The great man of the age is the one who
can put into words the will of his age, tell his age what its will is, and
accomplish it. What he does is the heart and the essence of his age, he
actualizes his age. The person who lacks sense enough to despise public
opinion as he encounters it here and there will never do anything great.
319. Freedom of public communication (of the two modes of
communication, the press and the spoken word, the ﬁrst exceeds the
second in range of contact but lags behind it in vivacity), satisfaction
of the goading desire to say one’s say and to have said it, is directly
assured by the laws and by laws, upheld by the public authority,
which control or punish its excesses. But it is assured indirectly by
the innocuous character which it acquires as a result principally of
the rationality of the constitution, the stability of government, and
also of the publicity of Estates assemblies. The reason why the latter
makes free speech harmless is that what is voiced in these assemblies
is a sound and mature insight into the concerns of the state, with the
result that others are left with nothing of much importance to say,
and above all are deprived of the opinion that what they say is of
peculiar importance and eﬃcacy. A further safeguard of free speech
is the indiﬀerence and contempt speedily and necessarily visited on
shallow and cantankerous talking.
The State
301

To deﬁne freedom of the press as freedom to say and write what-
ever we please is parallel to the assertion that freedom as such
means freedom to do as we please. Talk of this kind is due to wholly
uneducated, crude, and superﬁcial ideas. Moreover, it is in the
very nature of the thing that formalistic thinking should nowhere
be so stubborn, so unintelligent, as in this matter of free speech,
because what it is considering is the most ﬂeeting, the most 
contingent, and the most particular side of opinion in its inﬁnite
diversity of content and tergiversation. Beyond the direct 
incitation to theft, murder, rebellion, etc., there lies its artfully
constructed expression—an expression which seems in itself
quite general and indeterminate, while all the time it conceals a
meaning anything but indeterminate or else is compatible with
inferences which are not actually expressed and of which it is
impossible to determine whether they rightly follow from it or
whether they were meant to be inferred from it. This indeter-
minacy of matter and form precludes laws on these topics from
attaining the requisite determinacy of law, and since any misde-
meanour, wrong, and injury here assumes the most particular and
subjective shape, judgement on it is reduced equally to a wholly
subjective decision. Besides, such an injury is directed against 
the thoughts, opinions, and wills of others, and these form the 
element in which it is actually anything; but this element is 
the sphere of the freedom of others, and it therefore depends on
them whether or not the injurious expression of opinion is an
actual deed.
Laws then in this sphere may be criticized by exhibiting their
indeterminacy as well as by arguing that they leave it open to the
speaker or writer to devise turns of phrase or forms of expression
to evade the laws or to claim that judicial decisions are mere sub-
jective judgements. Further, however, against the view that the
expression of opinion is an act with injurious eﬀects, it may be
maintained that it is not an act at all, but only opinion and thought,
or only talk. And so we have before us a claim that mere opinion
and talk are to go unpunished because they are purely subjective
both in form and content, because they do not mean anything and
are of no importance. And yet in the same breath we have the
claim that this same opinion and talk should be held in high
esteem and respect—the opinion because it is my property and
Third Part: Ethical Life
302

indeed property of the most spiritual kind, the talk because it is
only this same property being expressed and used.
But the substance of the matter is and remains that traducing
the honour of anyone, slander, abuse, bringing government, its
oﬃcial bodies and civil servants, and in particular the person of the
monarch into contempt, deﬁance of the laws, incitement to rebel-
lion, etc., are crimes or misdemeanours with many gradations.
The rather high degree of indeterminability which such actions
acquire on account of the element in which they are expressed
does not annul this substantial character of theirs. Its only eﬀect is
that the subjective ﬁeld in which they are committed also deter-
mines the nature and form of the reaction to the oﬀence. It is the
ﬁeld in which the oﬀence was committed which itself necessitates
subjectivity of view, contingency, etc., in the reaction to the
oﬀence, whether the reaction takes the form of punishment proper
or of police action to prevent crimes. Here, as always, formalistic
thinking sets itself to explain away the substantial and concrete
nature of the thing by concentrating on individual aspects of its
external appearance and on abstractions drawn therefrom.
The sciences, however, are not to be found anywhere in the ﬁeld
of opinion and subjective views, provided of course that they 
are indeed sciences. Their exposition [Darstellung] is not a matter
of clever turns of phrase, allusiveness, half-utterances, and semi-
reticences, but consists in the unambiguous, determinate, and
open expression of their meaning and purport. It follows that they
do not fall under the category of public opinion (see § 316).
As I said just now, the element in which views and their expres-
sion become completed actions and attain actual existence, con-
sists of the intelligence, principles, and opinions of others. Hence
this aspect of these actions, i.e. their proper eﬀect and their danger
to individuals, society, and the state (compare § 218), depends on
the character of the ground on which they fall, just as a spark
falling on a heap of gunpowder is more dangerous than if it falls 
on hard ground where it vanishes without trace. Thus, just as 
the right of science to express itself depends on and is safeguarded
by its subject-matter and content, so an illegitimate expression
may also acquire a measure of security, or at least suﬀerance, in 
the scorn which it has brought upon itself. Oﬀences of this sort 
are legally punishable in themselves, but a part of them may be
The State
303

attributed to that kind of nemesis which inner impotence, feeling
itself oppressed by the preponderating abilities and virtues of
others, is impelled to exact in order to recover itself again in face
of such superiority and to restore some self-consciousness to its
own nullity. It was a nemesis of a more harmless type which
Roman soldiers exacted against their generals when they sang
scurrilous songs* about them in triumphal processions in order in
a way to get even with them for all the hard service and discipline
they had undergone, and especially for the omission of their names
from the triumphal honours. The former type of nemesis, the bad
and hateful type, is deprived of its eﬀect by being treated with
scorn, and hence, like the public that may provide a circle of spec-
tators for such scurrility, it is restricted to futile malice and to the
self-condemnation which it implicitly contains.
320. Subjectivity is manifested in its most external form as the
dissolving of the established life of the state by opinion and ratiocin-
ation when they endeavour to assert the authority of their own con-
tingent character and so bring about their own destruction. But its
true actuality is attained in the opposite of this, i.e. in the subjectiv-
ity that is identical with the substantial will, the subjectivity which
constitutes the concept of the power of the crown and which, as the
ideality of the whole, has not up to this point attained its right or its
existence.
Addition: Subjectivity has been treated once already [§§ 279ﬀ.] as the apex
of the state, as the crown. Its other aspect is the manifestation of its arbi-
trariness in public opinion, its most external mode of appearance. The
subjectivity of the monarch is abstract in itself, but it should be something
concrete and so be the ideality which diﬀuses itself over the whole. The
state at peace is that in which all branches of civil life subsist, but they pos-
sess their subsistence outside and alongside one another as something
which issues from the Idea of the whole. This process of issuing must also
come into appearance as the ideality of the whole.
2. External Sovereignty
321. Internal sovereignty (see § 278) is this ideality insofar as the
moments of spirit and its actuality, the state, have been developed in
their necessity and subsist as the organs of the state. Spirit in its free-
dom, however, is an inﬁnitely negative relation to itself and hence its
Third Part: Ethical Life
304

essential character is just as much being-for-self [Fürsichsein] which
has incorporated these subsistent diﬀerences into itself and so is
exclusive. So characterized, the state has individuality, and individu-
ality is in essence an individual, and in the sovereign an actual,
immediate individual (see § 279).
322. Individuality, as exclusive being-for-self, appears as a rela-
tion to other states, each of which is independent vis-à-vis the others.
In this independence the being-for-self of the actual spirit has its
existence; hence it is the primary freedom which a people possesses
as well as its highest dignity.
Those who talk* of the ‘wishes’ of a collection of people constitut-
ing a more or less independent state with its own centre, of its
‘wishes’ to renounce this centre and its independence in order to
unite with others to form a new whole, have very little knowledge
of the nature of a collection or of the feeling of selfhood which a
people possesses in its independence.
Thus the power which a state has at its ﬁrst entry into history is
this independence as such, even if it be quite abstract and without
further inner development. For this reason, to have an individual
at its head—a patriarch, a chieftain, etc.—is appropriate for this
original appearance of the state.
323. This negative relation of the state to itself has its existence as
the relation of another to another, as if the negative were something
external. The existence of this negative relation, therefore, has the
shape of a happening and an entanglement with contingent events
that come from without. But in fact this negative relation is the state’s
own highest moment, the state’s actual inﬁnity as the ideality of
everything ﬁnite within it. It is the moment wherein the substance of
the state—i.e. its absolute power over everything individual and par-
ticular, over life, property, and their rights, even over societies and
associations—brings the nullity of such things into existence and
brings it home to consciousness.
324. This determination whereby the rights and interests of indi-
viduals are posited as a vanishing moment, is at the same time some-
thing positive, i.e. the positing not of their contingent, changing
individuality, but of their individuality in and for itself. This relation
and the recognition of it is therefore the individual’s substantial duty,
The State
305

the duty to maintain this substantial individuality, i.e. the independ-
ence and sovereignty of the state, at the risk and the sacriﬁce of prop-
erty and life, as well as of opinion and everything else naturally
comprised in the compass of life.
An entirely distorted account of the demand for this sacriﬁce
results from regarding the state as a mere civil society and from
regarding its ﬁnal end as only the security of individual life and
property. This security cannot possibly be obtained by the
sacriﬁce of what is to be secured—on the contrary.
The ethical moment in war is implied in what has been said in
this Paragraph. War is not to be regarded as an absolute evil and
as a purely external contingency, which thus has a cause that is
itself contingent, be it injustices, the passions of peoples or the
holders of power, etc., or in short, something or other which ought
not to be. What is by nature contingent is subject to contingencies,
and this fate is therefore itself a necessity. Here, as elsewhere, the
point of view from which things seem pure contingencies vanishes
if we look at them in the light of the concept and philosophy,
because philosophy knows contingency to be semblance and sees
in it its essence, necessity. It is necessary that the ﬁnite—property
and life—should be posited as contingent, because contingency is
the concept of the ﬁnite. From one point of view this necessity
appears in the form of the power of nature, and everything ﬁnite
is mortal and transient. But in the ethical essence, the state, nature
is robbed of this power, and necessity is elevated to the work of
freedom, to something ethical. The transience of the ﬁnite
becomes a willed passing away, and the negativity lying at the roots
of the ﬁnite becomes the substantial individuality proper to the
ethical essence.
War is the state of aﬀairs in which the vanity of temporal goods
and concerns is treated with all seriousness—a vanity at other
times a common theme of edifying sermonizing. This is what
makes it the moment in which the ideality of the particular attains
its right and is actualized. War has the higher signiﬁcance that by
its agency, as I have remarked elsewhere,125 ‘the ethical health of
Third Part: Ethical Life
306
125 See ‘On the Scientiﬁc Ways of Treating Natural Law’ (1802–3), in G. W. F. Hegel,
Political Writings, ed. L. Dickey and H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1999), 141. [S.H.]

peoples is preserved in their indiﬀerence towards the stabilization
of ﬁnite determinacies; just as the blowing of the winds preserves
the sea from the stagnation which would be the result of a pro-
longed calm, so also stagnation in peoples would be the product of
prolonged, let alone perpetual, peace.’126 This, however, is said to
be only a philosophical Idea, or, to use another common expres-
sion, a justiﬁcation of providence, and it is maintained that actual
wars require some other justiﬁcation. On this point, see below 
[§§ 334–7 and 343].
The ideality which is in evidence in war, i.e. in a contingent
external relationship, is the same as the ideality in accordance with
which the domestic powers of the state are organic moments in a
whole. This fact appears in history in various forms, e.g. success-
ful wars have prevented domestic unrest and consolidated the
internal power of the state. Other phenomena illustrate the same
point: e.g. peoples unwilling or afraid to tolerate internal sover-
eignty have been subjugated from abroad, and they have struggled
for their independence with the less glory and success the less they
have been able previously to organize the internal powers of the
state—their freedom has died from the fear of dying. Further-
more, states whose independence has been guaranteed not by their
armed forces but in other ways (e.g. as with states that are dispro-
portionately small in comparison with their neighbours) have been
able to subsist with an internal constitution which by itself would
not have assured peace in either internal or foreign aﬀairs.
Addition: In peace civil life continually expands; all its spheres become
ﬁrmly established, and in the long run people stagnate. Their idiosyn-
crasies become continually more ﬁxed and ossiﬁed. But for health the
unity of the body is required, and if its parts become hard within them-
selves, that is death. Perpetual peace is often advocated as an ideal towards
which humanity should strive. With that end in view, Kant proposed a
league of monarchs to settle diﬀerences between states,127 and the Holy
Alliance128 was meant to be an institution of much the same kind. But the
state is an individual, and individuality essentially implies negation. Hence
even if a number of states make themselves into a family, this group as 
an individual must engender an opposite and create an enemy. As a result
The State
307
126 See second explanatory note to p. 234 [p. 355 below]. [S.H.]
127 See Kant Toward Perpetual Peace, ‘Second Deﬁnitive Article for Perpetual Peace’.
[S.H.]
128 See ﬁrst explanatory note to p. 234 [p. 355 below]. [S.H.]

of war, peoples are strengthened, but nations involved in civil strife also
acquire peace at home through making wars abroad. To be sure, war pro-
duces insecurity of property, but this real insecurity is nothing other than
a necessary movement. We hear plenty of sermons from the pulpit about
the insecurity, vanity, and instability of temporal things, but everyone
thinks, however much he is moved by what he hears, that he at least will
be able to retain his own. But if this insecurity now actually comes on the
scene in all seriousness in the form of hussars with shining sabres, then the
moving and edifying discourses which foretold all these events turn into
curses against the invader. Be that as it may, the fact remains that wars
occur when the nature of the case requires. The seeds burgeon once more,
and talk is silenced by the solemn recurrences of history.
325. Sacriﬁce on behalf of the individuality of the state is the sub-
stantial relation of all its members and so is a universal duty. Since
this relation is one side of the ideality (in contrast to the reality) of
particular subsistence [Bestehen], it becomes at the same time a 
particular relation with an estate [Stand] of its own—the estate of
courage—dedicated to it.*
326. The matter at issue in disputes between states may be only
one particular aspect of their relation to each other, and it is for such
disputes that the particular group devoted to the state’s defence is
principally appointed. But if the state as such, if its independence, is
in jeopardy, all its citizens are in duty bound to answer the summons
to its defence. If in such circumstances the entire state is under arms
and is torn from its inner life within itself to ﬁght abroad, the war of
defence turns into a war of conquest.
The armed force of the state becomes a standing army, while its
appointment to the particular task of state defence makes it an
estate. This happens from the same necessity as compels other
particular moments, interests, and activities in the state to crystal-
lize into a given status or estate, e.g. into the status of marriage or
the estates of trade and industry or the civil service. Ratiocination,
running hither and thither from ground to consequent, launches
forth into reﬂections about the relative advantages and disad-
vantages of standing armies. Opinion readily decides that the
latter preponderate, partly because the concept of a thing is harder
to grasp than its individual and external aspects, but also because
particular interests and ends (the expense of a standing army, 
and its result, higher taxation, etc.) are rated in the consciousness
Third Part: Ethical Life
308

of civil society more highly than what is necessary in and for 
itself. In this way the latter comes to count only as a means to par-
ticular ends.
327. In itself [für sich], courage is a formal virtue, because (i) it is
the highest abstraction of freedom from all particular ends, posses-
sions, pleasure, and life (though it negates them in a manner that is
external and actual); and (ii) their alienation or abandonment
[Entäußerung], the fulﬁlment of courage, is not intrinsically of a spir-
itual [geistig] character—the courageous person’s inner disposition
may be [the product of] this or that reason, and its actual result may
only be there for others and not for itself [i.e. for the courageous
person himself].*
Addition: The military estate is that universal estate which is charged with
the defence of the state, and its duty is to give existence to the ideality
within itself, i.e. to sacriﬁce itself. Courage, to be sure, takes diﬀerent
forms. The mettle of an animal or a brigand, courage for the sake of
honour, the courage of a knight, these are not true forms of courage. The
true courage of civilized peoples is readiness for sacriﬁce in the service of
the state, so that the individual counts as only one amongst many. The
important thing here is not personal mettle but aligning oneself with the
universal. In India ﬁve hundred men conquered twenty thousand* who
were not cowards, but who only lacked this disposition to work in close 
cooperation with others.
328. The worth of courage as a disposition is to be found in the
genuine, absolute ﬁnal end, the sovereignty of the state. The work of
courage is to actualize this ﬁnal end, and the means to this end is the
sacriﬁce of personal actuality. This form of experience thus contains
the harshness of extreme contradictions: alienation itself which yet 
is the existence [Existenz] of freedom; the highest independence 
of being-for-self, which at the same time exists only in serving 
the mechanism of an external organization; absolute obedience,
renunciation of personal opinion and reasoning, in fact complete
absence of spirit, coupled with the most intense and comprehensive
presence of spirit and decision in the moment of acting; the most 
hostile and so most personal action against individuals, coupled with
an attitude of complete indiﬀerence or even benevolence towards
them as individuals.
To risk one’s life is certainly superior to merely fearing death, but is
still purely negative and so indeterminate and without value in itself.
The State
309

It is the positive aspect, the end and content, which ﬁrst gives
signiﬁcance to this spiritedness. Robbers and murderers bent on
crime as their end, adventurers pursuing ends planned to suit their
own whims, etc., these too have spirit [Mut] enough to risk their
lives.
The principle of the modern world—thought and the univer-
sal—has given courage a higher form, because its expression now
seems to be more mechanical, the act not of this particular person,
but of a member of a whole. Moreover, it seems to be turned not
against individual persons, but against a hostile group as such, and
hence personal bravery appears impersonal. It is for this reason
that thought has invented the gun, and the invention of this
weapon, which has changed the purely personal form of courage
into a more abstract one, is no accident.
329. The state’s orientation towards the outside stems from the
fact that it is an individual subject. Its relation to other states there-
fore falls to the power of the crown. Hence it directly devolves on the
monarch, and on him alone, to command the armed forces, to conduct
foreign aﬀairs through ambassadors etc., to make war and peace, and
to conclude treaties of all kinds.*
Addition: In almost all European countries the individual head of the state
is the monarch, and external relations are his business. Where the Estates
have constitutional powers, the question may arise whether they should
not decide on war and peace, and in any case they have their inﬂuence on
the question, particularly in connection with ways and means. In England,
for example, no unpopular war can be waged. If, however, it is supposed
that monarchs and cabinets are more subject to passion than parliaments
are, and if for this reason an attempt is made to juggle the decision on war
and peace into the hands of the latter, then we must point out that whole
nations may often be prey to excitement or be carried away by passion to
a greater extent than their leaders. In England the entire people has fre-
quently pressed for war and to a certain extent compelled ministers to
wage it. The popularity of Pitt* was due to his knowing how to fall in with
what the nation wanted at the time. It was only later that the people cooled
down and so began to reﬂect that the war was useless and unnecessary and
had been undertaken without counting the cost. Moreover, a state stands
in relation not with one other state only, but with many. And the complex-
ities of their relations become so delicate that they can be handled only by
the head of the state.
Third Part: Ethical Life
310

B. Right between States
330. Right between states [das äußere Staatsrecht] springs from
the relations between independent states. It is for this reason that
what is in and for itself in it retains the form of an ought-to-be
[Sollen], since its actuality depends on diﬀerent wills each of which
is sovereign.
Addition: States are not private persons but completely independent total-
ities in themselves, and so the relation between them diﬀers from a moral
relation and a relation involving private rights. Attempts have often been
made to regard the state as a person with the rights of persons and as a
moral entity. But the position with private persons is that they are under
the jurisdiction of a court which gives eﬀect to what is right in itself. Now
a relation between states ought also to be rightful in itself, but in worldly
aﬀairs that which has being in itself [das Ansichseiende] ought also to have
power. Now since there is no power in existence which decides in face of
the state what is right in itself and actualizes this decision, it follows that
so far as international relations are concerned we can never get beyond an
‘ought’. The relation between states is a relation between independent
entities which make mutual stipulations but which at the same time are
superior to these stipulations.
331. The people as a state is spirit in its substantial rationality and
immediate actuality and is therefore the absolute power on earth. It
follows that every state is sovereign and independent in relation to
others. It is entitled in the ﬁrst place and without qualiﬁcation to be
sovereign from their point of view, i.e. to be recognized by them as
sovereign. At the same time, however, this title is purely formal, and
the demand for this recognition of the state, merely on the ground
that it is a state, is abstract. Whether a state in fact has being in and
for itself depends on its content, i.e. on its constitution and condi-
tion; and recognition, implying as it does an identity of both form
and content, is conditional on the neighbouring state’s perception
and will.
A state is as little an actual individual without relations to other
states (see § 322) as an individual is actually a person without a
relationship with other persons (see § 71 and elsewhere). The
legitimacy of a state and, more particularly, so far as its external
relations are concerned, of its monarch also, is partly a purely
internal matter (one state should not meddle with the domestic
The State
311

aﬀairs of another). On the other hand, however, it is no less essen-
tial that this legitimacy should be rendered complete through its
recognition by other states, although this recognition requires a
guarantee that where a state is to be recognized by others, it shall
likewise recognize them, i.e. respect their independence; and so it
comes about that they cannot be indiﬀerent to each other’s inter-
nal aﬀairs.
The question arises how far a nomadic people, for instance, or
any people on a low level of culture, can be regarded as a state. As
once was the case with the Jews and the Muhammadan peoples,
religious views may entail an opposition at a higher level [between
one people and its neighbours] and so preclude the universal iden-
tity which is requisite for recognition.
Addition: When Napoleon said before the Peace of Campo Formio129 that
‘the French Republic needs recognition as little as the sun requires it’,
what his words implied was simply the strength of existence which carries
with it, without any verbal expression, the guarantee of recognition.
332. The immediate actuality which any state possesses from the
point of view of other states is particularized into a multiplicity of
relations which are determined by the arbitrary will of both inde-
pendent parties and which therefore possess the formal nature of
contracts pure and simple. The subject-matter of these contracts,
however, is inﬁnitely less varied than it is in civil society, because in
civil society individuals are reciprocally interdependent in the most
numerous respects, while independent states are principally wholes
which achieve satisfaction internally.
333. The principle of international law [Völkerrecht]—the uni-
versal right which ought to be valid in and for itself between states,
as distinguished from the particular content of positive treaties—is
that treaties, as the ground of obligations between states, ought to be
kept. But since the sovereignty of a state is the principle of its rela-
tions to others, states are to that extent in a state of nature in relation
to each other. Their rights are actualized only in their particular wills
and not in a universal will constituted as a power over them. This
universal determination of international law therefore does not go
beyond an ought-to-be, and what really happens is that relations in
Third Part: Ethical Life
312
129 See second explanatory note to p. 310 [p. 362 below]. [S.H.]

accordance with treaties alternate with the suspension [Aufhebung] of
these relations.
There is no praetor130 to judge between states; at best there may be
arbitrators or mediators, and even these exercise their functions
only contingently, i.e. in accordance with particular wills. Kant
had an idea for securing ‘perpetual peace’ by a federation of states
to adjudicate every dispute.131 It was to be a power recognized by
each individual state, and was to arbitrate in all cases of dissension
in order to make it impossible for disputants to resort to war in
order to settle them. This idea presupposes an accord between
states; this would rest on moral or religious or other grounds and
considerations, but in any case would always depend ultimately on
particular sovereign wills and for that reason would remain
infected with contingency.
334. It follows that if states disagree and their particular wills
cannot be harmonized, the matter can only be settled by war. A state
has an extensive range and, through its subjects, has many-sided
relations, and these may be easily and considerably injured; but it
remains inherently indeterminable which of these injuries is to be
regarded as a speciﬁc breach of treaty or as an injury to the recogni-
tion and honour of the state. The reason for this is that a state may
regard its inﬁnity and honour as at stake in each of its individual con-
cerns, and it is all the more inclined to take oﬀence the more its
strong individuality is impelled as a result of long internal peace to
seek and create a sphere of activity abroad.
335. Apart from this, the state is something spiritual [Geistiges]
and therefore cannot restrict itself to noting when an injury has actu-
ally occurred. On the contrary, there arises in addition as a cause of
strife the idea [Vorstellung] of such an injury as the idea of a danger
threatening from another state, together with calculations of degrees
of probability on this side and that, guessing at intentions, etc.
336. Since states are related to one another as independent en-
tities and so as particular wills on which the very validity of treaties
depends, and since the particular will of the whole, as regards its 
The State
313
130 See second explanatory note to p. 25 [pp. 330‒1 below]. [S.H.]
131 See Kant, Toward Perpetual Peace, ‘Second Deﬁnitive Article for Perpetual 
Peace’. [S.H.]

content, is a will for its own welfare as such, it follows that welfare is
the highest law governing the relation of one state to another. This is
all the more the case since the Idea of the state is precisely the super-
session of the opposition between right as abstract freedom and wel-
fare as the particular content which ﬁlls it, and it is when states
become concrete wholes that they ﬁrst attain recognition (see § 331).
337. The substantial welfare of the state is its welfare as a particu-
lar state in its speciﬁc interest and situation and its no less distinctive
external circumstances, including its particular treaty relations. Its
government therefore is a matter of particular wisdom, not of univer-
sal providence (compare Remark to § 324). Similarly, its aim in rela-
tion to other states and its principle for justifying wars and treaties is
not a universal (philanthropic) thought but only its actually injured
or threatened welfare in its determinate particularity.
At one time the opposition between morality and politics, and the
demand that the latter should conform to the former, were much
discussed. On this point only a general remark is required here.
The welfare of a state has a justiﬁcation that is totally diﬀerent
from that of the welfare of the individual. The determinate being
[Dasein] of the ethical substance or the state—i.e. its right—is
immediately embodied in an existence [Existenz] that is not
abstract but concrete, and the principle of its conduct and behav-
iour can only be this concrete existence and not one of the 
many universal thoughts supposed to be moral commands. When
politics is alleged to clash with morals and so to be always wrong,
the doctrine propounded rests on superﬁcial ideas about morality,
the nature of the state, and the state’s relation to the moral point
of view.
338. The fact that states reciprocally recognize each other as
states remains even in war—the state of aﬀairs in which rights disap-
pear and force and contingency hold sway—a bond wherein each
counts in the eyes of the others as something that has being in and
for itself. Hence in war, war itself is characterized as something
which ought to pass away. It entails therefore the determination of
international law that the possibility of peace be retained (and so, for
example, that envoys must be respected), and, in general, that war
not be waged against internal institutions, against the peace of family
and private life, or against private individuals.
Third Part: Ethical Life
314

Addition: Modern wars are therefore humanely waged, and person is not
set over against person in hatred. At most, personal enmities appear in the
vanguard, but in the main body of the army hostility is something indeter-
minate and gives way to each side’s respect for the duty of the other.
339. Apart from this, the conduct of states towards one another in
war (the fact that prisoners are taken), and in peacetime the conces-
sion of rights to subjects of other states for the purpose of private
trade and intercourse, etc., depend principally upon the customs
[Sitten] of nations, custom being the inner universality of behaviour
maintained in all circumstances.
Addition: The European nations form a family in accordance with the uni-
versal principle underlying their legislation, their customs, and their civil-
ization. Accordingly, this principle has modiﬁed their conduct under
international law in a state of aﬀairs [i.e. war] otherwise dominated by the
mutual inﬂiction of evils. The relations of state to state are uncertain, and
there is no praetor available to adjust them. The only higher judge is the
universal spirit in and for itself, the world spirit.
340. It is as particular entities that states enter into relations with
one another. Hence their relations are on the largest scale a highly
animated play of external contingency and the inner particularity of
passions, interests and purposes, talents and virtues, vices, force, and
wrong—a play wherein the ethical whole itself, the independence of
the state, is exposed to contingency. The principles of the spirits of
peoples [Volksgeister]* are in general restricted on account of their
particularity, for it is in this particularity that, as existent individuals,
they have their objective actuality and their self-consciousness.
Their deeds and destinies in their relations to one another are the
manifest [erscheinende] dialectic of the ﬁnitude of these spirits, and
out of it arises the universal spirit, the spirit of the world, free from all
restriction, producing itself as that which exercises its right—and its
right is the highest right of all—over these ﬁnite spirits in world his-
tory as the world’s court of judgement.*
C. World History
341. The element in which the universal spirit exists in art is intu-
ition and imagery, in religion feeling and representation
[Vorstellung], in philosophy pure, free thought. In world history this
The State
315

element is the actuality of spirit in its whole compass of inwardness
and externality. World history is a court of judgement because in its
universality in and for itself the particular—i.e. the Penates, civil
society, and the spirits of peoples in their variegated actuality—is
present as only ideal [Ideelles], and the movement of spirit in this 
element is the exhibition of that fact.*
342. Further, in world history it is not merely the power [Macht]
of spirit that passes judgement, i.e. the abstract and non-rational
necessity of a blind destiny. On the contrary, since spirit in and 
for itself is reason, and reason’s being-for-self [Für-sich-Sein] in 
spirit is knowledge, world history is the necessary development, 
out of the concept of spirit’s freedom alone, of the moments of 
reason and so of the self-consciousness and freedom of spirit. This
development is the exposition [Auslegung] and actualization of the
universal spirit.
343. The history of spirit is its own act. Spirit is only what it does,
and its act is to make itself the object of its own consciousness. In his-
tory its act is to gain consciousness of itself as spirit, to apprehend
itself in its exposition of itself. This apprehension is its being and its
principle, and the completion of an act of apprehension is at the same
time its alienation and transition. Expressed formally, spirit appre-
hending this apprehension anew, or in other words returning to itself
out of its alienation, is the spirit of the stage higher than that on
which it stood in its earlier apprehension.
The question of the perfectibility and education of the human race
arises here. Those who have maintained this perfectibility* have
divined something of the nature of spirit, something of the fact
that its nature is to have ‘Know thyself’* [Gn ˆwqi seauto′n] as the
law of its being, and, since it apprehends that which it is, to have
a form higher than that which constituted its mere being. But to
those who reject this doctrine, spirit has remained an empty word,
and history a superﬁcial play of contingent, so-called ‘merely
human’, strivings and passions. Even if, in connection with history,
they speak of providence and the plan of providence, and so
express a faith in a higher power, their ideas remain empty because
they expressly declare that for them the plan of providence is
inscrutable and incomprehensible.*
Third Part: Ethical Life
316

344. In the course of this activity [Geschäft] of the world spirit,
states, peoples, and individuals arise animated by their particular
determinate principle which has its exposition and actuality in their
constitutions and in the whole range of their life and condition.
While they are conscious of this actuality and are absorbed in its
interests, they are all the time the unconscious tools and organs of
this inner activity. The shapes which they take pass away, while the
spirit in and for itself prepares and works out its transition to its next
higher stage.
345. Justice and virtue, injustice, force and vice, talents and their
deeds, passions strong and weak, guilt and innocence, grandeur in indi-
vidual and national life, independence, fortune and misfortune of states
and individuals, all these have their speciﬁc signiﬁcance and worth in
the ﬁeld of conscious actuality; therein they are judged and justice—
though only imperfect justice—is meted out to them. World-history,
however, falls outside the point of view from which these things matter.
Each of its stages is the presence of a necessary moment in the Idea of
the world spirit, and that moment attains its absolute right in that stage.
The people whose life embodies this moment secures its good fortune
and fame, and its deeds are brought to fruition.
346. History is spirit giving itself the form of events or of imme-
diate natural actuality. The stages of its development are therefore
present as immediate natural principles. These, because they are nat-
ural, are a plurality external to one another, and they are present
therefore in such a way that each of them is assigned to one people in
the form of its geographical and anthropological existence.
347. The people to which is assigned a moment of the Idea in the
form of a natural principle is entrusted with giving complete eﬀect to
it in the advance of the self-developing self-consciousness 
of the world spirit. This people is dominant in world history during
this one epoch, and it is only once (see § 346) that it can play this
epoch-making role. In contrast with this its absolute right of being
the bearer of this present stage in the world spirit’s development, the
spirits of the other peoples are without rights, and they, along with
those whose epoch has passed, no longer count in world history.
The particular history of a world-historical people contains (a) the
development of its principle from its latent embryonic [kindlich]
The State
317

stage until it blossoms into the self-conscious freedom of ethical
life and enters universal history; and (b) the period of its decline
and fall, since it is its decline and fall that signals the emergence in
it of a higher principle as simply the negative of its own. When this
happens, spirit passes over into the new principle and so marks out
another people for world-historical signiﬁcance. After this period,
the declining people has lost its absolute interest; it may indeed
take up the higher principle positively and build it into itself,
but—since the principle is something received from the out-
side—the people’s activity lacks immanent vitality and freshness.
Perhaps it loses its independence, or perhaps it continues to exist
(or to drag out its existence) as a particular state or a group of
states and involves itself without rhyme or reason in manifold
enterprises at home and battles abroad.
348. At the vanguard of all actions, including world-historical
actions, stand individuals as subjectivities giving actuality to what is
substantial (see Remark to § 279). They give life to the substantial
deed of the world spirit and they are therefore immediately at one
with that deed, though it is concealed from them and is not their aim
and object (see § 344). For the deeds of the world spirit, therefore,
they receive no honour or thanks either from their contemporaries
(see § 344) or from public opinion in later ages. All that is vouchsafed
to them by such opinion is undying fame as formal subjectivities.*
349. A people does not begin by being a state. The transition from
a family, a horde, a clan, a multitude, etc., to political conditions is
the formal realization of the Idea as such in that people. Without this
form, a people, as an ethical substance—which is what it is in
itself—lacks the objectivity of possessing for itself and for others a
universal and universally valid existence in laws, i.e. in determinate
thoughts, and as a result it fails to secure recognition from others. So
long as it lacks objective law and a ﬁrm rationality for itself, its inde-
pendence is formal only and is not sovereignty.
It would be contrary even to commonplace ideas to call patriarchal
conditions a ‘constitution’ or a people under patriarchal govern-
ment a ‘state’ or its independence ‘sovereignty’. Hence, before his-
tory actually begins, we have, on the one hand, dull innocence,
devoid of interest, and, on the other, the courage of revenge and of
the formal struggle for recognition (see § 331 and Remark to § 57).
Third Part: Ethical Life
318

350. It is the absolute right of the Idea to step into existence in
legal determinations and objective institutions, beginning with mar-
riage and agriculture (see Remark to § 203), whether the Idea be ac-
tualized in the form of divine legislation and favour, or in the form
of force and wrong. This right is the right of heroes to found states.
351. The same consideration allows civilized nations to regard
and treat as barbarians those who lag behind them in the substantial
moments of the state. Thus a pastoral people may treat hunters as
barbarians, and both of these are barbarians from the point of view of
agricultural peoples, etc. The civilized nation is conscious that the
rights of barbarians are unequal to its own and treats their independ-
ence as only a formality.
When wars and disputes arise in such circumstances, the trait
which gives them a signiﬁcance for world history is the fact that
they are struggles for recognition in connection with something of
determinate worth.
352. The concrete Ideas, the spirits of peoples, have their truth
and their destiny in the concrete Idea which is absolute universality,
i.e. in the world spirit. Around its throne they stand as the executors
of its actualization and as witnesses to, and ornaments of, its grandeur.
As spirit, it is nothing but its active movement towards absolute
knowledge of itself and therefore towards freeing its consciousness
from the form of natural immediacy and so coming to itself.
Therefore the principles of the formations of this self-consciousness in
the course of its liberation—the world-historical realms—are four
in number.
353. In its ﬁrst and immediate revelation, spirit has as its principle
the shape of the substantial spirit as the identity in which indi-
viduality is absorbed in its essence and remains without justiﬁcation
for itself.
The second principle is knowledge on the part of the substantial
spirit, so that the latter is both the positive content and ﬁlling of
spirit and also the being-for-self which is the living form of spirit. This
is the principle of beautiful ethical individuality.132
The State
319
132 On the close connection Hegel sees between the Greeks, beauty and art, see G. W. F.
Hegel, The Philosophy of History, trans. J. Sibree (New York: Dover Publications, 1956),
241–50. [S.H.]

The third principle is the inward deepening of this knowing being-
for-self until it reaches abstract universality and therefore inﬁnite
opposition to the objective world which in the same process has
become forsaken by spirit.
The principle of the fourth formation is the conversion of this
opposition so that spirit receives in its inner life its truth and con-
crete essence, while in objectivity it is at home and reconciled with
itself. Since the spirit, which has thus reverted to the ﬁrst substan-
tiality, has returned out of the inﬁnite opposition, it engenders 
and knows this its truth as thought and as a world of law-governed
actuality.
354. In accordance with these four principles, the world-historical
realms are the following: (1) the Oriental, (2) the Greek, (3) the
Roman, (4) the Germanic.
355. (1) The Oriental realm.
The world-view of this ﬁrst realm is substantial, without inward
division, and it arises in natural communities patriarchically governed.
According to this view, the secular government is theocratic, the
ruler is also a high priest or God himself; constitution and legislation
are at the same time religion, while religious and moral commands,
or usages rather, are at the same time laws of the state and of right.
In the magniﬁcence of this whole, individual personality loses its
rights and perishes; the external world of nature is either immedi-
ately divine or else God’s ornament, and the history of actuality is
poetry. Distinctions are developed in customs, government, and
state on their many sides, and in default of laws and amidst the sim-
plicity of manners, they become unwieldy, diﬀuse, and superstitious
ceremonies, the accidents of personal power and arbitrary rule, and
diﬀerences of estate become crystallized into natural castes. Hence in
the Oriental state nothing is constant, and what is ﬁrm is fossilized;
the state lives therefore only in an outward movement which
becomes in the end an elemental fury and devastation. Its inner calm
is merely the calm of private life and immersion in feebleness and
exhaustion.
A still substantial, natural, spirituality is a moment in the develop-
ment of the state, and the point at which any state takes this form
is the absolute beginning of its history. This has been emphasized
Third Part: Ethical Life
320

and demonstrated with learning and profound insight in connec-
tion with the history of particular states by Dr Stuhr* in his book
The Downfall of Natural States—a work in which he leads the way
to a rational treatment of constitutional history and of history gen-
erally. The principle of subjectivity and self-conscious freedom is
there too shown to be the principle of the Germanic nation, but
the book goes no further than the decline of natural states, and
consequently the principle is only brought to the point where it
appears either as a restless mobility, as human caprice and corrup-
tion, or in its particular form as emotion [Gemüt], and where it has
not yet developed to the objectivity of self-conscious substantiality
or to organized legality.
356. (2) The Greek realm.
This realm possesses this substantial unity of ﬁnite and inﬁnite,
but only as a mysterious foundation, suppressed in dim memory in
the recesses [Höhlen] and images of tradition.* This foundation,
reborn out of the spirit which diﬀerentiates itself into individual
spirituality, emerges into the daylight of knowing and is tempered
and transﬁgured into beauty and a free and serene [heiter] ethical life.
Hence it is in a world of this character that the principle of personal
individuality arises, though it is still not self-enclosed but kept in its
ideal unity. The result is that the whole falls apart into a group of
particular national spirits* [Volksgeister]; the ultimate decision is
assigned not to the subjectivity of self-consciousness that is for itself,
but to a power standing above and outside it (see Remark to § 279);
on the other hand, the particularity associated with needs is not yet
taken up into the sphere of freedom but is farmed out to a class of
slaves [Sklavenstand].
357. (3) The Roman realm.
In this realm, diﬀerentiation is carried to its conclusion, and ethi-
cal life is sundered without end into the extremes of the private self-
consciousness of persons, on the one hand, and abstract universality,
on the other. This opposition begins in the clash* between the 
substantial intuition of an aristocracy and the principle of free per-
sonality in democratic form. As the opposition grows, the ﬁrst of
these opponents develops into superstition and the maintenance of
cold, self-seeking power, while the second becomes more and more
The State
321

corrupt until it sinks into a rabble [Pöbel]. Finally, the whole is dis-
solved and the result is universal misfortune and the death of ethical
life. The individualities of peoples [Völkerindividualitäten] perish in
the unity of a pantheon, all individuals [Einzelnen] are degraded to
the level of private persons equal with one another, possessed of
formal rights, and the only bond left to hold them together is an
abstract, monstrously insatiable self-will.
358. (4) The Germanic realm.
Spirit and its world are thus both alike lost and plunged in the
inﬁnite pain of that loss for which a people, the Jewish people, was
held in readiness. Spirit is here pressed back upon itself in the
extreme of its absolute negativity. This is the turning-point in and for
itself. Spirit grasps the inﬁnite positivity of this its inwardness, i.e. it
grasps the principle of the unity of the divine and human nature,*
the reconciliation of the objective truth and freedom which have
appeared within self-consciousness and subjectivity—a reconcili-
ation, the fulﬁlment of which has been entrusted to the Nordic prin-
ciple of the Germanic peoples.*
359. The inwardness of this principle is ﬁrst of all abstract; it
exists in feeling as faith, love, and hope,133 the reconciliation and reso-
lution of all opposition. It then unfolds its content, raising it to
become actuality and self-conscious rationality, to become a secular
realm proceeding from the heart, ﬁdelity, and comradeship of free
individuals, a realm which in this its subjectivity is equally a realm of
barbarous manners and crude arbitrariness that is for itself. This
realm is set over against a world beyond, an intellectual realm, whose
content is indeed the truth of its spirit, but a truth not yet thought
and so still veiled in the barbarism of imagery [Vorstellung]. This
world beyond, as the spiritual power over the actual heart, acts
against the latter as an unfree, frightful force.
360. These two realms* stand distinguished from one another
though at the same time they are rooted in one unity and Idea. Here
their distinction is intensiﬁed to absolute opposition and a hard strug-
gle ensues in the course of which the spiritual realm [das Geistliche]
reduces the existence of its heaven to an earthly here and now, to the
Third Part: Ethical Life
322
133 See 1 Corinthians 13: 13. [S.H.]

ordinary worldliness of actuality and representation [Vorstellung].
The secular realm, on the other hand, builds up its abstract being-
for-self into thought and the principle of rational being and knowing,
i.e. into the rationality of right and law. In this way their opposition
implicitly [an sich] loses its strength and disappears. The present has
discarded its barbarity and unjust arbitrariness, and truth has cast oﬀ
its otherworldliness and contingent force, so that the true reconcili-
ation which discloses the state as the image and actuality of reason
has become objective. In the state, self-consciousness ﬁnds in an
organic development the actuality of its substantial knowing and
willing; in religion,* it ﬁnds the feeling and the representation of this
its own truth as an ideal essentiality; while in [philosophical] science,
it ﬁnds the free comprehension and knowledge of this truth as one
and the same in its mutually complementary manifestations, i.e. in
the state, in nature, and in the ideal [ideell] world.*
The State
323

EXPLANATORY NOTES
Unless otherwise indicated all explanatory notes and footnotes are based on
notes by T. M. Knox in the original edition (1952). Many of these notes have
been extensively revised, and several have been supplemented with additional
material. A few explanatory notes are based on notes by A. W. Wood (the
editor), or H. B. Nisbet (the translator), in the Cambridge University Press
edition of the Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1991). These have been indi-
cated as follows: [S.H./A.W.W.] or [S.H./H.B.N.]. New explanatory notes
and footnotes by the present editor are indicated by [S.H.].
PREFACE
3 the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences (Heidelberg, 1817): Hegel’s
references are always to this, the ﬁrst edition of his Encyclopaedia of 
the Philosophical Sciences. For an English translation of this edition, see 
G. W. F. Hegel, Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in Outline [1817]
and Critical Writings, ed. E. Behler (New York: Continuum, 1990). In the
footnotes and Explanatory Notes reference will be made additionally (or
sometimes exclusively) to the third edition published in 1830. For
English translations of the three parts of the third edition, see G. W. F.
Hegel, The Encyclopaedia Logic, trans. T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting,
and H. S. Harris (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1991) [Encyclopaedia §§ 1–244];
Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature: Being Part Two of the Encyclopaedia of the
Philosophical Sciences (1830), trans. A. V. Miller (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1970) [Encyclopaedia §§ 245–376]; and Hegel’s Philosophy of Mind:
Being Part Three of the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences (1830),
trans. W. Wallace, together with the Zusätze in Boumann’s text (1845),
trans. A. V. Miller (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971) [Encyclopaedia
§§ 377–577]. [S.H.]
the Remarks: the Remarks are the indented passages that follow the main
paragraphs of Hegel’s text. They are to be distinguished from the
Additions which were not included by Hegel himself, but compiled after
his death by the editor of the ﬁrst posthumous edition of the Philosophy of
Right, Eduard Gans. [S.H.]
a work as ephemeral as Penelope’s web: Penelope was the wife of Odysseus.
During her husband’s long absence from home, many suitors asked to
marry her. She put them oﬀby telling them they had to wait until she had
ﬁnished weaving a shroud for her father-in-law and by secretly undoing
each night the weaving she had done that day. See Homer, Odyssey 19.
137–55. [S.H.]

4 I have fully expounded the nature of speculative knowing in my Science of
Logic: Hegel’s Science of Logic was published in three volumes between
1812 and 1816. A second, expanded edition of the ﬁrst part of the 
Logic—the Doctrine of Being—was published in 1832. See Hegel’s
Science of Logic, trans. A. V. Miller (Amherst, NY: Humanity Books,
1999). [S.H.]
7 positive jurisprudence which often has to do only with contradictions: Hegel
has in mind here the inconsistencies in systems of positive law (see e.g.
his comments on ﬁctions in Roman law in the Remarks to PR §§ 3 and
180), as well as contradictory judgements (see e.g. Remark to PR § 211).
8 contemporary philosophizing: especially that of Immanuel Kant
(1724–1804), Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi (1743–1819) and their respec-
tive followers. [S.H.]
philosophy of recent times: it is publications by the Romantics (e.g.
Friedrich von Schlegel (1772–1829)) that Hegel has mainly in mind.
9 He giveth to his own in sleep: like many of Hegel’s quotations (which are
usually made from memory), this is inaccurate. Psalm 127: 2, in Luther’s
version, reads, literally translated, ‘for to his friends he gives it [bread] in
sleep’. The ‘wares of sleep’ are dreams.
Herr Fries: Jakob Friedrich Fries (1773–1843), professor at Heidelberg
(where he was Hegel’s predecessor) 1805–16, and thereafter at Jena.
a solemn public occasion: the Wartburg Festival of the German Student
Fraternities on 18 October 1817.
Epicurus: Epicurus (341–270 bc), ancient Greek philosopher. He meas-
ured conduct by the standard of feeling and impulse, and truth by the
standard of sense-perception.
a quotation I have used elsewhere: the lines (mis)quoted by Hegel are from
Faust. Part One (1808) by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832).
The lines to which Hegel refers are:
Verachte nur Vernunft und Wissenschaft
Des Menschen allerhöchste Kraft. . . .
Und hätt’ er sich auch nicht dem Teufel übergeben,
Er müsste doch zu Grunde gehn.
(‘Studierzimmer’, ll. 1851–5, 1866–7)
Do but despise reason and knowledge,
The highest strength in man! . . .
And even if he had not given himself to the devil,
He would still have to perish!
Hegel misquotes the lines both here and in the Phenomenology. See
Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A. V. Miller (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1977), 218.
Explanatory Notes
325

Explanatory Notes
326
10 the subjective form of feeling: the piety which Hegel attacks (Friedrich
Schleiermacher (1768–1834) is sometimes in his mind) is that which
regards the world as God-forsaken and which exalts the sanctities of inner
conviction above the wickedness of the world. It forgets, Hegel holds, that
God reveals himself in the world, in nature and history. Piety of the right
sort worships God not as an abstract ‘supreme being’, but as a loving and
self-revealing spirit. Such piety is at home in the world and is reconciled
to it, because it has faith that, since the world is the revelation of God,
reason must be immanent in it as its law and essential principle.
Philosophy diﬀers from such piety, in Hegel’s view, only in substituting
knowledge for faith.
11 the service of the state: there is nothing sinister in what Hegel says here. All
that he means is that in Prussia philosophy was conﬁned mainly or
entirely to universities, i.e. to state institutions, whose professors were
civil servants and so in ‘the service of the state’. In Greece, on the other
hand, philosophy was not a professional occupation.
outlined for us by Plato: see e.g. Protagoras and Republic, 493ﬀ., where the
sophist is contrasted with the true philosopher. Plato is thought to have
been born in 428 bc and to have died in 348 bc.
12 numerous publications in the ﬁeld of the positive sciences: the reference 
is probably to the numerous attacks made by empirical scientists on the
philosophy of nature of Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling
(1775–1854).
a letter of Johannes von Müller: Müller (1752–1809) was the most important
Swiss historian of the eighteenth century. [S.H.]
They are tolerated, like brothels: ‘On les tolère comme les bordels’ (in French
in Hegel’s text). [S.H.]
13 as I have said: this has not been said before, but Hegel may be referring
back to his earlier assertion that ‘philosophy with us is not, as it was with
the Greeks for instance, pursued as a private art, but has an existence in
the open, in contact with the public’ [p. 11 above]. [S.H.]
so I revert to what I have said before: this might be a reference back to
Hegel’s observation ‘that nature is inherently rational, and that what
knowledge has to investigate and grasp in concepts is this actual reason
present in it’ [p. 6 above]. [S.H.]
the pivot on which the impending world revolution turned: the principle
breaking into the Greek world in Plato’s time was the principle of 
‘subjective freedom’, on which Hegel has a good deal to say in the third
part of this book. The ‘world revolution’ then impending was the change
in people’s ideas due to the emergence of Christianity.
14 What is rational is actual and what is actual is rational: ‘Was vernünftig ist,
das ist wirklich; und was wirklich ist, das ist vernünftig.’ Hegel’s claim here
is that reason is an actual [wirklich] power in the world, working to create
the institutions of human freedom, but he is not saying that everything

Explanatory Notes
327
that exists or is ‘real’ is rational. His famous statement is further
explained and defended in Encyclopaedia (1830) § 6 [Geraets trans.,
29–30]: ‘But when I speak of actuality, one should, of course, think about
the sense in which I use this expression, given the fact that I dealt with
actuality too in a quite elaborate Logic, and I distinguished it quite clearly
and directly, not just from what is contingent, even though it has existence
too, but also, more precisely, from being-there [Dasein], from existence
[Existenz], and from other determinations. [. . .] [Philosophical] science
deals only with the Idea—which is not so impotent that it merely ought
to be, and is not actual—and further with an actuality of which [. . .]
objects, institutions and situations are only the superﬁcial outer rind.’ For
Hegel’s discussion of the concept of ‘actuality’, see Science of Logic,
Miller trans., 541–53. [S.H.]
For since rationality . . . simultaneously with its actualization: reason at 
any stage does not attain full actuality until it passes over into existence
and embodies itself in something objective; e.g. religious convictions are
not genuinely actual until they are objectiﬁed in institutions, churches,
etc. Similarly, the state, as an objectiﬁcation in the external world of
humanity’s rational will, is that in which alone our freedom, the essence
of our will, is fully actualized.
Plato might have omitted his recommendation: see Plato, Laws 789b–790a.
Hegel’s citation is not quite accurate, and he seems to have forgotten that
Plato is saying that to make such a regulation is unnecessary and would
be ridiculous.
And Fichte too: see Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Foundations of Natural Right
(1796–7), trans. M. Baur (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2000), § 21 [p. 257]. Fichte (1762–1814) limits this requirement to
‘important persons (who therefore can aﬀord it)’.
15 Hic Rhodus, hic saltus: ‘Here is Rhodes; here’s the jump [i.e. jump here!].’
The proverb comes from one of Aesop’s fables, in which an athlete 
boasts of the many feats he has performed in many countries and espe-
cially of a jump he once made in Rhodes. He says that he can prove this
by the testimony of eyewitnesses ‘if any of the people who were present
ever come here’. At this, one of the bystanders tells the athlete that 
he doesn’t need eyewitnesses since the place where he is standing will 
do just as well as Rhodes itself: ‘Here is Rhodes; jump here!’ See Fables
of Aesop, trans. S. A. Handford (1954; Harmondsworth: Penguin Books,
1964), 185. [S.H.]
Here is the rose, dance here: Hegel is playing on words. ‘Ρóδος means the
island of Rhodes, but suggests ‘Ρóδον, a rose. Saltus means a jump, but
salta is the imperative of the verb ‘to dance’. The rose is the symbol of
joy, and the philosopher’s task is to ﬁnd joy in the present by discovering
reason within it. In other words, philosophy may ‘dance’ for joy in this
world; it need not postpone its ‘dancing’ until it builds an ideal world
elsewhere.

Explanatory Notes
328
15 the rose in the cross of the present: this metaphor was suggested to Hegel 
by the name and emblem of the Rosicrucians, a secret religious society
established in the seventeenth century. [S.H.]
16 What began with Luther: the inﬂuence of Martin Luther (1483–1546) is
marked in Hegel’s work, and he declared himself to be a Lutheran; see
Hegel: The Letters, trans. C. Butler and C. Seiler (Bloomington, Ind.:
Indiana University Press, 1984), 520: ‘I am a Lutheran, and through 
philosophy have been at once completely conﬁrmed in Lutheranism.’ 
In contrast to Luther, however, Hegel considers religion, especially
Protestantism, and philosophy to have the same content. In Hegel’s view,
faith and feeling are the form of religion, while rationality is the form of
philosophy (see Remark to PR § 270).
The saying has become famous: the phrase is from the English philosopher
and statesman Francis Bacon (1561–1626), The Advancement of Learning
(1605), Book I, I. 3: ‘It is an assured truth, and a conclusion of experience,
that a little or superﬁcial knowledge of philosophy may incline the mind of
man to atheism, but a further proceeding therein doth bring the mind back
again to religion’ (Francis Bacon, ed. A. Johnston (New York: Schocken
Books, 1965), 24). There is a similar remark in Bacon’s essay on Atheism.
the ideal [das Ideale]: here Hegel uses the word ‘ideal’ to refer not to what
is beautiful, nor to what is a mere ‘moment’ of a whole, but to the realm
of thought as such. See third explanatory note to p. 31 and second
explanatory note to p. 60.
When philosophy paints its grey in grey: compare Hegel’s remark with 
these words of Mephistopheles from Goethe’s Faust. Part One: ‘Grey,
dear friend, is all theory, | And green life’s golden tree’ (‘Studierzimmer’,
ll. 2038–9).
The owl of Minerva begins its ﬂight only with the falling of dusk: Minerva
was the Roman goddess of wisdom (and the equivalent of the Greek 
goddess Athena). Her sacred bird was the owl. [S.H.]
INTRODUCTION
18 and its deduction is presupposed: this deduction is provided in the
Encyclopaedia (1830) §§ 469–86 and is summarized in PR §§ 5–32. [S.H.]
in civil law, all deﬁnition is hazardous: ‘omnis deﬁnitio in jure civili pericu-
losa’ (Justinian, Digest [Pandects], 50. 17. 202) (in Latin in Hegel’s text).
The ‘positive’ science of right is the ordinary, non-philosophical study of
right and law; see PR § 3 and Remark. [S.H.]
19 immediate ‘facts of consciousness’: here and in other places where Hegel uses
this phrase, his arrow is primarily aimed at J. F. Fries.
direct bearing on action and not simply on knowledge: see e.g. Remarks to PR
§§ 126 and 140. If feeling or inspiration is made a substitute for law, then
any crime may be justiﬁed by the convictions or ‘moral intentions’ of the
criminal.

Explanatory Notes
329
20 the necessities of nature: i.e. soil, climate, geographical position, etc. On the
inﬂuence of these, see the section on the ‘Geographical Basis of History’
in G. W. F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, trans. J. Sibree (New York:
Dover Publications, 1956), 79–102.
much more like that between Institutes and Pandects: legal rights in any
given system of law are regarded by Hegel as an embodiment of the le-
gislator’s conception of what is right in the nature of things. The illustra-
tion he chooses is not very happy. The Institutes of Justinian are an
elementary textbook of law; the Pandects (or Digest) are a complete codex
of case-law to which the Institutes are an introduction. Hegel takes the
Institutes to lay down the general principles on which the detailed case-
law collected in the Pandects is based, but that is not quite true of the
books in question. (Justinian I (ad 482/3–565) was Eastern Roman
Emperor from ad 527 until his death.)
Montesquieu proclaimed the true historical view: see Charles Louis de
Secondat, baron de Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws (1748), trans. 
A. M. Cohler, B. C. Miller, and H. S. Stone (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1989), Part 1, Book 1, chap. 3, pp. 8–9: ‘Laws should
be so appropriate to the people for whom they are made that it is very
unlikely that the laws of one nation can suit another. [. . .] They should
be related to the physical aspect of the country; to the climate, be it freez-
ing, torrid, or temperate; to the properties of the terrain, its location and
extent; to the way of life of the peoples, be they plowmen, hunters, or
herdsmen; they should relate to the degree of liberty that the constitution
can sustain, to the religion of the inhabitants, their inclinations, their
wealth, their number, their commerce, their mores and their manners.’
[S.H.]
21 in order to comprehend law or an institution of right: this is an allusion to the
controversy started by the historical school of jurists—Friedrich Karl
von Savigny (1779–1861) and his followers—in Hegel’s day.
22 Herr Hugo’s Textbook of the History of Roman Law: Gustav, Ritter von
Hugo (1764–1844), was professor in Göttingen from 1788 and a member
of the historical school of law. The ﬁrst edition of his Textbook of the
History of Roman Law [Lehrbuch der Geschichte des römischen Rechts] was
published in 1790. The ﬁfth edition appeared in 1815 and there were
many subsequent editions.
Cicero praises the Twelve Tables: the reference to Cicero (106–43 bc) is to
his On the Orator [De Oratore], 1. 44. The Twelve Tables was the early
Roman legal code (c.450 bc).
23 As far as the correction of the philosopher Favorinus . . . is concerned: both
Favorinus (ad 80–150), the philosopher from Arles, and Sextus Caecilius
(d. c.ad 169/175), the African jurist, were historical ﬁgures, members 
of Hadrian’s circle, but their conversation is rather imagined than
reported by Aulus Gellius (c.ad 125–80). Gellius’ Attic Nights [Noctes
Atticae] is a collection of notes on grammar, geometry, philosophy, and

Explanatory Notes
330
history which takes its name from the long winter nights Gellius spent
in Attica, Greece.
23 You must be aware . . .: ‘Non . . . ignoras legum opportunitates et medelas
pro temporum moribus et pro rerum publicarum generibus, ac pro utilitatum
praesentium rationibus, proque vitiorum, quibus medendum est, fervoribus,
mutari ac ﬂecti, neque uno statu consistere, quin, ut facies coeli et maris, ita
rerum atque fortunae tempestatibus varientur. Quid salubrius visum est roga-
tione illa Stolonis . . ., quid utilius plebiscite Voconio . . . ? Quid tam necessar-
ium existimatum est . . . quam Lex Licinia . . . ? Omnia tamen haec obliterata
et operta sunt civitatis opulentia’ (in Latin in Hegel’s text). Licinius Stolo
was a tribune in the Roman Republic from 376 to 367 bc, during which
time he proposed the Licinian law which required that a consul seat be
given to a plebeian and restricted the amount of public land that could 
be owned by one individual. Voconius’ decree (c.169 bc) regulated the
inheritances of women. [S.H.]
24 Shakespeare’s Shylock in the Merchant of Venice: Shylock lends 3,000
ducats to the young Bassanio to enable him to enter the competition for
Portia’s hand in marriage. The condition is that the merchant Antonio,
who stands surety for Bassanio, must forfeit a pound of ﬂesh if Bassanio
fails to repay the loan within a speciﬁed time. When Shylock tries to
enforce the contract, however, Portia (in disguise) discloses its ﬂaw: while
the contract permits Shylock to extract from Antonio his pound of ﬂesh, it
says nothing about any right to shed blood in the process. Shylock thus
immediately loses his advantage, ﬁnds himself in the position of an alien
who has threatened the life of a Venetian citizen, and so must plead for his
own life. Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice was written in 1596–7. [S.H.]
not only a horse but also a carriage or wagon: by ad 100 jumentum meant a
draught animal, but earlier it had meant a vehicle drawn by yoked ani-
mals. An arcera is a covered vehicle. [S.H./A.W.W.]
25 a method commended by Leibniz: Hegel is contrasting the method of math-
ematics, which lays down certain axioms, postulates, and hypotheses, and
deduces what follows from them, with the method of philosophy, whose
subject-matter is actuality and not hypotheses, and which develops by its
own inner necessity, a necessity lacking, e.g., in the advance from one
book of Euclid (ﬂ. c.300 bc) to the next. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
(1646–1716) frequently uses the mathematical method in his philosoph-
ical work; e.g. in his Principles of Nature and Grace (1712–14) he lays down
the supreme perfection of God, and then goes on, in §§ 10ﬀ., to deduce
what follows therefrom, e.g. that this is the best of all possible worlds, that
the perceptions and desires of each monad must be of a certain character,
etc. (see G. W. Leibniz: The Monadology and Other Philosophical Writings,
trans. R. Latta (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1925), 417ﬀ.).
to call bonorum possessio what was nevertheless an inheritance: see Remark to
PR § 180. The law of inheritance [hereditas], laid down by the Twelve
Tables, led to much injustice, e.g. children emancipated from the authority

Explanatory Notes
331
of their fathers were eo ipso excluded from inheritance. Edicts by the
praetors—Rome’s magistrates—allowed parties so excluded to obtain
their inheritance under another name—bonorum possessio [‘the possession
of goods’]. Thus, by a legal ﬁction, the old law of inheritance was main-
tained unimpaired, while its unpalatable consequences were evaded. See
e.g. Gaius, Institutes, 3. 25–8. (Gaius was a Roman jurist who is assumed
to have lived ad 110–79.)
26 by the ﬁction or pretence that a daughter [ﬁlia] was a son [ﬁlius]: this 
example of a legal ﬁction was withdrawn, as a mistake, from later editions
of the book in which Hegel ﬁnds it: J. G. Heineccius, Illustrated Treatise
on Ancient Roman Jurisprudence [Antiquitatum Romanarum jurisprudentiam
illustrantium Syntagma] (Frankfurt, 1771). What Heineccius says is that
by a legal ﬁction the praetors in certain cases treated a daughter as a son
in order to give her rights of inheritance from which in strict law she was
excluded. Johann Gottlieb Heineccius (1681–1741) was a German jurist
and professor of philosophy and jurisprudence at Halle.
28 I hope by and by to be able to elaborate them still further: the hope of pro-
ducing an ampler exposition was not fulﬁlled. In the third edition (1830)
of the Encyclopaedia this particular section (§§ 440–82) was not much
enlarged, though some important changes were made.
29 the annihilation of any organization which tries to rise anew from the ruins:
Hegel has in mind the ideas and actions of the French revolutionaries
(especially during 1793–4). Compare the section on ‘Absolute Freedom
and Terror’ in the Phenomenology, Miller trans., 355–63.
31 appears (in the second proposition) merely as an addition: Fichte published
the ﬁrst version of his Science of Knowledge [Wissenschaftslehre] in 1794–5.
The ﬁrst principle of Fichte’s new science is that ‘the self begins by an
absolute positing of its own existence’. The second principle is that the
self posits a ‘not-self’ in opposition to itself. Hegel’s criticism here is that
the second, ‘negative’, principle is not derived by Fichte immanently
from the ﬁrst, ‘positive’, principle, but is introduced as an additional prin-
ciple. Unlike Hegel himself, therefore, Fichte does not apprehend the
negativity that is immanent in the I itself. See J. G. Fichte, Science of
Knowledge, trans. P. Heath and J. Lachs (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1982), 93–105. [S.H.]
the I is this solitude and absolute negation: i.e. the pure I of PR § 5. As such,
it is ‘alone’ and negative because it is the renunciation of everything
determinate and is simply turned in upon itself.
something which is only ideal: by calling something ‘ideal’ [ideell] Hegel
does not mean that it does not really exist or that it exists only in the
mind; nor does he mean that it is ‘ideal’ in the sense of ‘perfect’ or ‘beau-
tiful’. He means that it is not something independent in its own right, 
but merely an aspect or ‘moment’ of some larger whole. In this sense, a
part of the body, such as a hand, is ‘ideal’, since it is what it is only as a
part of the body. See Science of Logic, Miller trans., 149–50: ‘ideal being

Explanatory Notes
332
[das Ideelle] is the ﬁnite as it is in the true inﬁnite—as a determination, a
content, which is distinct but is not an independent, self-subsistent being,
but only a moment.’ [S.H.]
33 which is not considered separately [für sich] any further here: the will may be
regarded as determinate in two diﬀerent respects: (a) it may be deter-
mined as subjective only and not also as objective; i.e. it may be the self-
consciousness which distinguishes itself from the external world. As will,
this self-consciousness seeks to overcome its subjectivity and to give
objectivity to itself, because to be only subjective is to be restricted, and
the will’s implicitly inﬁnite nature struggles to overcome this restriction.
This relation of consciousness to an object in which it ﬁnds not itself but
only something other than itself is a mode in which the will appears, but
it is only an appearance, not actuality. (Actuality is the synthesis of sub-
jective and objective. A cleavage between these is only an appearance.) On
this point see PR § 108. The ﬁrst ‘form’ of the will which Hegel distin-
guishes here is thus the will determined in form as subjective. (b) The
second form of the will is the will that is also determined in content—the
will whose determinations are its own and thereby constitute its content.
This form of will—the genuinely determinate will which supersedes (but
also includes) the abstract or formal will of self-consciousness—Hegel
proceeds to treat in the following Paragraphs.
34 its purpose: the second form of the will is the one whose determinations are
its own and therefore its content; but since it also includes the ﬁrst form of
the will—and so is subjectivity in contrast to objectivity—this content is
the will’s purpose or aim.
as its object: that is, as its content and purpose.
the will is for itself what it is in itself: in itself or in its essential nature a child
is a human being, a rational being. The child exempliﬁes the generic
essence of humanity, and it is only if we know this that we can understand
what a child is at all. But this generic essence is only implicit in the child;
in itself the child is a man or woman, but it is not yet this for itself or in
its own eyes. Childhood is the mode of existence that corresponds to the
concept of humanity while that concept is still only implicit; or, to use
Hegel’s terminology, in the child, humanity is ‘in its concept’, or is ‘as
concept only’, or is ‘in accordance with its concept’. The potentialities of
humanity are realized only when the child grows up, and then, as an
adult, is for itself what it is in itself. Humanity explicit or for itself as the
adult is a diﬀerent thing, a diﬀerent type of existent, from the child,
despite the inner identity between child and adult in respect of their con-
cept. A human being, however, is ﬁnite and may fail adequately to
embody the concept of humanity: he may, for example, be a lunatic. Here
again then there may be a discrepancy between the human being’s
implicit nature and what he explicitly is, and it is the occurrence of such
a discrepancy which constitutes ﬁnitude. A lunatic exists, is a phenomenon,
but because of this discrepancy, he lacks actuality and is a ‘mere’ existent
or ‘only’ a phenomenon.

Explanatory Notes
333
but for itself it is time: Hegel’s point here is that in time the negativity
inherent in space becomes explicit. Time, therefore, is nothing but the
process whereby space negates itself. See Encyclopaedia (1830) §§ 254–9.
For a detailed study of Hegel’s understanding of space and time, see 
S. Houlgate, An Introduction to Hegel: Freedom, Truth and History (1991;
Oxford: Blackwell, 2005), chap. 6. [S.H.]
35 the immediate or natural will: the natural or immediate will is treated in 
PR §§ 11–18. The will which is explicitly free and is the basis of formal
rights is treated in PR §§ 21ﬀ. The concept of the will is freedom, but the
natural will does not fully actualize that concept, since it is not free for
itself. It is thus free only implicitly or in its concept alone. Such implicit
freedom turns out to involve a fundamental dependence on natural desire
(and caprice) and so is in fact a very restricted form of freedom.
36 in this twofold indeterminacy: the indeterminacy is twofold because 
(a) none of these desires is my particular desire (any more than any other),
and (b) each of the desires is itself indeterminate (e.g. hunger, which all
sorts of diﬀerent foods might satisfy, is not hunger for anything speciﬁc).
the German language also contains the expression sich entschliessen: there 
is no precise parallel in English to the diﬀerence between beschliessen
and sich entschliessen. Both expressions mean ‘to decide’. Etymologically,
the former implies simply ‘closing the matter’, while the latter implies
that the decision is at the same time the ‘disclosing’ or ‘opening’ of the
character of the person who makes it.
Thus they understand little of the nature of thinking: Hegel may have Kant
and his followers in mind, but his remarks apply equally to René
Descartes (1596–1650) who, in his Fourth Meditation, explains the phe-
nomenon of human error by the fact that our will is unrestricted, whereas
our understanding is ﬁnite and limited. [S.H.]
37 However ‘beautiful’ such a disposition may be: this is a reference to the ideal
of the ‘beautiful soul’ described by Friedrich Schiller (1759–1805) in his
essay On Grace and Dignity [Über Anmut und Würde] (1793), but associ-
ated by Hegel more with Romantics such as Novalis (1772–1801). See
also Phenomenology, Miller trans., 400, 406. [S.H.]
‘Whoever wills something great must be able to restrict himself’: from
Goethe’s sonnet ‘Nature and Art’ [‘Natur und Kunst’] (1800). Hegel
quotes inaccurately. Goethe’s actual words may be translated: ‘Whoever
wills something great must ﬁrst collect his energies: it is in restriction that
the master ﬁrst shows himself.’
38 at the time of Wolﬀ’s metaphysics: Christian J. Wolﬀ(1679–1754) was a
rationalist metaphysician whose comprehensive system (indebted to
Leibniz) dominated German philosophy until the ‘critical’ revolution
inaugurated in the 1780s by Immanuel Kant (1724–1804). [S.H.]
39 Pheidias has no mannerisms: Pheidias was the greatest sculptor of the High
Classical Period in ancient Athens. He was active from c.460 bc until

Explanatory Notes
334
c.430 bc. His most famous works (both now lost) were the Athena
Parthenos and the Olympian Zeus. [S.H.]
41 or itself qua inﬁnite form: ‘inﬁnite’ in the sense of ‘purely self-related and
free from all restriction’.
44 the ethical will: Hegel must have in mind here an undeveloped, ‘childlike’,
form of ethical will, since he makes it clear later that ethical life is made
concrete precisely by the ‘inﬁnite form’ of subjectivity; see PR § 144.
[S.H.]
46 Kant’s Doctrine of Right: Hegel refers, quoting as usual from memory, to
Kant’s statement that one should ‘so act externally that the free use of
your choice can coexist with the freedom of everyone in accordance with
a universal law’ (I. Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals (1797), trans. 
M. Gregor (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 56
[Metaphysical First Principles of the Doctrine of Right, Introduction, § C]).
47 especially popular since Rousseau: Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–78), the
author of Discourse on the Origin of Inequality (1755), On the Social
Contract (1762), and Émile (1762). He is accused by Hegel of having
understood freedom as primarily the freedom of the individual. [S.H.]
And the phenomena . . . on which they are based: Hegel is referring to the
French Revolutionary Terror of 1793–4.
48 even in Plato: Hegel probably has in mind (among other dialogues) Plato’s
Parmenides. See Science of Logic, Miller trans., 55–6: ‘Even the Platonic
dialectic, in the Parmenides itself and elsewhere even more directly, on the
one hand, aims only at abolishing and refuting limited assertions through
themselves, and, on the other hand, has for result simple nothingness.’
[S.H.]
49 to endow its moments with this distinctively shaped existence: a caution against
the supposition that Hegel is writing a history of institutions. It is not
until PR § 158 that he begins to deal with the family. The family thus lo-
gically presupposes all the ‘determinations of the concept’, or categories,
dealt with in the earlier Paragraphs, but it does not follow that these lo-
gical presuppositions are always explicitly present in actual societies with
families. In certain social conditions families may exist although private
property does not.
51 ‘Morality’ [Moralität] and ‘ethical life’ [Sittlichkeit]: for Hegel’s distinc-
tion between these, see PR § 141. Moralität is abstract morality; it pos-
sesses the form of all genuinely moral action, i.e. conscientiousness, but it
lacks a properly objective content to correspond with this form. Sittlichkeit
is the concrete morality of a rational social order where rational institutions
and laws provide the content of conscientious conviction.
ABSTRACT RIGHT
56 The classiﬁcation of the system of rights: the classiﬁcation adopted in
Justinian, Institutes, 1. 2. 12. ‘Every right exercised by us relates either to

Explanatory Notes
335
persons, things, or actions.’ The translator’s authority for this and most
of the other notes on Roman law is W. W. Buckland, Text-book of Roman
Law (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1921).
57 capitis diminutio: caput is a person’s legal, political, and social status, his
position in regard to family rights and consequently to freedom and citi-
zenship. Capitis diminutio is a change in caput, amounting to its loss in the
case of those sold as slaves, and suﬀered to some extent by those banished
and by those adopted into new families. On the ‘slave-status’ of children,
see Remarks to PR §§ 175, 180.
PROPERTY
58 It is only these things: i.e. the existences just referred to: (a) natural endow-
ments, (b) external objects.
60 The so-called ‘philosophy’ . . . the nature of the thing-in-itself: it is (i) the
philosophy of common sense, and (ii) the philosophy of Kant, which
Hegel has in mind here.
the free will idealizes such actuality and so is its truth: the free will by using
and destroying ‘external’ objects shows that these have no subsistence 
of their own but are only ‘ideal’ (see third explanatory note to p. 31),
while the free will does subsist and is their truth because they exist only
‘for’ it.
61 The nature of the elements: i.e. the four elements of early Greek cosmol-
ogy—earth, air, ﬁre, water (see Encyclopaedia [1830] § 281).
In the Roman agrarian laws: especially the proposals of the Gracchi and
their successors in the last century of the Roman Republic to distribute
domain lands to individual colonists.
One factor in family testamentary trusts: a family testamentary trust 
(ﬁdeicommissum) requires those who inherit family property to pass it on
to other speciﬁed family members at a later stage, and thus can be seen as
a limitation on the right to dispose of property freely. [S.H.]
a so-called ‘artiﬁcial’ person [moralische Person] and into mortmain: an
‘artiﬁcial’ (or ‘moral’) person is a corporate body created for a speciﬁc
purpose, such as a church or a corporation. ‘Mortmain’ is the transfer of
property to a corporation that can never part with it again (and so has a
‘dead hand’). [S.H.]
Plato’s ideal state violates the right of personality . . . property: if Hegel has
Plato’s Republic in mind, then he fails to notice that it is the Guardians
only who are there precluded from holding private property. But he may
be thinking of Laws 739c.
62 universal in content and undivided: my body diﬀers in form from other
bodies and to that extent its form is particular; but its content is univer-
sal, since everything that is mine is grounded in it.
Diogenes Laertius: Diogenes Laertius (probably ﬁrst half of 3rd cent. ad)
was a biographer of ancient Greek philosophers. His Lives and Sayings of

Explanatory Notes
336
Famous Philosophers, to which Hegel refers here, is an important source of
information on the development of Greek philosophy. [S.H.]
64 rationality developed into an organism: an abstract universal has no organic
connection with its particulars. Spirit, or reason, as a concrete universal,
particularizes itself into diﬀerences which are interconnected by its uni-
versality in the same way in which the parts of an organism are held
together by the single life which they all share. The parts depend on the
whole for their life, but, on the other hand, the persistence of life neces-
sitates the diﬀerentiation of the parts.
65 the anticipated relation to others: ‘relation to others’—i.e. the recognition
by others that the thing is mine. This recognition depends on my putting
my will into the thing, and I cannot do this (except by infringing the
rights of others) unless the thing is without an owner when I do so.
66 Fichte has raised the question . . . a form on it: see Foundations of Natural
Right, § 19 [Baur trans., 189–91]. Fichte is there maintaining that the
farmer has no right to his land as such but only to its products, to its ‘acci-
dents’, not to its ‘substance’; he may not prevent others from grazing
cattle on it after harvest, unless, in addition to cultivation rights, he has
grazing rights for cattle of his own.
67 the positive, negative, and inﬁnite judgements: the relation between these
three types of judgement is expounded in Encyclopaedia (1830) §§ 172–3.
They represent progressive attempts to attach a predicate to a subject; e.g.
(i) since the will is embodied in its property, we may say that ‘the will is
a particular thing, its property’, ‘this property is my will’, ‘this and my
will are identical’. But the will is universal and the thing is particular, and
so the thing is the negative of the universal or the will, and (ii) the will is
therefore not the thing. By using it the will negates the thing in order to
bring it into accordance with itself. Such negation, however, can never
completely achieve its end, because the will, as universal, can never be
adequately embodied in any one particular. Hence (iii) the will must be
asserted to be the will, and the object must be altogether spurned or alien-
ated. This is not a mere negative judgement, but a ‘negatively inﬁnite
judgement’ which asserts a total incongruity between the subject (the
will) and the predicate (the thing).
68 nothing further on this topic can be deduced from the concept: this is one of the
places in Hegel’s work where he makes clear the limits of philosophical
understanding. [S.H.]
72 negated by the user: when I mark a thing as mine, I attribute to it the uni-
versal predicate ‘mine’ and ‘recognize’ its particular characteristics in the
sense that I do not interfere with them. But when I use it I ‘negate’ its par-
ticular characteristics in the sense that I change them to suit my purpose.
To mark land as mine by fencing it does not change its character, but to
use it, e.g. by planting it, does.
73 Thus he who has the use of arable land: i.e. the entire and enduring use of
it—see PR § 62.

Explanatory Notes
337
usufruct is the right . . . revert to the proper owner: ‘ususfructus est jus alienis
rebus utendifruendi salva rerum substantia . . . . Ne tamen in universum
inutiles essent proprietates semper abscendente usufructu, placuit, certis
modis extingui usumfructum et ad proprietatem reverti.’ (In Latin in Hegel’s
text.)
74 res mancipi and nec mancipi, dominium quiritarium and bonitarium: (a)
things transferable by mancipation, a formal ceremony before witnesses,
and things transferable by simple delivery. (b) Quiritarian ownership was
originally the only type recognized in law; bonitarian ownership was that
which was recognized by law even though there were formal defects in
the owner’s legal title to it.
in the relations of dominium directum and dominium utile, in the emphyteutic
contract: the distinction Hegel is referring to is that between ownership in
the abstract and usufruct. The landlord’s ownership of land is dominium
directum [‘direct ownership’] whereas the tenant’s is dominium utile
[‘useful ownership’]. Emphyteutic contracts grant land in perpetuity or
for a long term on condition of cultivating it properly and paying a stipu-
lated rent.
dominium directum becomes at the same time a dominium utile: where bur-
dens are attached to a tenancy, the tenant eﬀectively has only partial use
of the land with the result that the landlord also has partial use of it.
[S.H.]
the utile [the usefulness of property] which here is the rational factor: lords of
the manor are eo ipso nobility or gentry, whether their lands are being
farmed or not. Use is a stage further on in the dialectic than mere abstract
property, or the mere seizure of a possession, and, since it is further on,
it is ‘rational’ in contrast with the lower stage of property in the abstract.
76 prescription [Verjährung]: positively, prescription is a title or right to the
possession of property which has been uninterruptedly used or possessed
either from time immemorial or for a period ﬁxed by law. Negatively, it
is a limitation of the time within which an action or a claim may be raised,
e.g. to recover possession of property after it has been given to someone
else to use.
the speciﬁc character of property as ‘real’: in Hegel’s terminology, a thing
has ‘reality’ [Realität] when it has objective existence in relation to some-
thing subjective. A plan is ‘real’ when it ceases to be merely subjective
and becomes determinate in words or acts (see Encyclopaedia [1830] § 91
and Addition). Property is ‘real’ as embodying my will, and prescription
in Hegel’s view is a right because, when I use a thing, I embody my will
in it and it becomes ‘really’ mine, while when I withdraw my will from it,
it becomes ownerless. Hegel is not here speaking of ‘real’ property in the
usual legal sense (of immovable property—land and the things aﬃxed to
it—as opposed to personal property).
such publications become ownerless . . . though in an opposite way: public
memorials become private property through being disregarded and

Explanatory Notes
338
becoming objects of indiﬀerence. The content of books becomes public
property by the opposite process, i.e. by being studied, assimilated, and
used in the writing of new books.
77 whose nature cannot be conceived except as existing: ‘cuius natura non potest
concipi nisi existens’ (in Latin in Hegel’s text). In his Ethics (1677)
Benedict de Spinoza (1632–77) deﬁnes a causa sui [cause of itself] as ‘that
whose nature cannot be conceived except as existing’ (Ethics, Part 1,
Deﬁnition 1) and he goes on in Proposition 7 to show that substance is
such a cause. Hegel applies this deﬁnition to spirit, or, as he would say, to
that which is both substance and subject as well. Spirit is actualized only
when it passes over from mere abstract being into existence, i.e. into the
actualization of its potentialities in a determinate way.
80 is not to retain proprietorship without use [utile]: in Hegel’s view, therefore,
it is legitimate (and not merely arbitrary) for an author to retain copyright
over his works. [S.H.]
82 Only an ethical Idea: i.e. the state (see PR §§ 257 and 323ﬀ.).
83 When Hercules destroyed himself . . . Brutus fell on his sword: Hercules had
himself burned to death on Mount Oeta in order to escape from a robe,
poisoned with the blood of the hydra, which clung to him, tore his 
skin, and caused him agonizing and incurable suﬀering (see Ovid,
Metamorphoses, Book IX). Marcus Junius Brutus (85–42 bc) was a sen-
ator in the late Roman Republic and one of the conspirators who in 44 bc
assassinated Julius Caesar. Brutus took his own life by falling on his sword
after his defeat at the second battle of Philippi in 42 bc. [S.H.]
CONTRACT
84 my will as alienated is at the same time another’s will: to say that I am the
rightful owner of a property implies that others recognize my right, i.e.
they recognize that what I call mine is not merely a thing externally
related to other things, but is my property, the external embodiment of
my will. The ‘thing’ I can alienate on my own account, but the property
I cannot alienate without the cooperation of someone else’s will, because
property (and therefore alienation) presupposes recognition. Hence in the
social context of recognized rights, there is an equivalence between my
will to alienate and another’s will, and my will thus becomes objective to
me in the will of the other (see PR § 71 and Remark).
85 Just as at one time: i.e. under feudalism (see PR §§ 277–8).
86 excessive damage (laesio enormis): the principle that if you sell e.g. a farm
for less than half its value, you have suﬀered excessive damage, and the
contract is voidable, was enunciated in Roman law, though it is very
exceptional and seems to apply only to land transactions, and there to
sales only, not to purchases (see Justinian, Codex, 4. 44. 2).
87 distinctions in Roman law between other types of contract: Roman law recog-
nized four main types of contract: contracts re, verbis, litteris, and consensu,

Explanatory Notes
339
giving rise to real, verbal, literal, and consensual obligations. Obligations
created by verbal and literal contracts are unilateral, those arising out of
real and consensual contracts are bilateral or mutual (though sometimes
imperfectly bilateral). Real obligations arise out of traditio rei, the hand-
ing over of things by way of loan, deposit, etc. Verbal obligations arise out
of stipulations made by the parties in set terms by word of mouth to each
other. Literal obligations arise out of a written entry made against a
debtor (even in his absence, hence the ‘unilateral’ character of such a con-
tract) by a creditor. Consensual obligations arise out of sales, purchases,
etc.; they could be created by a common understanding without any for-
mality and so could be contracted by letter, messenger, etc. In a verbal
contract, the parties are liable only for what they have speciﬁcally prom-
ised in words to perform. In a consensual contract, they are reciprocally
liable for what each in fairness and equity should do for the other (see
Justinian, Institutes, 3. 13. 2). Kant uses the distinction between unilateral
and bilateral contracts, and includes loans, deposits, and gifts in the
former (Doctrine of Right § 31 [Gregor trans., 102–3]).
88 The distinction in Roman law between pactum and contractus is a bad one:
pactum is the expression of an intention to make a contractus (or formal
contract). The formula of a pact is ‘I am prepared to sell’. Thus contract
is enforceable at law, while pact is not. So Heineccius, Illustrated Treatise
on Ancient Roman Jurisprudence [Antiquitatum Romanarum jurisprudentiam
illustrantium Syntagma] (Frankfurt, 1841), 3. 14. 4, an earlier edition of
which was probably Hegel’s authority. More recent writers on Roman
law give a diﬀerent account of the matter.
89 the progress ad inﬁnitum: for Hegel’s distinction between the bad and the
true inﬁnite, see Encyclopaedia (1830) §§ 94–5 and the Addition to PR §
22. The true inﬁnite returns from its other into itself and so is self-related
and self-determined. The bad inﬁnite, on the other hand, is the eternal
sameness of an endless, ‘inﬁnite’, progression; we lay down a limit, then
we pass it and lay down another, and so on ad inﬁnitum, but without ever
leaving the ﬁnite behind or reaching true inﬁnity. Hegel’s point here is
that the inﬁnite divisibility of time, etc. makes it impossible to say at what
precise point, in Fichte’s view, the contract becomes legally, as distinct
from morally, binding.
90 formal and real [reell] contracts: ‘real’ not in the legal sense mentioned in
the Remark to PR § 79 (see explanatory note to p. 87), but in Hegel’s
sense deﬁned in PR § 76.
nominate and innominate: transactions in the form: ‘I am doing this for you
now on the understanding that you will do this for me later,’ were classed
with ‘real’ contracts by Roman lawyers, but they have been called
‘innominate’ by modern writers in distinction from the four ‘nominate’
types enumerated in the explanatory note to p. 87.
mutuum and commodatum without . . . interest: Roman law distinguished
four types of ‘real’ contract, namely mutuum, commodatum, depositum,

Explanatory Notes
340
and pignus. (a) Mutuum was a loan not for use but for consumption, i.e. a
loan of res fungibiles, things returnable in kind. The borrower of a jar of oil
would consume the oil and return other oil of the same kind. Mutuum was
supposed to be a loan without charge. (b) Commodatum was a loan for use
only, the thing itself being returned, a loan therefore of res non fungibiles.
Again the loan was supposed to be without charge; if a fee was charged,
the transaction became locatio, letting, hiring. (c) Depositum was deposit
and (d) pignus was pledge.
91 or even commodatum since rent is charged: strictly speaking, commodatum
(like mutuum) is a loan without charge (see previous note). Yet Hegel
appears to suggest here that a loan of money in return for rent or interest
(rather than, say, in return for some service) remains that of commodatum.
Too little is said, however, to know precisely why he might think this. To
be sure, money is loaned in return for money; but it is not the same money
that is being returned in the rent, nor is its value normally equivalent to
the value of the amount loaned. [S.H.]
92 so far as the possession of the property is concerned: i.e. the possession of the
value of the property.
WRONG
93 proceeds in wrong to become a semblance: Hegel distinguishes between
Schein (semblance) and Erscheinung (appearance) (see Encyclopaedia
[1830] § 131). An appearance is a shining-forth of the reality or essence. A
semblance is the inessential masquerading as the essential, the denial of
the essence in its apparent assertion. Contract is an ‘appearance’ of right
and no more than that, because the will in contract is not the universal
will in its truth as self-mediating but only a common will, posited by the
arbitrary wills of the parties. Since these wills are arbitrary, their corres-
pondence with the rightness whose appearance they are is contingent on
their arbitrary choice; and hence they may if they please make an arbitrary
choice in deﬁance of the right. Although crime is a denial of right, it is
only in a context of right that there can be a crime at all. Hence crime is a
mere ‘semblance’, no genuine existence; what it denies is its own essential
basis, right, on which the very being of crime depends.
95 only the particular is negated: if someone challenges my right to some par-
ticular thing, he does not deny my rights in general or my property as a
whole; he denies only that I have rightly included this particular property
amongst the things called ‘mine’. Hence the judgement which he asserts
is ‘this is not rightfully yours (although other things are)’. For the neces-
sity of the advance from this type of negative judgement to the inﬁnite
judgement, see Encyclopaedia (1830) §§ 172–3.
96 an inﬁnite judgement expressed positively or as a tautology: the ‘positively
inﬁnite judgement’ is the expression of a mere identity: the individual 
is the individual. This, though true, lacks the universality of thought. 

Explanatory Notes
341
The predicate should be a universal and tell us something about the 
subject, but in this case the subject is qualiﬁed by itself, and the judge-
ment is bogus, a show, because it professes to be a judgement, to tell us
something, and it does not. The same is true of fraud. Fraud as the sale
of this article, e.g. this share certiﬁcate, which the purchaser voluntarily
accepts, is prima facie a genuine transaction. But as a sale it should con-
tain a universal element, i.e. value. The seller professes to sell this univer-
sality of which the printed paper is supposed to be only a symbol, and the
transaction is fraudulent because the universality is absent.
Here again all there is, is the demand: a demand that remains unfulﬁlled
because of the fraud. [S.H.]
98 a negatively inﬁnite judgement in its full sense: the criminal by wronging
someone is eﬀectively denying that his victim is the bearer of right that
should be respected, i.e. he asserts a total incompatibility between his
victim and right. Hence ‘you have no right’ is a ‘negatively inﬁnite judge-
ment’.
99 The Stoic view: ‘The Stoics hold that the virtues accompany each other,
and if a man has one, he has all’ (Diogenes Laertius, 7. 125, ‘Life of
Zeno’). The single virtue is to live in accordance with nature, and vice is
the converse.
the laws of Draco: in the early history of Athens, Draco (7th cent. bc) pre-
scribed ‘one penalty, death, for almost all oﬀences’ (see Plutarch, Life of
Solon).
101 The positive existence of the injury . . . the particular will of the criminal: as
a simple event a crime is not distinguished from other events such as acci-
dents. What gives it positive existence as a crime (as opposed to an acci-
dent) is the presence in it of the criminal’s will. In this sense, ‘the positive
existence of the injury consists solely in the particular will of the criminal’.
To the person injured (and to onlookers), however, the crime is negative,
a wilful attack on rights, a denial of them, and therefore something null
and self-destructive.
[E. F.] Klein, Principles of Common German and Prussian Penal Law:
Ernst Ferdinand Klein (1743–1810) was a prominent German jurist and
co-author of the Prussian General Legal Code of 1794. [S.H.]
102 Feuerbach bases his theory of punishment on threat: Paul Johann Anselm
Ritter von Feuerbach (1775–1833) was the father of the Young Hegelian
philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach (1804–72), and the author of Textbook of
the Penal Law Commonly Valid in Germany [Lehrbuch des gemeinen, in
Deutschland gültigen peinlichen Rechts] (1801). He is regarded as the
founder of the modern German theory of punishment. [S.H.]
103 As is well known, Beccaria: Cesare, marquis of Beccaria (1738–94), was an
Italian philosopher and politician and the father of modern criminology.
His best-known work (in which he set out his opposition to capital pun-
ishment) is On Crimes and Punishments [Dei delitti e delle pene] (1764).
[S.H.]

Explanatory Notes
342
103 Even if neither Joseph II: Emperor Joseph II of Austria was born in 1741
and reigned from 1765 to his death in 1790. [S.H.]
105 In crime, whose basic determination is the inﬁnite aspect: a crime is a particu-
lar act with a particular character, e.g. it is a theft, and a theft of, say, 
£15. But it also has an inﬁnite aspect because it is the negation of right by
the free will and therefore it deserves to be punished, i.e. to be negated in
its turn.
106 The Eumenides sleep: the Erinyes (or Furies) were female spirits of justice
and vengeance in Greek (and Roman) mythology. They are known espe-
cially for pursuing Orestes, who murdered his mother Clytemnestra in
revenge for her killing of his father Agamemnon. After Orestes was
acquitted by a court in Athens on the deciding vote of Athena, the Erinyes
were appeased and then welcomed into the city as the ‘Eumenides’ or
‘kind-hearted ones’. See Aeschylus, The Eumenides (458 bc). [S.H.]
punished not as public crimes . . . but as private crimes: ‘Private crimes’ are
those which are left to the injured party to prosecute, as opposed to those
that are prosecuted by the state. In Roman law, for example, both theft and
robbery were treated as private crimes (see Gaius, Institutes, 3. 182). [S.H.]
MORALITY
109 posited as identical for itself with the will that is in itself: at the start, there is
an implicit identity between the universal will in itself and the will of the
subject, because the latter does embody the former, though without fully
realizing it. This identity becomes explicit only after the explicit individ-
ual will has sunk ‘deeper and deeper into itself’, i.e. estranged itself 
further from the universal, entrenched itself more and more deeply,
plumbed the recesses of its own moralizing—a process which it may
carry so far eventually as to defy the universal altogether and so be expli-
citly evil. The occurrence of evil is the transition to the higher stage of
ethical life, just as the occurrence of wrong was the transition to morality.
110 the right of the subjective will: a right is the embodiment or ‘existence’ of
the free will (see PR § 29). Abstract rights embody the freedom of person-
ality, the abstract form of the will. We now come to more concrete rights,
those of subjectivity, which itself is the higher ground in which the free
will is now embodied. Just as personality in the process of becoming more
and more determinate was embodied in a series of rights, so the develop-
ment of subjectivity gives rise to a series of rights.
becomes objective [objektiv] in the sense of the will’s own universality: the
process which we are studying in the ﬁeld of morality is two-sided: (a) the
subject gradually comes to a realization of his own universality, i.e. of 
the objectivity of the universal will which his subjective will embodies. 
(b) The embodiment of the subject in his action—the right of the subject—
changes in character as the character of subjectivity changes. To start
with, the will recognizes its subjectivity in something which it has done;

Explanatory Notes
343
the recognition is immediate and the action done is immediate too. Next,
when the action is seen to embody the subject’s welfare, the universality
implicit in the subject begins to be explicit (PR § 125). Finally, the action
is seen to embody the good, something explicitly universal. The whole
process may be summed up by saying that the subject gradually deter-
mines the character of his action further and further until it expresses the
universal nature, i.e. the concept, of the subject in concrete detail, and he
does this in the course of discovering what this concept is.
111 positing them as identical: the will determined as subject is eo ipso an
embodiment of the concept of the will. Implicitly, then, subjectivity is a
unity of objective and subjective; but this unity cannot be made explicit
until the diﬀerence of these moments is made explicit and the will over-
comes that diﬀerence.
PURPOSE AND RESPONSIBILITY
117 Oedipus, who killed his father without knowing it: Oedipus, king of Thebes,
unknowingly killed his father and married his mother and then blinded
himself on discovering what he had done. In Sophocles’ play, Oedipus the
King (c.427 bc), Oedipus accepts responsibility for what he has done,
even though he did it in ignorance [ll. 1310–35]. In Sophocles’ Oedipus at
Colonus (c.408 bc), however, Oedipus is more defensive and protests his
innocence [ll. 265–75, 535–50]. [S.H.]
INTENTION AND WELFARE
119 Etymologically, Absicht [intention] implies abstraction: Absicht is derived
from the word absehen (to ‘look away’).
describable in a proposition, not a judgement: in Hegel’s terminology, a
proposition [Satz] says something about the subject which does not stand
to it in any universal relationship; it gives expression to some individual
action or state of the subject. Hence ‘gold is a metal’ is a judgement
[Urteil], but ‘Caesar crossed the Rubicon’ is a proposition (see
Encyclopaedia [1830] § 167).
The device of dolus indirectus: ‘The distinction between dolus directus and
indirectus, in the sense that, in the latter case, the intention of the agent
was not to commit the wrong which resulted, but only a slighter one, is
now quite obsolete, although it still obtains in Austria’ (F. J. W. P. von
Holtzendorﬀ, Encyclopaedia of Jurisprudence Presented Systematically and
Alphabetically [Enzyklopädie der Rechtswissenschaft in systematischer and
alphabetischer Bearbeitung] (Leipzig, 1875), 402).
121 the time of Croesus and Solon: Hegel refers to the conversation between the
Lydian King Croesus (595–546 bc) and the Greek statesman and law-
maker Solon (638–558 bc), reported by the Greek historian Herodotus
(c.484–425 bc). Croesus asked Solon: ‘who is the happiest man you have

Explanatory Notes
344
ever seen?’, and received the reply: ‘An Athenian called Tellus’, because ‘his
city was prosperous, and he had ﬁne sons [. . .]; he had wealth enough by our
standards; and he had a glorious death’. When Croesus, somewhat irritated,
pressed Solon further and asked: ‘But what of my own happiness?’, Solon
replied that he would not answer this question ‘until I know that you have
died happily’. See Herodotus, The Histories, trans. A. de Sélincourt (1954;
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 2003), 14–15 [1. 30–2]. [S.H.]
123 Do with abhorrence what duty commands: Hegel quotes from memory from
Schiller, Xenien (published with Goethe), no. 389: ‘Decision’ [Decisum]:
Da ist kein andrer Rat, du mußt suchen, sie zu verachten,
Und mit Abscheu alsdann thun, wie die Pflicht dir gebeut.
There is no alternative: you must seek to despise them
And to do with abhorrence what duty commands you to do. [S.H.]
In great things, it is enough to have willed: ‘In magnis voluisse sat est’
(Propertius, Elegies, 2. 10. 6) (in Latin in the text).
124 the ‘benevolence’ [guten Herzen] of the pre-Kantian philosophers: for an
analysis and criticism of the ‘law of the heart’ (the eighteenth-century
doctrine exaggerated by Hegel’s Romantic contemporaries), see
Phenomenology, Miller trans., 221–8.
well-known touching dramatic productions: Hegel is apparently referring to
certain Sturm und Drang dramas of the late eighteenth century, especially
Schiller’s The Robbers [Die Räuber] (1781), a play in which a young man
with good intentions is expected to obtain the sympathy of the audience
when he organizes a band of robbers to ﬁght tyranny.
125 The famous answer: ‘I do not see the need for it’: the libeller defends himself
with the words: ‘Il faut donc que je vive.’ The famous answer—which is
said to have been given by Cardinal Richelieu (1585–1642)—is: ‘Je n’en
vois pas la nécessité.’ (Both statements are quoted in French by Hegel.)
[S.H.]
When St Crispin stole leather to make shoes for the poor: St Crispin and 
St Crispinian were twin brothers born to a Roman family in the 
3rd century ad. They evangelized Gaul, preaching in the streets by day
and making shoes by night. They are the patron saints of cobblers and
other leather-workers. [S.H.]
the ‘beneﬁt of competence’ [beneﬁcium competentiae]: the beneﬁcium compe-
tentiae was the right of a debtor or an unsuccessful defendant in a civil
action not to be condemned to pay more than his means would allow, i.e.
not to have to forfeit the tools of his trade, and to be allowed to live hon-
estly, according to his station in life.
GOOD AND CONSCIENCE
126 ﬁat justitia should not be followed by pereat mundus: ‘ﬁat justitia pereat
mundus’ (‘let justice be done, even if the world should perish’). [S.H.]

Explanatory Notes
345
129 the ‘clear ideas’ . . . of Wolﬀ’s psychology: ‘When we can recognize what it
is that we perceive or when we can distinguish it from other perceivable
things, then the perception which we have is a clear perception’ (i.e.
idea), ‘e.g., when we look at a tree in daylight, we have a clear idea of the
tree’ (C. J. Wolﬀ, Empirical Psychology [Psychologia empirica] [Frankfurt
and Leipzig, 1732], § 31).
his will’s obligation arises directly in this relation: the particular subject dis-
tinguishes between the essence of his will and the inessentiality of, e.g.,
particular desires, and endeavours to make the latter correspond with the
former. He ‘ought’ to do what the essence of his will enjoins, but never
gets beyond ‘ought’ to ‘is’ or ‘does’.
131 the possibility of envisaging an action as a universal maxim: Hegel’s citation
of this formula is, to say the least, careless. The citation in the Addition
to this Paragraph—‘Consider whether your maxim can be laid down as a
universal principle’—is more accurate (but still not completely so). See
Kant, Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, Gregor trans., 73: ‘Act
only in accordance with that maxim through which you can at the same
time will that it become a universal law.’ Full bibliographical details are
given in footnote 58 [p. 130 above].
132 It therefore has ﬁxed principles: what is good in and for itself is concrete and
therefore systematically determinate and diﬀerentiated. Hence to will it is
to will in accordance with determinate rational principles.
134 The latter is part of the ethical disposition: in the state, ‘true’ conscience
takes the form of patriotism (see PR § 268). Note, however, that when
Hegel says this, it is the state as Idea, the rational state, that he has in
mind. Bad states exist, and patriotic acceptance, even if conscientious, 
of their bad laws would not in Hegel’s view be the working of ‘true’ 
conscience, which is the conscientious acceptance of rational laws and
institutions only. For the ‘religious’ conscience, see Encyclopaedia (1830)
§ 552.
in Socrates, the Stoics, and others: the keynote of the teaching of Socrates
(c.470–399 bc) is the dictum of the Delphic oracle: ‘Know thyself’, and
he described himself as a midwife, bringing to birth the ideas already
present in embryo in people’s minds (see PR §§ 279 and 343). The Stoic
precept was ‘live according to nature’, i.e. in accordance with reason.
135 something inward in comparison with that level: we all begin life on the nat-
ural level; and at that level, i.e. in infancy, there is neither freedom nor
morality. Freedom depends on the discovery of the self which is not nat-
ural but spiritual, i.e. the inner rational self present in germ, even in the
infant, as the inner truth of its apparently purely impulsive life. It is by
transcending that life that we attain to freedom, but since there is no
breach of continuity, freedom may be said both to arise from the natural
life and yet to be something opposed to that life, i.e. to be our inner—
initially unrealized—essence.

Explanatory Notes
346
139 They will all be damned . . . surrendering to him: ‘Ils seront tous damnés ces
demi-pécheurs, qui ont quelque amour pour la vertu. Mais pour ces francs
pécheurs, pécheurs endurcis, pécheurs sans mélange, pleins et achevés,
l’enfer ne les tient pas: ils ont trompé le diable à force de s’y abandonner’;
see B. Pascal, Lettres Provinciales (1656–7), 4th letter (quotation in
French in Hegel’s text). Blaise Pascal (1623–62) was a French math-
ematician and philosopher. [S.H.]
the old questions about eﬃcacious grace: the problem of the doctrine of grace
is to reconcile a belief in our inability to attain salvation independently of
God’s grace with a belief in our individual freedom. In the seventeenth
century the Jansenists, who tended to belittle human freedom, carried on
a controversy with the Jesuits on this question; both parties believed in
eﬃcacious grace but diﬀered as to how it was obtained. Hegel’s point is
that if grace—God’s power, i.e. the objective—is regarded as given to
some people and not others—as both parties to the controversy agreed
that it was—then God’s power and human freedom are being treated as
if they were related only accidentally.
Pascal quotes there too Aristotle’s distinction: Aristotle (384–322 bc)
distinguishes between actions done ‘through ignorance’ [di’ a’gnoia´n]
(when the agent acts ‘without idea’ [ou’k ei’dw´V]), and actions done 
‘in ignorance’ (when the agent acts α’γνοωˆν). In the ﬁrst case the ignorance
is unavoidable; there are external circumstances which the agent (e.g.
Oedipus) had no means of knowing. In the second case, the ignorance is
due to circumstances within the control of the agent, e.g. to drunkenness.
(Aristotle adds that every act done through ignorance is ‘non-voluntary’,
but that, strictly speaking, such an act is ‘involuntary’ only when it causes
the agent subsequent pain and repentance; see Nicomachean Ethics
1110b17–19.)
140 all these questions are the less important aspect of the matter: Hegel’s position
is this: evil consists in freely going against the content and (ethical) form
of the good, the genuine universal (see Addition to PR § 139). This can be
done in the explicit consciousness that it is evil—that is, with a ‘bad con-
science’—but also, as we see later in this Remark, in the belief that one is
actually obeying a higher good oneself that only conscience can see. [S.H.]
probabilism: a doctrine of Jesuit moral theology which (in Hegel’s inter-
pretation) teaches that we incur no guilt if at least one reason can be found
to make it probable that an action is permitted, even if most scholarly
opinion judges the action to be wrong. Hegel’s criticism of probabilism is
indebted in part to Pascal. [S.H.]
141 the goodness of the will consists in its willing the good: Kant famously asserts
that: ‘It is impossible to think of anything at all in the world, or indeed even
beyond it, that could be considered good without limitation except a good
will’ (Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, Gregor trans., 49). Remark
(d), however, is an attack not so much on Kant’s doctrine itself, but on what
Hegel regards as the perversion of that doctrine by the Romantics.

Explanatory Notes
347
144 which denies that the truth is knowable: Hegel again has Kant’s philosophy
in mind, or rather the simpliﬁed Kantianism of some of Kant’s followers.
[S.H.]
145 F. H. Jacobi to Count Holmer, on Count Stolberg’s change of faith: in the
ﬁrst twenty years of the nineteenth century there was a strong Roman
Catholic revival in Germany. It began with the sensational conversion of
the poet Count Friedrich Leopold zu Stolberg (1750–1819) in 1801, and
gathered momentum by the accession of the leaders of the Romantic
movement (such as Friedrich von Schlegel in 1808). Their change of faith
antagonized Hegel the Lutheran as much as their elevation of emotion
above reason disgusted Hegel the philosopher. Jacobi was a prominent
critic of both Enlightenment and German Idealist rationalism and was
often the target of Hegel’s criticism. In this case, however, Hegel cites
Jacobi’s comments with approval. Brennus was a northern German peri-
odical. Count Friedrich Levin Holmer (1741–1806) was ﬁrst minister of
the German Duchy of Oldenburg (after 1777 Holstein-Oldenburg) from
1774 to 1806.
146 For to err is human: see Alexander Pope: ‘To err is human, to forgive
divine’ (An Essay on Criticism [1711], 2. 525). Hegel’s source, however, is
likely to be the Roman proverb, ‘errare humanum est’. [S.H.]
147 My colleague, the late Professor Solger: Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand Solger
(1780–1819) was a professor in Berlin from 1811 until his death and the
author of Erwin: Four Conversations about the Beautiful and Art [Erwin:
Vier Gespräche über das Schöne und die Kunst] (Berlin, 1815). He wrote a
long review of Friedrich von Schlegel’s thoughts on irony that was pub-
lished in two parts (1809 and 1811). [S.H.]
Critique of August Wilhelm von Schlegel’s Lectures on Dramatic Art and
Literature: August Wilhelm von Schlegel (1767–1845) was a poet, trans-
lator, and critic and the brother of Friedrich von Schlegel. His lectures on
dramatic art and literature were delivered in Vienna in 1808 and pub-
lished 1809–11. [S.H.]
148 the hero of a modern tragedy, Die Schuld: Guilt [Die Schuld] is a play by
Adolf Müllner (1774–1829). The play was an immediate success on its
production in 1813. Hugo, a Norwegian, loves Elvira, the wife of Carlos,
a Spaniard. He kills Carlos and marries Elvira. Carlos turns out to have
been his brother, and he and Elvira commit suicide because of their guilt.
in romantic tragedy the character of the interest undergoes a certain
modiﬁcation: in ‘romantic’ tragedy (by which Hegel means tragedy pro-
duced since the Middle Ages by writers such as Shakespeare, Schiller,
and Goethe), characters are motivated more by their own subjective
drives, passions, and ambitions than by ethical concerns. For a detailed
study of Hegel’s understanding of tragedy, see S. Houlgate, ‘Hegel’s
Theory of Tragedy’, in id. (ed.), Hegel and the Arts (Evanston, Ill.:
Northwestern University Press, 2007), 146–78. [S.H.]

Explanatory Notes
348
149 a stage, however, there diﬀerent in character: in the Phenomenology (1807)
the transition is directly from conscience to religion, not as here and in the
third edition of the Encyclopaedia, from subjective morality to a concrete,
rational ethical order embodying both subjective convictions and objec-
tive institutions, and then later to religion.
150 The chief hypocrites are the religious ones (the Tartuﬀes): Tartuﬀe (1664) is
a comedy about religious hypocrisy by Molière (1622–73). [S.H.]
ETHICAL LIFE
154 distinctions whose speciﬁc character is thereby determined by the concept: what
is concrete is self-determining and self-diﬀerentiating (see PR § 7). The
substantiality which we are now considering is that of the spirit that is free
reason and therefore of the concept. Hence the institutions and objective
duties of the ethical order are the concept’s diﬀerentiation of itself (see PR
§§ 262, 269–70, 272).
no one knows whence the laws come; they are everlasting: in the modern 
translation by Elizabeth Wyckoﬀ, Antigone’s words to Creon are as 
follows:
Nor did I think your orders were so strong
that you, a mortal man, could over-run
the gods’ unwritten and unfailing laws.
Not now, nor yesterday’s, they always live,
and no one knows their origin in time.
See Sophocles, Antigone (c.442 bc), Greek Tragedies, ed. D. Grene and 
R. Lattimore, 3 vols. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960), 196
[ll. 450–7]. Hegel refers to the same lines in PR § 166 Remark and
Phenomenology, Miller trans., 261. [S.H.]
156 the form of a ‘doctrine of duties’: Kant provides a doctrine of duties under
the title ‘Doctrine of the Elements of Ethics’ in his Metaphysics of Morals
(Gregor trans., 214ﬀ.), and Fichte’s System of Ethics (1798) contains a
‘Doctrine of Duties in the proper sense of the term’ [§§ 19ﬀ.].
159 Virtue is rather like ethical virtuosity: heroes (‘ethical virtuosi’) lived in
uncivilized conditions (see Addition to PR § 93) and there was no estab-
lished ethical life in society as they found it; but since they introduced
ethical institutions for the ﬁrst time (see Remarks to PR §§ 167 and 203),
they displayed virtue as a kind of virtuosity. Nowadays, ethical life is
common to everyone and consists in conformity to the existing order, not
in divergence from it.
160 Make him a citizen of a state with good laws: this answer is attributed to
Xenophilus the Pythagorean by Diogenes Laertius (8. 1. 15), but em-
phasis on the educational value of good laws and institutions is a com-
monplace of Greek ethics and politics.

Explanatory Notes
349
The educational experiments, advocated by Rousseau in Émile: in Émile
(1762) Rousseau sets out his views on education by means of a semi-
ﬁctitious account of the upbringing of the young boy after whom the book
is named. The boy is raised in the countryside in an attempt to keep him
away from the corrupting inﬂuences of society. [S.H.]
161 since particularity is the outward appearance of the ethical order: the ethical
order as appearance is civil society, and it is in that sphere that individ-
uals attain their ‘particular satisfaction’, i.e. their livelihood through work.
THE FAMILY
163 and even Kant does this: ‘The marriage contract [. . .] is a contract that is
necessary by the principle of humanity, that is, if a man and a woman
want to enjoy each other’s sexual attributes they must necessarily marry,
and this is necessary in accordance with pure reason’s principles of right’
(Kant, Doctrine of Right, § 24 [Gregor trans., 96]). [S.H.]
166 the religious character of marriage and the family, or pietas: pietas—dutiful
conduct, especially to members of one’s family, ‘family piety’. Penates—
the guardian deities of the Roman household, regarded here as represent-
ing the spirit of the family.
168 Friedrich von Schlegel . . . and a follower of his in the anonymous Letters:
Friedrich von Schlegel’s novel Lucinde was published in 1799, and the
Letters on Schlegel’s ‘Lucinde’ were published anonymously in 1800 by
Friedrich Schleiermacher. [S.H.]
169 the ideal [das Ideale]: by this word Hegel means ‘the beautiful and its
associations’ (Science of Logic, Miller trans., p. 149, Hegel’s fn.). It is to
be distinguished, therefore, from das Ideelle, for which see third explana-
tory note to p. 31 [p. 331 above]. [S.H.]
172 the wife in the easily dissolved type of marriage: if a wife stayed away from
her husband for three nights in a year, she could avoid becoming
eﬀectively the property of her husband by remaining technically a part of
her original family and under the authority of her father. Her husband
then had no rights over her property and divorce was easier. Such a wife
was called a matrona rather than a materfamilias (see Gaius, Institutes,
1. 136). [S.H./A.W.W.]
the presupposition . . . here becomes a result: i.e. persons immediately exist-
ent (as children).
174 The play theory of education: the play theory of education was popularized
in Germany by Johann Bernhard Basedow (1724–90) in the years follow-
ing the publication of Rousseau’s Émile (1762). Friedrich Wilhelm
August Fröbel (1782–1852), with whom the theory is now commonly
associated (and who coined the term ‘kindergarten’), did not publish his
On the Education of Man [Die Menschenerziehung] until 1826.

Explanatory Notes
350
175 A third ethical authority: a court of law (or the Church) (see Addition to
this Paragraph). The married parties are the other two.
177 its arbitrary recognition by others: Hegel may have in mind Fichte’s view in
his Foundations of Natural Right, § 19 [Baur trans., 223–4], though
Fichte’s point is that any testamentary disposition requires recognition
from the state. [S.H./A.W.W.]
unless the will speciﬁcally so provided: Hegel does not exaggerate the scope
of a Roman father’s authority. To allow to sons private possession even of
peculium castrense was a revolutionary change, introduced by Augustus (63
bc–ad 14), and even then, if the son died intestate, this property passed
to the father of the family.
a matrona, not a wife who in manum conveniret, in mancipio esset: on
matrona, see ﬁrst explanatory note to p. 172 [above]. In manum convenire
means ‘to come into the power [the hand] of a husband’; in mancipio esse
means ‘to have been taken by the hand [of another]’ and so ‘to be the prop-
erty [of another]’. [S.H.]
178 erudition that makes one a legal expert: this titbit of legal lore is culled from
Heineccius, Illustrated Treatise on Ancient Roman Jurisprudence.
the writings of Lucian and others: Lucian of Samosata (c. ad. 125–80) was
a writer of satirical works, including a speech supposedly delivered in
court by a man who was disinherited by his father and studied medicine.
His father became insane, but the son cured him and was restored to his
will. He was then disinherited a second time on his refusal to treat his
stepmother’s insanity. He appeals to the court against his father.—‘And
others’: Hegel probably has in mind the Controversiae of Lucius Annaeus
Seneca (54 bc–ad 39), known as ‘Seneca the Elder’ or ‘Seneca the
Rhetorician’ and the father of the Roman philosopher and dramatist
Seneca (c.4 bc–ad 65). The Controversiae was a collection of imaginary
legal cases said to have been put together from memory in which the opin-
ions of various Greek and Roman orators regarding each case were pre-
sented.
what ﬁne writing about honestum and decorum there is in his On Duties: ‘hon-
estum and decorum’ are ‘morality and propriety’. On Duties [De Oﬃciis]
was written in 44 bc. [S.H.]
ﬁdeicommissa and substitutiones: Fideicommissa—testamentary trusts; 
see third explanatory note to p. 61 [p. 335 above]. Substitutiones—
nominations in a will of one or more heirs to inherit as substitutes in the
event of the failure of the heir instituted to take possession of the inherit-
ance, whether through death or otherwise.
CIVIL SOCIETY
182 a relative totality: i.e. the two sides of the Idea as a whole, universality and
particularity, are merely related to one another, not integrated here in an
organic unity.

Explanatory Notes
351
187 as in Smith, Say, and Ricardo: Adam Smith (1723–90), Jean-Baptiste Say
(1767–1832), and David Ricardo (1772–1823) are three of the most
important ‘classical’ economists. Smith’s An Inquiry into the Nature and
Causes of the Wealth of Nations was published in 1776, Say’s Treatise on
Political Economy [Traité d’économie politique] in 1803, and Ricardo’s On
the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation in 1817.
190 reﬁned: reading gebildetem for Hegel’s ungebildetem.
The entire Cynical mode of life adopted by Diogenes: the Cynic school of phil-
osophy was founded by Antisthenes (444–365 bc), a pupil of Socrates,
and forms a link between Socrates and the Stoics. The Cynic Diogenes of
Sinope (c.412–323 bc) showed contempt for civilization and contempor-
ary ideas of human decency and made a virtue of extreme poverty. [S.H.]
193 The estates are speciﬁcally determined in accordance with the concept: the
three estates correspond to the three main stages in the advance of the
concept which is the animating principle of the whole of ethical life. At
ﬁrst we have the stage of immediacy, when thought is sunk in substance—
the life of feeling for which diﬀerence is not explicit. This type of social
life is therefore based on the family. Secondly, diﬀerences are made
explicit; we have advanced from implicit universality to explicit particu-
larity, from feeling to reﬂection, so that substance now has a particular
content and a universal form apprehended by reﬂection. Social life here is
based on reﬂection, i.e. it is the product of education and so is specially
characteristic of civil society—the child of the modern world. Thirdly,
the synthesis of these; the particular consciously ﬁnds himself in the uni-
versal; the original unity has been restored, but on a higher plane. Private
satisfaction is secured by the deliberate pursuit of universal ends. This
type of social life preﬁgures the life of the state. Hegel’s point is that the
distinction between agriculture, industry, and the civil service is not a
matter of accident or convenience, but is based on logical necessities.
194 my distinguished friend, Herr Creuzer: Georg Friedrich Creuzer
(1771–1858) was appointed professor at Heidelberg in 1804 and was
Hegel’s colleague there from 1816 to 1818. His Symbolism and Mythology
of Ancient Peoples, especially the Greeks [Symbolik und Mythologie der alten
Völker, besonders der Griechen] was published 1810–12. Further editions
followed in 1819–23 and 1836–43.
195 has little occasion to think for itself: ‘hat dagegen wenig selbst zu denken’.
This may be a misreading by the compiler of the Additions, Eduard
Gans, of the phrase ‘hat wenig sich selbst zu danken’ (‘owes little to
itself’) from one of the transcripts of Hegel’s lectures. [S.H./A.W.W.]
199 graphically portrayed by those acquainted with the matter: Hegel may be
thinking of the eminent English jurist Sir William Blackstone (1723–80).
Blackstone’s Commentaries on the Laws of England were published in four
volumes from 1765 to 1769.
200 An Emperor: Theodosius II, who was Eastern Roman emperor from 
ad 408 to 450. The law in question (the lex citationum) was created in 

Explanatory Notes
352
ad 426 and included in the Theodosian Code (ad 438), 1. 4. 3. The 
‘college’ consisted of Papinianus, Paulus, Gaius, Ulpianus, and Modestinus.
When the ‘votes’ cast on a given point were equal (as they might be, since
judgements by all members were not available on all points), Papinianus, the
‘president’, had a ‘casting-vote’. If Papinianus expressed no opinion on the
matter, the judge would be free to use his own judgement. [S.H.]
200 No greater insult: precisely such an ‘insult’ constitutes the principal thesis 
of Karl von Savigny’s Of the Vocation of our Age for Legislation and
Jurisprudence [Vom Beruf unsrer Zeit für Gesetzgebung and Rechtswissenschaft]
(1815).
201 the Corpus Juris: Corpus Juris Civilis [The Body of Civil Law] is the modern
name (ﬁrst used in 1583) for the collection of works in jurisprudence which
was compiled by order of Justinian I from ad 529 to 534, and 
which comprises the Digest (or Pandects), the Institutes, and the 
Codex Constitutionum (see second explanatory note to p. 20 [p. 329 above]).
[S.H.]
203 four dollars and twenty-three groschen, etc.: in Hegel’s day there were 
24 groschen in one dollar [Reichsthaler]. [S.H./A.W.W.]
or always adopting, say, thirty-nine: the Jamaica Consolidated Slave Law
of 1816 provided that in no case was a slave to suﬀer more than thirty-
nine lashes in one day. Thirty-nine lashes was a not uncommon statutory
maximum in slavery legislation, and Hegel was a student of the English
press, where such legislation was a good deal discussed. See also
Deuteronomy 25: 3.
204 as Dionysius the Tyrant did: Dionysius I (430–367 bc) became tyrant of
the Greek colony of Syracuse in Sicily in 405 bc. His son, Dionysius II
(c.395–343 bc), succeeded him as tyrant in 367 and ruled until 357. It is
not clear whether Hegel has the father or son in mind and, in any case, no
such anecdote has been found about either of them. [S.H.]
Goethe’s theory of colours: Goethe’s anti-Newtonian theory of colours
[Farbenlehre] was published in 1810 and found favour with Hegel, as well
as with Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860), though it was generally dis-
missed by the scientiﬁc community of the time. For Hegel’s discussion of
Goethe’s theory, see Encyclopaedia (1830), § 320 and Addition. [S.H.]
205 The greatest enemy of the good is the better: ‘Le plus grand ennemi du bien,
c’est le mieux’ (in French in Hegel’s text). The ﬁrst edition has ‘meilleur’
rather than ‘mieux’. The proverb is best known from its use by Voltaire
(1694–1778) in his poem, La Bégueule [The Prude] (1772), which begins
with the lines:
Dans ses écrits un sage Italien
Dit que le mieux est l’ennemi du bien
In his writings a wise Italian
Says that the better is the enemy of the good.
[S.H./A.W.W.]

Explanatory Notes
353
206 phrases adequately expressing them: e.g. mancipium, a taking by the hand,
originally meant the ceremonial transfer of something from one person to
another. The ceremony involved an actual transfer by hand and the
speaking of certain words. Later, when the ceremony was dropped, the
word was used to mean not a transfer but the possession of something
acquired by formal transfer. (See third explanatory note to p. 177
[p. 350 above].)
207 in the tragedy of the ancients: i.e. Greek tragedy.
208 as Herr von Haller does in his Restoration of Political Science: Karl Ludwig
von Haller (1768–1854) was a Swiss jurist and Romantic reactionary. 
His Restoration of Political Science [Restauration der Staatswissenschaft]
was published 1816–20. [S.H.]
210 a court of arbitration or court of the ﬁrst instance: a Friedensgericht is some-
times a court of the ﬁrst instance, competent in some of the German
states to try actions where only small amounts are at issue, sometimes an
arbitration tribunal. A Schiedsgericht is a court of arbitration. The details
in Hegel’s text apply to the judicial organization of only some of the
German states in his day.
the public administration of justice: in the Prussia of Hegel’s time trials were
not held in public. Here, therefore, we see an example of the way in which
Hegel’s logical unfolding of the concept of freedom leads to a critique of
contemporary conditions. [S.H.]
211 Decisions on these two diﬀerent aspects are diﬀerent functions: (a) A jury of
laymen ﬁnds the facts, and (b) the judge declares the law and, in 
criminal cases, pronounces sentence.
and then appointed a special judex to inquire into the facts: under the formula
system of trial, the praetor heard the parties informally and prepared an
issue which he sent in writing to a panel of judices for trial, instructing
them to give judgement for A or B in accordance with the evidence.
Judices were laymen and not magistrates, though they often required and
possessed legal knowledge. A. H. J. Greenidge (The Legal Procedure of
Cicero’s Time (Oxford, 1901), 150) says that it is a mistake to hold that the
work of judices was limited to reaching conclusions on points of fact.
212 animi sententia: the words were used in the formula of the oath of the
Roman judex: ‘I swear to the best of my belief’, or ‘on my conscience’ [ex
animi mei sententia].
213 spring from the soul of the criminal: the verdict of his peers is the verdict of
the criminal’s own soul or reason because reason is universal and so
common to them and to him alike. His crime is his subjective deﬁance of
his own reason or his inner universality (see PR § 99).
214 the so-called jury-courts: jury trials were not part of the Prussian judicial
system in Hegel’s lifetime. They were established in Magdeburg,
Hanover, and Westphalia under Napoleon’s rule, but later abolished.
[S.H./A.W.W.]

Explanatory Notes
354
215 the corporation actualizes the unity as a limited but concrete totality: Polizei,
translated ‘police’ here, has a wider sense than that conveyed by ‘police’
in English. Hence in what follows it is generally translated ‘public 
authority’. The justiﬁcation for this is that Hegel himself sometimes (e.g.
in PR § 235) uses öﬀentliche Macht as a synonym for Polizei; but the dis-
advantage of this rendering is that it is less speciﬁc than Hegel’s word.—
‘Corporation’ [Korporation] is a term which originates with the workmen’s
corporations in ancient Rome. Hegel is of course not thinking of what we
know as trades unions, since his Korporationen are societies of which both
employers and employed are members. Indeed, he is thinking not only of
economic organizations but also of religious bodies, learned societies, and
sometimes of town councils.
217 means and arrangements which may be of use to the community as a whole: i.e.
public utility undertakings such as drainage, water supply, etc.
219 The disputes that have arisen in France: Rousseau’s Émile (1762) is the clas-
sic demand for freedom in education. State supervision was advocated by
Louis-René de Caradeuc de La Chalotais (1701–85) in his Essay on
National Education [Essai d’Éducation nationale] (1763).
221 the Neapolitan lazzaroni for example: these were homeless people in
Naples who lived by begging and occasional work. They were named after
the Hospital of St Lazarus, which served as their refuge. [S.H.]
223 A prudent god has sundered the lands by the estranging sea: ‘deus abscidit
prudens Oceano dissociabili terras’ (Horace, Odes, 1. 3) (in Latin in
Hegel’s text). Quintus Horatius Flaccus (65–8 bc)—since known as
Horace—was the leading Roman lyric poet during the time of Augustus
(63 bc–ad 14). [S.H.]
Livonia: Livonia was located on the eastern coast of the Baltic in present-
day Estonia and Latvia. [S.H.]
224 whose universal purpose is thus wholly concrete: because the universal pur-
pose of the corporation is at the same time the particular purpose of its
members. In the system of needs, the universal is abstract because the
particular individual in pursuing his end is not clearly conscious of the
universal which regulates his activity. In the corporation the case is 
otherwise. The diﬀerence between the corporation and the state is that
the purpose of the corporation, though universal for its members, in the
sense that it is the same for all of them, is still restricted; it is not the purpose
of all the members of society but that of a section only.
225 privileges proper in the etymological sense: a privilegium—from privus (‘par-
ticular’, ‘special’) and lex (‘law’)—is a law aﬀecting an individual only and
hence is something exceptional. But the privileges of an order, for ex-
ample, although peculiar to it, cannot rightly be regarded as exceptional
or accidental. The order itself is there because it is a branch of society; as
one particular branch it is like other branches in being a branch, but it is
distinct from them in other respects, and its distinction from others is
outwardly manifest in its privileges.

Explanatory Notes
355
226 the two moments around which the disorganization of civil society revolves:
the stability and organic unity of the state are foreshadowed in the family
and the corporation. Civil society is characterized generally by its atom-
icity, and it is saved from complete disintegration only by these ﬁxed and
organic institutions. Hegel is here using a metaphor drawn from the solar
system: the sun is a ﬁxed point whose attractive power prevents the dis-
sipation of the heavenly bodies which revolve around it and so confers a
unity on the system as a whole.
THE STATE
230 the most terrible and drastic event: i.e. the French Revolution of 1789 (and
especially the Terror of 1793–4). [S.H.]
232 leguleius: a lawyer who depends on legal technicalities for getting the
better of his opponent.
233 Magna Carta . . . the Bill of Rights: Magna Carta was signed by King John
at Runnymede in 1215 and guaranteed certain baronial privileges against
royal incursion. John later repudiated the agreement. The English Bill of
Rights was issued in 1689 under William and Mary. It recognized certain
civil and political rights of British citizens and established the political
supremacy of parliament. [S.H./A.W.W.]
the Prussian General Legal Code: the Prussian General Legal Code was
begun during the reign of Frederick the Great (who ruled from 1740 to
1786) but not promulgated until 1794. It was regarded by Hegel and
others as an important legacy of Frederick and of the Enlightenment.
[S.H./A.W.W.]
234 the Holy Alliance: the Holy Alliance was concluded in 1815 by Austria,
Russia, and Prussia (all opponents of Napoleonic France) to maintain
peace in Europe after Napoleon’s defeat and to protect against the
inﬂuence of modern (and especially revolutionary) political ideas from
France. [S.H.]
always relative only and restricted, like any ‘perpetual peace’: Hegel is allud-
ing (critically) to Kant’s famous essay Toward Perpetual Peace [Zum
Ewigen Frieden] (1795). [S.H.]
242 the fable about the belly: the fable recounted by Menenius Agrippa (consul
in 503 bc) to dissuade the Roman plebs from secession. See Livy, History
of Rome, 1. 2. 32, and Shakespeare, Coriolanus, I. i. 93–151.
it is often reiterated nowadays: by Friedrich von Schlegel and other
Romantics.
247 toleration [Toleranz] in the strict sense of the word: i.e. the state bears or
endures them (from Lat. tolerare—to ‘bear’, ‘endure’, ‘sustain’).
the abolition of slavery: Quaker petitions against the slave trade were pre-
sented to Congress in 1783 and 1790, and the retort in question may have

Explanatory Notes
356
been made then, or perhaps, if the date is not too late, in 1820 during the
debates on the Missouri Compromise.
247 proved itself to be both wise and digniﬁed: in Prussia Jews gained a measure
of emancipation in 1812 under the Edict Concerning the Civil Condition
of the Jews (see the editor’s Introduction, p. xi above). [S.H.]
251 Giordano Bruno: Giordano Bruno (1548–1600) was an Italian philoso-
pher, priest, and cosmologist. He was condemned by the Church for
allegedly holding opinions contrary to the Catholic Faith and speaking
against it and its ministers, believing in metempsychosis and in the trans-
migration of the human soul into brutes, and denying the virginity of
Mary (among other things). He was declared a heretic and burned at the
stake in Rome. [S.H.]
forced Galileo to recant . . . his exposition of the Copernican view of the solar
system: Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543) set out his heliocentric view of
the solar system in his work On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres
(1543). Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) defended the Copernican theory in
his Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632), but was
forced to recant his views in 1633. [S.H.]
252 Laplace, Exposition of the System of the World: Pierre-Simon, marquis de
Laplace (1749–1827), was a French mathematician and astronomer who
made signiﬁcant contributions to mathematical astronomy and probabil-
ity theory. [S.H.]
253 held up by some as the highest of ideals: wishes for the unity of church and
state were characteristic of Romantics like Friedrich von Schlegel and
Adam Müller (1779–1829). In conformity with these wishes, many of
them became Roman Catholics (see Addition to PR § 141 and explanatory
note to p. 145 [p. 347 above]) and longed for the days when an emperor
owed his crown to a pope.
256 the history [Geschichte] of the state: reading Geschichte (‘history’) for
Gesinnung (‘disposition’). [S.H./H.B.N.]
in the time of the Roman Emperors and the Praetorians: under the reforms
instituted by Diocletian (ad 245–312) and Constantine (c.ad 280–337), the
Praetorian Prefects, who were originally exclusively military oﬃcials, had
supreme authority, under the Emperor, in both civil and military aﬀairs.
thanks to those: it is no doubt Fries and the Romantics whom Hegel has in
mind, as well as von Haller.
257 those who hold that the divine is inconceivable: Hegel may have in mind
Kant and his followers, though, if so, this is a distortion of Kant’s views.
Kant argues that God cannot be known in himself but not that he is
beyond all conceiving. For Kant’s conception of God, see his Critique of
Pure Reason (1781), A 567ﬀ. [‘The Ideal of Pure Reason’]. [S.H.]
258 as we have seen on a grand scale: in the French Revolution.
260 diﬀerence in the number . . . supposed to be immanent: in Aristotle’s Politics,
for example, the three principal types of constitution identiﬁed by

Explanatory Notes
357
Aristotle—monarchy, aristocracy, and ‘polity’ or ‘constitutional govern-
ment’ (of which democracy is a ‘perversion’)—are distinguished on the
basis of the number of those who govern; see Politics, 1279a30ﬀ. [S.H.]
All these forms . . . maintaining them there: see Fichte, Foundations of
Natural Right, § 16 (vi) [Baur trans., 144]. The ‘forms’ to which Fichte
refers are monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy. The name and the idea
of the ephorate were derived by Fichte from the constitution of Sparta,
where the power of the two kings, who held oﬃce for life, was checked by
the ﬁve ephors (‘overseers’), who were elected annually. Fichte distin-
guished his ephors from the Spartan, however, and likened them rather
to the Roman tribunes, because his ephors were to have a veto only and
no executive power.
262 See Roman history, for example: the constitution of the Roman Republic
was still in essence aristocratic in the second century bc, and was totter-
ing into anarchy or despotism in the ﬁrst century bc. Hegel assumes that
this was due to a defect in the character of aristocratic government as
such, not to the inability of the particular form of Roman aristocratic gov-
ernment to adapt itself to the rule of an empire.
the type organized into an objective constitution: i.e. limited or ‘constitu-
tional’ monarchy, where the moments of the concept are objectiﬁed in
diﬀerent institutions which yet so interlock as to form a single whole (see
PR § 272).
263 Napoleon . . . wished to give the Spaniards a constitution a priori:
Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821) expelled the Bourbons from Spain and
put his brother Joseph Bonaparte on the throne under the Constitution of
Bayonne in 1808. With the breakdown of the Napoleonic regime in
1812–13, the Bourbons were restored together with the old constitution.
A liberal document, the Constitution of Cadiz, was drawn up in 1812, but
it remained a dead letter.
265 oﬃcers’ commissions up to a certain rank are saleable to this day: in 
Hegel’s day all oﬃcers’ commissions from an ensign’s to a lieutenant-
colonel’s were on sale, but there were restrictions on both purchaser and
price.
268 the unconditional character of that right is contained in its divinity: if a
monarch derives his authority from God, he rules by divine right—a
claim accompanied with disastrous results when interpreted, as in seven-
teenth-century England for example, as a ‘divine right to govern wrong’.
Hegel holds, however, that God’s will is not inscrutable, but intelligible,
and that it is the task of philosophy to understand it both in itself and in
its results in the world. Hence, philosophy may admit that a monarch
rules ‘by divine right’ in the sense that monarchy is a rational institution,
the apex and basis of the state as a rational and so as a divine institution,
and yet deny that a monarch may be absolute or defy the will of the
people, because rationality requires a limited, constitutional and not an
absolute monarchy.

Explanatory Notes
358
268 in which one has recently begun to speak: i.e. at the end of the eighteenth
century and the beginning of the nineteenth, largely as a result of
Rousseau’s work.
270 a ‘daemon’ (in the case of Socrates): Socrates describes this ‘daemon’ as ‘a
sort of voice which comes to me’ and ‘dissuades me from what I am pro-
posing to do’. See Plato, Apology, trans. H. Tredennick, in The Last Days
of Socrates (1954; Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1969), 64 [31c ﬀ.].
[S.H.]
272 recently it has been declared inconceivable: Hegel has in mind Kant’s rejec-
tion of the ontological proof of God’s existence. See Kant, Critique of Pure
Reason A 592ﬀ., and Hegel, Encyclopaedia (1830) § 51.
the other consequences that disrupt the Idea of the state: as, for example, in
the French Revolution. If kingship is irrational, then the king may be
guillotined, and Terror, the breakdown of political life, may follow. See
the reference to the salut du peuple (‘welfare of the people’) in the Remark
to the next Paragraph.
273 the Idea of something unmoved by caprice: Hegel’s point here is that the
monarch is not (or should not be) moved by or ‘grounded in’ the particu-
lar contingent, changing—and that sense, ‘capricious’—interests that
move the members of civil society. The monarch does not (or should not)
act on the basis of his own particular concerns, and he should not repre-
sent a particular faction or ‘interest group’, but should stand above such
factions. Herein lies the majesty of the monarch—a majesty secured by
the fact that he inherits his crown, and does not earn it by virtue of any
particular talents he may possess. Yet precisely because the monarch’s
will is ‘groundless’, his decisions are in another sense nothing but the
expression of his own arbitrary will (Willkür). The range of his arbitrary
will is, however, strictly limited (see, for example, PR §§ 282–3, 291–2).
For the most part ‘he is bound by the concrete content of the counsel he
receives, and if the constitution is stable, he has often no more to do than
sign his name’ (Addition to PR § 279). It remains the case, therefore, that
Hegel’s monarch is a constitutional, not an absolute monarch. [S.H.]
drawn from this ‘welfare of the people’ (salut du peuple): a reference to the
French Revolution and the Committee of Public Safety (Comité de Salut
Public). [S.H.]
274 the constitution becomes an electoral contract: in the sixteenth century, by
compelling the man of their choice to accept such a compact as a condi-
tion of election, the Electors acquired a distinct preliminary control of
both the internal government of the Holy Roman Empire and its foreign
policy, and so circumscribed the Emperor’s authority.
the state disintegrates within and is overthrown from without: In this treat-
ment of elective monarchy, Hegel has in mind both the Holy Roman
Empire (in which the Emperor was chosen by a college of six Electors
whose positions were hereditary) and the elective monarchy in Poland.

Explanatory Notes
359
275 I am not your prince, I am your master: ‘Je ne suis pas votre prince, je suis
votre maître’ (in French in the text). When Napoleon met Tsar
Alexander I at Erfurt in 1808, he was visited by envoys from many con-
quered German states who hoped to gain concessions from him by adopt-
ing the position of dutiful subjects petitioning their sovereign. This is one
of the many stories of Napoleon’s rudeness on that occasion.
applied to or reﬂected in the sphere below: pardon (forgiveness) belongs
essentially to the sphere of religion. See the end of the Remark to PR
§ 137.
279 in concrete supervision by the supreme executive: the diﬃculty which Hegel
ﬁnds in the construction of a civil service organization springs from the
fact that he wishes to combine (a) administrative eﬃciency with (b) pri-
vate freedom. To attain (a), he prescribes (i) the division of the civil ser-
vice into distinct departments: Treasury, Ministry of Health, etc., and
(ii) the uniﬁed control of these departments at the top in the person of the
Prime Minister or other supreme oﬃcial (see Addition to this Paragraph).
To attain (b), he prescribes that civil life with its concrete business of
buying and selling, and the concrete individuals who compose it, shall be
governed ‘from below’, i.e. by oﬃcials elected at least partly by them-
selves. These are the corporations’ oﬃcials (see Remark to PR § 289) and
probably mayors also. These popularly elected oﬃcers are at the same
time the lowest rung of the oﬃcial hierarchy; it is they and not civil ser-
vants proper who directly oversee everyday life; in them again the
diﬀerent branches of the civil service converge, in the sense that the
Treasury and other departments issue their orders not directly to private
individuals, but to the mayor or corporation oﬃcial who is thus at the
same time the lowest of the treasury (or other departmental) oﬃcials (see
PR § 295).
283 the notorious aﬀair of Arnold the miller: the miller in question was sued 
for arrears of rent which he could not pay because a nobleman had cut 
oﬀpart of his water-power to construct a ﬁshpond. This famous case
dragged on for years until Frederick the Great overrode the magistrates
and found in the miller’s favour.
286 colossal architectural undertakings: such as the building of the pyramids.
[S.H.]
287 The last moment in the legislature is the Estates [das ständische Element]: the
Estates (or Estates assemblies) are the bodies in which the estates of civil
society are given a political signiﬁcance (see PR § 303).
as for instance the Constituent Assembly did: the French Constitution of 1791
laid down that ‘ministers and other agents of the executive power [. . .]
shall be obliged to choose between their oﬃces and that of representative’
(Title III, Chapter I, Section 3, § 4). This meant that no members of the
executive could sit in the new Legislative Assembly that held its ﬁrst ses-
sion on 1 October 1791. The ‘self-denying ordinance’ of May 1791 fur-
ther stipulated that no member of the outgoing Constituent Assembly

Explanatory Notes
360
would be eligible for election to the new Legislative Assembly. See J. H.
Stewart, A Documentary Survey of the French Revolution (New York:
Macmillan, 1951), 224, 237, 269. [S.H.]
297 the distinctive function of mediation in the sphere of politics: see PR § 304.
If we consider in abstraction the monarch and the estates constitutive of
civil society, then they are opposed to one another as the one and the
many, or as the abstract individual and the abstract universal. The latter
Hegel calls the universal of ‘all-ness’ [Allheit] (see Remark to PR § 24) or
‘empirical universality’ (PR §§ 301, 304). These opposites become fused
into a unity only if some middle term comes into existence to mediate
between them and so to produce the concrete unity of a syllogism. The
executive is such a middle term from the point of view of the crown,
because it carries out the crown’s will and so particularizes it in the estates
of civil society. But the estates do not feel their unity with the crown until
they acquire political signiﬁcance as the ‘Estates’ and until one of the
Estates, in virtue of its likeness in certain respects to the crown, is able to
mediate between the crown and civil society as a whole. The agricultural
estate shares certain characteristics in common with the crown (see PR
§ 305) and is thus in a position to be such a mediator. But it can act as such
in the constitution only if its political function is embodied in an institu-
tion separate both from the crown, on the one hand, and industry (or its
embodiment in a lower house of parliament), on the other; i.e. it must be
embodied in an upper house. The upper house then mediates between
civil society and the crown; and if the upper house on any given issue
sides with the lower house, this helps the lower house and obviates the
impression that the latter is a mere faction against the crown and not genu-
inely devoted to the interest of the state (see PR § 313).
300 the voice of the people is the voice of God: ‘vox populi, vox Dei’ (in Latin in
Hegel’s text).
the ignorant populace reproves everyone and talks most of what it understands
least: ‘Che’l volgare ignorante ogn’ un riprenda e parli più di quel che
meno intenda’ (in Italian in Hegel’s text). Ludovico Ariosto (1474–1533)
was an Italian poet and author of the epic poem Orlando Furioso [Orlando
Enraged] (1516). The lines quoted by Hegel are from Canto XXVIII,
Stanza I.
A great spirit: i.e. Frederick the Great, who set as a question for the Berlin
Academy prize in 1778: ‘Is it useful to deceive the people?’ Both here and
in the Phenomenology [Miller trans., 336] Hegel substitutes ‘permissible’
for ‘useful’.
the masses can ﬁght, they’re respectable at that . . . miserable: Goethe’s lines
(from ‘Proverbially’ [Sprichwörtlich]) are:
Zuschlagen muß die Masse,
Dann ist sie respektabel;
Urteilen gelingt ihr miserabel.
(Hegel substitutes kann for muß and da for dann.)

Explanatory Notes
361
304 when they sang scurrilous songs: in his Life of Julius Caesar (the ﬁrst part of
his On the Life of the Caesars [ad 121]), Suetonius (c.ad 69/75–130)
reports the irreverent songs sung by Caesar’s soldiers during his tri-
umphal procession after his victories over Gaul. See Suetonius, Life of
Caesar, 49. [S.H./A.W.W.]
305 Those who talk: the allusion is to the wishes of some Prussians in Hegel’s
day to sacriﬁce the autonomy of Prussia and join with other German
states to form a new whole called ‘Germany’.
308 an estate [Stand] of its own—the estate of courage—dedicated to it: see
Plato’s Republic, 373e, where the warriors form a special class distin-
guished by their courage, as the Guardians are by their wisdom.—In 
war the state is, in Hegel’s understanding, the ‘ideality’ of the real
diﬀerences subsistent within it, and one aspect of this unity is that all
individuals are bound to sacriﬁce themselves to it if need be. This aspect
is realized objectively in an institution distinct from other institutions, i.e.
in a standing army. Hegel is here criticizing Kant, who had proposed the
abolition of standing armies (see Toward Perpetual Peace, preliminary
article 3).
309 not for itself [i.e. for the courageous person himself]: this Paragraph must 
be taken with its successor. Courage is a virtue (a) because it is an expres-
sion of freedom, (b) because the courageous person insists on his freedom
to such an extent that he evinces it by renouncing the achievement of 
particular aims. But ‘in itself’ (i.e. in abstraction from its intrinsic worth)
it is a virtue only in form because (a) although it negates the material
realm, it remains negative to the last; such a negation is the formal char-
acter of a virtue but there is no intrinsic value in mere negation, even
negation of the material realm. Before we can know whether a given act
of courage is merely physical or is of a ‘spiritual’ character, we must
enquire into all the circumstances (see Remark to PR § 328). (b) The
intrinsic worth of courage (see PR § 328) is derived from the end it 
subserves, i.e. from the sovereignty of the state. This sovereignty is both
the animating principle and the goal of courageous action, but this may
never be present to the courageous person’s mind. A courageous person’s
motive may be not the defence of sovereignty but only devotion to 
a leader or even personal gain; and of what he achieves (the defence of
sovereignty) he may be unconscious and think that he has only captured
a particular fort.
In India ﬁve hundred men conquered twenty thousand: in 1751 Robert Clive
(1725–74) ‘led ﬁve hundred men to Arcot [. . .] and there held a crum-
bling fortress against ten thousand Indians with a stiﬀening of French
troops for ﬁfty days’. At Plassey ‘he brought three thousand men into
action, of whom nine hundred only were Europeans, against a force of
forty thousand infantry and ﬁfteen thousand cavalry, and with a loss 
of less than a hundred men routed his opponents’ (H. A. L. Fisher, 
A History of Europe (London: Edward Arnold, 1936), 764).

Explanatory Notes
362
310 to make war and peace, and to conclude treaties of all kinds: these are the
powers which Blackstone ascribes to the King of England (see
Commentaries, I. 252ﬀ.).
The popularity of Pitt: William Pitt the Younger (1759–1806) became
prime minister of England in 1783. He was initially opposed to war with
Revolutionary France but, after the execution of Louis XVI in 1793, he
yielded to popular sentiment and joined the First Coalition against
France (which also involved Prussia, Austria, Spain, and Portugal). The
Treaty of Campo Formio (1797) marked the victorious conclusion of
Napoleon’s campaign in Italy and the collapse of the First Coalition. In
1799 a Second Coalition against France was formed (with Austria and
Russia), but this again proved unsuccessful. Pitt resigned as prime minis-
ter over the issue of Catholic Emancipation in 1801—by which time his
war policy had become extremely unpopular in England—but he
returned to the premiership in 1804. [S.H.]
315 the spirits of peoples [Volksgeister]: the conception of the ‘spirit of a
people’, which has appeared elsewhere in this book (see PR §§ 33, 257
Remark, 274), seems to be ultimately due to Montesquieu; see The Spirit
of the Laws, Part 3, Book 19, chap. 5.
world history as the world’s court of judgement: ‘World history is the world’s
court of judgement’ [‘Die Weltgeschichte ist das Weltgericht’] is a phrase
from Schiller’s poem ‘Resignation’ (1784).
316 the movement of spirit in this element is the exhibition of that fact: PR §§
341–60 are a very compressed summary of Hegel’s philosophy of history,
and, without the commentary which that work supplies, they are perhaps
no less hard to understand in German than they are in English. See 
G. W. F. Hegel, The Philosophy of History, trans. J. Sibree (New York:
Dover Publications, 1956).
Those who have maintained this perfectibility: Hegel has in mind above all
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (1729–81), whose essay The Education of the
Human Race [Die Erziehung des Menschengeschlechts] was published in
1780.
Know thyself: the keynote of the teaching of Socrates.
for them the plan of providence is inscrutable and incomprehensible: the refer-
ence is probably to Kant, who says (in the ‘First Supplement’ to Toward
Perpetual Peace) that we must understand the progress of humanity and
the eventual arrival of perpetual peace to be guaranteed by nature, or
rather by providence, even though we can have no knowledge of the
designs of providence, nor even know that such providence actually
exists. [S.H.]
318 undying fame as formal subjectivities: great individuals gain fame for the
greatness of their own speciﬁc acts, but they are not honoured or thanked
by their contemporaries or by succeeding generations for their con-
tribution to fulﬁlling the aims of the ‘world-spirit’, of humanity as such.

Explanatory Notes
363
Only speculative philosophy recognizes this contribution by showing
how the deeds of such individuals further the historical development of
human freedom. [S.H.]
321 Dr Stuhr: Peter Feddersen Stuhr (1787–1851) published The Downfall of
Natural States [Der Untergang der Naturstaaten] (1812) under the pseu-
donym Feodor Eggo. The book was a discussion, in the form of letters, of
the History of Rome [Römische Geschichte] (1811) by Barthold Georg
Niebuhr (1776–1831).
the recesses [Höhlen] and images of tradition: the reference is presumably
to the Eleusinian mysteries in ancient Greece, which are thought to have
begun around 1500 bc. These were initiation ceremonies held every year
for the cult—based at Eleusis—of Demeter (the goddess of grain and
fertility) and her daughter Persephone.
the whole falls apart into a group of particular national spirits: Greece was
divided into a plurality of city-states, each possessed of autonomy and so
with a ‘spirit’ of its own.
This opposition begins in the clash: this is in part a reference to the conﬂict
between the patricians and plebeians in the ﬁrst two centuries of the
Roman Republic. What Hegel is describing in this paragraph, however, is
a conﬂict not just between two social groups but between two principles
that inform the Roman world. [S.H.]
322 the unity of the divine and human nature: this unity is grasped in
Christianity and in particular in its central doctrine of the Incarnation.
[S.H.]
the Germanic peoples: ‘Germanic’ [germanisch] here does not mean
‘German’ [deutsch]. It refers to the whole range of Germanic peoples who
would go on to form the core of modern European nations. [S.H.]
These two realms: the ‘secular’ realm (as described in the preceding
Paragraph) is that of the medieval, feudal state, and the ‘intellectual’ or
‘spiritual’ realm is that of medieval Christianity and the medieval
Church. In this Paragraph Hegel appears to describe the process whereby
the Church becomes increasingly ‘worldly’ (prior to the Reformation),
and the secular state then develops into an ordered realm of right and law
(in the wake of the Reformation). In this process the opposition between
the ‘secular’ and the ‘spiritual’ is implicitly dissolved and the state
emerges as the objective embodiment of reason and truth. At the same
time, religion (in the form of Protestantism) comprehends through feel-
ing the truth that the secular and spiritual are reconciled, while philoso-
phy comprehends this through concepts. [S.H.]
323 in religion: by which Hegel understands Lutheran Protestantism. [S.H.]
in the ideal [ideell] world: i.e. the world of art, religion, and philosophy
itself.

INDEX
abstraction xviii, xxi, xxxv, 28–9, 189,
191, 230, 294, 343
action xxv, 114, 116–19, 122, 146
actuality xxix, 14, 253, 326–7, 332
Adam and Eve 26
Additions xxxvii, 324
advisory oﬃces/oﬃcials 276, 278
Aesop 327
agent 282, 295
aggregate 262, 265, 280, 290–1
agricultural estate 193, 195, 224, 291,
293, 360
agriculture 193–4, 225, 319, 351
Alexander I, Tsar 359
alienation xxx–xxxi, 77–8, 309, 316;
of property 77, 84, 338
Altenstein, Karl Siegmund Franz vom
Stein zum ix, xi, xiv, xliv
America 223
American Congress 247
Anabaptists 247
anarchy 262
ancient world 182, 194, 196, 207, 259, 271
animals xvi, xxiii–xxiv, 27, 29, 33, 35,
58, 60, 62, 169, 183, 187–8, 199
Antigone 154, 348
antinomy 70
antiquity 158, 235, 237
anti-Semitism xii
Antisthenes 351
appearance 33, 111, 113, 180, 332, 340;
of rationality 186–7
Arabs 107
arbitrariness/caprice xxi, 37–8, 86, 92,
141, 151, 159, 176–8, 187, 195–6
arcera 24, 330
Ariosto, Ludovico 300, 360
aristocracy 259, 261, 269, 357
Aristotle vii, 139, 158, 346, 356–7
Arnold the miller 283, 359
arson 119–20
art xvii, 315; works of 79
artiﬁcial/‘moral’ person 61, 267–8, 335
Asia 217, 238
Athena 228, 328
Athens 219, 271, 341
Augustus 350, 354
Aulus Gellius 23, 329; Attic Nights 329
Austria 355, 362
authority xxix, 146, 150, 155, 229, 250,
252–3, 299
authors, rights of 76, 79–82, 338
Bacon, Francis 328
bad, the 142, 300
barbarians 191, 200, 319
Basedow, Johann Bernhard 349
beautiful ethical individuality 319, 321;
soul 37, 149, 333
Beccaria, Cesare 103, 341
Beethoven, Ludwig van viii
begging 222
being xv–xvii
being-for-itself 34–5, 43, 305, 309
being-in-itself 34–5, 43
belly 264; fable of 242, 355
beneﬁcium competentiae 125, 344
‘benevolence’ 124
Bible, quoted/referred to 4, 9, 16, 26,
105–6, 130, 138–9, 166, 260, 322
Bill of Rights 233, 355
Blackstone, William 351, 362
body 62–3, 335; and soul 17, 42, 63
Bonaparte, Joseph 357
Bonaparte, Napoleon ix–x, xii, xliii–xliv,
263, 275, 280, 312, 353, 355, 357,
359, 362
bonitarian ownership 74, 337
bonorum possessio 25, 177–8, 331
Bourbons 357
Brahman 30
Brennus 347
Britain vii, xviii, xxix, 223, 268
Brittany 223
brothels 12, 326
Bruno, Giordano 251, 356
Brutus, Marcus Junius 83, 338
Buckland, W. W. 335
Burckhardt, Christiana xliv
business estate 195, 291, 293
Caecilius, Sextus 23–4, 329
Campo Formio, Peace of 312, 362
capital 192, 218

capitalism xxxi
capital punishment 103, 106, 341
capitis diminutio 57, 335
Caradeuc de La Chatolais, 
Louis-René de 354
Carové, Friedrich Wilhelm xiv
castes 196, 320
categories xvi
causa sui 77, 338
ceremony 167–8, 206
Ceylon 88, 268
charity 220
chastity 167
child/children 35, 44, 46, 59, 110, 120,
128–9, 137, 163, 172–5, 219, 287,
332, 335, 349
Chinese, the 202
choice xx–xxiv, xxvii, 37–8
Christianity 40, 74, 122, 168, 183–4,
254, 326, 363
church, the, and marriage 166; and the
state 246–55, 363
Cicero 22, 178, 329; On Duties 178, 350
citizen 184, 188
Civil Code x, xii
civil servants/service 282–4, 288, 293,
326, 351, 359
civil society xxvii, xxx, 52, 162, 180–2,
186, 196, 206, 214, 218–19, 222,
224–5, 227, 239, 274, 278, 291,
351, 355; a battleﬁeld of private
interests 278
clan 172, 175
class 221, 225
classical jurists 25–6
‘clear ideas’ 129
Clive, Robert 361
cockade 71
code, legal 20, 199, 204–5; penal 207
coercion 97–8
collisions 200
colonization 223
comfort 188
commerce 222
commodatum 90–1, 339–40
common sense 205, 299, 335
communism xxxi
communities 265, 280, 282, 290, 292,
294–5
compendium 3
compensation 100
completeness 205
concept xvi, xviii–xix, xxxiv–xxxvi, 7,
17, 19, 21, 32, 34, 49, 51, 84, 137, 152,
197, 256–7, 262, 266, 332‒3, 348, 351
concrete xxxv
concubinage 166
confederation of states 234
confession of guilt 213
Congress of Vienna xi
conquered people 275
consanguineous marriage 170
conscience xxv–xxvi, xxviii, 10, 115,
126–7, 132–5, 151, 153, 212, 344–6;
bad 10, 139–40, 346
consciousness 33, 111
consequences of an action 117–18
Constantine 356
Constituent Assembly 287, 359
constitution 162, 234, 239–40, 242,
255–6, 262–3, 276–7, 284, 290;
medieval 265
constitutional monarchy 259–60, 270,
357
consumer protection 217
contingency xxiv, 37–8, 95, 117, 182,
197, 203, 216, 218, 231, 306, 313–15
contract xxiv, 56, 83–93, 96, 108, 114,
165, 206, 230, 312, 340; classiﬁcation
of 90; in Roman law 87, 338–9;
nominate and innominate 90, 339;
reell (Hegel’s sense) and real (Roman
sense) 86, 89–90, 339
contradiction xxi, 7, 131–2, 162, 203,
309, 325
conviction xiii, 10, 13, 144–7, 150–1,
156, 212, 328; religious 327
Copernicus, Nicolaus 356
copyright 81–2, 338
corporations xxvii, xxx, xxxii, 186, 215,
222, 224–7, 239, 248, 265, 278–80, 282,
285, 290, 294–5, 297, 335, 354‒5, 359
Corpus Juris 201, 352
corruption 178, 182, 196
cosmopolitanism 198
counsel 264, 271, 358
courage 309–10, 361; estate of 308, 361
court of law xxv, xxvii, 208–10, 232, 353
covenant 87–8, 92–3
Creuzer, Georg Friedrich xiv, 194, 351
crime xxiv, xxxii, 56, 94, 97–105, 114,
118, 129, 144, 207–8, 215, 328,
340–2, 353; private 106, 342
Crispin, St 125, 344
Index
365

Croesus 121, 343‒4
crown 259, 263–4, 281, 292, 304,
310, 360
custom 159, 199, 216, 228, 263, 315
customary rights 199
Cynicism 190, 351
daemon 270, 358
danger 222; to public safety/society
99–100, 207, 216, 303; to state 313
death 42, 82, 106, 160, 307
decide, to 333
decision 138, 259, 264, 267, 270, 272,
321
deed 115
deﬁnitions 18, 328
democracy 259, 261, 269, 294, 357
Denmark 223
deputies 294–7
Descartes, René 333
desire 183
despotisms 238, 253, 266, 277, 290–1
determinate being, existence/
determination 30, 49, 83, 197
determinism 38
development xxxvi
dialectic xxii, xxiv–xxv, xxx, xxxii,
39–40, 48, 143, 147, 222, 334
diﬀerence 111, 180–1, 228, 257, 260
Digest 328, 329, 352
Diocletian 356
Diogenes Laertius 335, 348
Diogenes of Sinope 190, 351
Dionysius the Tyrant 204, 352
discipline 173, 246
disease 265
disposition 247–8, 293;
political 240–1, 279
distress, right of 125–6
division of labour 191, 221, 279;
of powers 257, 287
divorce 166, 175
doctrine, religious and political 248,
250–1
dolus indirectus 119, 343
dominium 74, 337
Draco 99, 341
duties, doctrine of 156, 158, 348
duty xxv, 41, 130–2, 156–7, 161,
236–7, 243–4, 308, 344; and right
236–8; religious 237
education 41, 110, 159, 163, 173–4,
184–6, 191, 198, 206, 219, 222–3,
225, 241–2, 284, 298–9; of the human
race 316, 362; play theory of 174, 349
Egypt 76, 217, 223, 243, 286
elections 278, 297
electoral contract 274, 358
elements 335
Eleusinian mysteries 363
emphyteutic contracts 74, 337
‘end justiﬁes the means’ 143–4
England and the English 179, 188, 199,
201, 211, 221–2, 233, 261, 265, 268,
287, 291, 310, 362
English colonies 223; law 106
ephorate 260, 357
Epicurus 9, 61–2, 325
equality 64, 104–5, 189, 192
equity 210
Erfurt 275
Erinyes/Eumenides 106, 342
error 146, 151, 333
estates 193–7, 292, 351, 359, 360
Estates xxvii, 284, 287–92, 294, 297–9,
301, 359, 360
ethical action 39
ethical life/order/relations/world
xxvi–xxx, xxxvi, 6, 9, 50–2, 111, 132,
144, 148, 152–5, 157–61, 182, 247,
334, 348, 349, 351
Euclid 330
European nations 315
evil xiii, xxvi, xxxii, 40, 77, 115, 135–40,
145, 149–50, 342, 346
excessive damage 86–7, 338
exchange xxxi, 86, 90–1
executive power xxvii, 258–60, 278–80,
287, 289–90, 292, 359–60
externality 58
extraordinary punishments 212
‘facts of consciousness’ 19, 28, 41, 104,
328
faith 145, 151, 155–6, 244, 246, 250,
253, 328
fame 318, 362
family xxvii, xxxvi, 49, 52, 57, 161–3,
169, 171, 178–80, 193, 218, 222,
225–6, 239, 274, 291, 293, 334, 355
fanaticism 29–30, 245, 255
Favorinus of Arles 22–4, 329
Index
366

favour 179
federation of states xxxii, 313
feeling 9–10, 42, 133, 162–3, 168–9,
174–5, 206, 228, 244, 250
feudal institutions/law 75, 172, 205, 209,
262, 265, 277, 286, 338, 363
Feuerbach, Ludwig x, xlv, 341
Feuerbach, Paul Johann Anselm 102,
341
ﬁat justitia 126, 344
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb vii, xliii, 14, 31,
66, 89, 151, 230, 260, 327, 331, 336,
339, 348, 350, 357
ﬁdeicommissa 178, 350; see also
testamentary trusts
ﬁnitude 30, 34, 36, 95, 104, 111, 113,
115–16, 148, 152, 254, 306, 332
Finland 223
Fischer, Ludwig xliv–xlv
foetura 68, 80
force 72, 79, 97
forgiveness 139, 275, 359
form 69; and content 4–5, 15
formalism 47, 303
formalities, legal 206–7, 210
France and the French vii, xviii, 
xxix, 159, 219, 265, 280, 301, 312,
355, 362
fraud 94, 96, 341
Frederick the Great 283, 355, 359, 360
freedom viii, xiii, xvi–xxix, xxxiii,
124–5, 135, 152, 154, 157, 185, 190,
195–6, 204, 232, 235, 270, 277, 333,
345, 346; as possibility xx, xxiii, 34,
37, 42, 55; common, ordinary idea of
xxi, 37–9; dies from fear of dying
307; formal 287, 298–9; negative
xx–xxi, 29; of the press and of speech
301–2; of the will xvi, xix, xxii–xxiii,
26, 28, 32–3, 42–3, 46, 97, 109,
121–2, 335; of thought 5–6; of trade
217–18; subjective 121–2, 160, 230,
238, 248, 262–3, 286–7, 299, 326
French Revolution viii, x, xxviii, xxx,
xliii, 30, 116, 258, 280, 331, 334, 355,
356, 358–60
Friedrich Wilhelm III xi, xlv
friends/friendship 33, 176, 179
Fries, Jakob Friedrich 9, 38, 325,
328, 356
Fröbel, Friedrich Wilhelm August 349
fury of destruction 29
future 125
Gaius 331, 352
Galilei, Galileo 251, 356
Gans, Eduard x, xxxvii, 324, 351
Genoa 268
geometry 205, 212
German Imperial Estates 233; language
292; law 179; nationalism xii–xiii;
princes 284
Germanic Realm 320–2, 363
Germany and Germans vii, xviii, 159,
205, 213, 223, 256, 361
gift 86, 90
God xxxv, 137–8, 233–4, 242, 254–5,
272, 274, 300, 320, 326, 346, 356–8
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von ix–x, xlv,
9, 37, 204, 300, 325, 333, 344, 347,
360; theory of colours 204, 352
‘good reason’ 23–4, 140–1, 143
good xxv–xxvi, xxviii, 52, 98, 115, 122,
126–7, 129, 133, 137–8, 142, 150–4,
244, 344–5; will 141, 143, 346
Gracchi, the 335
grace, eﬃcacious 139, 346
great man 301
Greece/Greeks xxxiii, 11, 76, 118, 196,
223, 271, 320–1, 326, 335–6, 348, 363
Greenidge, A. H. J. 353
Griesheim, Karl Gustav von xxxvii
gun, invention of the 310
habit 159, 241
Haller, Karl Ludwig von xii, 208,
231–3, 353, 356
hand 68, 253
happiness xxvii, 41, 121, 240
Hardenberg, Karl von x, xliv
Haym, Rudolf x, xii, xiv, xlv
health 307
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich; as
Lutheran 328, 347; children of xliv;
critique of contemporary conditions
353; education and life viii–x, xliii–xlv;
Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical
Sciences ix–x, xv, xxii, xxxvii, xliv–xlv,
3, 28, 324, 327–8, 331, 348; in Berlin
ix–x; in Jena ix, xxxii; lectures on
natural law/philosophy of right ix–x,
xliii–xliv, 3; Outlines of the Philosophy 
Index
367

Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (cont.)
of Right vii–viii, x, xvi–xvii, xix–xxii,
xxiv–xxvii, xxix, xxxii–xxxiii,
xxxvi–xxxvii, xliv; Phenomenology of
Spirit ix, xv, xliv, 131, 149, 325, 331,
348; philosophical system xv–xvii;
philosophy of history x, xvi–xvii, 362;
philosophy of right xvi–xix, xxiii;
Science of Logic ix, xv, xliv, 4, 63, 325
Hegel, Marie xliv
Heineccius, Johann Gottlieb 331,
339, 350
Henning, Leopold von xiv
Hercules 83, 158, 338
hereditary succession to the throne 273,
276–7, 289, 358
Herodotus 343–4
heroes 83, 98, 106, 118, 123, 348; right
of 98, 319
Hinduism 29–30, 243
history xxxii–xxxiii, 51; in contrast with
philosophy 21–2
Hölderlin, Friedrich viii, xliii
Holmer, Count Friedrich Levin 145, 347
Holy Alliance 234, 307, 355
Holy Roman Empire 284, 358
honour 81, 99, 122, 221, 262, 313;
of one’s estate 196, 225–6
Horace 223, 354
Hotho, Heinrich Gustav xxxvii
Hugo, Gustav, Ritter von 22, 24–5, 329
human being xvii, xxvii, 7, 27, 29, 35,
129, 136–7, 160, 173, 187–8, 190,
198–9, 332
humanity xii, xxvii, 198, 247
Humboldt, Wilhelm von x–xi
Hungary 233
husband 171
hypocrisy 138–41, 144–5, 150
I, the xx–xxi, 27, 30–2, 45, 126, 149,
151, 264, 271, 273, 331
Idea xvi–xvii, xix–xx, xxxv–xxxvi,
14–15, 17–18, 34, 46, 49, 110, 126,
137, 147–8, 152–4, 181– 2, 184, 229,
234, 237–8, 250, 254–5, 257, 259–60,
267, 270, 275, 289, 294, 317, 319, 327,
350; of freedom 154; of right 17
ideal 169, 328, 331–2, 335, 349;
see also ideality
idealism 60, 265
ideality 240, 256, 264, 266, 304–9, 361
ignorance 139, 346
immanent development xix, xxxvi, 18,
48–9, 51, 267; doctrine of duties 131,
156; negativity 31, 331
immediacy 51
impulses 36, 39–40, 158
in judicio stare 214
independence 305–6, 309, 311–12, 318
indeterminacy 28, 31, 36, 333
India 196, 223, 309
individual/individuality xxviii, 31–2,
118, 155, 160–1, 169, 184, 228–30,
233–5, 238–9, 264, 291, 295, 305–7,
311, 321, 334; great/world-historical
318, 362–3
inequality 192
inﬁnite 43, 153, 334, 339; bad 89, 339
inheritance 175–9; Roman law of 330–1
Inquisition 251–2
‘insanity of personality’ 73
insight 128
Institutes of Justinian 20, 73, 329,
334–5, 352
institutions xxvi, xxviii–xxix, 154–6,
238–9, 241, 245, 277
intention xxv, 115, 118–19, 142, 212,
343; good 141–3, 145, 149, 231;
‘moral’ 124, 328
interdependence 181, 192, 312
interest 121, 296–7
international law/relations 311–15
Ionia 223
Ireland 268
irony 147–8, 151
irritability 239, 256
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich 145, 325, 347
Jamaica Consolidated Slave Law 352
Jansenists 346
Jesuits 150, 346
Jesus Christ 130, 139, 145, 166
Joseph II of Austria 103, 342
Jewish emancipation xi, 247, 356;
law 106; people xii, 312, 322
judex/judices 211, 353
judgement 336, 343; inﬁnite 96, 98, 282,
340–1; negative 95, 340
judges 199–200, 203, 211, 353
judiciary power 259, 278, 280
jumentum 24, 330
Index
368

jury, trial by 213–14, 353
justice 101–3, 107, 204, 215, 317;
administration of 186, 197, 208, 210,
214–15, 284; eternal 155
Justinian 204, 329, 352
Kant, Immanuel vii, xxii, xxv, xliii,
25–6, 31, 38, 46, 51, 56–7, 85, 130–2,
163, 233, 307, 313, 325, 333–5, 339,
345–9, 355–6, 358, 361–2
Karlsbad Decrees xiii–xiv, xliv
Kierkegaard, Søren xliv
Klein, Ernst Ferdinand 341
Klopstock, Friedrich Gottlieb viii
knights errant 106, 281
Knox, T. M. xxxiv
Kotzebue, August von xiii, xliv
language 88, 166, 191
Laplace, Pierre-Simon marquis de
252, 356
law xxvi, xxviii, 10, 133, 146, 154–6,
162, 169, 175, 198–203, 206, 208,
229, 233, 236, 242–5, 248, 250, 263,
273, 276, 284–5, 302, 318, 329;
hatred of xii–xiii, 10, 231; of nature 6;
of right 7; of the heart 344; positive
23, 325
Law of Citations 200, 351–2
lazzaroni 221, 354
league of monarchs 307
learning 81
legislative power xxvii, xxix, 258–60,
284, 287
leguleius 232, 355
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 25,
330, 333
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim viii, 362
Licinian law 23, 330
Licinius Stolo 330
life 83, 122, 125, 264; to risk one’s
309–10
literary work 79
Livonia 223, 354
loan 90
logic 12; speculative xv–xvi, 32, 43, 48,
51, 152, 257, 271, 290
logical spirit 4
love 33, 122, 162–5, 174, 179
Lucian 178, 350
lunacy 120, 128, 145, 332
Luther, Martin 16, 325, 328
luxury 190, 225
machine 191
Magna Carta 233, 355
Magna Graecia 223
majority voting 295
mancipium 177, 350, 353
many, the 274, 287, 291
marriage 85–6, 163–7, 169–71, 174,
178–9, 193–4, 226, 239, 247, 319, 349
marriage settlements 172
Marx, Karl vii, xxxi, xliv–xlv
masses, the 280, 300
mathematics 25, 75, 330
matrona 177, 350
matter 26, 65; and form 66–7
mayor 359
mechanization of labour 225
mediation 290, 292, 297, 360
men and women, diﬀerences between
168–9
Menenius Agrippa 355
Mephistopheles 9, 328
Metternich, Clemens Wenzel Nepomuk
Lothar von xiii
Middle Ages 86, 280; see also feudal
institutions
middle class 283–4
‘might is right’, doctrine that xii
military and civil powers 256
military estate 308–9; service 286
Minerva, owl of 16, 328
Missouri Compromise 355–6
moderation 261
modern times/world xxxiii, 16, 122, 132,
181, 237–8, 259, 262, 271, 300, 310;
art/drama 164–5; state xxix, xxxiii,
227, 235, 287
modesty 167
Molière 348
monarch xxvii, 267–9, 271–2, 274–6,
289, 304, 310, 358, 360; and law-courts
209; divine right of 268, 357;
his right of pardon 275; majesty of
273, 275–6, 358
monarchy 259–60, 262, 272–3, 276,
287, 357; constitutional 259–60, 270,
357; elective 274, 358
monasteries 22, 62
monastic doctrine 166
Index
369

money xxxi, 75, 90–1, 195, 285–7
monogamy 169–70
Montesquieu, baron de vii, 20, 25, 236,
261–2, 329, 362
morality xxv, xxvii–xxviii, xxxvi, 47,
50–2, 98, 107–15, 131, 133, 135, 153,
157, 159–61, 187–8, 197, 202, 220,
236, 263, 334; and politics 314; in civil
society 197, 220
mortmain 61, 335
Moses 4, 260
motives 109, 120
Muhammadan peoples 312
Müller, Adam 356
Müller, Johannes von 12, 326
Müllner, Adolf 347
multiplication of needs 187–9
Municipal Ordinance xi
murder xiii, 106, 119–20, 142, 150
mutuum 90–1, 339–40
nation 180
natural accessions 68, 80; law 20; objects
155; will 35, 121, 136–8, 333
nature 6–7, 20, 64, 232, 258, 264, 271,
326, 329; philosophy of xvi
Nazis xxvii
necessity xv, xxii–xxiii, 18–19, 117,
184, 187, 215, 240, 242, 253, 306
needs, system of 186–8, 215; and proﬁt
xxi, 188
negation 361
negative and positive 137
negativity 31–2, 331, 333;
as self-relating 31–2
nemesis 304
nervous system 238–9
Netherlands xxix
Niebuhr, Barthold Georg 363
Nietzsche, Friedrich vii
nobility 194, 337
nomads 312
Norway 223
Novalis 333
oath 202, 212, 247, 353
objectivity 113; and subjectivity 44–6
obligations in Roman law 339
ochlocracy 266
October Edict x–xi
Odysseus 324
Oedipus 117–18, 343, 346
oﬃcers’ commissions 265, 357
one-sidedness 29–30, 33, 148
ontological proof 272, 358
opinion 133, 144, 252, 300, 304
oracles 270–1
ordinary consciousness xv
Orestes 342
organism 242, 265, 336; of the state
240–2, 276–7, 285, 294
Orient, the 320
original sin 40
originality 186
ought xviii, 111, 114, 127, 131, 175,
311–12, 345
overproduction xxx, 222
pactum in Roman law 88, 339
Pandects 20, 329, 352
Papinianus 352
pardon, right of 129, 275, 359
parents 172, 219
particular/particularity 30, 55, 120,
122–4, 132, 135, 151, 161, 180–6, 192,
196, 215, 224, 226, 234–5, 237,
239–40, 264, 274‒5, 291, 313–15,
349, 350, 358
Pascal, Blaise 139, 346
patriarchal societies 173, 318, 320
patriotism 240–1, 278, 345
peace 266, 304, 307, 314;  perpetual 234,
307, 313, 355, 362
peculium castrense 177, 350
Penates 166–7, 172, 228, 316, 349
Penelope 3, 324
people 268–9, 288–9, 291, 296;
world-historical 317–18
perfectibility 316
performance (in a contract) 87–9, 92–3
person xxiv, 52–7, 59, 66, 188, 267, 321;
‘moral’/artiﬁcial 61, 267–8, 335;
private 311, 322
personality 108, 169–70, 183, 267–8;
nature of 53–6, 83
Pheidias 39, 333–4
philosophy xvii, xxxiv–xxxv, 8, 14–16,
18, 49, 138, 144, 152, 205, 306, 315,
326, 328, 363; and religion 328; as a
priori xv, xvii; limits of 336; method
of xviii, 3–4, 19, 25, 48–50, 330;
paints its grey in grey 16, 328; proof
in 19, 152; and the state 11–12, 15,
229, 250, 255, 268, 273, 289, 357
Index
370

pietas 166, 349
piety 10, 246, 255, 326
Pitt, William (the Younger) 310, 362
plagiarism 81–2
plants 169
Plato 11, 13–14, 48, 61, 147–8, 183–4,
238, 326, 327, 334–5; Parmenides 334;
Republic vii, 13, 182–3, 196, 286, 326,
335, 361
‘Platonic love’ 166
play in education 174
pledge 91–2
Poland 358
police 11, 186, 215, 278, 280, 354
political economy 187; life 292;
state 240
politics and morality 314
Pope, Alexander 347
Popper, Karl vii–viii, x, xii, xvii
Portugal 362
possession 60, 65–9, 71
poverty xxx–xxxii, 219–22, 226
powers of the state 241–2, 256, 258–9,
265, 274
practical attitude 27; sense 294
praetor 25, 211, 313, 315, 331, 353
Praetorians 256, 356
prescription 76–7, 337
prices, ﬁxing of 217
Prime Minister 280, 359
primogeniture 179, 276, 293
private estate 291; property 61–2,
193, 225
privileges 225, 354
probabilism 140–1, 150, 346
prohibition 55, 113–14
promise 88
property/ownership xxiv, xxvii, 52,
56–8, 60–2, 65–6, 73, 83, 108,
131, 171, 197, 206, 274, 338; as ‘real’
76, 337
property qualiﬁcation for oﬃce 296
proposition 343
Protestant/Protestantism 16, 153, 251,
328, 363
providence 307, 316, 362
Prussia x, xxix, 326, 353, 355, 361–2;
General Legal Code 233, 355; reaction
and restoration in x–xii, xiv, xlv;
reform in x
psychology 28, 123; empirical 27, 35,
40; valet 123
public authority xxvii, 216–18, 220, 227,
354; criticism/discussion xxix, 288;
memorials 76, 337–8; opinion xxix,
295, 298–304
publicity 298–9, 301; right of 211, 214
punishment xxiv–xxv, 96, 100–7,
207–9, 211, 341
purpose 33–4, 112, 114–16, 118, 332
pyramids 359
Pythagorean 160, 348
Quakers 247, 355–6
quantity 75, 202, 260, 286
quiritarian ownership 74, 337
rabble xxx, 219, 221–2, 225, 258, 289, 322
rational as actual xxix, 14
rationality xxix, 14, 39, 44, 48, 154, 201,
229, 240, 248, 250, 258, 263, 300,
328, 357
Rawls, John vii–viii, xxii
realism 60
reality 182, 264, 337
reason 15–16, 83–4, 128, 145, 185, 203,
245, 316, 326–7, 336, 353
rebellion 275
recognition xxiii, 70, 83–4, 95, 107, 110,
122, 128, 133, 189, 197–8, 206, 210,
225–6, 300, 311–12, 314, 318–19,
336, 338, 350
reconciliation 15, 153, 322–3
rectitude 157, 196, 226
reﬁnement 188
reﬂection/reﬂective thinking 31, 38, 41,
155–6, 183, 206
Reformation, the 76, 363
relation 111, 121, 127, 131
religion xvii, 78, 134, 137–8, 166, 237,
243–6, 248, 250, 254–5, 275, 315,
323, 328, 345, 348, 359, 363; and the
state 242–7, 251, 254–5
Remarks xxxvii, 3, 324
rendering explicit xviii
representation 295, 297
representational thinking 149, 241,
244, 246
republican government 269
res mancipi 74, 337
resolve 36–7
resources 80, 171, 192
responsibility xxv, 115–18, 120, 128–9,
136, 140
Index
371

retribution xxiv, 103–6
revenge xxv, 106–7, 200, 209
Rhodes 15, 327
Ricardo, David 187, 351
Richelieu, Cardinal 344
right xxiii–xxiv, 7, 17–18, 26, 46–7, 51,
93–5, 100, 126, 130, 133, 152–3, 159,
161, 198, 200–1, 204, 206, 208–10,
236, 275, 342; abstract, formal xxiv,
xxxvi, 50, 52, 55, 59, 98, 113–14, 161,
188, 197–8, 215, 236, 342; and duty
236–8; as positive 19–20, 68, 198,
201; between states 311; classiﬁcation
of 56; of intention 119; of moral will
114, 116; of objectivity 119, 128, 139;
of self-consciousness 203, 213–14,
252; of subjective freedom/will 110,
122, 127; philosophical science of 40;
positive science of 18, 328; to know
xxv, 116
rivers 222–3
robbery and theft 99
Roman Catholic Church 153, 347, 356
Roman Empire 12, 179, 200, 256; history
178, 262, 363; law 18, 21, 24–5, 56–7,
59, 61, 87–8, 106, 172, 174, 177–9,
204, 206, 211, 325, 329–31, 334–5,
338–9, 342, 350, 353; soldiers 304;
world 183, 196, 363
Romantics, the 325, 333, 344, 347, 355–6
Rome xxxiii, 320–1, 354, 357
Rosicrucians 328
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques vii–viii, 47, 160,
229, 231, 334, 349, 354, 358
Russia 223, 284, 355, 362
sacriﬁce 306, 308–9, 361
sanctuaries from vengeance 117
Sand, Karl Ludwig xiii
satisfaction xxv, 120–2, 186, 240
savages 194
Savigny, Friedrich Karl von 329, 352
Say, Jean-Baptiste 187, 351
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von
viii, xliii, xlv, 326
Schiller, Friedrich 333, 344, 347, 362
Schlegel, August Wilhelm von 147, 347
Schlegel, Friedrich von 147, 151, 168,
325, 347, 349, 355–6; Lucinde 168,
349
Schleiermacher, Friedrich xi, xiii, 
326, 349
Schopenhauer, Arthur viii, x, xii
science 249, 251–2, 254, 301, 303;
empirical 104, 326; philosophical
4–5, 267, 323, 327
sciences, method of 18
Scotland 222, 268
sea, cultural inﬂuence of the 222–3
second nature 159, 241
seducers 168
self-consciousness 228, 233, 332
self-determination xvi–xvii, xix–xx,
108–11, 264, 270
semblance 93–4, 96, 180, 203, 340
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus 350;
Controversiae 350
sensation 238–9
services 286
sex diﬀerences 168–9
sexual love/union 163, 194
Shakespeare, William viii, 23, 347, 355;
Merchant of Venice 24, 330
shame 167, 170
shibboleth 10, 231
Shylock 24, 330
sign 71–2, 87–8, 166
slander and abuse 303
slave, slavery xxiv, 18, 42, 44, 46,
69–71, 78–9, 161, 173–4, 224, 237,
247, 321, 335, 352, 355–6
Smith, Adam vii, 187, 351
Socrates 134–5, 147, 160, 263, 270, 345,
351, 358, 362
solar system 187, 355
Solger, Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand
147–8, 347
Solon 121, 343‒4
Sophists, the 11, 326
Sophocles 169; Antigone 169
soul and body 17, 42
sovereignty 264–9, 274, 281, 289, 304,
306, 309, 311–12, 318, 361; of the
people 269
space 34, 333
Spain 263, 357, 362
Spanish colonies 223
Sparta 196, 357
speculation/speculative philosophy 32
Spinoza, Benedict de xv, 338
spirit xvi–xvii, xxxvi, 7, 26, 70, 77, 140,
144, 159, 161, 184–5, 232, 238, 250,
258, 263–4, 304, 309, 316–19, 322,
336, 338; natural history of 158; of a
people 51, 228, 263, 315–16, 319, 362;
philosophy of xvi
Index
372

stagnation 307
standing armies 308, 361
state xix–xx, xxvii, xxxiii, xxxvi, 6,
51–2, 83, 85, 128, 133, 162, 175, 181,
193, 227–9, 232–44, 246–56, 258,
263–4, 267–8, 274, 279, 281, 284,
286, 291, 296, 304–5, 307, 311–13,
323, 327, 350, 361, 363; and
individuals 86, 228–9, 236; and
opinion 252; as earthly divinity 258;
as hieroglyph of reason 270;
bad/imperfect 234–5, 253–4, 345;
based not on force but on sense of
order xxix, 241; contract theory of
85–6, 103, 230; external 181;
historical origin of 229; not a
mechanism 248; oriental 238;
substantiality of 242
state of nature 98, 170, 189, 312
Stein, Freiherr vom x, xliv
stipulation 87–90, 92, 166
Stoics, the 99, 134, 341, 345, 351
Stolberg, Count Friedrich Leopold zu
145, 347
Stolo 23
Strauß, David Friedrich x, xlv
street-lighting 218, 220
stock-breeding 170
Stuhr, Peter Feddersen 321, 363
student fraternities xii
subject 54, 109, 122, 188, 267
subjectivity xxv–xxvi, 44, 52, 108–13,
126, 132, 134–6, 139, 141–2, 144, 149,
151–2, 160, 184, 235, 252, 254–5, 259,
262–3, 266–7, 270, 304, 321, 332,
334, 342–3; and objectivity 44–6,
142, 154, 185; as absolute xxvi, 138,
147–50, 245
subsistence or livelihood 64, 219,
221, 225
substance 50, 160, 266, 305; and
accident 79, 155, 165; ethical 161
substitutiones 178, 350
Suetonius 361
suicide xxi, 62, 82–3
superﬁciality 10–11, 47
superstition 78
suspicion xxviii–xxix
Sweden 223
syllogism 290, 292, 360
Tartuﬀe 150, 348
taxation and tax-paying 182, 233, 289, 291
Tellus 344
Ten Commandments 205
testamentary disposition 90, 177–9, 350;
trusts 61, 75, 335, 350; see also
ﬁdeicommissa
theft 99, 142
Theodosius II 351
theoretical attitude 27
thing, meaning of 58–9
thing-in-itself 60, 63
thought xv, xx–xxi, xxxiv, 6–7, 26–7,
42, 127, 198, 228–9, 248, 251, 254
threat 102
time 34, 333
toleration 247, 355
towns 195; and country contrasted 227
trade 195, 222
trades unions 354
tragedy 118, 148, 169, 207, 353;
romantic 148, 347
treaties 312–13
trials 353
trust xxviii–xxix, 155, 165, 174, 193–4,
239–41, 283, 295
truth 5, 42, 108, 144, 245, 272; as 
result 50
Tübinger Stift viii, xliii
Turkey 76
Twelve Tables 22–5, 329–30
understanding xxxiv, 4, 34, 43, 123, 137,
162, 168, 179, 185–8, 201, 206,
257–8, 268, 272
unity 183–4
universal/universality xxxiv, 28, 43–4,
79, 118, 180–2, 184–5, 189, 215, 228,
235, 253, 259, 263, 321, 350–1, 360;
estate 195, 224, 280, 291
use 71–2, 79, 336–7
usufruct 73, 337
vaccination 219
value 75, 86, 96, 100, 104–5, 115, 121,
282, 285, 340
Varnhagen von Ense, Karl August x
Venice 268
Verdi, Giuseppe xliv
virtue 157–9, 348; in democracy 261
Voconius 23, 330
Voltaire 352
wage labour xxxi
wages, contract for 91
Index
373

Wagner, Richard xliv
war xxxii, 216, 306–8, 313–15, 319, 361;
modern 315
wares of sleep 9, 325
Wartburg Festival xii, 325
water 190
wedding ceremony 168
weight 26, 32
welfare 115, 121, 123, 126, 130, 181, 215,
226, 314; of the people 273, 358; of
the state 124, 266, 273, 314
Wette, Wilhelm de xiii
Wieland, Christoph Martin viii
will, the xxii–xxiii, 26–9, 31–2, 37, 44,
83, 97, 136–7, 229–30, 274, 332; and
the thing 336; as ﬁnite 37; as formal
33, 36, 332; as immediate or natural
35, 121, 333; as inﬁnite 36, 42–3;
‘general’ 230; objective 230
will, right to make a 176–7, 179;
see testamentary disposition
Wittgenstein, Count W. L. G. von xi, xiv
Wolﬀ, Christian J. 38, 129, 333, 345
women, their diﬀerence from men
168–9
Wordsworth, William viii
work 186, 190
world history xxxiii, 234, 245, 259,
315–17; spirit xxxiii, 48, 51–2, 161,
234, 315, 317–19, 362
wrong xxiv, 92–7, 108, 207, 216, 340, 342
Wyckoﬀ, Elizabeth 348
Xenophilus 348
Index
374

