BSPS
Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
Volume 209
by
Georg Helm
The Historical 
Development of 
Energetics
Springer-Science+Business Media, B.

THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT 
OF ENERGETICS

BOSTON STUDIES IN THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE
Editor
ROBERT S. COHEN, Boston University
JURGEN RENN, Max-Planck-Institute for the History of Science
KOSTAS GAVROGLU, University of Athens
Editorial Advisory Board
THOMAS F. GLICK, Boston University 
ADOLF GRUNBAUM, University of Pittsburgh 
SYLVAN S. SCHWEBER, Brandeis University 
JOHN J. STACHEL, Boston University 
MARX W. WARTOFSKYf (Editor 1960-1997)
VOLUME 209

Georg Helm (1851-1923)

THE HISTORICAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
OF ENERGETICS
By
GEORG HELM
Translated, and with an 
Introductory Essay by 
ROBERT J. DELTETE 
Seattle University, USA
SPRINGER-SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA, B.V.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.
ISBN 978-94-010-5915-2 ISBN 978-94-011-4471-1 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-94-011-4471-1
Printed on acid-free paper
All Rights Reserved
© 2000 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 
Originally published by Kluwer Academic Publishers in 2000 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 2000
No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
utilized in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and 
retrieval system, without written permission from the copyright owner.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Translator’s Note 
1
Helm’s History of Energetics: A Reading Guide 
4
Primary Sources 
46
Glossary of Terms 
50
Georg Helm: The Historical Development of Energetics
Preface 
55
Contents 
57
Part One 
: The Establishment of the First L aw 
65
Part Two 
: Preparation for the Second Law 
107
Part Thr ee: Classical Thermodynamics 
125
Part Fou r: New Initiatives, Disputes and Misplaced Efforts 
161
Part Fiv e: The Energetic Treatment of Chemistry 
181
Part Six 
: The Energetic Foundation of Mechanics 
253
Part Sev en: Energy Factors 
299
Part Eig ht: The Mechanical Approach to Energetics and
Mechanical Pictures 
363
Index 
405
vii

TRANSLATOR’S NOTE
As anyone who has tried it knows, translating an essay or a book for 
publication is much different from translating passages for scholarly use. I 
have done much of the latter; I have also done some of the former - but nothing 
on this scale.
I came to this project with liabilities. I am neither German nor am I fluent in 
the language; I am not a physicist or a physical chemist. I do, however, know 
something about energetics, having written a doctoral dissertation and several 
essays on the subject. This is one explanation for what otherwise might seem to 
be - and often seemed to me as I was doing it - incredible hubris. Other 
explanations are given in the acknowledgements below.
I have read that to be a good translator, one must be a good lover. The 
suggestion here is that to translate well, one must be intimately acquainted with 
the text. With this, I agree. At the same time, one cannot be a good lover 
without allowing the other to stand on her own. Friends who have done 
translation have also told me - rightly, I think - that there is no such thing as 
a translation in which the translator does not impose his own style. And this, 
evidently, is at odds with allowing the text to stand on its own. What, then, to 
do?
I do not think that any reader of Helm’s book would proclaim him a great 
stylist. Certain passages excepted, his writing tends to be stiff and ponderous, 
such as we might expect from a nineteenth-century German academic. I had 
therefore to make a decision: to render his work in English pretty much the way 
he wrote it in German, or to rewrite it so that it would be more comfortable to 
contemporary English readers. For the most part, I decided on the former 
course, although I was sorely tempted by the latter one.
I did so for two reasons. As much as possible, I wanted to avoid the 
temptation to interpret Helm in translating him: to revise a person’s style is to 
run the risk of altering his intent. Moreover, I think that writing style tells us 
something about a writer, and to transform his style is to make him into 
something other than what he was. There are hermeneutical snags here, of 
course, and I do not pretend to have avoided them all; but I did think long and 
hard about how best to translate Helm's book, rather than simply writing one 
of my own.
A few comments on the translation I have produced may therefore be helpful 
to readers of it. To begin with, Helm writes much of his history in the present 
1

2
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
tense. I have followed him here, not just out of fidelity, but because I think it 
gives his subject more immediacy. My central concern throughout has been to 
convey accurately the content of what Helm wrote. However, I often separate 
long, convoluted sentences into shorter, more easily digestible ones. When 
there seemed to be natural breaks, moreover, I have divided extended, straggly 
paragraphs into more wieldy ones. That is, I move, whenever possible, in the 
direction of simplicity and clarity, without (I hope) distorting Helm’s style too 
much in the process. For the same reason, I add pronouns, or replace pronouns 
with proper nouns, when this seemed to facilitate the reading. I also 
occasionally add words that are not in the text to make connections with what 
has gone before more readily apparent. My hope in these maneuvers is to make 
Helm’s work more easily accessible. At the same time, owing to Helm’s 
frequent parenthetical remarks and his fondness for examples and elabora­
tions, I often could not avoid ample use of commas and dashes as a way of 
rendering his intent clearly, if not always very gracefully. There is also the 
annoyance that Helm makes use of a number of troublesome words the 
translation of which is difficult. I therefore include a glossary of some of the 
more problematic terms and phrases and my translations of them. The list is 
not intended to be exhaustive and I do not explain many of my choices; but I 
hope that interested readers will find the glossary both manageable and useful.
Two additional comments are perhaps in order. Helm quotes from works 
written in French and English, as well as from ones in German. I translate his 
German translations of these quotations. When he quotes from German 
translations of works, moreover, I translate the version he employs. It would 
have been better, no doubt, to use, or translate from, the originals; but I have 
resisted that temptation for two reasons. First, the originals are frequently 
obscure or not readily available; second, I wanted to finish this translation in a 
reasonable amount of time. General readers, I think, will not be led astray here. 
And scholars interested in the issues Helm addresses will, in any case, want to 
examine the originals - including the original of Helm’s text - and not rely on 
my translations of them.
A related matter concerns the references. Helm often mentions figures or 
works without providing citations. I do not try to track down the sources he 
refers to in the text but does not cite in his notes. Helm’s notes, moreover, are 
casual, abbreviated and inconsistent. I also do not flesh out his notes, to make 
of them the sort of proper citations we now customarily expect, nor do I try to 
resolve his inconsistencies. I translate his citations as given, but do not go 
beyond that. Where I have noticed them, however, I have corrected typogra­
phical errors in the text and equations, and - when it is obvious - have 
occasionally added symbols to the equations that were inadvertently omitted. 
I have also added some terms to his index to make access to particular authors 
or subjects easier.
Anyone who undertakes a project of this sort incurs large debts. I cannot 
properly thank all those who have helped me with it, but I do want to 
acknowledge some of them. Since I had already prepared a rough translation 
of Helm’s Energetik in the process of writing my dissertation, a kind invitation 

TRANSLATOR’S NOTES
3
from Robert S. Cohen to publish the translation as a volume in this series 
seemed possible and feasible. In addition, a sabbatical leave gave me the time to 
rethink the text and rework the rough original. I thank Bob for his encourage­
ment and Seattle University for the release time it provided me to complete the 
project. For help with the German and the historical period in which Helm’s 
book was written, I am indebted to Russ McCormmach, who took time off 
from a manuscript of his own to assist me with mine. For help with the physics, 
I relied - as I always do - on the secure knowledge and uncommon good sense 
of Reed Guy, my colleague at Seattle University in the Department of Physics 
and a frequent collaborator with me in projects that must seem bizarre to both 
our departments. Reed is not responsible for my final choices in translation, or 
for mistakes in translation that still inhabit the text; but he provided welcome 
support and prevented me from making countless mistakes I otherwise would 
have made.
As always, my most extended and least tangible debt is to my wife, Pat. She 
has born patiently and usually cheerfully the compulsion, inattention and 
moodiness which are, it seems, the usual concommitants of my research. She 
has also read each draft of the work, subjecting it to her careful scrutiny, and 
has made many suggestions for improvement - most of which have been 
incorporated into the final version. Even more so than with my dissertation, 
which I wrote almost twenty years ago, Pat must have wondered whether this 
project was worth the effort; but she has remained my tower of strength 
throughout. For her understanding and support, for her faith in me and her 
constant, loving presence - for that, and much else besides, I thank her.

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE
1) The introduction to the book you now hold is lengthy and, I hope, useful; 
but I once had larger plans for it. Originally, I had thought of developing 
Georg Helm’s own version of energetic theory up to 1898, when the book was 
first published, showing in relief the changes it had undergone. My idea was to 
do this in a rather technical manner, which befits Helm’s own development. 
Along the way, I was also going to compare Helm’s position with the version 
contemporaneously developed by his uneasy ally, Wilhelm Ostwald; describe 
the Lubeck debate on energetics, which helps to explain some of the content 
and tone of the book; and summarize the post-Lubeck critiques of energetics 
and Helm’s consequent history of the subject. For me that plan was defeated by 
the sheer number of works to be considered and the complexity of the issues 
they address.1
2) Before discussing Helm’s book, I should like to say something about the 
man who wrote it. This is not easy, for the available sources are meager.2 Georg 
Ferdinand Helm was born in 1851 in Dresden, where he spent almost his entire 
life. The son of a cabinet-maker, he was educated in mathematics and physics at 
the city’s Polytechnical Institute; there he was a student of Gustav Zeuner, who 
exerted an important formative influence. He then studied for three years at the
In its place, I instead offer a sort of “Reading Guide” to Helm’s Energetik. 
The guide is rather informal and discursive: It is not intended to be 
comprehensive, will not be overly technical, and will not deal with every twist 
and turn in the text. Though the book is pitched to physicists and mathemati­
cians, my essay is intended for a more general reader - if such there be for this 
sort of work. As with the translation, my overall objective is to provide easier 
entry into what is often a very difficult book to understand from a contempor­
ary standpoint. My remarks should therefore be read as orienting guidelines to 
the global contours of Helm’s history and its context, coupled with some 
recommendations on what to look out for, rather than with the expectation of 
finding detailed analyses or evaluations of Helm’s arguments. Notes to primary 
sources (cited internally by means of superscripts) refer to the list of references 
at the end of the essay. (An exception is Helm’s 1898: In the text I refer to pages 
from the translation, enclosed in brackets [ ]; but in the notes I refer only to 
pages from the original. Internal cross-references in the original have been 
amended, in the translation, to refer to pages of the translation, and are also 
enclosed in brackets.) Substantive comments and a few citations to more recent 
works are included as endnotes - for the benefit of scholars, but so as not to 
interrupt the flow of the narrative. Although I was not able to carry out my 
original project, its issues do infuse this essay - as will be evident to readers.
4

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 5
Universities of Leipzig and Berlin, where he attended the lectures of Wilhelm 
Henkel, Carl Neumann and probably those of Hermann von Helmholtz. He 
received his doctorate from Leipzig in 1881 for a dissertation, written under 
Neumann, on differential equations in mechanics.
For nearly fourteen years, beginning in 1874, Helm taught mathematics and 
physics at the Annenschule in Dresden, where he was instrumental in the 
reform of education in physics and mathematics. He left in 1888 to become 
extraordinary professor of analytical geometry, analytical mechanics and 
mathematical physics at the Polytechnicum, and remained in that position 
until 1892 when he was appointed ordinary professor of the same subjects at 
the newly founded Technische Hochschule.3 Helm then filled this position for 
fifteen years, until 1906, when he was named professor of applied mathematics. 
He held that position until he was forced by illness to retire in 1920. Helm was 
accorded the title “Geheimer Hofrat” in 1903 and was elected rector of the 
Technische Hochschule for the academic year 1910-1911. He died in Dresden 
in 1923, after an academic career spanning almost half a century.
3) Helm’s interest in developing a theory of energy is first announced in a 
monograph, The Theory of Energy (1887a), which is developed “historically 
and critically” in the manner of Ernst Mach’s history of mechanics, published 
four years earlier (Mach 1883), and which proposes (as its subtitle suggests) the 
formulation of a “general energetics”.8 There is no evidence of any such interest 
in earlier writings, and later ones seldom refer to it explicitly (1904, 144-45; 
1907a, 372; 1907c, 29). Helm’s active promotion of energetics is, therefore, 
relatively confined. An essay in 1890 sought to reduce mechanics to energetics 
(1890b), and another in 1892 was likely intended to bring electricity and 
magnetism within the compass of the new theory of energy (1892a). An 
exploratory note (1893) anticipated a book on the energetic development of 
physical chemistry (1894). These publications, plus more wide-spread interest 
in energetics, led to an invitation to address the 1895 Lubeck meeting of the
Helm’s research, reflecting the influence of Zeuner, Neumann and the 
mathematican, Gustav Schlomilch, was largely at the interface between 
mathematics and physics.4 It also reflected the wide range of his interests and 
teaching responsibilities.5 Early on, he investigated problems in analytical 
mechanics and mathematical physics, including gravitational theory and the 
aether, as well as in the theory of probability (1877a, 1877b, 1878, 1879, 1880, 
1881). A textbook, The Elements of Mechanics and Mathematical Physics, based 
on lectures at the Polytechnicum, appeared in 1884 (1884). Later publications 
include more studies in mechanics, probability theory, and the possibility of 
reconciling the principle of relativity with the hypothesis of an aether; 
investigations into insurance statistics and statistical phenomena in biology; 
essays on scientific epistemology; and longer treatises on electrodynamics and 
the basic principles of higher mathematics (1892b, 1895c, 1902, 1912a, 1912b, 
1912a, 1917; 1887b, 1899; 1907b, 1916; 1904, 1910)6 He is probably best 
known today, however, for his systematic development and vigorous defense of 
energetics.7

6
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
German Association of Scientists and Physicians “on the current state of 
energetics” (1895a).
The heated debate at the Lubeck meeting proved to be a disaster for 
energetics and an unhappy occasion for Helm personally. It and he were 
apparently attacked from all sides. Helm was offended and deeply hurt.4 * * * * 9 The 
situation worsened when the physicists Ludwig Boltzmann and Max Planck 
quickly recorded their negative appraisals of energetics in the Annalen der 
Physik (Boltzmann 1896b; Planck 1896), with Planck’s short essay being 
probably the most blunt, unkind thing he ever wrote. Given what he thought 
had happened to him in Lubeck - that he had been set up, lured into a trap10 - 
Helm was outraged. He responded with a vigorous reply, as did his only 
Lubeck ally, the physical chemist Wilhelm Ostwald (Helm 1896; Ostwald 
1896a). But the traumatic effect on Helm of the meeting was deep and lasting, 
as is obvious from the Preface to his history. That work - or, rather, a book 
devoted to the “history of the energy principle” - had been commissioned 
before the Lubeck controversy; but the shape and sometimes the tone it 
eventually assumed were profoundly affected by the outcome.11 (To be sure, 
Helm’s work usually illustrates the detached, “objective” features of a sober 
German academic treatise; but it is also a very personal statement. The reader 
who ignores Helm’s occasional passion, and the reasons for it, therefore misses 
a good deal of what the work meant to him.) At the same time, the history of 
energetics that Helm produced seems to have been a cathartic experience: It 
allowed him to vent pent-up anger and frustration and gave him new peace of 
mind. He published on energetic subjects afterwards (e.g. 1907a, 1907b; 1913a, 
1913b); but, as indicated above, he did not again exercise himself in aggres­
sively defending the new theory of energy.12
4) In line with the overall intent of this introductory essay, a brief overview 
seems in order. In his history of energetics, Helm sought to achieve several
distinct, although often closely related, objectives. First, he tried to revise,
amplify and defend his own development of energetic theory, especially in
mechanics and thermodynamics. Accordingly, a fair amount of Helm’s book
discusses his earlier contributions to the subject - from his first work in 1887,
through his studies on the energetic foundations of mechanics, thermo­
dynamics and electromagnetism of the early 1890s, to his Lubeck reports and 
his reply to the published criticism they provoked.13 Here, Helm’s objective is
often personal: He wanted to secure his place in the history of the “mathema­
tical development of energetics”14 by defending his own work against the 
charges of simple-minded error or vacuity made by his principal critics.
More importantly, for my purposes, Helm also sought to defend and promote 
a certain conception of what energetics was really about - a view of the history,
nature and goal of physical theory - that would both respond to critics and also 
separate his vision of a science of energy from that of others, notably Ostwald,
who had contributed along similar lines. Here he in part restated ideas he had 
expressed in earlier works, but more forcefully and systematically, and in part 
recast them (Parts VI and VII, especially). Finally, Helm sought to describe the

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 7
overall evolution of the “energetic tendency in natural science,”15 and to show 
that while that evolution had sometimes followed fitful and inauspicious paths, it 
nevertheless amounted to nothing less than a “great reorientation in the human 
understanding of natural events” [55].
For the last project there was already a model - although one of which Helm 
was probably unaware until his own work was well underway. This was 
Ostwald’s Electrochemistry: Its History and Theory, published in 1896 
(1896b).16 Helm’s history of energetics was intended to show that natural 
science had progressed fitfully, though not inexplicably, in the direction of a 
comprehensive and unified science of energy. But his treatise differed from its 
energetic predecessor in at least two respects. First, it explicitly defended the 
larger thesis that natural science as a whole - and not simply electrochemistry - 
had evolved in the direction of a mature energetics; and second, it argued that 
that evolution had realized, or was in the process of actualizing, a certain 
conception of energetics, namely, the one to which Helm himself subscribed.
5) Consonant with the generalist approach of this essay, my remarks will 
focus on Helm’s last two objectives, rather than on his first one. Let me begin, 
therefore, by saying a bit more about his understanding of the historical 
evolution of science before I discuss his conception of energetics. In a quasi­
Hegelian manner, Helm saw this evolution moving in the direction of a 
completed energetics - a science of energy, rightly conceived. The idea of 
history with a telos (goal) is not accepted by most historians today and will 
probably be difficult for many readers to comprehend; but it is essential to 
understanding Helm’s history of energetics. This idea need not be taken as a 
claim that history is the working out of the purposes of some Creator who has 
set the whole process in motion, or, more mysteriously, as a suggestion that the 
universe itself can somehow have purposes. There is no evidence I am aware of 
that Helm accepted either of these views. He is best read as thinking that 
reflection on our scientific past enables us to discern the direction the history of 
science is taking and the destination it will ultimately reach.
The opening quotation from the French physicist, Pierre Duhem [65], with its 
metaphor of the rising tide, is therefore crucial and should be read carefully, 
since it provides a graphic illustration of how Helm thinks history works. At the 
same time, Helm’s comments on this passage may be misleading. He tells readers 
that to understand the emergence of energetics, initial attention should be paid, 
not to the “efforts of original thinkers, to the ideas of prescient minds, which 
were not understood by their contemporaries... [since] these are [only] waves 
that lick upward, but [which] quickly sink back into the general level.... To 
follow the gradual rising of the intellectual level,” Helm says, we must “first 
focus on the broad knowledge of the age, the generally recognized academic 
wisdom - however unpleasant to contemplate this may be” [65].
The “academic wisdom” Helm rehearses [65-68] is outdated and his 
objections to later (and, in his view, also outdated) wisdom are clear. But the 
main focus of Helm’s history is on the “prescient minds” who originated and 
developed energetics and only incidentally - if sometimes pointedly - on the 

8
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
backward ones who opposed it. In keeping with Helm’s metaphor, let me call 
the former thinkers “advanced waves,” and suggest that his real objective is to 
follow the advanced waves, with only side comments on the obstacles that 
inhibited them. I suggest that readers interested in following the overall 
argument of Helm’s narrative do likewise.17
This way of proceeding also helps to make sense of another prevalent feature 
of Helm’s history. In general, Helm tended to view his own work - more 
modestly than Hegel - as only the most recent stage in energetics - he never 
suggests that his contribution has completed the task - in a historical process 
to which many scientists and subjects had contributed (e.g. [401]). Accordingly, 
his history asserted or implied that investigations in diverse fields had either 
explicitly encouraged or implicitly supported the formulation of a general 
theory of energy, and he interpreted the ideas of well-known predecessors and 
contemporaries as anticipations of, or contributions to, such a formulation. To 
a large extent, that is, Helm seems to have viewed himself as merely collecting 
together and consolidating the work of other scientists, who, his narrative 
intimates, did not always understand the larger, energetic implications of their 
work.18 He therefore sought to relate his own contributions to earlier ones in a 
way that they did not appear to be radical departures from much established 
theory, but rather as clarifications and extensions of what others had - in part, 
at least - already done (e.g. [194-200, 266-78]; also 1895a, XVI-XVIII).
This is not always the case, however. Helm did seek to defend his own 
originality - as is evident, especially, in Parts VI and VII. But, in keeping with 
his global interpretation of the history of science, he usually tried to fit as much 
as possible of previous science within the confines of a properly conceived 
energetics. To use the tidal metaphor, he saw himself as helping to bring the 
“advanced waves” to a unified focus (e.g. [279-83, 310-11]).
6) One problem with Helm’s generously inclusive approach is that his gaze is 
often very selective: In following the waves leading to an energetics of the sort 
he welcomed, he usually looked only at certain aspects of work he admired. As 
a result, he often misinterpreted his favorite authors - Robert Mayer, William 
Thomson, Willard Gibbs, Rudolf Clausius and Hermann von Helmholtz - or 
was inconsistent in describing them. Knowledgeable readers will see this 
problem immediately; less knowledgeable ones should beware of accepting 
Helm’s historical reconstuctions at face value.
Another, more general, problem is that Helm appears uncertain of the story 
he wants to tell. More precisely, he seems unsure whether, in recounting the 
history of energetics, he is describing an accomplished, or all but accom­
plished, fact, or whether he is still urging - as he had in 1887 (1887a, 3, 45­
47, 57-58, 71) - the need for a new beginning. Are the “advanced waves” still 
being beaten back, or have they finally asserted themselves?
For the most part, Helm’s attitude in 1898 seems to have been that the 
evolutionary development of science had already led to the emergence, growth 
and maturation of energetic ideas, that traditional mechanism and atomism 
(their opponents) were dying, and that outdated views had only to be resisted 

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 9
when efforts to save them betrayed a misplaced sense of priority or when they 
obscured the important differences between molecular-mechanical theories 
and energetics. Thus, for example, he comments as follows on the idea that 
heat is a kind of molecular motion:
It seems to me unnecessary today to take the field against the mechanical 
hypothesis with the clatter of weapons. It has done its duty. The wave in the 
sea of scientific theories, of which we spoke in the introduction to this book, 
has risen and now falls, after having prepared the path for energetic ways of 
viewing things. One must combat only the attempt to maintain this 
mechanical hypothesis through all sorts of artificialities, as if the existence 
of moving atoms was more important than the simple description of 
experience. Above all, however, the conflation of energetics with the 
molecular hypothesis - which still has by no means been stamped out - 
must be resisted [193].
This is an example of Helm reasonably calm and collected, more or less 
dispassionately surveying the history of scientific ideas. Sometimes, however - 
especially when, in the heat of argument, he is trying to defend his own ideas - 
he is less sanguine and more revolutionary. Here is a passage in which he 
defends one of those ideas against what he regarded as outdated but deeply 
entrenched prejudice:
In view of the antipathy which [at Lubeck] met the intensity law,19 and the 
modern energetics attached to it, I am unable to suppress a suspicion. Steps 
have been taken here, steps regarded by the energeticists as progressive, 
which now appear so extraordinarily simple and self-evident. [Energetics 
does see the salvation of physics] in a revision of fundamental concepts, [but 
this] no doubt strikes some as too trivial. I suspect that opponents are ill- 
disposed towards energetics because it pays less attention to the most sublime 
things than it does to the most elementary ones. ...
Certainly, energetics wishes to try a new start on fundamentally new paths; 
the old tracks are worn out enough! Back to nature, to the nature of all 
theorizing, to our most basic ideas about natural events!20
There is, then, a tension in Helm’s narrative between the serene view that 
energetics has already triumphed - or all but triumphed - in the evolutionary 
course of the history of science and the defiant view that the struggle for its 
supremacy has only just begun. The former view dominates most of Helm’s 
text; but, rhetorically, at least, the latter one seems to prevail - in, especially, 
the emotional call-to-arms in the last, triumphal pages of his history [403-4].
7) Another tension, again related to Helm’s overall view of the history of 
science, also makes his history of energetics difficult to follow. While insisting 
throughout his study that energetics must be seen as “a unified intellectual 

10
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
movement” and “a great reorientation in the human understanding of natural 
events” [55,404], Helm nevertheless recognized, as he had in his Lubeck reports 
(1895a, III-V; 1895b, 28-30), two distinct, coherent and more or less indepen­
dent lines to its development - one from the side of mechanics and another from 
the side of thermodynamics.21 The main line of development, he now declared 
explicitly, was from the side of thermodynamics [154, 192-94, 256-60, 380-81]; 
but he continued to interpret what he called the “principle of analogy” in a way 
that mechanically-oriented physicists such as Helmholtz and Boltzmann, and 
Maxwell and Hertz, could be regarded - in much of their work, at least - as 
having contributed to the formation of a science of energy (see Part VIII and 
1895a, IV-V).
The natural question to ask, of course, is: “Why did Helm think that 
energetics constituted a unified intellectual movement when he conceded the 
existence of two different, independent lines of energetic development {Richtun­
gen), one of which he clearly preferred to the other?” The brief answer - to 
which I shall return - is that, for him, a mechanical theory counted as a 
contribution to energetics only if it satisfied certain requirements. Here the 
important point to stress is that, in his history, Helm’s sympathies were 
evidently with the thermodynamic approach to energetics, which “sees in 
energy equations nothing more than the purest expression of quantitative 
relations”, and that he sought to interpret the dominant line of energetic 
evolution in those terms.22 Helm’s own conception of a science of energy helps 
to explain why he would have found that approach most appealing.
8) The conception of energetics that Helm sought to defend and promote in 
1898 was one he attributed, in nascent form, to the physician Robert Mayer. 
That conception is perhaps best approached by contrasting his interpretation 
of Mayer with Ostwald’s, since this approach has the added advantage of 
highlighting some fundamental differences between Ostwald’s vision of a 
science of energy and Helm’s own.
Helm and Ostwald included all of the pioneers of energy conservation 
among the founders of energetics, but they both accorded a special place of 
honor to Robert Mayer. Sometimes, their reasons for doing so coincided. Each 
admired the boldness and independence of Mayer’s thought, his skeptical 
attitude toward prevalent molecular and mechanical hypotheses, and the way 
he steadfastly opposed any attempt to reduce heat to a form of mechanical 
energy. Above all, each praised Mayer’s insight that all natural phenomena are 
really energy transformations and his vision of a unifying science of energy.23 
But, at the same time, they disagreed fundamentally about the content of 
Mayer’s insight and the meaning of his vision.
9) When Helm praised Mayer in 1898 for the clarity of his insight into 
fundamental principle, it was for adumbrating the possibility of a science of 
energy that was a “pure system of relations,” exemplifying a phenomenalism of 
the sort championed by Ernst Mach [80]. Mayer had founded “a new world 
view,” Helm claimed [261], that was both energetic and phenomenalist in 

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 11
orientation. Like Mach, that is, Mayer was interested only in quantitatively 
describing and relating the data of experience - the phenomena. Eschewing any 
metaphysical references to underlying substances or causes, he was satisfied to 
show that “a relationship exists in consequence of which one phenomenon 
decreases in favor of another, or increases at its expense” [84]. But Mayer went 
beyond Mach in suggesting that all our experience, and so all phenomena, are 
the outcomes of energy relations. That was his “fundamental energetic idea” 
[76].
This interpretation is fanciful, and, in any case, it conflicts with Helm’s 
earlier reading of Mayer’s objective. But that is not my concern here.24 Instead, 
I want only to clarify the view Helm attributed to Mayer in 1898, because then 
Helm did think that a “pure system of relations can be achieved by means of 
energetics,” and this was the “fundamental energetic idea” that he sought to 
develop, defend and promote in his history of the subject (e.g. [253, 263, 400- 
404]). For reasons to be discussed shortly, I will call this Helm’s “official 
position” on the goal of energetics and will collect its main features under one 
heading, which I shall call the “Relations Thesis”.
There are epistemological, methodological and (anti)-metaphysical dimen­
sions to the Relations Thesis. First, it claims that we can only know phenomena 
and changes in phenomena, all of which are energetic in character [332, 400]. 
Second, it claims, in consequence, that the goal of natural science is to describe 
and relate energy phenomena in the simplest and most unified manner 
possible. Accordingly, a general theory of energy, or energetics, will relate the 
phenomena in terms of simple, unifying principles, such as the Law of Intensity 
and the Factorization Principle, properly construed.25 Third, it rejects all 
inferences to anything “behind” or “beneath” the phenomena, whether it be 
atoms or forms of energy. Specifically, it rejects all efforts to substantialize 
energy or to reify energetic changes in terms of “migrations,” “transitions,” 
“transformations,” or what have you.26
According to the Relations Thesis, the concept of energy - like any other 
genuinely physical concept - is empirical and relational, as is the law of its 
conservation. The energy law was essential to Helm’s energetics, of course, 
even if it was not its basic principle; but for him that law only expressed 
empirically verified, quantitative correlations between different energetic 
phenomena. Unverifiable inferences to the existence of an indestructible 
substance underlying the phenomena were ruled out - dismissed as metaphy­
sical speculation - as were any inferences beyond what had been empirically 
confirmed. “With the pronouncement ‘The energy of the world is constant,’ ” 
Helm remarked of Clausius’ dictum, “the firm footing of the energy law is 
abandoned, according to which this law is nothing more than an empirical 
relation between measurable quantities that we find present in any natural 
process. And for this sacrifice, absolutely nothing is gained in return but an 
empty saying.” He then extended this conclusion to include Clausius’ other 
well-known statement concerning the entropy of the world - that it “tends to a 
maximum” - commenting that while both had no doubt encouraged a livlier 
study of energy and entropy than “sober claims that try to express the true 

12
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
importance of these concepts,” they were, in fact, “nothing more than 
metaphysical aberrations” [176].27
The Relations Thesis thus expressed all there is to energetics; but to Helm, 
writing in 1898, that is all that is needed and warranted. (To follow the overall 
argument of Helm’s history, one must try to keep this in mind - even if Helm 
does not always adhere to his own policy.) And he portrayed Mayer as its first 
significant advocate:
Mach has repeatedly and justifiably warned of the mysticism associated with 
the word ‘transform’ that has sometimes tried to make its way into 
energetics. But it emerges clearly from the above words [of Mayer’s] that, 
judged by his manner of thinking, the founder of energetics does not need 
this warning, although the way he expressed himself in his writings has given 
some of his followers occasion for misunderstanding. In the sense of its 
founder, energetics is a pure system of relations [ein reines Beziehungstum] 
and is not out to place a new absolute in the world. When changes occur, this 
definite mathematical relationship still exists between them - That is the 
guiding formula of energetics, and certainly it is also the only formula of all 
true knowledge of nature. What goes beyond it is fiction [79-80].
10) Ostwald disagreed. In his view, Mayer’s most important contribution to 
energetics was to have ascribed reality and substantiality to energy as well as 
matter. That was the “essential insight” that Ostwald sought to promote and 
develop in his first writings on energetics;  but obstacles had made this 
difficult. Sometimes, Ostwald claimed that Mayer’s insight had been obscured 
by subsequent developments of the energy concept, especially in thermody­
namics, where, he thought, energy often tended to be regarded more as an 
interesting mathematical function, comparable to the potential function in 
mechanics, than as a physical reality. Usually, however, he put the blame 
elsewhere: “One may undoubtedly explain this as a consequence of the rapidly 
spreading mechanistic conception of nature,” a way of thinking he found 
harder to overcome.
28
29
Whatever the reason, Ostwald initially only wanted to recover and underline 
the importance of Mayer’s “basic idea”, that energy is as real and fundamental 
as matter. Within a few years, though, he was converted to the way of “pure 
energetics” and began to defend in his writings the idea that only energy is 
substantial and real. “The more I reflected on the nature of energy,” Ostwald 
wrote in 1891, “the clearer it became to me that matter is nothing but a 
complex of energy factors.” Given that realization, he concluded that a genuine 
energetics had to do more than treat energy as “a real substance and not just as 
a mathematical abstraction” (1891, 566); it had to acknowledge energy as the 
ultimate substance and the only reality.30
Helm’s Relations Thesis was likely on Ostwald’s mind, therefore, when he 
later reflected on the historical evolution of energetics. After proclaiming that 
his own development of the subject had not only opposed the “sterility of 
unbridled mechanism,” but had also sought to remove energy from “the realm 

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 13
of mathematical abstraction and to view it as the real substance of the world,” 
Ostwald then proceeded to criticize Helm’s initiatives as “a retreat to a position 
even less progressive than Mayer’s” (1926, vol. 2, 157-58).31 For his own part, 
Helm clearly had large reservations about Ostwald’s vision for energetics, but 
he confined them to correspondence.32 He discussed Ostwald’s energetic theory 
in his history, of course [254, 274, 290, 292-93, 312-13, 340-45, 402]. But while 
he acknowledged the formal shortcomings of Ostwald’s proposals, he generally 
ignored them, preferring instead to focus, more positively, on Ostwald’s 
“search for immediately clear principles” [290] in terms of which to express 
the basic relations of energetics. His efforts “to arrive at a convincing 
formulation of these relations - so difficult to grasp in their generality - are 
worthy of the most prominent notice,” Helm wrote. And he added: “In this 
area, if anywhere, it is easy to find fault, but difficult to do better” [341].33
Still, there are many critical passages in Helm’s history that point in 
Ostwald’s direction, even if Ostwald is not mentioned by name. Here is one 
example:
I thus consider it...to be the best thing about energetics that it is capable to a 
much greater degree than the old [mechanical] theories of adapting itself 
directly to our experiences', and I see in the attempts to attribute substantial 
existence to energy a dubious departure from the original clarity of Robert 
Mayer’s views. There exists no absolute; only relations are accessible to our 
knowledge. Whenever the spirit of research has contentedly reclined on the 
sluggard’s bed of any kind of absolute, it has immediately expired there. It 
may be a comfortable dream that our questioning can find rest in atoms, but 
it remains a dream! And it would be no less a dream if we wished to see in 
energy an absolute, instead of only the most striking expression up to now of 
the quantitative relations among the phenomena of nature [401].34
11) Helm’s position on the status of energy was never as definite and 
consistent as Ostwald’s late recollection might suggest. In his writings on 
energetics, Helm vacillates between the ascetic phenomenalism of the Relations 
Thesis and some form of energetic realism, so that his intent in a given passage 
is not always clear. Two conclusions, however, are reasonably secure. First, 
despite his advocacy of the Relations Thesis in 1898, he always spoke of the 
internal (or intrinsic) energy of a system as if it were a substance. More 
precisely, he always attributed to a system, as a real possession, a definite 
internal energy, which was a function of its physical and chemical state.  Early 
on, Helm also seems committed to another idea which I shall call the thesis of 
“real presence”.  The real-presence thesis claims that the internal energy of a 
system can be divided into distinct components (mechanical energies, heat, 
chemical energies, and so on), each of which is physically present in the system. 
Later, however, he rejected as unfounded the idea of real presence, and, in fact, 
argued vigorously against it, insisting that a physical system no more possesses 
a definite amount of kinetic energy than it does of heat or volume energy (1898, 
[337]).
35
36

14
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
So we may perhaps best summarize the praxis of Helm’s history, in contrast 
to his official position, by saying that while he took for granted a substance 
view of internal energy, he opposed the thesis of real presence. That is, he 
treated the internal energy of a system as an undifferentiated “something”, but 
rejected the idea that it can be split up into physically distinct forms. Hence, for 
example, his approval of P.G. Tait’s criticism of Clausius: “We are quite 
ignorant of the condition of energy in bodies generally. We know how much 
goes in, and how much comes out, and we know whether at entrance or exit it is 
in the form of heat or work. But that is all” [172]. Helm did not object in 
principle to Helmholtz’s distinction between “free” and “bound” energy as a 
heuristic device, or to Rankine’s between “actual” and “potential”, or even to 
Clausius’ between heat and internal work; but in 1898 he rejected any realistic 
interpretation of energy components. The appearance of different forms of 
energy is a sign of internal energy in transition; however, such forms are not 
themselves really present in different amounts in the energy content of a body.37
12) Ostwald evidently disagreed, but his own considered position is also 
difficult to reconstruct. From the early 1890s, when he first began to write in 
earnest on energetic theory, he officially subscribed to a view of matter’s 
relation to energy that might be called the “Composition Thesis”. On this view, 
“material objects” (or “bodies” or “physical-chemical systems”) are nothing 
more than energy complexes - spatially со-present and coupled clusters of 
energy. The Composition Thesis was undoubtedly central to Ostwald’s concep­
tion of energetics; in fact, acceptance of it in some form or other constitutes 
much of what he later meant when he spoke of his conversion to “pure 
energetics” (1926, vol. 2, 168-70).  In his more detailed discussions of 
energetic science, however, Ostwald employed a quite different view of matter’s 
relation to energy. Then he casually spoke of an object or system “containing” 
(or “possessing” or “having”) energy of certain kinds in certain amounts - as if 
a system were not the same as, but something in addition to, its energy content. 
In short, he assumed that objects or systems were “energy containers”. When 
he did so, moreover, he also usually just assumed, without comment, that every 
system contains definite amounts of distinct forms of energy (real presence) 
and that in each case the total energy content is given by the sum of the 
amounts of each form (really) present.  This view, into which Ostwald slipped 
whenever he attempted a mathematical development of energetic theory, might 
therefore be called the “Containment Thesis”.
38
39
40
13) Gathering together these brief remarks, I may quickly summarize the 
results of my comparison: In his history of energetics, Helm defends and 
promotes the Relations Thesis. This is his “official position” and the one he 
thinks has evolved, or is evolving, in the history of science. The scientific 
Weltgeist is moving in the direction of energetic phenomenalism. He ignores 
the fact that his own thought on energetics has changed and that he continues 
to regard internal energy as both real and substantial. This looks like a version 
of what I have called the Containment Thesis; and it is, except that Helm, after 

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 15
1895, vigorously opposes the idea of real presence. By contrast, Ostwald 
embraces real presence, even when he denies that he is being metaphysical 
(e.g. 1896a). His “official position” is what I have referred to as the Composi­
tion Thesis. For him, the scientific Weltgeist is moving in the direction of 
energetic realism, that is, toward the recognition that energy is the only 
ultimate substance. He ignores the fact that his own development of energetic 
theory is instead based on the Containment Thesis, in accordance with which 
material systems are at least as real as the energy or energies they contain.
14) In short, Helm and Ostwald were uneasy allies, who disagreed about the 
fundamentals of energetic theory. But they did have a common enemy: Both 
thought that the originality and importance of Mayer’s achievement had not 
been appreciated by his contemporaries because scientists were wedded to the 
mechanical world-view and were reluctant to give it up. Nowhere was this more 
evident, Helm argued, than in the subsequent development of thermodynamics 
and the effort to understand its laws. Here, he lamented, most physicists 
insisted that “the real scientific foundation of thermodynamics had to be 
sought in the mechanics of atoms.” It was as if the laws of thermodynamics 
were taken to be only “rough estimates,” useful for certain purposes, but 
ultimately unsatisfactory because they did not “open up a view into the 
mechanics of the interior of bodies.” Helm agreed that “to someone for whom 
the highest goal of theoretical natural science is the analysis of everything that 
happens into the motion of atoms,” thermodynamics probably seemed to be 
little more than a “bargain basement” theory, since its results were the 
consequences of more basic causes [193-94]. But he resisted that attitude as 
contrary to the real spirit of energetics.
One can be more precise about the nature of Helm’s resistance, and in a way 
that sheds further light on his view of history and his conception of energetics. 
Throughout his study, Helm applauded authors whose work contributed to a 
phenomenological theory of energy; and he criticized those who promoted 
molecular and mechanical theories, who conflated such micro-mechanical 
theories with phenomenological ones, or who valued the former sort of theory 
more than the latter. Mechanical realism was a stage through which history 
had passed (e.g. [193, 325]); but history also revealed the gradual unfolding - as 
his study sought to show - of an energetic phenomenalism. Of Clausius’ 
seminal memoir (Clausius 1850) which defined the science of thermodynamics, 
for example, Helm wrote that it marked “a decisive turning point” in the 
history of energetics:
We have before us here for the first time the foundations of a system of 
theory which, without hypothetically going back to mechanics or even using 
mechanical analogies, can nonetheless make the same claim to uncondi­
tional and comprehensive validity as does mechanics itself. What [Sadi] 
Carnot and Mayer aspired to is here fulfilled. The energetic originality of 
Clausius’ work is revealed in a particularly striking way when we compare it 
with [W.J.M.] Rankine’s, also published in 1850. This work arrives at similar 
results ... but it is based throughout on a mechanical hypothesis: Molecular 

16
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
vortices are conceived and certain mechanical relations among these 
vortices are hypothetically interpreted as heat, others as temperature, in 
order to forge ahead to the results.41
15) This passage is revealing, but also misleading. It gives an extreme 
example of the sort of endeavor Helm opposed. But his appraisal of Clausius’ 
memoir is selective and overstated - he did not really think that Clausius had 
“fulfilled the aspiration of Mayer” (see [193]). Still, the distinction that 
Clausius began to make in his memoir between what we would now call the 
“general” and “special” theories of heat does help to locate what is essential to 
Helm’s point of view. Helm praised Clausius’ phenomenological general theory, 
regarding it as fully energetic in spirit; but he regretted Clausius’ attempts to 
construct a special theory - his attempts to “penetrate the interior of nature” 
and his efforts to provide his general theory with a molecular-mechanical basis 
- regarding them as “deviations” or “departures” (Abwege) from energetics.  
Clausius himself was always very careful to separate his work on thermo­
dynamics from his mechanical interpretations, realizing that the latter were less 
likely to command general assent;  but others, such as Rankine, were perfectly 
willing to incorporate molecules and mechanisms into the very heart of 
thermodynamics. And Clausius believed, in any case, that an explanation of 
the laws of thermodynamics based on molecular mechanics was possible, 
fundamental and needed (e.g. Clausius 1871).
42
43
Helm did not share that point of view,44 and neither did Ostwald. But 
whereas Ostwald generally believed that the “interior of nature” sought by 
mechanical theorists was actually unveiled by a properly conceived energetics, 
Helm’s basic view was that the search for such subtleties was not the proper 
task of science. Given his advocacy of the Relations Thesis, it is therefore not 
surprising that Helm admired phenomenological thermodynamics or that he 
preferred a theory of energy modelled on it. Throughout his history of 
energetics, in fact, he often simply identified the two. While not denying that 
“the mechanical hypothesis” or the “molecular hypothesis” - two ideas he also 
frequently ran together - had sometimes yielded important results,45 he 
vigorously protested the tendency to interpret such hypotheses as more than 
conceptual or heuristic devices. Like Ostwald, moreover, Helm opposed 
attempts to defend realistically construed micro-mechanical conjectures by 
means of “all sorts of artificialities,” and sought to expose the confusion - still 
all too prevalent, in his view - of atomism and mechanism with what was really 
essential to energetics, namely, a pure system of relations.46
Helm found such confusions even in what he apparently regarded as 
legitimate attempts to construct energetics on a mechanical basis (see Part 
VIII). I shall return to these efforts, and his complaints about them, shortly. 
Now, I want to pursue a bit more the thermodynamic approach Helm evidently 
preferred, since adherents of this approach are clearly the “advanced waves” 
whose fitful progress his study mainly seeks to recount. Doing so will shed 
further light on the version of energetics Helm defended and also show how he 
often misinterpreted authors he thought had advanced it.

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 17
16) After Mayer, according to Helm, several continental scientists followed 
the path of a properly conceived energetics;  but the main impetus, in his view, 
came from the American physicist, Josiah Willard Gibbs. Nowhere, he 
thought, had the Relations Thesis found so clear and ardent a proponent:
47
Completely free of [any] bias in favor of the mechanics of atoms, determin­
ing with complete impartiality the strict consequences of the two laws of 
thermodynamics, without any longing glances at and yearning for me­
chanics - thus, following the historical development, the work of Gibbs 
suddenly stands before our gaze. Here the great old idea of Robert Mayer 
has come to life in mathematical formulae, free from all the molecular- 
hypothetical adornment.
Helm can scarcely contain himself. Of Gibbs’s great memoir on hetero­
geneous equilibrium (Gibbs 1876-1878), he exclaimed:
What a book, in which chemical processes are treated without the traditional 
chemical apparatus of atoms, in which theories of elasticity, of capillarity and 
crystallization, and of electromotive force, are set forth without all the usual 
devices of atomistic origin! Naked and pure, the true object of theoretical 
natural science - which is to ascertain the quantitative relations among the 
parameters determing the state of a material system during the changes 
subject to investigation - stands before us! (1898, [194])
Then, after remarking that Gibbs “renders the true content of the founda­
tions of energetics” in the opening lines of his memoir, Helm proceeded to 
describe in some detail how Gibbs carried out “his main task of investigating 
the equilibrium conditions of heterogeneous substances using the tools of 
energetics,” pausing now and then to salute certain of Gibbs’s solutions as 
“very remarkable from the standpoint of energetic methodology”.48
Again, though, Helm has selectively misread the history of science, attempt­
ing to bolster his own conception of energetics by claiming the authority of 
Gibbs for that point of view. In fact, Gibbs’s attitude toward molecular 
hypotheses was actually quite similar to Clausius’.49 Like Clausius, he tried to 
separate the general principles of his thermodynamics, and the consequences 
that could be drawn entirely from them, from special assumptions about the 
molecular constitution of bodies and molecular motions. But, also like 
Clausius, Gibbs never seems to have had doubted that matter was real and 
particulate in structure, and that an adequate physical theory would have to 
take account of this fact.50
17) Also misleading is Helm’s reading of Helmholtz’s later works on energy. 
For nearly a decade after they appeared, Helm complained, Gibbs’s works 
were virtually ignored. “Nor,” he went on, “was the entropy concept energeti­
cally developed or applied at this time in the manner so auspiciously marked 
out by [August] Horstmann. Instead, people still struggled to accomodate the 
alien-appearing concept of entropy under the old hat of the mechanics of 

18
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
atoms”.51 That situation began to change only in the early 1880s, when the 
“standstill of energetics” was followed by a succession of important develop­
ments. The most significant of these were due to Helmholtz who, late in his 
career, again turned to research on energy processes, this time to those 
involved in chemical reactions. That research in physical chemistry resulted in 
a three-part memoir, The Thermodynamics of Chemical Processes (1882-1883), 
which, Helm claimed, “treats the difficulties lying in the concept of entropy in a 
purely energetic manner,” without trying “to reduce it to mechanics or even to 
make it comprehensible through mechanical analogies, as he later did” (1898, 
[222]). To understand how Helm has misconstrued matters, we must look 
briefly at what Helmholtz had done.
In spite of ingenious ad hoc arguments, it had become increasingly clear by 
the late 1870s that heats of reaction did not always allow one to predict the 
direction and extent of chemical reactions, even though they did so much of the 
time. That difficulty led Helmholtz, among others, to ask whether the second 
law of thermodynamics could be adapted to provide a more reliable measure of 
chemical affinity in terms of the maximum work that a reaction can perform. 
His own answer appeared in the first installment of the memoir mentioned 
above, which began by distinguishing between the “free” and “bound” energies 
in chemical reactions. Helmholtz did this to differentiate between freely 
transformable kinds of energy, such as mechanical energy, and heat, the 
transformation of which is subject to limitations.52 From the two laws of 
thermodynamics, he then derived an equation - one of the so-called Gibbs- 
Helmholtz equations - which gave the maximum work for a reversible, 
isothermal process as a function of the free energy, rather than of the heat of 
reaction; expressed the free and bound energies as functions of internal energy, 
absolute temperature and entropy; and showed that it is the free energy which 
determines the direction and extent of a chemical reaction occurring at 
constant temperature and volume.53
Helmholtz’s work immediately drew the attention of physicists and chemists 
interested in the application of thermodynamic principles to chemistry - of, for 
example, Duhem and Henri Le Chatelier in France and Walther Nernst in 
Germany - who refined and extended the theory of free energy and applied it to 
a wider range of situations than Helmholtz himself had. Helm approved of 
these efforts, as he thought they advanced a relation-theoretical conception of 
energetics, but he did not given them his unqualified support (1898, [228-35]). 
One thing that bothered him was the tendency of free-energy theorists to 
interpret free and bound energy as physically on a par with the internal energy 
of a system, rather than as only mathematical functions whose “value lie solely 
in the analytical advantage they provide” [231]. This is the mistake of 
attributing real presence to forms of energy, a mistake Gibbs had not made 
[234], and which explains Helm’s terse dismissal of some remarks Nernst made 
at the Lubeck meeting [232]; also (1895b), 31.
But something deeper also troubled Helm. “Like Helmholtz’s youthful work 
on the conservation of force,” he wrote, “the great investigations with which he 
enriched the ideas of energy in old age are also, in the final analysis, written 

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 19
with a view to conquering an additional domain of application for the principles of 
mechanics. Thus, as in his work of 1847, [Helmholtz] again follows two paths.” 
One path, Helm explained, was to make thermodynamics as secure and useful 
as mechanics; the other attempted to reduce thermodynamics to mechanics, 
“whether through an appropriate mechanical hypothesis for the phenomena of 
heat or through mere mechanical analogy.” But whereas the beginnings of these 
two approaches were “intermingled” in his 1847 work, Helm thought that 
Helmholtz had separated them in the last decades of his life and devoted 
separate essays to each. And he claimed that Helmholtz’s memoirs on the 
thermodynamics of chemical processes were developed in a “purely energetic 
,, 54 
manner .
At first glance, this passage appears to reflect nothing more than a 
recognition in Helmholtz’s writings of the distinction, described above in 
connection with Clausius and Gibbs, between general and special develop­
ments of thermodynamics, with Helm welcoming the former as “purely 
energetic” and rejecting the latter. And, in fact, there is evidence in his history 
that this is the way Helm wanted his discussion to be read [228]. The problem 
with that reading, though, is the same one that infects his interpretations of 
Clausius and of Gibbs: Helm has overlooked - or, rather, simply ignored - the 
broader context in which Helmholtz sought to place the results of his memoir.
One can be more precise here, and in a way that provides another illustration 
of Helm’s selective reading of the history of science. In the first installment of 
his memoir, Helmholtz tried to account for the difference between free and 
bound energy by distinguishing between the kinetic energy of ordered and 
unordered molecular motions - the former allowing for the free transform­
ability of most energy and the latter explaining the limitations associated with 
heat - and he repeated that account in each of the other installments.55 Helm 
knows this, since he quotes in full the passage in which the explicitly molecular 
and mechanical distinction is made! His response is that Helmholtz “concludes 
his derivation of free energy by relapsing into the mechanical hypothesis, which 
elsewhere in his works on the thermodynamics of chemical processes, as has 
already been stressed, he avoids completely” [234]. Helm has his reasons - by 
now familiar ones - for objecting to this “relapse” [235]; but his discussion of it 
concedes that it was internal to the fabric of Helmholtz’s memoirs, that his 
essays were not “purely energetic” in character and were not intended to be.
A plausible explanation for this incongruity, in line with my earlier 
suggestion, is that while Helm approved of the greater part of what Helmholtz 
had written, which developed and applied a phenomenological thermo­
dynamics consonant with the Relations Thesis, he opposed and so ignored the 
part which presupposed a micro-mechanical explanation of that development. 
In his history, Helm evidently preferred a phenomenological approach to 
energetics, and so emphasized the importance of this approach wherever he 
found it - even if involved distorting the real intentions of his “advanced 
waves” in the process. Be aware of this as you read his work.

20
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
18) At the same time, though, Helm did not equally praise everyone who, in 
his view, had contributed to the advance of energetics. I have in mind here 
especially Max Planck. Although Planck generally shared Helm’s phenomen­
ological and thermodynamic orientation and his mistrust of molecular- 
mechanical theories, he was nevertheless a special target for criticism in Helm’s 
history - partly for his terse dismissal of energetics as worthless and partly 
because Helm and Ostwald both regarded him, quite literally, as a traitor. 
Helm’s attitude appears in the following passage from his history. After 
describing Planck’s development and defense of the second law of thermo­
dynamics as the principle of entropy increase, he remarked:
I have recounted here in some detail Planck’s manner of treating the concept 
of entropy, even though to date it has not provided any stimulus to further 
work in this direction. But the difficulties with the entropy concept are so 
formidable that any attempt to master them deserves special notice. At a 
time when it was believed that these difficulties could be eliminated through 
a mechanical interpretation of the concept of entropy, Planck had the 
independence to overcome them in a purely energetic manner. For what 
manner of treatment is more deserving of this name than the plan to derive 
entropy directly from our most universal experiences of the processes of 
nature? Or the attempt to place a new principle alongside - or even in place 
of - the Carnot-Clausius principle of classical thermodynamics, and thereby 
to give expression to the analogy that exists among the forms of energy? To 
be sure, a peculiar irony of historical development has ordained that the 
man who once entered the lists with such a purely energetic program sixteen 
years later denied energetics, with quite unnecessary pathos, in its hour of 
peril. Perhaps energetics remains more faithful to him than he to it.56 
Planck’s position was more complex and nuanced than Helm made it out to 
be.57 As he saw it, Planck had begun his support of energetics in his dissertation 
of 1879, which sought to derive the concept of entropy “more directly from 
experience” than Clausius and tried to generalize the second law of thermo­
dynamics, understood as a relation between heat and mechanical work, to 
energy changes of any sort.58 Papers published in the next half dozen years 
applied this fundamental theory to a variety of physical situations, including 
equilibrium, saturation, and changes of phase. The important insight Planck 
developed in these works was one that had already been exploited by Gibbs, 
namely, the idea that stable equilibrium in a system corresponds to its state of 
maximum entropy (e.g. 1882, [209-10]). He then turned his attention, in the mid- 
1880s, to the emerging field of physical chemistry, where he found additional 
applications for his theory and further confirmation of it. In a series of papers 
collected under the heading, On the Principle of the Increase of Entropy, Planck 
employed his entropy principle to solve problems of chemical affinity, spontane­
ity and equilibrium and, in the final installment of the series, to various 
electrochemical phenomena.59 Throughout his investigations, moreover, he 
avoided recourse to detailed hypotheses about molecular motions and was 
critical of contemporary developments of the kinetic theory of gases.60

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 21
Helm welcomed these writings of Planck’s as energetic in motivation and 
character, as he also did a book-length essay on the principle of the conserva­
tion of energy in which Planck explored the energetic foundations of 
mechanics.61 Not wholeheartedly, to be sure. Helm was critical of Planck’s 
derivation of the entropy principle and of some of his applications of it, 
preferring Gibbs’s approach instead (1898, [236-9, 243]). And he regretted 
Planck’s appeal, in his essay on the energy law, to a principle that divided 
energy into distinct components, each of which was physically present in a 
system [269]. But given the large areas of apparent agreement, Helm evidently 
regarded him as an advocate of energetics, or at least as sympathetic to it.62 He 
must have been genuinely surprised, therefore, by Planck’s written response to 
the Liibeck meeting.63
19) Planck did not take part in the Lubeck debate and had not previously 
commented publicly on energetics. But from the early 1890s, he had shown a 
lively interest in the development of Ostwald’s energetic theory, especially in 
connection with the second law of thermodynamics, which Ostwald did not 
regard as a fundamental law of nature.  Planck, who did, corresponded at 
length with Ostwald on the subject, but with little success.  He also wrote an 
essay on the “essence” of the second law (1893; also 1892), motivated at least in 
part by a desire to have Ostwald understand and appreciate his point of view.  
The essential point, Planck explained, was the irreversibility of natural 
processes, which was embodied in the second law as the principle of increasing 
entropy. Ostwald did not see matters that way: He confined the meaning of the 
second law of thermodynamics to reversible thermal processes, had little 
regard for entropy, and sought to make allegedly more general principles the 
fundamental principles of natural science.  Against mechanical theories of 
any sort, moreover, he repeatedly affirmed the greater clarity and consistency, 
hypothesis-free simplicity, and comprehensive unity of energetics. Planck did 
not agree. Shortly after the contentious Lubeck meeting, he told Ostwald that 
he thought it was “high time” to make his objections public.
64
65
66
67
68
Planck opened his harshly worded essay (1896) by saying that he did not 
intend to “stand up for the mechanical world-view,” since that would require “a 
deep and difficult study.” Instead, he said he would focus on the much simpler 
task of revealing the basic inadequacies of the “new energetics”. To begin with, 
there were large conceptual and mathematical problems - with the notion of 
volume energy, for example, which Planck thought had no physical meaning.69 
He also thought the value of energetics for mechanics had been exaggerated. 
The energeticists believed that they could treat mechanics in a more general 
manner by reducing it to a comprehensive science of energy. In Planck’s view, 
however, traditional mechanical presentations of reversible processes were 
more successful - and certainly much clearer. But his main criticism of the 
energeticists was that they had ignored the fundamental distinction between 
reversible and irreversible processes, and the fact that natural processes are all 
irreversible. So, while energetics pretended to offer a comprehensive world­
view, Planck thought it left the real world out. He faulted energetics for lacking 

22
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
sound foundations and secure methods, for pawning off disguised definitions as 
proofs, and for avoiding the real problems of science by hiding in untestable 
metaphysics. Planck vigorously protested any further development of ener­
getics in the direction it had recently taken, since, he thought, it had produced 
nothing of value. Its only success had been to encourage young scientists to 
engage in “dilettantish speculations, instead of a thorough absorption in the 
study of established masterworks, thereby laying fallow for years a broad and 
fruitful area of theoretical physics”.70
20) Planck’s essay was blunt and unforgiving. I have had to abbreviate its 
accusations, but the last quotation gives the overall tone. Helm was angry and 
deeply offended, as is evident at many places in his history (e.g. [334-40]). He 
replied (1896) that he, at least, was not guilty of the conceptual and 
mathematical errors with which Planck had charged energetics in his sweeping 
condemnation. He said that he did not need to be lectured on the difference 
between exact and inexact differentials, or on the difference between quantities 
that are functions of the state of a system and those that are not; he was a better 
mathematician and physicist than thati He also insisted that he had always 
distinguished sharply between the intrinsic energy of a system and its division, 
for analytical purposes, into different forms. In his view, the expression, pdV, 
did not represent the change in an amount of volume energy really present in a 
system - that would be an unwarranted metaphysical assumption - but only one 
term in the differential of its intrinsic energy, as does dQ, the differential change 
in heat.71
Helm then turned to Planck’s claim that energetics had yielded nothing of 
value, that it had “no positive accomplishments” to its credit. Here he argued 
that Planck had viewed the matter too narrowly. Drawing on a distinction 
similar to one Ostwald had made between “conscious” and “unconscious” 
energetics (1896a, 154-58), Helm insisted that, broadly conceived, energetics 
had in fact brought many successes to “theorists, experimenters, and applied 
scientists,” even if they were often obscured by unnecessary hypotheses. Had 
not Maxwell, Gibbs and Helmholtz successfully employed some of the main 
ideas of energetics, including the Factorization Principle? And “does not a 
method which is so generally widespread deserve to be developed, free from 
alien garb, to be established as an independent method?” In fact, is it not the 
essential task of the “contemporary theorist” to make clear and precise those 
ideas of “general validity” that have been used in unclear and imprecise ways? 
That, Helm wrote, was just what he had tried to accomplish in his own writings 
on energetics (1896, 162, 166). He conceded that the results had not been 
entirely satisfactory from a mathematical point of view (1896, 165), and so he 
appreciated Boltzmann’s criticisms, even if he did not agree with many of them. 
But Planck’s “protest” was another matter. In Helm’s view, it provided neither 
useful criticism nor assistance in addressing the main problems of theoretical 
natural science (1896, 167).
The “alien garb” from which Helm sought to distance energetics was 
realistically-construed molecular-mechanical hypotheses, whose lure, he 

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 23
claimed, even scientists who had advanced the “mechanical direction” in 
energetics found hard to resist. The ideas whose “general validity” he sought 
to clarify and present in a rigorous manner are the ones he develops, as partly 
his own contributions to the evolution of energetics, in Parts VI-VII of his 
history. These have to with the “universal significance” of the energetic 
intensities, a factorization principle that would reveal this properly, and a 
fundamental principle that could include both and also describe the course of 
any energetic change. I shall not attempt to describe those contributions here in 
any detail, for their mathematical development is often complex. In line with 
the intent of this introduction, I instead offer a brief sketch of Helm’s 
reformulation of mechanics, indicate some of Boltzmann’s criticisms of it, 
and then turn to Helm’s discussion - in the last part of his history - of the 
mechanical approach to energetics. This will allow me to round out my general 
account of his view of the history of science and of the place of energetics in 
it.72
21) The basic principle of energetics, in Helm’s view, was what he called the 
“energy principle.” This is not the usual integral law of the conservation of 
energy, which applies only to conservative systems (as its name implies), but an 
allegedly more powerful differential law, which is applicable to any system 
whatever, and of which the usual “energy law” is a consequence (Helm 1890b, 
309). Helm presented a version of his energy principle for conservative 
mechanical processes in his (1890b), a work that sought to reduce mechanics 
to energetics. It was essential to the formal, mathematical development of 
energetics, he thought, to be able to derive from the energy principle the 
differential equations of mechanics, which would include the equations of 
motion for a material point moving freely or under constraints and the 
Lagrangian form of the equations of motion.  In this he thought he had 
succeeded.  Helm intimated in his essay on the energetic foundation of 
mechanics that the energy principle could be extended beyond purely mechan­
ical phenomena to “all physical phenomena” [354]; but he struggled for some 
time to give that extension what he thought was a suitable analytical expres­
sion.  In the report he prepared for the Lubeck meeting, Helm stated his 
general energy principle in the form
73
74
75
1) dE<Y.JdM.
which claims that the total change in energy, £, in an infinitesimal process is 
equal to, or less than, the sum of the products of the intensities, J, and the 
changes in the corresponding capacity factors, M, and where the inequality is 
supposed to describe irreversible processes (1895a, XII; also VII-XI). He 
defended this version of the energy principle at the meeting as the “most 
fundamental formula in energetics,” arguing that it promised to unify natural 
science (1895b, 29).
In his report, and again at the meeting, Helm also defended the Relations 
Thesis. He allowed that the energy principle could be reached in two different 

24
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
ways. The first, or mechanical “way” (Richtung) of energetics “represents all 
natural processes as phenomena of motion” and seeks to reduce the phenom­
ena to an appropriate energetic mechanical principle, such as the energy 
principle for mechanical processes or an equivalent. According to this 
approach, all energy is conceived of as mechanical and all natural processes 
are represented by means of mechanical “pictures” or “models” (Bilder). By 
contrast, the second, or thermodynamic, path to energetics accepts as a given 
the phenomenal diversity of the various forms of energy appearing in the 
energy principle; it affirms, in line with Mayer and Mach, that what matters are 
the quantitative relations among the forms of energy, not the claim that they 
must all be “pictured” as ultimately mechanical. Once the relevant energy 
factors, J and M, have been determined and precisely defined for all the various 
forms of energy, the demand for a unified presentation, or theory, has been 
met. Nothing further is needed (1895a, III-IV; 1895b, 29-30).
Helm clearly favored the thermodynamic approach to energetics, as we have 
seen; but the official summary of the Lubeck discussion has him less sympa­
thetic to a mechanical approach than he was in his written report.76 According 
to the summary, Helm defended the following position in his remarks: While 
not categorically ruling out the attempt to construct “mechanical pictures” of 
natural processes, he regarded such constructions as supererogatory and 
generally misleading, since he thought that the need for them expressed by 
many theorists reflected the deeply entrenched view that mechanical phenom­
ena were somehow more basic or more intelligible. But, like Mach, he also 
regarded this as a prejudice and nothing more:
We owe the steam engine not to the conception of all thermal processes as 
phenomena of motion, but to the formula that expresses certain relations 
between heat and work. Do we, in fact, obtain a deeper knowledge if we then 
conceive of heat as motion? Isn’t velocity an expression for certain 
experiences just as much as temperature? To leave the empirical content of 
each form of energy as it is, instead of importing a mechanical picture - that 
is the realism of modern energetics. The possibility of comprehending the 
different forms of energy in a single picture [Bild] is not thereby excluded, 
but it is not the first and most necessary thing. A quantitative description - a 
theory of natural phenomena - can be accomplished without it (Helm 
1895b, 29; my italics).
The summary does have Helm conceding that efforts to construct mechan­
ical pictures had sometimes been heuristically beneficial in stimulating re­
search; but he then claimed that the detailed development of such pictures had 
always led, sooner or later, to complications which “render their value 
illusory”. Reliance on such constructions was therefore to be discouraged, 
especially since mechanical theorists were inclined to forget the distinction 
between their pictures (Bilder) and realist hypotheses. By contrast, the 
thermodynamic approach to energetics was both more rewarding (in its results) 
and less seductive (in its methodology). From that point of view, what needed 

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 25
fuller investigation were the striking analogies between the various forms of 
energy - especially their common properties of intensity and capacity - and the 
quantitative relations that linked them together (1895b, 29-30; also 1895a, XI- 
XII). Whether this was, in fact, Helm’s attitude at Lubeck is uncertain; it is, 
however, the view - entirely in keeping with the Relations Thesis - that he 
argued in his history.
22) Boltzmann’s general strategy, in his remarks at Lubeck and in writings 
descending from the confrontation there,  was to argue - less stridently than 
Planck, but as forcefully - that the energeticists had greatly exaggerated the 
actual achievements and future promise of their new science: The claims they 
had made for energetics as an accurate, simple, and comprehensive theory of 
nature were, he thought, extravagant and unfounded. There were, of course, 
areas of agreement. Boltzmann readily acknowledged that the energy concept 
held a position of “the highest importance” in natural science and that all 
natural processes were governed by the two laws of thermodynamics. He also 
welcomed exploration of the analogies among the various forms of energy, 
although he did not think them as deep and consequential as the energeticists 
thought them to be. Moreover, he stressed the importance of maintaining a 
clear distinction between empirically established laws and the hypothetical 
“pictures” - whether mechanical or otherwise - devised to “represent” them. 
And he also believed that representations of general laws should be kept “as 
free as possible from hypothetical elements” if they were to serve as secure 
“touchstones” for testing the adequacy of theories.
77
But here agreement ceased. To begin with, Boltzmann thought that the 
energeticists had often violated, in their own writings, the methodological 
positions they professed. In particular, they had imported obscure special 
hypotheses and unwarranted assumptions into their discussions of the various 
forms of energy, the result being a conceptual structure much less satisfactory 
than the precise and clearly stated propositions of classical mechanics and 
thermodynamics.78 Boltzmann conceded that the energeticists had managed to 
“derive” important and well-known results in mechanics and thermodynamics; 
but he generally found those derivations unsatisfactory. Sometimes, in their 
quest for novelty, he thought that the energeticists had simply juggled 
mathematical formulae to obtain, from energetic first principles, results they 
knew in advance; at other times, however, they were guilty of serious 
confusions and mathematical errors.79 Like Planck, moreover, Boltzmann did 
not think that energetic endeavors had given rise to any new discoveries. And, 
again like Planck, he regretted the energetic promise of easy victories for the 
education of younger scientists (1896b, 64). In short, he thought that the 
methods and manner of presentation of energetics had not been able to match 
the accuracy, simplicity, and fertility of more traditional, non-energetic devel­
opments of the different parts of physics.
A more general objection challenged the sufficiency of the narrow descriptive 
goal for natural science that Helm defended and promoted in the Relations 
Thesis. If successful, Boltzmann thought, Helm’s efforts might produce a

26
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
“natural history” of energy, but it would not yield the unified physical theory 
that was the real goal of theoretical natural science. The phenomenal laws of 
energy are “many and varied,” he observed in one place, adding that “a mere 
natural history of all the forms of energy (heat, electricity, magnetism, 
radiation) requires new laws for each kind” (Helm 1895b, 31). Such laws 
certainly had their place, and Boltzmann did not wish to minimize the 
importance of them for a quantitatively precise natural science. But he saw no 
reason to rest content with such isolated descriptive propositions, or with a 
mere catalogue of them. There was, he insisted, no reason to give up the hope 
that many of these laws - perhaps all of them - could eventually be given “a 
clearly arranged representation” by means of a “unifying theoretical picture 
(Bild).” Indeed, he believed that efforts to unify the laws of mechanics and 
thermodynamics had already achieved notable, albeit incomplete, success, so 
that “The cultivation of these pictures (that heat is motion in invisible 
dimensions, and of atomistics generally) is highly important, along with the 
general theory of heat ” To abandon the search for a unified theory, and rest 
content with a catalogue of energy forms, would be tantamount, Boltzmann 
thought, to abandoning the essential goal of theoretical physics.80
In seeking such a theory, a close study of the various forms of energy was not 
to be discouraged. On the contrary, Boltzmann found the analogies between 
the behaviors of different energies developed by Mach, Zeuner, Helm, and 
others to be “very interesting,” and he urged that this line of investigation be 
continued. But he did not think that these analogies were as deep and 
consequential as the energeticists claimed, or that development of them 
militated against the mechanics-based program of research he preferred.81
Finally, Boltzmann was adamant in insisting that even if one were to concede 
- as he himself had - that “the mechanical view of nature is not yet perfect,” 
being neither complete not fully adequate in any area except mechanics, that 
would still not imply that this view should be abandoned and energetics 
adopted in its place, since energetics was much less satisfactory and “much 
farther from a complete development.” He did not mean to suggest that 
additional effort should not be devoted to improving energetic theory; on the 
contrary, Boltzmann said that he welcomed such effort. In the meantime, 
however, energetics had been given sufficient time to mature that its present 
inadequacies should not go unchallenged. They needed to be candidly dis­
closed; and that is what he had sought to do at Lubeck and in his published 
remarks.82
23) No precise record remains of what was said at Lubeck, but much of the 
discussion apparently centered on Helm’s attempt to reconstruct mechanics 
from an energetic point of view (Helm 1895b, 30). Arnold Sommerfeld 
misunderstood the project, thinking that Helm had tried to do the impossible, 
namely, derive the equations of motion of any mechanical system from the law 
of energy conservation alone.  Helm rightly rejected that accusation; but he 
was at least partially responsible for the confusion. Helm expressed his energy 
principle verbally as “Energy remains constant for any possible change,” 
83

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 27
suggesting a variational principle, which is what he intended; but he rendered it 
analytically in mechanics as
2) 
dT = dA,
which seemed to assert no more than the equivalence of an actual differental 
change in kinetic energy (7) and an actual differential work (A) (1890b, 307-08; 
1895a, VII). Others at Lubeck, including Boltzmann, likely agreed with 
Sommerfeld. In his written reply, however, Boltzmann instead argued that 
Helm had managed to derive the equations of motion for mechanical systems 
from his energy principle only because he had ignored, or conflated, the 
essential difference between actual differentials, J, and variations, 8 (1896b, 
40-41; also 1896c, 39 and 1896d, 595). Either that or he had to assume that 
mechanical energies could be separated into physically distinct, independent 
components, and claim that energy is conserved for any possible division.84 
But what justification could there be for making such an assumption, since the 
co-ordinates used to describe mechanical systems may be selected at random? 
Would changing the co-ordinate system also change the energies present? 
(1896b, 45; 1896d, 595) In any case, Boltzmann thought that Helm was only 
able to derive Lagrange’s equations from his energy principle because he knew 
the correct results in advance. Beginning from what appeared to be Helm’s 
assumptions, Boltzmann developed them mathematically in a very reasonable 
manner and obtained different, clearly incorrect equations (1896b, 41-42; cf. 
1898, 65-67).
In his reply, Helm again insisted that he had not tried to derive the equations 
of motion from the “energy law,” but from the “energy principle”; and he again 
explained how that principle was to be understood (1896, 646-47). He 
conceded that he had not been sufficiently careful in developing his ideas 
mathematically, but thought they could easily be reformulated to eliminate 
any errors and lingering confusion.85 The key to Helm’s revised formulation 
was the introduction of a new set of infinitesimal variables, all labelled with the 
subscript cr, to distinguish possible displacements, velocities, forces and en­
ergies (and their components) from actual ones. With this new notation in 
hand, Helm restated the energy principle in mechanics (equation 2) using 
sigma subscripts, and then reworked his earlier derivations, once again 
obtaining all the results he had in his 1890 essay on the energetic foundations 
of mechanics (1896, 649-52).
Boltzmann was not satisfied. He did not think that Helm’s new notation had 
clarified the meaning of the energy principle, interpreted as the proposition 
that “energy remains constant for any possible change.” Sometimes his sigma- 
subscripted quantities were treated like ordinary differentials, sometimes like 
variations. Helm apparently wanted it both ways, and would slide, Boltzmann 
thought, from one interpretation to another as the need arose. Knowing the 
correct results, he was able to manipulate equations to yield them; but that was 
hardly an advance. Consistently interpreted, Helm’s sigma quantities were 
either the differentials of actual displacements, velocities, etc., in which case 
he could not derive the equations he wanted, or they were virtual quantities of 

28
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
the sort normally employed when d’Alembert’s principle is used to derive the 
equations of motion or to determine the generalized forces in Lagrange’s 
equations. In that case, however, Boltzmann saw no reason for preferring 
Helm’s obscure and contrived “energetic” development of mechanics to more 
standard presentations of the subject.86
Boltzmann also had another, more general objection, the gist of which is 
this: Not only had Helm failed to provide a simpler, clearer and more 
comprehensive formulation of the laws of mechanics, but he had not managed 
to avoid “pictorial representations” of mechanical systems and processes. To 
develop his equations, Boltzmann claimed, Helm often had to rely on the 
“theoretical picture” of bodies as consisting of “material points between which 
act forces of attraction and repulsion” - a view he explicitly rejected as one of 
the unwarranted dogmas of mechanistic physics. Boltzmann did think that the 
derivation of many important results in mechanics - Euler’s equations of 
motion for rigid bodies, e.g. - demanded recourse to some form of “atomistic 
picture”; and he also thought that Helm’s “lapse” conflicted with his professed 
phenomenalist methodology.87
24) Helm replied in detail to Boltzmann’s criticisms in his history.  Indeed, 
much of Parts VI-VIII can probably be understood only with them as a 
backdrop. Helm began Part VI, which sought to show the gradual evolution 
of an “energetic way of comprehending mechanics” [256], by insisting, once 
again, that the usual energy law was not a sufficient basis on which to construct 
the science of mechanics.  He then explained the task confronting energetics:
88
89
Robert Mayer founded a new world view. Or, if this expression is thought to 
be too pretentious, he founded a new view of the course of nature.... For 
him, and for energetics, the conservation of energy is not [an accidental 
property of natural processes], but rather the concept starting from which 
natural phenomena, including motion, can be described in a unified manner 
and understood in their fundamental nature. Energetics must therefore go 
beyond the well-established theorem of mechanics that kinetic energy 
always increases by the amount of the work performed - or it must give up 
being a view that encompasses the whole of nature.... Thus the task arises for 
energetics of forming its concepts in such a way that they lead beyond the 
law of the conservation of energy - encompassing the concept of force, as 
well - and thereby permit the equations of motion [of a mechanical system] 
to be derived [261].
This extension had been attempted by several authors, Helm thought, 
including Planck who now spurned energetics.90 It was also attempted in early 
works of his own, which he thought had been misunderstood and unappre­
ciated.91 What he had tried to do in his essay on the energetic foundations of 
mechanics, Helm explained, was to formulate an energy principle, which, in its 
mechanical applications, allowed one to derive the basic equations of 
mechanics, but which did not demand recourse to any ideas other than “the 

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 29
fundamental ideas also required elsewhere in energetics” [265]. This was the 
key point, he stressed. Helm again conceded that his 1890 attempt to 
accomplish this was unsatisfactory from a mathematical point of view, but he 
thought that his post-Lubeck reply to Boltzmann had clarified the matter and 
removed the (merely formal) imperfections [271-72]. To make certain that this 
point was understood, he reproduced all his derivations using the sigma- 
subscripted notation of that reply and then sketched an energetic reformulation 
of mechanics by Neumann - another of Helm’s “advanced waves” - that he 
claimed was quite similar to his own.92 There was nothing odd or problematic 
about his own development, in short, since the “scientific spirit” had already 
turned in that direction.
Helm also thought that Boltzmann’s other criticisms were products of error, 
confusion or misunderstanding. Properly understood, he wrote, energetics did 
not require any “detour over the atomic hypothesis,” even in mechanics [262]. 
Nor did it reify forces or co-ordinate systems, any more than it did material 
points or kinds of energy. Appeal to them “does not violate the pure relatedness 
achievable by means of energetics” or “represent a relapse into the phantasm of 
the absolute” [262, 269]. All that is required, Helm insisted, is that one analyze 
the energy equation for a mechanical process “in the only form in which it is 
physically comprehensible, that is, as requiring the conservation of energy in 
every possible direction” [270]. Moreover, energetics should not be criticized 
for providing only a catalogue of energy forms instead of a unified picture, as 
Boltzmann had done, since the “picture” is secondary and is usually mislead­
ing. The important thing was equations that accurately describe the present 
phenomena and allow one to accurately predict new ones. And, Helm claimed, 
his energy principle did just that [291-94]. The analytical formulation of the 
principle required some reworking, as did its verbal expression. The original 
version, that “Energy remains constant in any possible change” (1890b, 308) 
probably left the impression that it could not distinguish actual changes from 
merely possible ones. So Helm now expressed the energy principle for 
mechanics as follows: “Mechanical energy, taken with respect to any possible 
direction of motion, is invariable f and asserted that this form of his principle 
was “likely the most appropriate form for putting mechanics on an energetic 
foundation” [292, 297].
25) Boltzmann’s response (1898) to Helm’s more detailed and systematic 
presentation was basically the one he had already given. By comparison with 
the mathematical precision of the standard calculus of variations, he found 
Helm’s claim that “In any mechanical system the sum of the potential and 
kinetic energy must remain constant for any possible change” woefully 
imprecise. What, exactly, did Helm mean by this? And why did he think that 
verbal formulation an advance over his earlier one? Certainly, Boltzmann 
thought, Helm’s sigma-subscripted quantities did not illuminate the statement 
mathematically, since it was not clear to him that those quantities could be 
consistently interpreted in a way that would allow Helm to derive the equations 
of motion even for a single material point.

30
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Boltzmann’s criticism may be unjustified, but it is difficult to say, since 
Helm’s sigma notation is itself so difficult to interpret. Most of the time Helm 
was careful to insist that his sigma-subscripted quantities are not actual 
components of displacement, velocity, force or energy.93 Occasionally, how­
ever, he implied that at least some of them were.94 At the same time, he usually 
sought to distinguish them from ordinary variations.95 Occasionally, however, 
he suggested that the two were identical.96 If Helm thought that his sigma- 
subscripted displacements were the same as actual differential displacements, 
then, as Sommerfeld, Boltzmann, and others had pointed out, he is unable to 
derive the correct results, and he knows that. Still, he wants his subscripted 
quantities to be relevant to the actual displacements, so that the energy 
principle yields the actual change in any given situation.97 Boltzmann did not 
understand what Helm could mean; his verbal and analytical statements of the 
energy principle did not clarify matters. If Helm’s quantities were simply 
Lagrangian variations, then what has been gained? To put the essential point 
somewhat differently: If, as was known - and as Helm certainly knew - one 
could derive the equations of motion of a mechanical system from d’Alembert’s 
principle, what advantage did Helm’s puzzling notation provide? The answer, 
of course, is that Helm hoped to base not just mechanics, but all of natural 
science, on the “energy principle,” the mathematical articulation of which gave 
quantitative expression to the Relations Thesis; and the new notation allegedly 
permitted him to do that in a precise manner.98 But Boltzmann saw no reason 
to adopt Helm’s reformulation of mechanics in place of more traditional 
presentations of the subject, since it was neither clearer, simpler, nor more 
comprehensive. “All I see in this representation,” he wrote, “is an abandonment 
of the conceptual precision of classical mechanics for the purpose of artificial 
novelty” (1898, 640).
26) In his history, Helm defended his contributions to the reformulation of 
mechanics and thermodynamics.  He also defended the more general features 
of his energetic theory. In one place, for example, he tried to rebut the charge 
that the Factorization Principle was useless because it did not prescribe a 
unique analysis for a given form of energy, insisting that he sought analyses 
that were “physically most advantageous,” those which “reproduce the [en­
ergetic] relationships evident in natural phenomena.”  In another, he re­
sponded to the accusation that energetics could not be used to promote 
research, since “one can prove with it only what one already knows,” arguing 
that this reproach was “as much and as little justified as it is with respect to any 
theory” and that “this situation only manifests more honestly in the case of 
energetics, with its splendid simplicity, than it does in mechanical theories, 
which are decked out in ‘the bright cloaks’ of many hypotheses” [103]. And he 
defended in many places the heuristic value and unifying intent of the Intensity 
Law as the “cornerstone of modern energetics.”  After providing a table of 
energy forms and their factors, Helm remarked:
99
100
101

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 31
Now, however simple these relations appear, and however illuminating [our] 
survey of the diverse analytical uniformities manifested in the various 
departments of theoretical physics proves itself to be from the standpoint [I 
am recommending] - nonetheless, the displeasure with energetics that gained 
currency in 1895 also led to a kind of charge of vacuity against the intensity 
law, a charge which does not question its correctness, of course, but only its 
value and utility [334].
So what is its value? Helm answers as follows:
[The] intensity law liberates us from the compulsion to interpret everything 
that happens mechanically. Why, then, do we do this, why do we represent a 
phenomenon hypothetically as a process of motion? With no other intention 
than to declare that we describe it accurately in accordance with our 
experience when we regard certain of its parameters as velocities, others as 
forces, and still others as line segments, masses, and so on. But since nothing 
is experienced of the system under consideration other than the entry or exit 
of forms of energy, it thus becomes a matter in every case of forcing the 
intensities and extensities of these forms of energy to conform to the point of 
view that they are mechanical intensities and extensities. At best one thereby 
obtains a graphic, intuitive mechanical picture [Bild]; but what is essentially 
beneficial in the process of thought is only the recognition that certain 
parameters of the system possess those of intensity and others those of 
capacity [335].
This passage defends the Intensity Law and reaffirms the Relations Thesis, 
but it also emphasizes something else: For Helm, as for Mach, there is nothing 
special about mechanical energy. Indeed, mechanics itself has no privileged 
status, and mechanical representation is not the ultimate objective of physical 
theory.102
From the standpoint of the intensity law, the picture of all happening in the 
domain of mechanical processes is [merely] a special case, and it is only 
habituation [that gives primacy of place to mechanical energy].... I [there­
fore] cannot assign to mechanics any other position in physics than belongs, 
for instance, to analytical geometry in geometry in general [335-36]; also 
[256].
27) Still, Helm did think, as I noted earlier, that there were developments 
from the side of mechanics that had promoted the goal of energetics; but, as I 
also noted, his attitude toward this “direction” or “path” (Richtung) was 
hesitant and suspicious.  He introduced it in his history with the following 
remark:
103
Energetics would like to represent our experiences of natural processes as 
immediately as possible, without the aid of invented mechanical devices. The 

32
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
temporal changes in the parameters by means of which the states of a system 
are described are to be stated without hypothetically contriving a mechan­
ical system whose components move as though the parameters of the actual 
system were their co-ordinates.
Nevertheless, mechanics can achieve this goal of energetics in a certain way 
with its own resources and can thereby contest the domain of energetics that 
was developed out of thermodynamics. I was therefore able to organize 
simply the survey of the state of the subject I prepared for the Lubeck 
Convention of German Scientists and Physicians by distinguishing two 
approaches [Richtungen] to energetics, the mechanical and the thermody­
namic.... It is the mechanical direction in energetics to which we must now 
devote our attention ([363]; my emphasis).
The goal to which Helm referred was, of course, the descriptive one 
embodied in the Relations Thesis, and he found evidence to support that thesis 
in the writings of many “mechanical theorists” - in Maxwell and William 
Thomson, in Clausius, Helmholtz and Hertz, to name only some of the most 
prominent advanced waves.104 The key to their success, he thought, was the 
Principle of Analogy discussed in his Lubeck report, which allowed them to 
apply the equations of mechanics to non-mechanical systems.105
Helm commended the Principle of Analogy,106 but was wary of it, an 
attitude which is evident in his discussion of Boltzmann’s use.
I quote these splendid remarks of Boltzmann [from his 1892] in order to 
show that efforts originating in mechanics have the same goal in mind as 
those that grew out of thermodynamics, if only they keep themselves free of 
the inherited delusion that, since all experience is appearance, there is a 
mechanism standing behind sensuous appearance representing the truth, the 
detailed knowledge of which must be the aim of science.
Of course, if someone honestly takes the view that he cares only about a 
mechanical analogy, and does not silently yearn for the realization of this 
analogy, he will be easily persuaded that the thermodynamic approach to 
energetics is the more perfect and consistent one.... Working through [the 
complications of the mechanical approach] naturally appears entirely 
justifiable and necessary when the mechanism is the highest goal to which 
research aspires; but when it is only a matter of a picture [Bild], an analogy, 
which, in any case, remains valid only to a certain degree - what is the point 
of all the trappings? It just seems everywhere to be the fate of mechanical 
hypotheses that they require too many accessories, that they ascribe to the 
systems in question superfluously many properties. It is not surprising that 
some of these properties become the starting points for new formulations of 
questions; but the rest remains as ballast.
The thermodynamic approach to energetics [entirely avoids these problems] 
... [382].

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 33
Helm has several points to make here, all of which are important to an 
understanding of his position: First, mechanical theorists, despite their talk of 
“pictures” and “analogies”, were often still secretly committed to the real 
existence of a noumenal mechanical world, running its course behind the 
phenomenal world of experience and productive of it; second, even in terms 
of pictures and analogies, mechanical theorists were hard-pressed to accurately 
represent the real phenomenal realm - without recourse, that is, to a variety of 
complicating assumptions; and, finally, the thermodynamic approach, which 
he preferred, was better able to describe the phenomena in a manner free from 
dubious hypotheses.
The first claim is never far from the surface of Helm’s discussion, given his 
deep aversion to the mechanical world-view and his concern that advanced 
waves from the mechanical side of energetics continued to be drawn by the 
siren song of mechanistic realism. To justify the second claim, Helm began by 
quickly surveying the problems associated with mechanical representations of 
the second law of thermodynamics. It was one thing to construct mechanical 
analogies (or invent motions) for which functions could be formulated whose 
behavior imitated that of temperature or entropy for reversible processes, but 
the real challenge was to extend such analogies to irreversible ones [394-95]. 
One might attribute irreversibility to the presence of concealed and uncontrol­
lable parameters (or motions), as Helmholtz, among others, had done; but that, 
by itself, left unexplained the predominant unidirectionality of natural pro­
cesses. Why, to put the matter differently, the overwhelming tendency of energy 
to be transformed into unmanageable and unrecoverable forms? [395-96] Here 
one might assume that “in nature there exist far more concealed motions than 
motions which are accessible to our influence,” as Hertz had done, and then 
claim that “a very great probability speaks against the concentration of energy 
precisely in the special and distinct direction leading from the great number of 
concealed motions towards the small number of motions over which we have 
control” [397]. Or one might appeal to statistics in another way, as Boltzmann 
had, by explaining irreversibility in terms of the overwhelming probability of 
mechanical systems to evolve from highly improbable states into more and 
more probable ones, in conjunction with a further assumption about the initial 
state of the world, that it was highly improbable [398-99].
Helm did not ridicule these efforts; on the contrary, he described them fairly, 
if not enthusiastically. Of Ernst Zermelo’s Recurrence Paradox, for example, he 
remarked that it would be “foolish and unjust” to think that with this 
“absurdity” the mechanical world-view had been shown to be a “simple 
failure.” One need only say that the recurrence of a given state, while not 
theoretically impossible, is nonetheless extremely improbable. This is what 
Boltzmann had argued in his reply to Zermelo, and Helm thought that reply 
adequate, given what it sought to accomplish [398].107 Still, it will come as no 
surprise that Helm did not approve of the approach Boltzmann (and Helm­
holtz and Hertz) had taken. “[C]onsidered in the most advantageous light, what 
emerges from these results is only that the mechanical world-view is not simply 
invalid, but can hold its own even before the fact of irreversibility. It is another 

34
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
question [however] whether such results are appropriately pursued and 
whether, consistently carried through, atomism provides an appropriate 
picture of the world.”108 Helm thought not, arguing that the mechanical 
world-view had become less appropriate as it had tried to become more 
comprehensive, because it had, at the same time, become overloaded with ad 
hoc assumptions:
In fact, it seems everywhere to be the inexorable fate of the mechanical 
hypothesis that in order to describe experience it must burden itself with a 
crushing excess load of notions having nothing to do with experience. The 
means so admirably verified for producing a mechanical picture of a small 
area of experience become more and more inappropriate the greater is the 
area of experience that they are to reproduce; and, finally, they fail 
completely.... The mechanical world-view is a universal method of picturing, 
but it does not furnish a universal world picture; its force disappears with its 
extension [400].
28) In the last pages of his history, Helm forcefully restated the global 
conception of energetics he wished to promote [400-4]. He began with some 
Mach-inspired remarks on what it means to say that something exists. Briefly, 
Helm’s idea was that we ascribe existence to “things” in our environment in 
order to “secure for ourselves resting points in the flight of phenomena.” In 
itself our experience yields only relationships: one phenomenon follows or is 
preceded by another. But we regularly employ convenient “catchwords” to fix 
certain of these relationships or to stand for collections of observations. The 
danger lurking in this practice, in Helm’s view, is that scientists are often 
incautious in their use of such catchwords, thinking that because they 
habitually speak of, for example, “atoms” and “forces,” these words signify 
more than just shorthand ways of referring to certain experiences. Atoms have 
no existence in their own right. The word “atom” is a good catchword for 
describing certain phenomena - those of stoichiometry, for example; but for 
many areas of experience, it is awkward and inappropriate. The main point to 
be kept in mind, in any case, is that “For natural science nothing exists but 
scientific observations” [401]. From which Helm affirmed roundly:
I also consider it to be the best thing about energetics that it is capable to a 
much greater degree than the old theories of adapting itself directly to our 
experiences', and I see in the attempts to attribute substantial existence to 
energy a dubious departure from the original clarity of Robert Mayer’s 
views. There exists no absolute; only relations are accessible to our knowledge. 
And whenever the spirit of research has contentedly reclined on the 
sluggard’s bed of any kind of absolute, it has immediately expired there. It 
may be a comfortable dream that our questioning can find rest in atoms, but 
it remains a dream! And it would be no less a dream if we wished to see in 
energy an absolute, instead of only the most striking expression up to now of 
the quantitative relations among the phenomena of nature [401].

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 35
Here is the Relations Thesis boldly stated, this time explicitly joined with a 
form of agnostic phenomenalism.109 In adopting that stance, moreover, Helm 
thought of himself as following directly in the footsteps of Mach and Richard 
Avenarius and of his thermodynamics-based conception of energetics as an 
appropriate scientific articulation of their epistemological views. These views 
had still not achieved the recognition they deserved, he complained. “Other­
wise, the more profound aspects of energetics would not have been so little 
understood at Lubeck” [402]. Too many scientists still clung to favorite 
mechanical hypotheses and rejected, in consequence, the energetics that looked 
beyond them. This was not the first time, of course, that scientists had 
“stubbornly persisted” in traditional modes of thought long after they had 
been shown to be of limited use. That attitude Helm called “scholasticism,” 
after what he regarded as its most influential historical instance, and he insisted 
that “only new ways [of thinking], more directly linked to experience” could 
take one beyond its limits. Energetics, he declared, was such a way.110
That was not to say, Helm cautioned, that energetics itself could not be 
abused, or perverted, in much the way that the methods of mechanics often 
were. “Each of these approaches can be enhanced to luxuriant mysticism and 
exuberant imagery; and each can modestly content itself with desiring to be, 
and to be active in, nothing more than the reproduction of experience” [402]. 
Everything depended on adherence to the Relations Thesis: “What was 
opposed and defended [at Lubeck] about energetics is the method of being able 
to talk about natural processes in a language free of pictures. And for this 
purpose, the method of energetics is unsurpassed; it is not even approximately 
equalled by any of the other approaches” [402].111
Still, one need not go so far as to repudiate altogether the value of such 
pictures. The worth of “theoretical pictures,” whether of mechanical origin or 
otherwise, should be determined by their ability to represent clearly, simply, 
accurately and completely the relations among phenomena. “But,” Helm 
insisted,
when the imagined notion is taken to be the essence of the matter, when it is 
taken to be more valuable than the experiences from which it is invented - 
this is where scholasticism begins. And whoever rejects a completely 
adequate description of the phenomena such as energetics offers, a descrip­
tion not needing the aid of fictions - he has taken his stand with 
scholasticism. It is therefore not the old methods for describing the 
phenomena that I regard as dubious, but rather their excess, that blind faith 
in their general validity and infallibility which encourages all kinds of rescue 
efforts, invents the most peculiar notions, which are of no use for any 
purpose other than such a rescue, and then presents these fictions as the 
truth [403].

36
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
With some of this, at least, the critics of energetics would certainly have 
agreed: They, too, would have rejected the sort of ad hoc rescue efforts that 
Helm condemned. But from his reasonable objection, Helm immediately 
moved to the startling declaration with which he ended his history:
And so, in the controversy kindled in 1895 at Lubeck, [it is not] really a 
question of atomism or of matter continuously filling space, not a matter of 
the inequality sign in thermodynamics, or of the energetic foundations of 
mechanics. All of these are only details. In the final analysis, what is at stake 
are the principles of our knowledge of nature. Against the omnipotence in 
theoretically reproducing our experiences claimed by the mechanical 
method, a youthful method comes forward, permitting us a much more 
direct description of experience, and yet achieving the generality that is 
indispensible to every appropriate theoretical reproduction of nature. If the 
field of energetics is comprehended in this breadth, in which alone justice 
can be done to its efforts, then the decision is very simple: Here scholasticism 
- here energetics - that is the choice! [404].
29) This conclusion is a non-sequitur, of course, as Helm must have realized. 
What it suggests is that passion and residual anger has him trying to extract 
more from his overall argument than he knew it contained. To be precise: The 
last sentence erects a false dichotomy between energetics and mechanical 
theorizing that is not justified by what precedes it. Still more precisely: Helm 
conceded, however reluctantly, that energetics and scholasticism were not the 
only options - that mechanical theories could be (and had been) developed in 
ways that were both genuinely energetic in character and not guilty of 
“scholastic” excesses. What he should claim, in line with his overall argument, 
is that a thermodynamic energetics is better able than a mechanical one “to 
speak about natural processes in a language free of pictures,” since it is capable 
“to a much greater extent than older [mechanical] theories of adapting itself 
directly to our experience.” That, in any case, is the view he defends in the study 
you are holding and the one he thought that the history of science, however 
hesitantly, was moving toward.
NOTES
1 The best brief summary of the story in print is Christa Jungnickel and Russell McCormmach, 
Intellectual Mastery of Nature: Theoretical Physics from Ohm to Einstein, 2 vols. (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1986), vol. 2, 217-27, which is also a superb study of the period 
Helm’s history describes.
2 There is no entry for Helm in the Dictionary of Scientific Biography or its mathematical 
complement; and the Deutsches Biographisches Jahrbuch (Berlin and Leipzig), vol. 5, 430, does 
little more than note his passing in its “Totenliste” for 1923. A useful brief sketch is provided by H.- 
G. Korber in the Neue Deutsche Biographic (Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 1968), Vol. 8, 490-91. I 
have relied mainly on the commemorative address written by Friedrich Wilhelm Emil Naetsch, 
published in the Sitzungsberichte der naturmssenschaftlichen Gesellschaft Isis zu Dresden (1922/ 
1923), XIV-XVII. Naetsch was a mathematician, a colleague, and evidently a close friend (see 
Helm’s generous acknowledgment of Naetsch’s assistance in the preparation of Helm (1910), VI).

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 37
Helm seems to have been a plain, simple man whose widely acknowledged competence, 
dedication, and basic goodness inspired confidence in his students and his colleagues and won for 
him an intimate circle of friends. Naetsch, who movingly describes him in this way, also speaks of 
his “harmonious personality,” happy family life, and passion for science (XVII).
3 The Dresden Technische Hochschule was the result of a reorganization and enlargement of the 
Polytechnicum in 1890. Helm was one of the first (and few) full professors of mathematical physics 
in a German institute of technology. See Paul Forman, John Heilbron and Spencer Weart, “Physics 
circa 1900,” Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 5 (1975), 5-185; 21.
Throughout his career, Helm distinguished “theoretical” (or “analytical”) mechanics from 
“mathematical” physics. For him, as for most continential physicists, the former was essentially a 
part of mathematics, while the latter was a branch of natural science. See Helm (1884) ii-iv; also 
(1887a) 4-12.
4 See Naetsch (note 2), XV; Helm (1898) 164-165, 254-259 and (1908) (on Zeuner); Naetsch, XV 
and Helm (1901) (on Schldmilch); Helm (1898) 101-103, 133-134, 229-231, 248-249 and (1904) 
IV, 59-60, 86—87 (on Neumann).
5 Naetsch emphasizes Helm’s interest in many fields, his “cultivated versatility,” and his “intimate 
familiarity with all the particulars” of any field on which he chose to write. He was always widening 
his horizon, Naetsch says, in search of a secure stance from which to view the “great connections in 
the domain of exact science” (note 2, XVII).
Helm taught a variety of courses in mechanics, mathematical physics, and pure and applied 
mathematics. He soon developed a reputation as a dedicated teacher. His lectures were noteworthy 
for their clarity and careful preparation and showed a fondness for the historical development of 
concepts and principles. See Naetsch, XV-XVI; also Helm (1898) 237-239 and (1904) III—IV.
Helm was encouraged early to work on problems with technical applications. His major 
professors were both concerned with the relations between mathematics and other disciplines - 
mathematical physics in Neumann’s case, and applied {technische) physics in Zeuner’s. The applied 
emphasis of Helm’s history is evident in many places (e.g. 50-56 [on Carnot], 116-120 [on 
Rankine], 164-165 [on Zeuner], 205-209). Helm thought that many physical principles - in 
mechanics, thermodynamics and electricity, for example - had arisen from problems related to 
technology (see (1890a); also (1887a) 7-12, 16-22; (1904) III—IV), and was very critical of theorists 
who, in his view, ignored the applications of theory - the biting criticism of Planck (1898, 117) is 
one example.
6 To my knowledge, there is no definitive list of Helm’s publications; but a reasonably accurate 
one may be obtained from Poggendorffs Biographisch-literarisches Handworterbuch zu den exakten 
Wissenschaften (Leipzig: 1863-1940), vol. 3, 609; vol. 4, 611; and vol. 5-1, 516.
7 Korber, writing in 1968, stresses the contemporary relevance of Helm’s energetic writings (note 
2, 491). Naetsch (the mathematician), writing in 1923, mentions Helm’s work on energetics only in 
passing, saying that it was not well-known, and instead applauds Helm’s (1910), which showed his 
commitment to the importance of applied mathematics (note 2, XVII). In this essay, I do not try to 
estimate the influence of Helm’s writings on energetics or of the energeticists in general.
It is perhaps worth noting, though, that Helm looks quite like the sort of “classical” physicist 
Russell McCormmach describes in his brilliantly revealing pseudo-biography, Night Thoughts of a 
Classical Physicist (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982). Helm wrote on the special 
theory of relativity (1912a), but tried to interpret Einstein’s ideas in terms of the classically accepted 
aether. He also discussed Planck’s quantum hypothesis, but did not think that one had to regard 
“energy as an atomistically constituted substance in order to describe the actual relations” (1913a, 
513-14).
8 Mach’s influence pervades Helm’s writings. A course-grained division would have three over­
lapping areas: First, there is the historical and critical orientation of Mach’s studies. Helm’s (1887a) 
is evidently modelled on Mach’s (1883a), and his (1898) takes much the same approach as Mach’s 
(unfortunately incomplete) (1896a). Second, Helm was attracted to Mach’s methodological and 
epistemological orientation. Here the deep admiration that Helm had for Mach comes out most 
clearly in his elegant and moving (1916); but Helm’s commitment to Mach’s methodology and 
epistemology is clear in much of what he wrote (e.g. 1887a, 1, 76; 1894, 3-4; 1898, 20, 100, 125, 
272). In an emotional defense of the position on energetics he defended in his history, Helm wrote 
that he hoped knowledgeable readers would recognize the extent to which Mach’s ideas permeated 
the whole structure of his work (363). The ideas he had in mind - having to do with an economical, 
relational, and phenomenalist conception of scientific theory - are developed in Mach (1872, 1882, 
1883a, 1886 1894a, 1894b and 1896a). Third, Helm embraced a number of Mach’s favorite ideas - 
e.g. the idea that all energy is essentially mechanical energy as nothing more than historical 
prejudice (1887a, 60, 63, 101; 1898, 22, 188; cf. Mach 1883a, 1892, 1894a), and Mach’s seductive 

38
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
but erroneous comparison of the “fall” of heat through a difference in temperature to the fall of a 
weight through a given height (1898, 259-60; cf; Mach (1871, 1872, 54; 1892; 1896, 218, 328-46). 
Helm’s indebtedness to Mach deserves more detailed attention, but I will not attempt it here. For 
my purposes, Mach (1883a, 472-82) “The Relations of Mechanics to Physics” is especially relevant. 
9 See Helm (1895b) 30-32. Also Helm to his wife, 17 and 19 September 1895, in Ostwald (1961) 
118-120; Ostwald (1926), II, 180-181, 183; Ostwald (1969) 138-139 n2; and Arnold Sommerfeld, 
“Das Werk Boltzmanns,” Wiener Chemiker Zeitung 47 (1944) 25-28; 25.
There seems little doubt that Lfibeck was a big occasion for Helm, the reserved and competent 
but provincial scholar, and its outcome (despite some glosses) a bitter disappointment. See my 
forthcoming essay “Energetics at the Lubeck Naturforscher versammlung” (in Synthese).
10 Helm (1895b) 32; Helm to his wife, 19 September 1895, in Ostwald (1961) 119-120. Also 
Ostwald (1926), II, 183.
11 To give it some context, a bit of the history of Helm’s history is worth noting. A half year or so 
before the meeting, Ostwald had been invited by the publisher Veit & Comp to write a historical 
study of the energy principle. He declined the offer, but apparently recommended Helm. Helm to 
Ostwald, 27 April 1895, in Ostwald (1961) 79-80.
A few months after the meeting, Helm - still upset and concerned that his written reply to 
Boltzmann and Planck might be too strident for publication in the Annalen - wrote to Ostwald to 
ask whether, in the event that it was, it might be published in Ostwald’s Zeitschrift fur physikalische 
Chemie. He also wanted to know how Ostwald himself planned to proceed. Helm to Ostwald, 18 
January 1896, in Ostwald (1961) 81-82.
Ostwald counseled Helm to be as calm and dispassionate as he was trying to be. “In general,” he 
wrote, “polemic does not succeed much in such matters; only positive accomplishments are 
decisive.” In this spirit, Ostwald said, he was exploring the possibility of preparing a multi-volume 
work in which “all of physics was presented energetically, chapter by chapter,” and he wondered 
whether Helm would like to collaborate in that (or some other) joint effort. Ostwald to Helm, 19 
January 1896, in Ostwald (1969) 352.
Helm declined. He replied that he was already at work on his own “historical presentation of 
energetics,” adding that this was due to Ostwald’s initiative (presumably a reference to the Veit & 
Comp, offer), and that all of his available time would be taken up by that project. Helm to Ostwald, 
3 February 1896, in Ostwald (1961) 82-83. Owing to the Lubeck meeting, what might otherwise 
have been little more than a sober explication of energy ideas in physics and chemistry became a 
passionate defense of energetics.
Helm’s project - the history to which this essay serves as an introduction - was completed 
almost exactly two years later; and we may conjecture that it was for Helm, throughout that period, 
something of a consuming passion. He writes at the beginning of his Preface that the wounds he 
suffered at Lubeck had healed, but there are numerous indications in the text that they did not heal 
quickly or easily.
1 
At first glance, Helm’s (1913a) might seem an exception, but it is not. It is essentially a 
descriptive entry on the “theory of energy” to a scientific dictionary of the sort that was popular in 
nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Germany. To be sure, the essay does defend energetics in 
places for the security and generality of its methodology (esp. 508, 527); but it does not contain any 
of the bursts of passion and urgency that punctuate Helm’s history.
13 E.g., 149-152, 202-203, 225-228.
14 Helm to Ostwald, 16 May 1893, in Ostwald (1961) 75. Also Helm to Ostwald, 20 January 1891, 
in Ostwald (1961) 73; and Helm (1894) 4.
15 The phrase is Ostwald’s (1891, 566), but Helm says much the same thing (see 1887a, 2, 71; 
1894, 3).
16 Many years after the Lubeck meeting, in one of his many reflections on how he had been 
affected by it, Ostwald wrote: “For me the experience was an invitation to demonstrate the 
correctness and heuristic usefulness of energetics through practical application of the insights 
achieved by it to the greatest possible number of particular cases. This happened especially in the 
cultivation of electrochemistry, which was thereby given the scientific form and order it has retained 
ever since” (1924, 135). His (1896b) is supposed to detail that discovery.
Ostwald’s massive history is helpful in understanding a major goal of Helm’s. Ostwald’s stated 
objective in this, his first major post-Lubeck work, was to trace the historical evolution of 
electrochemistry as a branch of contemporary physical chemistry. But he also sought to argue that, 
rightly viewed, his study showed the “gradual unfolding” - at first halting and imprecise, but later 
clearer, more self-conscious and confident - of the conception of electrochemistry as a science 
which investigates the relations between electrical energy and chemical energy. He intended his 
work to serve, therefore, as “a detailed case study” of the emergence and development of “an 

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 39
important chapter in the science of energetics” (v-vi). There is also the implication, hinted at in 
several places in Ostwald’s lengthy treatise, that historical studies of other branches of energetics - 
of thermodynamics and thermochemistry, for example - would reveal essentially the same sort of 
development. They would show, that is, that the “scientific spirit” had evolved from primitive 
beginnings, through various setbacks, obstacles and diversions, “to general fruition in the modern 
theory of energy” (4-6, 756, 806, 811, 1146—47; 6).
1 7Mixing his metaphors, Helm also refers to the “infertile ground” onto which energetic “seeds” 
were sown or, later, to the “hostile environment” in which the newly generated seeds had to struggle 
(1898, 36, 54). I’ll stick with the tidal metaphor.
18 
For example, Helm (1898) 20, 52, 99, 124, 151-52, 178, 226-27, 311, 328. The same attitude 
also guides Helm’s (1887a) and (1894).
19 This is the claim that “Every form of energy has the tendency to pass from higher to lower 
intensity” (1898, 276). More precisely, the intensity law, which is modelled on the behavior of heat 
(253-54), says that “energy of a specific form passes from one body to another only when the two bodies 
have different intensities, and it then passes from the higher to the lower intensity (272). It is central to 
Helm’s energetic theory (see 1887a, 51, 58-9, 61-2; 1898, 261, 268, 293-94, 302).
20 Helm (1898), 294-95. The last paragraph of this passage bears a striking resemblance to the 
“Back to Kant” declarations of the 1860s and 1870s, when philosophers and scientists in Germany 
were urging a return to Kant and not merely reporting that it had already occurred. See Frederick 
Gregory, Scientific Materialism in Nineteenth-Century Germany (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1977).
21 
Helm (1898) 101, 145, 210, 322. In one place, in fact, he criticized Planck for failing to 
recognize that there were two approaches to “the unified development of energetic ideas” (292).
22 
Helm (1898) 99-101, 322-324. The quotation is from Helm (1895a) IV.
23 
See Helm (1887a) 15, 23-26; (1898) 18-28; Ostwald (1892a) 363; (1893a) 40-41; (1895a) 162- 
164 [(1904), 231-233]; (1910) 79, 84, 91.
24 In 1898 Helm praised Mayer for “the far-seeing boldness and clarity of [his] reasoning,” for his 
“clarity and logical rigor” (25, 30). In 1887, when he first wrote on energetics, Helm’s evaluation of 
Mayer was less enthusiastic. Then he criticized Mayer’s “philosophical excesses” and his “predelic­
tion for a priori deductive arguments,” accusing him of basing the proof of the conservation of 
energy on “metaphysicsl monism” - by which Helm presumably meant that Mayer had sought to 
make energy the ultimate substance and the only reality (14-15; also 23-27). If that was Helm’s 
view, then he was mistaken; and he was also mistaken when he later described Mayer as if he were a 
proponent of Machian phenomenalism (cf. Mach 1896a, 245-252). I do not attempt here to work 
out these contradictions. In general, Ostwald was more inclined to exaggerated interpretations than 
Helm; but when it came to Mayer, he was both more consistent and more accurate (1887) 13-14 
[(1904), 192-193]; 1891 566; 1893 41-43). A balanced account can be found in Kenneth Caneva, 
Robert Mayer and the Conservation of Energy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993).
25 Helm (1898) 266-76, esp. 276; 291-308, esp. 300-02; also Helm (1887a) 62-65. The 
Factorization Principle claims (1) that every form of energy can be divided into two components, 
so that (2) the analytical separation of any form of energy can be made in terms of two (physically 
significant) factors - an intensity factor and a capacity (or extensity) factor (Helm 1898, 261, 268, 
273, 314). Ostwald (the realist) factored forms of energy (and not just their representation) as E = 
ic, where E is a form of energy, i is its intensity component and c its capacity (1892a, 368; 1893, 44, 
46-47). Helm (the phenomenalist) insisted that it was only the mathematical differential represent­
ing a change in energy that could be factored, and not the energy itself. His version of the 
Factorization Principle is thus dE = JdM, where J is an intensity and M a capacity (extensity) 
(1887a, 61—62; 1898, 266-69, 272). Helm’s opposition to Ostwald’s approach is evident in his 
history (297-98) - although he never mentions Ostwald by name - and in his correspondence, e.g. 
Helm to Ostwald, 16 May 1893, in Ostwald (1961), 75-76. Planck opposed Ostwald (in part) for the 
same reason; see Planck to Ostwald, 20 March 1892 and 27 April 1892, in Ostwald (1961) 41-44.
26 Helm (1898) 296-99, 313-21, 338-53, esp. 341, 347-50. There are, I think, deep connections 
linking Helm’s Relations Thesis to Mach’s anti-metaphysical methodology and epistemology; but, 
as I said earlier, I will not try to develop them here.
27 Helm quoted Clausius’ statements in his history (122). Intended as summaries of the two laws 
of thermodynamics, they originally appeared as the last lines of a memoir Clausius wrote in 1865 
(1865, 400). Helm approved of Mach’s evaluation: “Propositions about the ‘energy of the world," 
‘the entropy of the world" and so on, have no meaning. For such propositions contain applications 
of metrical concepts to an object [the world] which cannot be measured” (Mach 1896, 338). Quoted 
by Helm (125).
-s See Ostwald (1887), 13-14, 20 [(1904), 192-193, 200]; (1891), 566; (1893), 41-43; (1895), 162- 
164, 164-165 [(1904), 231-233, 234-235]; (1926) vol. 2, 154.

40
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
29 Ostwald (1887) 13-14 [(1904), 192-193]; (1891) 566; (1893) 10, 40-44; (1895) 161-162 [(1904), 
229-231]; (1926), vol. 2, 156.
30 See Ostwald (1892a) 375-376, 385; (1893) 4-6; (1895) 155, 158-159,161, 164-165 [(1904) 220­
221, 226-227, 229, 233-235]; (1902) 163-167; (1926) vol. 2, 153-162.
31 
It is worth noting that this is Ostwald’s only public criticism of Helm of which I am aware, and 
that it comes in his autobiography. Otherwise, Ostwald’s assessments were typically effusive. For 
example, Ostwald to Helm, 2 October 1894, in Ostwald (1969) 351; and Ostwald’s review of Helm’s 
(1894), in Zeitschrift furphysikalische Chemie 16 (1896) 190.
32 For example, Helm to Ostwald, 13 May 1893; Helm to Ostwald, 19 May 1895, in Ostwald 
(1961), 75-76, 80-81.
33 Given the substantive disagreements between Helm and Ostwald, this is a noteworthy feature 
of Helm’s history. I conjecture that it is due to the fact that Ostwald had recommended Helm for the 
project and to the suspicion that internecine fights would not promote the cause of energetics. If I 
am correct in the interpretation I offer, it also reflects Helm’s belief that science was moving (or had 
already moved) in the direction that he preferred.
34 Other passages implicitly critical of Ostwald include most of, e.g., 296-298. The passage 
quoted in the text indicates - rather by accident - what Helm had in mind when he spoke of 
energetics as a “relativism” (362). “Relationism” would have been better.
35 Helm (1887a) 50-51, 54, 56-57, 61-62; (1894) 1, 58, 68-70, 113; (1898) 226, 296-299. Helm 
never resolves this tension (or contradiction) in his energetic writings. In 1887 he even makes 
energy an absolute, calling it “the true element of the world” (56-57)!
36 See Helm (1887a) 34-36, 42-44; (1894) 16, 24-28, 42-43, 58, 60, 70-73.
37 Helm (1898) 111-112, 121-122, 187-188, 222-225, 296-299. Helm makes the same point in his 
Lubeck report: “A form of energy...has reality only at the moment in which it passes from one body 
to another. Forms of energy as possessions of a body have only a mathematical meaning” (1895a, 
XII).
38 This section of Ostwald’s autobiography is entitled “The Essence of Energetics”.
39 For example, Ostwald (1892a) 367-368, 371-378, 380; (1893) 16, 30-35, 41-42, 47, 485-90.
40 This tension, which I also do not attempt to resolve, is especially noticeable and acute when 
Ostwald discusses the “substances” involved in chemical reactions (e.g. 1893, 500-17). On the 
composition view, these should just be clusters of energy, but Ostwald treats them as “stoffmengen” 
which possess energy - including chemical energy!
41 Helm (1898) 81; also 108, 111-112.
42 See Helm (1898) 120-126, 342-343. The quotations are from 121, 120. Also (1887a) 53-56.
43 Clausius (1850), (1854) and (1862); in (1867) 16, 19, 21, 108, 206.
44 Helm was aware of Clausius’ deeper intent, but mentions it in his history only in a regretful 
aside (145).
45 For example, the law of mass action and the concept of entropy (138, 120).
46 The authoritative source of this conflation, according to Helm, was Helmholtz’s (1847) memoir 
on the conservation of energy (1898, 145). Helmholtz sought to derive the energy law from two 
beginnings: (1) the impossibility of perpetual motion and (2) the idea that “all actions in nature can 
be reduced to attractive and repulsive forces, whose intensity depends only on the distance between 
the points acting upon one another,” so that “everything that happens is reducible to acceleration­
dependent forces,” i.e., from one version of the mechanical world-view (Helm 1898, 35-42; 35, 41). 
47 Helm (1898) 145^6 (on Zeuner); 131-137, esp. 131, 137 (on Robert Kirchhoff); 141^14, esp. 
143-44 (on August Horstmann; cf. 146).
48 Helm (1898) 146-175; the quotations are from 149, 146, 171.
49 See Gibbs (1902) xii, 165—67; also Lynn P. Wheeler, Josiah Willard Gibbs. The History of a Great 
Mind, 2nd ed. (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1952), 121, 157.
50 For more details on Helm’s (and Ostwald’s) misappropriation of Gibbs, see my “Gibbs and the 
Energeticists,” in No Truth Except in the Details; Essays in Honor of Martin J. Klein, A. J. Kox and 
Daniel M. Siegel, eds. (Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1995), 135-69. 
Helm does not even mention Gibbs’s references to molecules when it would be appropriate to do so, 
e.g. in connection with the “Gibbs paradox” (162-63). He may be forgiven for not knowing that 
Gibbs was then working on statistical mechanics, and had been for some time. One would very 
much like to know what Helm thought of Gibbs’s 1902; but, to my knowledge, he never mentioned 
it.
51 
Helm (1898) 175; also 179. Maxwell praised Gibbs and immediately developed some of his 
ideas. “However, Maxwell’s contemporaries did not give to Gibbs’s works the more profound 
attention they deserved. The spirit of the age was not to be overcome so quickly” (1898, 166). This 
passage shows Helm’s tidal view of history at work, as do others on 168 and 174-75.

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 41
52 Helmholtz (1882-1883) 959-60, 971.
53 Helmholtz (1882-1883), 2, 971-72; also 983-84 and 3, 94-95. (For Helm’s discussion, see his 
(1898) 179-81.) The last two installments of Helmholtz’s memoir showed how the results of his 
basic research could be applied to several problems in thermo- and electrochemistry.
54 Helm (1898), 178-79. The “paths” of Helmholtz’s (1847) have already been mentioned (see note 
46). Helmholtz’s later works along the second path - which Helm preferred, but did not think were 
ultimately satisfactory - probably include Helmholtz (1884a), (1884b), and (1887), as I have already 
indicated.
55 Helmholtz (1882-1883) 971-72; 981; 94-5.
56 Helm (1898) 193; also 223. For evidence that Ostwald, too, regarded Planck as an ally, see 
Ostwald to Planck, 26 June 1893, and 2 July 1893; in Ostwald (1961) 48, 52; and Ostwald (1926) 1, 
187-88. On the “betrayal,” see (1926) 2, 30-31.
57 See J.L. Heilbron, The Dilemmas of an Upright Man: Max Planck as Spokesman for German 
Science (University of California Press: Berkeley, 1986) 9-17; and Thomas S. Kuhn, Black-Body 
Radiation and the Quantum Discontinuity (Oxford University Press: New York, 1978) 22-28.
58 Helm (1898) 98, 189-91; cf. Planck (1879) 1-6, 42.
59 Planck (1887b), (1891a). Helm describes aspects of Planck’s thermochemistry in his history 
(195-204). Also (1894) 41-42.
See, e.g., (1882) 140, 161; (1887b), 197, 202; and (1892b), 372-73. Planck had not given up on 
the mechanical world-view, though. See (1894), (1897) iii-vii.
61 
Planck (1887a). Discussed in Helm (1898) 222-24.
62 Helm does not comment in his history on Planck’s evident mechanistic leanings in his (1887a), 
e.g., 137-38.
63 Others (besides Ostwald) were as well. See Arrhenius to Ostwald, 16 February 1896; in 
Ostwald (1969) 145.
64 Ostwald regarded thermodynamics as essentially the study of the reciprocal transformations of 
heat and mechanical energy, and the laws of thermodynamics as governing such transformations 
(e.g. (1889) 244-252; (1893), 12, 484-86). Entropy has a role in his energetic theory only as the 
capacity factor of heat for isothermal changes ((1892a) 370, 382; (1893) 49-50,485, 490, 494-94. In 
1892 and 1893, Ostwald explained irreversibility and energy dissipation as the fault of radiant 
energy. Because of its peculiar nature, he thought, radiant energy cannot be coupled to energy of 
other forms, and so cannot take part in reciprocal transformations. Its formation is therefore 
unidirectional and always results in a loss of “moveable energy.” See (1892a) 370-71, 384-86; 
(1893) 1006-22.
5 The correspondence extended over more than two years: Ostwald (1961) 34-59; Ostwald (1969) 
345-50. I know of no correspondence between Planck and Helm.
66 Planck to Ostwald, 25 June 1893; in Ostwald (1961) 45-46.
67 See Deltete, “Gibbs and the Energeticists” (note 50), 151-55, 164n68, for a sketch of Ostwald’s 
energetic theory and further references. Also the correspondence between Planck and Ostwald, 
mentioned above (note 65), for Planck’s growing impatience.
68 Planck to Ostwald, 27 December 1895; in Ostwald (1961) 61.
69 Volume energy was one of the forms of “spatial” energy in Ostwald’s inventory of energy 
forms, and for many purposes the most important one (e.g. 1893, 30). He factored it as E = pV, 
where p is pressure and V is volume ((1891) 566; (1892a) 369; (1893) 12-14, 17-18, 24-27, 30-35, 
37-38). Planck argued (rightly) that “volume energy” is not a state function, but rather a path­
dependent quantity. He also argued that any quantity of energy, which in Ostwald’s energetics 
“represents substance par excellence,” must be a function of the physical and chemical state of a 
system; otherwise the principle of energy conservation would be undermined ((1896) 73-75; also 
Planck to Ostwald, 20 March 1892, 22 April 1892, 25 June 1893; in Ostwald (1961) 41-45; and 
(1958) vol. 3, 384-85).
° (1896) 73, 78. The “broad and fruitful” area Planck clearly had in mind was thermodynamics, 
to which he had made important contributions, and its second law, which he thought he had set on 
a proper foundation with his entropy principle.
71 
Helm did not like being lumped, indiscriminately, in Planck’s critique with people - such as 
Ostwald - who treated volume energy and heat as state functions. But he seems guilty of the charge 
in works prior to Lubeck, at least, which sometimes use volume energy as the basis for a discussion 
of other forms of energy (e.g. (1894), 13, 14-18, 20-28, 42-43, 58, 60, 70-73). Helm’s response thus 
involves some backpedaling, and so do other angry references to Planck in his history (e.g., 292­
99).
72 Like Planck, Boltzmann also objected to Helm’s attempt to reformulate thermodynamics from 
an energetic point of view, and for many of the same reasons; the energeticists’ treatment of 

42
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
irreversibility, for example, looms large for both. Some relevant texts are the following: Helm 
(1895a) XII-XIV, (1895b), 30-33; Boltzmann (1896b) 56-62; Helm (1896) 652-56; Boltzmann 
(1896c) 39-40, (1896d) 596-97; Helm (1898) 122-23, 149-54; Boltzmann (1898) 640-41. Since 
Helm’s own preference was for a thermodynamic approach (Richtung) to energetics, it may seem 
incongruent not to sketch Boltzmann’s criticisms of that way of proceeding. Put more globally, 
since Helm evidently thought that the history of science was evolving toward (even if it had not 
already reached) a complete, thermodynamics-based science of energy, why talk about mechanics? 
There are good reasons, I think, for discussing Helm’s mechanics: First, Boltzmann’s criticisms of 
Helm’s thermodynamics (while cogent) are often quite technical; second, Boltzmann did think that 
mechanics should be regarded as the foundation of natural science - in the absence, that is, of a 
coherent, consistent, more comprehensive alternative, which he did not think that energetics yet 
provided; and, finally, a look at Helm’s view of mechanics offers a natural entry into the last Part of 
his history.
73 Helm (1890b) 308. Also Helm to Ostwald, 20 January 1891; in Ostwald (1961) 73: “[A] unified 
construction of natural science on the basis of energy concepts must above all understand how to 
bring the most secure knowledge, namely mechanics, under that point of view.”
74 The derivation for a freely moving point is developed on 307-309, those for time-dependent 
and time-independent constraints on 309-313; Lagrange’s equations are derived on 313-314.
75 
See Helm (1887a) 64-65; (1890b) 307-09; 315; (1894) 42-43, 58-60, 70.
76 
See Helm (1895a) V-VII. I have no satisfactory explanation for the disparity. Perhaps Helm 
tried to be as impartial as possible in his written report and expressed his own preference more 
explicitly only in his oral presentation and the subsequent discussion. But it also seems likely that 
the official summary of the discussion was written by Boltzmann, who expressed the issues in terms 
of his own (but not Helm’s) “picture theory” of scientific theories (see below). Still, given the way 
that Helm characterized what he called the “mechanical direction” in energetics in his report, one 
would have expected him to oppose it. Proponents of mechanical energetics, he wrote, seek to 
construct “a concealed, invented world, which runs its course behind the real [phenomenal] world; 
a picture of the world which seems to be more or less capable of sensuous representation, but which 
has evaporated to a system of equations.” These equations are able to represent something 
“palpable,” namely motions; but the “thermodynamic approach” (Richtung) to energetics did not 
need to fabricate a world of concealed masses behind the motions. Instead, its goal was “to conform 
as directly as possible to experience; and, since it permits not only the forms of energy themselves 
but also certain of their distinguishing factors to enter as fully equal elements of our experience, it 
sees nothing in [energy] equations than the purest expression of quantitative relations” (1895a, III— 
IV).
The last statement is a nice reminder of the phenomenalism expressed by the Relations Thesis; 
but it remains unclear why Helm would have endorsed - even while finding it unsatisfactory - what 
he called the mechanical approach (Richtung) to energetics. The key to the puzzle, I conjecture, is 
the “picture theory” of scientific theories that was proposed and developed by Boltzmann and 
Hertz, but which I cannot begin to do justice to here. (See Andrew Wilson, “Mental Representation 
and Scientific Knowledge: Boltzmann’s Bild Theory of Knowledge in Historical Context,” Physis 
28 (1991) 769-795.) Inspired by his close reading of Maxwell, whom he took to be “as much a 
pioneer in epistemology as in theoretical physics” (1895, 99-100), Boltzmann began as early as 
1890 to speak of scientific theories as “purely inner mental pictures (Bilder)” of phenomena (1890, 
76). This view, which he argued throughout the 1890s and early 1900s (1892, 1896a, 1896b, 1897a, 
1899a, 1899b, 1900, 1902, e.g.), was based on the following core idea: Scientific theories should be 
regarded as conceptual pictures (Bilder), or representations, of the world, rather than as 
phenomenal descriptions or realist hypotheses. According to the “picture theory,” scientific theories 
are neither true nor false. Instead, they are to be judged more or less acceptable, according to their 
empirical adequacy (the extent to which they accurately represent a domain of phenomena), their 
completeness (their ability to represent those phenomena in a comprehensive and unified manner), 
and their simplicity (their relative absence of arbitrary or extraneous features). The aim of science, 
on the picture view, was not to produce theories that are true, but “the most perfect picture 
representing all phenomena in the simplest and most appropriate manner” (1899a, 259; also, 
1896b, 49-50 and 1899b, 215-16).
At some level, difficult to make precise, Helm was attracted to this way of thinking about 
theories - in spite of his advocacy of the more austere, and Machian, Relations Thesis. But he also 
had reservations, some of which are included in the text. The Bild conception of scientific theories - 
both for its promise and its problems - is a rich area for research, which Wilson and others have 
begun to explore, but which I cannot develop in this essay.”

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 43
77 
Helm (1895b) 30-32; Boltzmann (1896a,c,d), (1897a) I, 1-3, 193-94, 211-12; II, 1-6, 111-12; 
(1899b) 205, 216-19.
78 One assumption, already noted above, resolved the internal energy of a gas into components of 
heat and volume energy. Another postulated the conservation of energy in every possible direction 
of change of a mechanical system. Boltzmann regarded the former as simply wrong and the latter as 
an ad hoc maneuver, for which there was no empirical justification. To note: While Boltzmann was 
usually more careful in distinguishing the views of differerent energeticists, he, like Planck, 
sometimes lumped them together.
79 
Volume energy, mentioned above, was one example. In another, Boltzmann argued cogently 
that the inequality in Helm’s energy principle was either redundant or made no sense for 
irreversible processes; indeed, if the infinitesimal changes take place between non-equilibrium 
states, then the energies in the sum cannot even be analyzed into his canonical JdM form (Helm 
1895b, 30; Boltzmann 1896b, 59-61; 1898 67). Helm’s error was to conflate external and internal 
intensities in thermodynamic applications of his principle (1894, 24, 28; 1896, 653, 654-55). He 
corrected the mistake in his history (149-54, esp. 150-51), but in so doing undermined the novelty 
of the energy principle (Boltzmann 1898, 67-68). Another example was Ostwald’s efforts to 
quantitatively describe mechanics and thermodynamics, which Boltzmann showed to be usually 
inadequate, often amounting to no more than bald assertions or disguised definitions (1896b, 43- 
45, 48-56; 1898, 66-67).
80 Boltzmann (1896b) 40-41; (1896c) 39; (1896d) 597; (1897b) 150-51; (1898) 68.
81 
Boltzmann even declared himself a “passionate energeticist” when it came to exploring the 
analogies among the the forms of energy (1896c, 38). For his reservations, see 1896b, 4142, 1896c, 
38-39; 1896d, 598; 1897b, 148-51; 1899b, 101-02.
82 Helm (1895b) 32; Boltzmann (1896b) 42, (1896c) 39, (1896d) 597-98, (1897a) I, 3-4, (1897b) 
151-52, (1899b) 205, 216-19. Also H.A. Lorentz: “With regard to energetics, which he opposed 
quite adamantly, [Boltzmann] did not criticize its efforts to create a new world picture in which the 
transformations of energy are primary; he only thought that the confidence with which its 
advocates proceeded could not - for the time being, at least - be justified by the successes achieved” 
(“Ludwig Boltzmann,” Verhandlungen der deutsche physikalische Gesellschaft 5 (1907): 206-38; 
209).
83 Arnold Sommerfeld, “Das Werk Boltzmanns,” Wiener Chemiker Zeitung 47 (1944) 25-28; 25.
84 
Cf. Helm (1890b) 308 and (1898) 224.
85 Helm’s concessions are grudging; he seems to think that Boltzmann is nitpicking (1896, 647; 
also 649, 650-51). At the Lubeck meeting Helm complained that criticisms of the “energetic 
foundations of mechanics” he had proposed did not address the “physical side of the matter,” but 
only the analytical form, which he said “needed some improvement” (1895b, 31; 1896, 352). He 
lodged the same complaint in his history, after he thought the needed improvements had been made 
(1898, 228). However, Helm’s resistance to formal criticism does not square well with his statement 
to Ostwald that his main concern was the “mathematical treatment of general energetics” (Helm to 
Ostwald, 16 May 1893; in Ostwald (1961), 75). Helm thought he was being accused of 
incompetence, and it shows in Part VI of his history (e.g. 226-28).
86 Boltzmann also used this “lack-of-significant-originality” approach in criticizing Ostwald’s 
(very) fragmentary remarks on mechanics (cf. Ostwald (1893), 25-27 and Boltzmann (1896b), 42- 
45), which were far less sophisticated than Helm’s. Boltzmann’s judgment was harsh: energetic 
formulations “do not in the least advance our insight into the principles of mechanics.” Even when 
correctly stated, “they conform entirely to older formulations,” but are “infelicitously clothefd] in 
the language of energetics” (1896b, 45).
Boltzmann correctly surmised that Helm’s energy principle in mechanics was only d’Alembert’s 
principle - which Helm implicitly conceded (e.g. (1890b), 307, 310; (1895a), VII). He therefore did 
not think that Helm - much less Ostwald - had done anything that was both novel and significant. 
87 Boltzmann (1896b) 45-46; also (1896d) 595-96 and (1898) 65-6.
88 
Helm (1898) 15-16, 222, 226, 235, 248, 268-69, 281, 282-93, 338-40, 357-66.
89 “[E]nergetics is not identical to the proposition in mechanics of the conservation of energy” 214; 
also 211,218, 245-46, 282-83.
90 Planck might now reject his earlier work, but Helm thought it energetic in character. For 
example, Planck did not affirm the Superposition Principle only as a special property of mechanical 
energy, but “accounts for it energetically - however painful that may be for him to admit today - as 
a property characteristic of the behavior of energy in general.” Of course, Helm also thought that 
the mathematical analysis of energy differentials was the essential point, “not the distinction of 
individual kinds of energy, which can be changed independently of one another, as self-sufficient 
components of the intrinsic energy.” Planck might now oppose the latter view and abandon 

44
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
energetics. But aside from the fact that “real presence” is not essential to energetics (indeed, is 
“without foundation”), Helm could not resist pointing out that Planck had subscribed to it himself 
in his own work on the energy law. In any case, the “advance” in that work was not the conception 
of energies as real, physically isolable and independently variable “stuffs,” but Planck’s “mathema­
tical derivation of d’Alembert’s principle from an essentially energetic point of view” (223-25).
91 
See (1898) 226, 228 (on Helm’s 1887a); 227-28 (on Helm’s 1890b).
92 Helm (1898) 212-14, 228-31. For more on Neumann as an advanced wave, see 101-03, 133- 
34, 216, 248-49.
93 (1898) 212-13, 217-18, 227, 228, 229, 237.
94 (1898)236,246,247-48.
95 (1898) 236, 237.
96 (1898)218,220,237.
97 (1898) 236,247-48.
98 (1898)220,246.
99 Boltzmann’s critique of Helm’s energetic reconstruction of thermodynamics has much the 
same contours as his criticisms of Helm’s energetic mechanics. Boltzmann began by thinking that 
Helm was either obviously wrong or obscure in his formulations. When Helm sought to clarify what 
he had done, Boltzmann’s reply was that it was still obscure or that it represented no advance over 
what was already known (see Helm (1895a) XII-XIV, (1895b), 30-33; Boltzmann (1896b) 56-62; 
Helm (1896) 652-56; Boltzmann (1896c) 39^40, (1896d) 596-97; Helm (1898) 122-23, 149-54; 
Boltzmann (1898) 640-41). One can imagine the frustration on both sides: Helm claiming that his 
formulation was both correct and original, even if not expressed in quite the right way; Boltzmann 
arguing that it was either wrong, obscure, or unoriginal.
юсг (1898) 269; also 189, 232. Helm is responding to Boltzmann’s objection (1896b, 56-57) that 
the energeticists had provided no definitions of the intensity and capacity (extensity) factors of 
energy apart from the bare mathematical requirement that their products have the dimensions of 
energy. Boltzmann expressed the view that they were able to make physically useful divisions not 
because the Factorization Principle told them which ones to make, but only because they knew, in 
advance, the right ones to make.
101 (1898) 112-13, 188-89, 272-76; 272. The Intensity Law says that all forms of energy have the 
natural tendency (when not prevented from doing so) of moving from regions (or states) of higher 
intensity to regions (states) of lower intensity (see note 19). A more phenomenalist way of putting 
the matter, in accordance with the Relations Thesis, is to say that energetic intensities (when not 
inhibited) are found to come to equilibrium with those of their surroundings. The model for this 
“law” is the behavior of heat; but the energeticists thought that the model applied to all forms of 
energy. Cf. my essay Gibbs and the Energeticists (note 50) for further discussion and additional 
references.
102 This is the place, I think, where Mach’s influence on Helm needs to be pursued further; but I 
will not attempt that here.
103 Helm never seems to have been quite sure what he meant by the “mechanische Richtung” in 
energetics, how that path was related to the thermodynamic one which he preferred, or how it 
differed from other mechanical approaches which he opposed. In his Lflbeck report, he said that 
proponents of mechanical energetics seek to construct “a concealed, an invented world, which runs 
its course behind the real world; a picture of the world which seems to be more or less capable of 
sensuous representation, but which has evaporated to a system of equations. These equations are 
capable of representing something palpable, however, namely motions” (1895a, III—IV). Helm did 
not explain what he meant here, but almost certainly he was thinking of Lagrangian or 
Hamiltonian descriptions of natural phenomena. Both deal essentially, and not merely incidentally, 
with energy quantities, and so might be regarded as genuinely energetic in character; both posit a 
“concealed [mechanical] world” that runs its course behind the “real [phenomenal] world” given to 
us in observation, but which effectively “evaporates into a system of equations,” since virtually 
nothing is said about the detailed structure of the hidden world; and both are able to represent 
“palpable” motions. Still, belief in a concealed world running its course behind the phenomena is 
evidently contrary to the Relations Thesis, as I’ve already indicated (see note 76). On the other 
hand, Helm rejected, in his report, certain developments of mechanical ideas as not properly 
energetic: “No attention will be paid here to the oldest means of transferring the laws of mechanics 
to all natural phenomena, namely, the mechanical world-view, which conceives of everything that 
happens as motion. For, although numerous recent attempts to explain gravitation and electrical 
and magnetic processes by means of atomic or aether hypotheses have of course taken the energy 
law into consideration, their explanations have their roots, not in this law, but in kinematic ideas. 
These efforts are therefore not to be included in energetics” (IV). It is not clear what efforts Helm is 

HELM’S HISTORY OF ENERGETICS: A READING GUIDE 45
rejecting here, since he does not identify their authors. But, whoever they were, they had 
presumably failed to regard the concept of energy and an energy principle as fundamental, since 
Helm immediately contrasted their way of extending mechanics with “other means that have 
emerged to date for applying the equations of motion of dynamics to all the phenomena of nature” 
- means that had “the development of energy concepts as their essential pre-requisite” (IV-V).
104 Helm (1898) 224-25 (on Maxwell), 342-43 (on Thomson), 342-43 (on Clausius), 326-34 (on 
Helmholtz), 325-26 (on Hertz).
105 Helm (1898) 334. Helm never explicitly stated the Principle of Analogy, but he intended 
roughly the following: Just as the kinetic and potential energies of a purely mechanical system can 
be given as a function of spatial co-ordinates and velocity, so one should be able to formulate 
corresponding functions for other forms of energy (which are equivalent to the mechanical ones) by 
using such parameters as temperature, electric charge, chemical potential, and so on (1895a, IV-V).
106 See e.g. Helm (1898) 333, where Helmholtz is praised for showing “an altogether energetic 
spirit” in his memoirs on cyclic systems. But, as I have already indicated, Helm is able to interpret 
Helmholtz as an energetic phenomenalist, such as he wanted, and as he thought the history of 
science showed, only by glossing over or ignoring what Helmholtz actually intended. See M.J. 
Klein, “Mechanical Explanation at the End of the Nineteenth Century,” Centaurus 17 (1972): 58­
82.
107 Making use of a mathematical theorem proved by Henri Poincare in 1890, Zermelo argued in 
an 1895 paper that no mechanical proof of the second law is possible, since any mechanical system 
left to itself would ultimately return to a configuration arbitrarily close to the one from which it 
began. Sources and a brief discussion of Planck’s reply may be found in Kuhn, Black Body Theory, 
26-29 and Jungnickel and McCormmach, Intellectual Mastery 2: 214-15. A more extended 
discussion of Zermelo’s paper and Boltzmann’s reply to it is contained in M.J. Klein’s masterful 
essay, “The Development of Boltzmann’s Statistical Ideas,” in The Boltzmann Equation: Theory and 
Applications, E.G.D Cohen and W. Thirring eds., Acta Physica Austraica, Suppl, X (Vienna and 
New York: Springer, 1973), 53-106.
108 (18 98) 360. Here, as elsewhere, Helm joins atomism and mechanism as parts of a single 
doctrine (also 362-63). He also seems to forget that he is describing the legitimate, if suspect, 
mechanical approach to energetics - the one that makes use of mechanical analogies and “pictures” 
(Bilder) - and slips into describing it and the mechanical world-view as if they were the same thing.
109 On a less charitable reading, Helm illicitly tries here to draw a metaphysical conclusion (that 
there is no absolute) from an epistemological premise (that all we know are relations among
363-64. This paragraph illustrates the tension, noted earlier, between Helm’s serene 
view of history and the view that still required a call to arms. I am reminded of passages from 
Marx’s writings, but won’t press the comparison.
111 Helm does not mention, in his conclusion, Planck’s charge that the energeticists had ignored 
irreversibility, likely because he thought that - in his own case, at least - it was mistaken. Nor does 
he refer to Boltzmann’s criticisms of his attempts to describe irreversible processes with the energy 
principle, perhaps because he thought he had already rebutted them. This is a large issue, which I 
cannot adequately address here.
phenomena)
110 (1898)

PRIMARY SOURCES1
1 This list of primary sources is not intended to be very detailed, much less complete. Citations in 
the text are all to the German - sometimes to the original organ of publication, but often to a 
convenient reprint. I have tried to provide enough information so that interested readers may 
check my sources, if they so desire; but I sometimes do not give all the information one might 
like in tracking down the originals. When an English translation is to be had, however, I have 
included an available source; but, again, I have not tried to indicate all the places where 
translations may be found.
Boltzmann, Ludwig (1890). “Uber die Bedeutung von Theorien”; rpt. in (1905), 76-80; trans, in 
(1974).
__  (1892). “Uber die Methoden der theoretischen Physik”; rpt. in (1905), 1-10; trans, in (1974).
__  (1895). Ueber Faradays Kraftlinien, ed. L. Boltzmann (Leipzig: W. Englemann).
__  (1896a). Vorlesungen uber Gastheorie. I. Theil. IL Theil (1898) (Leipzig: J. A. Barth). Translated 
as Lectures on Gas Theory by S.G. Brush (Berkeley, CA: U. California Press, 1964).
__  (1896b). “Ein Wort der Mathematik an die Energetik,” Annalen der Physik 57, 39-71.
__  (1896c). “Ein Vortrag uber die Energetik,” Vierteljahresberichte der Wiener Verhandlung zur 
Fdrderung des physikalische und chemische Unterrichts 2, 38-44.
__  (1896d). “Zur Energetik,” Annalen der Physik 58, 595-598; rpt. in (1905), 137-140; trans, in 
(1974).
__  (1897a). Vorlesungen Uber die Principien der Mechanik, I. Theil (Leipzig: LA. Barth). II. Theil 
(1904). Partial trans, in (1974).
__  (1897b). “Uber die Unentbehrlichkeit der Atomistik in der Naturwissenschaft,” Annalen der 
Physik 60, 231-46; rpt. in (1905), 141-157; trans, in (1974).
__  (1897c). “Uber einige meiner weniger bekannten Abhandlungen Uber Gastheorie...’” Verhan- 
dlungen der Gesellschaft deutscher Naturforscher und Arzte\ II, 1, 19-26; rpt. in (1909).
__  (1898). “Zur Energetik,” Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft deutscher Naturforscher und Arzte II, 
1, 65-68; rpt. in (1909), vol. 3, 638-641.
__  (1899a). “Uber die Grundprinzipien und Grundgleichungen der Mechanik”; rpt. in (1905), 
253-307; trans, in (1974).
__  (1899b). “Uber die Entwicklung der Methoden der theoretischen Physik in neuerer Zeit,” 
Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft deutscher Naturforscher und Arzte I, 99-112; rpt. in 1905, 198— 
227; trans, in (1974).
__  (1900). “Uber die Prinzipien der Mechanik”; rpt. in (1905), 308-330; trans, in (1974).
__  (1902). “Uber die Prinzipien der Mechanik”; rpt. in (1905), 330-337; trans, in (1974).
__  (1905). Populare Schriften (Leipzip: J. A. Barth).
__  (1909). Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen, ed. by F. Hasendhrl. 3 vols. (Leipzig: J. A. Barth).
__  (1974). Theoretical Physics and Philosophical Problems: Selected Writings of Ludwig Boltz­
mann, ed. by B. McGuinness and (largely) translated by P. Foulkes (Dordrecht: D. Reidel).
Clausius, Rudolph (1850). “Uber die bewegende Kraft der Warme welche sich daraus fur die 
Warmelehre selbst ableiten lassen”; rpt. in (1867).
— (1854). “Uber eine veranderte Form des zweiten Hauptsatzes der mechanischen Warmethe- 
orie”; rpt. in (1867).
46

PRIMARY SOURCES
47
__  (1862). “Uber die Anwendung des Satzes von der Aequivalenz der Verwandlungen auf die 
innere Arbeit”; rpt. in (1867).
__  (1865). “Uber die verschiedenen fur die Anwendung bequeme Formen der Hauptgleichungen 
der mechanischen Warmetheorie”; rpt. in (1867).
__  (1867). Die mechanische Warmetheorie (Braunschweig: F. Vieweg). Translated as The Mechan­
ical Theory of Heat by T.A. Hirst (London, 1867).
__  (1871). “Uber die Ziiruckfuhrung des zweiten Hauptsatzes der mechanischen Warmetheorie 
auf allgemeine Principien,” Annalen der Physik 142, 433 461.
Gibbs, Josiah Willard (1876-1878). “On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances”; rpt. in The 
Scientific Papers of J. Willard Gibbs, ed. by H.A. Bumstead and R.G. Van Name. 2 vols. (New 
York: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1906).
__  (1902). Elementary Principles of Statistical Mechanics. Developed with Especial Reference to the 
Rational Foundations of Thermodynamics (New Haven: Yale U. Press).
Helm, Georg (1877a). “Bemerkungen zu einer Untersuchung des Hrn. Edlung,” [Experimenteller 
Beweis, dass der galvanische Leitungswiderstand von der Bewegung des Leiters abhangig ist,“ 
Annlen der PhysiY 157 (1876), 645-647], ibid. 319-320.
__  (1877b). “Uber die partielle Summation,” Zeitschriftfiir Mathematik und Physik 22, 400-402.
__  (1878). “Zu Reimann’s Gravitationstheorie,” Zeitschrift fur Mathematik und Physik 23, 261— 
263.
__  (1879). “Elementare Ableitung des Newton’schen Gravitationsgesetzes aus den drei Ke- 
pler’schen Gesetzen,” Archiv fur Mathematik und Physik 63, 326-328.
__  (1880). “Beitrage zur geometrischen Behandlung der Mechanik,” Zeitschrift fiir Mathematik 
und Physik 25, 217-233.
__  (1881). “Ueber die Vermittelung der Fernwirkungen durch den Aether,” Annalen der Physik 
14, 149-176.
__  (1884). Die Elemente der Mechanik und mathematische Physik. Ein Lehr- und Uebungsbuch fiir 
hohere Schulen (Leipzig: B.G. Teubner).
__  (1887a). Die Lehre von der Energie, historisch-kritisch entwickelt. Nebst Beitragen zu einer 
allgemeinen Energetik (Leipzig: A. Felix).
__  (1887b). “Die bishere Versuche, Mathematisch auf volkswirthschaftliche Frage anzuwenden,” 
Sitzungsberichre der naturwissenschaftlichen Gesellschaft zu Dresden, 71-80.
__  (1890a). “Ueber des Einfluss der Technik auf die Ausbildung der mechanischen Prinzipien,” 
Civilingenieur 36, 159-161.
__  (1890b). “Uber die analytische Verwendung des Energieprinzips in der Mechanik,” Zeitschrift 
fiir Mathematik und Physik 35, 307-320.
__  (1892a). “Die Fortpflanzung der Energie durch den Aether,” Annalen der Physik 47, 742-751.
__  (1892b). “Schwankungen der Erdachse,” Sitzungsberichte der naturwissenschaftlichen Ge­
sellschaft Isis zu Dresden, 12-15.
__  (1893). “Die Ansatze zu einer mathematischer Chemie,” Sitzungsberichte der naturwis­
senschaftlichen Gesellschaft ISIS zu Dresden, 13-14.
__  (1894). Grundziige der mathematischen Chemie. Energetik der chemischen Erscheinungen 
(Leipzig: W. Engelmann). Trans, as The Principles of Mathematical Chemistry by J.L.R. Morgan 
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1897).
__  (1895a). “Uberblick uber der derzeitigen Zustand der Energetik,” Beilage zu den Annalen der 
Physik 55, III-XVIII.
__  (1895b). “Uber der derzeitigen Zustand der Energetik,” Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft 
deutscher Naturforscher und Arzte, II, 1, 28-33.
__  (1895c). “Die Hertz’sche Mechanik,” Zeitschrift fiir wissenschatliche Philosophic 11, 101-107.
__  (1896). “Zur Energetik,” Annalen der Physik 57, 646-659.
__  (1898). Die Energetik nach ihrer geschichtlichen Entwicklung (Leipzig: Veit & Comp.).
__  (1899). “Statistische Beobachtungen biologischer Erscheinungen,” Sitzungsberichte der nat­
urwissenschaftlichen Gesellschaft ISIS zu Dresden, 66-67.
__  (1901). “Oskar Schldmilch,” Zeitschrift fiir Mathematik 46, 131-136.
__  (1902). “Die Wahrscheinlichkeitlehre als Theorie der Kollektivbegriffe,” Annalen der Natur- 
philosophie 1, 364-381.

48
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
__  (1904). Die Theorien der Elektrodynamik nach ihrer geschichtlichen Entwicklung (Leipzig: Veit 
& Comp.).
__  (1907a). “Die kollektiven Formen der Energie,” Annalen der Naturphilosophie 6, 366-372.
__  (1907b). “Neuere Ansichten iiber den Wesen der Naturerkenntnis,” Sitsizungsberichte der 
naturwissenschaftlichen Gesellschaft ISIS zu Dresden, 56.
__  (1907c). “Die kollektiven Formen der Energie,” Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft deutscher 
Naturforscher und Arzte, II, 1, 27-29.
__  (1908). “Gustav Anton Zeuner,” Naturwissenschaftliche Rundschau 23, 61-63.
__  (1910). Die Grundlehren der hoherer Mathematik, zum gebrauch bei Anwendungen und Wider- 
holungen zusammengestellt (Leipzig: Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft).
__  (1912a). “Das Relativitatsprinzip in der Atherhypothese,” Physikalische Zeitschrift 13, 171— 
173.
__  (1912b). “Der Sammelbegriff als Grundlage der Wahrscheinlichkeitslehre,” Sitzungsberichte 
der wissenschaften Gesellschaft ISIS zu Dresden, 89-90.
__  (1913a). “Die Energielehre,” in Handworterbuch der Naturwissenschaften (Jena: G. Fischer), 
vol. Ill, pp. 508-527.
__  (1913b). “Die Energetik auberhalb der Naturwissenschaft,” Die Geisteswissenschaften 1, 66- 
67.
__  (1916). “Ernst Mach, dem naturwissenschaftlicher Denker, zum Gedachtniss,” Sitzungsber­
ichte der naturwissenschaftlichen Gesellschaft ISIS zu Dresden: 45-54.
__  (1917). “Die Atherhypothese,” Physikalische Zeitschrift 18, 121-127.
Helmholtz, Hermann (von). (1847). Ueber die Erhaltung der Kraft: Eine physikalische Abhandlung 
(Berlin: G. Reimer); rpt. in (1882-1895); trans, in (1971).
__  (1882-1883). “Die Thermodynamik chemischer Vorgange”; rpt. in (1882-1895), 2, 958-78, 
979-92; 3, 92-114.
__  (1884a). “Studien zur Statik monocyklischer Systeme”; rpt. in (1882-1895), vol. 3.
__  (1884b). “Principien der Statik monocyklischer Systeme”; rpt. in (1882-1895), vol. 3.
__  (1887). “Ueber die physikalische Bedeutung des Princips der kleinsten Wirkung”; rpt. in 
(1882-1895), vol. 3.
__  (1882-1895). Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen von Hermann Helmholtz, 3 vols. (Leipzig: J.A. 
Barth).
__  (1871). Selected Writings of Hermann von Helmholtz, ed. by R. Kahl (Middletown, CT: 
Wesleyan U. Press).
Mach, Ernst (1871). “Eine Bemerkung uber den zweiten Hauptsatz der mechanischen Warmethe- 
orie”; Rpt. in (1872).
__  (1872). Die Geschichte und die Wurzel des Satzes von der Erhaltung der Arbeit (Prague: Calve). 
Translated as History and Root of the Principle of the Conservation of Energy by P.E.B Jourdain 
(La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1911).
__  (1882). “Die okonomisch Natur der physikalischen Forschung”; rpt. in (1896b), 186-213.
__  (1883a). Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwicklung. Historisch-kritisch dargestellt (Leipzig: F.A. 
Brockhaus). 2nd. rev. ed. (Leipzig, 1889). Translated as The Science of Mechanics. A Critical 
and Historical Exposition of Its Principles by T.J. McCormack (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1893)
__  (1883b). “Uber Umbildung und Anpassung im naturwissenschaftlichen Denken”; rpt. in 
(1896b), 214-235.
__  (1886). Beitrage zur Analyze der Empfindungen (Jena: G. Fischer). Translated as Contributions 
to the Analysis of Sensations (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1897).
_ (1892). “Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Carnot’schen Warmegesetzes,” Wiener Berichte 101, 
1589-1613.
__  (1894a). “On the Principle of the Conservation of Energy”; rpt. in (1896b), 137-185.
__  (1894b). “Uber das Princip der Vergleichung in der Physik”; rpt. in (1896b), 236-258.
— (1896a). Die Prinzipien der Wdrmelehre. Historisch-kritisch entwickelt (Leipzig: J.A. Barth). 
Translated as Principles of the Theory of Heat. Historically and Critically Elucidated (Dordrecht: 
D. Reidel, 1986).
__  (1896b). Populdr-wissenschaftiche Vorlesungen (Leipzig: J.A. Barth). Translated as Popular 
Scientific Lectures by T.J. McCormack (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1895).

PRIMARY SOURCES
49
__  (1902). “Die Ahnlichkeit und die Analogie als Leitmotiv der Forschung,” Annalen der 
Naturphilosophie 1, 5-14.
Ostwald, Friedrich Wilhelm (1887). Die Energie und ihre Wandlungen; rpt. in (1904).
__  (1889). Grundriss der allgemeinen Chemie (Leipzig: W. Engelmann).
__  (1891a). “Studien zur Energetik,” Berichte Uber die Verhandlungen der Sachsischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig 43, 271-288. Reprinted in Zeitschrift fur physikalische Chemie 9 
(1892), 563-578.
__  (1892a). “Studien zur Energetik II: Grundlinien in der allgemeinen Energetik,” Berichte Uber 
die Verhandlungen der Sachsischen Akakemie der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig 44, 211-237. 
Reprinted in Zeitschrift furphysikalische Chemie 10 (1892), 363-386.
__  (1892b). Thermodynamische Studien von J. Willard Gibbs, trans. W. Ostwald (Leipzig: W. 
Engelmann).
__  (1893). Lehrbuch der allgemeinen Chemie. Zweite ungearbeite Auflage. II. Band, I. Teil: 
Chemische Energie (Leipzig: W. Engelmann).
__  (1895). “Die Uberwindung des wissenschaftlichen Materalismus,” Verhandlungen der Ge­
sellschaft deutscher Naturforscher und Arzte I, 1: 155-168; rpt. in (1904).
__  (1896a). “Zur Energetik,” Annalen der Physik 58, 154-167.
__  (1896b). Elektrochemie: Ihre Geschichte und ihre Lehre (Leipzig: Veit & Comp.).
__  (1902). Vorlesungen Uber Naturphilophie, gehalten im Sommer 1901 an der Universitat Leipzig 
(Leipzig: Veit & Comp.).
___ (1904). Abhandlungen und Vortrage allgemeinen Inhaltes (1887-1903) (Leipzig: Veit & 
Comp.).
__  (1910). Grosse Manner (Leipzig: Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft).
__  (1924). “Wilhelm Ostwald,” in Philosophie der Gegenwart in Selbstdarstellungen (Leipzig: B.G. 
Teubner), vol. IV, pp. 127-161.
__  (1926). Lebenslinien: Eine Selbstbiographie, 3 vols. (Berlin: Klasing & Co., 1926-1927).
__  (1961). Aus dem wissenschaftlichen Briefwechsel Wilhelm Ostwalds, I. Teil: Briefwechsel mit 
Ludwig Boltzmann, Max Planck, Georg Helm und Josiah Willard Gibbs, H.-G. Korber, ed. 
(Berlin: Akademie-Verlag).
__  (1969). Aus dem wissenschaftlichen Briefwechsel Wilhelm Ostwalds, II. Teil: Briefwechsel mit 
Svante Arrhenius und Jacobus Hendricus van I Hoff, H.-G. Korber, ed. (Berlin: Akademie- 
Verlag).
Planck, Max (1879). Uber den zweiten Hauptsatz der mechanischen Warmetheorie (Munich: Acker­
man); rpt. in (1958), 1, 1-61.
__  (1882). Verdamfen, Schmelzen und Sublimiren,“ Annalen der Physik 15, 446-475; rpt. in 
(1958), 1, 134-63.
__  (1887a). Das Princip der Erhaltung der Energie (Leipzig: Teubner).
__  (1887b). “Uber das Princip der Vermehrung der Entropie”; rpt. in (1958) 1, 196-216, 217-31, 
232-73.
__  (1891a). “Uber das Princip der Vermerung der Entropie,” Annalen der Physik 44, 385-428.
__  (1891b). “Allgemeines zur neueren Entwicklung der Warmetheorie”; rpt. in (1958) 1, 372-81.
__  (1892). “Bemerkungen fiber das Carnot-Clausiussche Princip,” Annalen der Physik 46, 162— 
166.
__  (1893). “Der Kern des Zweiten Hauptsatzes der Warmetheorie,” Zeitschrift fiir physicalische 
und chemische Unterricht 6, 217-221.
__  (1894). “Antrittsrede zur Aufname in die Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin von 28. Juni 
1894,” Sitsungsberichte der preusiche Akademie der Naturwissenschaften zu Berlin (1894), 641— 
644.
__  (1896). “Gegen die neuere Energetik,” Annalen der Physik 57, 72-78.
__  (1897). Vorlesungen Uber Thermodynamik (Leipzig: Metzger & Wittig). Translated as Treatise 
on Thermodynamics by A. Ogg (London, New York and Bombay: Longmans, Green, 1903).
__  (1958). Physikalische Abhandlungen und Vortrage, 3 vols. (Braunschweig: F. Vieweg).

GLOSSARY OF TERMS
“Abweg” - usually as “detour” or “byway”; sometimes as “deviation”, 
“departure” or “wrong way”.
“Begriindung” - usually as “foundation”; sometimes as “founding”, “ground­
ing” or “establishment”.
“beliebig” - usually has the sense of “willkiirlich”, and so is translated as 
“arbitrary”; but sometimes “randomly chosen” is more appropriate.
“Bewegungsgrosse” - usually as “momentum”, but occasionally as “quantity of 
motion”.
“Beziehungstum” - usually as “pure system of relations”, but sometimes as 
“pure relatedness”.
“Bild” - usually as “picture”, as in “die mechanischen Bilder” (“mechanical 
pictures”), or “beurteiltes Bild” (“appropriate picture”), or “in einer bilder- 
freien Sprache” (“in a language free of pictures”); but sometimes as “model”. 
Usually, however, “model” is reserved for “Modell”, as in “ein mechanisches 
Modell” (“a mechanical model”). Helm often seems to equate a “Bild” with an 
analogy, as in “aber wenn es sich nur um ein Bild, ein Analogie handelt” (“but 
when it is only a matter of a picture, an analogy...”); or when the movement of 
energy is spoken of as “ein mechanisches Bild, als ein Analogie” (“[as] a 
mechanical picture, as an analogy”). But I translate “Analogie” as “analogy”, 
rather than as “picture”, as in “mechanischer Analogien” (“mechanical 
analogies”). There are a lot of issues here that I don’t try to resolve (see note 
76 to my “Reading Guide”).
“Dampf” - usually as “vapor”; but sometimes as “steam” when it is clear from 
the context that “Wasserdampf” is being discussed or in phrases such as 
“Dampfmachine” (“steam engine”).
“dynamische Differentialgleichungen” - sometimes as “differential equations 
of dynamics”; often as “equations of motion” when it is clear from the context 
that the phrase is equivalent to “Bewegungsgleichungen”.
“Eigenenergie” - as “intrinsic energy” instead of as “internal energy”. Helm 
follows William Thomson rather than Clausius, whose “innere Energie” would 
more appropriately be translated as “internal energy”.
50

GLOSSARY OF TERMS
51
“Erhaltung der Kraft” - as “conservation of force”, not as “conservation of 
energy”.
“Forschern” - depending on the context, as “researchers”, “scientists” or 
“investigators”.
“galvanische Kette” - as “battery” rather than as “galvanic chain”.
“gegenseitig” - sometimes as “reciprocal”, but usually as “mutual”.
“alles Geschehens” - as “all that happens” or “everything that happens”. 
Ostwald’s “Das Gesetz des Geschehens” is rendered as “The Law of Happen­
ing”, and “Naturgeschehens” as “natural occurrence” or “natural events”, 
depending on the context.
“lebendige Kraft” - as “living force”, not as “kinetic energy”. Occasionally, I 
translate “lebendige Kraft” as “vis viva” when Helm is quoting - or when it is 
clear that he is referring to - texts in which that phrase would have been used.
“mechanische Warmetheorie” - as “mechanical theory of heat” rather than as 
“thermodynamics”.
“nicht-umkehrbar” - as “irreversible” rather than as “non-reversible”.
“Satz” - depending on the context, as “proposition”, “principle”, “theorem”, 
“law” or “thesis”. “Satz” and its variants - such as “Grundsatz”, 
“Fundamentalsatz” and “Hauptsatz” - are problematic in Helm, since he 
appears to use them casually and inconsistently. “Grundsatz” is usually 
translated as “basic principle” and “Fundamentalsatz” as “fundamental 
principle”. “Hauptsatz” is generally reserved in the text for the laws of 
thermodynamics, and so usually gets translated as “law”. But not always. 
Thomson’s “Hauptsatze” in Part III, Section 2, is translated as “basic 
principles” or “propositions”.
“spannung” - usually as “tension”, as in “Spannkraft” (“tensional force”) or 
“Oberflachenspannung” (“surface tension”); but sometimes as “pressure”, as 
in “Dampfspannung” (“vapor pressure”).
“Stoff” - as “substance” or “material”, as in “Warmestoff” (“heat substance”). 
Exceptions to this occur in Part 2, Sections 1 and 4, where Helm quotes from 
Carnot’s writings or refers to works of other early nineteenth-century French 
scientists; there I translate “Warmestoff” as “caloric”.
“Technik” - as “technology” rather than as “technics”. But “Techniker” is 
translated as “applied scientist”, “technische” - sometimes as “technical”, as in 
“technische Ausdriicke” (“technical terms” or “expressions”), but often as 
“applied”, as in “technische Mechanik” (“applied mechanics”).
“unendlich klein” - as “infinitely small” or “infinitesimal”; “verschwindend 
klein” - usually as “infinitesimal”, but sometimes as “negligibly small” or 
“vanishingly small”.
“Veranderung” - usually as “change”, but sometimes as “variation” when it is 

52
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
clear from the context that it is equivalent to the standard variation (“<$’) in 
physics.
“von selbst” - sometimes as “spontaneously”; sometimes as “by itself” (“by 
themselves”) or “in itself’ (“in themselves”).
“Wechselwirkung” - sometimes as “reciprocal action”; usually as “interac­
tion”, as in “Wechselwirkungsenergie” (“interaction energy”).
“Wirkungsgrad” - sometimes as “efficiency”, sometimes as “efficacy”. 
“Wirkungsfunktion” gets translated as “efficacy function” and “Wirkungs- 
fahigkeit” as “effective capacity”.
“zerfallen” - as used by Helm with reference to energy, forms of energy, energy 
equations, forces/influences, actions and motions, this important and recurrent 
word usually has the sense of “to split up” or “to divide/separate into parts, 
components or factors”. I generally use “resolve” or “resolution” (for “Zerfall” 
and “Zerfallung”) when Helm is discussing forces or motions and occasionally 
when he is discussing energy. But, usually, I have energy and energy equations 
being “split up”, or “divided into parts”, or “separated into contributions”, or 
(sometimes) “analyzed into components”, and the like. For example, “die 
kinetische Energie...in drei Energiearten zerfalle” is translated as “the kinetic 
energy...separates into three kinds of energy”. Forms of energy are “analyzed” 
into factors, although I otherwise try to avoid using “analyze” or “analysis” too 
often, since people tend to think of these in the popular sense of “study”, rather 
in the chemical sense of “separating (or separation) into constituents”. For 
similar reasons, I do not translate “zerfallen” as “decompose” (much less as 
“disintegrate”, “break down” or “decay”) or “Zerfallung” as “decomposition”; 
these all sound too organic - as if Helm were referring to a compost bed, 
instead of to energy or an energy equation. Analagous remarks apply 
throughout to “zerlegen” and “Zerlegung”.

DIE ENERGETIK
NACH IHRER GESCHICHTLICHEN ENTWICKELUNG.
Von
Dr. GEORG HELM,
0. PROFESSOR AN DER K. TECHN. HOCHSOHULE ZU DRESDEN.
MIT FIGUREN IM TEXT.
LEIPZIG, 
VERLAG VON VEIT & COMP. 
1898.

PREFACE
Although produced in controversy, this book is not a controversial work. The 
calming effects of the years that have passed since the tumultuous days in 
Lubeck are enough to guarantee that these pages will accurately trace the 
coming and going of opinions, the battle for the truth and the recognition of 
error.
In only a few passages, especially in Part Six, will one be able to tell from the 
tone of the book that it comes out of this struggle. For these I ask the 
indulgence of my reader, since they contain explanations the extent of which 
probably does not correspond either to the difficulty of the questions treated or 
to their influence. But in such passages the extent of treatment could not - as 
was otherwise the case - be made to depend solely on a judgment as to the 
value and significance of the investigations presented. There considerations of 
defense, more than concern for symmetry, had to determine the structure.
Throughout the book, however, there is one dominant idea that permeates 
its pages: Energetics is a unified development of thought, a unique manner of 
seeking a comprehensive knowledge of nature, which unfolds from Robert 
Mayer to the present day. It has exhibited errors and excrescences at all stages 
of its growth; and much that is generally acknowledged today first appeared in 
impure form and needed to be refined. But the eye that follows the historical 
development of energetics will recognize that here, as with all living things, it is 
the same motive forces which give rise both to the valuable addition and to that 
which is rejected. The book will therefore vigorously protest the attempt to 
brand energetics as something useful only in special fields - as its opponents 
have tried to do - and that discounts its status as a unified intellectual 
movement. This production of thought must instead be understood as a whole, 
as a great reorientation in the human understanding of natural events.
Dresden, February 1898
Georg Helm
55

CONTENTS
PART ONE : The Establishment of the First Law
Section One 
: The Conception of Force before Robert Mayer 
65
An Historical Standpoint regarding the Development of Scientific 
Theories. The Concept of Force according to Gehler’s Dictionary.
Point of View of German textbooks.
Section Two 
: Isolated Beginnings of an Energetic Conception 
68
Religion and Speculative Philosophy. Heraclitus, Anaxagoras, 
Empedocles, Democritus, Epicurus, Plato, Lucretius. Euler, 
Hobbes, Locke, Johann Bernoulli.
Section Thr ee: Heat as a Kind of Motion 
70
Heat Substance, Atoms of Heat. Daniel Bernoulli, Rumford, 
Davy, Fresnel. Mohr. Placidus Heinrich, Liebig.
Section Fou r: The Founding of Energetics in Mechanics 
72
Principle of Living Force according to Lagrange. Change of Living 
Force in Collisions. The Idea of Transformation in Applied 
Mechanics. Carnot, Coriolis, Navier, Poncelet. German textbooks. 
Weisback, Redtenbacher.
Section Fiv e: Robert Mayer’s Fundamental Energetic Idea 
76
The essay of 1841. First Publication of 1842. A new Concept of 
Force. Imponderables. “To Transform”. Energetics as Relativism.
Mayer’s Intuition.
Section Six 
: The Equivalence of Energies 
81
Heat is not the Same as Motion, but only Equivalent to it. The 
Equivalent of Heat. Energetics of the Electrophorus. On Cosmology. 
The Forms of Energy. Personality and Life of Robert Mayer.
Section Sev en: Grove and Joule 
86
Grove 1842. Equality of the Forms of Energy, but still the Priority 
of Motion. A Religious Point of View. Joule versus Clapeyron.
Measurements of the Heat Equivalent. Hess 1840. Table of older 
Determinations of the Heat Equivalent.
57

58
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Section Eig ht: Helmholtz’s Point of View 
91
The Perpetuum Mobile Principle. Planck’s Commentary on this 
Principle. Formulations of the Starting Point. Derivation of the 
Conservation Law from Mechanics. Lipschitz’s Objection and 
Helmholtz’s Response. When is the Increment of Work a Total 
Differential? Central Forces. Conflation of two Ways of Viewing 
Things. Conservation of Force.
Section Nin e: Helmholtz’s Applications of Energetics 
99
Interference. Friction and Impact. The Two-Fold Point of View on 
the Relation between Heat and Motion. Electrostatic States.
Batteries. Induction. Planck’s Critique. Vindication of Energetics 
from a Reproach. Reception of Helmholtz’s Work. Energetic 
Requirements of new Hypotheses. Popularization of Science.
PART TWO : Preparation for the Second Law
Section One : Sadi Carnot 
107
Energetic Starting Point. Passage of Heat from higher to lower 
Temperature. Cyclic Process with Vapors. Reversibility. Perpetuum 
Mobile Principle. Cyclic Process with Gases. A Carnot Process.
Heat Equivalent. Life.
Section Two : Clapeyron 
113
Graphical Representations. Analytical Treatment. The 
Temperature Function C. Clapeyron’s Formula.
Section Thr ee: Holtzmann 
117
Rober Mayer’s Standpoint. Clapeyron’s Error. Determination of 
the Temperature Function C. The Heat Equivalent, von Kauffmann.
Section Fou r: Thomson’s Pre-energetic Works 
119
The Absolute Zero Point. Clement and Desormes. Determination 
of the Temperature Function C. Dependence of the Melting Point 
on Pressure; James Thomson’s Cyclic Processes.
PART THR EE: Classical Thermodynamics
Section One : The Founding of Thermodynamics by Clausius 
125
The Unification of Mayer’s and Carnot’s Points of View. The 
Analytical Treatment of the Infinitesimal Cyclic Carnot Process 
for Gases. The Function U. The Differential dQ. Vapors. Analytical 
Application of Carnot’s Principle. Auxiliary Assumptions and the 
Function C. The Specific Heat of Vapors. The Heat Equivalent. 
Energetic Character of Clausius’ Work.

CONTENTS
59
Section Two : The Founding of Thermodynamics by William Thomson 136 
Thomson’s Conversion from Carnot’s Standpoint to Energetics. 
The Principles of Thermodynamics according to Thomson.
Analytical Treatment. Intrinsic Energy. Deviation of Recent 
Energetic Theories based on Carnot’s Point of View from Older 
Ones. The Function C. Efflux of Gas. Thermal Currents. Other 
Applications of Thermodynamics.
Section Thr ee: Preparation for the Concept of Entropy 
145
Thomson’s Knowledge of Dissipation. The Relation between 
Heat and Temperature according to Thomson. The Equivalence 
Value of Transformations according to Clausius. Planck’s Critique 
of this Concept. The Total Differential dQJO.
Section Fou r: The System of Classical Thermodynamics 
153
Intrinsic Energy and the First Law. Carl Neumann’s Explication 
of the Second Law. States of Equilibrium and Reversibility. The 
Entropy Function. Energy and Entropy of the Parts and the Whole.
PART FOU R: New Initiatives, Disputes and Misplaced Efforts
Section One : Doubts about Thermodynamics 
161
Mathematical Difficulties. Reech, Hirn, Tait, Tolver, Preston.
Carnot’s Principle in the Case of Radiation.
Section Two : Rankine 
163
A Molecular-Hypothetical Point of View. The Names “Actual” and 
“Potential”. The Splitting Up of Intrinsic Energy. First Appearance 
of the Entropy Function. Helmholtz’s Judgment. Analysis of Energy 
into Factors. Rankine as Applied Scientist. Applied Mechanics and 
Thermodynamics. Second Law of Thermodynamics.
Section Thr ee: Introduction of Entropy by Clausius 
171
Departures from Thermodynamics occasioned by the Mechanical 
Hypothesis. Disgregation. Energy and Entropy of the World.
Critique of the Universal Laws.
Section Fou r: The English Priority Dispute 
176
Tyndall emphasizes Robert Mayer. Joule’s Claims. Good Words. 
Colding.

60
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
PART FIVE: The Energetic Treatment of Chemistry
Section One : Kirchhoff 
181
Introduction of a new Variable. Application of Intrinsic Energy. 
Kirchhoff’s Fundamental Formulae. Kirchhoff’s Cyclic Processes.
Vapor Pressure over Ice and over Water. Helmholtz’s Application 
of Concentration Chains. Dependence of Heat of Reaction on 
Reaction Temperature.
Section Two : Beginnings of Thermochemistry 
187
Hess, Julius Thomson. Influence of the Molecular Hypothesis.
Schroder van der Kolk. Berthelot. Horstmann. Application of 
Clapeyron’s Formula. Dissociation. Obstruction of Progress 
by Atomistic Views.
Section Thr ee: Main Features of Gibbsian Thermochemistry 
192
Liberation from the Molecular Hypothesis. Earlier Conflation of 
the Molecular Hypothesis and Thermodynamics. Mathematical 
Method. Gibbs’s first Conception of the Laws of Thermodynamics. 
Connection with the Formulae of Clausius. Isolated Systems.
Nature of Reversible Change. The Second Conception of the Laws. 
Example of Heat Transfer.
Section Fou r: The Gibbs Functions 
202
Phases. Intrinsic Potentials. Example for Homogeneous Bodies. 
Intensity Property of the Intrinsic Potential. Example of Osmosis. 
Massieu’s Function Fand Gibbs’s Characteristic Functions. The 
Fundamental Equation. Energy and Entropy of the Whole and the 
Parts.
Section Fiv e: The Phase Rule and Geometrical Methods 
211
The Phase Rule. Two-Dimensional Diagrams. The Gibbsian V-S-E 
Surface. The Two-fold Corresponding 0 - P - П Surface.
Section Six : The Measurement of Chemical Intensity 
215
Chemical Intensity and Gravity. The Splitting Up of the Fundamental 
Formula. Second Solution to the Problem. Third Treatment.
Chemical Intensity and Electrical Potential Difference.
Section Sev en: Helmholtz’s Thermochemical Works 
222
Helmholtz’s Influence. Gibbs’s Study of the Galvanic Cell.
Helmholtz’s Theory of the Galvanic Cell. Helmholtz’s Endeavor to 
extend the Methods of Mechanics. Free Energy.

CONTENTS
61
Section Eig ht: Further Development of the Theory of Free Energy 228 
Duhem. Robert von Helmholtz’s Summary. Nernst’s Standpoint.
Le Chatelier’s Energetics. The Analytical Use of Free Energy: 
Gibbs’s Point of View. Unjustified Influence of the Molecular 
Hypothesis.
Section Nin e: Planck’s Treatment of the Concept of Entropy 
235
Connection with Horstmann’s Works. The Preference of Nature. 
Entropy as the Measure of the Preference. Entropy of a Gas;
of an Arbitrary Substance. Evaluation of Planck’s Point of View.
Section Ten: Planck’s Thermochemistry 
241
The Principle of Entropy Increase in the Case of Chemical Processes. 
Gibbs’s more rigorous Treatment of the Problem. Planck’s Derivation 
of the Generalized Clapeyron Formula. Chemical Reactions in Gas 
Mixtures. Concentration. Dilute Solutions. Number of Components. 
Properties of the Concentration Products. Changes in Aggregation of 
Dilute Solutions.
PART SIX: The Energetic Foundation of Mechanics
Section One : The Development of Energetics in its Different Fields of 
Application 
253
Electricity. Physiology. Philosophy and Political-Economic Theory. 
Ostwald’s System of Measurement. Thermo-technology. Efficiency of 
a Machine. Value of Energetics for Evaluating Motors.
Section Two : Energy Law and Energy Principle 
256
The Energetic Principles of Mechanics. The Differential Equations 
of Mechanics in Relation to the Energy Law and Variational 
Principles. The Energy Law with one Degree of Freedom and the 
Reduction of Problems of Equilibrium to this Case. Energetics is not 
Identical to the Law of the Conservation of Energy. Boltzmann’s 
Objection regarding Material Points. Internal Forces. The Absolute 
System of Coordinates in the Relativism of Energetics. Prominence of 
the Principle of Virtual Displacements. Energy Law and Energy 
Principle.
Section Thr ee: The Energetic Foundations of Mechanics in Poncelet, 
Maxwell, Planck, Helm 
266
Poncelet’s Founding by Means of Impulse. Maxwell. Planck’s 
Superposition and the Resolution of the Conservation Law with 
Respect to Three Directions. Mathematical Equivalence of this 
Treatment with the Contemporaneous One of Helm. Critique and 
Justification of Helm’s Work of 1890. Gruner 1897. Carl Neumann’s 
Presentation of the New Principle. General Coordinates.

62
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Section Fou r: Energetic Treatment of the Concept of Force 
278
Geometrical and Mechanical Dependencies: The Nature of Force.
Work and the Resolution of Force. The Parallelogram of Forces. 
The Equivalence of Action and Reaction. Restrictions on Motion 
Explicitly Containing Time.
Section Fiv e: The Energetic Treatment of Mechanics 
283
Union of the Energy Principle with Galilean-Newtonian Mechanics. 
Treatment of Fluid and Elastic Bodies.
Section Six : Ostwald’s Energetic Principles 
290
The Principle of the Exceptional Case. Maximum and Singularity.
The Energy Principle Distinguishes the Actual Motion from Merely 
Possible Ones. Ostwald’s Maximum Principle. Carl Neumann’s 
Formulation and Proof of this Principle. An older Form of the 
Principle following Thomson and Tait.
PART SEVEN: Energy Factors
Section One : Zeuner’s Analogy between Heat and the Work of Gravity 299 
The Forms of Energy. Peculiarity of Heat. Zeuner’s Analogy.
Analogy for Irreversible Processes. Degree of Efficacy.
Section Two : Other Analogies Among the Forms of Energy 
305
Mach. Lippmann. Maxwell and von Oettingen. Popper’s Ball 
Machine. Popper’s Product Representation.
Section Thr ee: Intensity and Extensity 
311
The Development of the Differential of Intrinsic Energy into 
Energetic Normal Form. Mathematical Reasons for Other Possible 
Developments. Duhem’s Development. Properties of the Intensities 
and Extensities. Gibbs’s Proof of the Mutual Dependence of these 
Properties.
Section Fou r: The Mechanical Forms of Energy 
321
Forces Derivable from a Potential. What is Electricity? Kinetic 
Energy. Galileo’s Conception of Velocity as Intensity. Cyclic Carnot 
Processes with Arbitrary Forms of Energy. Forms of Mechanical 
Energy. Interaction Energy. Resolution with respect to Three 
Perpendicular Directions. Popper’s and Ostwald’s Representation of 
Kinetic Energy. Monocycles. The Integrating Denominator.
Section Fiv e: Conclusion of the Survey of the Forms of Energy 
330
Surface Energy. Different Representations of the same Form of 
Energy. Radiative and Electromagnetic Energy. Ebert’s Formulation 
of the Intensity and Capacity Factors. Review of the Forms of Energy.

CONTENTS
63
Aversions to the Energy Factors. Mechanical Rendering of the 
Energy Factors. Approach of Energetics to Elementary Questions. 
Splitting Up of the Energy Equation. Intrinsic Energy and the Forms 
of Energy.
Section Six : Ostwald’s Treatment of the Energy Factors. 
340
The Generalized Law of Intensity. The Compensation of Intensities.
Law of Happening. Doubts. The Universal Character of the 
Intensities. The Perpetuum Mobile of the Second Kind.
Section Sev en: Special Studies of the Energy Factors of Heat 
345
A Theorem concerning Differential Expressions. The Integrating 
Denominator of the Heat Differential according to Zeuner, 
Helmholtz, Budde. von Oettingen’s Adiabats. Pfaundler’s Image 
for Dissipation. Wald’s Point of View.
Section Eig ht: Relations between Intensity and Extensity 
354
Wronsky, Dressel. Wiedeburg’s new Conception. The Inequality 
of Clausius. Resistance. The New Entropy Function. Relations 
between the Two Concepts of Entropy. Delay of Energy Transfer.
PART EIGHT: The Mechanical Approach to Energetics and 
Mechanical Pictures
Section One : The Differential Equations of Lagrange 
363
The Kinetic Potential. Maxwell. Cyclic Coordinates. Examples 
from Helmholtz: Electrodynamics, Thermodynamics, Theory of 
the Gyroscope. Concealed Motion. Relations between Forces and 
Parameters. The Principle of Analogy. J. J. Thomson. The Dispersion 
Function.
Section Two : Mechanical Pictures 
380
Boltzmann. Comparison of the Thermodynamic and Mechanical 
Approaches to Energetics. Hypotheses of Clausius and William 
Thomson. Duhem’s Energetic Treatment of Viscosity Phenomena.
Section Thr ee: The Migration of Energy 
388
Hertz, Poynting. Objections. Lodge and Foeppl. Wilhelm Wien.
Section Four: The Limits of Description by means of Mechanical Pictures 394 
Difficulty of Picturing Irreversibility by means of Conservative 
Systems. Further Difficulty of Picturing Dissipation. Loschmidt, 
Boltzmann. Poincare, Zermelo. Limits of the Pictorial Method. Do 
Atoms Exist? Standpoint of Relativism. Atoms and Differential 
Equations. Approaches to the Description of Nature. Energetics as 
the Guiding Idea for All Scientific Approaches.

PART ONE: THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FIRST LAW
Section One:
The Conception of Force Before Robert Mayer
1. The standpoint from which historians approach scientific theories has 
rarely been characterized as clearly as it was a few years ago by the ardent 
proponent of energetics in France: “By means of theories that arise only to be 
batted down again, through hypotheses that one century reveres as the secret 
mechanism and the concealed mainspring of the universe and the next century 
breaks like a child’s toy, there occurs slowly, but unceasingly, the advance of 
mathematical physics. When the floodtide rises on the coast, a wave forms, 
trembles, breaks and covers the previously dry ground. But soon it must give 
up its conquest; the sand dries and it is lost in the wave that forms behind it. 
This surging of the waves, which rise up only to sink back once again, appears 
to be a vain endeavor of the sea, a little foam and much noise. All the same, two 
hours later, the sand of the shore, in which your foot left behind its traces, lies 
deep under the water. In the unceasing dashing back and forth of the waves, 
their restless rising and breaking, their pressing forward and retreating - the 
ocean has risen.”1
1 P. Duhem, “Les theories de 1’optique,” Revue des deux mondes 123, (1894).
2 Gehler’s Physikalisches Wdrterbuch, newly revised by Brandes, Gmelin, Horner, Muncke, Pfaff 
(Leipzig, 1830), Vol. 5. The signature “M” indicates that the article “Force” was written by 
Muncke.
More than anything, anyone who wants to understand energetics historically 
must be aware of the state of the ground in 1840 over which, in the interim, the 
waves of this knowledge have passed. But for this awareness, attention must be 
paid primarily not to the efforts of original thinkers-to the ideas of prescient 
minds, which were not understood by their contempories, were long forgotten, 
and are admired today. These are the waves that lick upward, but quickly sink 
back into the general level. Instead, the eye that wishes to follow the gradual 
rising of the intellectual level must first focus on the broad knowledge of the 
age, the generally received academic wisdom, however unpleasant to contem­
plate it may be.
2. What was generally thought about the way forces act at the time with 
which our history begins can be gathered, for example, from the article “Force” 
in Gehler’s Dictionary,  printed in 1830: “One of the investigations of motive 
forces with which the old geometers were most concerned is the designation of 
such forces as dead and living. A force could be called dead, or more correctly 
2
65

66
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
latent, which must be regarded as being present, to be sure, insofar as it can be 
produced at any time-and is thus completely present in its conditions at a given 
time - but which does not exist as an active force and thus, strictly speaking, 
does not exist at all. Hence, for example, the force to overcome a certain 
resistance can be attributed to gunpowder; but, at the same time, this force can 
be called ‘latent’ until the powder is ignited. In this case, however, the faculty or 
capacity of manifesting force is obviously confused with a force that is present, 
but which is by no means already actually present in the gunpowder that has 
not been ignited. After ignition, though, the gunpowder itself no longer exists; 
it has been transformed into gases, which then, being compressed into a narrow 
space, exhibit the manifestation of force. Insofar, therefore, as its essence is 
given by its activity, a latent force is actually totally unthinkable; and the 
underlying reason for thinking otherwise is apparently the conflation of the 
possibility of a manifestation of force with its reality.”
“Moreover, the division of forces into living and dead, which was first 
formulated by Leibniz in 1686 (Acta Erud. Lips. 1695, p. 145) in order to 
explain the measure of force he proposed, signifies something entirely different. 
That is, according to Leibniz’s formulation, a dead force is one that is in reality 
present and active but which does not produce any motion - for instance, the 
force with which a heavy body presses upon whatever supports it or with which 
it tightens a thread from which it is suspended. Johann Bernoulli (Acta Erud. 
1735 May, p. 210. Discours sur le mouvement. Chap. III. def. 2) therefore takes 
pressure and dead force to be synonymous. However, it is clear that both great 
geometers were led into this error by their effort to find the measure of forces 
from the motion produced by them, according to which every force must 
therefore be equal to zero or, if it produces no motion at all, itself be dead. But 
on this definition, all forces considered in statics would have to be dead, since 
the equilibrium generated by them is merely constructed.”
“And one soon realizes that this assumed designation is also untenable 
insofar as it attributes something to the force itself which in no way lies in it, 
and which does not even lie in that body to which it belongs, but rather lies in 
the nature of that against which the force is exerted. Furthermore, if in 
accordance with such usage, the predicate dead is to denote the cessation of 
activity, then application of this predicate leads to strange conclusions. For 
example, if a weight is placed in one of the trays of a balance located above a 
table, it will sink down and rest upon its immovable support. This lasting effect 
would thus have to be generated by a dead force, which would instantaneouly 
become living once again if the support were removed. Two equal weights on 
the two trays would be living as long as the balance oscillates, but both would 
be dead as soon as it comes to rest. Although this is simply a matter of a name 
and an expression, since nothing is changed in the situation itself, it is 
nevertheless better to remove such merely arbitrary designations from science. 
For, obviously, no change in the force itself is produced by the fact that another 
equally strong force resists it, which makes not the force itself, but only its 
effect, equal to zero.”

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 67
“Leibniz calls ‘living’ a force that generates real motion and not merely a 
striving for motion; and the expression was understood in the same sense by 
Wolf (Elem. Math. Chapter I. Def. 7). However, Johann Bernoulli extends the 
concept to such bodies as would be able, by their own motion, to set others in 
motion if they should hit them - for example, to a falling ball, which would 
have within itself the force to push away another ball, even if it did not actually 
hit that ball and so did not push it away. However, since the force of a body set 
in motion cannot cease as long as it is not obstructed by another body or 
annihilated by an opposing force, and since a proportional motion is again 
produced when a body in motion hits another body at rest, Bernoulli thus came 
to the conclusion that a constant sum of living forces is preserved at all times in 
the world of bodies. According to Leibniz, ‘if living force is to consist of 
innumerable frequently repeated impressions of dead force’...”.
But let us cease recounting this desert of aimless discussions! No clarification 
of anything fundamental is to be gotten from the subsequent discussion in the 
book of Leibniz’s and Descartes’ measures of force, the rather casual mention 
of the measurement of forces through accelerations, and the enumeration of the 
different forces exhibited in nature. Thus, electricity and heat are included 
among the motive forces of machines. Under one, the force of gunpowder and 
steam is given as an example; under another, the contractive force of cooling 
metals. To be sure, the data concerning the effective work of humans and 
animals are reduced to pounds per minute per foot of height. But the figures 
thus calculated, which are called “efficiencies,” serve only for comparison and 
do not appear to be of fundamental importance for understanding the forces of 
nature. A real use for this data would have been possible only by drawing on 
the concept of work developed at that time by the applied mechanicians of 
France. The article thus finds its fitting conclusion in a not very brief discussion 
of the hidden forces of sympathy, of the divining-rod and the like.
3. This single book may here bear universal witness. One will seek in vain for 
any more profound enlightenment in the textbooks of the entire fourth decade of 
our century. Indeed, it is not until the beginning of the 1840’s that German 
textbooks even incorporate the deepened understanding that French researchers 
had achieved in the area of purely mechanical processes by means of the 
principle of living force and the concept of mechanical work. Weisbach, to 
whom German mechanics owes much for its clarity and independence, writes 
these significant words in 1835 in the preface to his handbook on the mechanics 
of mining machines: “The author has found useful Poisson’s textbook on 
mechanics and Coriolis’ work, Du calcul de leffet des machines, even if he has 
not been able to discuss the principle of living force.” And Helmholtz, as late as 
1847, suggests adding the factor^ to the product of mass and the square of 
velocity, which is essential for the conception of motion as a transformation of 
energy, even though Coriolis had already done that in 1829 in the work just cited.

68
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
This was the state of the soil, on the whole, upon which fell the seed that was 
sown by the founders of energetics in the fifth decade of the nineteenth century. 
But I emphasize: on the whole. Such was the overall situation. Although they 
remain isolated, there has never been any lack of individual voices that reveal a 
deeper understanding. Such voices have been present as long as people have 
reflected on force, as long as they have speculated about natural processes.
Section Two:
Isolated Beginnings of an Energetic Conception
1. The central idea is revealed in the principle that all becoming is a passing 
away, and all passing away a becoming. This is indeed the source of all human 
meditation on the processes of the external world in the most ancient creations 
of systematic thought - the world’s religions. And the most ancient endeavors 
at speculative philosophy, which seek in their own ways to cross the boundaries 
of these traditions, also see their problem in this principle. Thus, the ideas of 
conservation and transformation are as old as theory itself. In fact, even the 
two main approaches that we can distinguish today in energetics for clarifying 
and quantitatively developing those fluctuating ideas have their roots in those 
venerable utterances of the most ancient meditative considerations of nature: If 
one of the approaches shapes what is conserved in all transformations into a 
great mysterious unknown, then the other seeks something perceptively 
obvious, namely motion, in every change of appearance. Monism prevails in 
the former case, the mechanical world-view in the latter. It has therefore been 
possible to find occasional remarks with an energetic tinge in every age.
According to my conception of the historical formation of science, none of 
these remarks has any importance for the history of energetics; they have only a 
psychological value. Still, since many readers will want to find them in a book 
such as this, in what follows I shall include a list of the most important sayings 
of this kind with which I am familiar.
2. Ruhlmann, who provides a fairly complete survey of such sayings,  
reminds us that Heraclitus developed the view of the eternal variability of 
nature and of its harmonious lawfulness in change, and points to Anaxagoras’ 
remark that “Nothing comes into being or is destroyed, but rather everything is 
a combining or separating of things which already preexisted.” He cites as 
Empedocles’ this maxim: “Fools think that that which never was can begin to 
be, or that that which is can pass away and thus wholly vanish.” From 
Democritus he gets the principle: “Nothing comes from nothing and nothing 
can pass away to nothing,” which appears again in Epicurus in the form: 
“Nothing comes from nothing, for otherwise everything could come from 
everything.” In his discussion of the immortality of the soul in the Phaedrus, 
Plato writes: “That which is eternally in motion is immortal; but that which 
moves something else and is in turn moved by something else ceases to live as 
3
Ruhlmann, Mechanische Warmetheorie (Braunschweig 1885), Vol. 2, 863.
3

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 69
soon as its motion ceases .... The origin of motion is that which sets itself in 
motion. But this can neither pass away nor become, else all the heavens and all 
of nature must collapse and stand still, without ever again having a cause of 
motion.”
Among the ancients, however, the idea of conservation is expressed most 
strikingly by Lucretius in his didactic poem in the famous passage: “The 
primary matter was, moreover, never denser or looser at an earlier time; for 
this never increases, nor does it decrease through destruction. Thus, the motion 
which now rules in the primary elements was already there from time 
immemorial, and thus it will also still be there in the future. That which has 
come into being until now will continue to come into being and endure under 
the same condition, will increase and flourish and grow stronger, each thing 
according to the measure granted to each by natural law. For there is no place 
to which the parts of primary matter could flee, no place whence renewed 
forces could break forth to change the motion and nature of things.”
3. From Berthold’s extensive inventory of remarks  which anticipate the 
atomistic hypothesis of the nature of heat, we may extract the following 
thoughts as preparing the way for energetics. Euler considers it paradoxical 
that from the smallest spark the greatest fire can arise, given that the effect 
must nevertheless be equal to the cause and that neither the quantity of motion 
nor the forces can be increased. Hobbes considers one and the same motion to 
be the cause both of light and of heat, since both are kindred effects of the same 
cause. Better known because of countless references to it is Locke’s saying: 
“That which appears to our senses as heat is only motion in the object.”
4
4 Berthold, Rumford und die mechanische Warmetheorie (Heidelberg 1875).
5 Phil. Mag. (4)28(1864).
On the occasion of the Tyndall-Tait controversy (cf. Part 4, Section 4), Bohn5 
pointed out a series of older remarks which must be acknowledged as 
anticipations of energetics. From Johann Bernoulli’s treatise on the true 
concept of living forces and their use in dynamics (Opera omnia, vol. 3), he 
cites the following passages: “From this it follows that living force (which, more 
appropriately, should be called the capacity for action - in French, lepouvoir) is 
something real and substantial, which exists through itself and whose quantity 
does not depend on anything else. Accordingly, we conclude that each living 
force has its definite magnitude, of which nothing is lost that would not again 
be found in some effect which has come into being. It follows, therefore, that 
living force conserves itself, so that what was present before the action in one 
body, or in several, is now, after the action, to be found in another body, or in 
several others, if it has not been retained by the earlier ones. And that is what 
we call the conservation of living force.” “When bodies are not perfectly elastic, 
then a part of the living force which seems to disappear is used for the 
compression of the bodies.’

70
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Section Thr ee:
Heat as a Kind of Motion
1. The works which combatted the material theory of heat and attempted to 
demonstrate that heat must be regarded as a kind of motion turned out to be 
far more influential for the historical development of views concerning the way 
forces act than did the isolated remarks we have cited.  The ancient assumption 
of a special heat substance had already given rise to attempts at mechanical 
explanation, by imagining that the parts of a heated body are in a process of 
violent motion caused by the collision of heat atoms. The total elimination of 
heat atoms, and of a special heat substance, from this [kinetic] way of putting 
things has been undertaken repeatedly and from different directions in the last 
two centuries. It was thus inevitable that this development of a purely 
mechanical point of view would lead to energetics, since this view was, of 
course, the reason for applying the law of living force to the phenomena of 
heat.
6
6 The development is carefully set out in Berthold, Rumford und die mechanische Warmetheorie 
(Heidelberg 1875).
7 From evidence cited by Bohn, Phil. Mag. (4) 28 (1864). It comes from the appendix Fresnel 
wrote for the French translation of Thomson’s Chemistry.
Thus, Daniel Bernoulli, in the development of his kinetic theory of gases, 
uses the expression “living force which is implanted in a compressed elastic 
body”; and he understands by this “the potential lift that an elastic body can 
give to other bodies, as long as its total elastic force has not been exhausted.” In 
fact, he already “is convinced that, if all the living force which is concealed in a 
cubic foot of coal is utilized advantageously for the motion of a machine, more 
can be achieved thereby than through the daily work of eight or ten men.” 
Moreover, when Count Rumford succeeded while drilling in bringing water to 
the boil by means of frictional heat in Munich in 1798, he added to the 
publication of his experiments the excellent energetic observation: “No condi­
tion can be imagined in which it would be advantageous to create heat in this 
manner, for more heat is obtained even from the feed for the one horse, which 
is necessary for the operation of the drill, when it is used as fuel.”
After Humphrey Davy transformed ice into water by rubbing two pieces of 
ice against one another in 1799, the habit of thinking in terms of a material 
conception of heat was gradually overcome. But with the mechanical concep­
tion of heat, energetic views about the mode of action of forces were also 
disseminated. Fresnel concluded from the conservation of living force that it 
must be regarded as the measure of light, whose amount, as long as it passes 
through transparent media, remains very nearly unchanged. However, he 
continues, one cannot conclude from the phenomena of absorption that the 
conservation of living force is no longer applicable to these processes. On the 
contrary, the most probable idea is that the sum of living force is always the 
same, and that the amount of living force which disappears as light reappears 
as heat.7

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 71
2. In Mohr’s essay on the nature of heat, which appeared in 1837 in a journal 
of limited circulation  after Poggendorff had refused to publish it in the 
Annalen, there are passages that sound exactly as if they came from the writings 
of Robert Mayer which appeared only in 1842 and 1845. “When the force of 
heat is used to destroy another force (cohesion), then it must itself cease to be 
perceptible as a force. Accordingly, every time heat becomes latent, there is a 
change in the state of aggregation, that is, by annihilation of material forces.” - 
“A force can also be explained as if it were a ponderable material: one can 
divide it, subtract from it and add to it, without any loss of the original force or 
change in its quality.” Or, in another passage: “Besides the known 54 chemical 
elements there exists in the nature of things only one additional agent, and this 
is called ‘force’. Under appropriate conditions it can appear as motion, 
chemical affinity, cohesion, electricity, light, heat and magnetism; and from 
each of these kinds of phenomena, all of the others can be produced.”
8
8 Baumgartner and von Holger’s Zeitschrift fiir Physik, vol. 5. The essay was later printed in 
Mohr, Allgemeine Theorie der Bewegung und der Kraft (Braunschweig 1869).
9 Phil. Mag. (4)28 (1864).
10 H. Klein, Prinzipien der Mechanik (1872), p. 43. Berthold, Annalen der Physik 157. Helm, 
Energie (1887), p. 79.
These passages in no way challenge the priority of Robert Mayer, however. 
For in the first place, they are based entirely on the mechanical way of 
explaining heat: When Mohr calls heat a force, he means by this that it consists 
in a definite motion that can be caused, for purely mechanical reasons, by other 
motions or forces. And in the second place, Mohr reaches no quantitative 
conclusion in his deliberations: He does not find the magnitude of force in its 
various outward forms and therefore does not discover the mechanical 
equivalent of heat.
3. There are also the pronouncements in Placidus Heinrich’s work on 
phosphorescence of 1812, which Akin  reckons among the anticipations of 
energetics: “Meanwhile, we know at least this much with reliability, that 
nothing is lost in nature; ... everything is conserved through continuous 
exchange: one thing gains through the loss of another, one thing comes into 
being via the disappearance of another .... Hence, there is never loss in the 
universe, only change and exchange!” But these words are also so general that it 
seems misplaced to call them energetic hints.  In any case, their author applies 
them only to the conservation of matter.
9
10
The one who advanced furthest in this sphere of ideas - even to the point of 
making quantitative estimations - is undoubtedly Justus von Liebig, who, in his 
Chemical Letters, independently formulated views which come quite close to 
Robert Mayer’s ideas and that no doubt stimulated and supported them. For 
example, he says: “Heat, electricity and magnetism stand in a relation to one 
another which is similar to the chemical equivalents of coal, zinc and oxygen. 
Using a certain amount of electricity, we produce a corresponding ratio of heat 
or of magnetic force which are mutually equivalent. I purchase this electricity 
with chemical affinity, which, consumed in one form, produces heat, in the 

72
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
other, electricity and magnetism ... zinc and sulfuric acid supply us with 
chemical affinity in one form, coals and an adequate draft in another form ... 
No force can come into being from nothing ... If we burn the coals with a 
steam engine that we use for melting the zinc from its ores, it is highly probable 
that we will also produce far more force than by starting from the zinc itself, in 
whatever form and in whatever apparatus we may utilize it.”11 Robert Mayer 
rises above the far-sighted mind expressing these words by vigorously empha­
sizing just one idea.
11 Chemische Briefe, tenth letter in the 1845 edition. First printed in the supplement to Allg. Ztg., 
30 September 1841.
Section Fou r:
The Founding of Energetics in Mechanics
1. The dynamical principle of the conservation of living force was far more 
important to the development of the energetic mode of thinking than the 
precursors discussed above. Indeed, this principle was finally decisive for 
developing the nucleus of the new views on the way forces act. No explanations 
are required here of how, from simple experiences, it took shape in Huyghens, 
Leibniz and the Bernoullis, or, above all, of how it developed around the 
problem of the physical pendulum. The only thing of importance - but for us of 
most decisive importance - is the series of ideas joined to the finished product 
of the dynamical analysis.
As is well known, Lagrange derives from the differential equations of 
dynamics the theorem that, for systems now referred to as conservative, the 
sum of all living forces, augmented by a known function of the coordinates of 
all its constituent mass points, is constant. Here the living force of a mass is 
taken to be the product of its mass m and the square of its velocity v. The 
condition that the system must be conservative has two parts. First, the effective 
forces must be conservative, that is, the components of each force must be 
capable of being represented as derivatives of a function of the coordinates; 
and second, there must be no constraints imposed on the system other than 
those which can be represented by equations between the coordinates. Under 
these conditions Lagrange discovers, by integrating the equations of motion, 
the theorem stated above
(1)
mV — H.
or the sum of the living forces, mv2, is equal to the quantity 
2H-2£mK,
where H denotes a constant and К is a function of the coordinates.

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 73
Along with this proposition, changes in living force on impact also attract 
the attention of mechanicians. In the case of elastic collision, the living force 
after the impact, ^2 w’2’ is equal to that before it occurred, ^2 m(2- Bui Carnot 
finds a very simple expression for the loss of living force in the case of an 
inelastic collision. This loss is 
(2)
2 
me
mv2 = 
v)2,
and so is equal to the living force of the lost velocity, that is, to the resultant of c 
and -v.
2. The development of ideas that is fundamental for us takes these principles 
as its starting point - principles that appear as products of mathematical 
calculation, especially in Poisson’s Treatise on Mechanics (Paris 1811), which 
subsequently exerted a great influence. We owe this development to the great 
representatives of applied mechanics in France, who, although thoroughly 
schooled in theory, nonetheless kept their gaze directed at the problems of 
practice. Only in France did the youthful flourishing of technology in the first 
peaceful decades of the century meet with an applied education that was equal 
to it. Even here, the union did not achieve very great immediate successes; but 
it kindled ideas that dominated minds and thus had all the more lasting effect. 
Lazare N.M. Carnot, and also Monge, Coulomb, Navier, Coriolis and, finally, 
Poncelet are the bearers of these ideas. And it is by means of the notion of a 
transformation of force that the analytical formula for the conservation of force 
soon becomes fruitful.
Living force generally changes during the motion of a conservative system; 
but it can increase only when the function V, introduced above, decreases. 
Furthermore, living force can decrease only when this function increases and it 
always has the same value when V has a given value - thus, for example, when 
the system returns to the same position. The idea of transformation is indeed 
suggested strongly enough here, and it was certainly present to the minds of all 
the scientists of the eighteenth century who worked to develop the law of living 
force. Nevertheless, it was only the founders of applied mechanics who clarified 
this idea and secured it for use.
Since technical use cannot be restricted to conservative forces and systems, 
we reason largely as follows: If m is the mass of a point that traverses the 
position xyz with velocity л7//, and if XYZ represent the components of force 
and t the time, there follows from the equations of motion
dx! „ dy' _ dzf
(3 
) 
m— = X, m^-=Y, m— = Z,
7 
dt 
dt 
dt 
when multiplied by

74
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(4)
the relation
(5)
x'dt — dx, y'dt = dy, z*dt — dz.
m(x'dx! + y’dyf + z’dz') — Xdx + Ydy + Zdz.
Or if v denotes the velocity, Q the acting force, and dq the projection of the path 
element onto the direction of force,
(6)
mvdv = Qdq.
For an arbitrary system of points, this gives
(7) 
y^mvdv = y^Qdq
and, through integration,
It now becomes a question of an appropriate terminology. When Lazare 
Carnot12 contrasts force vive latente with force vive, mv2, he already shows in his 
choice of terms that he has understood the idea of transformation.13 And the 
applications Carnot made to hydrodynamic machines of his theorem concern­
ing the loss of force vive upon impact appeared so original to Navier that he 
refers to them as early as 181814 and quotes some characteristic sentences 
verbatim. A whole series of names is suggested for f Qdq and 12mv> 
respectively; for the function ^mv2, equal to half the living force, which appears 
as reserve during motion; and for the double of that function, such names as 
puissance mechanique, moment d’activite, effet dynamique, quantite d’action. 
“Mechanical work”, a name “which to a certain extent defines itself”, is 
suggested by Coriolis, and comes into vogue through Poncelet. The suggestion 
to call |mv2 “living force”, which was only accepted slowly, also stems from 
Coriolis. It is true that Poncelet usually writes | with mv2; but he calls mv2 
“living force”, in accordance with the older usage. It was expecially important, 
though, that Poncelet introduced a unit for work, which, following Navier’s 
12 Principes de I’equilibre et du movement.
13 Bohn, Phil. Mag. (4) 29; and Ann. Chim. (4) 4.
14 Ann. Chim. (2) 9.

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 75
notation к • m, he termed the “kilogram-meter” - this at a time when Young, 
who already occasionally understands by labour a definite mechanical work, 
still renders its unit by verbal paraphrase.
The most significant development, finally, was the direct use of the principle 
of living force to draw conclusions in mechanics.
Coriolis utilizes the principle of living force to solve mechanical problems in 
his Treatise on Mechanics of 1829, as does Poncelet, from 1824, in his lectures 
at the artillery school in Metz15 and in his evening lectures intended for 
workers.16 It is almost always a question here, of course, of problems in 
engineering, the solutions to which depend on only one variable coordinate; 
and Coriolis says explicitly that the treatment of problems of motions involving 
higher degrees of freedom must go back to the equations of motion. But with 
static problems this limitation is by no means observed. Instead, the equation 
proceeding from the principle of living force,
15 Cours de mechanique appliquee aux machines. Published by Kretz (1874). First appearance 
lithographically between 1826 and 1836.
16 Introduction a la mechanique industrielle. Published by Kretz (1879). First appearance in 1829.
17 Cours de mechanique appliquee aux machines (1879), p. 17.
(9)
Xdx + Ydy + Zdz = 0,
is understood as the principle of virtual velocities. Moreover, Poncelet suggests 
extending the understanding of work to include the quantity mvdv. Since 
Poncelet calls — the “force of inertia” and — mvdv, accordingly, the “work 
of inertia”, he expresses equation (7) as a relationship between virtual moments 
in the words: “The sum of the elementary works developed, both of those 
generated by the various forces altering motion as well as of those forces of 
inertia developed by these changes, is always equal to zero”.17
As we shall see later, when equation (7) is thought of in this way, it - like 
d’Alembert’s principle - is able to encompass the whole of mechanics. 
However, one does not yet find in Poncelet any applications to motions 
involving degrees of freedom of higher order. Aware of the originality of their 
ideas, Coriolis and Poncelet also call the principle of living force, in which they 
now see the foundation of applied mechanics, by a new name: the Principle of 
Work or Principle of Transformation, Transition and Propagation of Work - le 
principe de la transmission du travail.
3. Here we have the historical foundations of energetics. In the domain of 
mechanics, and particuarly in that of practical engineering, the ways of 
conceiving of transformation and of the storing up of work are developed in 
the principle of work which were later developed into a view of nature 
encompassing all of experience.
With Poncelet’s principle of work, energetic views receive their first, more 
general circulation. In particular they are absorbed into German textbooks of 

76
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
mechanics at the same time that Robert Mayer sees their far-reaching 
importance. (The German translations of Poncelet’s and of Coriolis’ works 
appear around 1845.)18 While Weisbach’s Mining Machine Mechanics (1835) 
still gives - at least, in brackets - the Cartesian and Leibnizian measures of 
force, Hecht’s First Principles of the Mechanical Sciences (1843) already 
provides the concept and unit of mechanical work. Moreover, Ruhlmann’s 
Applied Mechanics (1844) already treats a few problems by means of the 
concepts of living force and mechanical work - even if, to be sure, it retains 
the two confusing measures of force. For the further development of applied 
mechanics in Germany, the most significant event was then the publication, in 
1845, of Weisbach’s Textbook of Engineering and Machine Mechanics. In this 
book the concept of work stands out prominently and Poncelet’s principle of 
the transmission of work is also emphasized.
18 Schnuse, Lehrbuch der Anwendung der Mechanik auf Maschien von Poncelet, I (1845), II (1848).
Schnuse, Lehrbuch der Mechanik fester Korper von Coriolis (1845). Industrielle Mechanik nach 
Poncelef, Vol. I by Hallbauer (1845), Vol. II by Kuppler (1841).
19 R. Mayer, Kleinere Schriften und Briefe. Nebst Mitteilungen aus seinem Leben. Edited by J. 
Weyrauch. Stuttgart (1893).
As for the rest, Redtenbacher, in his Principles of Mechanics and Engine 
Building (1852), gives a peculiar form to the principle of living force, by 
defining as mass half of the amount usually so called - that is, weight divided 
by double the acceleration of gravity - and thereby takes into account the 
factor | with mv2.
The influence of French applied mechanics is not exhausted with the 
development of the principles of living force and virtual velocities into the 
principle of work. The names of Sadi Carnot and Clapeyron belong to the same 
time and with the same French technology. But we can permit their farseeing 
achievements to enter the sphere of our consideration only after we have 
examined the conclusion to which Robert Mayer was led through reflection 
on the principle of work, and the new path to scientific theory he thereby 
opened up.
Section Five:
Robert Mayer’s Fundamental Energetic Idea
1. The deepest insight into the workshop of a mind, into the points of 
departure and guiding principles of its activity, is granted to us through its 
errors. Weyrauch has collected and commented on the letters and writings of 
Robert Mayer with loving care.  As a result, it has been unusually easy to 
acquire an intimate insight into the growth of this genius such as his friends, 
particularly Rumelin, have already conveyed to us, and also into the period of 
Mayer’s development in which the intuitively recognized truth had not yet been 
separated from the dross.
19
Today, the first essay that Robert Mayer sent to Poggendorff in 1841 seems 
very curious. It was never returned to him, as Rfimelin and others believed. 
Zollner published a facsimile of it, taken from PoggendorfTs original, in the 

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 77
fourth volume of his Scientific Papers (1881); and Weyrauch had it printed with 
the Brief Writings and Letters of Robert Mayer. Poggendorff cannot be blamed, 
of course, for not publishing the paper. Still, it does contain the basic idea 
whose importance was verified in the following decades. If two equal masses m 
are moving towards each other in a straight line with equal velocities c, the 
momentum is zero, and remains zero after their collision. But according to 
Mayer’s opinion at the time, the absolute values of the momenta are also 
conserved in their total amount, 2mc. In the case of perfectly elastic impact, 
this amount remains a quantity of motion; in the case of inelastic impact, it 
appears as heat and measures the momentum.
“Motion, heat and, as we intend to explain later, electricity are phenomena 
that can be reduced to one force, which measure each other and which change 
into one another according to definite laws. Motion changes into heat by being 
neutralized through an opposite motion or through a fixed point. The heat 
which has come into being is proportional to the motion that has disappeared.”
Thus, in addition to an unfortunate system of notation, which we have 
avoided in what was said above, Mayer’s first article also suffers from the error 
of measuring the absolute amount of motion through momentum. But after the 
description given earlier of the general state of knowledge about the way forces 
act, it is less noteworthy that Mayer fell into this error than it is that he worked 
through it. For, starting from the Cartesian measure of force, and working 
entirely on his own, he arrived at the Leibnizian measure. It can be seen from a 
letter Mayer wrote to Baur in July 184220 how thoroughly he had clarified for 
himself the fact that motions capable of neutralizing one another - that is, 
which have equal but opposite momenta - do not have to be equally great - 
that is, of equal energy. His first publication, the “Remarks on the Forces of 
Inanimate Nature,” which appeared in May 1842 in Liebig’s Annals of 
Chemistry and Pharmacy, exhibits the new knowledge of the mode of action of 
forces from the correct standpoint, according to which living force is that 
which is indestructable in motion.
Kleinere Schriften, p. 133.
2. 
Mayer writes: “Forces are causes. Accordingly, the principle causa aequat 
effectum is completely applicable to them. If the cause c has the effect e, then 
c = e. If e is then the cause of another effect f we have e = f, etc. 
c = e = f... = c. In a chain of causes and effects, a term or a part of a term 
can never become zero, as is apparent from the nature of an equation. We shall 
call this first characteristic of all causes their indestructability”
“If a given cause c has produced an effect e equal to itself, c has thereby 
ceased to exist; it has become e. If, after the production of e, all or a part of c 
were left over, an additional effect would have to correspond to this remaining 
cause. Hence the total effect of c would generally turn out to be greater than e, 
which is contrary to the assumption that c = e. Consequently, as c is converted 
into e, e into f and so on, we must regard these quantities as different 
manifestations of one and the same object. The capacity for assuming different 
20

78
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
forms is the second essential property of all causes. Combining the two 
properties, we shall say: Causes are (quantitatively) indestructable and (qualita­
tively) transformable objects.
“Experience tells us that there are two classes of causes to be found in nature, 
between which no conversions take place. One class consists of causes having 
the properties of ponderability and impenetrability - kinds of matter; the other 
is comprised of the causes which lack these properties - forces. They are also 
called “imponderables,” from their negative property. Forces are therefore 
indestructable, transformable, imponderable objects?'
“A cause that raises a weight is a force; its effect, the raised weight, is thus 
also a force. More generally expressed, this means: The spatial separation 
between ponderable objects is a force. Since this force effects the fall of bodies, 
we shall call it fall-force. Fall-force and fall - and, more generally, fall-force and 
motion - are forces related to each other as cause and effect, forces that are 
convertible one into the other, two different manifestations of one and the same 
object. Example: a weight resting on the ground is not a force; it is the cause 
neither of a motion nor of the raising of another weight. However, it becomes 
so to the extent that it is raised above the ground. The cause, the distance of the 
weight from the earth, and the effect, the amount of motion produced, stand, as 
we learn from mechanics, in permanent equality.”
“In considering gravity as the cause of the fall, one speaks of a force of 
gravity and thus confuses the concepts of force and property. The union of 
indestructability and transformability, which is precisely what is essential to 
every force, is entirely missing from any property. It is therefore impossible to 
establish between a property and a force, between gravity and motion, the 
equation required for a correctly conceived causal relationship. If one calls 
gravity a force, one imagines a cause producing an effect without itself 
diminishing, and thereby entertains incorrect notions about the causal con­
nectedness of things. In order for a body to be capable of falling, its having 
been raised is no less necessary than its gravity. Thus, one cannot attribute the 
fall of bodies to their gravity alone.”
3. Robert Mayer’s specific accomplishment is set down for the first time in 
these words. All the rest is exposition, commentary on these ideas. The concept 
of something indestructable in the flux of phenomena is now singled out from 
the confused notions that were until then unified under the name of force', and 
for the rest of his life, Mayer never abandoned the demand that the name 
“force” be applied exclusively to this indestructible something, which we today 
call energy. To be sure, Mayer occasionally uses the word “energy”. But it 
probably seemed to him much too indefinite, not objectively precise enough, for 
his purpose. Thus, he speaks on one occasion of an increase in the energy of the 
process of oxidation in an organism and another time of the energy of motion; 
but he does not connect any scientifically defined concept with the word.
Today, we regard as force something that is not consumed in its effect - a 
mere property in Mayer’s terminology. Nonetheless, the clear separation of 
what is now termed energy from the old notions of force is Mayer’s achieve­

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 79
ment, as is the separation offall-force and motion - or, as we would now say, of 
potential and kinetic energy. Mayer was the first to grasp this distinction 
clearly, however close Poncelet’s sphere of ideas may have come to it.
Judging from Mayer’s manner of presentation, which shows the influence of 
the medical writings of his time, one could assume that, with the exception of 
his central idea, he was otherwise still quite deeply immersed in scholastic 
thinking and in the search for an absolute. However, that is not the case - at 
least not to the extent that it is revealed from his style. Thus, for example, 
Mayer explains what he understands by imponderables in a letter to Griesinger 
of December 16, 1842, as follows: “One can form the concept, based in 
experience, of indestructible, transformable objects. Among these belong, 
certainly, the chemical elements and their combinations, all of which can be 
characterized by the properties common to them as indestructible, transform­
able, ponderable (and coercible) objects. But if we take away the last two 
properties, there remain those indestructible, transformable, imponderable 
objects, whose objectivity is also established by experience (at least as well as 
that of the ponderable ones). One may, with every justification, call these 
objects imponderables ... Motion is an imponderable, just as much as heat.” 
One can also speak of the capacity for motion (that is, density) in exactly the 
same sense one can of heat capacity.
4. Moreover, Mayer defends the expression “transform” (“Force is trans­
formed into motion, motion into heat”), which Griesinger finds too abstract, 
with the following explanations: “If one pours a bottle of ether slowly into 
another vessel, so that the room is filled with odor, there is no longer a full 
bottle of ether in the second vessel. One then says that the ether has been 
partially transformed into vapor. And this word has a precise quantitative 
sense, for it means: If one ounce is missing in the second vessel, then the weight 
of the ether vapor is precisely equal to one ounce. However, the layman says: 
The air just consumed the ether. Air consumes weight, particularly fresh air. 
When I say that motion can be transformed into heat and vice versa, this only 
means that there take place back and forth between heat and motion the same 
quantitative relations as take place between the ether and its vapor.” (Letter of 
July 20, 1844) “To demand an explanation of how heat comes into being from 
the disappearing motion, or, in my manner of speaking, of how motion is 
converted into heat, would be to demand too much of the human mind. 
Certainly, no chemist will rack his brains about how vanishing О and H yield 
water and why, for example, another matter, with different properties, does not 
arise therefrom. But what is beyond any doubt is that he will come closer to the 
laws obeyed by his objects, the kinds of matter, if he understands that the 
amount of water coming into being can be found precisely from the disappear­
ing amounts of H and O, than if he is not aware of any such connection.” 
(Letter of December 5 and 6, 1842)
Mach has repeatedly and justifiably warned of the mysticism associated with 
the word “transform” that has sometimes tried to make its way into energetics. 
But it emerges clearly from the above words that, judged by his manner of 

80
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
thinking, the founder of energetics does not need this warning, although the 
way he expressed himself in his writings has given some of his followers 
occasion for such misunderstanding. In the sense of its founder, energetics is a 
pure “system of relations" and is not out to place a new absolute in the world. 
When changes occur, this definite mathematical relationship still exists 
between them - that is the guiding formula of energetics, and certainly is also 
the only formula of all true knowledge of nature. What goes beyond it is fiction.
5. From all that has been said before, we must surely conclude that Robert 
Mayer’s new idea did not gradually crystallize from the traditional concepts of 
force when he thought them through more deeply. Rather, it belongs to those 
intuitively grasped ideas which, originating in other areas of intellectual work, 
assault thought, as it were, and compel it to transform traditional concepts in 
accordance with them. In fact, Mayer himself always understood his ideas in 
this way and told of “how he arrived at the whole business.” “By no means did I 
hatch the theory at my desk,” he writes to Griesinger on June 16, 1844. “As I 
keenly and persistently studied the physiology of the blood on my journey to 
East India (as ship’s doctor on a Dutch ship from February 1840 to February 
1841), observation of the altered bodily state of our ship’s crew in the tropics, 
owing to the process of acclimatization, again gave me much material for 
reflection. The forms of illness, and especially the condition of the blood, 
continually directed my thoughts to the generation of animal heat through the 
process of respiration.”
In particular, Mayer observed during bloodlettings that blood taken from a 
vein showed a strikingly bright red coloration, as if he had struck an artery; 
and German doctors in Batavia affirmed this to be a familiar phenomenon, 
which occurred with natives as well as foreigners. “If one desires then,” he 
continues in the letter to Griesinger, “to understand the physiology of the 
phenomenon, a knowledge of physical processes is indispensable - that is, if 
one does not prefer to treat it instead as a matter of metaphysics, which 
disgusts me infinitely Thus, I adhered to physics and gave myself up to the 
subject with such relish that I - and many will laugh at me for this - was little 
interested in that far part of the world. But I liked best to stay on board where I 
could work without interruption, and where sometimes I felt as if I were 
inspired, as it were, in a way I cannot recall having been similarly inspired 
earlier or since. I immediately and diligently pursued a few insights that flashed 
into my mind - it was in the roadstead of Surabaya - and this led to still new 
subjects.”
“Those times are over. But the calm examination of what surfaced in me 
then has taught me that it is truth - truth which not only can be felt 
subjectively, but that which be objectively proven. Whether this can be done 
by me, however, a man so little versed in physics - this I must, of course, leave 
undecided. The day will come - that is quite certain - when these truths will 
become the common property of science; but who can say who will bring this 
about and when it will happen?”

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 81
We also have another valuable document from the period in which Mayer 
first sought to work through the idea he had grasped. Rtimelin21 describes how 
Robert Mayer was so possessed by his idea in autumn, 1841, that it was 
difficult to talk to him about anything else, and of how, in conversation and in 
coming and going, the young thinker at that time made constant use of three 
catch words: Ex nihilo nihil fit; nihil fit ad nihilum; causa aequat effectum.
Reden und Aufsatze. New Series (Freiburg and Tubingen 1881), p. 350.
“Once we were walking on the main road, engaged in such a conversation, 
when the express carriage with four steaming horses thundered toward us. 
What do you think is the physical effect of the muscular force of these horses? 
he asked me. I replied that all I could say was that the weight of the horses’ 
bodies and of the carriage with its contents underwent a displacement in space 
which would not have taken place without such an expenditure of force. Well, 
he asserted, let the carriage turn halfway around and return to Heilbronn - 
what, then, is the physical effect? ... Locomotion was the motive and incidental 
result of the mechanical performance of work by the horses, Mayer said, but 
not its physical effect. The heating of the horses, the accelerated internal 
combustion process of the feed consumed by them, the frictional heat which 
the moved wheels leave behind in blue streaks on the main road, the 
consumption of the fats in the wagon-grease on the axles - all these are not 
incidental details, which I seem to take them for. Rather, in the motion of the 
horses, their mechanical work is transformed into the phenomena of heat and, 
what is more, according to a constant ratio. Mayer sees the discovery and 
formulation of this ratio as the most important part of his task; but he no 
longer has the slightest doubt about the correctness of the principle. I under­
stood then for the first time what he actually intended and what he believed he 
had found.”
Section Six:
The Equivalence of Energies
1. In the following period, what seemed to be the most important application 
of Mayer’s fundamental idea was the assumption that in situations where 
motion disappears and heat appears, the latter arose out of the former. But, as 
it says in his paper of 1842: “Just as it cannot be concluded from the connection 
existing between fall-force and motion that the essence of fall-force is motion, so 
this conclusion is not valid for heat. Rather, we are inclined to infer the opposite: 
that, in order to become heat, motion - whether simple motion or vibratory, as 
with light, radiant heat, and so on - must cease to be motion”
“If fall-force and motion are equal to heat, then, of course, heat must also be 
equal to motion and fall-force. Just as heat arises as an effect, attended by a 
decrease in volume and the cessation of motion, so heat, too, then disappears 
as a cause, accompanied by the appearance of its effects: motion, increase in 
volume and the raising of weight.”
“In waterworks a significant amount of heat is continuously supplied by the 
motion which arises at the expense of the decrease in volume that a terrestrial 
21

82
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
body undergoes through the fall of water, but which afterwards disappears; 
conversely, steam engines then serve to resolve heat into motion or the raising 
of weight. The locomotive with its train can be compared to a distilling 
apparatus: The heat applied under the boiler is converted into motion, and this 
is deposited in quantity as heat in the axles of the wheels.”
After statements such as these, it is incomprehensible that it could have been 
maintained, until quite recently, that it can only be determined through direct 
experience whether the heat that came into being was equal to the kinetic 
energy that had disappeared, or whether it might be equal to another quantity - 
momentum, for example - which is indestructible in pure transmissions of 
motion. By always pointing to the chain of energy conversions, Mayer 
simplifies the experimental problem from the start. If, by virtue of his point of 
departure, the relations between fall-force and motion and between fall-force 
and heat are known from experience, then the relation between motion and 
heat is also established.
2. 
At the conclusion of his paper, Mayer arrives at the first statement of the 
mechanical equivalent of heat'. “In applying the theorems which we have put 
forth to the heat and volume ratios of different kinds of gases, it is found ... 
that the heating of a weight of water from 0° to 1° corresponds to the fall of a 
weight from the height of about 365 meters. If the efficiencies of our best steam 
engines are compared with this result, it can be seen that only a small part of 
the heat applied under the boiler is really resolved into motion or the raising of 
weight; and this may serve to justify the attempts to generate useful motion in 
some way other than by expending the chemical difference between C and O, 
namely, through transformation into the motion of electricity that is obtained 
by chemical means.”
The calculation of the equivalence is presented exactly in Robert Mayer’s 
second publication, Organic Motion in its Relation to Metabolism: A Contribu­
tion to Natural Science?'2 “Gay-Lussac has proven through experiment that an 
elastic fluid which flows from a flask into an equally large evacuated container 
cools off in the first vessel by exactly as many degrees as it is heated in the 
second. This experiment, which is noteworthy for its simplicity and the same 
result of which has been obtained by all observers, teaches us that a given 
weight and volume of an elastic fluid can expand to double, four times, and, in 
general, to many times its volume, without undergoing any noticeable change 
of temperature; or that, in and of itself, no expenditure of heat is required for 
the expansion of a gas. At the same time, it also reveals the fact that a gas 
expanding under pressure suffers a decrease in temperature^ ... “A cubic 
centimeter of atmospheric air at 0°, reading 0.76 meters of barometer, weighs 
0.0013 grams. If it is heated by 1° at constant pressure, the air expands by 1/ 
274 of its volume, and thereby raises a mercury column having a base of one 
square centimeter and a height of 76 centimeters by 1 /274 centimeter.”
22 Heilbronn 1845.

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 83
“The weight of this column amounts to 1033 grams. According to Delaroche 
and Berard, the specific heat of atmospheric air at constant pressure is 0.267, 
with that of water set equal to 1. The amount of heat our cubic centimeter of air 
absorbs in order to go at constant pressure from 0° to 1° is thus equal to the 
heat by which 0.0013 • 0.267, or 0.000347, grams of water is raised by 1°. 
According to Dulong, who is followed in this by the majority of physicists, the 
amount of heat which the air absorbs at constant volume is related to the 
amount of heat at constant pressure as yyy. Calculating from this relation, the 
amount of heat which raises our cubic centimeter of air by 1°, the volume being 
held constant, is ()^Q4°23147 = 0.000244 degrees.”
Consequently, by expending 0.000347 - 0.000244 = 0.000103 degrees of 
heat, the weight of 1033 grams is raised centimeters. “By reducing these 
figures, one then finds
Ю 1 i 
( 
367 m 1 , . ,
1 heat = 1 gram to 
r > height.
[1130 Parisian feet]
3. 
The Organic Motion of 1845, which was Mayer’s first work to appear 
independently, provides not only a more thorough exposition of the ideas 
enunciated in his brief paper of 1842, it also contains numerous new 
applications of them.
To begin with, there is the energetic theory of the electrophorus. If a disc of 
weight P is lowered from the height h to the electrified cake of resin, then 
electrical attraction performs mechanical work in addition to gravity. This 
work can be set equal to Ph + p. While the disc rests on the cake, an electrical 
effect z is exerted and now the electrical attraction is intensified, so that work 
Ph + p + x is required to raise the disc again to its original height. Once there, 
it produces a second electrical effect z!. Thus, while we expend a mechanical 
effect x each time in raising and lowering the disc, we gain each time the 
electrical effect z + z!. And so, as a result,
x = z + z'
“The conclusion is simple,” Mayer writes. “Nothing comes from nothing. 
The electricity of the resin cake cannot have produced the consecutive sum of 
electrical effects, since it has been conserved undiminished; and the mechanical 
effect, which has disappeared upon each repetition, cannot have become zero. 
If one does not take pleasure in a double paradox, what remains? Nothing, but 
to declare: the mechanical effect has been transformed into electricity. The 
electrical cake, like the lever and the retort, is nothing more than an instrument 
that the experimenter makes use of to bring about a metamorphosis.”
Who would not be overcome on reading these remarks by an awareness of the 
farseeing clarity and boldness of Mayer’s reasoning! Set against such words, how 
wretched appears the attempt of later writers to dispute Mayer’s originality.

84
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
4. 
In addition to numerous physiological applications of the new doctrine, 
such as were naturally suggested to the doctor, the work of 1845 also contains 
cosmological reflections, which were taken up again, in popular presentation, in 
a paper published in 1848 entitled Contributions to the Dynamics of the Heavens. 
They led to the theory of solar heat, according to which losses of solar heat are 
opposed by gains from the kinetic energy of masses from the solar system that 
fall onto the sun. But since my desire in this book is to focus interest on the 
historical development of the fundamental energetic idea, I will not go into any 
detail about these first attempts at applications. I shall only append the 
diagram from the work of 1845 in which Robert Mayer summarizes the 
“primary forms of force considered up until now”:
I. 
Fall-force | mechanical forces
П. 
Motion 
f mechanical effect
A. simple 
, B. undulating, vibrating 
m.|s Heat 
§ 3 ■ Magnetism
■nr a я
IV. 6 
Electricity, Galvanic current
y, 
Chemical dissociation
of certain kinds of matter
chemical 
forces
Chemical combination 
of certain other kinds of matter
5. Among the founders of energetics, Robert Mayer is undoubtedly the most 
profound in his ideas, but he is also the poorest when it comes to the resources 
and knowledge of technical science. In a letter to Griesinger of December 5 and 
6, 1842, he cites the following as proofs for the truth of his assertions: “1. They 
are necessary consequences of principles that cannot be denied. 2. One proof 
that, subjectively for me, shows the absolute truth of my theses is a negative 
one: namely, it is a generally accepted principle in science that the construction 
of a mobile perpetuum is theoretically impossible (that is, even if one ignores all 
the mechanical difficulties, such as friction, etc., one still can not accomplish it, 
even conceptually). But my assertions can all be regarded as pure consequences 
of this principle of impossibility: If one denies any of my theses, I shall 
immediately construct a mobile perpetuum. 3. A third proof must be con­
structed for science from the teachings of experimental physics.”
With respect to the latter, Mayer even anticipated in concept what the co­
founders of energetics, Joule and Helmholtz, acomplished. But only in concept. 
In view of his disposition and training, he probably was not up to carrying out 

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 85
the practical and intellectual work he had in mind. But neither did fate grant 
him the opportunity to live to the fullest in his ideas; the resistance of a dull 
world lamed the wings of his mind.
Born on November 25, 1814, the son of an apothecary in Heilbronn, he 
received his preliminary education in the Heilbronn secondary school and the 
Schontal evangelical theological seminary, and studied from 1832 to 1837 in 
Tubingen. The fortunate financial situation of his father permitted him further 
years of training in Munich and Paris, followed then by that voyage to Java, as 
ship’s doctor on a Dutch merchant vessel, during which, as we have recounted, 
the synthesis that became the origin of energetics first occurred in his mind. In 
spite of subsequent medical activity in Heilbronn, where he was elected as head 
official surgeon and later town physician, the new views stayed with Mayer and 
impelled him to write the essays that have been described above.
But with these publications of 1842, 1845 and 1848, the creative power of the 
pioneering thinker is exhausted. In 1851, of course, he published two additional 
essays: “Remarks on the Mechanical Equivalent of Heat” and “On the Force of 
the Heart”; and the former again emphasizes forcefully the main points of the 
new way of thinking. But these writings no longer exhibit any forward impetus. 
One must look up Weyrauch’s admirable account23 of the sad experiences with 
which Mayer had to cope at that time in order to understand the martyr’s fate of 
this solitary thinker from Heilbronn. To be sure, 1842, the year of his first 
publication and of his marriage, passed for him “like the bridal night’s sweet 
joys”; but severe disappointment soon followed. Joule’s claims of priority; the 
disregard with which Helmholtz, as reviewer for the Berlin journal Advances in 
Physics, treated Mayer’s work in comparison with those of Holtzmann, Joule, 
and his own; the political commotions of the year 1849; the base condemnation 
of Mayer in the Augsburg General Newspaper, plus the bitter loss of two children, 
as well as that of his parents - it was a coincidence full of disastrous tragedy.
23 Mechanik der War me, third edition, pp. 224-234.
24 loc. cit.
The accumulated overburdening of Mayer’s nervous system thus led to a first 
frightful outbreak on the morning of May 28, 1850: In an attack of delirium, 
and in front of his wife, he hurled himself through the window two stories down 
into the street. To be sure, the severe bodily injuries he incurred were healed, 
even if their aftereffects never entirely disappeared. But the manifestations of 
brain fever and melancholia recurred periodically. He sought care in a mental 
hospital, but found only new aggravation in the degradingly harsh treatment 
for lunacy he received there. Subsequently, Mayer repeatedly sought and found 
relief in other mental hospitals; and he also published several additional works 
and addresses, which will be of great interest to anyone wishing to follow, from 
a psychological standpoint, the pathways of this unique mind.
But Mayer’s further activity has no importance for the history of energetics. 
His later works appear to us as a fading away of the central system, an 
afterglow of the clarity that once filled it. Professor Hufner (Tubingen), who 
visited Mayer in 1873, describes him in a letter to Zollner24 as a quiet man - 

86
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
with whom, of course, one had better not talk about Darwin, if one did not 
want to irritate him - who was politically a resolute ultramontanist. Mayer died 
on March 20, 1878, of chronic pneumonia, after he had received in abundant 
measure, during the last decade of his existence, the honors to which his life’s 
work entitled him. These did not come too late to assuage his resentment, but 
they were too late to become for him stimuli to new creations.
Section Seven: 
Grove and Joule
1. The development of energy ideas in England rises on the broad foundation 
of extensive scientific knowledge. Compared with the narrow domain of 
experience with which Robert Mayer begins and from which he works his way 
through to the truth, the supply of facts established by Faraday’s research 
appears both ample and abundant. The reciprocal transformations Faraday 
revealed among electrical, magnetic, chemical, mechanical and optical states 
must have - by themselves, as it were - given new life to views about the nature 
of force, which had already been aroused by the much simpler transformation 
phenomena discovered earlier, and that provided the impulse for their scientific 
elaboration. At the same time that Mayer published his ideas in 1842, Grove 
first stated the views that, after further development, he later published in book 
form under the title On the Correlation of Physical Forces. The point of view his 
work defends is that, in his own words,  “the different states of activity 
(affections) of matter which form the main topics of experimental physics, 
namely, heat, light, electricity, magnetism, chemical affinity and motion are all 
correlated with each other, that is, are reciprocally dependent upon one 
another, so that none of them, considered by itself, can be regarded as the 
essential cause of the other. Rather, every one of them is capable of giving rise 
to every other one or of itself being transformed into it. Thus, heat can directly 
or indirectly give rise to electricity, electricity can produce heat, and so with all 
the rest. Each of them disappearing as force creates others as result, and the 
same holds true for the other forces, so that it must be regarded as an 
unavoidable conclusion that no force can come into being other than through 
the expiration of a previously existing force or forces.”
25
Quoted from the German version edited by Schaper (Braunschweig 1871).
In Grove, however, this point of view is in no way based, as it is in Mohr, on 
the assumption that all those states of activity are states of motion. Rather, and 
above all, Grove adheres solely to experience; and in this way he arrives at 
statements that are quite reminiscent of Mayer’s words: “We know nothing but 
definite changes of matter for which heat is the general designation; the thing 
heat in itself is unknown to us. Since it has been proven of heat that it is a force 
capable of generating motion, and that motion is capable of producing the 
remaining kinds of forces, it therefore follows of necessity that heat also has the 
capacity to give rise indirectly to these other forces.”
The conclusion of Grove’s work contains the following characteristic 
25

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 87
passages: “The precise meaning of the term ‘correlation’, which I selected as the 
title of my lecture of 1843, includes a necessary mutual or reciprocal 
dependence of two ideas which are inseparable even in the mental conception 
of them.” “It is probable that, if not all, nonetheless the majority of physical 
phenomena are correlated among each other, and that without such a duality 
of concept, the understanding is not capable of having any idea of them.” “The 
evolution of one force or form of a force into another has misled some to view 
all the different activities of nature as reducible to a unity, and as having arisen 
from a single force that is the efficient cause of all the rest. Thus, one author 
attempts to prove that electricity is the cause of all change in matter; another, 
that chemical activity causes each and every thing; a third, that heat is the 
universal cause; and so forth. If, as I have shown, the true expression of the fact 
is that each mode of force is capable of producing the others, and that none of 
them can be produced other than through another force that has preceded it, 
then any view portraying one or the other of them as the efficient cause, in and 
of itself, of all the rest is erroneous. This view stems, I believe, from a confusion 
of the abstract or generalized meaning of the term ‘cause’ with its concrete or 
particular meaning.”
To be sure, our author does stumble at the end. There the clarity and logical 
rigor which we admire in Mayer’s writings abandon Grove, and the English­
man concludes with a concession to traditional views: “Throughout the entire 
work, I have always put motion in the same category as the other states of 
matter. The line of argument used in the work, however, seems to me to lead 
inevitably to the proposition that these states of matter are themselves kinds of 
motion.” “Whether we continue, because of our familiarity with motion, to 
connect the other states of activity with motion, as if this word were most easily 
construed and most suitable for explaining them; or whether it is in reality the 
only mode in which our understanding, in contrast to our senses, is able to 
picture to itself material effects - so much is certain, that since the time when 
people constructed for themselves mystical notions of spiritual or supernatural 
forces in order to explain physical phenomena, all hypotheses formed to this 
end have attributed them to motion.” “In all these hypotheses, our concepts 
comprehend only those of matter and of motion. Moreover, when we choose 
terms deriving from our sense perceptions, which themselves may be merely 
forms of motion of nerve elements, we are once again incapable of finding any 
words to describe different phenomena other than those expressible through 
matter and motion. We labor in vain to escape from these ideas. But if we 
should do it, our mental powers would have to undergo a change of which, at 
present, we have not the slightest idea.”
Perhaps it will temper the heated excitement of the current controversy over 
the justification of the mechanical or of the energetic point of view to find that 
these oppositions are older than the name “energy,” and that they already 
concerned one of the leading minds at a time when the ideas of transformation 
were just beginning to assume a definite shape.
In the last words of his work, Grove expresses, simply but firmly, the 
profound conviction - which is also everywhere in evidence in Mayer - that 

88
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
the new views are connected with the most basic fundamentals of human 
thinking and being: “The more deeply research penetrates into all phenomena, 
the more the conviction is urged upon us that, speaking in human terms, 
neither matter nor force can be created or annihilated, and that the essence of 
cause is inaccessible to us. That which causes is the will, the creation, the act of 
God.”
2. The scientist who then added to Grove’s work what it still lacked - a 
quantitative conclusion - is filled with the same conviction. Despite large 
differences in their basic points of view, Grove’s arguments have much in 
common with those of Mohr. Like him, moreover, Grove is satisfied with a 
qualitative presentation. The credit for having determined experimentally the 
fixed quantitative relations among the various forms of energy that can be 
transformed into one another belongs to James Prescott Joule. From the 
experimental side, Joule’s research appears to be a continuation of Rumford’s 
plans. But the idea that guides him is no longer the demonstration of the 
mechanical nature of heat; it is the same idea of transformation to which Grove 
had given such effective expression. “I shall lose no time,” Joule writes in 
1843,  “in repeating and extending these experiments, as I am persuaded that 
the mighty forces of nature are indestructible through the Creator’s ‘Let there 
be’; and that where a mechanical force is expended, an exact equivalent of heat 
is always obtained.” If an “animal should turn a part of a machine or climb a 
hill, there would result, as I believe, a decrease in the heat developed in the 
system with a given chemical activity in proportion to the muscular exertion 
utilized for this activity.”
26
Joule, Das mechanische Warmeaquivalent. Translated by Spengel (Braunschweig 1872).
In the conclusion to a paper of 1845, Joule expresses himself in still greater 
detail: “The principles I have adopted lead to a theory of the steam engine quite 
different from that usually assumed, but one that at the same time corresponds 
much better to the facts. It is the opinion of some researchers that the 
mechanical force of the steam engine arises simply from the passage of heat 
from a warm to a cold body, without any loss of heat during the passage. 
Clapeyron adopted this view in a very able theoretical paper ... This researcher 
agrees with Carnot in that he ascribes the force to the vis viva developed by the 
heat contained in the steam in its passage from the temperature of the boiler to 
that of the condenser. But I am of the view that this theory, which is in any case 
ingenious, contradicts the recognized principles of natural science, because it 
leads to the conclusion that living force can be destroyed if the apparatus is set 
up poorly. Thus, Clapeyron draws the conclusion: ‘Since the temperature of the 
fire is 1000 to 2000°C higher than that of the boiler, there is enormous loss of 
vis viva in the passage of the heat from the furnace floor to the boiler.’ As I am 
of the view that only the Creator possesses the power to destroy, I agree with 
Roget and Faraday that any theory whose consequences yield the annihilation 
of force is necessarily false. The principles which I... have developed are free of 
this difficulty. We may conclude from them that the steam, while it is expanding 
26

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 89
in the cylinder, loses an amount of heat which is exactly proprtional to the force 
transmitted to the piston, and that, with the condensation of the steam, the heat 
thus converted into force does not again become free. If we assume that no heat 
is lost in radiation, the theory presented here requires that the heat set free in 
the condensor is less than that which was imparted to the boiler from the 
furnace floor, and, what is more, in exact proportion to the equivalent of the 
mechanical force developed.”
3. The experimental investigations of Joule himself, and of later researchers 
who determined the equivalent of heat with increasing certainty, belong within 
the sphere of ideas of the present book only insofar as they more and more 
allayed initial doubts about the quantitative practicability of the ideas of 
transformation. The absolute measurements of the electrical and magnetic 
quantities had to have the same effect - as did, in general, all determinations 
of the numerical relationships among different forms of energy which satisfied 
up-to-date standards of precision. It is not feasible, of course, to summarize 
here all such measurements; but at least the older determinations of the heat 
equivalent, which substantially contributed to bringing energetics to fruition, 
may be welcome.
The determinations of the heat equivalent also have a general importance 
that surpasses all of the other equivalence determinations. It is this: If we could 
transform a system from one state into another by expending only mechanical 
energy, it would then follow from the principles of mechanics that any other 
purely mechanical transformation from the same initial state to the same final 
state requires the same expenditure of energy. Now, of course, the supply of 
positive amounts of energy, to the extent that they are not themselves 
immediately mechanical energy, can easily be attributed, in simpler cases, to a 
mechanical source; and the further development of energetics has shown that 
such energy can be replaced, in every case, by the importation of mechanical 
energy. But the energy released by no means always reveals itself as mechanical 
energy, and especially not in the simplest cases, but rather as heat. That this 
heat is equivalent to mechanical energy in accordance with a fixed ratio thus 
has far-reaching significance, because heat is the final form in which we 
encounter energy contributions.
As long as the equivalence between heat and work was not established, a 
special proof had to be given, for example, that in chemical changes in which 
the total energy difference indeed usually manifests itself as heat, this develop­
ment of heat depends only on the nature of the initial and final states and not 
on the choice of the intermediate ones. In 1840,27 in fact, Hess demonstrated 
experimentally the independence of reaction heat from the intermediate states, 
and thereby made a contribution to energetics that was independent of the 
experimental difficulties in determining equivalences.
27 Pogg. Ann. 50 and 56.

90
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Older Determinations of the Heat Equivalent 
(Cf. Helm, Theory of Energy [Leipzig 1887], p. 90.)
1798 Rumford observed the evolution of heat in the 
drilling of metals. There follows from these observations, 
in accordance with Joule’s assumption,. 
(567) kgm
1830 At approximately this date, S. Carnot, in an unknown 
way, arrived at the value.......................... (370) kgm
1839 Seguin measured the work of expansion of steam, and 
later Joule and Tate calculated therefrom contradictory 
equivalence values..................................... ........
The following are the unquestionable determinations:
1842 
From the specific heats of air, R. Mayer calculates 
365 kgm
1843 
From the friction of metallic bodies, Colding finds 
350 kgm
Joule measures the transformation in the magneto­
electrical motor......................................................... 460 kgm
Joule measures the friction of water in narrow tubes 422 kgm
1845 Holtzmann calculates in the manner of R. Mayer 
374 kgm
R. Mayer’s detailed calculation.............................. 367 kgm
Joule: series of experiments on compression and 
dilution of air......................................................... 436 kgm
Joule: as in 1843, first procedure............................ 452 kgm
Joule: as in 1843, second procedure....................... 425 kgm
Joule: friction of a paddle wheel in water............... 
488.3 kgm
1847 Joule: friction of a paddle wheel in water, new 
series of experiments................................ 428.8 kgm
Joule: friction of a paddle wheel in spermaceti oil 
429.1 kgm
Joule: friction of a paddle wheel in mercury........... 
432.1 kgm
Seguin, as in 1939 ..................................................... (449) kgm
1850 Joule: friction of a paddle wheel in water, in mercury, 
as well as friction of cast iron. Joule declares the best 
value, exact within | %, to be...................... 423.55 kgm
Colding: friction heat................................................. 372 kgm
Clausius: like R. Mayer............................................... 370 kgm
Clausius: expansion of water vapor........................... 421 kgm
1852 Kupffer: dilation of metal wires through heat and 
through tension............................................. 453 kgm

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 91
1855 
Hirn: friction between machine parts......................... 370 kgm
1857 
Favre: heat in closing arc with electric motor............ 
426^164 kgm
le Roux: development of heat through magneto­
electrical machines..................................................... 458 kgm
Boscha: electromotive force of Daniell’s cell in 
absolute measure....................................................... 419.5 kgm
Quintus Icilius: development of heat of absolutely 
measured current intensities...................................... 399.7 kgm
1858 Favre: friction of metals in the mercury calorimeter 413.2 kgm 
Hirn: friction of metals upon the application of 
lubricants...................................................... 371.6 kgm
Hirn: destruction of metals in drilling..................... 425 kgm
Hirn: transformation by the steam engine, according 
to Clausius’s correction............................................... 413 kgm
Matteucci: closing arc with motor.............................. 438.56 kgm
Section Eight:
Helmholtz’s Point of View
1. The establishment of the energy law, developed from the standpoint of 
professional science, we owe to Helmholtz. Joule allowed himself be guided by 
views of nature with religious underpinnings. Mayer, to be sure, was guided by 
a scientific concept, the concept of force; but it was a concept of such generality 
that its clarification was possible only in the comprehensive manner of a 
philosopher. Helmholtz succeeds in characterizing precisely the definite 
aspects that a consideration of nature - that any way of expressing our 
knowledge of the course of nature - must exhibit if it is to be in agreement 
with the law of energy. He finds this precise characterization in the principle of 
the impossibility of a perpetuum mobile.
It is obvious, of course, that just this principle is also an expression of the 
experiences upon which Robert Mayer’s sequence of ideas is constructed. 
Judged epistemologically, moreover, it is neither better nor worse than Mayer’s 
emphasis on indestructable, but changeable, causes. Still, it is more valuable 
logically, since it states precisely what is necessary - no more and no less - of 
the course of nature in order to establish the energy law. The very fact that, 
from the outset, Helmholtz does not make use of the concept of cause, which 
Mayer had to take as his starting point in order finally to overcome it entirely, 
thus gives a fundamental significance to the principle of the impossibility of a 
perpetuum mobile.
In his celebrated youthful work “On the Conservation of Force: a Physical 
Memoir,” which was presented at the meeting of the Physical Society in Berlin 
on July 23, 1847,28 Helmholtz looks for expressions for the new way of 
28
Berlin, Reimer, 1847.

92
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
conceiving of natural phenomena. “The derivation of the theses established 
here may be thought of as arising from two starting points: either from the 
principle that it is impossible to obtain an unlimited amount of force for doing 
work from the effects upon each other of any combination of natural bodies, or 
from the assumption that all actions in nature can be reduced to attractive and 
repulsive forces whose intensity depends only on the distance between the 
points acting upon one another.” Helmholtz wishes to demonstrate in the first 
part of his paper that the two propositions are identical.
To this end, the former proposition, or principle of the impossibility of a 
perpetuum mobile, is first precisely formulated:
“Let us imagine a system of natural bodies, which stand in certain spatial 
relations to one another and are acted upon by forces mutually exerted among 
them, so that they move until they have come into different positions. Then, we 
can regard the velocities thereby acquired as a specific mechanical work and 
can translate them into such. If we now want the same forces to act a second 
time, so as to obtain the same quantity of work, we must in some manner, 
through the application of other forces at our disposal, return the bodies to 
their initial conditions. In so doing, however, a certain quantity of work of 
these other forces will again be consumed. Our principle in this case then 
requires that the quantity of work gained when the bodies of the system go from 
the first position to the second, and lost when they go from the second back to 
the first, is always the same, no matter what the kind of motion, the path, or the 
velocity of this transition. If this were not the case, if the quantity of work were 
greater in one way than in the other, then we could use the first to gain work 
and the second - to which we could apply a part of the work just gained - to 
return the system, and could, in this way, gain mechanical force indefinitely. We 
would have constructed a perpetuum mobile, which could not only maintain 
itself in motion, but would also be capable of imparting force externally.”
2. The last sentence is in need of commentary, aptly supplied by Planck.  If 
the transformation from the initial to the final state requires the amount of 
work a in one way and the amount d in another, it should not be thought, for 
example, that by reversing the second path a cyclic process can be formed 
which consumes the work a - d, for the paths may be irreversible (cf. Part 2). 
Rather, the final state should be taken back to the initial one via a third path 
requiring the work b. Then, two cyclic processes are formed which consume the 
works a + b and d + b, respectively, both of which could not disappear if a and 
a’ were different. If they were, there would then exist at least one inexhaustible 
source of work or one insatiable consumer of it, since then the sum, which does 
not disappear, is either positive or negative. It may be granted as a principle of 
experience, adequately established by numerous unsuccessful experiments, that 
inexhaustible sources of work do not exist. On the other hand, one cannot - as 
Planck correctly notes - portray the impossibility of an unlimited disappear­
ance of work in such a process as a result based on experience, since the focus
29
Das Prinzip der Erhaltung der Energie (Leipzig 1887), p. 141.
29

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 93
of the inventors of the perpetuum mobile principle was always directed toward 
the generation, not at the annihilation, of work. Along with Klein,30 one may 
therefore doubt the logical, but not the historical, justification of constructing 
the principle of energy on the proposition of the impossibility of a perpetuum 
mobile.
H. Klein, Deduction des Prinzips der Erhaltung der Energie (Dresden 1889), p. 47.
If this objection is put aside, then, in accordance with what has been said, the 
perpetuum mobile argument requires the physical possibility of a transforma­
tion from the final state back to the initial one; hence that - as Planck expresses 
himself - in general the transformation of every state of a system into every 
other state is possible in at least one way. But one can tell whether two given 
states are states of the same system only by the fact that one of the states can 
arise from the other. Accordingly, the perpetuum mobile argument is secure 
only if the following principle is also granted: A state which has arisen from 
another state can again be transformed into this state, even if in a completely 
different way.
To be sure, this principle does not appear nearly so evident as the perpetuum 
mobile principle itself, to which, owing to the irreversibility of many transfor­
mations, it must necessarily be added. In this regard, Planck remarks that, for 
example, the conversion of coal into diamond is at present humanly impos­
sible, but that, according to the supplementary principle, it must be taken to be 
a naturally possible process. From induction, we expect that transformations 
will occur which have not yet been observed, just as we conclude, also from 
induction, that a perpetuum mobile is impossible.
3. If in the interest of brevity, we make use the concept of a cyclic process, 
which was introduced by Sadi Carnot (cf. Part 2), and also attend to what was 
said before, then the perpetuum mobile principle amounts to the following 
assertions:
1) 
Every natural process can be restored by means of a cyclic process;
2) 
The quantities of work that enter and leave a system of bodies
during a cyclic process cancel each other out, regardless of whether 
these quantities appear as mechanical work or are only transform­
able into it.
If one does not wish to accept these propositions, but still wishes to adopt the 
standpoint of Helmholtz’s work, one must nevertheless grant the conclusion 
that can follow only from them, namely
The total amount of work that a system gains when it goes from any state into 
any other state is independent of the nature of the conversion process.
4. 
The conditions under which this theorem may be derived from the 
differential equations of mechanics had been known with precision since
30

94
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Lagrange (cf. p. [72]). Helmholtz attempts, conversely, to derive from his 
principle the conditions under which the theorem known in mechanics as the 
law of the conservation of living force holds true. He did not succeed in this 
attempt. Thus, if the living force of a point
(1) 
T = |m(x'2 + y'2+ z'2)
depends only on its position, hence upon x, y, and z (designations as on p. [73]), 
then for any arbitrary change in position
ЭТ j 
dT J dT J
(2) 
dT = —dx + —dy + —dz,
ox 
dy dz
and also (p. [73])
(3) 
dT = Xdx + Ydy + Zdz.
But the conclusion that it follows from (1)—(3) that the components of force 
X, Y, Z have to be derivatives of a function T of x, y, z, and thus themselves 
functions of x, y, z, is untenable. Lipschitz has raised the objection that the 
formulation
(4) 
X^^+Qz'-Ry',Y = ^ + Rx,-Pz',Z = ^ + Py'-Qx'
ox 
dy 
dz
also satisfies the above equation for dT9 hence that a force perpendicular to the 
direction of motion and to the arbitrary vector PQR may be added to XYZ, as 
in
(5) 
(Qz' - Ry^x’ + (Rx' - Pzf)yf + (Pyf - Qx')z' = 0
and
(6) 
(Qzf - Ry')P + (Rx' - Pz')Q + (Py' - Qx')R = 0
If what essentially ought to be proved is not to be virtually assumed - 
namely, the dependence of the forces on position alone - then nothing remains 

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 95
but to make another assumption, in addition to the perpetuum mobile principle, 
about the nature of forces. Helmholtz31 later disposed of Lipschitz’s objection 
by appealing to the assumption that forces must satisfy the principle of action 
and reaction. In fact, the restriction on forces hereby introduced apparently 
contradicts, in general, the appearance of forces which are always perpendi­
cular to the direction of motion.
31 Wiss. Abhandl. Vol. 1 (Leipzig 1882).
32 Voigt, Elementare Mechanik (Leipzig 1889), p. 86.
33 C. Neumann, Die Prinzipien der Elektrodynamik (Tubingen 1868).
5. 
Voigt  has very generally settled the question of the conditions under 
which the expression
32
Xdx + Ydy + Zdz
is the total differential of a function of the coordinates and their derivatives 
with respect to time. If f is a function of time t, the coordinates x, and the 
derivatives x', x", x"'..., then
(7)
«ЛАЯ
dt dt dx dx'
Now one uses the transformations
(8a)
9/ „ =d_ (df^ Л £ 
,
dx1 X dt [ dx'X j dt [ dx' J X
(8b)
dx" dt [dx" J dt (dx"J
1 (JL "I 
'1 f df 1
dt [ dx" X J dt dt [ dx" J X dt1 [ dx" j
(8c)
If one then introduces Carl Neumann’s33 notation for the coefficients of 
variation

96
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
¥ = m £ (df_ 1 _£ fjq
¥ dt [d£J + dt2 [d£"J Л3(д£"') +
there follows
(10)
(У J +± PG")
dt dt Ъх dt (by J dt J
The expression
Xdx + Ydy + Zdz
thus becomes a total differential when
(H)
ЬФ _M>
ЬФ
in which Ф represents a function of the coordinates xyz and of their derivatives 
x!y'z' .^y^z”,... which does not explicitly contain t. Moreover, that trinomial 
will then also be the total differential of the expression
-Ф +
йФ , с)ф , йф 
ox oy' oz'
In particular, if XYZ are to contain only the coordinates xyz and the 
velocities x'/z', Ф cannot contain any derivatives of the coordinates other than 
the first derivative, and those only to the first power, so that
(12)
Ф = <Po + V’ix' + <Pzy' +
when the are functions of xyz. Then
(13)
Oyo , |Wi , / (dyi dtp31 
dx ( dy dx J Z [ dz dx )
and the corresponding Yand Z assume the form of expression (4), while

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 97
(14)
Xdx + Ydy + Zdz — —dp$.
6. 
Helmholtz also proves that when all forces can be reduced to forces acting 
between points - to so-called point forces - these must be central forces, that is, 
forces acting in the line connecting the pair of points, dependent only on the 
distance r separating them. Now since, in accordance with what has been said, 
when one of the two points is thought of as fixed at the origin of the system of 
coordinates,
(15)
dT = Xdx + Ydy + Zdz = 0
must be the case whenever r has the same value, thus whenever 
(16) 
that is, whenever
(17)
there follows
(18) 
= xdx + ydy + zdz = 0,
_ 
xdx + уdy
az —---------------
z
for any arbitrary dx and dy. Accordingly,
(19) 
X : Y .Z = x.y.z.
It is evident from this result, however, that the force XYZ lies in the line 
connecting the two points.
7. 
In this way, Helmholtz erected the law of energy on two different 
foundations, each of which is capable of replacing the other: on the principle 
of the impossibility of a perpetuum mobile and on the thesis that all forces can be 
reduced to central forces satisfying the principle of reciprocal action. He does 
not emphasize the profound difference that separates these two conceptions.

98
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Because the physics of that time was directed towards a mechanical explana­
tion of the whole of nature, it is not clear anywhere in Helmholtz’s memoir that 
the mechanical hypothesis - that is, the assumption that everything that 
happens is reducible to acceleration-dependent forces - underlies one of these 
conceptions, while the other is free of this hypothesis. Indeed, even in the 
precise expression of the perpetuum mobile principle (cited on p. [91]), 
mechanical concepts are intermingled, the result being that one is compelled 
in every application of it - for example, to electrical or thermal processes - to 
think velocities and forces into the empirical facts.
In keeping with this mechanical point of view, Helmholtz takes as the 
analytical expression of the energy law the equation well-known in mechanics 
since Lagrange (cf. p. [74], equation 8), in the form valid for central forces, 
namely
(20) 
= Rdr-
In this expression, R represents the intensity of the attraction active between 
two points at a distance r from one another; n and Г2 are two values of the 
distance at which the points move with the velocities vi and ?2, respectively; 
and the summation ^2 is extended over all the points in the system.
Helmholtz called the function Rdr on the right-hand side of this equation 
the “sum of the tensional forces between the distances r\ and rf \ or the “sum of 
the tensional forces consumed (in the change in distance)” and the “loss in 
quantity of tensional force” By means of the latter phrase, which has become 
especially important, the concept of tensional force is now employed, without 
its being said expressly, to one of the two states alone, that is, for the integral of 
Д Rdr, starting from any standard distance ro. If the above equation is then 
written as
(21) 
+ Rdr = ^2^mvi+Yj/r Rdr'
this gives the famous Helmholtzian principle of the conservation of force, which 
we now call the law of the conservation of energy:
The sum of the living and tensional forces present is constant',
or, in later terminology,
The sum of the kinetic and potential energy is constant.

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 99
Section Nine:
Helmholtz’s Applications of Energetics
1. The following parts of Helmholtz’s essay are taken up with applications of 
the principle thus formulated to the different domains of physical experience. 
They were subsequently the most effective sections of the memoir, because the 
dissemination and acknowledgement of the principle of energy are principally 
attributable to the applications of it that Helmholtz considers.
Briefly recalled, there is, to begin with, the application of the energy law to 
motions which take place under the influence of the general force of gravita­
tion, and to the transmissions of motion through incompressible solid and fluid 
bodies. Then the motions of perfectly elastic solid and fluid bodies are 
surveyed, and the following proposition is noted: “In the case of the inter­
ference of two wave trains, there is no destruction of living force, but only a 
different distribution. Two wave trains of intensities a2 and b2, which do not 
interfere, give the intensity a2 + b2 to all the points they affect. If they interfere, 
the maxima have the value (a 4- Z>)2, that is, 2ab more, and the minima (a — 
that is, just as much less, than a2 + Z?2.” I call attention to this simple 
determination only because, for quite a long time afterwards, the matter was 
erroneously represented in a widely circulated textbook.
34 Following today’s manner of representation, the word in parentheses should probably be 
replaced by “imperfectly elastic” or else be omitted. It is, however, still to be found in the new 
impression of the work in Helmholtz’s Gesammelten Abhandlungen.
2. In these applications the occurrence of friction was excluded; but this is 
now taken into consideration in a later section, where the heat generated by 
friction is represented as equivalent to the lost work. This section refers in such 
detail to the older statements of Carnot, Clapeyron and Holtzmann, in 
addition to Joule’s investigations, that it is not appropriate to discuss it in the 
present context. Mention need only be made here of how this section 
subordinates the phenomena of heat to the general principle. “It is customary 
in mechanics to represent friction as a force which counteracts some existing 
motion, and whose intensity is a function of velocity. This conception is 
obviously only a very incomplete expression, made for the purpose of 
calculation, of the complicated processs of action and reaction into which the 
various molecular forces enter. It followed from this conception that with 
friction living force was absolutely lost, just as the same loss was assumed in 
the case of (elastic ) impact. But no account was taken here of the fact that, 
apart from the increase of the tensional forces due to the compression of the 
bodies rubbed or struck, the heat that is developed also represents a force 
through which we can generate mechanical effects. Also not taken into account 
was the electricity usually generated, which can produce mechanical effects 
directly by its forces of attraction or repulsion, or indirectly through its 
development of heat. It remains to be asked, therefore, whether the sum of 
these forces always corresponds to mechanical force that is lost. In those cases 
where molecular changes and the development of electricity are avoided as 
34

100 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
much as possible, this question would be posed as follows: Does a definite 
quantity of heat always emerge for a certain loss in mechanical force? To what 
extent can a quantity of heat correspond to an equivalent of mechanical force?”
But, then, Helmholtz does not perceive the entirely different importance of 
these two questions. While the answer to the first question about the actual 
equivalence, which is given by referring to Joule’s experiments, apparently 
suffices to subordinate the phenomena of heat to the fundamental laws of 
energetics, Helmholtz treats quite thoroughly the second question about the 
manner in which the equivalence is to be pictured mechanically, and cannot 
regard as conclusive the answer that heat is to be viewed partly as living force 
and partly as tensional force. However, he contents himself by saying that “the 
insight into the possibility of conceiving of the phenomena of heat as due to 
motion is sufficient for our purposes.” This passage is particularly revealing of 
the fact that, in 1847, Helmholtz is still uncertain about the perpetuum mobile 
principle in that he wavers in acknowledging its validity beyond the limits of 
mechanics.
3. More auspicious - according to this conception of that time - is the state of 
knowledge regarding electrical and magnetic processes. Here Helmholtz is able 
to separate living force from tensional force in the phenomena and to derive 
formulas for these phenomena from his fundamental law. From Coulomb’s 
law, the tensional force for electrostatic states is known; and from the energy 
principle, so is the living force. “We obtain this living force as mechanical when 
the velocity of motion of the electricity in the bodies is negligibly small in 
comparison with the speed of propagation of the electrical motion; if this is not 
the case, we must receive it as heat.”
The fundamental law then emerges in fullest clarity, in all its universality and 
without any reference to mechanical notions, in Helmholtz’s treatment of a 
battery. “Since, during a certain period of action of such a battery, nothing 
changes in it other than its chemical relations and the quantity of heat, the law 
of the conservation of force then requires that the heat gained through the 
chemical processes which take place be equal to the quantity actually gained.” 
From the Lenz-Joule law for current heat, and from Ohm’s law, there follows 
from this the relationship between the electromotive force of the battery and 
the heats of combination of the reactions taking place within it. Cf. Part 5, 
Section 7.
4. The treatment of magnetic induction, one of the finest accomplishments of 
the essay, is again not managed without the aid of mechanical notions. “If a 
magnet moves under the influence of a current, the living force it thereby gains 
must be supplied by the tensional forces consumed in the current.” Now it is by 
no means evident - and the author does not at all try to make it evident - that 
the energy consumed during the time element dt in a chain of electromotive 
force A with current intensity J - that is, the amount A Jdt in units of heat or 
aAJdt in mechanical units, where a represents the mechanical equivalent of a 
unit of heat - exactly measures the tensional forces consumed during the time 

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 101
element dt. And it is no more evident why the current heat aJ2 Wdt, developed 
against the total resistance W, measured in mechanical units, is referred to as 
the living force produced in the circuit, or even why the product of the current 
intensity J and the change in magnetic potential V is referred to as the living 
force gained by the magnet.
Planck, Das Prinzip der Erhaltung der Energie (Leipzig 1887), p. 47.
It is obvious, of course, that JdV need not manifest itself as living force, 
much less as the living force of the magnet. But since it does not matter at all 
what is called living force and what is called tensional force, those unfounded 
assumptions nevertheless lead to the correct equation
(1)
aAJdt — aJ1 Wdt + J —— dt, 
dt
from which the law of induction
(2)
W I a dl J
follows. Helmholtz notes that equation (1) also holds for A = 0. Well, in that 
case the whole thing takes place without tensional force. Doesn’t this suggest 
that the distinction is, in general, an artificial one? Certainly, it can only be 
determined from our experience what amounts of work and work equivalents 
are produced and consumed during a natural process - but that is also all that 
is necessary to formulate the energy equation. Of course, the feeling that causes 
Helmholtz to distinguish the quantity aAJdt, and to place it alone on the left 
side of equation (1), was later refined into a clear concept in Thomson’s idea of 
intrinsic energy.
There is also the difficulty, as Planck has pointed out,35 of determining the 
individual amounts of work or work equivalents that come into consideration 
here. Only experience can determine whether all of the work equivalents that go 
into the process have been taken into account. In fact, Helmholtz errs when he 
proceeds to set up the law of conservation for the case in which two currents 
influence one another, and in exactly the same way as was described above for 
the case of the action between a current and a magnet, by not taking into 
account the electrodynamic potential of both currents. If we call the kinetic 
energy T and the heat developed Q, then in the action between current and 
magnet
(3)
dT = JdV, dQ = aJ2Wdt,
35

102 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
and, from the law of induction (equation 2),
1 ( 1б7П
W I/ ~a~dt J ’
it is also true that
(4) 
dQ = aJAdt - JdV
Summation therefore yields the Helmholtz formulation,
(5) 
aJAdt = dT + dQ.
from which, in hindsight, the law of induction can be inferred.
But in the action between two currents designated by the subscripts 1 and 2, 
and when self-induction is ignored
(6) 
dT = +JxJ2dV.
in accordance with the electrodynamic laws of motion. The expression for the 
current heat
(7)
dQ = aJ^W}dt + aJ^W2dt
yields, by means of the laws of induction for currents,
(8)
1 Wi I ' a dt J ’ 2 W2 I 2 a dt J ’
the equation
(9) 
dQ = aJ\A\dt + J2A2dt - hd(J2 V) - J2d(Jx V)■
It thereby follows that
(10) 
dT + dQ = aA i dt + aJ2A2dt - d(h J2 K), 

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 103
while in Helmholtz the final term is missing, and the formula reads
(10*) 
J1Ax+J2A2 = J2iWx+JlW2+-J\J2~.
a at
5. 
Confronted by the difficulties that here have been deliberately emphasized, 
difficulties that led even one of the great advocates of energetics into errors, 
opponents will be quick with the reproach that energetics cannot, after all, be 
used to further research, that one can prove with it only what one already 
knows. I believe that this reproach is as much and as little justified as it is with 
respect to any theory, and that this situation only manifests itself more honestly 
in the case of energetics, with its splendid simplicity, than it does in the 
mechanical theories, which are decked out in “the bright cloaks” of many 
hypotheses. If we apply energetics to any domain of phenomena, then we must 
of course select, in accordance with experience, the work equivalents to be 
taken into account, that is, we must choose in such a way that the mathematical 
conclusions agree with experience. But if we apply the mechanical hypothesis 
to the same domain, we must equally select coordinates, velocities and forces in 
accordance with the same principle. And the fact that errors are revealed more 
quickly in the former case than in the latter does not speak in favor of the latter.
6. Certainly, the deficiencies of Helmholtz’s work cannot at all justify, or even 
explain, the cool reception it initially found. “I was afterwards rather 
astonished by the opposition I met with in expert circles,” Helmholtz writes in 
1882.  “My work was rejected by Poggendorff’s Annals, and among the 
members of the Berlin Academy only C.G.J. Jacobi, the mathematician, took 
up my point of view. Fame and external advancement were not yet to be won in 
those times with the new principles; quite the opposite.”
36
Wiss. Abhandl. Vol. 1, p. 74.
Still, when the great penetrating insight into nature that opens this work had 
been recognized, and the importance of the principle of energy had asserted 
itself, then, in my judgment, Helmholtz’s memoir was overvalued as compared 
with the investigations of Robert Mayer. Even if we ignore entirely the 
distorted, indeed quite foolish, English judgments (about which I shall have 
more to report later), we nonetheless quite often find the view elsewhere as well 
that Robert Mayer was only a prophet, a herald of the new theory, and that 
Helmholtz was its real scientific preacher. Historically considered, that is also 
entirely correct. In Germany, at least, the insight into the value of the law of 
energy was spread by Helmholtz’s work. But if the more perfect professional 
development belongs to Helmholtz, it must be acknowledged that the greater 
clarity in principle belongs to Mayer. And this seems to have been realized 
more and more in the course of the last decades - at least by those who, putting 
aside professional prejudices, have tried to find out for themselves about how 
ideas are created.
According to Robert Mayer’s conception, indestructibility embraces the 
36

104 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
entire content of the concept of force. Energetics thus contains the whole of 
mechanics. As we have seen (cf. p. [94]), Helmholtz temporarily pursued the 
same idea, made a false step, and thereby turned away from it. Energetics 
presented enough other problems. Even though it may not describe exhaus­
tively the processes of motion, what energetics grasps of them immediately 
offers research secure footing enough.
The influence of Helmholtz’s work is very clearly prominent in the area of 
physical theories. Ever since the appearance of his essay on the conservation of 
force, every new theory has been obliged to demonstrate that it does not 
contradict the law of the conservation of energy. In this respect, Helmholtz’s 
work was acknowledged very rapidly; it marks a first stage of unquestioned 
recognition of the fundamental idea of energetics.
7. But Helmholtz must also be credited with another, more special achieve­
ment: He should be thanked for disseminating knowledge of the law of energy 
within the broad circles of the educated classes in Germany. The main interest 
and the main requirement in lectures to a public with a predominantly literary 
education appeared to him to be, according to his own words, to illustrate the 
nature and importance of the laws of nature and their bearings on the 
intellectual activities of man. This cosmic point of view - which seems to have 
become almost incomprehensible to the present academic generation - 
stimulated Helmholtz to write pedagogically and stylistically consummate, 
virtually classic, essays and addresses.  There was never an item of physical 
knowledge so appropriate for giving purpose and coherence to such presenta­
tions as the conservation of energy. As Helmholtz said: This “new universal 
law of nature, which governs the action of all the forces of nature in their 
mutual relations with one another, has a significance as great for our 
theoretical ideas about natural processes as it is important for the technical 
application of those ideas.”
37
Helmholtz, Populare wissenschaftliche Vortrage. (Braunschweig 1865, 1871, 1876). The collec­
tion appeared enlarged under the title: Vortrage und Reden (1884).
Let us mention here only the earliest of these popular lectures, “On the 
Interaction of Natural Forces and the Most Recent Discoveries of Physics 
Relevant to Them”, which was given in Konigsberg in 1854. Here the idea of a 
perpetuum mobile is illuminated and the concepts of living force and tensional 
force are emphasized. Clausius’ new investigations are also taken into con­
sideration. All these new results are then applied to the great cosmological 
problems of the origin of the solar system, the conservation of solar heat, the 
weather, the tides and organic life, in order “to send rays of light into the 
distant nights of the beginning and the end of the history of the universe.”
Thus, without himself continuing to work on his ideas of 1847, Helmholtz 
for decades labored for these ideas. He continued the work of Grove in 
describing the mutual interactions of natural forces, and Robert Mayer’s 
manner, which was of course rooted originally more in the ground of general 
knowledge; and he supported them with his ever more greatly acknowledged 
37

THE CONCEPTION OF FORCE BEFORE ROBERT MAYER 105
authority. In this way, the law of conservation penetrated ever more deeply into 
the textbooks, into the mode of thinking of scientists, and, indeed, into the 
general consciousness. It even prompted premature claims that, in part, go too 
far.38 But, as we shall see, it was only at the end of his career that Helmholtz 
again intervened in the development of the ideas of energy in a manner 
conducive to the advancement of science.
38 For example, when Reis in his widely circulated Lehrbuch der Physik fur Gymnasien . . . (1872) 
tries to derive, “by the method of deduction, the physical phenomena and their laws from the 
principle of the conservation of force and the views of Clausius on the internal structure of 
matter.”

PART TWO
PREPARATION FOR THE SECOND LAW
Section One:
Sadi Carnot
1. The further development of energetics is characterized by the fusion of 
ideas developed until then (Part 1) with a train of thought entirely foreign to 
them, originating with Sadi Carnot. It is true, as we have seen, that in one place 
this train of thought already finds its way into Helmholtz’s work on the 
conservation of force; but until Clausius and Thomson it stands in unresolved 
opposition to the ideas which had primarily inspired that work. It will become 
evident later on how fruitful and influential the resolution of this conflict 
turned out to be. But first we must direct our attention to the second train of 
thought considered in itself. This emerged directly from the applied mechanics 
of France, whose profound influence has already been described. Thus, in 
particular, the work generated by water in hydraulic motors, which became 
decisive for Carnot’s conception of the steam engine, was at that time given a 
wholly energetic treatment. The knowledge diffused among French applied 
scientists around 1820 determined both the advantages and the errors of Sadi 
Carnot’s manner of thinking.
1
2
1 Petit, Ann. chim. (2) 8, 1818.
2 S. Carnot, Reflections sur la puissance motrice du feu et sur les machines propres a developper cette 
puissance (Paris 1824). Reproduced in the annals of the Ecole Normale in 1872. New issue in 
1887. German edition by Ostwald (Leipzig 1892).
The steam engine and the incompetence of the theoretical mechanics of his 
time in the face of this powerful new lever of technology form the starting point 
for Carnot’s ideas. Carnot himself, who was a theoretical genius, clearly set 
forth the method of his investigation in the following words: “In spite of diverse 
works on heat engines, and in spite of the satisfactory state they have currently 
achieved, their theory has nonetheless advanced very little, and the attempts to 
improve it are guided almost entirely by accident ... The phenomenon of the 
production of motion by heat has still not been treated from a sufficiently 
general point of view. It has been investigated only in machines whose mode of 
action does not permit it the entire development of which it is capable. In such 
engines, the phenomenon manifests itself, so to speak, in a mutilated and 
incomplete way, so that it becomes difficult to perceive its foundations and 
study its laws.”
107

108 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
“In order to consider the principle of the generation of motion by heat in all 
its generality, one must conceive of it in a manner that is independent of any 
mechanism and any particular agent. One must produce arguments that are 
applicable, not only to steam engines, but to any conceivable heat engine, 
whatever the working substance may be and in whatever manner it is acted on.”
“Machines that do not receive their motion from heat, such as those whose 
motive force is the force of human beings or of animals, the falling of water, the 
flow of air, and so on, can be studied in minute detail by means of theoretical 
mechanics. All cases are provided for; all possible motions are subject to 
general, solidly founded principles that are applicable under all conditions. 
This is the distinguishing characteristic of a complete theory; but such a theory 
is clearly lacking in the case of heat engines.”
2. And now Carnot recognizes one of the essential conditions common to all 
heat engines. The other he does not perceive, because his scientific training 
rendered him captive to the view, which had been newly revived in France at 
that time by Fourier’s great works, that regards heat as a substance. On this 
view, it appears almost self-evident to assume heat to be an indestructible 
agent, so that the error arises of thinking that the same amount of heat arrives 
in the condenser of the engine as is released by the boiler. “The production of 
motion in steam engines is always tied to one condition to which we must call 
attention. This condition is the restoration of the equilibrium of the caloric 
when it passes from one body at a higher temperature to another where it is 
lower. What actually happens in a functioning steam engine? Caloric produced 
in the furnace through combustion penetrates the walls of the boiler and creates 
steam, so to speak, by incorporating itself into the boiler. The steam takes the 
caloric along and leads it to the cylinder, where it performs some kind of 
service, and from there into the condenser, where it liquefies in contact with the 
cold water present there. In this last place, therefore, the cold water of the 
condenser takes possession of the caloric developed by the combustion. It is 
heated by the steam, just as if it had been brought directly into the furnace. The 
steam serves here only as a means of transporting the caloric; it does the same 
thing as in the heating of baths through steam, except that in our case the 
motion is used ... The generation of motive force in the case of steam engines is 
due, therefore, not so much to an actual consumption of the caloric, as to its 
passage from a hot body to a cold one, that is, to the restoration of its 
equilibrium, which has been disturbed by some cause - a chemical action, such 
as combustion, or some other means.”
According to the material assumption, exactly the same ideas hold for all 
other cases in which heat serves to generate motive force. “A solid body - a 
metal rod, for instance - increases and diminishes in its length when it is 
alternately heated and cooled, and is capable of moving bodies which are 
attached to its ends.” Similarly, fluids and gases, as well as the vapors of all 
materials, are capable of exerting effects: “Wherever there is a difference in 
temperature, motive force can be produced”

PREPARATION FOR THE SECOND LAW
109
Ct
A------------ -----------
High Temp. 
Low Temp.
3. Carnot’s decisive achievement then consists in posing to himself this 
question: “Is the motive force that a given amount of caloric is able to generate 
invariable with respect to quantity, or does it change with the agent, the 
intermediate substance, which is used to obtain it?” To answer this question, 
Carnot devises a process in which work is generated from heat, the working 
substance again returns exactly to its original state (cyclic process), and all 
changes that occur can also take place in the opposite direction (reversible 
process).
That is, 1. by withdrawing caloric from a body Л, the boiler wall, steam is 
generated at the temperature of this body. 2.
If this steam is allowed to push a piston 
forward in a cylinder C and so increase its 
volume, in the doing of which it cools off, 
then the dilation and cooling may be con­
tinued until the temperature of a body В is 
reached. Hereupon, 3. the steam at this 
temperature is brought into contact with body B9 the cooling water or the 
cooled walls of a condenser, and, with the pressure remaining constant, is 
condensed to the point of liquefaction.
The objection that, after these three processes, the working substance is now 
colder than it originally was and thus is not exactly in its original state - which, 
however, it must be for the subsequent conclusions - this objection, strictly 
speaking, can only be removed by not bringing the steam under constant 
pressure in process 3 to the point of liquefaction. Instead, this steam must be 
compressed only far enough so that, via a fourth process, appended after 
separation from the cooling body B, it arrives by means of further compression 
at the original pressure and the original temperature.
Carnot makes this objection to himself, but removes it through a stroke of 
genius that resembles more the cutting of the Gordian knot than the solution to 
a theoretical difficulty. He thinks that one can select the temperature differ­
ences between bodies A and В so as to make them infinitesimally small, and 
that one can overcome finite differences in temperature by allowing the steam 
to run successively through many infinitesimal ones. Moreover, given an 
infinitesimal difference in temperature between A and B, the objection can be 
disposed of by reestablishing, as process 4, contact of body A with the 
condensation water produced in the course of process 3. In any case, the 
equalization of infinitely small temperature differences must surely be regarded 
as a reversible process, since otherwise processes 1, 2, and 3 could not be 
carried out in the opposite direction.
In these processes, the bodies A and В must be imagined as so large, or as 
connected with other bodies in such a way, that they do not perceptibly change 
their temperature, despite the fact that one body releases caloric and the other 
receives it. In order to achieve this goal, the two bodies could also be chosen so 
that both are at the melting or the boiling point throughout.

110 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
4. We have now arrived at the really salient point in our description of 
Carnot’s ideas, at the place where genius manifests itself: “The processes 
described can be carried out as well in one direction as in the opposite 
direction. Nothing prevents us from forming steam with caloric from body В 
and, at the temperature of B, compressing it in such a way that it reaches the 
temperature of body Л, and finally condensing it by putting it in contact with 
Л.” With these words the idea of the reversible process was born; and Carnot 
immediately applies it in order to answer the question he had raised. That is, 
while in the process first described (a), caloric goes from A to В and work is 
thereby delivered to cylinder C, the reverse process(-a) returns the caloric 
from В to A and work is consumed in cylinder C. If there then existed some 
process (/3) by which the caloric could be caused to produce a quantity of 
motive force greater than that yielded by process (a) in its transfer from A to B, 
one would only need to let process (-a) follow process (/?) in order to return 
things to their original state and to be able to repeat the operation. “That would 
not only be a perpetuum mobile, but also the creation of an unlimited amount of 
motive force, without the consumption of caloric or of any other agent.”
It is certainly extremely noteworthy that the first theoretical use of the 
perpetuum mobile principle is only to establish the impossibility of generating 
work force without limit. If an actual creation of motive force were possible, 
Carnot explains, “it would be superfluous to seek motive force in currents of 
water and air or in fuels; we would have an inexhaustible source of it, upon 
which we could draw at will.” But Carnot does not assume that it is impossible 
to destroy work force without limit. Rather, he tacitly admits its destructibility. 
Indeed, he makes an allowance in his considerations for heat transfers which 
occur without the production of work. But if one reversed such a transfer of 
heat through process (-a), one would have simply annihilated work force.
It is as certain that no transfer of heat can occur between A and В that 
results in more motive force than the work process involving steam described 
above as it is certain that aperpetuum mobile is impossible. The caloric behaves, 
in this regard, exactly like falling water. “The motive force of falling water 
depends on its height and on the quantity of liquid; the motive force of heat 
likewise depends on the amount of caloric that is used and on what might be 
termed - in fact, on what we shall call - its height of fall, that is, on the 
difference in temperature of the bodies between which the exchange of the 
caloric takes place.”
5. Better known than the cyclic process carried out with steam, to which the 
last conclusions are tied, and which is free from the outset of the objection 
discussed above, is a second process devised by Sadi Carnot: a reversible cyclic 
process of an ideal gas. Let atmospheric air occupy the space abik (Figure 1):
Let the air expand in contact with the heat source A until the piston 
has gone from ik to ef
1.

PREPARATION FOR THE SECOND LAW
111
2.
3.
4.
Removed from contact with A, the piston expands 
further, without absorbing caloric, until it has 
arrived at gh, whereby the temperature may sink 
to that of body B.
In contact with body B, which, as before, is colder 
than Л, the gas is compressed to cd.
After contact with В is broken, the compression is 
continued to the initial position of the piston, ik, 
whereby the air in its isolated state undergoes an 
increase in temperature until it reaches its initial 
temperature, the temperature of body A.
The cyclic process is thereby closed, and the play can begin again. Since the 
temperature is always higher during the expansion motions, 1 and 2, than it is 
during the compression motions, 3 and 4, for the same piston position or the 
same volume, the work produced by the gas is correspondingly greater than 
that consumed in the compression. Motive force has been gained.
6. The essential characterisics of the process described, which can also be 
united in working substances other than gases, are the following. We call a 
Carnot process any sequence of operations carried out with a body that:
1. 
is a cyclic process, that is, returns the body subjected to change to its 
initial state;
2. 
is reversible, that is, can be carried out in one direction as well as in 
the opposite direction;
3. 
transmits heat from a {higher /lower} temperature to {lower/ 
higher} one, thereby {producing/consuming} mechanical work;
4. 
is comprised of four different processes, two isothermal changes of 
the working substance, that is, changes in which its temperature 
does not change, and two adiabatic changes, namely, changes in 
which the body neither absorbs nor releases heat. The purpose of 
this composition is essentially to avoid any unutilized transfer of 
heat, that is, any transfer from the higher to the lower temperature 
in which work is not at the same time performed.
Thus, the cyclic process carried out by steam described above is also to be 
designated a Carnot process, while, as was stated there, Carnot himself 
referred to it as a perfect cyclic process only for the case in which the 

112 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
temperature difference between bodies A and В is infinitesimal. This deficiency 
was later eliminated by Clapeyron in accordance with the model of the process 
Carnot provided for gases. After all, Carnot also applies his process to gases in 
the case of infinitesimal differences of temperature.
Beginning from any Carnot process, then, the principle of the impossibility 
of a perpetuum mobile leads to Carnot’s principle: “The motive force of heat is 
independent of the agent that is used to develop it, and its quantity is determined 
solely by the temperatures of the bodies between which the transmission of the 
caloric takes place”
It would lead us away from our task to pursue further Carnot’s applications 
of this principle. However fundamental Carnot’s points of view became for the 
development of energetics, in his own case their use is ruined by the error 
already described - from which it took Clausius and Thomson to free the 
theory of heat - of conflating the two concepts that were later distinguished as 
heat and entropy. Both concepts are still mixed in an undeveloped state in the 
caloric of Carnot’s approach. For example, when Carnot, making meticulous 
use of the experimental data known at that time, calculates how many units of 
motive force are produced by a unit of heat when, acting on air or vapor, it 
passes from one body to another cooler by 1°, and in so doing finds that a drop 
of the caloric by 1° produces more motive force in the case of lower degrees of 
temperature than in the case of higher degrees - that is all correct, assuming 
that by heat and caloric is understood the entropy of the working substance. 
But Carnot’s words had to lead to confusion, since they were used for the 
energy perceived as heat.
7. That Sadi Carnot to some extent clarified this by himself is documented in 
notes from his scientific remains that were published by his younger brother, 
Lazare Hippolyte, in 1878 in the new edition of the Reflections. In the central 
passage, which is reproduced in facsimile, the conception of heat as the motion 
of the smallest parts of bodies is proposed instead of the material hypothesis; 
and it is stated that in order to generate 1000 kilogram-meters of work, 2.70 
calories of heat must be destroyed, from which the heat equivalent is calculated 
as = 370 kilogram-meters. To be sure, no information at all is provided 
about the way in which Carnot arrived at this figure, which agrees so 
remarkably with the one found more than ten years later by Robert Mayer. In 
particular, it is unknown whether and how Carnot inwardly overcame the 
contradiction between his theory, based on a conserved caloric, and the 
equivalence of heat and work - that is, whether and how he was able to develop 
the concept of entropy out of that of heat.
In and of itself, moreover, it is not out of the question for equivalence to be 
joined with the material hypothesis. But to do this, it would be necessary to 
carry through completely the analogy between caloric and falling water. The 
truth happens to be that the equivalence of heat and work is independent of any 
particular view about the nature of heat - as, indeed, in the case of Robert 
Mayer, it is developed independently of the hypothesis that heat is a form of 
motion. It thus appears that, after the publication of his work and for his own 

PREPARATION FOR THE SECOND LAW
113
enlightenment, Carnot occupied himself with the idea of Rumford, which sees 
in heat processes of motion; and that he was led thereby to the idea of 
equivalence, an idea whose contradictions with his publications he was not 
able to overcome completely. In the midst of internal struggle, he was over­
taken by death - the tragic end of a genius.
Nicolas Leonard Sadi Carnot first saw the light of the world in the 
Luxembourg Palace in Paris on June 1, 1796, the son of the great applied 
scientist and mathematician, Lazare Carnot, who was then a member of the 
Directory and a year later was forced into exile. Educated at the Ecole 
Polytechnique in Paris, Sadi was a soldier until 1828, after which he devoted 
himself entirely to technical studies and physical investigations. His body 
weakened by feverish illnesses that began in June, Carnot succumbed, on 
August 24, 1832, to an attack of cholera.
Just as Carnot wandered along the paths of Robert Mayer, so too Carnot’s 
trains of thought were not foreign to Mayer, although he did not give them his 
sustained intellectual attention. In a letter to Griesinger of June 16, 1844, 
Mayer explains3 that the human or animal organism is not capable of 
devouring the heat needed for a performance of work - in ascending a height, 
for example - “without at the same time generating increased heat. For the 
increased respiration ... in itself presupposes a greater need of heat, in order to 
heat the air that is taken in and released in greater quantity and in order to 
effect the increased evaporation of water, even leaving out of account, for the 
time being, any excess heating of the entire body.” Thus, instead of burning one 
grain of carbon, “perhaps an additional expenditure of 2| grains takes place 
here: 1 grain for mechanical effect and 11 grains for increased heat. (Fairly 
good parallels can be drawn everywhere with steam engines.)”
3 Weyrauch, Kleinere Schriften and Briefe von R. Mayer (1893), p. 240.
4 J. de I ecole polytechnique 14 (1834). Later printed in Poggendorff’s Annalen with Carnot’s note. 
The importance of this hitherto little-noticed essay still deserves to be more fully acknowledged.
Section Two:
Clapeyron
1. 
Sadi Carnot had himself already attempted, in an extended footnote, to 
formulate analytically the result of his reflections; but that was later acom- 
plished in exemplary fashion by a French mining engineer, Emile Clapeyron. 
Although Clapeyron’s work  suffers from the same error as Carnot’s point of 
view, which it adopts entirely, it nonetheless served as a model for the later 
corrections of this error. Indeed, it virtually determines the analytical and 
geometrical form in which thermodynamics was formulated by Clausius and 
Thomson. Moreover, it was probably only Clapeyron’s study that preserved 
Carnot’s ideas for posterity at all, since Carnot’s original work was little 
circulated and Holtzmann, as well as Clausius and Thomson, report that it 
was initially inaccessible to them.
4
To begin with, Clapeyron provides graphical representations for the gas and 

114 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
steam processes devised by Carnot that 
have since been incorporated into every 
textbook. In this connection, he adds 
the correction to the steam process 
which has already been taken into 
account in the representation of that 
process on page [109]. By representing 
the volume of the working substance as 
abscissa and its pressure as ordinate, he 
obtains in the curve segments CE, EG, 
GK, and КС a graphical representation 
of the partial processes that were desig­
nated as 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively, on 
page [109] and page [111]. EG and КС 
are adiabats; CE and GK are isotherms. 
Figure 2 represents the Carnot process 
for an ideal gas, Figure 3 that for 
saturated steam.
Fig. 3.
2. 
Clapeyron then succeeds in giving an analytical treatment to Carnot’s ideas 
by making the four partial processes infinitesimal, so that the rectangle CEGK 
contracts into an infinitely small parallelogram. The temperature d of every 
working substance considered by Carnot is a function of its specific volume v 
and of the pressure p exerted on it. Therefore,
(1)
Jn dd, dd 
dd = —dp+—dv. 
dp dv
Along the isotherm CE, dd = 0; thus
(2)
dd J dd J n 
_dp + _dv = Q
as well.
At this point, Clapeyron makes Carnot’s mistake of taking heat to be a 
function of a body’s state. That is, according to Carnot’s point of view, the 
quantity of caloric contained in a body is here a function of p and v. For an 
infinitesimal absorption of heat, one thus obtains the equation
(3 
) 
dQ = ^dp + ^dv.
dp dv
It is obviously the hypothesis that heat is a substance which leads to this 

PREPARATION FOR THE SECOND LAW
115
formulation, in that it measures heat through the amount of substance which is 
conceived of as connected with the ponderable material of the body. At the 
same time, it certainly cannot be maintained, as we have already noted, that the 
concept of heat as a substance by itself makes this incorrect formulation 
inevitable. Indeed, any attributes - motions, tensions and precipitations, for 
example - could be ascribed to the heat substance, and the heat could be 
measured by these properties instead of through its amount. Then it would be 
immediately evident that heat can not be a function of the momentary state of a 
ponderable body, but that it also depends on the preceding changes of state. 
The same purpose can also be achieved if the heat is measured by the quantity 
of a hypothetical fluid - by, for example, attributing a latent caloricum to the 
parts of the ponderable material, by imagining its quantity to vary with 
changes of the body’s state, and by declaring as the measure of heat only the 
caloricum that is released from its parts. But even if such ideas were assumed as 
fundamental, equation (3) would still be unfounded. Nevertheless, for the usual 
substance hypothesis adopted by Carnot and Clapeyron, (3) of course appears 
to be the natural analytical expression.
When a change occurs isothermally, equations (2) and (3) hold simulta­
neously, so that the heat absorbed is given by
/.x 
dPj(dtidQ d^dQ]
4 
dQ = ^dvl 
к
ou [op dv dv dp)
This is the amount of heat substance which enters the working body at 
temperature and, according to Carnot’s view, leaves it unchanged at 
temperature - dfi. During the process, this body performs work; and during 
the return to the initial state, it consumes work. Since the work performed in 
the increase in volume dv is equal to pdv, the difference between the work 
performed and consumed, that is, the total work gained during the cyclic 
process, is measured in Clapeyron’s graphical representation by the rectangle 
CEGK. During the infinitesimal cyclic process that is here being analyzed, a 
work is thus produced which is represented by an infinitely small parallelo­
gram. Its area is found by multiplying the horizontal projection of CE by the 
vertical distance between CE and KG, that is, the dv of equation (4) by -^dti. 
The work gained in the passage of the quantity of heat dQ from temperature $ 
to $ - dti is therefore
(5)
3. Carnot proved that a perpetuum mobile would be possible if, by means of 
some device that conveys heat between the same temperatures, more work 
could be generated with the same transfer of heat than through a Carnot 

116 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
process. Thus, if a perpetuum mobile is impossible, the ratio of values of (4) and 
(5) must be a function of the temperature alone. Accordingly, if C denotes a 
function of the temperature
(6)
&d dQ_&&dQ_ 
dp dv dv dp
From this result, Clapeyron’s famous equation for the isothermal absorption 
of any quantity of heat dQ 
follows from equation (4); and, with regard to (2),
dv
(8) 
dQ = -C—dp 
in isothermal changes.
In the case of gases, for which the relation
(9) 
pv = Д(273 +
holds, we have
(10) 
^ = 1
V ; 
dv R dp R
and thus, from (4) and (6),
(П)
dQ =
dQ dQ\ dv 
dv dp ) v
and
(12)
_ dQ dQ 
CR = v^-p^. 
dv dp

PREPARATION FOR THE SECOND LAW
117
Since in this case C, as a function of alone, is also a function of p and v, 
there exists a partial differential equation, whose integral is
(13) 
Q =f(p • v) - RCiogp = R(B - Clogp),
where now В is also a function of p • v, or also offl.
Finally, Clapeyron tries to determine the temperature function C that he 
introduced, since “it is the common link between all the phenomena of heat in 
solid, fluid and gaseous bodies. It would be desirable if very precise experi­
ments, for example, experiments on the propagation of sound in gases at 
different temperatures, could acquaint us with this function to all desired 
precision.” In fact, Clapeyron determines the numerical values for C for 
different temperatures from the experiments known to him; but he does not 
succeed in finding the general expression for the function.
Section Three:
Holtzmann
1. Holtzmann begins his noteworthy study from a standpoint different from 
that of Carnot and Clapeyron, namely, from the equivalence of heat and work.5 
But, influenced by those authors, his work also miscarries when he makes use 
of formula (3) (p. [114]): He mistakingly thinks that 1 kg of gas at a given 
pressure and volume contains a definite quantity of heat Q, just as it possesses a 
definite temperature fl.
5 Holtzmann, Uber die Warme und Elasticitat der Gase und Dampfe (Mannheim 1845).
Holtzmann’s starting point, however, is the equivalence grasped by Robert 
Mayer shortly before the publication of his investigation, but applied only to 
gases: “The effect of the heat added to a gas is therefore either a rise in 
temperature accompanied by increased elasticity, or mechanical work, or a 
combination of both; and a mechanical work is the equivalent of an increase in 
temperature.” His view emerges even more distinctly in these words: “I call a 
unit of heat the heat which, on being added to a gas, is able to perform the 
mechanical work a, that is, which can raise a kilograms a height of 1 m.” That is 
the Joule-Mayer point of view, and a is the mechanical equivalent of heat. With 
Carnot and Clapeyron it can always be a question only of the work that is 
produced in the passage of one calorie of heat from fl° to (fl - dfl)°. Holtzmann 
regards a calorie as completely equivalent to a | kilogram-meters - which, to be 
sure, he does not express clearly in the words cited above, according to which 
mechanical work is equivalent to the increase in temperature. In any case, he 
does the calculation correctly, by comparing the work pdv that is performed by 
a gas in an isothermal change with the heat dQ that is supplied to the gas in the 
process, which gives

118 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(1)
pdv 
~dQ=a’
But he then introduces the incorrect formula (3) (p. [114]) and obtains
, dv 
pdv — a— 
v
dQ dQ
He integrates the partial differential equation
(2)
se=,_,
dv P dp a
as Clapeyron had done, and obtains
(3)
or
Q=f(p-v)-— logp, 
a
(4)
Q = F(d)-----i-----------logp.
a
Comparison with (13) (p. [117]), shows that Clapeyron’s function C is 
generally determined from this result, as Helmholtz has noted.6 More precisely,
6 Uber die Erhaltung der Kraft (Berlin 1847), p. 36.
(5)
273 + ^ 
a
Holtzmann determines the numerical value for the constant a, the mechan­
ical equivalent of heat, from the specific heats of ideal gases. The specific heat 
at constant pressure follows from (4) by simple differentiation with respect to Л
\ dF
(6a)
and through differentiation with respect to given the condition dv = 0, there 
also follows from (4) the specific heat at constant volume:

PREPARATION FOR THE SECOND LAW
119
(6b)
dF 7? R 
— — —logp — — 
dv a a
The difference of the specific heats is therefore
(7)
R
Cp cv — a
Thus, from (9) (p. [116]), the equation for determining a follows:
(8) 
pv = a(cp - cv)(273 + $).
Holtzmann finds the numerical value for a to be 374. It is not precise, owing 
especially to a deficient knowledge of cp, which he sets at 0.267 calories, 
following the experiments of Delaroche and Berard for atmospheric air, 
whereas, according to Regnault, it is only 0.2375. But Holtzmann is rigorous 
enough to state that, considering the state of experimental knowledge at that 
time, the value 374 for a may be in error by as much as 40 units.
A work to which probably no reference has been made until now takes a view 
quite similar to that of Holtzmann. This is “The Work of Heat” by Hermann 
von Kauffmann.7 Here, too, the formulas are those of Clapeyron, and heat is 
viewed as a function of pressure and volume. But nearby there stands as the 
“action principle” this proposition: “Heat and mechanical work by nature 
replace one another reciprocally in order that nothing of the sum should be 
lost.” Further on, though, the author introduces other assumptions into his 
action principle, which destroy the value of his study.
H. v. Kauffmann Ruckblick auf Vortrage, gehalten bei den Naturforscherversammlung zu 
Nurnberg, Kopenhagen und Aachen (Copenhagen 1848).
Section Four:
Thomson’s Pre-Energetic Works
1. The most important use of Carnot’s theory is undoubtedly the one for 
which it was devised, namely, evaluating the performance of steam engines or 
other heat-driven motors. But it is just here that its fundamental error emerges 
most clearly, so that we may pass over these applications carried out by 
Carnot, Clapeyron and Holtzmann. Other conclusions of these authors, which 
extend to the theoretical derivation of known physical properties of gases and 
vapors, will also not be discussed in detail, since they did not reveal any new 
facts. However, we must not ignore the two most splendid fruits of this theory. 
These are the consequences that William and James Thomson developed from
7

120 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Carnot’s assumptions, conclusions that retained their validity even after 
Clausius’ correction of Carnot’s theory - which will be discussed later - and 
that even in their mathematical form required only slight alterations. I consider 
these ripest fruits of Carnot’s theory to be the absolute thermometric scale and 
the depression of the melting point through pressure.
William Thomson, whose life spans the entire time in which the history of 
energetics unfolds, will confront us repeatedly in this history as a researcher 
who intervenes with the most enduring influence on its development. We will 
now discuss his achievements based on Carnot’s ideas. Later, we shall see him 
find, together with Clausius, the classical form of the theory of heat; and we 
shall see him establish, along with Rankine, the terminology and carry out the 
first attempts at generalizing the theory of heat, that is, at framing it in the 
sense of a general energetics.
To survey William Thomson’s absolute thermometric scale in a historical 
light, one must go back to the beginning of the century. The history of absolute 
zero and absolute temperature is a prize exhibit in the history of ideas, the 
study of which is to be recommended particularly to those whose eyes are so 
blinded by the brilliance of what was transmitted to their age as true that, like 
the opponents of energetics today, they slight what is developing and venerate 
what is passing away.
The concept of absolute temperature was developed on the foundation of the 
substance theory of heat. According to this theory, a state of any body is 
conceivable in which it no longer contains any heat substance and thus cannot 
be cooled any further, the temperature then prevailing being called ‘absolute 
zero’. If we imagine all bodies brought into this state, in which they no longer 
contain any caloric, then there remains for us, say Desormes and Clement,8 “a 
picture of the whole of nature very different from that which we see before our 
eyes. Not only is life missing from this sad universe we are imagining, but every 
kind of motion would have ceased on earth. There would be no atmosphere, no 
rivers, no seas; rigidity and death would rule everywhere.” The heat substance 
that is supplied to a body is then visualized in part as latent heat in intimate 
connection with the ponderable parts of the body, and in part as free heat, 
which evokes the sensation of temperature through its tension.
J. de physique, de chemie et I’histoire naturelle (1819). In our description of this work, we follow 
the elegant presentation of Duhem, Revue des deux mondes 129 (1895).
To avoid having to take latent heat into account, Desormes and Clement 
pose the question thus: “How much caloric does the vacuum contain at a given 
temperature?” They understand by temperature the tension of this caloric, 
calculated according to a measure in which the tension of water at the boiling 
point of water is 100 units greater than at its freezing point. Temperature 
understood in this way they call the “absolute temperature”. Finally, by also 
assuming that free caloric obeys the Boyle-Mariotte law, they use the density of 
the gas to measure its tension.
Now, it has been known since Gay-Lussac’s experiment in 1807 that when 
air expands into a vacuum heat is on the whole neither bound nor released; the
8

PREPARATION FOR THE SECOND LAW
121
caloric behaves as if it were attached to the volume. If the volume of a gas is 
suddenly increased, it cools down and reaches its earlier temperature only after 
it has been mixed with as much caloric as is attached to the volume by which 
the gas was increased. Moreover, any sudden compression raises the tempera­
ture until as much caloric is released as corresponds to the decrease in volume 
the gas has undergone.
If atmospheric air is allowed to rush into a space filled with rarefied air and 
the space is then closed off immediately after the pressure is equalized, there is 
too much caloric in it. Desormes and Clement have taught us to how to 
measure the excess: They determined it through the decrease in pressure that 
occurs upon subsequent cooling. By determining this excess first at the 
temperature of solidifying water and then at that of boiling water, they found 
the temperature of absolute zero to be located 267.50° below the freezing point. 
The close agreement of this result with the reciprocal value of the Gay-Lussac 
expansion coefficient for gases, that is, 266.66°, obviously confirmed the 
reasoning of these experimenters. They thought they had found a result of as 
much importance for the understanding of the phenomena of heat “as Galileo’s 
reply to the Florentine water-well builders had been for the theory of atmo­
spheric processes.” True, the work of Desormes and his son-in-law, Clement, 
which was submitted to the Academy in 1812 for a prize competition in which 
the determination of the specific heats of gases was required, was a crown on 
the observations of Delaroche and Berard; but the rejected work appeared in 
print only in 1819.
I have remembered this work in some detail in order to emphasize how 
things shift in the historical process. Today, Clement and Desormes are still 
cited in the textbooks, but in what a different light they are portrayed than they 
appeared to themselves or their contemporaries! We read that fundamental 
inadequacies have been discovered in their method, that their figures had to be 
corrected, that their theoretical standpoint is now totally forgotten. And yet 
their work had a lasting effect. It encouraged a variety of experimental 
repetitions and alterations, and it gave rise to new theoretical ideas. Doesn’t 
the remark of the authors cited above recall Carnot’s starting point? Just as 
limits had been established for the performance of a pneumatic engine, they 
believe they have determined the limits of performance attainable by means of 
caloric; and Carnot later undertakes to measure rationally the efficiency of 
engines driven by caloric. The work of Clement and Desormes is one of those 
waves in the history of physics which, in falling back, generates new ones.
2. We must now pursue further the development of the idea of an absolute 
measurement of temperature, the idea of establishing a relation between 
temperature and heat, which, since Black’s theory of latent heat, could of course 
no longer be viewed as identical, as they once had been. “Does any principle 
exist on which an absolute thermometric scale can be founded?” William 
Thomson  asks himself in 1848. He finds such a principle in Carnot’s ideas of 
9
Phil. Mag. (3) 33 (October 1848). Math, and Phys. Papers (Cambridge 1882), Vol. 1, p. 100.
9

122 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
1824, which he also attempts to disseminate in an extended presentation of 
them in 1849.10 Indeed, Carnot had asserted a relationship between 
temperature, heat and mechanical work: The maximum work that can be 
achieved when a unit of heat passes from any temperature to one 1° lower 
depends only on the temperature. Accordingly, Thomson suggests constructing 
the temperature scale in such a way that a unit of heat in falling Г is always 
able to produce the same mechanical effect, regardless of the initial 
temperature. The quantity £, which Thomson calls “Carnot’s coefficient,” can 
be determined for gases and vapors in accordance with equation (7) (p. [116]); 
and Thomson uses the observations on water vapor, published in the meantime 
by Regnault, to calculate this coefficient for all temperatures of the air 
thermometer between 0° and 230°.
Transactions Edinb. R. Soc. XVI (1849). Math, and Phys. Papers, Vol. 1, p. 113.
3. The same equation also leads to the beautiful consequence of Carnot’s 
theory, discovered by William Thomson and published by his brother James, 
that the melting point of ice is lowered by an increase ofpressure. The heat added 
to ice at 0° actually produces a decrease of volume; hence must be negative. 
Owing to the tables, based on Regnault’s observations, that William published, 
the factor C in the formula was known more precisely than it had been by 
Clapeyron. James Thomson was therefore able to calculate that an increase of 
pressure of one atmosphere must lower the melting point by 0.0075°. But his 
derivation is not based on equation (7), in which his brother certainly first 
noticed the relationship. Rather, James develops the phenomenon in an 
independent manner, one that was later imitated quite often with other natural 
phenomena.
The idea of a reversible cyclic process stems from Carnot. But Carnot and 
Clapeyron only treat two such processes, one carried out with steam, the other 
with atmospheric air. However, there is no reason to limit oneself to these; 
James Thomson devised new cyclic processes, which led him to his conclusion. 
He first shows that water can be converted into ice via a purely mechanical 
process, but without any overall consumption of mechanical work. For this 
purpose, air need only be compressed isothermally at 0°, by keeping the 
cylinder containing it, for example, in contact with a lake of 0°, as he suggests. 
If the air is then permitted to expand, again isothermally, until it has reached 
its initial state, but is now kept in contact with a smaller mass of water M at 0°, 
then heat is extracted from M. Hence, the mass of M is partially converted into 
ice, but without any change of temperature. Nothing has occurred during the 
entire process except that heat has been transferred from M into the lake 
without a drop in temperature.
Furthermore, to demonstrate that the freezing point is below 0° at higher 
pressure, James Thomson imagines the mass of water M contained in a 
separate cylinder that is closed by a piston. During the freezing, which may be 
induced in the manner described above, the pressure must be increased if the 
freezing is to occur at constant volume. Near the end of the expansion of the 
air, the pressure in the cylinder containing the water should be allowed to 
10

PREPARATION FOR THE SECOND LAW
123
decrease gradually, attended by an increase of volume, until it reaches its 
original pressure. Then, work A has been gained with the piston of the water 
cylinder, and yet when the ice is melted, without any drop in temperature, by 
heat supplied from the lake, everything is in its original state. The immediate 
conclusion - that work A must have come into being through the consumption 
of heat, and that, therefore, the temperature of the ice formed under pressure 
was lower than that of the air cylinder - is intrinsically unacceptable from 
Carnot’s point of view, since heat and work are not recognized by him as 
interconvertibly equivalent. Thomson therefore concludes that work must have 
been performed somewhere equivalent to the work A that has been gained, and 
that it could have occurred only with the piston of the air cylinder. The reason 
is that the air was colder in the expansion than in the compression, and so the 
water that was in contact with it during the expansion was also colder than 0°.
Finally, in order to find the quantitative relation between increase in pressure 
and depression of temperature, James Thomson devises a cyclic Carnot process 
for an “ice engine.” It goes as follows: 1. A mass of ice of such a size that it 
yields more than a cubic foot of water upon melting is isolated in a cylinder and 
isothermally compressed until one cubic foot of melted ice has been obtained. 
2. The pressure is increased adiabatically, whereby the temperature falls, since 
this temperature is always the melting temperature at the current pressure. 3. 
At the temperature below 0° achieved in this way, the mass is isothermally 
converted into that state which 4. permits the mass to be returned adiabatically 
to its original state.
William Thomson conducted experiments that completely confirmed this 
consequence of Carnot’s theory, a consequence he had noticed and for which 
his brother had provided the proof. But in the same year, 1850, in which he 
publishes these experiments, Thomson also renounces Carnot’s idea, won over 
by Rankine’s discovery of the condensation of water in the expansion of 
saturated steam and by Clausius’ first publication in thermodynamics.

PART THREE: 
CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
Section One:
The Founding of Thermodynamics by Clausius
1. If we ignore the difference between Robert Mayer’s view of the concept of 
energy and Helmholtz’s - a difference which is profound, to be sure - we are 
left with two fundamental ideas as results of the development presented thus 
far. On the one hand, there is the equivalence of heat transfer with mechanical 
work, championed by Carnot and Clapeyron; and, on the other hand, there is 
the equivalence between heat energy and work which, at least in the judgment 
of contemporaries, received its greatest support from Joule’s experimental 
investigations. The former view is fully in harmony with the hypothesis that 
heat is a substance, since as heat loses its capacity for doing work, it, like falling 
water, nonetheless does not change its amount. The other idea impels one to 
think that heat is the motion of the smallest parts of bodies, since in working it 
ceases to exist, like motion which gives rise to another motion. In his work of 
1847, Helmholtz is already aware of the contradiction between these two points 
of view; but Clausius was the first to overcome it in his fundamental work of 
1850.
1
2
1 Franz E. Neumann has stated on many occasions that he had, in a lecture before 1850, already 
developed thoroughly and systematically the ideas that Clausius began to publish in 1850, and 
which are generally referred to as the “mechanical theory of heat”. He was not able to state the 
year precisely; but he wished the lecture to be published if a suitable notebook of a listener at 
that time could be found. Carl Neumann requests (according to a letter to Paul Volkmann in his 
book Franz Neumann [Leipzig: Teubner, 1896]) former students of his father to make possible 
the completion of this wish.
2 Delivered to the Berlin Academy, February 1850. Published in Pogg. Ann. (1850) and Phil. Mag. 
(4)2.
Clausius presents the contradiction in the following words: “Carnot proves 
that whenever work is performed through heat, and a lasting change in the 
state of the working substance does not at the same time occur, a certain 
quantity of heat passes from a warm body to a cold one, as, for example, in the 
case of the steam engine, where heat is transmitted from the furnace to the 
condenser through mediation of the steam that develops in the boiler and is 
then precipitated in the condenser. He regards this transmission as the change 
of heat corresponding to the work produced. Carnot says expressly that no heat 
125

126 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
is lost in the process, that the quantity of heat remains unchanged, adding: ‘This 
fact has never been disputed; it was first assumed without investigation and 
then confirmed in many cases through calorimetric experiments. To deny it 
would amount to overturning the entire theory of heat in which it is the main 
principle.’ ”
“I do not know, however, that it has been sufficiently established experimen­
tally that a loss of heat never takes place in the production of work. Rather, 
perhaps, the opposite can be maintained with greater justification, that 
although such a loss has not been proved directly, nonetheless other facts 
render it not only possible, but even highly probable. If one assumes that heat, 
like a substance, cannot decrease in quantity, one must also assume that it 
cannot increase. However, it is almost impossible to explain, for example, the 
heating caused by friction without an increase in the quantity of heat; and 
through the very careful experiments of Joule, in which heat was produced in 
various ways by means of mechanical work, the proposition became almost a 
certainty that, not only is it possible to increase the quantity of heat in general, 
but that the amount of newly-produced heat is proportional to the work 
utilized in its production. To this it may be added that recently more and more 
facts have become known indicating that heat is not a substance, but that it 
consists in a motion of the smallest parts of bodies. If this is correct, then the 
general principle of mechanics must also be applicable to heat: that an existing 
motion can be converted into work in such a way that the loss in living force is 
proportional to the work performed.”
“These circumstances, of which Carnot was also well aware, and whose 
importance he expressly admitted, urgently demand that a comparison 
between work and heat be undertaken by means of the divergent assumption 
that for the production of work not only a change in the distribution of heat is 
required, but also an actual consumption of it; and that, conversely, heat can be 
produced through the consumption of work.”
Then, after Clausius has pointed out that Holtzmann did not recognize the 
contradiction between the two ways of thinking, while William Thomson 
indeed perceived it, but still preferred Carnot’s position, because of the 
difficulties with which Joule’s was temporarily still beset - he continues with 
words that read like a program for any advance in theoretical physics:
“I believe that one must not shrink from these difficulties, but that we must 
instead familiarize ourselves as much as possible with the consequences of the 
idea that heat is a motion, since it is only by doing this that one can obtain the 
means of confirming or refuting it. I also do not consider the difficulties to be as 
considerable as does Thomson, for although some changes must be made in the 
usual way of looking at things, I cannot anywhere find an inconsistency with 
established facts. It is not even necessary in so doing to repudiate Carnot’s 
theory completely, which one certainly would decide to do only reluctantly, 
since it has in part been strikingly confirmed by experience. On closer 
consideration, however, we find that the new approach is opposed, not to the 
actual fundamental principle of Carnot, but only to the corollary that no heat is 
lost. For it is quite possible in the production of work that both can take place

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
127
at the same time: that a certain quantity of heat may be consumed, and another 
transferred from a warm body to a cold one, and that both quantities can stand 
in a definite relation to the work produced.”
2. 
Accordingly, Clausius puts forth as his first principle a proposition 
concerning the equivalence of heat and work, namely “that in all cases where 
heat arises through work, an amount of heat proportional to the work 
produced is consumed; and that, conversely, by consuming an equally large 
amount of work, the same quantity of heat can be produced.” In order to leave 
the internal work out of his mathematical treatment, that is, the work required 
for a change of state of the working substance that generally appears along 
with the external work, Clausius makes use of Carnot’s device of considering 
only cyclic processes, so that the working substance is returned to its original 
state after carrying out the transformation of heat and work. To begin with, 
moreover, he limits the investigation to ideal gases, and makes use of 
Clapeyron’s representation of a cyclic Carnot process (that is, consisting of 
two isothermal processes and two adiabatic ones) carried out with such a gas. 
Finally, by also imagining all the changes of the gas that occur to be 
infinitesimally small, he obtains the following point of departure for mathema­
tical analysis.
Let volume v and pressure p of an ideal gas be represented by the abscissa 
and ordinate of a point A. Let the corresponding temperature be Л Let AB 
represent an infinitely small isothermal change in which the volume increases 
by dv; and let AD represent an infinitely small adiabatic change in which 
volume and temperature may increase by Sv and Sti. In the case represented in 
Figure 4, Stf is negative.
Now, Q is not to be viewed as a function of the quantities determining the 
current state of the gas; that is the new twist we owe to Clausius. If one 
considers the state of the gas to be determined by v and $, as he does, then Q 
is not a function of these variables, but instead
(1)
dQ = Mdv + Ndd.
In this differential, M and N are to be treated as well-defined functions of v and 
ft, since the heat input is a definite quantity for any given change (dv, dd) of a 
state (v, i?). In particular, there follows for the isothermal change AB,
(2)
dQAB — Mdv,
and for the adiabatic change AD,

128 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(3 
) 
dQAB = 0 = M6v + NW.
By means of the latter process, M now becomes
,, dM c dM
M + — Sv + — 6d;
dv dv
thus, an isothermal change DC, which changes the volume v + <5 v by the 
amount dv, will require the heat
(4)
dQDc = M + 
(5v + —W pv.
dv dv J
In order to preserve a Carnot process, however, the magnitude of dv is selected 
in a way such that C lies on the adiabat passing through B. From this it follows 
that the adiabatic expansion requires a change of volume of Sv + dv - dv and a 
change in temperature of dO. Since, moreover, in В the function M was 
converted into
and N into
_ dM J
M + -——dv 
dv
at dN J 
N + ~Z~dv, 
dv
qA'&B'C1 v 
Fig. 4.
P
we have
(5) dQBC = b= + 
(6v + dv-dv) + f N + ^-dv | 6d.
( dv ) 
( dv j
Accordingly, the total heat supplied during the cyclic process
(6a)
Г (^6) — ^Qab + dQec + dQcD 4- dQiyA
1 
= dQAB ~ dQnc
is

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
129
(6)
(dQ) = Mdv — {M + ~dv + ^fr&\dv. 
I dv dv I
With the help of (3) and (5), frv and dv can be eliminated from this equation; 
and, limiting the result to second-order differentials, one finds that
P)
dM 
~dd
5ЛП 
dv J d$ • dv.
On the other hand, the surface area ABCD represents the work which has 
been released during the input of heat dQ, and this can be represented by 
AK • dv, where AK indicates the change in pressure that takes place at constant 
volume when the temperature increases by the (negative in the figure) amount
In the case of ideal gases, which obey the law
(8)
pv = R('& + 273),
this change is
AK =
D
6d =---- 6^
dv=Q 
V
and the work released is therefore
(9)
- — dv 6$. 
v
Hence, there follows the ratio of the heat consumed to the work produced 
рм алп v^ 
[~&&~~dv J Я’
and, in accordance with Clausius’s first principle, this is a universal constant - 
the heat equivalent - which may be denoted by A. For ideal gases, therefore, 
his first principle finds its mathematical expression in the formula

130 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
dM 0N__a^ 
dd dv v ’
3. 
Clausius immediately adds to the last observation, which is highly 
important for the development of energetics, that this differential equation 
can also be replaced by
(11a) 
dQ = dU + A-p • dv,
if an unknown function of v and d is denoted by U. For if dQ and p are replaced 
by their values following from (1) and (8), then
(lib) 
(M - Ap)dv + Ndti = dU,
hence
dM /-dJL
and that is equation 10, which has just been established.
4. 
It is surely advisable to call attention here, where the designation makes its 
first appearance, to the difficulties and misunderstandings caused by the symbol 
dQ. Since dQ is indeed an infinitely small quantity, but is not the differential of 
a function of the variables otherwise appearing in the equations, it can be 
viewed analytically only as a symbol for the expression Mdv + Ndd and must 
be replaced by this expression in all calculations. For this reason Carl 
Neumann has suggested  the special differential sign dQ as a way of always 
keeping in mind this peculiar situation.
3
C. Neumann, Vorlesungen Uber die mechanische Theorie der Warme (Leipzig 1875), p. ix.
5. 
Clausius also applies his first principle to saturated vapors, which Carnot
and Clapeyron had already been able to treat by means of their theory, along
with ideal gases. He considers an infinitesimal 
cyclic Carnot process that is carried out by a unit 
weight of a mixture of liquid and vapor, and 
determines its state from the temperature ft and 
the amount of vapor m that is mixed with the 
amount of liquid 1 — m. To increase the quantity of 
vapor by the amount dm at constant temperature #, 
a quantity of heat rdm is required, where the heat of
Fig. 5.
3

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
131
vaporization is indicated by r. Furthermore, if one calls the specific heat of the 
liquid c, and h the heat which must be supplied to the unit weight of saturated 
vapor if it is to be heated by d$ degrees but in the process (by means of increase 
of pressure) be maintained in a saturated state, then [(1 — m)c + mh]dti is the 
heat necessary to heat the mixture without altering the ratio of liquid to vapor. 
The amount of heat required for an arbitrary change of the state is therefore
(12)
dQ = rdm + [(1 — m)c + mh]d,0.
Via the same analysis of the cyclic process that led from equation (1) to 
equation (7), a determination of the heat input required during the infinitesimal 
cyclic Carnot process can be obtained from equation (12). It is
(13)
(dQ) — ~ I 777 + c ~ h\ dmdfi.
On the other hand, one finds the work produced during the cyclic process 
represented by the parallelogram ABCD, and therefore equal to AK • AB. Here 
AB is the increase in volume when the amount of vapor increases by dm\ hence, 
AB = (s - (j)dm, where 5 denotes the specific volume of the vapor and a that of 
its liquid. Since, moreover, as was pointed out above in the treatment of gases,
(w J
it follows that the work produced is
(14)
and the principle of the equivalence of heat and work yields
(15)
Эг . . ( 
.dp
— + c - h = A(s - o-)-^. 
dd 
dti
6. After Clausius has determined in this way what follows from the first 
principle of his theory for gases and vapors, he then turns to Carnot’s principle. 
“Carnot assumed that the production of work results equivalently from the 
mere transfer of heat from a warm body to a cold one, without any attendant 
decrease in the quantity of heat. The last part of this assumption, that is, that

132 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
the quantity of heat remains undiminished, contradicts our first principle, and 
must therefore be rejected if we wish to retain the latter. The first part, on the 
other hand, can remain substantially unchanged. For although we no longer 
have need of an actual equivalent for the work produced, after we have 
assumed as such a real consumption of heat, it is nevertheless possible that the 
transfer takes place simultaneously with the consumption and likewise stands 
in a definite relation to the work produced. It remains then to be investigated 
whether this assumption, in addition to being possible, also has sufficient 
probability to recommend it.”
Here it it is important to emphasize that a transfer of heat having no 
mechanical effect can also occur, namely, upon direct contact of bodies at 
different temperatures. To obtain the maximum of work for the transfer of a 
definite quantity of heat between two bodies A and В at the definite 
temperatures t and r, the process must therefore be conducted in such a way 
that, as Carnot taught, two bodies of different temperature never come into 
contact. “It is this maximum of work which must be compared with the 
transmission of heat. When this is done, we find that there is indeed reason to 
assume, with Carnot, that the work depends only on the quantity of heat 
conveyed and on the temperatures t and т of the two bodies A and B, but not on 
the nature of the mediating substance. That is, this maximum has the property 
that, through its consumption, a quantity of heat can also be transported from 
the cold body В to the warm one A which is equal to the heat that had to go 
from A to В during its production? A closer look at Carnot processes, of course, 
teaches us this immediately.
If there existed two substances which developed different amounts of work 
when the same quantity of heat was conveyed through them from body A to 
body B, one of the bodies could be used (cf. p. [110]) to produce work, and the 
other, less efficient one could use this work to return the heat to the higher 
temperature of body A. “By repeating these two alternating processes one 
could therefore transfer, without any expenditure of force or any other change, 
any amount of heat from a co/dbody into a warm one; and that contradicts the 
usual behavior of heat, which everywhere tends to equalize existing differences 
of temperature and therefore to pass from warmer to colder bodies.”
Finally, to confirm the correctness of the first part of Carnot’s assumption 
through its consequence as well, Clausius pursued the matter in a mathemati­
cally more precise fashion. If a unit of heat passes from A to a body cooler by 
d'd, then the maximum work capable of being produced in the process is a 
function of 13 and 13 - di3 alone and, accordingly, may be represented in the 
form
where C denotes a function of the temperature

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
133
In the cyclic processes treated above, the heat transferred is the quantity 
indicated by cIQdc- For while (IQab is absorbed by the working substance and 
one part of it (dQ) is transformed into work, the other part remains heat and as 
such passes to the lower temperature of the lesser isotherm. If we ignore 
infinitesimal contributions of the second order, then according to equation 
(4), in conjunction with (3) and (5),
dQoc — Mdv = Mdv
for gases and rdm for saturated vapors. Thus, from (9), while a unit of heat 
drops by the temperature d'O, the maximum work that can be developed in the 
gas is
Rdvdd/v dd 
Mdv = "C’
in the vapor, on the other hand, in conformity with (14), the maximum amount 
is
^s - cr)dmd$ _ dti 
rdm C
Thus,
(16) 
M = ~
follows for gases, while for vapors
(17) 
r=C(s-ff)g.
7. Clausius finally obtains the value for C by means of an auxiliary assump­
tion'. “When a permanent gas expands at constant temperature, it consumes 
only as much heat as is consumed in the external work which it performs in the 
process.” Following (11b), this assumption is then stated in the formulas
(18a)
M = Ap at constant temperature

134 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
and
(18b)
,D273 + tf
M = AR---------
v
and comparison with (16) shows that
(19) 
C = Л(273 + <
In addition, Clausius can cite Clapeyron’s, and particularly Thomson’s, 
calculations of numerical values for C, which satisfy the above formula with 
sufficient precision.
Clausius also notes the important conclusion which follows from (15) if (17) 
and (19) are considered:
dr , r 
 
1- c — h — 
 
d$------------- 273 + $
This equation makes it possible to calculate the values of A, and Clausius 
finds them to be negative between the temperatures 0 and 200°. He concludes 
from this result that saturated vapor “condenses partially in (adiabatic) 
expansion, while in compression its temperature rises disproportionately to 
the increase in density.” The older theory of steam, as it had been developed 
particularly by Watt and Pambour for technological purposes, had assumed 
that in adiabatic change of volume saturated vapor remains saturated; hence, 
h = 0. A negative h means that a supply of heat is required for the cooling 
necessarily associated with the expansion of saturated vapors - whose pressure 
is, of course, a function of temperature. If this is precluded by an adiabatic 
envelope, then the vapor ceases to be saturated.
To dispose of an objection raised by Thomson, Clausius demonstrated in a 
separate essay4 that this proposition is only correct when the vapor develops its 
full compressive force in every stage of its expansion, and that in other cases it 
has to be modified.
4 Pogg. Ann. 82 (1851) and Phil. Mag. (4) 1.
5 Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh 20 (1850). Also printed in Phil. Mag. (4) 7 (1854).
At almost the same time as Clausius, Rankine5 deduced from the theory of 
heat that h is negative. The condensation of expanding vapor is the second 
major result of the new theories in physics - in addition to the discovery of the 
lower melting point of ice under pressure - which contributed importantly to 
stimulating and maintaining the interest of contemporaries in the new ways of 
thinking.

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
135
8. At the conclusion of his great memoir, Clausius calculates the mechanical 
equivalent of heat, from his formulae. His manner of calculation, which had 
already been employed by Robert Mayer and Holtzmann, follows from the 
equations valid for gases. As a consequence of the auxiliary assumption (18), it 
follows from (Hb) that U is a function of the temperature alone, so that
dU = cvdti
where cv is now dependent only on $ . Accordingly, in conformity with (1), 
equation (11a) becomes
dQ = Mdv + Ndi!) = cvdd + Apdv.
This shows that cv represents the specific heat at constant volume. As applied 
to the case of constant pressure, in which cp is the specific heat, it yields
Cpdd = cvd$+Apdv — cvdd + ARDd 
cp- cv = AR,
an equation which has already been developed on p. [119] and which yields, 
given the numerical values known at that time, = 370.
The equations developed for vapors, (17) and (19), also offer a means of 
calculating A, or rather - since Clapeyron and Thomson had already 
calculated the numerical values for C from equation (17) - equation (19) allows 
the values of A to be calculated from the existing tables for C. In this way 
Clausius finds values for which lie between 416 and 462. He concludes “that 
the work equivalent for a unit of heat is the raising of something heavier than 
400 kg to the height of 1 m” and that Joule’s direct observations are in good 
agreement with this theoretical result.
This work of Clausius from the year 1850 marks the decisive turning point. 
We have before us here for the first time the foundations of a system of theory 
which, without hypothetically going back to mechanics or even using mechan­
ical analogies, can nonetheless make the same claim to unconditional and 
comprehensive validity as does mechanics itself. What Carnot and Mayer 
aspired to is here fulfilled. The energetic originality of Clausius’ work is 
revealed in a particularly striking way when we compare it with Rankine’s 
treatise, also published in February 1850. This work arrives at similar results - 
as Rankine emphasizes later in a letter to Poggendorff6 to protect his priority - 
and, in particular, as has just been mentioned, provides a theoretical derivation 
of the behavior of saturated vapor in flux. But Rankine’s work is based 
throughout on a mechanical hypothesis: Molecular vortices are conceived and 
certain mechanical relations among these vortices are hypothetically inter­
preted as heat, others as temperature, in order to forge ahead to the results.
Pogg. Ann. 81 (1850).
6

136 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Section Two:
The Founding of Thermodynamics by William Thomson
1. The first great success of Clausius’ memoir was to win William Thomson 
over to the equivalence of heat and work, which Joule had already been 
advocating in England for some time and whose confirmation through 
experiment he had significantly advanced. To this point, we have come to know 
Thomson as the most important and successful champion of Carnot’s views; 
and as late as 1848 he declared in his work on the absolute temperature scale 
that “the transformation of heat (or of caloric) into mechanical effect is 
probably impossible.” But in a footnote he appends to this assertion the 
remarkable words: “A contrary opinion is held by Joule in Manchester. Some 
quite noteworthy discoveries he has made with respect to the generation of heat 
by the friction of fluids in motion, and some well-known experiments with 
electromagnetic machines, seem to indicate a real conversion of mechanical 
effects into caloric. No experiment has been adduced, however, in which the 
reverse transformation was demonstrated. But it must be conceded that, as yet, 
much is wrapped in mystery with regard to these fundamental questions of 
natural science.”
2. To be sure, the Mayer-Joule idea of equivalence appears only as a 
correction to Carnot’s theory in the introduction to Thomson’s essay “On the 
Mechanical Equivalent of Heat”,  a change which had become necessary as a 
result of scientific advance; and the former champion of this theory must now 
determine what of it can still be defended. But in the essay itself, and in the 
abundant applications Thomson is able to extract from it later, the independent 
character of the new theory nonetheless emerges brilliantly.
7
Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh (1851). Phil. Mag. 4 (1852). Math. Phys. Papers I, p. 174.
The investigation is based on two basic propositions, which Thomson 
formulates as follows:
“I. When equal quantities of mechanical effect are produced by any 
purely thermal sources, or are consumed in purely thermal effects, 
equal quantities of heat pass away or come into being.
II. 
If an engine is so constituted that in its reverse motion the physical 
and mechanical phenomena in every part of its motions are 
reversed, then it generates as much mechanical effect as can be 
produced from a given quantity of heat by any thermodynamic 
engine having the same boiler temperature and the same condenser 
temperature.”
Thomson bases the proof of the latter proposition on a version of Carnot’s 
principle peculiar to him. He says: “It is impossible, through processes in 
7

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
137
inanimate matter, to obtain mechanical effects from any body by cooling it 
below the temperature of the coldest of the surrounding objects.” To derive 
Proposition II from this, Thomson first reasons in exactly the manner of 
Carnot: If there existed a process (/3) (cf. p. [110]) that produced more 
mechanical effect from the same quantity of heat than the reversible process 
(a), then the process (/3 — a), composed of (/3) and (-a), could produce work 
without any consumption of heat. Now if one sees to it, Thomson reasons, that 
(/3) withdraws as much heat from boiler A as (-a) supplies to it, then, 
according to Proposition I, more heat must be withdrawn from condenser В 
by process (-a) than (/3) supplies to it in order to explain the creation of the 
work formed by process (/3 - a). Consequently, heat would be transformed 
into work, even though the condenser is colder than its surroundings - and 
this contradicts Thomson’s principle.
3. Then, like Clausius, Thomson represents by Mdv + Nd'd the differential of 
the quantity of heat which is added to an arbitrary substance whose volume, 
temperature and pressure are v, $ and p. Since -pdv denotes the work added, 
the total external effect, in mechanical terms, will be
/1X 
f (M 
TV 1
(1) 
-< — -pldv + ~ dti>.
I I A ) Al J
Thomson now diverges from Clausius in concluding that the integral of this 
expression must vanish, in conformity with Proposition I, when it is taken over 
a cyclic process of the substance. Therefore, it must be a total differential, that 
is
dp = dM dN
U 
Э13 
8$
which corresponds to equation (10) (p. [130]) in Clausius.
By comparison with Clausius, Thomson here already shows a broader, more 
comprehensive view. This lies not so much in his immediately formulating a 
general equation that is not restricted to ideal gases and vapors, but rather to 
the attention he gives to the integral function
(3) 
+
Thomson calls (3) the “mechanical energy” of the substance being considered, 
whereas Clausius had merely introduced it with the letter U (cf. p. [130]). 
Moreover, in an article he submitted to the Edinburgh Society on December

138 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
15, 1851, Thomson not only uses it mathematically, by setting
de = — (Mdv + Ndd) — pdv 
de M 
de N
'~dv~~A~P' 
дд = А
from which (2) also follows; he also physically introduces the concept of 
mechanical energy into science with these words:
4. 
“A body that either emits heat, or alters its dimensions against resisting 
forces, performs work on the surrounding matter. The mechanical effect of this 
work, in one case, is the excitation of thermal motions, and in the other, the 
overcoming of resistance. The body must itself change in its circumstances, so 
that it contains within itself a store of work which decreases by precisely the 
total value of the mechanical effects produced. Conversely, the total value of 
the mechanical effects produced must depend solely on the initial and final 
state of the body, and is therefore the same, no matter what intermediate states 
the body may have passed through, provided only that the initial and final 
states are the same.”
“The total mechanical energy of a body may be defined as the mechanical 
value of all the effects it would produce, through heat emitted and resistances 
overcome, if it were cooled as much as possible and allowed to contract or 
expand indefinitely, depending on whether the forces active between its parts 
attract or repel, when all thermal motion in the body is precluded. But given 
our present deficient knowledge of perfect coldness and the nature of molecular 
forces, we cannot determine this total mechanical energy for any part of matter 
and cannot even be certain whether or not it is infinitely great for a finite 
portion of matter. Hence, it appears appropriate to select a certain state as the 
standard state of the body under consideration, and to use the expression 
‘mechanical energy’ simply with reference to this standard state. The mechan­
ical energy of a body in a given state thus denotes the mechanical value of all 
the effects the body would produce in passing from the state in which it is given 
to the standard state, or the mechanical value of whatever agency it would 
require to bring the body from the standard state into the state in which it is 
given.”
We shall call the quantity here defined, not mechanical energy, but rather 
intrinsic energy, in accordance with the name Thomson himself later used.
5. While equation (2) expresses mathematically Proposition I, Thomson 
finds, as Carnot and Clapeyron had, that the formula
ddM C

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
139
expresses Proposition II. That is, in the infinitesimal cyclic Carnot process 
considered on p. [114] and p. [132-33], the amount of heat mdv is absorbed 
isothermally at the higher temperature, a part of it is released as heat at a 
temperature lower by dti, and, in the course of the process, the other part, 
^dvdd, is transformed into work in accordance with I. The ratio of both 
amounts, according to II, is a function of temperature.
Even here, Thomson remarks that only an infinitely small fraction of the heat 
which has entered into the process is converted into work, “while the remainder 
is irremediably lost for man, and thus wasted, though not annihilated.”
Equation (5) has the same form in the new theory as in Clapeyron (equation 
7, p. [116]), but the difference between the two theories shows itself whenever 
the cyclic process operates through a finite difference in temperature.
That is, if one imagines the finite drop in temperature from $o to du to be 
divided into infinitesimal parts, and via one of these parts the heat q to be 
conveyed in part to a temperature lower by dfi and in part transformed into 
work dq, then according to II (cf. also p. [133]).
(6)
consequently,
(7)
dq dO
Aq = ~C’
1 H j
where H denotes the heat absorbed at the higher temperature and R the heat 
released at the lower one. If one sets
f’’0
c = r'
there follows, accordingly,
(8)
R = He r:
and the work gained is therefore
1 
1-f
(9) 
^ = -(Я-Л)=-(1-е-г
/к 
/1
r^d# ( T T 
\ ~C t 2+T3

140 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
According to Carnot’s theory, however, the quantity of heat H would not 
change during the drop in temperature. Thus,
dW d-d
(10) 
would be the case. It can be seen from this that the smaller the drop in 
temperature $o - du, the less the new theory differs from the older one of 
Carnot.
6. The important thing for Thomson now is to determine the temperature 
function C, for which he had previously calculated the numerical values, but 
from Carnot’s point of view. Joule had written him in 1848 that one can set 
(11)
C = A + 
= Л(273 + 0),
where a denotes the expansion coefficient of ideal gases. This already followed 
from Holtzmann’s work of 1845, as Helmholtz had pointed out in 1847 (cf. p. 
[118]). Thomson is reluctant to accept this formula. From (5) there initially 
follows only 
and if a body then needs the heat H in order to increase its volume isothermally 
from Vi to V2> 
where W stands for the work performed in the increase of volume. For gases 
subject to the laws of Boyle and Gay-Lussac, a simple calculation yields 
(13)
Accordingly, the heat required to obtain work isothermally from a gas is indeed 

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
141
proportional to the work, but the proportionality factor is independent of the 
temperature of the process only when 
(14)8
[Helm calls this equation (11), instead of (14), as it should be. I have therefore renumbered it 
and the remaining equations of the section and also references to these equations in the text. - 
trans.]
273 + #
The heat consumed stands to the work performed in a clear relation of cause 
and effect only when no other change - a change in the density of the working 
substance, for example - takes place. Thomson portrays as an arbitrary 
hypothesis of Robert Mayer the fact that in an isothermal change of a gas the 
heat added is nevertheless proportional to the work performed, and that a gas 
therefore requires no heat for the isothermal change of its own state. This is a 
criticism often repeated later; but, as we have seen on p. [83], it is entirely 
unjust.
7. Thomson recommends renewed study of the efflux of gases to answer the 
question of whether deviations between equation (14) and the values of C 
calculated by Clapeyron and Thomson are based only on imprecise observa­
tions of gases and vapors and, in particular, on an imprecise determination of 
the heat equivalent from which they were derived, or whether equation (14) has 
to be rejected instead.
While the gas of volume Vi from a very large vessel at the pressure p\ is 
throttled by a porous stopper separating it from another vessel in which it 
assumes the volume v2 under the pressure p2, let the quantity of heat H be 
released (particularly from the point of efflux) to the surroundings. Both vessels 
are maintained at the temperature $, and the throttling processes are limited to 
such small parts of the vessels that the pressures and temperatures of the vessels 
undergo no noticable changes as a result of them. The change of volume of the 
mass of gas being considered requires the expenditure of heat
(15) f—
in which p denotes the pressure, lying between px and p2, with which the gas 
flows through the opening between the two vessels. On the other hand, the 
work consumed in the flow is/
/•V2
vdp = J pdv - p2v2 + px vi = W.
According to the gas laws, the last two terms cancel each other. The heat 
A f pdv corresponds to the work calculated, so that
8

142 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(17)
And then, in conformity with the gas laws,
(18)
Г2 
V2
9 By Thomson, Math. phys. Papers I, 333ff. Taken together.
10 Trans. Roy. Soc. June 1854.
W = pdv = /jjvilog —, 
J vi
V1 dp _ W
, &TV-273 + tf’
there follows
H =
(19)
273 + $
W.
If equation (14) is correct, and if Mayer, Clausius and Joule are right, then 
experiment must yield H = 0. That is, no heat may be released to the fluid with 
the temperature $ which flows around the two vessels. In a series of detailed 
experimental studies,9 Joule and Thomson have shown that in the throttling of 
air, H is in fact very close to zero. And in 1854,10 again starting from the the 
standpoint of the new theory, they arrive at Thomson’s old suggestion of 
defining temperature as proportional to Carnot’s function, that is, at the 
absolute thermometric scale in the modern sense.
From this point of view, measurements of the value of H in the Joule- 
Thomson throttling experiments then appear as comparisons of the air 
thermometer with the absolute thermometric scale. If we call 0 the absolute 
temperature, which corresponds to the temperature 273 + $, we can write $ as
(20)
[*> di) 1 , 0o 
L.
and thereby bring formulae (8) and (9) into the form
(20b) 
R = 
AW = нв°~ви
#0 
#0
8. Among the applications Thomson makes of the mechanical theory of heat, 
one particularly stands out as important for the energetic generalization of 

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
143
thermodynamics: the theory of the reversible relations between heat and 
electricity, which opens up the possibility of broadening the scope of thermo­
dynamics proper. This theory was therefore taken up quite early by Clausius,11 
as well as by Thomson;12 but Thomson took a significant step beyond his rival.
11 Pogg. Ann. 90 (1853).
12 Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 21,1 (1854). Papers I, p. 232.
What turns out to be most influential in this application of the theory of heat 
is the difference between reversible and irreversible processes. Although a 
development of heat proportional to the square of the current intensity had 
been a subject of study in the thorough investigations of energy conservation 
which Joule had carried out, it nevertheless had to be left out of account in 
order to develop a complete theory on thermodynamic foundations. Thomson’s 
second basic proposition is thus brought into play, for which heat does not 
depend on the direction of the current and is not at all reversible. Rather, it is to 
be compared with the development of heat through friction, which, in relation 
to the actions of conservative forces, was also not treated initially in mechanics. 
With regard to reversible thermoelectric heat processes, the smaller the current 
intensity, the less the Joule heat turns out to be. We therefore assume the 
current to be very weak.
Moreover, to ensure reversibility in the processes being considered, heat 
conduction in the connecting circuit must also be ignored. Or, more precisely, 
it must be assumed that the thermoelectric processes taking place would obey 
the same laws even if no heat conduction occurred.
So, let a connecting arc consist of two conductors touching at points 1 and 2. 
The quantities of heat Q\ and Q2 at the temperatures 0\ and 02 must be supplied 
each second at these joints to maintain a positive current of unit intensity in the 
arc. Furthermore, let <jd0 denote the quantity of heat that is developed in one 
second in a conductor element whose ends are maintained at the temperatures 
0 + d0 and 0, while a current of unit intensity flows through it. <r, the so-called 
specific heat of electricity, is different in different metals. In the two parts of our 
connecting arc, let this quantity have the values cq and cr2. If 0o is the 
temperature of an arbitrary point in the first conductor, then the total heat 
developed within the conductor is
ffy) 
c9\ 
Г@2
(21) 
(j\d0 + 
&2d0 + 
(T]d0 — (cri — <J2)d0,
J 9\ 
J9 2 
9q 
v/Oo
while at the joints the quantity of heat Q\ - Qi is consumed.
Now if A stands for the electromotive force produced by these thermal 
processes, A also represents the energy produced thermoelectrically each 
second in the passage of a unit of current. Thus, according to the first basic 
proposition,

144 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(22)
A = 61 - Qi~ (crj — 02)df), 
Je}
while the second basic proposition requires that
(23)
6i Qi
01 
02
Г @2
If 0\ - 02, then 2i = Q2 and A = 0. When the temperatures 0i and 02 are 
only slightly different, as is necessary to produce a weak current - and, of 
course, our theory holds only for weak currents - then, through differentiation 
of equation (23), there follows
(24)
d ( 61 
- <T2
de ( 0 J + 0
Q dQ
At the same time, however, equation (22) for A becomes
(25) 
Д = -Г|й?0,
or, with a sufficiently small temperature difference, #i - 02,
(25b) 
A = f(0!-02).
(7
Differentiation then yields the Peltier heat
(26) 
6 = ^-
If, like Clausius, someone did not consider the so-called Thomson effect, 
which is expressed by the terms containing cr, then it would follow from 
equations (23) or (24) that Q is proportional to 0, which is empirically not the 
case.

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
145
9. I cannot here pursue in greater detail the numerous other applications of 
thermodynamics that Thomson carried out. To go into the physical details of 
his extended investigations of elasticity,13 and of the mechanical value of 
various arrangements of electricity, magnetism and galvanism,14 would lead 
us too far afield from our main subject. Moreover, his more general reflections 
on the mechanical effects of radiation and of animate beings, and on the 
sources of energy, which he published in 1852,15 are belated in view of the 
development energetics had already received in Germany.
13 Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh (1851). Phil. Mag. (4) (1851). Quarterly J of Math. (1855). Papers I, 
pp. 203, 291ff.
14 Glasgow Phil. Soc. Proc. Ill (1853). Papers I, p. 521.
15 Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh (Feb. 1852). Papers I, p. 505.
16 Phil. Mag. (4) 8 (1854). Papers II, p. 1.
17 Papers II, p. 34.
18 Phil. Mag. 9(1854). Papers II, p. 28.
19 Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh (April 1852). Phil. Mag. (October 1852). Papers I, p. 511.
Worthy of mention, however, is an error in the 1852 essay to which Thomson 
calls attention when it is reprinted in his collected works. In enumerating the 
sources of energy used by human beings, he thought in 1852 that the 
mechanical work we obtain in windmills and sails stems only in part from 
solar energy, that it is rather also caused in part by the rotation of the earth, 
which generates the trade winds. In the reprint the passage is corrected to the 
effect that the only work attributed to the rotation of the earth is that obtained 
in water mills driven by the tides.
Thomson’s publications of 1854 on the mechanical energies of the solar 
system16 and on heat and light,17 the mechanical precursors of motion, also do 
not lead beyond the range of cosmological reflection found in Mayer and 
Helmholtz. On the other hand, a work on the possible density of the light ether 
and the mechanical value of a cubic mile of solar light18 does carry out a new 
application of the energy principle, by subjecting the ether hypothesis and 
radiation to the criticism of this principle.
Section Three:
Preparation for the Concept of Entropy
1. If William Thomson today appears to us to be a follower when it comes to 
scientific knowledge that depends on the first law of thermodynamics, or 
energy principle, he nevertheless still confronts us as a precursor and a pioneer, 
not only through his formulation of the concept of intrinsic energy, but in all of 
the theories implied by the second law of thermodynamics, and so for that part 
of the new theory with which he had long since been familiar.
It has already been noted on p. [139] that Thomson was the first to call 
attention to the difficulties - not completely overcome even today - entailed by 
the second law in the case of irreversible processes. In a brief article that 
appeared in 1852,19 he treats “the universal tendency in nature to the 
dissipation of mechanical energy”. There he divides stores of mechanical energy 

146 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
into two classes - statical and dynamical. “Raised weights, which stand ready to 
fall and to do work if need be, an electrified body, and fuel - all contain stores 
of mechanical energy of a statical kind. Moving masses, volumes traversed by 
light vibrations and radiant heat, and bodies having thermal motions among 
their particles (that is, which are not infinitely cold) - these all contain stores of 
mechanical energy of the dynamical kind.” As early as 1853,20 in an essay “On 
the Restoration of Mechanical Energy from an Unequally Heated Space,” 
Thomson abandons the terms statical and dynamical in favor of the designa­
tions potential and actual, which had been introduced in the meantime by 
Rankine.
Phil. Mag. (4) 5 (Feb 1853). Papers I, p. 554.
Already in the work of 1852, moreover, Thomson deduces from his form of 
Carnot’s principle (p. [136]), among other things, the following: “When heat is 
generated through an irreversible process (for example, by friction), there is a 
dissipation of mechanical energy, and a complete restoration of this energy to 
its original condition is impossible. When heat expands through conduction, 
there is a dissipation of mechanical energy, and complete restoration is 
impossible.”
The work of 1853 elaborates as follows: If a body is at a non-uniform 
temperature, and the volume element dv has the absolute temperature 0 and 
the heat capacity c, then the heat cd0dv is obtained by cooling this element by 
d0. If the result of then equalizing the temperatures of all the volume elements 
is 0q, then, in the ideal limiting case that the fall of heat from 0 to 0q runs a 
reversible engine in conformity with equations (20) on p. [142], the amount 
cd0dv^ would remain heat and the amount cd0dv^^- would be converted into 
work. If, at the same time, one imagines the parts of the space initially having a 
temperature 0 lower than 0q brought to this equalization temperature by 
reversible engines, the values for the total heat remaining at the temperature 
0q and for the total work obtained are
Я
в J № 
1 f fe J e - 00 Jn
where the integration is to be carried out over all of the volume elements. 
Assuming that c is independent of 0, it also follows that
(2) R = 0(} [ c(l0 - lO^dv, W = 
[ cdv\O-Oo-0ol^-\.
J v 
J v \ 
0Q)
Since 0q is supposed to be the temperature of equalization, R = 0; thus, the 
equalization temperature in the ideal case being considered would result from
20

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
147
(3)
ieQ
fv clOdv 
f cdv
and the maximum mechanical energy capable of being produced from the heat 
would amount to
(4)
Iff 
Q
w = - cdv\e-eQ- eQi-
AJV [ 
6>o
For example,21 if the system consists of two equal masses having the same 
specific heat and initially having the temperatures 0\ and O2, then the 
equalization temperature which can be reached in the limiting case of 
reversible thermal equalization is given by
21 Tait, Warmelehre (Wien 1885), p. 306.
22 Thomson, Phil. Mag. (5) 7 (1879). Also Papers I.
Wo =1(W1 + W2).
Therefore, 
(5)
#0 = V #1^25
and the mechanical energy obtained in the process amounts to 
(6)
w = 
eV,
where V represents the volume of one of the masses.
When #0 denotes in formulas (1) and (2) the lowest temperature of the 
surroundings of the system to which the system can be brought, then W 
indicates the maximum amount of mechanical work which can be obtained 
from the system through a change of its temperature, and R the amount that 
remains as heat during the process. If, in addition, the work L can be obtained 
from the system through other changes, Thomson calls the sum
M = L+ W
the total motivity22 of the system. The capacity of heat to perform work, its 

148 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
motivity, should thus be measured by W, since W is an expression for that 
possession “the squandering of which is called dissipation”
The last elaborations stem from a much later time, following the entropy 
concept of Clausius, and, in fact, already anticipate the idea of free energy, 
treated shortly thereafter by Helmholtz. But already in 1852,23 Thomson 
possesses the foundations for this great knowledge, a knowledge which 
subsequently became the starting point for so many studies and which, even 
today, has not resulted in universally satisfactory and accepted agreement. For 
as early as 1852, he proposed these propositions:
23 Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh (April 1852). Phil. Mag. (October 1852). Papers I, p. 511.
24 Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh (21 May 1854). Papers I, p. 236.
“1. There prevails in the material world a general tendency toward the 
dissipation of mechanical energy.
2. Any restoration of mechanical energy, amounting to more than the 
equivalent of the dissipation, is impossible in inanimate material 
processes, and can probably never be effected by means of orga­
nized matter, whether it is endowed with vegetable life or is subject 
to the will of an animal creature.
3. Within a finite past the earth must have been unsuitable for 
habitation by human beings as they are presently constituted, and 
in a finite future it must be so once again - unless processes have 
taken place, or are performed, which are impossible under the laws 
that govern the known processes now taking place in the material 
world.”
2. The systematic formulation of the mechanical theory of heat, founded by 
Clausius and Thomson in competition, finds its brilliant conclusion in the 
recognition of the existence of the entropy function, which was the upshot of 
what follows.
In his investigation of thermoelectric currents,24 Thomson notices that 
equation (20b) (p. [142]) can be formulated as
(7)
oo ou
Here H represents the heat absorbed at the higher temperature 0q, and R the 
heat released at the lower temperature 9U. If the heat released is reckoned as 
negative, and the quantities of heat absorbed at the absolute temperatures 
01,02,... are denoted by H\, 
.., then the last formula can be written as

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
149
(8)
^1 , Я?
0\ 
02
In this form it can be generalized, as it was elsewhere by Thomson: The 
quantities of heat quantities Q\yQi... absorbed during a reversible cyclic 
process at the absolute temperatures 0\, O2... satisfy the equation
(9)
0i 02 en
when released amounts of heat are treated as absorbed negative quantities.
To prove this result, imagine a series of reversible cyclic processes:
Let the first one release Q\ at 0i and absorb 02^ at 62’,
let the second release 02 + Q2 at 02 and absorb O3 j at 63
let the third release 03 j + 2з at 0з
and absorb O4 | 
1 at 04
I (71 
(72 
(73 I
etc.;
let the last release
0n-2 
+ 
' 
+Qn-2 at en-2
к 
^n—3 )
and absorb
л (2i . Qi . 
. Qn-21 . a
"11 »; ' «г1 л, , J •' e-'
This chain of reversible processes, all of which satisfy condition (8), releases 
the same quantities of heat as are absorbed by the cyclic process we are 
considering. If this cyclic process is therefore carried out simultaneously with 
that chain of processes, then the net effect is a series of processes that is 
identical to a reversible cyclic process between two temperatures 0„_iand 0n. 
That is to say, the total process absorbs the heat

150 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
0n-l
(Ch 62 
&7-2I
[ 01 4 
On-2 J
+ Qn-i
at 0n_i and the heat Qn at 0n. Thus, in accordance with (8), the following 
equation must obtain for the total process:
/q\ 
Qi 
. 62 
Qn-2 
Qn-i 
Qn __
U 
01 02 
0,-2 
0,-1 
0, “ 
’
which is what was to be proved.
3. Clausius reaches the same conclusion in the same year, 1854.25 He takes as 
his starting point Carnot’s principle, which he now formulates as follows: 
“Heat can never pass from a colder to a warmer body without another change, 
connected with this transfer of heat, occurring at the same time.” Moreover, 
when heat Q at temperature 0 arises from work, he calls the quotient the 
equivalence value of this transformation; and when heat Q at temperature 0i (of 
the boiler) passes to temperature 02 (of the condenser), the equivalence value of 
this transformation is said to be
_ ( 1 П
Now, since every quantity of heat which is absorbed by the working 
substance can be regarded as converted into work, and every quantity of heat 
released as produced from work, the equivalence value of all the transforma­
tions occurring during a cyclic process of the kind described above is
or, if the temperatures of the quantities of heat change continuously as they are 
being absorbed,
(11)
dQ 
0 ’
25
Pogg. Ann. 93 (December 1854).

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
151
By reducing the situation to a series of cyclic processes each of which takes 
place between only two temperatures, Clausius then shows, via an argument 
less precise than Thomson’s, that N = 0 must be the case when the cyclic 
process under consideration is reversible, and that N can never be negative 
when the process is irreversible.
Clausius’ line of argument has been thoroughly criticized by Planck.26 If the 
expression
26 Max Planck, Uber den zweiten Hauptsatz der mechanischen Warmetheorie (Munich 1879).
Q\02~0j
is used to represent the value for the transformation of heat Q from 
temperature 0\ to temperature 02, and work is always regarded as heat of 
infinitely high temperature, whenever it is a question of the transformation 
values of heat into work and vice versa, then the proposition that the 
transformation value of a process cannot be negative certainly follows from 
the Carnot-Clausius principle. But, Planck adds, the corollary, that the 
transformation value of every process is zero, holds true for every process, not 
just for reversible ones. If, for example, the heat Q passes from one gas at 
constant volume to another gas at constant volume, and during the process the 
first gas cools from 0\ to while the second is heated from 02 to then
(12)
e = C1(01-^1) = C2(0'-02),
in which ci and c2 denote the specific heats at constant volume of the two gases. 
During this process in nature, then, in general three transformations have 
taken place:
1. 
The quantity of heat Q has passed from the temperature 0\ to the 
temperature ^2;
2. 
The heat remaining in the first gas is transformed from the 
temperature to the temperature 0[;
3. 
The heat c232 initially present in the second gas has been trans­
formed from the temperature 02 to the temperature 0'2.
The equivalence values corresponding to these three changes (taking (12) 
into account) are, respectively

152 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
cA
П 
02 J
1-11
= _Q
*2
Q
Ox
Their sum is zero. So when Clausius obtains the expression - f as positive 
for this irreversible process, that is only because in forming the sum he does not 
include in his calculation the transformation value of the heat remaining in 
the heat reservoir (here, therefore, in the first gas), but adds only the 
transformation values having to do with the body considered as working 
substance (here the second gas), that is, only the transformation values that 
yield, in later terminology, the change in entropy of the working substance.
Under such circumstances, it seems appropriate in formulating the entropy 
function to leave the transformation values out of account altogether, and to 
derive the entropy in the manner of Thomson, which will be described in more 
detail below. Elsewhere, however, Planck makes a suggestion that goes further: 
He wishes, in his own unique way, to derive the concept of entropy more 
directly from experience than either Thomson or Clausius. I must also give an 
account of this later (Part 5, Section 9).
4. 
For now only one more observation is necessary. Already in this first stage 
of development, Clausius takes the step that is decisive for the further 
elaboration of the concept of entropy. The expression for the heat differential
(13)
dQ = Mdv + Nd#
is not a total differential. Properly, therefore, Thomson always avoids referring 
to heat by a differential: He never sets Mdv + Nd# equal to the differential of 
some quantity. Clausius then observes that in reversible processes 
(14) 
dQ M j N
is a total differential, since in such processes J ф must of course always equal 
zero whenever $ and v again assume their initial values. It is true that he does 
not yet introduce the differential of a function of v and # for the quantity but 
he already concludes that 
(15) 
д ГМ) _д_ ГЛП 
d# [ 3 j dv [ 3 J
and, just as early, then draws additional conclusions from this relation.

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
153
Section Four:
The System of Classical Thermodynamics
1. Anticipating what is to follow, we have already used the name entropy, 
which Clausius introduced only in 1865, just as we also used the term energy as 
early as the account we gave of the achievements of Thomson’s predecessors. 
In so doing, the knowledge of the relations between heat and work obtained 
until about 1855 revealed a scientific system that is complete in itself. This 
system gradually achieved general acceptance under the heading of the 
“mechanical theory of heat” or of “thermodynamics”; and it is so indisputably 
well-established today that it can certainly be called “classical” - which was the 
label first given it by the opponents of all efforts to develop it further.
It therefore appears useful to delay for a moment our account of the 
subsequent development of energetics in order to understand better what had 
been achieved up to around 1855.
Mayer’s energy principle - that the total amount of energy is invariable - has 
by then evolved through three phases. The law of the equivalence of heat and 
mechanical work, as it was revealed through Joule’s investigations, had become 
for Helmholtz the law of the conservation of energy (cf. p. [94]). Now Thomson 
gave the same principle its most far-reaching expression by stating it as the law 
of intrinsic energy, the mathematical importance of which had emerged as 
early as Clausius’ first work:
There exists a function, dependent only on the quantities determining the 
momentary state of a body, that is, only on the parameters of the body's state, 
such as the temperatures, coordinates and velocities of its parts, whose change 
during any given period of time measures the total energy that was supplied to the 
body during the period, regardless of whether the individual contributions of 
energy (positive or negative) were supplied as mechanical work or were only 
transformable into it. The function thus defined by its temporal change, therefore 
mathematically by its differential, is to be called the intrinsic energy of the body.
In thermodynamics this proposition has been called its first law. Instead of 
the name “intrinsic energy,” however, a string of other names have been used, 
such as the “efficacy function” (by Kirchhoff), “internal heat and internal 
work”, respectively (by Zeuner), the “energy function” (by Carl Neumann), 
capital, the work store of the body, and “internal energy” (by Clausius). The 
word “Eigenenergie” is probably used for the first time in Neesen’s translation 
of Maxwell’s theory of heat to render the English term “intrinsic energy.”
Whoever has not yet grasped the central point of the matter will perhaps 
regret that in the preceding presentation of the historical development no proof 
of this proposition was given. But to prove means to reduce to known facts. As 
Mach once said: “One cannot prove mathematically that nature must be as it 
is.” And what he also says about the principle of virtual velocities - that in it 
“lies only the recognition of a fact with which we had long since been 
immediately familiar, but that we did not grasp as sharply and clearly” - is 
literally true of the energy principle, which encompasses that principle of 

154 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
mechanics and in part grew out of it. The fact which underlies the energy 
principle is that the same change in nature cannot give out more work on one 
occasion than on another. He who finds the perpetuum mobile principle easier 
to understand may cite this. Whoever holds the principles of Galilean-New­
tonian mechanics to be certain may derive from them the law of kinetic energy 
and, with it, a part of the energy principle. But these are all only expressions of 
the same thing, not mathematical proofs.
2. Beside the energy principle as its first law, thermodynamics places a second 
law, which by 1855 had developed out of Carnot’s principle into a theory.
The most careful presentation of this theory is probably the one due to Carl 
Neumann.27 Let us imagine, he says, a homogeneous or heterogeneous 
substance, M, which may also consist of several spatially-separated parts. Let 
any mechanical and thermal influences on this substance M come from outside 
it. We may imagine the mechanical effects to be produced by a mechanical 
system, and the thermal ones by a series of constant heat sources, or heat 
accumulators, of the required temperatures. Then, any thermodynamic process 
to which M is subjected consists, first, of a change of state of the substance, 
second, of a loss of work (positive or negative) by the mechanical system and, 
third, of (positive or negative) heat losses by the individual heat accumulators. 
“These three different things, taken together, may be called the total effect of the 
process under consideration.” Neumann then formulates Clausius' principle as 
follows:
Leipziger Ber. (1891), p. 75.
“Making use of substances of arbitrary number and composition, a process will 
never be possible whose total effect consists of an actual heat loss from a colder 
constant source of heat and of an equally great heat gain by a hotter constant 
source of heat.”
Or, in easily comprehensible symbols:
(1) [Qoo'i—Qei] impossible, when < 0\ and Q positive.
From this principle then follows, in the manner taught by Carnot, Clapeyron 
and Clausius, the theorem'. Utilizing two constant heat sources at the absolute 
temperatures 9q and (f, and employing a mechanical system, it will always be 
possible to carry out a process with an ideal gas, M, whose total effect consists 
of the release of the amounts of heat xo and xi, respectively, by the heat sources 
and of the receipt of a quantity of work equal to x0 + *i by the mechanical 
system. For this it is only necessary to select the amounts xo and xi in such a 
manner that the equation
27

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
155
(2)
*0 Xj
0o 0i
is satisfied. The process that must be carried out is a cyclic Carnot process, 
repeated as often as need be.
The total effect of this process could be represented schematically by
[*10! ; xqov ; - (x0 + xi)],
when the temperature of its heat reservoir is again added to each quantity of 
heat as a subscript, and the work released by the mechanical system is written 
in terms of heat without a temperature subscript. (Neumann’s notation differs 
somewhat from that used here.)
Neumann then uses the fact that a second condition is still available for the 
quantities xq and xi to derive the principle used by William Thomson from 
Clausius’ principle. If a process could be carried out with any substance whose 
total effect was the release of heat q by a heat source of temperature 0 and the 
absorption of work equivalent to this heat by the mechanical system, then this 
process could be followed by a Carnot process with a gas. For the latter process 
a second heat source of temperature 0i could be used, in addition to the one at 
temperature 0. If the quantities x and xi are then eliminated in such a way that, 
in addition to the equation
(3b) 
f + r = 0’
V (71
they also satisfy the equation 
(3b) 
x + 
= —q.
the total effect of both processes is such that heat q + x, or -xi, is released from 
the heat source at temperature 0 and heat xi from that at temperature 0i:
Process 1
Process 2 
Total process
[qe, 
-tf],
[X0 , Xiff, , (x + %1)], 
[—*10 , X10,]-
According to Clausius’ principle (1), this is impossible when q > 0, since, of 
course,

156 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(4)
%i = -
q0\
0x-0
results from equations (3). Thus, Thomson’s principle follows: Substances of 
arbitrary number and composition being utilized, a process can never be 
carried out whose total effect consists of the absorption of a positive quantity 
of heat from a heat source at constant temperature and the release of an 
equivalent amount of work to a mechanical system. Or:
(5)
[#0; -q] impossible, when q > 0.
In order, finally, to treat the general case, a process whose total effect is
[#101 ; #202 ; #303 ;•••; #«0„ 5 
~(#i+#2+ #з+ ••• + #«)],
one constructs, following Thomson (p. [149]), (n - 1) processes with the total 
effects 
xw, ; 4* ;
*202 ; 
;
•^303 , -^-304 ?
-(%1 + xj)
-(x2 +x'3)
-(x3 +V4)
and makes
ii+i = 0, 
» Hi 
«2 
»! 
».-l 
0
as well as
#1 + -*1 — 0, #2 + Xj + X2 + 0, ^3 + X2 X3 — 0,. . . 
qn-\ + 4_2 + x„_i =0.
If one then also carries out these (n - 1) processes in accordance with the 
given process, one obtains a process having the total effect
[(^ + <_i)e„ ; 
-(?« +4-1)1-

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
157
However, this is impossible, according to Thomson’s principle, when 
qn + 
> 0. After eliminating by means of the above equations, the
inequality signifies that the condition
+ + ^<0 
02 ^3 en~
must also be satisfied. The inequality of Clausius is thereby demonstrated for 
any given homogeneous or heterogeneous substance and for any given cyclic 
process. The B's signify only the temperatures of the heat sources or reservoirs, 
and should not be taken to represent the temperatures which the substance, or 
any part of it, possesses during the process of heat absorption.
3. The temperature of this substance may be represented by В only when the 
substance has the same temperature in all of its parts, which can of course 
change with time. It can also be represented in this way only when this 
temperature is the same as the source that sometimes releases heat, which 
obviously can be assumed only for changes of the substance that take place 
infinitely slowly. In this case, when every state of the substance is a state of rest, 
it is usually assumed that the cyclic processes can also be carried out in the 
reverse order. In appealing to this assumption, certain phenomena are left out, 
of course, such as elastic exhaustion, hysteresis and others. Duhem28 devotes a 
good deal of effort to these processes, in which a continuous succession of 
equilibrium states still does not yield a reversible process. The most transparent 
example of such a process is motion on a rough path, when it occurs uniformly 
so that the friction is just overcome: If the motion is reversed here, the 
processes attending it are not reversed. Now, as before, mechanical work is 
transformed into heat. Nevertheless, there exists an equilibrium in each of the 
states the system has passed through between the friction and the normally 
effective forces.
“Sur les deformations permanentes et 1’hysteresis,” Mem. Ac. Belgique 54 (1896).
If cases of this kind are also left out of account, such as usually happens, then 
only the equals sign in (7) remains. Thus, if we call dQ the heat supplied to the 
substance M during the temporal interval dt, and В the temperature, the same 
in all parts, of the substance in the interval dt, then
(8)
holds true for all such infinitely slow and reversible cyclic processes.
An important characteristic of reversible processes may be mentioned here. 
Every reversible process can be understood as the disruption of mobile 
equilibrium. The equilibrium between water and steam, for example, can be 
28

158 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
pictured as a mobile equilibrium in which, continuously, just as much water is 
vaporized as steam is condensed. If one of these two imaginary processes 
predominates, then the equilibrium changes in one direction; and if the other 
predominates, it changes in the reverse direction. One could imagine in the 
same way that in a thermo-electric connecting circuit the current raises the 
temperature differential between the junctions, and that this difference simul­
taneously produces more current.
Every state of rest of the substance M is then determined by specifying the 
values of certain parameters it possesses in this state, such as the temperature 
of the substance or the coordinates of its individual points, hence by a point in 
a multi-dimensional space. If Zo is taken as a permanently established initial 
state, and Z as an arbitrary state of the substance, then 
will have one and the same value for all paths going from Zo to Z. More 
precisely, 5 is a function of Z alone, or of the parameters determining this state. 
Let the function 5 now be called the entropy of the substance. Then, for a 
substance having the temperature 9 which passes reversibly from a state of rest 
to a different, infinitely close, state of rest, the equation
(9b)
dQ = 9dS.
holds true.
4. We shall also follow, in essence, Neumann’s consideration of two other, 
later much-debated, questions. When a substance is made up of several 
component parts, is its energy the sum of the energies of its parts? Is its entropy 
the sum of the entropies of its parts?
Let a substance consist either of two spatially separated or of two contiguous 
parts, which are distinguished by the subscripts 1 and 2, while any additional 
substance that may be present in the environment of 1 and 2 carries the 
subscript 0. Then, if d$ signifies the heat that passes from the surroundings 
to the first part, dA\ the work that passes from 1 to 2, and the appropriate signs 
for all the effects being considered are used, then the total change of energy is
(10a)
dE = d$ + dQ% + dA°! + dA°2,
while the intrinsic energies of the two parts, 1 and 2, change by

CLASSICAL THERMODYNAMICS
159
(10b)
dEx = dQ\ + dQ\ + dA\ + dA] 
dEi = d(^ + d<$z + dAz + dA\'
Apparently,
(11)
dE — dE\ + dE2
only when the two equations
(12)
+ dQ\ = 0, dA\ + dAj = O
are satisfied. If one also imagines the quantities of heat to be supplied reversibly 
at the temperature 9, then the changes in entropy, dS^ and dS2, of the parts of 
the system, and the total change dS, respectively, must satisfy the equations
(13)
d$ + dQ°z =0dS, d$ + dQ\ = 0dSx, 
dtf2 + dQ\ = 6dS2
Therefore,
(14)
dS = dS\ = dS2
only if in return, but now only for reversible processes,
(15)
d£ +dQ\ = 0.
Apparently, then, conditions (12) are satisfied only in the case of mere 
contact effects between the two substances 1 and 2, while distant effects 
between them in general violate the condition that
dA\ + dA\ = 0.
Accordingly, it might be suspected that the parts of a system can always be 
chosen in such a way that equations (11) and (14) are satisfied. To do so one 
would only have to be able to replace the distant effects with contact effects, 
that is, if need be, to count as a part of the system the media between the 
substances through which one can imagine the distant effects to be mediated.

160 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
However, even if conditions (12) are satisfied, the addition propositions still 
do not hold true for the energy and entropy themselves, but only for their 
differentials. The additive constants appearing in the values for energy and 
entropy require, in every case, a separate investigation before the addition 
proposition can be applied to the energy and entropy themselves. With regard 
to this result it should be noted, in particular, that when the additive constants 
are arbitrarily chosen for some substances, they are simultaneously co­
determined for any other substance that can be produced from them through 
any reversible operations. For example, if integration constants for liquid water 
were arbitrarily chosen, then they would also be со-determined for water 
vapor; if one had fixed them arbitrarily for hydrogen and oxygen, one could 
not again select them arbitrarily for water.
From these investigations, it is already doubtful whether, according to 
circumstances, the addition of the energies and entropies of spatially contig­
uous substances yields us the energy and entropy of the system. But it is 
obvious that, in general, it is not permissible to calculate either function by 
addition for any substance from functions valid for other substances when the 
former has arisen from the latter through mixture. This question, which 
belongs to thermochemistry, is one that we shall return to again elsewhere (in 
Part 5).

PART FOUR:
NEW INITIATIVES, CONTROVERSIES AND MISPLACED 
EFFORTS
Section One :
Doubts about Thermodynamics
1. The appropriation of a new doctrine by its contemporaries probably always 
takes the form of its being misunderstood and resisted by some of them. The 
young thermodynamics also had its opponents, whose attacks sometimes 
intensified to the point of passionate excitement. At the same time, many 
expressions of the authors championing the new doctrine turned out to be 
insufficiently precise; indeed, the clearly articulated version of the fundamental 
teachings we have just assembled is only a recent product. The essence of the 
matter, however, remained as it was created by Clausius in 1850.
To begin with, Clausius had to contend with mathematical misunderstand­
ings. The use of partial derivatives and inexact differentials in physics led to 
errors, which required Clausius to explicate the mathematical context at 
greater length. But despite habituation to these concepts, which has become 
more and more widespread, such confusions still have not died out entirely.
Moreover, the equivalence of heat and work was called into question as late 
as 1853 by Reech,1 and even later - until 1860 - by Hirn.2 This was done in 
such a scientific manner, however, that their studies were nevertheless 
extremely useful in disseminating and gaining recognition for the theory of 
heat.
1 Lionville J. (1853); Berl. Ber. (1853), p. 404.
2 Recherches Colmar (1858); Berl. Ber. (1858). On the other hand, recognition of the cosmological 
theory of heat in Berl. Ber. 16 (a860), p. 328.
The main problem was that the two basic concepts of intrinsic energy and 
entropy, as well as the second law, were understood only after many difficulties 
and controversies, so that it was a matter of repeatedly defending and 
elucidating these concepts, of presenting them unobjectionably and of guarding 
them from misunderstandings.
Thus, for example, Hirn specified an apparatus with which a mass of gas 
could be brought from 0° to approximately 120° by means of heat from a 
source at 100° without any change of its volume, hence without work being 
performed or consumed. This process seemed to contradict the Carnot- 
161

162 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Clausius principle that heat passes spontaneously only from higher to lower 
temperatures. Clausius, of course, was easily able to show3 how the process 
must be understood in order to eliminate the apparent contradiction. Still, it is 
more useful to formulate the principle itself in such a way that the objection 
cannot arise at all, as this is in fact accomplished in Carl Neumann’s 
formulation (p. [154]).
3 Clausius, Mechanische Warmetheorie, Ch. XIII, discussions, etc.
4 Phil. Mag (4) 4. Clausius, Pogg. Ann. 121 or Mechanische Warmetheorie.
Moreover, Tait’s objection - that a wire can be heated to incandescence by a 
thermopile even though the junctions are maintained, for example, only at 
temperatures of 0° and 100° - also appears to require discussion only with 
respect to the form of Carnot’s principle stated by Clausius. It is not an 
objection which can be made to Neumann’s formulation where, in addition to 
the release of heat from a source of 100° and the absorption of heat at 0°, a 
third process also takes place. Either the change in temperature of the wire or, 
if the wire is maintained at constant temperature, the change of a third heat 
source can be regarded as the third process.
It is immediately clear, of course, that any given heat transfer between two 
heat reservoirs can be used to produce heat of a temperature higher than that 
possessed by the warmer of the two reservoirs, if one imagines the transfer as 
first used to produce work - as in a steam engine - and then the work obtained 
as converted into heat - by friction, for example.
Another objection raised by Tolver Preston constructs a process in which 
hydrogen and oxygen are mingled through diffusion; but in the conclusions he 
draws from this process, he overlooks the fact that it is not a cyclic process.
2. Even today, such objections are certainly not without value for a study of 
the subject, or at least for a study of its historical development. However, only 
one of them led to an actual enrichment of science. Cannot a higher 
temperature be attained in reflection and refraction through a convergence of 
rays than is possessed by the source of the rays? We note in passing that this 
objection first emerged in a very curious form, or rather - since the matter itself 
seems pretty obvious - in a setting where it became so acute that it had to be 
removed.
Thermal losses to the universe through radiation, which the world we know 
continuously undergoes, cause one to fear that the world is tending towards a 
final state in which all energy is dissipated in the form of radiant heat, the stars 
are extinguished, and all natural phenomena have ceased. Rankine’s inventive 
mind found a remedy4 for this dismal prospect in the assumption that the ether 
which fills the visible world is limited, and that its boundary surface therefore 
completely reflects all the energy radiated towards it in such a way that it 
converges in foci. If an extinct star came into such a focus, it would again be 
heated, vaporized and disintegrated into its elementary components; chemical 
energy would again be developed at the expense of radiant heat. Clausius 
investigates this scenario with a view to discovering the conditions under which 

NEW INITIATIVES
163
it is impossible by focusing rays to achieve a higher temperature than that 
possessed by the bodies emitting them. He finds that when Carnot’s principle is 
admitted and the temperature is constant, the emission capacities of bodies in 
different media must be different, namely, inversely proportional to the square 
of their speeds of propagation in these media.
Section Two :
Rankine
1. 
Immediately after the appearance of the first works of Clausius and 
Thomson which founded thermodynamics, efforts also appear, which today 
are met with such violent hostility, to develop this theory and frame it in such a 
way that its teachings can be applied to all forms of energy - indeed, are 
elevated or deepened to become the foundations of all of natural science. The 
romantic who follows in the train of the classicists, by setting out from his 
wholly individual, highly imaginative conception of natural phenomena, is 
William John Macquorn Rankine.
It has already been mentioned that Rankine could raise priority claims 
against Clausius (p. [135]), but that his works from that period are erected 
entirely on the foundation of a specific mechanical hypothesis about the 
internal nature of bodies. He later gives the following brief outline of his ideas:5
5 Phil Mag. (4)27, p. 313.
6 Phil. Mag. (4) 17 (1859), p. 252. Cf. above, p. 17.
Bodies consist of small nuclei surrounded by atmospheres. These nuclei 
perform the function of the ether, in that their oscillations, transmitted as 
waves by means of the forces they exert on one another at a distance, account 
for the phenomena of radiation. Thermometric heat, on the other hand, 
consists in an agitation of the atmospheres, which produces outward pressure 
in accordance with the laws of centrifugal force. Radiation is emitted when the 
atmospheres whirl faster than the nuclei oscillate and are therefore retarded by 
the latter; in the reverse case, absorption occurs. States of aggregation are 
distinguished by the extent to which the nuclei are retarded by the atmospheres.
Rankine permitted himself be guided still further by this hypothesis of 
molecular vortices in that he tried to use it to explain the theories of Clausius 
and Thomson. It is only by starting from this standpoint that one can 
understand the main ideas of his essay “On the General Law of the 
Transformation of Energy”, in which, as has already been mentioned (p. 
[146]), he introduced the names potential and actual energy. Rankine later 
remarked,6 however, that Lazare Carnot, in his principles of equilibrium and 
motion, had already grasped the difference for mechanical energy through his 
use of the terms “virtual” and “actual” vis viva (p. [74]).
Thomson adopted Rankine’s terms in place of the ones he had suggested, 
that is, “statical” and “dynamical” energy, and later replaced these with the 
terms potential and kinetic. But what Rankine had in mind does not entirely 

164 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
coincide with Thomson’s classification of the forms of energy. Instead, Rankine 
deals with the concepts that Clausius calls “internal work” and the “heat 
contained in the body” and perhaps, indeed, with those that Helmholtz much 
later established as free and bound energy. In Rankine’s view, a part of the heat 
dH which is supplied to a body becomes potential, or latent in the body, while 
another part remains there as actual and tangible. The same holds true of any 
form of energy which is supplied to the body. When any of its parameters V are 
changed, potential energy is thereby developed, which arises in part through 
conversion of the actual energy already present in the body.
This is a view that is patterned on the behavior of mechanical energy and is 
thus for Rankine - for whom, indeed, every body is nothing but a mechanical 
system - self-evident. He apparently imagines actual energy as the energy of 
motion of his molecular vortices, which also possess potential energy. But he 
represents this distinction as valid for all energy, whereas, in fact, it is bound to 
the mechanical conception of nature.
If we call dU the “released potential energy” and dQ the “absorbed actual 
energy,” then the increase in intrinsic energy dE can always be represented as
(1) 
dE = dQ-dU 
(cf. formula 3 in Rankine’s essay).
To show that this view is related to Helmholtz’s later concepts of free and 
bound energy, we shall write the increase in intrinsic energy which occurs in a 
reversible change as
(2) 
dE = OdS - PdV,
understanding 0, S, P and V in the usual manner as the absolute temperature, 
entropy, pressure and volume. If this equation is put into the form
(3) 
—d(E - OS) = SdO + PdV,
and
(4) 
Q = os, U =—E + os, 
are set in order to obtain Helmholtz’s concepts, then, as in Rankine
(lb)
E = Q - U-

NEW INITIATIVES
165
and, since dU = PdV, 
is also obtained, as in his formula A.
But now
as _dP_ 
dv~ de
also follows from equation (3). Hence, the quantity of heat dH = OdS which 
must be supplied, the temperature remaining constant, to change the volume 
by d V becomes
BP
(7) 
dH = 0—dV-
and the quantity of heat Я required to change the volume from Va to Vb can be 
written as
d fVb
(8) 
H = e—jy PdV = 9(Fb — Fa),
when the function
191 F=u.Fdr
is determined through integration from a normal state Vo at a constant 0.
Furthermore, if the states of the body being considered are determined as 
functions of 0 and F, instead of as functions of 0 and V, and F is made to 
undergo the same change both times, then one finds that the quantities of heat, 
H\ and H2 which must be supplied while 0 has the constant values and O2, 
respectively, are
(8b) 
Я1 = 0^Fb - Fa), H2 = 02(Fb - Fa).
For a reversible cyclic process, which leads the state 0\Fa through the states 
0]Fb, 02Рь, 02Fa back to the state 6\Fa, there follows

166 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(10)
Я1 - h2 ex - o2 
Hx ~ e,
as in Clausius and Thomson. Rankine arrives at formulas (8) to (10) in another 
way, which has its problems, and uses Q in them instead of 0. Indeed, one can 
also accomplish what he does in the way used above, namely, by transforming 
equation (2) into
(11)
-d(E - 051ogS) = logS • d(0S) + PdV
and may conclude from this that
dP _ dlogS _ 1 dS 
dQ~ dV ~SdV’
so that, instead of (7), one obtains
and, instead of (10), one gets Rankine’s equation (7):
Я1 - я2 = 2i - 22
Я1 2i ’
But then the correct equation (10) does not follow from this formula, which 
Rankine regarded as generally valid for every form of actual energy, and which 
is gotten only from the special case in which heat is the actual energy supplied 
from outside. Rankine obtains this mistaken equation by saying that, on the 
basis of his hypothetical views regarding molecular vortices, the internal actual 
energy 2 must be regarded as proportional to the absolute temperature в. But, 
according to (4), this is unacceptable. In general, it seems that Rankine’s work 
suffered misfortune because, owing to unclear analogies occasioned by his 
mechanical hypothesis, he never rigorously distinguished the quantities Q and 
0.
2. 
Still, the work does not want for farseeing ideas. If 2? the internal actual 
energy, does not change, then all actual energy supplied from outside is 
converted into potential energy; if F does not change, then no actual energy is 
supplied. If by heat is understood the energy supplied from outside, one has 
before one the isotherms and adiabats, as Rankine explained in detail in 1854.  7
Phil. Mag. (4) 7.
7

NEW INITIATIVES
167
In F, moreover, we find for the first time the function which becomes the 
entropy in the special case of heat input, as appears directly from the above 
development in which F is identical to S.
But with respect to this work, and Rankine’s entire manner of working in 
general, we must even today endorse the judgment Helmholtz expresses about 
him in the Berlin Reports for 1853, with reference to his essay “On the General 
Law of the Transformation of Energy”: “The reporter notes that it is in general 
very difficult to work through Mr. Rankine’s works in such a way that one may 
form an opinion of them. Mr. Rankine has discovered in his own way many 
results that, proceeding from very different starting points, are also recognized 
as correct by other researchers. But it is usually impossible to follow him in the 
way in which he seeks to carry out the proof of his propositions, so that the 
impression is created that he has found his results more through a kind of 
correct instinct than by means of rigorous mathematical analysis. Or he has 
suppressed so many of the middle terms in his logical connections that the 
reader must discover these connections anew almost entirely for himself.”
3. Planck has recently asserted  that Rankine tried in his work of 1853 on the 
general law of the transformation of energy “to expand Carnot’s law into a 
general law that was to encompass all natural processes, by dividing energy 
into different forms and analyzing several of these forms into two factors.” 
With regard to the analysis into factors, however, this is incorrect. Rankine 
arrived at this analysis only in 1859, and the way he came to do so is as follows.
8
8 Wied. Ann. 57 (1896).
9 Phil. Mag. (4) 17.
In 1859 there appeared an essay by Faraday9 on the conservation of force in 
which he complains about the misunderstandings to which his studies of 
gravitation had given rise. By “force” Faraday understands “the cause of a 
physical action, the source or sources of all possible changes among the 
particles or materials of the universe” - not, like some, “mechanical force”, 
that is, the tendency of a body to pass from one location to another. The 
conservation of force has reference only to his concept, Faraday continues, and 
he cannot see any reason why those to whom the convertability of heat, 
electricity, magnetism, chemical effect and motion is a familiar idea should 
exclude a priori the cause of gravitation from association with the cause of these 
other phenomena.
A work of Rankine’s appearing in the same volume of the Philosophical 
Magazine picks up the thread of the opposition between energy and tendency 
emphasized here by Faraday. “It is certain,” Rankine says, “that no law of 
conservation is applicable to the tendency of a body to change its location or to 
any such tendency. The quantity whose amount is conserved during all the 
reciprocal actions between a system of bodies is always the product of two 
factors; and when one of these factors measures the magnitude of the tendency 
to some sort of change, the other factor is the magnitude of the change during 
which this tendency is able continuously to act.” Consequently, the energy of a 

168 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
moving mass is the product of its mass by half the square of its velocity; the 
energy of heat is the product weight x temperature x specific heat x Joule’s 
equivalent; the energy of an electric current is proportional to the product 
electromotive force x strength of electric current, or to (strength of electric 
current)2 x resistance of the circuit; and so forth. For gravitation, Newtonian 
force is the tendency; but the potential function is that energy whose quantity is 
“conserved.”
Edinb. Phil. Journal (1855).
In this work of Rankine, too, there is a sound core in an otherwise erroneous 
conception, especially as it is presented by means of mathematically dubious 
expressions. It had long been known - indeed, had found a special place in 
applied mechanics - that the differential of mechanical work can be represented 
in the form Pds, where P here signifies a force, therefore a tendency in the 
Faraday-Rankine sense. The same form had also been found for the differ­
entials of certain electric and magnetic forms of energy. But, in general, the 
differentials of the forms of energy are inexact ones. It is thus meaningless from 
the outset to speak of finite amounts of most of these differentials, since J Pds 
depends on the nature of the path taken. If P changes in this manner, one can 
certainly introduce a mean value P\ as Rankine wishes to do; but this is not the 
arithmetical mean of the initial and final values of P, as he seems to assume, but 
is dependent on the nature of the path. Moreover, if one did wish to introduce a 
function Pf • f ds, it would remain to be shown what mathematical utility would 
be gained thereby and whether a physical meaning could profitably be 
attributed to these invented quantities.
4. 
Rankine’s strength lies in the application of mechanics and thermodynamics 
to technological questions. In the same way that Weisbach disseminated French 
applied mechanics in Germany, and Zeuner thermodynamics, so Rankine taught 
English applied scientists how to make use of these theories. Born July 5, 1820, 
in Edinburgh, Rankine devoted himself from 1839 to the profession of engineer­
ing and spent his time until 1852 working on numerous hydraulic and railroad 
projects. From 1852 until his death on December 24, 1872, he was professor of 
mechanics and engineering at the University of Glasgow.
In my opinion, Rankine’s mind, at home in the direct, practical dealing with 
objects themselves, tries to give to theory the same force with which he 
immediately evaluates the phenomena. In so doing, he fails to recognize that a 
theory which encompasses broad areas agrees only in its final result with the 
view granted by practical insight. In method, however, theories built up from 
concepts with rigorous logical consistency confront those based on the intuitive 
clarity of the practitioner like opposite poles.
What Rankine has in mind in his theoretical studies can therefore be seen far 
more clearly in his celebrated textbooks, particularly his handbooks of applied 
mechanics and on the steam engine, than in his purely scientific efforts. Here 
one sees what he actually intended for the science which he was the first to call 
energetics,10 a science that was to embrace all of the theoretical knowledge of 
10

NEW INITIATIVES
169
nature, above all mechanics and thermodynamics, but also electro-technology. 
However much of it was given up or had to be redone, the world has never 
entirely ceased discussing this energetics - Hr. Planck notwithstanding,11 and 
all those like him who are so blinded by the tiny bit of the most pure theory they 
have mastered that they do not see the vast domain of applied science.
11 Wied. Ann. 57, p. 72.
12 First published Phil. Mag. (4) 7 (1854).
Rankine’s system of mechanics, which stems from his study of machines, 
begins with the concept of work. To be sure, force and resistance are used to 
define work; but to start with, work alone is measured. The work required to 
impart to a body a certain acceleration - more precisely, to bring it from 
velocity vi to velocity V2 - is found to be
Gv22 - 
g 2 
’
where j denotes the mass of the body.
Later, the name “energy” is introduced for the capacity to perform work. 
The energy expended for acceleration is called “accumulated” or “absorbed”, 
the energy converted into work in retarding motion is called “released”, and
Gv2
2g
is called the “actual energy” stored up in the mass j having the velocity v. The 
energy capable of being produced by the work of a force is called “potential” 
energy, in contrast with actual energy.
5. 
In thermodynamics, Rankine first lays down the energy law as first law. He 
then turns to the graphical representation of the states of a homogeneous body, 
the isothermal and adiabatic curves representing the heat which must be 
supplied to a substance in order for its state to traverse reversibly the curve 
segment AB in the plane bounded by AB and the adiabats, indefinitely 
extended, passing through A and К  Then, as in the works by Rankine already 
discussed, intrinsic energy is represented as consisting of two parts: the 
potential energy of the molecular actions and the actual energy, the effective 
capacity “that the substance possesses because it is warm.” Rankine once again 
sets this actual energy proportional to the absolute temperature. However, he 
does not see the second law of thermodynamics in this assumption, but rather 
in the following proposition: “The effect, in causing the transformation of 
energy, of the presence of actual energy in a substance, is the sum of the effects 
of all of its parts.” For heat he gives to this dismal proposition  the following 
form: “If the absolute temperature of any uniformly warm substance is divided
12
13

170 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
into an arbitrary number of equal parts, then the effects of these parts in
producing work are equal.”
As always with Rankine, the matter becomes clearer in application. If a 
series of isotherms corresponding to temperatures at equal intervals from each
other is drawn between a pair of adiabats, then the resulting plane segments are
equal to one another. When A\M and BfiN represent the adiabats, the 
isothermal path AiBi requires the amount of 
heat Hi, which is represented by the plane 
A^BiNM; the isothermal path A2B2, whose 
end points belong to the adiabatic curves of 
the points Ai and Bx, requires H2 = 
A2B2NM\ finally, the cyclic process 
Л15152Л2 consumes the heat H\ - H2 = 
Л1^1В2Л2 and converts it into work. (The 
objection that the planes A\B\NM and 
A2B2NM, whose boundaries extend indefi­
nitely, do not have to be finite was later 
answered by Zeuner,13
 14 using a construction
13 Compare also Maxwell’s disapproving critique in his review of Tait’s Thermodynamics. 
Maxwell, Scientific Papers II, p. 664.
14 Technische Thermodynamik I, p. 39.
15 Phil. Mag. (4), 5 (1853), p. 107. Helmholtz’s critique in the Berl. Ber.
of which Rankine’s is a special case.) Now, if 0\ is the absolute temperature of 
the isotherm AxBi, and if this is divided into an arbitrary number of equal 
parts Д0 so that в2 = 0\ — Д0 is the temperature of the isotherm A2B2, what is 
asserted by Rankine’s principle is that the familiar equation
Hi - H2 _ 6>i - 02
Hi “ 0i
obtains. The observation that the plane Л1Т?1В2Л2 can be represented as
d fB
= M — PdV 
dOJA
for infinitely small Д0 had earlier misled Rankine15 to also conclude that
d [B 
H'=e^L
so that he could then obtain by division the equation to be derived. Rankine’s 
second law was subsequently introduced only to support this conclusion.

NEW INITIATIVES
171
Once again, however, it is important that Rankine sets as the heat 
differential
dH = Odp,
and thus introduces the function </?, which he had earlier designated as F and 
that was later called “entropy”. It appears in the midst of his dubious 
calculations and alongside another function F, which he calls the “heat 
potential” and that did not prove viable.16 But already he realizes of the 
function (/?, which soon became so important, that it has a constant value along 
each adiabat; and this leads him to calculate its values for ideal gases, and to 
call it the “thermodynamic function” or “heat factor”.
16 Clausius deals with this in his Pogg. Ann. 116 (1862); Abhandlungen I, p. 260. Rankine defends 
his view in Phil. Mag. (4), 30 (1865).
17 Phil. Mag. (4) 30 (1865), pp. 291 and 407.
The equation
dH = Odtp,
finally appears even more definitely - as the real point of the second law of 
thermodynamics, necessary in addition to the law of equivalence - in a work 
Rankine published17 in 1865, after Clausius had introduced the entropy 
function. There he immediately proposes, as the second law of thermody­
namics, the following proposition: “The quantity of energy which is converted 
from one of these forms (heat and mechanical work) into the other during a 
given change of the dimensions and state of a given body is the product of the 
absolute temperature and a function of this change, and of the kind and state of 
the substance of the body.”
How Rankine derives this second law of thermodynamics from his molecular 
hypotheses does not belong here, any more than do the relations of his 
conception of the internal state of bodies to the views of Clausius which had 
appeared in the meantime.
Section Three:
The Introduction of Entropy by Clausius
1. The works of Rankine seem to have prompted Clausius to conclude studies 
which he publishes only with a certain tentativeness. We can now see clearly 
what might have given him pause. These works are grounded in the second law 
and lead to the definitive form of the concept of entropy, but they do not 
operate in the established domain of thermodynamics. They are a departure 
from energetics, along which, to be sure, Clausius does not stumble mathema­
tically, as does Rankine. These deviations of the two masters are no longer 
given in the textbooks, and have probably been forgotten by those who today 
condemn the recent efforts of energetics - and yet, the concept of entropy was 
given form in such ways.

172 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
The methods I am here calling deviations are occasioned by the mechanical 
hypothesis, and consist in confounding this hypothesis with energetics. If every 
body is nothing but a dynamical system, then there is a clear meaning to 
analyzing its intrinsic energy into kinetic (or actual) and potential energy. But 
outside of the mechanical hypothesis, that is, in the realm of the first and 
second laws of thermodynamics, any speculation about how much intrinsic 
energy has the form of heat, or any other form, is logically excluded. As Tait 
very rightly remarks about such speculations: “We know how much goes in and 
how much comes out, and we know what has the form of heat or of work going 
in and coming out. But that is all.”18
18 Maxwell quoted the passage in his review of Tait’s Thermodynamics (Papers II (Cambridge 
1890), p. 644).
19 Clausius, Uber die Anwendung des Satzes von der Aquivalenz der Verwandlungen auf die 
innere Arbeit,” Pogg. Ann. 16 (1862).
In intrinsic energy, as the capacity of a body to perform work, any 
distinction of forms of energy has disappeared. But every change of intrinsic 
energy occurs in one or another form, the form depending on the particular 
conditions of the change. Now a problem remains here, of course, even when 
the matter is conceived purely energetically; but that was addressed only much 
later by Helmholtz. After all, the intrinsic energies of two bodies are different 
things, precisely in that the bodies have different properties; one can more 
easily get one of the bodies to emit a definite amount of intrinsic energy than 
the other. Can one perhaps force an emission in a certain form - as mechanical 
work, for example - only up to a certain amount? But the time about which I 
am reporting now has yet not advanced as far as this question of free energy.
2. Like Rankine, Clausius also seeks to some extent to penetrate the interior 
of nature, by trying to find the way in which the energy absorbed by a body is 
stored in it and by attempting to analyze this energy in a manner such that 
predictions can be made about its subsequent behavior.
In an essay published in 1862,19 Clausius separates the intrinsic energy E 
into internal heat H and internal work, which may be designated as J in units of 
heat. Moreover, if the heat supplied from outside is denoted by dQ and the 
work released outwards as dW (also in units of heat), then
(1) 
dE = dH + dJ = dQ- dW,
and
(2) 
dQ = dH + dJ 4- dW.
Clausius then analyzes the quantity he introduced (cf. p. [152]) and later 
called “entropy” as

NEW INITIATIVES
173
so that
(4) 
OdZ = dJ + dW
He calls Z the disgregation and dZ the change of disgregation, or change in 
arrangement of the body. By H he understands the kinetic energy of the body’s 
particles. According to (3), after undergoing a reversible cyclic process, the 
transformation value of the heat contained in the body must be
dH
T
Since dH and are both total differentials, it may be concluded from the last 
relation, as Clausius shows, that the heat H present in a body depends only on 
the temperature. Then, for hypothetical reasons which we cannot pursue 
further here, he sets it proportional to the absolute temperature, just as 
Rankine does his actual energy.
3. Soon thereafter, in 1865, Clausius returns to these ideas in a memoir that 
concludes somewhat rhetorically with the words:
“ 1. 
The energy of the world is constant.
2. The entropy of the world tends to a maximum^
The function S, which had engaged him since 1854 (cf. p. [152]), now appears 
to Clausius, in conformity with equation (3), as the sum of the disgregation Z 
and the transformation value of the heat content H; and, since the disgregation 
can be considered to be the transformation value of the arrangement of the 
component parts of the body, Clausius ends by saying of the quantity 5 that it is 
the transformation content of the body. “Consequently,” he continues, “I 
suggest that the quantity S be named the entropy of the body, after the Greek 
word p tqotvt], the transformation^
After constructing this function for ideal gases and for saturated vapors, 
Clausius uses it to express mathematically the tendency in nature (cf. p. [139]) 
which Thomson deduced immediately in his first thermodynamic work from 
the union of the law of energy with Carnot’s principle. For this purpose, 
Clausius proceeds from his formula of 1854 (cf. p. [150]):

174 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(5)
This is never negative when the integral is extended over a cyclic process, and is 
called the uncompensated transformation during the process. Then, in order to 
arrive at a statement representing any given process, a, which takes state 1 of 
the body being considered into state 2, he imagines this process closed to a 
cyclic process by a reversible process /3, obtaining for this whole process the 
relation
Now since, according to the concept of entropy, the integral extended over a 
reversible process (cf. p. [158]) is
(7)
dQ V V
T 52-51’
we have, accordingly,
(8) 
N = S2-SX- f
With this relation, Clausius has calculated the uncompensated transforma­
tion for the cyclic process a + (3. But, by virtue of the proposition that 
reversible cyclic processes do not produce any uncompensated transforma­
tions, he has also calculated the uncompensated transformation for the 
irreversible process a. Obviously, the formula is subject to the restriction that 
states 1 and 2 must be able to be converted into one another by a reversible 
process, and so must be states of equilibrium - for example, also states of 
uniform temperature in all parts of the body. On the other hand, the states lying 
between 1 and 2 in process a may certainly be arbitrary ones. Then, however, 0 
must always be understood as the absolute temperature of the heat reservoir 
from which the quantity of heat dQ comes or to which it is released (Cf. p. 
[157]).
Bauschinger20 has calculated the value of N for certain conditions and has 
confirmed equation (8). This deserves to be mentioned here because a 
Zeitschr. f. Math. u. Phys. 10 (1865), p. 109.
20

NEW INITIATIVES
175
discussion with Clausius about the concepts of reversibility and entropy 
resulted from his work, a discussion in which Clausius had to defend his 
definitions.21
21 It extends throughout Volume 11 of the Zeitschr.f Math. u. Phys. (1866).
22 Planck, Vorlesungen Uber Thermodynamik (Leipzig 1897), p. 95.
Clausius does not take the analysis further in the memoir we are considering, 
but restricts himself to citing in conclusion - as results of further investigations 
carried out there - those sensational propositions about the universe that were 
mentioned above.
4. To the extent that no one is in doubt as to what is intended, the first of these 
propositions certainly appears to be completely unobjectionable; but it is not 
very precisely framed. If we imagine all the parts of the known universe as 
enclosed by a very large surface, then the energy law says that in any temporal 
interval the change of the energy enclosed by the surface is equal to the energy 
passing through the surface. It cannot be maintained - with respect to the 
properties of radiant energy, for example - that if one permits the limiting 
surface to extend indefinitely, the latter energy approaches zero; and this is also 
certainly not the intended meaning of such a proposal. Rather, it should no 
doubt be understood to the effect that there exists a surface of such dimensions 
that it encloses all the parts of space in which anything whatsoever occurs. 
That, however, is an extremely dubious assumption and is, in any case, 
completely unnecessary for any application of the energy law.
The proposal may be permissible if one refers the laws of the conservation of 
matter or of momentum to “the world,” for we find it both clear and under­
standable to assume that ordinary ponderable matter fills a limited part of 
space. But that by no means holds true for energy - at least for radiant energy. 
Or, rather, it holds true only if hypothetical notions about the relations between 
matter and energy are introduced, which is certainly not the intention of the 
universal version of the energy law.
In an effort to salvage to some extent Clausius’ proposition - whose lack of 
clarity, however, he concedes - Planck,22 to be sure, goes so far as to say: “One 
certainly commits a relatively small error if one supposes the energy of our 
solar system to be a constant.” But, then, with the exception of the extremely 
small fraction of solar energy which forms the essential source of everything 
that happens on earth and the planets, isn’t all of the energy radiating from the 
sun lost to our solar system? On the other hand, anyone who should wish to 
refer to the energy radiated to the solar system from outside would become 
entangled in incalculable difficulties and would, in any event, relinquish the 
fundamental simplicity of the energy principle.
Thus, with the pronouncement “The energy of the world is constant,” the 
firm footing of the energy law is abandoned, according to which this law is 
nothing more than an empirical relation between measurable quantities that we 
can find present in any natural process. And for this sacrifice, absolutely 
nothing is gained in return but an empty saying.

176 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
5. The situation is far worse, however, with Clausius’ second universal 
proposition: “The entropy of the world tends to a maximum.” If one applies 
equation (8) - with which Clausius concludes his analytical investigation, in 
order then to continue with considerations of a more general nature - to a 
system of bodies in an adiabatic envelope, it is true that
(9) 
S2 > S,
follows, since all dQ are now equal to zero and N can only be positive or zero.
But what is proved thereby is only that when a system has passed 
abiabatically from one state of equilibrium to another the entropy cannot have 
decreased. For equation (8) is valid, of course, only when the states denoted as 
1 and 2 are also capable of being attained reversibly, and the concept of entropy 
is in general defined only for such states. The more formal objections lying in 
the concept of world, just stated with reference to the first proposition, and long 
since raised by Mach,23 are thus joined here by a material objection based on 
the concept of entropy. We can state the entropy of the bodies known to us only 
when each of them is in a state of equilibrium, and the entropy of a system of 
such bodies only when the system is in equilibrium. But equilibrium is never 
present in the part of the universe that interests us; and if at some time it should 
be present, then - the matter would no longer interest us.
Mach, Erhaltung der Arbeit (Prag 1872), p. 36. Cf. Mach, Wdrmelehre (Leipzig 1896), p. 338.
So these, two famous propositions are nothing more than a metaphysical 
aberration - which, to be sure, encouraged a more lively study of energy and 
entropy than sober claims that try to express the true importance of these 
concepts.
In addition to these objections of principle, a mathematical error should be 
mentioned that occurs in the use of the second law. Since S cannot decrease in 
adiabatic processes, but remains constant in those that are reversible, it has 
occasionally been concluded that 5 increases in irreversible adiabatic pro­
cesses. This conclusion is unjustified, however. For it is not known, for 
example, whether N converges to zero as dQ decreases; it is known only that 
it is never negative. It could very well be that in all adiabatic processes N and 
dS will also vanish along with dQ, as has recently been made probable by 
Wiedeburg (cf. Part 7, Section 8). Clausius’ mode of reasoning proves nothing 
more than that 5 cannot decrease in adiabatic processes; but in this way, 
whether it is constant or increases remains entirely unanswered.
Section Four:
The English Priority Dispute
1. For the time being, we must break off our account of the development of 
pure energetics with Clausius’ memoir of 1865, since a lively priority dispute 
was fought out earlier in England concerning the claims of the individual 
23

NEW INITIATIVES
177
founders of energetics. As if nothing, not even the smallest truth, could be 
recognized in the field of energetics without heated personal controversy, to 
emphasize the merits of Robert Mayer as opposed to the views of his 
precursors, such as Rumford and Davy, or the achievements of his contempor­
ary, Joule, was then denounced as an affront to English national pride. In a 
blazing battle of opinions - indeed, amidst much personal abuse - the relative 
achievements of Mayer and Joule were then clarified in a way that is now 
acknowledged as a just balance.
Such profound excitement, such convulsion of the whole person in scientific 
controversies, is always a sign that what is fundamentally at issue is not some 
special subject, but rather of general ways of looking at things. And, indeed, 
what is at stake in that priority dispute is not the question of whether Mayer or 
Joule made this or that statement earlier or later, but rather of whether the 
more philosophizing style of Mayer is scientifically valuable along with the 
experimental method of Joule. More precisely, it is a matter of whether Mayer’s 
approach is any more valuable than the ideas of his predecessors which were 
not systematically developed - or, in fact, than the incidental sayings of earlier 
centuries.
In an evening lecture on force delivered in 1862, John Tyndall had 
emphatically stressed the priority of Robert Mayer with an admirably clear 
assessment of his intellectual work and right of discovery. “Everything,” he says 
at the conclusion of his lecture, “everything I have explained to you is the work 
of one man. All that I have brought before you is taken from the works of a 
German doctor named Mayer ... Led by his own marvelous investigations, 
and completely independently of Mayer, Joule published his first work “On the 
Mechanical Value of Heat” in 1843; but in 1842 Mayer had in fact calculated 
the mechanical equivalent of heat from data that could be put to use only by a 
man of rare originality.4*
Phil. Mag. (4) 24 (1862), p. 57.
Tyndall’s lecture appeared in the Philosophical Magazine?^ and Joule replied 
promptly in the next issue of the journal: “Mayer’s achievement consists in 
having announced, evidently without knowledge of what had been done before, 
the true theory of heat. That is no small achievement, and I am the last person 
who would want to see it diminished. But to award to Mayer, or to any 
individual, the unshared prize of having proposed the dynamical theory of 
heat, is obviously unjust to the many people who have contributed to this great 
advance in the knowledge of nature.” Joule then cites the remarks of Locke, 
Rumford and Davy. Above all, however, he refers to Seguin’s work “On the 
Influence of Railroads,” which appeared in 1839. There one finds expressed the 
supposition that a certain quantity of heat disappears in the act of producing 
force, and vice versa. “The mechanical force,” says Seguin, “which appears 
during the drop in temperature of a gas, as of any other body when it expands, 
is the measure of this decrease of heat, and reciprocally.” Indeed, he gives a 
table of the amount of mechanical effect produced corresponding to the 
temperature loss of expanding steam; and from this it appears, as Joule says, * 
24

178 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
that 1°C. corresponds to 363 kg. raised to the height of 1 m.25 Joule also cites 
another passage from Seguin, in which he says that only a small part of the heat 
expended to produce force in industry and domestic use appears to be utilized, 
and that “another very considerable amount, which could create tremendous 
values and thereby augment the national wealth, appears totally lost.”
Later, in the course of the dispute, Joule admits that he misunderstood this passage in Seguin. 
Phil. Mag. (4) 28 (1864), p. 150.
In Joule’s opinion, Mayer, like Seguin, hypothesized that the heat developed 
in compressing an elastic fluid is equivalent to the force of compression. At the 
time, however, this hypothesis was not based on fact, which explains the scant 
attention the scientific world paid to these writings. He [Joule] provided the 
confirming experiments, and many others also contributed to the elaboration 
of the theory. Moreover, Joule says that he is not unfair with regard to the 
credit due Mayer, and suggests that Mayer’s first writings be printed in the 
Philosophical Magazine, so that it is possible for everyone to judge his 
legitimate claims. And, indeed, this honorable suggestion was carried out: 
Mayer’s “Remarks on the Forces of Inorganic Nature” and the “Contributions 
to the Dynamics of the Heavens” appeared in the same and the following 
volumes.
Tyndall replied to Joule’s words, simply, that it had never occurred to him to 
slight Joule’s achievements for science, which are entirely independent of 
Mayer’s works. “There is room for both of you,” he says, “on this great stage.” 
Still, he opposes Joule’s assertion that Mayer had availed himself of an 
assumption about the behavior of gases that was unjustified in his time.
2. Tyndall became very indignant, however, when he saw the October number 
of a magazine called Good Words, which appeared in an edition of 120,000 
copies. Amidst reflections on the childhood of Jesus, the bonds of love, and 
being at home in the Bible, it published an article on energy by Thomson and 
Tait, which, in the name of scientific patriotism, rejects the attempt to 
emphasize Mayer’s achievements as compared with those of Joule. Angered at 
these gentlemen’s serving up a controversial matter to the lay public of such a 
journal, Tyndall, in order to justify himself to those competent to judge, cites a 
passage from his “Lectures on Heat Considered as a Form of Motion” 
contained in volume 25 of the Philosophical Magazine'. “Mayer’s works bear, 
to a certain extent, the stamp of profound intuition, which however rose in his 
mind to the force of undoubting conviction. Joule’s works, by contrast, are an 
experimental proof. True to the speculative instinct of his country, Mayer drew 
broad and weighty conclusions from slight premises, while the Englishman 
strove, above all, for a definite establishing of the facts. And he has established 
them.”
The resulting crass reply, which goes so far as to say that Mayer’s essay has 
no claim at all to novelty or precision, is signed by Tait; but, in a very insulting 
manner, this is ignored by Tyndall. Instead, he sends a letter to the Philosophi­
cal Magazine addressed to Thomson, not to Tait, and treats Tait’s reply as 
25

NEW INITIATIVES
179
having proceeded from Thomson; for, he asserts, in any article where 
Thomson’s name is associated with Tait’s, Thomson must certainly be regarded 
the principal author. In his long reply, Tyndall refers to Helmholtz’s and 
Verdet’s26 remarks about Robert Mayer, and gives a detailed account of 
Mayer’s first work. He also contests here, by citing the data of Grove, Joule’s 
assertion that the same value of the heat equivalent follows from Seguin’s data 
as was calculated by Mayer.
26 Verdet, Theorie mechanique de la chaleur. The relevant parts were also published in Phil. Mag. (4)
25.
27 Phil. Mag. (4)26(1863), p. 66.
28 C.R. 29 (1849), p. 534.
29 Phil. Mag. (4)27(1863).
30 Bohn quotes the passage in Phil. Mag. (4) 28.
Offended by Tyndall’s tone, Thomson refuses to intervene personally in the 
dispute; and Tait begins his own rejoinder with a proof that - Newton had 
already established the conservation of energy for mechanical processes. As for 
the rest, he sticks to his opinions.
The controversy now drags on in a hopelessly unedifying manner, as Tait, 
Tyndall and Joule repeatedly adhere to their points of view. Mayer27 himself 
even restates the claims against Joule that had been advanced in 1849.28 
Nevertheless, this squabble, too, was fertile for the history of science.
3. 
In particular, it motivates the chief engineer of the city of Copenhagen, 
August Colding, to advance his claims.  In 1843 he had presented to the 
Copenhagen Academy an essay entitled “Theses on Force,” in which he 
advocated the conservation idea that had already occupied him for years, 
throughout which he was encouraged by Oersted. Colding’s starting point is 
the complete opposition of force and matter - a conceptual presumption which 
has become almost incomprehensible to us today, at least in the natural 
sciences. To him the forces of nature are something spiritual and immaterial, 
entities of which we are cognizant only through their mastery over nature, and 
which therefore, of course, are far superior to everything material. And 
because it is through them alone that the wisdom we recognize and admire in 
nature expresses itself, they must be related to the spiritual, immaterial and 
intellectual power which guides nature in its progress. But if that is the case, 
then it is quite impossible to conceive of these forces as anything natural, 
perishable or ephemeral.
29
Thus, Colding arrived at the conservation of force a priori - almost as 
Descartes once proved the conservation of the quantity of motion from an 
attribute of God30 - and then tried to subordinate the known phenomena to it. 
In the case of the development of heat during compression, he expressly 
endorses the erroneous view, which Joule, Thomson and Tait would impute to 
Mayer, that in the compression of all bodies, including solids, the heat 
developed is proportional to the mechanical energy expended. He made use of 
the proportionality of frictional heat and expended work to determine the 
equivalent of heat and found it to be equal to 350 kgm. Colding achieved this 

180 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
result through experiments for whose continuation the Copenhagen Academy 
awarded him a grant in 1843. In 1848 and 1850, these corrected experiments 
were presented to the Academy.31 They were followed, in 1854 and 1856, by 
further theoretical investigations, in which the subject is the origin of the 
universe and in which the immediate effect of the forces is again found by 
liberating them from intimate connection with matter. Where we let them act 
contrary to this law, Colding says, we only prepare a state that is later also 
destroyed.
Berl. Ber. (1851), p. 597.
Colding’s activity belongs earlier in my narrative, of course; but I have 
intentionally given an account of him only now. It is my purpose to describe 
how scientific ideas are constructed and supported. Colding exerted no 
influence. He is named alongside Joule and Mayer - since Clausius’ and 
Thomson’s works directed more general attention to energy - in order not to 
do him an injustice. But his approach was not well received; and only his 
experimental procedure appeared worthy of being passed on, along with the 
experiments of Rumford and Joule.
The Tyndall-Tait controversy also caused attention to be directed to the 
precursors of the ideas of energy. Historical notes, elucidations and excerpts 
repeatedly appear in the volumes of the Philosophical Magazine through which 
the battle extended, which are noteworthy for the history of the concept of 
force and upon which I have already drawn for the compilation given on p. [68­
72].
31

PART FIVE:
THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
Section One: 
Kirchhoff
1. Kirchhoff is the first scientist after the founders of thermodynamics who 
opens it up to a new field of application. The touch of the great theorist proved 
to be as ingenious as it was successful: To this day, the chemical applications of 
thermodynamics are the uncontested domain of energetics.
Kirchhoff’s basic mathematical idea is genuinely energetic, only much more 
circumspect than the energetic efforts of Rankine and of subsequent research­
ers, who today present welcome points of attack to opponents. Kirchhoff 
remains entirely on the solid foundations of classical thermodynamics: He 
considers a substance in states that are completely defined by temperature and 
pressure. To determine mathematically the state of this substance and its 
change, however, he uses a variable x, in addition to the temperature if which 
is assumed to depend on temperature and pressure, but whose physical 
significance is for the time being left open. I regard this change, which appears 
purely formal, as energetically important. It immediately permits the founda­
tions of thermodynamics to be applied, not just to gases and vapors, but also to 
solutions whose states change with temperature and pressure, by taking x to 
signify a quantity which determines the mixing ratio. Kirchhoff’s idea thus 
extends the domain of energetics, but it remains as reliable as thermodynamics 
in the narrowest sense.
If we denote the intrinsic energy of the substance by E (in his treatise, 
Kirchhoff introduces the opposite quantity, -E, which he calls the efficacy 
function), then from the first law of thermodynamics
(1)
dE = -dQ - PdV 
A
in which P represents the pressure and V the volume of the substance, dQ is the 
heat supplied and is the mechanical equivalent of a unit of heat. If x increases 
by dx and $ by df then
181

182 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(2) dQ = Xdx + Cd®
where X and C signify functions of x and ®. In addition,
(3) dV = ^dx + ^dd.
thus
’ 
dx A dx’ d® A d®'
The second law of thermodynamics, according to which must be a 
complete differential when 0 = 273° + ® denotes the absolute temperature, tells 
us that
d fTl _ d (C'l 
d® ( 0 J dx ( 0 j ’
or
[W
X = 0
(5b)
ac) 
dx J
By means of equations (4), there follows from (5b)
(6)
dx (d® dx dx d® J dx
- /?2( C J dv _ Г J dH.
ч [ д'д дх дх д'д)
and Kirchhoff uses this expression, and equation (4) 
&d~ A ~P1№
above, to represent the intrinsic energy E by means of integrals.

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
183
In particular, if by x is understood the volume Кof a gaseous substance, then
(7)
is obtained, which is zero for ideal gases.
On the other hand, if x is taken to be the amount of vapor m which stands 
above a liquid - for example, an aqueous saline solution or a mixture of water 
and sulfuric acid - then, because of the properties of the saturated vapor, P is 
independent of x, and
(8)
ЭЕ 2 l/J dV 
dm dft dm ’
Finally, Kirchhoff even succeeds in setting up an appropriate formula 
containing Bunsen’s absorption coefficient for the case in which the liquid is 
capable of precipitating two gaseous substances - for example, when it is 
ammoniacal water.
2. The method Kirchhoff then uses to apply his formulas to the processes to 
be investigated is the method of cyclic processes, the one most reliably adapted 
to the nature of the energy law. He always conceives the substance under 
consideration to be brought in two different ways from one definite state of 
equilibrium into another definite state of equilibrium, and determines the 
energy conveyed for both ways.
To determine the heat released in the dissolution of a salt in water, Kirchhoff 
thus imagines that the mass of water is poured on the salt all at once and that, 
in order to keep the temperature of the substance constant during the process, 
all of the developed heat is carried off. One state of the materials entering into 
reaction, the state of complete separation, has therefore been converted into 
another state, that of mixture. The transition from the same initial state into the 
same final one is now effected in a second way as follows: One vaporizes the 
water isothermally, brings the vapor into contact with the salt, and compresses 
it isothermally until it is completely condensed.
In order to avoid the integrals necessary in Kirchhoff’s original work, we 
shall prepare the following processes in accordance with the procedure of Carl 
Neumann,1 instead of those just described. We pour a very small amount of 
water dm into a given saline solution and, keeping the temperature constant, 
remove the heat released dF. To carry out the dilution of the saline solution in a 
1 C. Neumann, Vorlesungen uber die mechanische Theorie der Wdrme (Leipzig 1875).

184 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
second way, we vaporize the originally given amount of water dm by increasing 
its volume and, by further increasing its volume, impart to it the pressure of the 
vapor of the saline solution at the prevailing temperature. We then bring the 
saline solution into contact with the amount of vapor dm and, finally, compress 
it until we have gotten the solution diluted by dm obtained in the first way.
Kirchhoff then makes the assumption - considered permissible in the case of 
water vapor at low temperatures - that it behaves like an ideal gas; and that, in 
conformity with (7), its energy is therefore a function of temperature alone, and 
remains constant in the present case of isothermal changes. Under this 
assumption, the only energy changes that need be considered are the vaporiza­
tion from pure water under the pressure p0 and the condensation over the saline 
solution under the higher pressure p\. If the volume of the liquid is ignored in 
comparison with that of the vapor, and the latter is determined according to the 
Mariotte-Gay Lussac law, then, in accordance with (8), these changes amount 
to
^■dm-02 
Po
RO
Pi
dm
= fel dm - RO2-^-! fel dm = RO2^-! W dm. 
dti ) 
d'O t в J 
dv (pi J
The quantities of energy which must be supplied to the system consisting of 
the saline solution and the small amount of water dm in order to bring it from 
the state of separation into that of mixture are independent of the path of 
transition; hence, it follows that
(9)
--dF = RO2^! (—1 dm, 
A 
dti (pi J
dm dti
Kirchhoff confirms this formula in the first place by referring to Babo’s law, 
which was derived from experience, according to which the ratio or ratio of 
the pressure of water vapor over the solution and over pure water of equal 
temperature is independent of the temperature. For dilute solutions, in which 
the addition of water does not result in any development of heat, the law 
follows from the above formula. Mainly, however, Kirchhoff tests his formula2 
by showing the extent to which it effects a linkage between Thomson’s 
observations on the heat developed in the mixing of water and sulfuric acid 
and Regnault’s measurements of the vapor pressures over dilute sulfuric acids.
2
Pogg. Ann. 104(1858).

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
185
3. Finally, a noteworthy application of equation (8)3 is the proof that the 
vapor pressure curves of ice and of liquid water at 0° do not meet with a 
common tangent, but rather in different directions. That is, if the energy of one 
gram of water at 0° is set equal to zero, then from equation (8) the energy of the 
saturated vapor which can be formed from it is
d
27 32 —
where cr denotes the volume of a unit mass of vapor at 0°, the volume of the 
water being ignored, pw designates the vapor pressure over water and, after the 
differentiation is carried out, $ must be set equal to zero. On the other hand, if 
we imagine the same amount of water transformed into ice, by extracting the 
heat of fusion Q = 79 calories, and the ice transformed into saturated vapor, 
then we must obtain the same energy as before. Now, if pe is the pressure of the 
vapor over ice, and if the volume of the ice is again ignored in favor of that of 
the vapor, then
(10)
э I — I
о ° И
-^ + 2732-^-<t = 2732
A dv
cW
Thus, when the differentiation is carried out and pe is set equal to pw,
(H)
dpe _ dpw1 
_ Q
dti ~ 
“ A a 273 ‘
4. I shall not discuss in detail here another application which Kirchhoff 
makes of his formulas, because his rather complex calculations do not contain 
any idea bearing on energetics that goes beyond what has been discussed 
above. This application concerns the absorption of a gas in water in which 
liquid water and the gas are converted isothermally in two ways from a state of 
separation into one of mixture. In the first way, the mass of gas is brought into 
contact with the water and the volume is reduced, the pressure and temperature 
remaining constant, until the entire gas mass is absorbed by the water. In the 
second, the water is transformed into vapor, the density of which is so low that 
it behaves like an ideal gas; the gas to be absorbed is brought to the same
3
Pogg. Ann. 103 (1858).

186 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
pressure and is then brought into contact with the water vapor; and, after the 
diffusion, the mixture is converted into the liquid state by compressing it. 
Kirchhoff finds that the heat Q developed in the absorption of the amount of 
gas g is equal to
(12) 
Q=-AgB!02 — log
4 Wied. Ann. 3. Wiss. Abh. Vol. 1. “Uber galvanische Strome, verursacht durch Konzentration- 
sunterschiede; Folgerungen aus der mechanischen Warmetheorie”.
in which b represents Bunsen’s absorption coefficient and Rf is the constant of 
the Mariotte-Gay Lussac law for the gas in question.
That Kirchhoff’s method proves to be a very handy tool, even in more 
complex situations, emerges from a much later application which Helmholtz 
makes of it.4 Helmholtz subjects a concentration cell (for example, an element 
consisting of two copper sulfate solutions of different concentration into which 
copper rods are dipped) to an isothermal reversible process in two ways: on the 
one hand, by supplying to and extracting from the electrodes the quantities of 
electricity needed each second, for which the work equivalent can easily be 
stated; on the other hand, by determining, in Kirchhoff’s manner, the work 
equivalent of the changes of concentration which occur during the flow. That is, 
we can eliminate the change of state that takes place in the liquid “by allowing 
as much water to vaporize as is supplied from all the strata of the liquid where 
the current dilutes the liquid and, conversely, by supplying the corresponding 
amount of water, through precipitation of vapor, where the current concen­
trates the liquid.” Above all, the vapor is to remain in contact with the liquid at 
the pressure p, which corresponds to the degree of saturation of the liquid with 
salt. Then it is to expand isothermally up to a certain pressure pi, from which it 
is again withdrawn at that point where the vaporization must be negative. In 
this way, the work equivalent of the dilution occurring per unit of time follows 
for every stratum and, through integration, for the entire liquid.
5. But we are obliged to Kirchhoff for a second, energetic explanation. He 
calls attention to the fact that, strictly speaking, experiments on the heat 
developed in chemical processes ought to take into consideration the tempera­
ture at which the processes take place, since the heat of reaction is a function of 
the temperature of reaction. That can be derived from the first law of 
thermodynamics in the following manner. If a substance A - oxyhydrogen, 
for example - develops the quantity of heat Q when it is converted into another 
chemical state B, water, the volume remaining constant along with temperature 
$, then let us imagine the same initial state A converted into the same final state 
В in a second way. Let the substance A be heated to the temperature ; let the 
chemical reaction occur at this temperature, the volume remaining constant; 
and let the reaction products be brought into state В through a change of 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
187
temperature. Since the reaction takes place in both ways without any 
performance of work, the amount of energy by which state A is richer than В 
can be represented by two expressions, corresponding to the two different 
conversions, and one obtains the equation
(13)
Q = Ca($ ~ $1) + 61 + Cb^l ~ tf),
where ca and cb represent the mean specific heats of the substances A and В for 
the temperature interval traversed. It follows that 
(14)
61 = Q+{ca- Cb)^\ -#)
and thus that 61 is different from Q, since ca is not equal to cb.
Section Two:
Beginnings of Thermochemistry
1. At the same time in which Kirchhoff arrived at the energetic study of 
chemical processes by starting from physical and mathematical points of view, 
there were also stimuli to energetic endeavors in the field of chemistry itself. 
The development of heat in chemical processes had been the subject of 
numerous experimental works since Hess (see p. [89]). Above all, the broadly 
conceived, extensive measurements of Julius Thomsen were now in full swing. 
The hope, of course, was to obtain as a reward for this work more than a series 
of numbers measuring the differences of intrinsic energy of chemically different 
substances. The hope was that, in comparing these numbers, a deep insight into 
the relations among substances, into the interplay of the chemical forces, into 
what was called “chemical kinship” or “affinity”, could be achieved. But this 
hope was more a postulate than a defined concept.
As early as 1854, Julius Thomsen5 published theoretical discussions in which 
he sought to measure affinity immediately through heat tone. Since the weaker 
affinity is always overcome by the stronger one, Thomsen argues that the force 
gained in satisfying the stronger affinity must always, in any chemical process, 
amount to more than the force required to overcome the weaker affinity. Hence, 
force must appear in the form of heat. Via this energetic argument - which is 
invalid, of course, owing to its conflation of affinity and energy - Thomsen thus 
arrives at his principle, later much cited in the controversy over Berthelot’s 
maximum principle, that every “purely” chemical action is attended by the 
development of heat.
Pogg. Ann. 92, p. 34.
Obviously, the efforts of physical chemistry then took second place to the 
tremendous successes of stoichiometry, but they never disappeared. Indeed, it 
is precisely because equivalent weights were generally conceived as proportions 
5

188 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
of small masses that people were encouraged, again and again, to attribute 
forces to these masses which might govern them as Newton’s force did the 
heavenly bodies. And although this goal itself repeatedly proved to be 
deceptive, nevertheless the first mathematical formulation of the law of mass 
action by Guldberg and Waage surely emerged from its sphere of thought. 
Today, of course, we have recognized that the molecular hypothesis stands 
opposed to the energetic approach, but the proponents of the mechanical 
theory of heat were not aware of this opposition. Except for Robert Mayer, 
William Thomson and the proponents of thermo-technology, all of them, in 
fact, tried to eliminate the difference in principle - or, at least, occasionally to 
blur it. Thus, from time to time, not even the dominant atomistic conception of 
chemistry could detract from efforts to apply the mechanical theory of heat to 
chemical processes, efforts which were clearly enough suggested by the close 
relation between the observed facts in question and the phenomena of heat.
2. An early, remarkable attempt to apply energetics to chemistry is Schroder 
van der Kolk’s work “On the Mechanical Energy of Chemical Actions,”  which 
is noteworthy if only because in 1864, at the same time that Clausius affirmed 
the continual increase of entropy, it likewise emphasized that chemical 
phenomena proceed in a definite direction. The author believes that the view 
of Sainte-Claire Deville, engendered by the phenomena of dissociation, that all 
chemical compounds can ultimately be analyzed into their components at 
sufficiently high temperature, is connected with the development of heat in 
chemical processes. For according to the energy principle, bodies which, when 
heated, are converted into another state with an attendant development of heat 
cannot, in general, return to the earlier state upon subsequent cooling. Indeed, 
if there were exceptions to this rule, they would either have to absorb heat from 
the surroundings in the process of re-formation or cool down suddenly below 
the original temperature, since the energy present in them is not sufficient to 
produce the original substance at the original temperature.
6
Pogg. Ann. 122, p. 439 and p. 658; latter completed in Pogg. Ann. 131.
Van ‘t Hoff later showed how these cases - referred to by Schroder as 
exceptions to his rule - should be treated and how the rule should be changed. 
Schroder himself only cites a series of facts confirming the rule and which are 
intended to emphasize the usefulness of the energy concept in chemistry. In 
concluding, he remarks that the energy function in chemical compounds “very 
often coincides with Stahl’s phlogiston. Just as there was thought to be a great 
deal of phlogiston in carbon which escapes in combustion to carbon dioxide, 
the amount of which is related to the heat of combustion, so too carbon and 
oxygen individually possess more energy than the carbon dioxide formed, 
which difference indicates, as it were, the heat of combustion. In this respect, 
he says, “the phlogiston theory was very much in accord with nature.”
A similar reference to the old phlogiston theory can already be found in 
Robert Mayer. The noteworthy passage occurs in Mayer’s first publication, his 
“Remarks on the Forces of Inanimate Nature” in the Annals of Chemistry and 
6

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
189
Pharmacy for 1842. It was, however, omitted by Mayer in the later reprint of 
the work in his Mechanics of Heat of 1867. Mayer says:7 “Oxyhydrogen, H + O, 
and water, HO, behave like cause and effect; therefore, H + О = HO. But if 
HO results from H + O, then heat, cal., appears as well as water. This heat 
must likewise have a cause, x; it is therefore H + O+x = HO+ cal., and not for 
example H + О = cal. and x = HO, which could also be inferred from the 
above equation, and more of the like. The phlogistic chemists recognized the 
equation between cal. and x, which they called phlogiston, and thereby took a 
large step forward; however, they entangled themselves again in a system of 
errors by putting —x in place of O, thus obtaining, for example, H = HO - x.” 
It hardly needs to be remarked that, from the present state of energetics, 
Mayer’s x should be taken to represent the difference in intrinsic energy 
possessed by H + O, on the one hand, and by HO on the other.
7 Also Mechanik der Warme, 3rd ed. (1893), p. 31.
8 Essai de mechanique chimique fondee sur la thermochemie (Paris 1879).
9 Berthelot only conceded in 1894 that the law of entropy was superior to his principle of 
maximum work, and even then only for treating the phenomena of dissociation. Otherwise, he 
continued to affirm the consonance of the two propositions. Berthelot’s present standpoint may 
be seen in his Thermochemie (Paris 1897) which should be compared with Duhem, Thermo­
chemie apropos dun livre recent de M. Marcelin Berthelot (Paris 1897).
Schroder van der Kolk also accentuates the difference between chemical 
energy and chemical affinity very clearly by illustrating it through an energetic 
analogy: The heat of combination is as little a measure of affinity as the heat 
developed in the impact of a free-falling body teaches us the particular 
characteristics of gravitation. It can be seen from this analogy that the author 
understood very well the directions in which energetics would prove valuable 
for chemistry.
3. Of course, further development in these directions did not proceed without 
abortive endeavors. The most influential was Berthelot’s attempt to add a 
“principle of the maximum work” to the first law in order to explain chemical 
processes energetically.  In his voluminous major work, which brings to a 
conclusion his extensive experiments and studies, Berthelot formulates this 
principle of the maximum work as follows: “Every chemical change occurring 
without the intervention of foreign (external) energy tends to the formation of 
that body, or system of bodies, which releases the greatest amount of heat.” As 
substantiation, he cites the conclusions advanced by Schroder van der Kolk 
which we have just discussed, and finds an appropriate analogy for his principle 
in the proposition that the center of gravity of a system seeks the lowest 
possible position.
8
9
4. Horstmann is the one who resolved these theoretical problems. He showed 
that the manner in which the theory of heat had itself already had to develop in 
order to establish the direction in which natural processes take place is also 
adequate for answering chemical questions. While the first law, or law of 
energy, is not sufficient by itself, there is nonetheless no need for new auxiliary 

190 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
principles - based, for example, on specifically chemical experience. Rather, 
the consequences of the second law, the properties of entropy, also suffice for 
treating a whole series of chemical problems.
First in 1869,10 and then at greater length in 1870, in his essay “On the 
Second Law of the Mechanical Theory of Heat and its Application to some 
Phenomena of Decomposition,”11 Horstmann applied Clapeyron’s equation
10 Ber. de deutsch. chem. Ges. 2 (1869).
11 Ann. d. Chem. 8 Suppl. (1872). However, a paperback of the entire volume containing 
Horstmann’s essay was distributed in 1870.
dP
(cf. formula 7 on p. [116] and formula 5 on p. [118]) to chemical changes as 
well. In conformity with the Clausius-Thomson development of thermody­
namics, this formula is now derived from the energy law
(1)
dE = ^-pdV 
A
and the entropy law for reversible processes
(2)
dQ
T = ds’
by eliminating the element of heat dQ and then taking into account that 
changes of intrinsic energy E and of entropy S are total differentials. It is 
probably simplest to set
dE = \odS-pdV, 
71
(
П 1
E — 0—\ =-SdO+pdV, 
A I A
and then to conclude
(3)
_dp
AdV~ d0‘
From this it follows for isothermal processes that

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
191
(4) 
dQ-e-dV-AD-^dV,
that is, the formula already derived by Clapeyron for changes of aggregation. Ц 
is a function of temperature not only for changes of aggregation, but also in the 
dissociation of sal ammoniac, crystalline water compounds and carbonate of 
lime. Thus, during a decomposition which takes place isothermally, the heat 
A 2 required to transform a unit of weight is related to the change of the 
specific volume Av by the equation
(5) 
= Л0||Ду;
and Horstmann shows that this requirement of the theory is adequately 
satisfied by the observations at hand.
5. In a later work entitled “Theory of Dissociation,”12 Horstmann penetrates 
still deeper: “A reaction, of whatever kind it may be, can begin and continue 
only when the total increase of entropy undergone by the individual processes 
outweighs any simultaneous decrease; for, as we know, entropy on the whole 
cannot decrease. The reaction must therefore cease at the instant when the 
decrease is about to become greater than the increase, that is, at the instant in 
which the total increase is equal to zero. One thereby arrives at the mathema­
tical expression for the condition of the state of equilibrium in the case of 
dissociation: The equation dS = 0 must hold true, where S signifies the entropy 
of the system. This equation contains the entire theory of dissociation.”
12 Ann. d. Chem. 170 (1873).
13 Lehrbuch der physikalischen und theoretischen Chemie by Horstmann, Landolt and Winkelmann 
(Braunschweig 1885), Section II, p. 717.
14 Ann. d. Chem. 187 (1877).
Now, in representing entropy as a function of the relative number of moles 
transformed, Holtzmann also employs Clausius’ concept of disgregation in his 
original publication; but he later13 discards this concept, and arrives at 
formulas that prove to be in satisfactory agreement with existing observations. 
Later,14 using observations of his own of ammonium carbamate, he also 
subjected to a more thorough test the conclusion of the theory that when a 
solid body dissociates into two gaseous component parts, so that m moles of 
one gas and n moles of another arise from 1 mole of the solid compound, the 
partial pressures p\ and /ъ of the gases must always satisfy the equation
(6) 
pTp" =f
during the dissociation equilibrium, where f is a function of the temperature.

192 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
6. However obvious Horstmann’s steps appear to us today, even this modest 
advance of energetics did not occur without the most impassioned criticism of 
a malicious nature. Alexander Naumann, the leading advocate at the time of 
yesterday’s ideas, assumed a tone which - as Horstmann wrote15 - actually 
precludes any reply. Confronted with Naumann’s objections from the stand­
point of the molecular hypothesis, Horstmann thus defends himself simply and 
accurately by pointing to the fact that the conclusions he has drawn from 
thermodynamics are completely independent of the value of our hypotheses 
concerning molecular processes. “In the case of melting ice, for example, we 
are in this connection today still completely in the dark; and yet the formula 
[Equation 6] predicted correctly as early as 20 years ago the depression of the 
melting point through increased pressure.”
15 Ber. chem. Ges. 4 (1871), p. 849.
16 Ann. chim. phys. (4) 24 (1871).
17 C.R. 72 (1871).
In 1871, the same year in which Horstmann - who had himself originally set 
out from a molecular-hypothetical point of view - had to defend energetics 
from the arrogance of the molecular hypothesis, Clapeyron’s vapor pressure 
formula was also applied to dissociation phenomena by two French research­
ers, Peslin16 and Moutier,17 much as Horstmann had done two years earlier. 
But here, too, the predominance of the molecular hypothesis nevertheless 
prevented a more general recognition and employment of Horstmann’s 
advance. Indeed, Horstmann’s general method of submitting chemical pro­
cesses to the entropy concept was not taken up again until 1887, when Planck 
extended the method and transferred it to new areas of application. This was 
after Gibbs and Helmholtz had opened up other paths in the meantime: Gibbs, 
by introducing new functions in addition to entropy, specifically devised for 
chemical purposes; Helmholtz, by extending general thermodynamics through 
a new function derived from the entropy. But Horstmann deserves the 
recognition - which he fortunately received in his own lifetime - for showing 
that the reasons drawn from the molecular hypothesis, which suppressed his 
valuable method for more than a decade, are today scarcely worth mentioning. 
Ignorance failed to appreciate his achievements.
Section Three:
The Main Features of Gibbsian Thermochemistry
1. In the preceding account, we have repeatedly had occasion to call attention 
to the fact that thermodynamics was kept closely linked to the kinetic theory of 
gases and, therefore, to atomistics well into the eighth decade of the century. 
The matter was conceived approximately as if, in the laws of energy and 
entropy, it was a question entirely of rough estimates. These were sufficient for 
some purposes, of course (technical ones, for example), just as, similarly, the 
center of gravity and plane integrals, or the energy integral, prove to be useful 
in mechanics. But they still did not in any way open up a view into the 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
193
mechanics of the interior of bodies. To someone for whom the highest goal of 
theoretical natural science is the analysis of everything that happens into the 
motion of atoms, thermodynamics, as it had been developed up to that time, 
may certainly seem to be a bargain basement theory, since the only relations 
accessible to it are relations he considers to be late consequences of those 
processes which, in his opinion, are the true and essential innermost ones. The 
overcoming of this atomistic way of considering things does not belong to 
energetics alone; more general trains of thought also share in it. Energetics only 
shook substantially the belief in the necessity of atomistic hypotheses and the 
satisfaction they are supposed to provide.
Today, we must certainly acknowledge the great historical importance of the 
mechanical hypothesis. Historically, it was a necessary point of transition for 
scientific development. After all, it should be recalled that the material 
hypothesis of heat had achieved great success in Fourier’s hands, and that even 
William Thomson espoused this approach until the middle of the century. 
Now, through energetics, it had become impossible to conceive of heat simply 
as substance; and it became a matter of great importance to find a different way 
of viewing things to which the new theories could be adapted, and in which the 
new knowledge of heat could be made intelligible and conceivable with a 
picture. This new picture was heat as motion. If it had not been found to a 
certain extent already ready-made, nothing would have remained but to fit the 
old material theory to the experiences which had recently come into promi­
nence by means of additions and auxiliary hypotheses in order to obtain an 
intelligible picture.
It seems to me unnecessary today to take the field against the mechanical 
hypothesis with the clatter of weapons. It has done its duty. The wave in the sea 
of scientific theories, of which we spoke in the introduction to this book, has 
risen and now falls, after having prepared the path for energetic ways of 
viewing things. One must combat only the attempt to maintain this mechanical 
hypothesis through all sorts of artificialities, as if the existence of moving atoms 
was more important than the simple description of experience. Above all, 
however, the conflation of energetics with the molecular hypothesis - which still 
has by no means been stamped out - must be resisted.
2. 
Helmholtz is the one who gave rise to this conflation of energetic ideas with 
the molecular hypothesis in his fundamental work of 1847. Robert Mayer 
avoids the confusion completely; and in England, under the steady influence of 
William Thomson, energetics also developed more purely. The gradually- 
increasing predominance of mechanical hypotheses in Germany shows itself 
very clearly in the personal development of Clausius. His first work of 1850 
sees (cf. p. [125]) in energetics a new science joining mechanics on an equal 
footing; but the molecular hypothesis intrudes itself more and more into his 
later works. In the same way, the entire course of development of science in 
Germany from the mid-fifties to the mid-eighties appears as a falling away 
from the pure clarity of Mayer’s intuition. During this time in Germany, it is 
pretty much only thermo-technics which, under Zeuner’s leadership, disdains 

194 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
recourse to molecular-hypothetical points of view and adheres to the imme­
diacy with which the two laws permit justice to be done to experience. At the 
same time, however, almost all authors of textbooks on the theory of heat 
believe that they are obliged in their writings to do obeisance before the 
molecular hypothesis. Thus, as we have seen, even Horstmann is originally 
mired in the view that the real scientific foundation of thermodynamics must be 
sought in the mechanics of atoms.
3. Completely free of such bias in favor of the mechanics of atoms, 
determining with complete impartiality the strict consequences of the two laws 
of thermodynamics without any longing glances at and yearning for mechanics 
- thus, following the historical development, the work of Gibbs suddenly 
stands before our gaze. Here the great old idea of Robert Mayer has come to 
life in mathematical formulae, free of all the molecular-hypothetical adorn­
ment.
What a book, in which chemical processes are treated without the traditional 
chemical apparatus of atoms, in which theories of elasticity, of capillarity and 
crystallization, and of electromotive force, are set forth without all the usual 
devices of atomistic origin! Naked and pure, the true object of theoretical 
natural science stands before us, which is to ascertain the quantitative relations 
among the parameters determining the state of a material system during the 
changes subject to investigation. No wonder that people did not understand 
these works of Gibbs, even though Maxwell18 emphatically called attention to 
their importance. It was only a decade after their appearance - after Helmholtz 
had recognized Gibbs as a precursor of investigations of his own, about which 
we shall have something to say about later - that people began to comprehend 
Gibbs and to study his work. That Gibbs’s work, which is difficult to come by, 
was more generally read is principally the achievement of Ostwald, who was 
probably the first to realize the great value of precisely the more profound 
energetic properties of his research, and not simply its formal-mathematical 
features.19
18 Proc. Cambr. Phil. Soc. II (1876); Scientific Papers II, p. 498.
19 Willard Gibbs, “On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances,” Trans, of the Connecticut 
Acad. 3 (1875-1878). Thermodynamische Studien, translated by Ostwald (Leipzig 1892).
4. 
The independence with which Gibbs sets about his main task of investigat­
ing the equilibrium of heterogeneous substances using the tools of energetics is 
already apparent in the mode of mathematical expression he employs.
Up to then, ever since Clapeyron had provided a mathematical rendering of 
Carnot’s ideas, the total differential equation had essentially remained the only 
form of mathematical expression in thermodynamics. During a change of a 
system, which can also be run through in reverse, let the intrinsic energy of the 
system change by dE, the entropy by dS, and the volume by dV. When 
temperature 0 and pressure p prevail in the system, then

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
195
dE = OdS — pdV
is the relation obtaining between the total differentials dE, dS and dV. If all the 
quantities appearing in the equation can be represented by two independently 
variable quantities x and y, then there exists a differential equation between the 
latter, an equation between dx and dy, of the form
Xdx + Ydy — 0,
from which follows the relation
dX _dY 
dy dx'
This is the foundation on which Clausius and Thomson, as well as Kirchhoff, 
base their conclusions. Helmholtz also employed the differential equation 
which forms the basis of the energy integral in mechanics; but, as we have 
indicated, he then drew unfounded conclusions from it.
This manner of treatment is certainly not the only way of reproducing 
Robert Mayer’s conception mathematically. Energy is indestructible. Thus, if 
E is the amount of energy possessed by a system which does not absorb or emit 
energy in any form, then it is a quantity that is invariable for all possible 
changes of the system. If E is also a function of the independently variable 
quantities x and у (not dependent on their derivatives with respect to time), 
then it remains constant both when only x changes and when only у changes. 
So, not only does one total differential equation
7r. dE J dE J л
dE =-—dx + -—dy = 0 
dx dy
hold true, but rather two equations
dy
which can be combined in the expression
6E = 0,
as Gibbs does. When these two conditions are not simultaneously satisfied, 
changes of x and у are possible that change E. Changes of x and у which do not 
change E are all those satisfying the differential equation

196 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
dE = Q, —~dx + -^-dy = 0.
ox dy
The problem of determining these changes is the one that has been treated by 
classical thermodynamics in the well-known - simple, but important - cases of 
gases and vapors.
We might perhaps formulate the contrast between the two manners of 
mathematical treatment by calling one the method of excluded changes and 
the other the method of permissible ones. Gibbs adds the former method to the 
latter, older one; at least he is the first for whom this method, clearly worked 
out, is central in the treatment of every problem.
To elucidate further the difference by means of an example, let us imagine 
that the changes of an ideal gas are to be investigated which are possible 
through changes of its pressure p and its volume И, there being on the whole no 
absorption or release of energy. The intrinsic energy of ideal gases is (cf. p. 
[135]) a linear function of the absolute temperature and thus, in accordance 
with the Boyle-Gay Lussac law, also a linear function of the product p • V. 
Changes of intrinsic energy are therefore excluded, despite arbitrary changes of 
pressure and volume, when, for all values of Ь V and bp,
6(pV)=p bV+V bp = 0,
that is, only when p = 0 and v = 0. It can be seen, therefore, that it is 
impossible, except at absolute zero, to hold the intrinsic energy unchanged 
against all possible changes of pressure and volume in the gas. Rather, there are 
certain changes of pressure and volume for every state which leave the intrinsic 
energy unchanged - more precisely, those that do not change p • V - namely, 
those for which
d(p • Г) = pdV + Vdp = 0,
or whose ratio has the value
dp p 
dV=~V'
5. 
Most importantly, Gibbs now gives the principles of energy and entropy, 
which are the foundations of his investigation, a rigorous formulation that is 
uniquely his own. To be sure, he does refer to Clausius. But the celebrated 
universal maxims of Clausius stand above Gibbs’s work as a motto - as guiding 
stars, so to speak - stimulating his imagination and aspiration. In the first 
words of the work itself, he renders the true content of the foundations of 
energetics, in the scope with which he applied them, by a formulation that is 
entirely his own. “For the equilibrium of an isolated system it is necessary and 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
197
sufficient that in all possible variations in the state of the system that do not alter 
its energy, the variation of the entropy is zero or negative"'.
(1)
(6S)E < 0.
As a matter of fact, Clausius proved (cf. p. [176]) that when a system has 
passed adiabatically from one state of equilibrium into another, the entropy 
cannot have decreased. Now Gibbs imagines that the energy as well as the 
entropy of a system are known as functions of its parameters for all contiguous 
states of equilibrium Z attainable through the disturbance of a given state of 
equilibrium Zo, and he tries to express Clausius’ principle by means of these 
two functions in a way that conforms to his method of excluded change. But the 
argument based on the latter principle is not nearly so obvious as it might 
appear from Gibbs’s statements regarding it, which essentially deal only with 
the most prominent minor difficulties, such as the influence of friction and 
viscosity. In any case, Gibbs did not set forth in a precise form the connection 
of his principle with that of Clausius.
6. This lacuna could be filled in the following manner.  If dE is the change of 
intrinsic energy in passing from the state Zo into any other state of equilibrium 
Z, but which we stipulate to be infinitely close to Zo; and if, further, dQ is the 
heat supplied to the system in the transition, and dA is the energy supplied to it 
in other forms, then
20
Helm, Grundziige der mathematischen Chemie (Leipzig 1894).
(2)
dE = dQ + dA.
Now, when the heat dQ comes from a heat reservoir with the temperature 0, 
and when the transition from Zo to Z being considered is reversible (for which 
it is necessary, among other things, that the system has the same temperature 0 
throughout), then
(3)
dQ = OdS,
in which the increase of entropy occurring during the transition in question is 
indicated by dS. However, in the event that this transition does not proceed 
reversibly (but can be completed to a cyclic process through a reversible 
change), then, in comformity with Clausius’ theorem (equation 8 on p. [174]), 
the following relations obtain:
20

198 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
__ dQ , 
. . 
x
dS —— (positive or zero), 
0
(4)
dS >dQ 
~ 6
dQ < OdS
Accordingly, 
(5) 
dE < OdS + dA
holds for all possible processes, whether they are reversible or not.
Thus, if heat of the same temperature is supplied to a system carrying out an 
irreversible process as is given it for a reversible one, and if both processes 
proceed from the same initial state Zo to the same, infinitely close, final state Z, 
then the irreversible process necessarily requires a supply of work, dA, equal to 
or greater than the reversible one.
7. 
The derivation of formula (5) can also be freed from the restriction that the 
final state Z must be a state of equilibrium.  When the state of complete 
equilibrium, Zo, first passes into a state Z1? while heat dQ from a heat source at 
temperature 0 is supplied to the system, along with work in the amount 
then the equation
21
Helm, Wied. Ann. 57 (1896), p. 654.
dE$\ = dQ + <T4oi
obtains.
If Zi is not a state of equilibrium, then if it is converted into such a state, Z2, 
without supplying additional heat, and if the work received by the system in the 
conversion is called dA\2, then
dE\2 — 6^12
Now, however, the second law may be applied to the transition from the 
original state Zo to the one, Z2, finally reached, and one has
dEtn = dQ + dAQ2, dQ/О < dS,
where dS signifies the change of entropy that occurs in the transition Z0Z2. It 
follows that
dE$\ < OdS + dA$\
When this formula is written as
21

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
199
dE < OdS + dA.
as above, it must only be noted that, while the changes dE and dA refer to the 
transition from a state of equilibrium Zo to any final state Z1? the change in S 
presupposes the conversion of that state of equilibrium Zo into a state of 
equilibrium Z2. In any case, though, the inequality is valid, so long as the 
transition Z]Z2 takes place adiabatically.
8. 
It follows from equation (5), then, that every possible transition from a 
state of equilibrium into an infinitely close neighboring state, in which energy 
remains constant and no work (hence, also no heat) is supplied, proceeds 
without a decrease of entropy, that is 
(6) dS > 0, when dE = 0 and dA = 0 (whereby also dQ = 0).
Therefore, if the function S in the state Zo is a maximum, if it has a higher 
value than in all the neighboring states satisfying the conditions 
dE = 0, dA = 0 (dQ = 0), when it thus cannot decrease, or where
(7)
6S < 0, when 6E = 0 in the isolated system,
then any disturbance of the state Zo is excluded. The words “in the isolated 
system” stand for the condition that no entry or exit of work occurs, that is, of 
any energy that does not take the form of heat - and therefore, since the total 
energy remains constant, also no entry or departure of heat - thus, in 
particular, no change in the total volume occupied by the system, no change 
in the total mass of any of the chemical components of the system, and the like.
It follows from our formula (5), for dA = 0 and dS = 0, that in every possible 
transformation into an infinitely close neighboring state of equilibrium, the 
energy must decrease whenever the entropy is held unchanged and the system is 
isolated, or
(8 ) 
dE < 0, when dS = 0 and dA = 0.
Any change is therefore ruled out when the energy function cannot decrease 
under the set conditions, that is, where
(9)
6E > 0, when 6S = 0 in the isolated system.
At first glance, the inequality (8) appears to contradict the law of the 

200 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
conservation of energy. But the latter asserts that when dQ = 0 and dA = 0, 
then necessarily dE = 0, as is stated in equation (2). Now, the heat dQ can be 
represented by OdS only in a rather incomplete manner, namely, only for 
processes that are reversible. In general, an integrating divisor 6 cannot be 
given for dQ', or, no function S of the parameters of the system can be found 
whose differential multiplied by 0 yields dQ. The heat required for the 
conversion of a system from the state Zo into the state Zx depends on the 
particular path of the conversion. Only in the case of reversible processes does 
it suffice to know the temperatures of the particular path and the course of 
entropy along the same. With constant temperature, in fact, it is enough to 
know only the difference in entropy between the two states Zo and Zb
9. It is striking, of course, that for equilibrium dE = 0 according both to (8), a 
condition of possible, namely reversible change, and also to (9), a condition for 
the impossibility of any change. But it should be noted that reversible change 
consists in passing through a series of states of equilibrium; hence, it does not 
itself signify a change which is possible in nature, but rather a limiting case. 
Indeed, there was a certain concession to earlier general custom when the 
equals sign was incorporated into equation (8). But the uniqueness of reversible 
change as a limiting case between natural changes, on the one hand, and states 
of perfect equilibrium, on the other, justifies incorporation of the equals sign 
characteristic of them into the general conditions of both what happens and 
what does not happen.
The characteristic of reversible change mentioned here was vigorously 
emphasized by Duhem.22 A reversible change, he says, is not a change', it is 
rather a continuous succession of states of equilibrium, the common boundary 
between two realizable classes of change taking opposite courses. But it cannot 
be maintained, for example, that any continuous succession of states of 
equilibrium is a reversible succession, as is shown by the example of magnetic 
hysteresis (cf. p. [157]).
Duhem, Traite elementaire de mechanique chimique I (Paris 1897), p. 59. Also J. de math. (4) 9 
(1893), p. 302.
10. 
Gibbs understands statement (9) in these words: “For the equilibrium of 
any isolated system it is necessary and sufficient that, for all possible variations in 
the state of the system in which the entropy remains unchanged, the variation of the 
energy is zero or positive"'.
(10) 
(*П > o.
Gibbs sets up this principle as the counterpart to (1) and makes use of it 
prominently in his investigations. He deduces (9) from (7) by observing that 
energy and entropy can be increased or decreased at the same time, namely, 
through the addition or withdrawal of heat. To make evident the analogy 
between the two principles - one of which excludes any entry or departure of 
22

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
201
heat, while the other excludes any change of entropy - Gibbs employs his 
peculiar concept of an isolated system. A Gibbsian isolated system is guarded 
from all exchanges of energy, except the exchange of heat. He thereby realizes 
two ways of expressing the principles of energetics, neither of which employ 
inexact differentials such as dQ and dA, and both of which make use of only 
two functions of the parameters S and E, which must be provided for every 
state of equilibrium of the system.
11. To penetrate the actual meaning of Gibbs’s constructions, it will be well 
for us to concentrate on the special case in which a system receives from a heat 
reservoir at the temperature 0\ the same quantity of heat dQi that it 
simultaneously gives off as -dQ2 to a heat reservoir at a lower temperature 
O2 < 0\ • According to Clausius’ formula
dQ < OdS,
it follows from
dQ\ 4- dQ2 = 0,
therefore, with the energy remaining constant, that
exdsx 4- e2dS2 > 0.
If instead of this, we write
01 (dS\ + dS2) - (6>i - 02)dS2 > 0,
and take note of the fact that 0\ >02, and that dQ2 and therefore also dS2 are 
positive, then the result is that, for any case
Ox(dSx +б752) > 0,
and therefore that the entire change of entropy is
dS\ + dS2 > 0,
the energy remaining constant. And thus the first of Gibbs’s principles 
(formula 1) is proved for the special case under consideration.
On the other hand, if we imagine the entropy constant,
dS\ dS2 — 0,
then also 0\dS\ + 0\dS2 = 0. Therefore, since 0\ > O2,
OxdSx 4- 02dS2 < 0.

202 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
All the more, then, is the total change of energy
dQ\ + dQz < 0,
the entropy remaining constant. And with this the second principle of Gibbs 
(formula 10) is proved.
It must therefore be noted, in particular, that a Gibbsian isolated system is in 
general not isolated from heat, but only from all other forms of energy. If a 
system were also isolated from heat, then, in conformity with the first law, its 
energy would be unalterable. Hence, in accordance with (1), its entropy would 
not be able to decrease.
Section Four:
The Gibbs Functions
1. After this survey of Gibbs’s manner of mathematical representation, we 
arrive at the two great physical results of his investigation, which he formulated 
in the concepts of phase and of chemical potential. “In considering the various 
homogeneous bodies which can be formed from any set of component parts,” 
he writes, “it will be convenient to have an expression which refers solely to the 
composition and thermodynamic state of any such body without regard to its 
quantity and form. We shall call such bodies, to the extent that they differ in 
state and composition, different phases of the substance in question, while 
regarding all bodies differing from one another only in quantity and form as 
different examples of the same phase.”
So let E ,E",... represent the intrinsic energies of the different phases of the 
system being considered; S', S"... their entropy functions; V', V" ... their 
volumes; M'X,M"... the masses (measured by grams, moles or another 
appropriate measure) of a substance which is a component of these phases; 
M2,M2,... the masses of another such substance, and so on. Further, let 
O' ,0" ... be the temperatures of the individual phases and p' ,p" ... the pressures 
that prevail in them. Gibbs sets
J dE = O'dS' - p'dV' + П;dM\ + T\!2dM'2 + ... T\!ndMfn
[ dE" = e"dS" - p"dV" + П"dM" + H"dM" + ... + H"dM"
and calls the functions П, appearing herein as partial derivatives of intrinsic 
energy with respect to mass, the internal (chemical) potentials, or intrinsic 
potentials, of the substances in question for the individual phases. Gibbs thus 
imagines a reversible process being realized for each phase - in the absence of 
which, of course, it would be meaningless to speak of a change of entropy - and 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
203
understands by 0,p, and П the determining coefficients of the differentials dS, 
dV, and dM for such a reversible process. He therefore understands by 0 the 
temperature prevailing within the phase that a heat reservoir must have in order 
to be able to give off heat to the phase reversibly, and likewise by p the pressure 
prevailing within the phase, and which must be exerted from without, if volume 
energy is to be delivered to it reversibly.
2. 
To make clear immediately the significance of the new function П by means 
of an example, let us  indicate by e, s and v the energy, entropy and volume of 
the unit of mass of a homogeneous substance, and the corresponding quantities 
for the total mass, M, of the substance by E, S and V. Then it follows from 
equation 11, discussed on p. [159], that
23
Helm, Math. Chemie (Leipzig 1894), p. 73.
E = eM,
hence
dE = Mde + edM;
and, owing to the relationship
de — Ods — pdv,
in which 0 and p signify temperature and pressure, we have
dE — MOds — Mpdv + edM.
From the equation
S = sM,
which is also admissible in accordance with p. [106], and since
V - v • M,
we really obtain
dE = 0dS-pdV + TWM,
in conformity with statement (1), when we understand by П the following 
expression:
E OS pV 
n
П =---------- H -— = e — Os
M M M
+ pv.
23

204 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Moreover, when the substance is an ideal gas, the parameters 0 and p can be 
eliminated from this expression, as Gibbs does (for example, to obtain his 
formula 259), by means of the equations
pV - ROM,
E — cv0M + Eq
in which R represents the gas constant, cN the specific heat at constant volume, 
and Eq a constant of integration.
3. Gibbs then applies formula (9) (p. [199]) to a system comprised of 
individual phases. The inequality 
(2) 
8E' + 8E" + ... > 0
obtains when 
(3) 
8 S' + 8S" + ... = 0
and when at the same time, to rule out any possible input of work dA, 
(4) 
8V' + 8V" + ... = 0
as well as
(5)
8M\ + 8M'( + ... = 0, 
8M'2 + 8M2 + ... = 0, 
8M'n + 8M'^ + ... = 0
If there are r different phases present in the system, then, from each of the 
conditions (3) to (5), one quantity will depend on r - 1 other quantities, which 
in turn are completely independent of each other. For example, one obtains
8S' = -8S" - 8S"' - ..
and formula (2), transformed by means of equations (1), will thus contain the 
terms
0'8S' + 0"8S" + 0"8S"' + ...
= (O' - 0)8S" + 
- 0)8S'" + ... .

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
205
Since the values SSfSS"'... can be chosen completely arbitrarily - for 
example, positively as well as negatively - the change of the total energy 
6Е + 6E" + ... can be prevented from having a negative value only when
ff = 0" = ff" = ... .
For corresponding reasons,
pf = p" = p"f ... .
The following relations
n; = п" = n"' =..., 
П' = Tl'' = n'2" = ...,
will also hold - and to prove this has been the intent of our argument - in all the 
phases in which both positive and negative changes in the amount of the 
substance in question are possible. In that case, of course,
6E' + 6E" + 6E"' + ... = 0,
but will not be positive. However, if there exist phases into which one of the 
substances being considered can enter, but in which it is not yet present during 
the state in question, then the chemical potential of this substance can also 
have a greater value in such phases than in the phases in which it is already 
present, since the corresponding bM can, of course, only be positive. In such 
cases, the expression
6E' + bE" + bE"' + ... > 0
will apply.
“The potential for each of the component parts must have a constant value in all 
the parts of the given mass of which this substance is an actual component part, 
and have a value not less than this one in all the parts of which it is a possible 
component part? This is the condition for chemical equilibrium discovered by 
Gibbs.
For our presentation of the principles of energetics, it is not necessary to 
pursue in detail Gibbs’s treatment of the cases which may perhaps give rise to 
doubts about the general theorem, such as the case in which the n substances 
distinguished within the system are not independent of one another, or the case 
in which new masses, not present before, are formed by the system, or in which 
one of the component parts is in a solid state. But it should be emphasized, as a 
characteristic feature of Gibbs’s investigation, that he always considers care­

206 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
fully the special conditions that might be suspected of disrupting his general 
statements.
4. We would like to present here just one more application of Gibbs’s general 
theory. This is the theory of osmosis, with which Gibbs anticipates later 
observations of semipermeable partitions. If the system being considered 
consists of two phases separated by a solid diaphragm permeable to certain 
substances, then condition (3)
(3b)
6S' + 8S" = 0
holds true, as in the general case.
One the other hand, (4) separates into two equations:
(4b) 
<5F' = 0, 
6V" = 0.
Likewise, for every substance to which the partition is impermeable,
(5b)
6M' = 0, 
8M" = 0,
while for every substance to which it is permeable only
(5c) 
6M' + 6M" = 0
From the series of conclusions derived above, this means that ff — 0" but not 
that pf = p"; and only for substances able to permeate the diaphragm do we 
have ГГ = П".
I find quite remarkable a second way in which Gibbs treats the same 
problem, since I see in it confirmation that my way of interpreting Gibbs’s 
fundamental principles (given on pp. [196-97]) is the correct one, and also 
because it is not subject to the restriction that no work can be released 
externally in osmosis. If it is left open whether heat and volume energy are 
absorbed from the surroundings or are released to them during an infinitesimal 
change of osmotic equilibrium, then24
24 considering Gibb’s formula 83.
(6) 
de + de’ < e'dsf + e"ds" - p'dv' - p"dv”,
where O'ffp'p" denote the internal temperatures and pressures when the 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
207
external energy changes occur reversibly. (This restriction is not observed by 
changes occurring in the system at the osmotic diaphragm, however, as the 
inequality sign shows.)
If (1) is recalled, then
(7)
n; 
+ ... + U"dM" + lV>dMf' +... < 0
follows; therefore, in accordance with (5c),
(8) 
(n; - H'')dM'x + (П'2 - Hf')dM'2 +... < 0.
In accordance with (5b), only those substances appear in this formula to 
which the diaphragm is permeable. If a substance is brought from the phase 
indicated by ' into that indicated by " during osmosis, then dM' is negative for 
this substance and the above formula requires that for it П' > П". On the other 
hand, if osmotic equilibrium prevails, then positive as well as negative values 
must be able to be assigned to the differentials dMf so that
(9)
П' =П", П' = n">... .
This is the same result that was derived above from the method of excluded 
changes preferred by Gibbs; here it was developed from the method of 
permissible changes.
5. Although the concepts of chemical potential and phase belong entirely to 
Gibbs, his introduction of characteristic functions had a predecessor and an 
independent later discoverer. In 1869 Massieu25 made the thermodynamics of 
a fluid dependent on the function F, which he introduced immediately; and the 
fact that Helmholtz later referred to the usefulness of such characteristic 
functions was primarily responsible for directing attention to the works of 
Gibbs. But, to a large extent, Gibbs already recognizes the great importance of 
these functions. From the relation
C.R. 69, pp. 858 and 1057.
(10) 
dE < OdS — pdV -\-H\dM[ + П2Ж, + ... + HndMn
there follow
(11) 
dF = d(E-OS) < -Sde-pdV + IWi + II2dM2 + ... + IIndMn,
25

208 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(12) 
dG = d(E + pV) < OdS + Vdp + ПкМ/i + II2JM2 + ■ • ■ + H„dM„,
(13)
dH = d(E - 0S + pV) < —Sd0 + Vdp + П1 dMx + П2бМ/2 
+ ... 4- HndMn
Since Vand all the Ms are invariable in an isolated system, it follows that for 
equilibrium 6F > 0, given the condition of constant temperature, and 5H > 0, 
given the condition of constant pressure and temperature. Gibbs remarks of 
the function G that, since
dG = d(E+pV) =dQ + Vdp + IIidM\ + IW2 + ... + UndMn,
it measures the heat dQ which reaches an isolated system, the pressure 
remaining constant, just as E represents the entry of heat at constant volume.
Thus, the whole of calorimetric chemistry is concerned with the functions E 
or G. In a formula such as
2H + 0 = H2O + heat of reaction,
thermochemistry understands by the chemical sign of an element simply the 
intrinsic energy E or the function G for one mole of the element, that is, for as 
many grams as signify its molecular weight. The sign of the element is 
understood as the function E if the heat of reaction was measured at constant 
volume, as the function G if it was measured at constant pressure.
Gibbs does not introduce any general name for the functions F, G and H. If 
they are called thermodynamic potentials, as they came to be known later, it will 
occasionally be expedient not to refer to the Gibbs functions П as potentials, 
which is Gibbs’s own term. For this reason, I have called the quantities П 
chemical intensities.
To the properties of the functions F, G and H just noted, Gibbs adds the 
following ones. When a reversible process is possible satisfying the equation
(14) dE = OdS - pdV + H{dMx + П2б/М2 + ... 4- RndMn,
chemical reaction can be imagined in many cases - in all those considered by 
Gibbs, in any event - in which all the differentials are proportionally increased, 
but without any attendant change of the factors 0,p and П. Thus, one can also 
set
(15)
E = OS -pV + V\M\ + П2М2 + ... + TlnM, 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
209
and, correspondingly,
(16) 
F = -pV + IWi 4- П2Л/2 + ... + HnMn
(17) 
G = 9S + П1М1 + n2M2 + ... + HnMn
(18) 
H = ВД + n2M2 + ... + HnMn.
If one differentiates (15), taking into account (14),
(19) 
0 = Sd9 - Vdp 4- Mnffli + Wn2 4-... 4- MndHn
also follows.
6. These considerations lead Gibbs to the concept of the fundamental 
equation. As soon as E is known as a function of the (n 4- 2) variables 
S, K,Mi,M2... Mn, equation (14) also shows us how to find the («4-2) 
quantities 0,р,П1,П2... П„ as functions of those variables: We need only 
differentiate E with respect to each variable. Thus, there are «4-3 known 
relations among the 2« 4- 5 quantities £, 9, S,p, К, П1, M\, П2, M2 ... Пл, Mn, 
that is, all the relations that exist at all, since plainly «4-2 variables are 
independent of each other. Gibbs therefore calls an equation between the 
quantities
E S V Mx M2 ... Mn
a “fundamental equation”; and for the same reason any equation among
F 3 V Мх M2 ... Mn,
or
G S p Mi M2 ... Mn,
or
H 9 p Mi M2 ... Mn,
or
p П1 n2 ... Щ,
is called a fundamental equation, as they likewise permit all the relations 
among the 2« + 5 quantities to be derived in accordance with (11), (12), (13) 
or (19), respectively. On the other hand, an equation between E 9 V Mi M2

210 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
... Mn would not be a fundamental equation. Since 0 = J , it can be 
replaced by an equation between E^p M\ М2 ... Mn, which obviously 
does not allow S to be determined as a function of the other quantities.
7. Gibbs provides a noteworthy application of equations (15) and (19) which 
I shall recount here, even though those26 who later treated the same subject 
established the proposition to be proved in other ways and thus probably 
consider Gibbs’s treatment to be inadequate. To me Gibbs’s investigation 
seems very clear and it is, in any case, characteristic of his method.
26 Duhem, Potential thermodynamique (1886); C. Neumann, Leipziger Ber. (1891), p. 109; 
Poincare, Thermodynamik (Berlin 1893), p. 227; Planck, Wied. Ann. 32 and Thermodynamik, p. 
197.
The point at issue is the question already touched on (p. [158]) of how one 
determines the energy and entropy of a new substance, which has arisen from 
other substances through mixing, from the energies and entropies of the 
components. Gibbs considers a mixture of ideal gases which has come into 
being without chemical reaction and defines such a mixture by means of 
Dalton’s law. This law can probably best be formulated as follows: The pressure 
of a mixture of different gases is equal to the sum of the pressures which the 
different gases would yield if each of these gases by itself filled the same volume, 
the temperature and the value of its chemical intensity remaining the same. If 
we call the pressure of the mixture P and the pressure that would be assigned to 
a component under the stated conditions p, then this law of Dalton is expressed 
by the equation
(20)
p = 'Ep-
Moreover, in accordance with (19),
(21) 
VdP = SdO + AWIIi + М2Л12 + ... + MndHn
holds true for the mixture. But the following equations also hold for the 
individual components:
(22)
VdPi = 51^ + M^ni
Vdp2 = SidO 
+ Л/2<7П2
4 Vdpn = Snd6 
+ MndHn,
where Si S2 ... Sn are the entropies these components would have under the 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
211
above conditions.
From Dalton’s law, it now follows that
dp_ = _dp_
} 
5П1 anf ап2 ап2 ’ ’
Thus, the amount M of each component in the mixture is the same as in the 
individual gas, which we have already expressed in our formulation of the 
above equations. In addition, though,
(24) 
= 
^E| = 5i+52 + ... + 5„;
Ou 
‘ Ou
and the additive proposition for the entropies of mixtures of ideal gases is 
thereby proven, provided that they satisfy Dalton’s law and the integral 
equation (15) is valid. From the latter, then, there immediately follows the 
additive proposition for the energies
(25) 
E = E\ + P2 4- ... Eni
which is usually accounted for by the fact that when ideal, chemically inert 
gases are mixed, no heat is developed and no external work is performed.
Section Five:
The Phase Rule and Geometrical Methods
1. Let us imagine the state of a phase containing n independent components 
given by ^1,/?,П1,П2,.. .П„. The changes to which these л-I-2 independent 
variables can be subjected are joined by one equation (19) (p. [209]). There are 
therefore n + 1 independent variations.
Now if the system consists of r phases, each of which actually contains the 
same n components, then, since the temperature, pressure and chemical 
intensity of each component must have the same value throughout all the 
phases, there are n + 2 variables present, whose changes must however satisfy r 
equations (19). The number of independent changes is thus n — r + 2. “Hence, 
when r = n + 2, no variation of the phases (remaining coexistent) is possible. 
An example of n = 1 and r = 3 is the coexistent solid, liquid and gaseous forms 
of a substance of invariable composition. An example of n = 2 and r = 4 is the 
solution of a salt in water in contact with steam and two kinds of crystals of the 
salt.”
2. 
A very substantial part of Gibbs’s research consists in the study of all the 

212 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
possibilities for changes of state in a system of homogeneous substances. In 
addition to the algebraic method of numbering the variables and the equations 
of state which obtain among them, of which we have just recounted the most 
important application, Gibbs also utilizes geometrical methods to great 
advantage. He thus transposes the question of the variety of chemical 
variations of a system of substances into a study of the coherence of spatial 
possibilities.
The method itself, of course, is as old as thermodynamics. Like the method 
of differential equations, which has always been treated most graphically via a 
geometrical approach, it is rooted in the treatise of Clapeyron; and it was 
thermotechnics, above all, which made use of the advantages provided by the 
clearly arranged representation of thermodynamic quantities in diagrams. 
Indeed, technology was immediately committed to this approach by the 
indicator diagram of the steam engine. And so for the case of a single 
homogeneous substance - the usual case studied in classical thermodynamics 
- the advocates of its technical applications, Rankine,27 Cazin28 and Zeuner,29 
used the long-established diagram of Clapeyron to solve all the problems they 
treated. For example, the algebraic method of Thomson, recounted on p. [150] 
and p. [156], for reducing an arbitrary reversible cyclic process to a series of 
Carnot processes becomes very clear and obvious through the procedure, 
developed by Zeuner, of analyzing the thermodynamic diagram of the cyclic 
process by means of adiabats and isotherms. Then, the rather unclear method 
of Thomson appears only as the realization of one particular kind of analysis 
among many which are possible. Ever since Clausius in his later writings made 
use of the graphic, intuitively clear procedure of Zeuner,30 it has passed over 
quite generally into all representations of thermodynamics.
27 Rankine, A Manual of the Steam Engine ... (1859).
28 Cazin, Theorie elementaire des machines a air chaud (1865).
29 Zeuner, Mechanische Warmetheorie (1866).
30 Cf. Mach, Warmelehre, p. 294.
31 Trans. Connecticut Academy II (1873). Also translated in Thermodynamische Studien.
32 Zeuner already employed this representation much earlier in lectures. It first appears in the 
literature (after Zeuner, Thermodynamik I, p. 71) in an 1872 essay by Belpaire, then in 1875 with 
Linde, in 1883 with Schrdter, and in 1884 with Herrmann. After Mollier (Verh. zur Beforderung 
des Gewerbelfleisses (1893), p. 160), it was employed by Gray in 1880 and then by Willans and 
Cotterill. Maxwell also makes use of the same representation for thermo-electric purposes in his 
book, published posthumously by Garnett, Die Elektrizitat in elementarer Behandlung. German 
by Gratz (Braunschweig 1883), pp. 141ff.
The attempt was also made to advance from representation in a plane to 
spatial overviews, by picturing the course of a variable as a function of two 
others via a surface.
Gibbs first deals with the plane diagrams of thermodynamics.31 Instead of 
using pressure and volume as coordinates, as was customary until then, he 
shows that one can make use of temperature and entropy with equal advantage 
- a procedure followed through later by Zeuner, particularly for technological 
purposes.32 But Gibbs also includes other systems of coordinates within his 
sphere of consideration. In the selection of coordinates, two things have to be 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
213
be kept in mind. On the one hand, it is significant how the thermodynamically 
important lines develop on which, respectively
volume, pressure, temperature, entropy, and energy
are constant, and which are called, respectively, the isometric, isopiestic, 
isothermal, isoentropic and isodynamic lines. On the other hand, the choice of 
coordinates and the assessment of their appropriateness is a question of 
whether the surfaces, which are bounded by closed lines, directly measure the 
work and heat which is converted in the cyclic process represented by the 
boundary curve, or whether the ratio of this work and heat to the surface 
depends on the values of the coordinates, and thus turns out differently for 
different points of the plane. The latter is the case, for example, when volume 
and entropy are used as the coordinates - a procedure which, from another 
view, offers certain advantages, as Gibbs points out. Gibbs also indicates 
various systems of coordinates in which all the upward-leading lines are 
represented as straight lines. For example, the logarithms of the volume and 
pressure could be used as coordinates in the case of an ideal gas to permit all 
those characteristic lines to appear as straight lines.33
33 Compare also v. Oettingen, Pogg. Ann., Supplementary Vol. 7 (1876), p. 96.
34 Trans. Connecticut Academy Vol. II (1873). Also in Thermodynamische Studien. Ritter 
represented the thermodynamic states of air, water and carbonic acid in bottles by means of 
the co-ordinates P, V, 0 - thus, non-energetically - in Wied. Ann. in 1877 and 1878.
35 Theorie der Warme (Braunschweig 1878), pp. 223f.
3. Gibbs teaches two methods for representing geometrically the thermo­
dynamic properties of a single homogeneous substance by means of surfaces.  
They are, incidentally, the same methods of Gibbs’s work that were promi­
nently stressed in a most appreciative manner by the outstanding scientist, 
Maxwell, quite soon after its appearance and made accessible to broader 
audiences in his widely circulated textbook.  However, Maxwell’s contempor­
aries did not give to Gibbs’s works the more profound attention they deserved. 
The spirit of the age was not to be overcome so quickly.
34
35
If volume К entropy S and energy E are plotted as the x-, y- and z- co­
ordinates, then, since
(1) 
dE = 0dS-PdV,
the quantities 0 and P are measured by the angle of inclination of certain 
tangents touching the surface at the point V, S, E. If, moreover, in conformity 
with equation 14 (p. [208]), one sets
(2) 
E = 
+

214 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
so that П represents the internal potential for the unit of mass of the substance 
under consideration and at the same time the function H is represented by (13) 
(p. [208]), then
(3)
П = £-
V
is the section formed on the Z-axis by the tangent plane which touches at the 
point К S, E.
4. The other method given by Gibbs corresponds to the first one in two 
respects. Let us select as coordinates
x = 0, у = P, z = U = H.
Then, since
dH = —SdO + VdP,
н = e -es + PV,
dz 
dx
dz dz
E = z-gix-^
Here the quantities that before were graphically illustrated by a point are 
now represented by the tangent plane, and vice versa.
These geometrical methods are so significant energetically because in them is 
expressed the analogy obtaining among the various forms of energy. Indeed, 
this analogy evidently led Gibbs to his comparisons of corresponding methods. 
Thus, the remarkable relations stressed by energetics also did not elude this 
profound inquirer, and in his hands became productive in their geometrical 
aspect. These are relations to which, as we shall see, so many before and after 
him were led from different points of view, and analogies which, in spite of 
everything, were still not apparent in 1895 to the Lubeck opponents of 
energetics.
This is not the place, however, to pursue these analogies further. Rather, we 
must review how Gibbs uses his surfaces to understand geometrically the 
heterogeneous states of a substance which can exist side by side.
5. He first imagines constructed either the V - S - E- or the в - P - П- 
surface for all the homogeneous states of a unit mass of the substance in 
question. The surface brought into being thereby is called the “original sur­
face”. Now when several such states can exist side by side - can coexist - the 
problem then arises of obtaining a general overview of the heterogeneous states 
of the given unit mass which are possible in this way. Gibbs solves this problem 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
215
in a surprisingly simple manner by deducing a derived surface from the original 
V - S - E- surface by means of tangent planes to the original surface. In so 
doing, he sets out from the principle that the volume, energy and entropy of the 
whole body are equal to the sum of the volumes, energies and entropies, 
respectively, of its parts, while the temperature, pressure and chemical intensity 
of the whole are the same as those of the parts. The position of the point 
determined by the volume, entropy and energy of such a mixture is therefore 
the center of gravity of as many points of the original surface as there are 
coexistent states present. One need only imagine the mass in the state in 
question placed at each of these points on the original surface - such points 
having, moreover, the same pressure and temperature - and then determine the 
center of gravity of these masses.
Thus, for example, all mixtures of solid, liquid and gaseous substance 
possible at the same pressure and temperature are represented by the points in 
a plane which is tangent to the original surface at three points: namely, a point 
of that part of the original surface corresponding to the homogeneous solid 
states of the unit of mass being considered; a point belonging to the liquid 
states; and, finally, one belonging to the gaseous states.
In the same manner, the points of a tangent twice touching the original 
surface represent states in which the unit of mass is separated into two phases. 
All states of that nature are located on the ruled surface enclosed by a plane 
tangent to the original surface at two points.
The derived surface is in general obtained by allowing the original surface to 
be rolled over by a plane to which it is tangent at least two points.
The heterogeneous states of the в - P - П- surface are represented graphi­
cally even more simply. For since the phases which coexist during hetero­
geneous states agree in 0,P and П, every curve in which one part of the 
в — P — П— surface intersects another indicates pairs of coexisting phases; 
and every point through which three parts of the surface pass represents a state 
in which three phases can exist side by side.
We shall not explain here how these methods are extended by Gibbs in order 
also to achieve geometrical clarity for systems consisting of several substances 
variable in a manner independent of one another, nor shall we explain the 
manner in which Gibbs separates geometrically the stable states of substances 
from the unstable ones. Judged from the historical standpoint, I have in any 
case already gone too far; for the methods described here have still by no means 
become the common property of science. Even today, we instead encounter 
works whose authors do not seem to know that Gibbs created the theoretical 
foundations for these matters; and that he not only sketched them in broad 
strokes, but also worked through them with careful attention to particular 
cases.
Section Six:
The Measurement of Chemical Intensity
1. If I do not consider at this point Gibbs’s great works on elasticity and 

216 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
capillarity, there are still two outstanding results of his theory which remain to 
be treated.
Gibbs showed how one can measure the numbers П, the chemical intensities 
of the substances, which he called their intrinsic potentials. First, they can be 
compared with the intensity of gravity and, second, with the electrical 
potential. The latter method, in fact, is just the one that has been used 
experimentally by Ostwald.
Gibbs36 obtains the measurement through gravity by seeking the conditions 
of equilibrium for a mass consisting of different substances subject to gravity. 
He imagines the mass enclosed in a stationary envelope - this is no restriction 
for an investigation only of equilibrium - which is impermeable to substances 
and to heat, and which is resolved into elements of mass DM. By taking the 
expression
Gibbs, loc. cit., Formula 219 ff.
(1) 
SDE = OSDS - PSD V + 
+ ... + HnSDMn
as the change in the intrinsic energy of an element of mass, he establishes the 
value
SDE + SghDM
for the change in the total energy of this element of mass. Here all of the 
symbols have their earlier designations: g is the intensity of gravity, h is the 
height of the element of mass above a solid horizontal plane,
(2) 
DM = DMX + DM2 + ... + DMn,
and the kinetic energy of each element of mass is set equal to zero. When the 
integration is extended over all the elements of mass, in accordance with 
Gibbs’s principle 10 (p. [200]), the condition of equilibrium
(3) 
S J DE+ S J ghDM > 0
must be observed, which, because of the relation
(4) 
S(hDM) = ShDM + hSDMx + hSDM2 + ... + hSDMn
following from equation (2), and because of equation (1), becomes 
36

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
217
У OSDS - У P8DV + УII16ZW, + ... + У Hn8DMn 
+ [ g8h -DM + [ gh- 6DM1 + ... + [ gh- 8DM„ > 0.
However, according to Gibbs’s principle, the variations appearing here are 
tied to conditions. To begin with, they cannot change the entropy:
(6)
У 8DS = 0.
If all of the variations in formula (5) are allowed to vanish except those of 
entropy - which is not in conflict with any of the conditions that must be 
satisfied by the variations - then (5) becomes
(7)
У OSDS > 0,
from which it follows, recalling (6), that the temprerature 0 must have the same 
value in all parts of the system.
Second, the volume of the system cannot change. This condition influences 
only two terms in (5), so that when the boundary surface of the system is 
invariable,
(8)
У P6DV + Уg8hDM > 0
must hold true. That is the usual condition of mechanical equilibrium which, if 
7 denotes the density of the substance, can be brought into the customary form
(9)
dP = —g^f • dh.
Since the surrounding envelope is stationary,
У D(P8V) = У DP-8V + У P8DV = Q,
and one may set

218 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
so that
8h DV = —6V DV = Dh SV,
8V-{DP + g^ Dh) > 0
is obtained from (8).
Third, the amounts of none of the substances М\,Мг,... Mn can change. 
The restriction on the variations stated by
(10)
8DMX = 0
only influences the terms of (5) containing 8DM\, so that from this formula
(11)
J HiSDMi + У gh6DM\ > 0
also follows, which is compatible with (10) only when
(12)
П1 + gh = Constant.
From this and corresponding equations for the other substances, there 
follows the theorem:
“Ifa liquid or gaseous mass is in equilibrium under the influence of gravity, and 
if it contains the same independently variable components throughout, then the 
intrinsic potentials are constant for each of these components at every given level 
and decrease uniformly with increasing height, the difference of the intrinsic 
potentials for each component at two different levels being equal to the work of 
gravity when a unit of the substance falls from the higher to the lower level”
1. One aspect of the derivation of this theorem is highly noteworthy vis-a-vis 
energetics. This is the splitting up of the fundamental formula (10) (p. [207]; or, as 
the case may be, 3 or 5) into three conditions of equilibrium, namely, (7), (8), 
and (11), that is, into conditions for thermal, mechanical and chemical 
equilibrium. The separation seems to have a purely mathematical basis. The 
requirement of constant volume, for example, for which only (5) holds true, has 
nothing to do with the terms in the formula containing variations of entropy or 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
219
of the masses. But in the condition of Gibbs’s fundamental principle, in the 
words “in the isolated system,” there is nevertheless present in latent form the 
independence of the forms of energy to which later we shall have to direct our 
attention. To isolate a system, it must be protected, first, from changes of 
volume and, second, from changes in the heterogeneous quantities of substance 
it contains. That yields different, separate equations, which may have as their 
mathematical consequence - quite strikingly in the case just treated - a 
splitting up of the condition of equilibrium.
3. Gibbs also gives a second solution37 - very remarkable from the standpoint 
of energetic methodology - to the problem treated under 1. of this section, a 
solution I would like to recount here, limiting myself to infinitesimal changes, 
although Gibbs also takes discontinuities into consideration. We imagine the 
system resolved, not as before, into invariable elements of mass, but into 
elements of volume that are invariant. Now the condition of equilibrium is
(13)
SDE + gh6DM > 0,
when the variations are subject to the conditions
(14)
6DMi = 0,
У 6DM2 = 0,... У 8DMn = 0.
Introducing the undetermined coefficients $,7Г1,7Г2,.. .тгл, Gibbs forms the 
condition of equilibrium
~ 7Г1 У 6DM1 - 
j8DM„ > 0,
in which the variations now are not subject to any restriction. Because of 
equations (1) and (2), this condition of equilibrium is written as
(0 - #)6DS + (gh + П1 - 
+ ...
(16)
(gh + nn-^8DMn>0
and yields the following individual requirements:
37
loc. cit., Formula 237.

220 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(17)
0 = П1 +gh = Tvl,...Hn+gh = 'Kn,
so that this method gives the same result as the previous one.
I shall add to this the treatment the problem would receive using the method 
of permissible changes. If we understand by $ the temperature of the heat 
source from which the system of volume elements DV receives heat, that is, the 
temperature of neighboring volume elements, while 0 is the temperature of the 
element DV; and if we likewise understand by щ the chemical intensity of the 
substance DM\ entering the system, while П1 is the intensity prevailing in the 
volume element, then the formula (cf. formula (5), p. [198], or (10), p. [207])
(18) 
/ dDE + / ghdDM < 
/ dDS -h тп / dDM\ + ... + кп / dDMn
holds true. Or, more precisely, it is valid for any possible change, designated as 
“d’\ which can occur in the system of volume elements DV and which leads 
from one state of equilibrium to another, infinitely close, state of equilibrium. 
If a reversible transition were carried out between these same states, then the 
following would hold true for this transition in every volume element:
(19)
dDe — OdDS -I- W\dDM\ -f-... 4- X\.ndDMn.
Comparison shows that for any possible transition the following must be valid:
(20)
У (6» - d)dDs + J\t1i +gh— 7Гi)dDMx
+... + I (Tin + gh - Tin)dDMn > 0
No change is possible when all the variations the entropy and the masses can 
undergo satisfy the condition
У (6> - d)6DS + У (П1 + gh - 7Г] )6DMi 
+ ...+ [+ gh — tv„)6DM„ > 0,
which is identical with (16). The designations Gibbs chose for the undeter­
mined coefficients he uses point so strikingly to the interpretation of the same 
as temperatures and chemical intensities that one is led to suppose that the

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
221
conception underlying formula (20) also stood in the background of his 
treatment, and that the principles of the calculus of variations are only outward 
garb.
4. Finally, Gibbs again develops condition (12) for chemical equilibrium 
under the influence of gravity. But this time he also considers the influence of 
electrical potential differences, thereby providing a theoretical foundation for 
the measurement of intrinsic, or chemical, potentials through electrical 
potentials. “If,” he says, “all the conditions of equilibrium in a given state of 
the system are fulfilled, except those which bring about a change in the flow of 
electricity; and if we suppose the state of the system changed by the passage of 
the quantity of electricity & together with the quantity 6Ma of the specified 
component, without any passage of other components or any change in the 
total entropy, then the total change of energy in the system will be represented 
by the expression
(K" - V'ffe + (П" - П' }dMa + (g/г" - gh'^Ma,
in which V, Vй denote the electrical potentials in pieces of metal of the same 
kind which are connected to the two electrodes, g/г', g/г", the gravitational 
potentials at the two electrodes, and Щ,П" the intrinsic potentials of the 
specified substance. The first term represents the increase of the potential 
energy of the electricity, the second the increase of the intrinsic energy of the 
ponderable substance, and the third the increase of energy owing to gravity. 
The following equation then holds true when aa denotes a constant, peculiar to 
the substance in question, which is positive in the case of a cation and negative 
in the case of an anion:
Ша = OLa
“It is therefore necessary for equilibrium that
К" = Г + аДП" = П') + aag(/z" - /г') = 0.”
“To extend this relation to all the electrodes, we may write
V 4- ой(П' + g/г') = V" + оДП" + g/г")
If the electrical potential difference is omitted, then condition (12), which 
has been developed above, again appears. Conversely, when the influence of 
gravity can be ignored, and there are only two electrodes present, we have
К"-Г = -аа(П"-П').

222 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
“When all the conditions of equilibrium in a galvanic or electrolytic cell are 
satisfied, the electromotive force is then equal to the difference in the values of 
the potential for any ion or apparent ion at the surfaces of the electrodes 
multiplied by the electro-chemical equivalent of this ion, the greater potential of 
an anion being located at the same electrode as the greater electrical potential, 
while the reverse holds true for the cation.”
The essential point emerges very clearly in this concise development: 
Intrinsic potentials can be measured by both electrical and gravitational 
potentials, because the differentials by which these different potentials must be 
multiplied to obtain values of energy represent equal or proportional quan­
tities. Thus, the conditions governing these differentials are satisfied or not 
satisfied for all three simultaneously, while other forms of energy are influenced 
by other conditions which are of no importance for those three.
We here take leave of Gibbs’s brilliant work, although we shall have occasion 
later to return, if only in passing, to his investigations of elasticity and 
capillarity. It has been granted the gifted American theorist - who since the 
publication of this work, initially so neglected, has devoted himself to 
substantially different mathematical studies - to witness in his lifetime how his 
great projects have conquered, very gradually, the resistance of a dull world.
Section Seven:
Helmholtz’s Thermochemical Works
1. The decade in which Gibbs’s works appeared passed without their being 
noticed; nor was the entropy concept energetically developed or applied at this 
time in the manner so auspiciously marked out by Horstmann. Instead, people 
still struggled to accommodate the alien-appearing concept of entropy under 
the old hat of the mechanism of atoms. I shall return again to these attempts on 
another occasion.
The whole picture changes with the beginning of the ninth decade. The 
standstill of energetics is now succeeded by a lively movement. The excitement 
has its beginnings in quite different starting points; and soon, too, it had its own 
abortive escapades.
This time of forward impetus was stimulated by Hermann von Helmholtz, 
the same scientist who earlier had won scientific recognition for energy in 
general. In three essays bearing the common title, “The Thermodynamics of 
Chemical Processes,” which appeared in 1882 and 1883, he treats the 
difficulties lying in the concept of entropy in a purely energetic manner. He 
does not attempt, as did others before him, to reduce entropy to mechanics or 
even to make it comprehensible through mechanical analogies, as he later did. 
No, Helmholtz allows himself to be led a step forward simply by the selfsame 
experiences that are described by the law of entropy. He shows that, owing to 
these experiences, according to which heat is a form of energy not capable of 
unlimited transformation, the intrinsic energy of any system can be divided 
into a part which can be obtained only as heat, so long as the temperature is

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
223
maintained unchanged, and into a part which, with constant temperature, is 
able to be released as freely transformable work.
Before we concern ourselves with the separation of intrinsic energy into two 
components, into bound and free energy, we must first describe an investiga­
tion from “The Thermodynamics of Chemical Processes” on which Helmholtz 
reports independently of his concept of free energy and before its introduction.
This investigation has to do with the heat developed in the work of galvanic 
cells. Helmholtz had already38 used thermodynamics before to determine the 
relationship between the electromotive force and the material changes in a cell 
in the simple case of concentration chains (cf. p. [186]). Gibbs makes reference 
to this work in order to verify the correctness of the new views he had 
developed on the work of galvanic cells. Gibbs had already grasped admirably 
the state of affairs; nevertheless, he did not determine the quantitative relation 
obtaining between that work and heat. It is one of the few theoretical points 
with respect to which Gibbs did not find the last word. He does point out most 
emphatically, though, that one cannot ignore the entropy of the saline solutions 
in the cell. The change of energy dE of the cell must satisfy the conditions
Wied. Ann. 3; Berl. Monatsber. (1877); JFfsx Abh. Vol. 1.
dE = dQ — Ade 
dE < OdS - Ade,
where A represents the electromotive force, de the discharged quantity of 
electricity, dQ the heat transformed, 0 the temperature, and S the entropy. To 
leave entropy out of the formula
Ade < -dE + OdS
is unjustified. It is, Gibbs says, “frequently assumed that neither heat nor cold is 
produced by the passage of a current through a perfect electro-chemical 
apparatus (excepting that heat which may be indefinitely decreased by increas­
ing the time during which a given quantity of electricity passes through it), and 
that heat can be generated in the cell only through processes of a secondary 
nature, which are not necessarily and immediately connected with the process 
of electrolysis. This assumption does not appear to be justified by any sufficient 
reason.”
2. 
Helmholtz adopts this point of view as his own. In his essays on the 
thermodynamics of chemical processes, he says: “The processes in a constant 
galvanic element which take place with negligibly small current intensity - in 
which case the development of heat in the loop wire, proportional to the 
resistance and the square of this intensity, can be ignored as infinitesimal 
quantities of the second order - are completely reversible processes and must 
be subject to the thermodynamic laws of reversible processes. If we have a 
38

224 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
galvanic element at the uniform absolute temperature 0, then, when the 
electrical quantum de passes through it, its state is changed in that a chemical 
change proportional to the quantity de takes place; and we may regard the state 
of the element as defined by the amount of electricity, s, which has passed 
through the element in a definite direction, assumed as positive. If the ends of 
the constant battery are connected to the two plates of a condenser of very 
large capacity, charged to the potential difference Д, then the passage from the 
negative to the positive plate of the condenser of the amount de would 
correspond to an increase Ade in the supply of available electrostatic energy.”
The following equation then obtains between this energy, the heat dQ that 
must be supplied to the element in order to keep its temperature constant in the 
aforementioned conduction of de and, finally, the intrinsic energy E of the 
element, which must be considered as a function of 0 and s:
(1) 
dE = -—-dO + ~^~de — dQ — kde.
In addition, according to the entropy law,
(2)
From the relation
d [ld£'| _d_ fl Г5Е д 
de h && J 50 (0
there follows at constant 0
(3)
П5Д дЕ . 
в^а =ТГ + А;
50 de
accordingly, (1) yields the Helmholtzian formula 
(4) 
at constant 9.
This development can be patterned exactly after the derivation of Clapeyr­
on’s formula (cf. p. [190]); one need only set p for A, and V for e to obtain the 
latter. It thus offers an outstanding example of the analogy among forms of 
energy.
Formula (4), which was soon confirmed by experiments, had a powerful 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
225
stimulating effect. That a new truth could be found entirely with the old methods 
of thermodynamics merely by inserting Ads in place of pdV - even more, that 
Helmholtz’s authority supported the formula - this had to direct attention to 
such lines of reasoning.
However, the first work of Helmholtz on the thermodynamics of chemical 
processes presents the above development only in the introduction - in passing, 
as it were. The main content of that work is quite different; it opens up an 
entirely new method to thermodynamics.
3. 
Like Helmholtz’s youthful work on the conservation of force, the great 
investigations with which he enriched the ideas of energy in old age are also, in 
the final analysis, written with a view to conquering an additional domain of 
application for the principles of mechanics. Thus, as in his work of 1847, he again 
follows two paths. On the one hand, he tries, by means of new turns of 
mathematical expression, to confer on the non-mathematical concepts ob­
tained in the realm of thermodynamics the same secure serviceability that has 
distinguished the concepts of mechanics for a century; on the other hand, he 
attempts to blend those thermodynamic concepts entirely into the domain of 
mechanics, whether through an appropriate mechanical hypothesis for the 
phenomena of heat or through mere mechanical analogy - which then, at least, 
would make the mathematical work in treating a non-mechanical problem 
identical with forming the dynamical equations of motion. But while the 
beginnings of these various lines of thought are intermingled in his work on 
the conservation of force, Helmholtz separates the different approaches in the 
works of the last decades of his life and devotes separate essays to them.39
39 One may compare Konigsberger, H v. Helmholtz’s Untersuchungen Uber die Grundlagen der 
Mathematik und Mechanik (Heidelberg 1895) with E. du Bois Reymond, H v. Helmholtz: 
Gedachtnisrede (Leipzig 1897).
The works on the thermodynamics of chemical processes are devoted to the 
purely energetic manner of treatment with which we are concerned in this 
section. “Dynamics has” - so Helmholtz begins the first paragraph of these 
works - “achieved a great simplification and generalization in its analytical 
development by introducing the concept of potential energy (taken as the 
negative of the force by C.G.J Jacobi, as the ergal by Clausius, and as the 
quantity of tensional forces by Helmholtz). However, in applications of this 
concept to date changes of temperature are not as a rule taken into considera­
tion, either because the forces whose work value was being calculated in no way 
depend on temperature - as, for example, gravitation - or because the 
temperature during the processes being investigated could be regarded as 
constant or else, as the case may be, as a function of definite mechanical 
changes - for example, in the case of the movement of sound as a function of 
the density of a gas. Of course, the physical constants occurring in the values of 
the ergal, such as the density, the coefficients of elasticity, and others, were able 
to vary with the temperature; and, in this sense, that quantity was certainly 
already a function of temperature. With that, however, the constant of 

226 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
integration appearing in the value of every ergal remained to be determined 
completely arbitrarily for every new temperature, and one could not make the 
transition from one temperature to another. But the manner in which this can 
be done emerges easily from the two fundamental equations of thermody­
namics formed by Mr. Clausius.”
4. 
Right from the beginning, however, Helmholtz then adds to these equa­
tions a very remarkable generalization, which until then only Gibbs - at that 
time still ignored - had dared. Alongside the temperature 0, he introduces not 
only one additional parameter, as classical thermodynamics had done up until 
then, but rather an arbitrary number of such parameters. Accordingly, 
Helmholtz forms the differential of the intrinsic energy E of a system of masses 
having the same temperature 0 and undergoing the same changes of tempera­
ture as
(5 
) 
dE = dQ - VЛфа = ~^d0 + У—dp„
90 дра
where P^dp^ is understood to be the entire freely transformable work capable of 
being generated in the change dp^ which can be in part transferred to the 
bodies of the environment and in part transformed into the kinetic energy of 
the masses of the system. Now if the changes that take place in the system are 
reversible - and this demands, in addition to the uniformity of temperature 
already required, only that no new heat be generated at the expense of other 
forms of energy - then also
/ax 
dQ 
dS 
dS J
(6 ) 
т = ‘к = э«‘/(’ + £а^''й-
The elimination of dQ from equations (1) and (2) yields 
(7)
13£ 
дё ~ 0 dO ’
dS 
дря
From this it follows, in the first place, that
(8)
Pa=—(0S-E); 
dpa

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
227
and when, in addition, the second derivative
d2S 
дв dpa
is formed in a twofold manner from equations (7), the result is
(9)
дв дръ a'
Helmholtz now introduces the function
(10)
F - E - в • S,
the same one used by Gibbs, which is an unequivocal function of the quantities 
в and ръ just as are E and S. Since arbitrarily chosen constants are present in E 
and S, it contains an arbitrary term of the form Eq — в • Sq. In accordance with 
(8) and by means of F
(11)
_ dF .
that is, Fis the potential energy of the system for all changes which take place 
isothermally and, indeed, for all unconditionally convertable values of work. 
From (10) there follows, moreover, taking (7) into consideration, that
(12)
therefore,
(13)
dF 
d0
= -5;
Helmholtz suggests the name free energy for the function F, because it plays 
the role of potential energy for the freely transformable forms of energy Pdp. 
Accordingly, the expression

228 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(14)
E - F = -0— = OS
receives the name bound energy. can change only through the absorption of 
new heat dQ, that is, of such heat as is either supplied from the surroundings or 
is newly produced by conversion of freely transformable equivalents of work 
into heat.
Section Eight:
Further Development of the Theory of Free Energy
1. The great analytical significance of Helmholtz’s method for linking 
thermodynamics to the function F = E — fiS was first recognized and 
exploited by Duhem.40 Since the appearance of his book on the thermody­
namic potential, this French scientist has worked through the entire realm of 
theoretical natural science with uncommon diligence in order to subordinate it, 
with ever more precise analytical rigor, to the concept of free energy.
From Clausius’ equation for the uncompensated transformation during a 
cyclic process which arbitrarily converts state 1 into state 2 and then, reversibly, 
2 into 1 (formula 8, p. [174]),
(1)
N = S2 - Si -
there follows for isothermal processes, taking into consideration
(2)
dE = dQ + dA,
the further formula
(3)
Duhem then sets
(4)
N = S2-Si-^—+ СaA. 
0 7i
4
40 Duhem, Lepotentiel thermodynamique (Paris 1886).

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
229
and calls N the “uncompensated work”. Thus
(5)
N = 0S2-0Sl-E2+El +
results.
Moreover, Duhem assumes that a potential W exists for the external work, 
so that
(6) 
- J dA = W2 - Wi
and obtains
(7) 
=
by setting
(8) 
fl = E - OS + W.
Duhem calls the function fl the “thermodynamic potential”. In the event that 
a uniform standard pressure P acts on the system under consideration,
(9)
-dW = -PdV = —d(P ■ K) 
W = PV,
and Q then changes into the function
(10)
h = e-os + pv.
to which Gibbs and Massieu had already been led and which Duhem calls the 
“thermodynamic potential at constant pressure”.
If, however, the volume V is also constant, then dW becomes equal to zero 
and fl passes over into the function introduced by Helmholtz, as it had been 
earlier by Gibbs and Massieu,

230 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(11)
F = E - OS.
which represents the thermodynamic potential at constant volume.
In accordance with (7), however, the proposition holds in every case in which 
the uncompensated work produced in an isothermal change is equal and 
opposite to the change in the thermodynamic potential.
Now since, according to Clausius, the uncompensated transformation N can 
never be negative, and thus, in accordance with (4), Duhem’s uncompensated 
work is also never negative, it follows that the thermodynamic potential can 
only decrease. Constant in reversible processes, it is a minimum at stable 
equilibrium.
Gibbs established and deployed the values the functions H and F have for 
ideal gases, after Massieu had already treated the subject. With the aid of 
Gibbs’s formulas, Duhem now presents a compilation of the most important 
results achieved in the thermodynamics of chemical processes up to 1886. 
From the characteristics of the thermodynamic potentials alone, he uniformly 
derives the phenomena in changes of aggregation and dissociations - even, for 
example, the theory of the triple point, elaborated by Moutier, in which the 
pressure curves of the three possible changes of aggregation of a given 
substance must intersect - the formulas of Kirchhoff and Horstmann, Gibbs’s 
investigations of gaseous mixtures subject to chemical reactions, and Helm­
holtz’s equations for the development of heat in a galvanic cell and for the 
electromotive force of concentration chains.
2. 
The theory of free energy developed by Helmholtz has been summarized by 
his son in a few propositions,  of which the first six follow here:
41
Wied. Ann. 30 (1887), p. 401.
“ 1. Every (chemical) body or system of bodies comes with a definite 
quantum of ‘free energy,’ which depends only on its momentary 
state (for example, its state of aggregation) and the temperature, but 
not on the way in which this state was reached.
To be distinguished from this is the ‘total energy,’ which also 
includes the equivalent of the untransformable heat contained in the 
body, in addition to the ‘free’ energy.
2. 
The work that can be performed in maximo by any isothermal 
change of state (chemical process, solution, change of aggregation, 
change of the capillary surface, for example) can be measured by 
the decrease in the free energy which occurs, while the difference in 
the total energy indicates the maximum of the possible emission of 
heat.
‘Free energy’ therefore plays the same role for chemical systems 
that ‘potential’ energy does for mechanical systems.
41

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
231
3. 
Accordingly, a chemical system is in stable equilibrium only when 
its free energy has assumed the least value possible at the prevailing 
temperature.
Spontaneously occurring processes are therefore always ones 
which lead the system from a state of greater to that of least ‘free’ 
energy.
Both do not hold true of the total energy (for example, this 
increases spontaneously in the case of freezing mixtures, that is 
through absorption of external heat).
4. 
Nevertheless, labile states do occur (for example, supersaturation, 
supercooling) in which the free energy is not a minimum. These can 
be lastingly maintained by very small forces; only after the removal 
or overcoming of these forces are such states ‘released,’ that is, 
induced to self-active transition into the stable state.
In this transition, of course, just as in other transitions, a work 
corresponding to the decrease in free energy is performed, or a heat 
equivalent to the difference in the total energy is released. Thus, 
there is no reason not to apply the same conclusions to such labile 
states in just the same way they are applied to the stable ones.
5. 
In general, therefore, it can be said that when two states of a body 
are found in mutual contact without disturbing one another, these 
states must possess equal free energy.
6. 
Among the possible isothermal changes of state, reversible ones, in 
particular, are the most favorable. For only they actually perform 
the maximum work, which measures the decrease in free energy. 
But also when two isothermal and reversible, yet otherwise arbi­
trary, paths are at hand, the amounts of work supplied can thus 
immediately be set equal; and in this way the relations between the 
reciprocal forces and the path parameters can be obtained.
The quantities of heat appearing in the course of these processes 
are also independent of the path. More precisely, they are equal to 
the difference of the non-transformable heat. However, this is not 
identical with the so-called ‘heat tone’ of chemical processes, which 
is instead produced only by a completely irreversible - that is, 
workless - process with at least equal final temperatures, and which 
corresponds to the change in total energy.”
In this statement, which brings out prominently the analytical significance of 
free energy, the tendency is already manifest to allow free energy to appear as a 
function which also enjoys a physical status at least equal to that of intrinsic 
energy. But as we have known since Gibbs, it is only one among many 
functions derivable from the intrinsic energy, which are to be selected 

232 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
according to the conditions under which the process in question takes its 
course. Their value lies solely in the analytical advantage they provide. If 0 is 
an independent variable together with pa, then, in consequence of the 
equation42
42 [I have again replaced the Fraktur subscripts with lower case ‘a’.]
43 Nernst, Theoretische Chemie (Stuttgart 1893).
44 Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft deutscher Naturforscher und Artze II, p. 31.
dF = d(E - es) = -Sde - ^2 Padp.,
S and Pa immediately result from the function F of these quantities. On the 
other hand, the factors P would not follow from the function E of the same 
variables, because
dE = OdS - P^dp^
leads to
0pa dpa
3. Nernst tries in an even more determined manner than his predecessors to 
place free energy alongside intrinsic energy. In his Theoretical Chemistry?  he 
strives to reduce all of the analytical applications of thermodynamics to one 
equation:
3
At Liibeck in 1895,44 Nernst explained that this equation must be joined by 
the condition of equilibrium
6F = 0
and the law of the conservation of energy; and he said that because all 
achievements up to now proceed from these, there is at present “really no 
compelling reason for introducing concepts such as intensity and the like.” But 
from the outset it is so far from being obvious that a function analytically 
suitable only for certain conditions is the last word of wisdom in the domain of 
energetics - which encompasses all conditions and which, above all, captures 
the physical nature of things - that a closer examination of this assertion can be 
omitted here.

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
233
4. Finally, Le Chatelier  also assigns an independent position to free energy. 
He considers Robert Mayer’s force - although this is indestructable! - to be 
nothing short of identical to Helmholtz’s free energy, and also to Carnot’s 
puissance motrice and - correctly, with certain restrictions - to Thomson’s 
motivity. All processes, Le Chatelier explains, are divided into those which 
unfold by themselves (the falling of water, the passage of heat from the boiler to 
the condenser, the combustion of gases, the decomposition of zinc in acid) and 
those which do not occur independently of a process of the first kind, but 
which, once present, spontaneously alter the tendency of the start and can 
thereby change suddenly into processes of the first kind (the elevation of a 
weight, the compression of gas, the charging of a storage battery). In all like 
processes a certain property passes from one system to another, namely the 
capacity for immediate transformation, either in an isolated state of the system 
or by bringing about a reverse transformation in another system. This capacity 
is to be called the “motive energy”,  a concept “that encompasses causality 
and reciprocity.”
45
46
45 Journ. dephys. (3) 3, 1894.
46 [Translating “Triebenergie,” Helm’s translation of “puissance motrice,” which is better 
translated as “motive power”.]
47 Ann. des mines (1888); which also appeared, in particular, as Recherches experimentale et 
theoriques sur les equilibres chimiques (Paris 1888).
As can readily be seen, there exists a kind of transformation between the 
immediately spontaneous transformations, which produce motive energy, and 
the reverse transformations, which consume it, that does not occur by itself and 
hence does not produce any motive energy, but whose course in one direction 
or the other requires only an infinitesimal expenditure of motive energy. These 
processes are called “reversible” and every state belonging to them a state of 
equilibrium.
Three empirical principles then hold for motive energy.
The first one amounts to the same thing as our theorem of the conservation 
of capacities (cf. Part 7) and is called the “Principle of the Conservation of the 
Capacity of Motive Energy”. But it is stated in a form which is neither 
immediately evident nor very suitable for drawing further conclusions.
The second is called the “Principle of the Conservation of Motive Energy” 
and asserts that this cannot be created.
The third is called the “Principle of the Conservation of Energy” and reads: 
“It is impossible to destroy motive energy without creating heat.”
The work of Le Chatelier is permeated by an authentically energetic spirit, 
which focuses upon the whole of nature and endeavors to embrace the 
multiplicity of phenomena. Le Chatelier also understood admirably how to 
place thermodynamics at the service of mathematical chemistry 47 But judging 
from the above indications, we can hardly characterize his peculiar foundation 
of energetics as auspicious or appropriate.

234 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
5. The great hopes that Helmholtz and his followers placed in free energy 
seem to me highly exaggerated. The whole state of affairs becomes completely 
clear with a glance at Gibbs’ equations (10) to (13) (p. [207-8]) or (15) to (18) 
(p. [208-9]). They show us that Helmholtz’s free energy F does not by any 
means play an independent role, but rather that different functions can be 
placed beside it, with different conditions of change in the system, as enjoying 
equal status. Above all, Gibbs’s equations make the quantities stand out that 
are, in the last analysis, decisive for chemical changes - the chemical potentials 
П or, more generally, Helmholtz’s Pa - while the functions £, F, G and H are 
only analytical aids, applicable under different conditions, which make it 
possible in a given case to represent the quantities П and Pa, respectively, as 
derivatives of a single well-defined function.
If still other Pa than the external pressure are to be held constant, additional 
functions of this kind appear, for example (cf. p. [223]), the function E + A • e 
with constant electrical tension. But if one does not consider the different 
conditions to which the freely transformable work can be subjected, E still 
remains a potential of equal status alongside F, namely, E for isentropic - or, 
rather, adiabatic - changes as Fis for isothermal ones.
And so Helmholtz, too, was unsuccessful in bringing to fruition the old idea 
of Rankine presented on p. [164]f. The intrinsic energy cannot simply be 
separated into two kinds, as the names “free” and “bound” are certainly 
intended to suggest. Instead, under different conditions of change, another 
part of the total intrinsic energy is also “free,” namely, the potential function 
for external work. It is very plain in Helmholtz, as in Rankine, that the ancient 
apparition of the mechanical hypothesis is responsible for the belief that 
intrinsic energy can be divided into two parts absolutely, regardless of the 
conditions of change obtaining. Rankine imagined the two parts as actual and 
latent. And Helmholtz also concludes his derivation of the free energy by 
relapsing into the mechanical hypothesis, which elsewhere in his works on the 
thermodynamics of chemical processes, as has already been stressed, he avoids 
completely. He writes: “We have need, finally, of another expression to 
distinguish clearly what theoretical mechanics has up to now called ‘living 
force’, or ‘actual energy’, from the work equivalents of heat, which also for the 
most part must be conceived as the living force of invisible molecular motions. 
I should like to suggest the designation the living force of ordered motion for the 
former. An ordered motion is one in which the velocity components of the 
moving masses can be regarded as differentiable functions of the spatial 
coordinates. A disordered motion, on the other hand, would be a one in which 
the motion of each individual particle need not be at all similar to that of its 
neighbors. We have every reason to believe that the motion of heat is motion of 
the latter kind, and in this sense the amount of entropy could be termed the 
measure of disorder. Given our devices, which are relatively crude by compar­
ison with the molecular structure, only ordered motion may be freely 
transformed again into other forms of work.”
The fact that in impact and with friction the kinetic energy is dispersed to 
smaller masses, while heat appears at the same time, has given rise since 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
235
ancient times, of course, to the idea that heat itself is nothing else than kinetic 
energy dispersed to very small particles. But today we can assert that this idea 
is unjustified. One of two things: Either the smallest parts whose motion is 
supposed to be identical with heat are still finite - are atoms in the usual sense - 
or they are themselves infinitely small and continuously fill space. In the first 
case, heat would be an absolutely statable part of the total energy; whereas, 
according to Gibbs, it depends entirely on the conditions governing the system 
how much energy in Helmholtz’s sense is freely transformable and how much is 
bound. The first case therefore contradicts experience. If, however, heat is 
imagined as energy dispersed to infinitely small parts of mass, then a limiting 
process must be carried out to the infinitely small. And then, of course, it is 
possible that, depending on the conditions to which the system is subject, this 
will yield different values. But if that is so, if the limiting process yields different 
results under different conditions, then nothing remains of the mechanical 
conception of heat but an analytical process, not a distinct notion. Then heat is 
no more motion than an infinite series needs to be a rational number - or a 
definite number at all - even if, formally defined, it is constructed from rational 
numbers. It was a simple, clear word that Robert Mayer once spoke (p. [81]): 
“In order to become heat, motion must cease to be motion.” One is of course 
free to continue to view heat as molecular motion, if one does not identify it 
with bound energy, so that it is no longer true that “the amount of entropy” is 
“the measure of disorder.” But the question then remains: Of what use is such a 
view of the nature of heat?
Section Nine:
Planck’s Treatment of the Concept of Entropy
1. Planck’s contributions to mathematical chemistry appear on the scene as 
the scientific realization of Horstmann’s ideas. Their very title, “On the 
Principle of the Increase of Entropy,” proclaims their connection with 
Horstmann’s essential thought. Planck has occupied himself with the principle 
of entropy in an entirely independent manner (cf. p. [150]); and he now applies 
it to chemical reactions by introducing the thermodynamic potentials only as 
combinations of quantities which appear in the analysis, and not by assigning 
them independent significance, as Helmholtz and his successors had done.
Before discussing Planck’s works on chemical reactions, it is therefore 
necessary to become acquainted with the position he takes with respect to the 
entropy function; and, for that reason, to go back to an older work by him in 
which the pure theory of entropy is established without regard to its use in 
chemistry. This older work is his treatise On the Second Law of the Mechanical 
Theory of Heat, which appeared as early as 1879 and to which we have already 
referred on p. [151].
“Let us consider any process in nature which converts a series of bodies from 
a definite initial state into a definite final state (wherein all of the bodies 
undergoing any changes through the process are always considered to be 
included in it). If we then conceive this final state given as the initial state of 

236 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
another process, two cases are possible: Either the new process can be set up in 
some way so that it gives rise to the former initial state exactly, or this cannot 
be done.
The occurrence of one case or the other evidently depends solely on the 
nature of the initial and the final states of the process first considered. We can 
therefore distinguish the two possible cases by means of the following concrete 
expression: In the first case, nature has an equal preference for the initial and 
final states, while in the second case, nature has a greater preference for the 
final state than for the initial one. For in the first case a transition is possible 
between the two states in both directions, but in the latter case only in one 
definite direction.”
“All processes in nature can be classified according to this distinction:
1. as those for whose final state nature has the same preference that it 
has for the initial one, which we shall call neutral processes; and
2. as those for whose final state nature has a greater preference than it 
has for the initial one - natural processes.”
Planck now makes the assumption - only hypothetically, to begin with - that 
there exists a definite function 5 for every state of a system of bodies, 
independently of the particular conditions of this state, whose value forms the 
measure of the preference of nature for this state. He next determines S for 
ideal gases. Naturally, the states whose S-values are to be compared must really 
be comparable’, that is, the transition from one state to the other cannot be 
accompanied by a loss of matter or of force. Instead, both states must 1. be 
comprised of the same substances in the same amounts and 2. contain equal 
quantities of intrinsic energy.
If a heavy weight is raised through a reversible change of the temperature 0 
and the volume К of a gas which exerts the pressure P, then the intrinsic energy 
of the gas increases by cdO, while the mechanical work PdV is accumulated as 
potential energy in the heavy body. The store of energy of the system consisting 
of the gas and the heavy body remains constant when
(1) 
Q = cdO + PdV.
In accordance with the equation
(2) 
PV = RO,
this condition becomes
(3) 
O = cdO+^-dV-,

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
237
that is,
(4)
„ dO ndV
° = CT + 7?V’
and this can be written as dS = 0 if one sets
(5)
Jo do dV 
dS = c- + R—,
(6)
5 = cie + RIV + Const.
The function S introduced here then has the property just demonstrated of 
not changing in a reversible process; it also increases in irreversible processes. 
That is, when it takes place without overcoming an external pressure and 
without change of temperature, the increase in volume of a gas presents itself to 
Planck as a natural process by virtue of his introducing as a new principle, 
analogous to the Carnot-Clausius principle, the empirical proposition: “A body 
cannot reduce its volume without compensation, the energy remaining con­
stant.” In this case dO — 0 and dV is positive; therefore
(7)
dS> 0.
In the case discussed above, for example, in which the quantity of heat Q 
passes from one gas to another, the entropy of the second gas increases by
<2V2K’
while that of the first decreases. More precisely, it increases by the negative 
amount
t/l 
Fi
If the volumes of the gases are kept constant during the transfer of heat, the 
total increase in entropy is therefore

238 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
O' + Cll 
t'l
e2'
However, that is equal in value to
(8)
if it is taken into consideration that Q = -c\(0\ — ^) = c2(#2 _ ^2) at constant 
volume.
Therefore, a transfer of the differential heat dQ causes the increase of entropy
(9)
which is indeed always positive, since it is identical to the transformation value 
of the quantity of heat dQ.
2. 
In order, then, to determine the value of the entropy for an arbitrary body, 
Planck introduces cyclic processes into his line of reasoning. He allows the 
body for which the entropy function is to be determined to run through a cyclic 
process, and imagines as heat reservoirs gases which release or absorb heat at 
constant volume. If such a gas releases the heat dQ at the temperature 0, and 
thereby becomes warmer by —dO, then, according to (5), its entropy increases 
Ьу-^=-^ •
Together with the heat reservoirs from which it absorbs heat or to which it 
imparts it, and an arbitrary mechanism to which it provides or from which it 
receives work, the body carrying out the cyclic process forms a system that 
undergoes no change in matter or energy. Since the latter also holds for the 
working substance considered by itself, if only its states at the beginning and 
the end of the cyclic process are considered, only the entropy changes in the 
heat reservoirs should be taken into consideration. And, since these are gases, 
the total entropy value of the process is 
(10)
(11)

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
239
in which the summation must be extended over all of the heat reservoirs. In the 
case of reversible cyclic processes, however, в is also the temperature of the 
working substance; and, on the other hand,
(12)
dQ = dE + PdV
can be represented only through states of this working substance. Therefore,
(13)
dQ _ Г dE + PdV 
e
when the integral is extended over all of the states which the body in question 
runs through during a reversible cyclic process. Hence, ^dE+E is a total
differential. If it is set equal to dS,
(14)
dE + PdV 
ds‘—0—
the function S satisfies not only the condition of not changing in the case of 
neutral processes, but also that of increasing in the case of natural ones. To 
prove this, Planck once again has recourse to his principle according to which a 
natural process is carried out when a body expands with dE = 0 - thus, for 
example, adiabatically without overcoming an external pressure. For dV > 0 
and dE = 0, dS becomes positive. For ideal gases, of course, equation (14) 
passes over into equation (5).
3. 
I have recounted here in some detail Planck’s manner of treating the 
concept of entropy, even though to date it has not provided any stimulus to 
further work in this direction. But the difficulties with the concept of entropy 
are so formidable that any attempt to master them deserves special notice. At a 
time when it was believed that these difficulties could be eliminated through a 
mechanical interpretation of the concept of entropy, Planck had the indepen­
dence to overcome them in a purely energetic manner. For what manner of 
treatment is more deserving of this name than the plan to derive entropy 
directly from our most universal experiences of the processes of nature? Or the 
attempt to place a new principle alongside - or even in place of - the Carnot- 
Clausius principle of classical thermodynamics, and thereby to give expression 
to the analogy that exists among the forms of energy? To be sure, a peculiar 
irony of historical development has ordained that the man who once entered 
the lists with such a purely energetic program sixteen years later denied 
energetics, with quite unnecessary pathos, in its hour of peril. Perhaps 
energetics remains more faithful to him than he to it.
By no means do I wish to maintain, however, that Planck solved the problem 

240 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
he had set for himself. It is not at all obvious that S is the only function which 
measures the preference of nature for one or the other among given thermally 
different states. Moreover, the principle he would like to introduce is hardly 
comparable to the Carnot-Clausius principle in persuasive force. Planck 
himself has conceded this, by replacing his earlier principle with another one 
in his recently published Thermodynamics^ one that corresponds to the 
Carnot-Clausius principle - or, rather, to Thomson’s principle (pp. [136] and 
[155]), which is equivalent to it. He formulates this new principle in the words: 
“It is impossible to construct a periodically functioning engine which produces 
no effect other than the raising of a weight and the cooling of a heat reservoir.”
The older principle of Planck could perhaps be replaced by the empirical 
result - precisely equivalent to Carnot’s principle - that volume energy can 
pass by itself only from higher to lower pressure. And in other respects, as well, 
the older ideas of Planck deserve to be preserved from oblivion, if only as useful 
pedagogical aids for understanding the entropy principle.
The anthropomorphic “preference of nature” invented to illustrate entropy is 
reminiscent, incidentally, of the ideas of Zollner,48
 49 published not long before 
the appearance of Planck’s work, about the sensation of pleasure associated 
with the transition of potential into kinetic energy and the repugnance 
associated with the opposite transition.
48 Planck, Thermodynamik (Leipzig 1897), pp. 80ff.
49 Zollner, Natur der Kometen (Leipzig 1872), p. 326.
50 Planck, Thermodynamik (Leipzig 1897), p. 77.
4. Planck’s definitions of reversible and irreversible processes cannot be 
termed an advance. “A process,” he says,  “which can in no way at all be 
made to go completely backwards is called irreversible, all other processes 
reversible. Hence, for a process to be irreversible, it is not sufficient that it 
cannot be directly reversed - that is also the case with many mechanical 
processes which are not irreversible - but it is required that, even utilizing all 
the reagents present in nature, there is no way of restoring everywhere the 
initial state exactly, once the process has run its course.”
50
We must beware of according demonstrative force to this conception from 
the proposition that state В of the world succeeds state A and that A does not, 
in turn, also succeed B. The proposition in question has nothing to do with this 
claim about the order of the world, although it might appear so judging from 
Planck’s earlier designation of irreversible processes as “natural processes,” a 
designation he has of course abandoned. For Planck must obviously consider 
the case in which a body or a system of bodies can be transformed, at our 
pleasure, from state A into state В or state B\ To achieve the one end, we must 
proceed differently, utilizing different reagents, than we do to achieve the other 
end; but it is possible for us to realize both intentions, in accordance with our 
choice. In the order of the world, however, such a choice is precluded, because 
we ourselves, together with our volition, are a part of the system which is 
passing from state A into state B.

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
241
But if the connection with the order of the world is abandoned, then Planck’s 
principle appears extremely dubious and unpractical. There is evidently no 
clear logical reason why it should not be possible, by means of appropriate 
devices, to take state В or B' back into state A. Planck himself states this 
explicitly: “Considered purely logically, it is indeed quite conceivable that one 
day a means may be discovered through whose application a process hitherto 
assumed to be irreversible could successfully be made to go completely 
backwards.” But how, then, are we to determine from experience whether the 
initial state is “everywhere” restored or not? Even in the case of relatively 
simple processes, distant things become involved - the earth, for example, in all 
processes influenced by gravity. And why the longwindedness, which sacrifices 
all elementary simplicity and clarity? What in the world does Planck accom­
plish by giving up the classical definition of reversibility?
Section Ten:
Planck’s Thermochemistry
1. Planck then applies the principle of the increase of entropy to a system of 
bodies in which the common temperature 0 and pressure P prevail.51 The 
system consists of arbitrarily many homogeneous contiguous bodies - or 
phases, in Gibbs’s terminology. Let the first of these bodies be composed of a 
number of chemically simple or complex substances having the molecular 
weights m, m\, mi... Let it contain n • m grams (or n moles) of the first of these 
substances, n\ • m\ grams of the second, and so on. In the second body let 
n' 'mf n\ • ntj... be the quantities of the same component parts, etc.
Wied. Ann. 30, 31, 32, 44 (1887-1891). Vorlesungen uber Thermodynamik (Leipzig 1897).
Now if 5, S', S"... are the entropies of the individual phases, and a is the 
entropy of the surrounding medium, then the principle of entropy increase 
requires that every possible change of the system satisfy the condition
(15)
bS 4- 6S' + 6S" + ... + да > 0,
since, of course, as application of the principle demands, the system together 
with its environment undergoes no change of intrinsic energy or of amounts of 
substance. If the heat given off from the surrounding medium to the system is 
bQ, then
and, according to the energy law (12), when V represents the volume and 
E its intrinsic energy,
51

242 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(17) 
=
Hence
(18)
If the sum £ + S' + ... is then represented by ^2 we have
(19)
6E + P67
>0,
or in expanded form
(19b)
1ЭЕ
0d0
0 90 J + [&P OdP 0OPj
IdE
0 dn
bn + ...}> 0.
The factors of 89 and 8P vanish. For in the case of changes of a body which 
do not change its material composition, hence in changes only of temperature 
and pressure,
(20)
,e dE + PdV 
ds =----- ------
in comformity with equation (14).
Planck now introduces the auxiliary function 
(21)
E + PV = Ф,
which is closely related to the thermodynamic potential H at constant pressure 
and temperature (formula (13), p. [208]). Ф is -H/0. As a result of Duhem’s 
formulas (7), (10) and (4) (p. [229-30]), the function Ф is also closely related to 
the uncompensated transformation N. With the help of Ф, equation (19b) 
changes into

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
243
(22)
0Ф
+... 
on\
>0.
( dn
The function Ф therefore increases in all material changes of the system. 
Equilibrium against material changes thus exists when, for all possible changes 
- all virtual changes 6n
(23)
In all chemical reactions, the changes dn of the molar numbers are 
proportional to small whole numbers z>, which are known stoichiometrically 
and which may be called conversion numbers. When they are utilized, the 
condition of equilibrium becomes
(24)
In addition, it is noteworthy that for each individual phase
дФ Jn дФ 
^м + аё‘1р’ (dS 
l ЭЕ 
PdV} 
E + PV
l до о do o do Jde + o1
(dS 
\dE 
PdV\ 
V
[aP 
OdP 
OdP) 
0dP'
and, therefore, once again taking into consideration equation (14),
(25)
дФЕ + PVG 
дФ _ V
~д0~ & “ 02’ 
dP~~l'
in which G was introduced for the thermodynamic potential at constant 
pressure, as it was earlier on p. [208].
We certainly cannot discern any advance on Duhem, not to mention Gibbs, 
in this derivation of equation (24) from the entropy principle. That the 
derivatives with respect to 0 and P behave differently than those with respect 
to n makes the development unedifyingly stilted from the outset. But, more 
than anything, the entropy a of the surrounding medium seems to me 
extremely questionable. Is the surrounding medium in a state of equilibrium 

244 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
before - or, indeed, after - the change of the system? In what sense, then, 
should we speak of its entropy? It may very well be the case that the quantity 
бег, which is the only one involved, has a negligibly small influence; but that 
does not affect the objections to calculating with a quantity which cannot be 
rigorously defined.
2. We shall therefore adhere to Gibbs’ formula (13) (p. [208]), which is 
completely unobjectionable, instead of to equation (24). If 0 and P denote the 
temperature and pressure prevailing in the system, and if each of the substances 
able to increase in a phase can also decrease in it and is thus a real component - 
as Planck, apparently, tacitly assumes - then (13) becomes
(26) d^H=d-es + PV) = Y,{-sd0 + vdp
+ П mdn + П1 m\ dn\ + ...}.
To begin with, it can be inferred from this equation that the chemical 
intensities related to the mole as unit of mass may be set as
(27)
„ ЭН 
dH
»'П = —, 
7И]П1=—
on 
ОП\
Since, in addition, d H = 0 at constant temperature and pressure in a 
system isolated against the exchange of matter, and dO and dP are also equal to 
zero in each individual phase of the system, there follows
(28) 
52(П mdn ■*" Hintidni +...)= 0,
v- (дН , ЭН 
) л
(29) 
7 — dn + —— 
+ 
=0,
( on 
ОП\ 
)
(30)
It will thus be appropriate in our further exposition of Planck’s investiga­
tions to set out, not as he does, from the function Ф and formula (24), but from 
equation (30), developed here from essentially Gibbsian premises.
These further investigations of Planck - his derivation of empirical chemical 
facts from theory - were, however, a very significant step. Planck was the first 
to derive from the entropy principle, in accordance with a uniform method, all 

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
245
of the propositions concerning gas mixtures and dilute solutions which had 
been determined experimentally at that time by means of physical chemistry. In 
so doing, moreover, he made use of a new and valuable concept, that of 
concentration. Where his formulas conform to those of Gibbs, they have 
nevertheless assumed a simpler and more transparent shape. It must be noted 
here, of course, that Gibbs’ theory precedes most of these empirical determina­
tions and thus portrays the most general form of the results. After the 
completion of the experiments - accomplished principally by Raoult - 
simplifications were allowed which were sufficient to describe what is now 
matter-of-fact.
To follow through, then, with Planck’s line of reasoning - but based on 
equation (30), instead of (24) - let us refer to the energy, entropy, volume and 
thermodynamic potential of one mole at constant 0 and P by e, s, v and h. We 
shall first consider the simplest case, that in which none of the phases 
undergoes any change of substance, so that only a single n applies to each. 
Then, for each one
(31) H = n • h = n(e - Os + Pv), = h — e — Os + Pv. 
on
and equation (30) becomes
(32)
vh + v'h' -F ... = 0.
If the temperature changes, the state of equilibrium characterized by this 
equation changes in a manner such that
(dh dhdPy ,(<№_ dh^dP}
+l/ ITw + 1ур1юJ +
But now, from (31),
(33)
dh 
dh
dfT~s' dp~+v'
Therefore, the displacement of equilibrium satisfies the condition 
(34)
vs + vs + .
dP 
d0

246 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
or, taking into consideration (32), the equation
(35) ve + v'e' + ... + P(yv + v'v' + ...) = 
+ p'v' + •••)•
And that is the generalization of the established formula of Clapeyron, as 
Horstmann had already applied it to chemical processes. To the left stands the 
development of heat occurring in the reaction at constant pressure; and, with 
reference to Gibbs’ formula (12) (p. [208]), e + Pv could be referred to as g. The 
left side of formula (35), or Y^vg, is the difference in energy at constant 
pressure, given in terms of the conversion numbers z/, that is undergone by the 
system during the reaction.
3. Following Planck, we shall also treat the case, first calculated in detail by 
Gibbs, in which the system consists of a single phase that is a mixture of gases. 
If c, ci, e2 • •. are the specific heats per mole of the components at constant 
volume, then
(36)
Б = n(c0 + q) + n\(c\0 + q\) + ...,
in which q,q\... represent constants. Moreover,
(37) 
S = ns + n\S\ + ...;
and, from equation (6) (p. [237]), we have
(38)
s = clO + RqIv 4- A,
where к denotes a constant, v is the volume of one mole, and Rq is a gas 
constant. It is here, then, that Planck introduces his concept of concentration.
If the partial pressures of the gaseous components of the mixture filling the 
volume V with pressure P are called p,p\,..., then
(39) 
pV = nR(& piV = niRQ0, p2V = n2RQ0,..., 
in which Rq has the same value
(40) 
Ro = 832 x 105 
= 1.96
v ’ 
°C °C

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
247
for all gases, in conformity with Avogadro’s law. 
By addition it follows that
(41)
PV=(n + nl+...)Ro0;
therefore,
(42) 
=------ ------- = C, =------- П------- =C,,...,
P « + «i+... 
P « + «i + ...
and Planck calls each such quotient - the ratio of the partial pressure to the 
total pressure, or the ratio of the molar number of a component to the total 
molar number of the mixture - the concentration of the component in the 
mixture. Since 
(43)
it follows that
V — nv — «ivi = ...,
n n 
R f)
(44a) s = clO + Rf)l-£- + k, S}=cJO + Rol-±— + kl,...
г C 
P Ci
and
' S = n{(c + Ro)ie - ROIP - ROIC + k'}
(44b) 
+«1{(C1 + R0)ie - ROIP - RolC + k\}
By this means, finally,
(45)
H = n(e - Os + pv) + «i (e - 0s\ + p\ vj) + ... 
= E - OS + PV = E - OS + RoO(n + m + ...)
is known, namely
(46)
' H = n{(c + Ro)0 - (c + Ro)OlO + RoOlP + R001C + q - Ok'}
< +ni{(pi + Ro)O - (ci + Ro)OlO + RoOlP + RoOlCi + q} - Ok)}

248 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
We calculate from this, and have, when we set
v + v\ + . •. = N,
(47)
vq + v\q\ + • • • = A, 
vk + V[k\ + ... = К, 
„ vc + PjCj + ... = Г,
the result
(Г + 7?qN)0 - (Г + P0N)6W + A0N6»/P 
+R^l{Cv ■ C"1 ...} + A = 0K = 0,
klI„ A 1 к
-N/P- ~^~n + 
Ko U Ko
(48)
= -^+^-n/p + 7.
V
The formula is slightly simplified when, owing to the known properties of 
gases, Г can be ignored.
4. Planck makes the transition from gas mixtures to dilute solutions in the 
following manner. In a highly dilute solution, the concentration of each 
dissolved component is very slight, so that
(49) E — ne + n\e\ + «2^2 + . • •, V = nv + n\+ «2^2 + • • •,
if higher powers are ignored; and now the quantities e, ei,... and v, vi,... 
depend only on temperature and pressure. Here e and v denote the energy and 
volume of 1 mole of the solvent, while e\ vi may also depend on the solvent as 
well as the dissolved substances. Furthermore, if the entropy of a mole when it 
alone is present - hence, in unit concentration - is called s*, then, in accordance 
with formula (44a),
(50)
s — s* — RqIC, si = 
— RqIC\ ,...

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
249
Thus, for gases
(51) 
H = n{h* + Rq61C} + nx{h\ + Rq01Cx} + ...,
in which 
represent the free energies at constant pressure and
temperature which a mole would possess if it were present in unit concentra­
tion, so that A*, Ap ... are therefore functions of pressure and temperature.
Formula (51) can now be shown to be valid not only for gases, but in general. 
To this end, Planck imagines changing the pressure and temperature of the 
phase, whereby only the quantities Л*, h\,... and 0 change, but not the Cs. His 
manner of reasoning is not entirely satisfactory. But it can be shown52 that 
when the chemical intensity П with respect to a mole of each component - and 
the bracketed contents of equation (51) stand for nothing more than the 
chemical intensities with respect to a mole (cf. formula (18) on p. [209] or 
formula (27) above) - depends only on the concentration of the same 
component, in addition to the pressure and temperature, then the expression
Helm, Mathematische Chemie (Leipzig 1894), p. 77.
dC
must have the same value for all components. This expression is Rq0 for a 
gaseous component. Hence, it is of such a magnitude for all the components of 
a phase, if any one of them can be regarded as gaseous.
According to this conception, equation (51) would not be valid in general, 
but would presuppose a suitable assumption about the different components in 
the phase. And, in fact, conclusions drawn from it are confirmed experimen­
tally only in the case of highly dilute solutions and, more widely, as far as the 
ionization hypothesis extends. From equation (51), by virtue of the same 
reasoning that led from (46) to (48), the product of concentrations
cv • cp • C^2...
must be a function of temperature and pressure; and the choice of components 
is in no way limited by the calculational foundations given above. Thus, in a 
mixture containing water, one could take this as a component just as much as 
its elementary components; and in a saline solution, NaCl could be taken for a 
component just as well as Na and Cl. However, if it is required that each of the 
components must be chosen such that that its chemical influence, given by the 
chemical intensity П may depend only on the concentration in which it appears, 
along with 0 and P, and not on the concentrations of the secondary 
components, then the freedom of choice of components is limited such as it 
seems to be in accordance with experience.
52

250 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Indeed, when we divest the ionization hypothesis of its atomistic garb, there 
is nothing left but a peculiar choice of components, which essentially pursues 
the standpoint of making the gas laws applicable to non-gaseous phases as well. 
There then results, in the way already carried out for gases, the law
(52)
/((T'CpC"2...) = - (z//z* + v\h\ +...)
which Guldberg and Waage have established experimentally.
The temperature-pressure function appearing on the right of this equation 
also has the properties discovered by van’t Hoff.53 That is, from equation (33),
van’t Hoff, Lois de lequilihre chimique (Stockholm 1886).
+ ... vs + p\Si + ...
’ ~+ 
RoO2 
1 
RoO
(53)
v(e + Pv) + v\ (ej + Pvi) + ...
“+ 
RO02
_ t'g + z/igi + ... 
G
+ Ro02 
RoO2’
in which g denotes the free energy for one component at constant pressure, but 
in which G is the change in this free energy taking place during the reaction in 
the whole system.
5. To conclude I shall also give Planck’s treatment of the changes of 
aggregation of highly dilute solutions. Let ... moles of salts of different 
nature be dissolved in n moles of water, and let the liquid phase composed 
thereof be in contact with n' moles of vapor or ice. The concentration
(n + И1 + Л2 + . . .)
is close to 1. The concentrations of the salts are very weak; the concentration of 
the solid or, as the case may be, gaseous water is
C = 1.
For a change in aggregation of one mole of water - the only chemical change 
that is possible in the system - we have the conversion numbers
V = — 1, Щ = Z/2 = • • • = 0, v' = +1.
53

THE ENERGETIC TREATMENT OF CHEMISTRY
251
Therefore, in accordance with (30) and (51), the condition of equilibrium 
becomes
-(Л* + Rq01C) + /г'* = 0, Rq01C = h'* - h\
Because C is close to 1, the following is sufficiently precise:
(54) 
~ h'* = c - 1 = 
+ ... = ли 4- + ...
Rq6 
n + П\ + П2 + ... 
n
Now, according to Taylor’s theorem
(55) 
h* = h0 + j JP - Po), h’* = h'o + ] (P - Po),
hold where ho and hf0 denote the values that h* and A'*, respectively, assume for 
P = Pq. Thus ho = Aq, and Po is understood to be the vapor pressure of pure 
water at the temperature prevailing in the system. Taking (33) into considera­
tion, we have
(56) 
=
n 
Kqu
With the well-known neglects,
(56b) 
»?..+ ^ + -=£^
v 7 
n 
PQ 
follows for the case of vaporization.
Of course, the case in which only one salt was brought into the solution, but 
which is molecularly divided and thus reacts with a greater number of moles 
than would be the case without dissociation, is also encompassed by this 
formula. In this connection, Planck was the first to emphasize that Arrhenius’ 
hypothesis satisfactorily explains deviations from observations of the antici­
pated relative lowering of vapor pressure.

PART SIX:
THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
Section One :
The Development of Energetics in its Different Fields of 
Application
1. If the actual task of this book were to give an account of the dissemination 
of the ideas of energy, I would have to describe in the most detailed manner the 
development of that great field of science and technology in virtue of which the 
culture of our time differs so strikingly from that of thirty years ago. That field 
is electricity and electrotechnology, where energetics has had its widest influ­
ence. It is not only that the indestructibility of energy has turned out to be the 
stable pole in the rich series of phenomena that electrics discloses to us, that it 
alone has established fixed quantitative relations among the ponderomotive, 
electromotive and magnetic processes which can be transformed into one 
another. To no less an extent, the development of heat through electric currents, 
the reversible relations between thermocurrents and the Peltier phenomenon, 
as well as the irreversible Joule heat, have long been regarded as shining 
examples of the general energetic laws treated by thermodynamics. Above all, 
however - and, from the standpoint of Robert Mayer, this must be given the 
utmost emphasis - electricity swept away that part of the old concept of force 
which regards force as what is primary, as an independent cause existing prior 
to and alongside its effect; and electrotechnics inoculates broad circles of 
researchers with the new monistic point of view.
The change in intensity of two currents is bound to the mutual positions of 
these currents. What is cause here, what is effect? The reciprocity of the relation 
is so striking and important that it seems entirely inappropriate to talk about 
cause and effect; rather, a relationship exists, in consequence of which one 
phenomenon decreases in favor of the other or increases at its expense. It is 
these energetic viewpoints, suggested by Lenz’s law, that Franz Neumann 
pursues as early as 1845 in his treatment of the phenomena of induction.1
1 Mach, Warmelehre, p. 318.
Despite this considerable emphasis on the ideas of energy, which electricity 
has been instrumental in spreading to wider audiences, we nevertheless do not 
need to treat in detail its electrical applications in our historical development of 
the theory of energy. For energetics in this field has in fact unfolded laterally, but 
253

254 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
has not become more profound. It has not added new rungs here or gained 
fundamentally new points of view, as in its chemical applications, but only 
demonstrated the power of its ability. Indeed, electricity has even been able to 
confine itself essentially to the first law, to the conservation of energy, and has 
only seldom had occasion to display its more difficult and special features. To the 
extent that this nonetheless occurred, our survey will naturally also consider it; 
but a contextual, summary exposition of electrical energetics, similar to our 
presentation of energetic chemistry, does not seem to be necessary.
2. Energetics has also proven to have a lasting influence in the area of 
physiology, where, of course, it demonstrably had its source in the genius of 
Robert Mayer. It can be seen from Fick’s  excellent presentation how the 
results of the physiology of muscular activity can be expressed energetically. 
And, recently, the generally still somewhat disreputable name of energetics is 
also being employed in biology - apparently to denote an exact, mathematical- 
physical conception, and yet, at the same time, expressly to reject being 
restricted to a purely mechanical treatment of the processes of life. So here, 
too, energetics is used in conscious opposition to mechanics.
2
3
2 Fick, Mechanische Arbeit und Warmeentwicklung bei der Muskelthatigkeit (Leipzig 1882). 
Recently replaced in this field of energetic inquiry by Henry, C.R. 122 (1896), p. 1360, and by 
Chauveau in various places (see C.R. 122, 123, 125).
3 Pfeffer,“Studien zur Energetik der Pflanze,” Leipzig. Abh. 18 (1892); Hueppe, “Uber die 
Ursachen der Garungen und Infektionskrankheiten,” Berl. klin. Wochenschr. (1893); and 
Griesbach, Energetik und Hygiene des Nervensystems in der Schule (Munich and Leipzig, 1895).
4 Rodewald, Untersuchungen fiber die Quellung der Starke (Kiel and Leipzig 1896).
5 Lasswitz, “Die moderne Energetik in ihrer Bedeutung fur die Erkenntniskritik,” Philos. 
Monatshefte 29 (1893); “Uber psychophysische Energie und ihre Faktoren,” Arch.f. syst. Philos. 
1, p. 46. Carriere, Abh. Munch. Akad. Philos. KI. 19 (1892). Ostwald, “Chemische Theory der 
Willensfreiheit,” Leipziger Ber. (1894).
6 Helm, Lehre von der Energie (Leipzig 1887), p. 72.
7 Ostwald, Leipziger Ber. (1891).
The energetic method should be of greater and greater importance precisely 
for physiological discussions, since it permits the determination of quantitative 
relationships without regard to imputed causes or purposes.4
As I have in this area, I shall also limit myself to calling attention to relevant 
works having to do with more philosophical attempts5 to extend energetics and 
to a single political-economic application6 of energetic ideas. To discuss them in 
detail would overstep the purpose of this book, the intent of which is to develop 
only the final, main precepts of energetics.
Mention may be made here of Ostwald’s suggestion7 to replace the unit of 
mass with the unit of energy in our system of fundamental units for physical 
measurements, thereby also bringing a new external form to the internal 
transformation of our ways of looking at things.
3. 
Up to now, of course, the strongest side of energetics with respect to its 
applications has still remained in thermodynamics. Cosmological problems, 
such as those that interested Robert Mayer so keenly, and which later found 

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
255
an ingenious proponent in Ritter, were joined by meteorological applications. 
The changes in state which occur in a moist air mass when its vertical elevation 
changes - and, in general, the changes of which a mixture of atmospheric air 
with water is capable in its different states of aggregation - became accessible 
to theoretical treatment only on a thermodynamic basis. Above all, however, 
thermotechnics has remained the uncontested field of energetic methodology 
ever since Clausius and Rankine carried through their methods by making use 
of the steam engine. Since 1860, mainly under Zeuner’s leadership, advances of 
technology in the construction of heating motors and refrigerating machines 
could also be judged by the principles of thermodynamics quite as a matter of 
course.
To measure the comparative efficiency of a steam engine,8 it is not reasonable 
to compare the work performed by the machine with the heat supplied to it. 
The comparison of steam engines with one another, and with motors of 
another kind, becomes more appropriate and more instructive when it is taken 
into account that even the theoretical ideal of a heat engine, determined by the 
temperatures of the heat input and departure, is only able to transform into 
work a fraction of the heat supplied to it. When the engine under consideration 
is compared with one that carries out a Carnot process between the attainable 
temperatures of the boiler and the condenser, a criterion of efficiency is 
obtained which is completely analogous to that utilized in the case of other 
engines - a water-power plant, for example. Indeed, Zeuner’s general compar­
ison of gravity with thermal effects proceeds exactly from this analogy, which 
later we shall come to know as one of the originating points of the intensity law 
and, thus, of the modern form of energetics.
8 Zeuner, Mechanische Warmetheorie, end. ed. (Leipzig 1866), p. 225. Zeuner, Techn. Thermo- 
dynamik (Leipzig 1887-90), p. 283 and II, p. 383.
9 Civilingenieur (1896), p. 665. Cf. also Lorentz, Die Grenzwerte der thermodynamischen 
Energieumwandlung (Diss. Munchen 1895).
10 Diesel, Theorie und Konstruktion eines rationellen Warmemotors zum Ersatz der Dampfmachinen 
(Berlin 1893).
In the use of superheated vapors, of course, it often happens that a Carnot 
process between the temperatures being used is ruled out, since it would require 
the observance of conditions which cannot in any way be realized technically. 
But Zeuner has explained in a recent publication9 how, even then, the principle 
of assessing the efficiency of a machine by comparing it to what is achievable 
under given conditions is applicable.
Thermodynamics was also able to follow new directions in the perfection of 
heat engines which unite the process of combustion and the work process. By 
bringing thermochemical data into play, it was able to advance these efforts - 
indeed, to develop immediately a general theory of combustion - by taking into 
account the working capacities appearing in the process.10
It may afford those who have preached the worthlessness of energetics some 
stimulus to reflection that the question of whether galvanic elements, or steam 
engines, or dynamo engines, or muscles work more profitably, and of how their 
comparative efficiency is to be measured, can be formulated precisely and led in

256 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
the direction of an answer only when we start from the basis provided by 
energetics.
Section Two :
Energy Law and Energy Principle
1. The theoretical founders of energetics, Robert Mayer and Helmholtz, set 
out from essentially mechanical points of view, and, in fact, further developed 
the way of thinking deployed in the applied mechanics of Poncelet. But from 
1850 on, energetics turned to the theory of heat and followed Joule, its 
experimental founder. The connection with mechanics - in which, after all, 
are to be found the strongest historical roots of energetics - was then so little 
used in its further development that when I tried a new twist from this direction 
a decade ago, it was initially answered with silence. Then, at Lubeck, it evoked 
the agitation that, as we have seen, anger at the disruption of customary ways 
of thought has so often produced in the history of energetics.
At the same time in which energetics was founded, however, developments 
had taken place in the domain of mechanics itself which really allowed the 
relations between mechanics and energetics to again stand out prominently and 
appear in a new light.
Until Poncelet’s principle of work, after all, there had been only three 
propositions of mechanics out of which the energetics of Mayer and Helmholtz 
had grown: first, the principle of virtual work or displacements - the old golden 
rule of mechanics; second, the principle of the conservation of kinetic energy in 
elastic impact; and third, the thesis that the increase in kinetic energy is equal 
to the mechanical work. But around the year 1840, not only does energetics - a 
new scientific view about the nature of force - grow out of these sources, but a 
rich formal mathematical development also unfolds on the same ground. The 
introduction of the potential function by Green and Gauss, as well as 
Hamilton’s works on the differential equations of dynamics and their compre­
hension by means of the calculus of variations, agree in one very striking point 
with the first development of energetics: They show the fundamental impor­
tance of the two functions which Thomson and Rankine then called “potential” 
and “kinetic” energy. In the energetics of Thomson and Rankine, the physical 
side of these fundamental equations stands out; in the theoretical mechanics of 
Green, Gauss and Hamilton, the mathematical side.
But with this development, the relationship also seemed to be exausted. Any 
more intimate connection was prevented by the fact that potential and kinetic 
energy are linked only as a sum in the law of the conservation of energy and the 
views of energetics to which it gives rise, while the calculus of variations allows 
mechanical processes to be dependent on differences of the same functions.
That is, let the equations
(1)
mX' = X, my" = Y, mz" = Z,

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS 257 
be the differential equations for the motion of a mass point whose mass is m, 
subject to a force with the components XYZ at the time t in the point xyz of a 
rectangular, absolutely fixed coordinate system, but which otherwise is subject 
to no geometrical restrictions on its mobility.
To arrive at the conservation of energy from these equations, they must be 
multiplied by У, y' and z', respectively, and then added. There follows
m(x"dx + y"dy + z"dz) = Xdx + Ydy + Zdz. 
(mx" — X)dx + (my" — Y)dy + (mz" - Z)dz = 0,
(2)
4 [|w(%'2+y2 + z'2) 
dt 2
= Ax' + Yy' + Zz';
or, when kinetic energy is introduced,
(3) 
T = |m(x/2+y  + z' ),
2
2
and
(4) 
dT = Xdx + Ydy + Zdz.
However, if the same equations (1) are multiplied by the arbitrary infinitesi­
mal amounts, fix, fiy.fiz, and are then added, there results, to begin with, 
d’Alembert’s principle:
(5) 
(mx" - X)fix + (my" - Y)fiy + (mz" - Z)fiz = 0.
Furthermore,
(6) 
x"fix = (x'fix) - <5(|-x' )2
can be affirmed. Accordingly, there now follows
(7)
{m(x'fix + y'fiy + z'fiz)} — fiT = Xfix + Yfiy 4- Zfiz.

258 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
If after multiplication by dt, an integration is now performed, and the 
variation in the integral is understood to be a so-called “internal variation” - 
that is, one which does not alter the limits of the integral - there follows
(8) 
-6 Г Tdt= Г (X6x + Yfy + Zbz).
J to 
J to
At the moment, it is of no importance that the right sides of equations (4) 
and (8) are simplified when the force components XYZ can be represented as 
derivatives of a potential energy function
(9)
dV y=-— 7=- — - 
dx ' 
dy ’ 
dz ’
nor is it important that the works X8x + Y fry + Z8z of such forces normal to 
the displacements vanish, and thus, in particular, express mechanically any 
geometrical (time-free) conditions. What is important is only the difference in 
sign. We can return to equation (5) from equation (8); and, since 8x, by, bz may 
be chosen at random, (5) separates into equations (1). In general, however, 
there is no way back to (1) from (4), because dx,dy,dz are not completely 
arbitrary, but are equal to x,dt,y'dt and z'dt\ thus, only dt can be chosen at 
random. Equation (4) is sufficient to derive (1), of course, only in the case of a 
single variable, so that, as is well known, in all problems regarding motions 
with a single degree of freedom, the law of the conservation of energy suffices 
for the solution.
2. An energetic grounding of mechanics can be based on the last observation 
via a line of reasoning presented by Thomson and Tait.11 They employ an 
axiom that is also much used elsewhere in laying the foundations of mechanics, 
namely the proposition that The equilibrium of a system whose points are subject 
to any given restrictions in motion is not disturbed by the imposition of further 
restrictions on the freedom of motion of the points. Since any freedom of motion 
can then be reduced to one degree of freedom by adding such conditions, 
equilibrium in general exists when it exists for any possible freedom of motion 
having a single degree of freedom. From this axiom, accordingly, the principle 
of virtual velocities then proceeds from the energy law valid for a single degree 
of freedom, to which dAlembert’s principle - and with it the equations of 
motion - can then be added in different ways to be discussed further below.
Thomson and Tait, Treatise on Natural Philosophy, I (Cambridge 1890), p. 266.
The axiom used in this procedure accomplishes essentially the same thing as 
the principle of reciprocal action with which Helmholtz had once disposed of 
the objection of Lipschitz (p. [95]). By means of rigid connections, in fact, any 
и

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
259
conditions can be imposed on movement which leave one point of the system 
unrestricted in its freedom of motion, but fix other points with respect to it. 
However, as can easily be seen, the forces resulting from the condition of 
constant distance satisfy the principle of reciprocal action.
The train of thought leading to the principle of virtual motions would thus 
go approximately as follows: If an arbitrary system is in a state of rest, then it 
should be seen to, by means of appropriate geometric restrictions on its 
mobility, that it has only one degree of freedom. Then there is equilibrium 
when, for the motion still possible,
Y^(Xdx + Ydy + Zdz) = 0.
On the other hand, motion occurs when the differential dT of equation (4) 
turns out positive, thus when
YJjdx + Ydy + Zdz) > 0.
Moreover, should the only motion still possible be open to the system only in 
one direction, and not in the opposite one as well, the condition of equilibrium 
would be
Y^Xdx + Ydy + Zdz) < °-
By dax, day and daz9 we now wish to understand the projections of a path 
element da allowed to the point xyz, in accordance with the conditions of the 
problem, which thus can be made into the only path element open to it by 
adding further conditions. For any possible change a, then, it is a condition of 
equilibrium that
y^(Xdax + Yday 4- Zdaz) < 0,
and a condition of motion12 that
Cf. C. Neumann, Leipziger Berichte (1879), p. 53.
y^(Xdax 4- Yday 4- Zdaz) > 0.
12

260 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
The matter is therefore relatively simple. The actual difficulties show 
themselves only in dynamics and are based primarily on the fact that kinetic 
energy, in addition to being dependent on the parameters of the system, also 
depends on their derivatives with respect to time. There thus arises the question 
of how the change daT of the kinetic energy can be determined in the event that 
only the motion a is free.
3. When no force acts on a freely mobile point,
x"6x + yf,Sy + z"6z = 0
follows from d’Alembert’s principle for this case; and that follows, for all 
arbitrary 6x, 6y, 6z, only when the law of inertia
x" = 0, y” = 0, z” = 0
holds.
In this case, on the other hand,
x"dx + y”dy 4- z"dz = 0
or
x"x' + /У + z"z' = 0
follows from (2) or (4); that is, the acceleration is perpendicular to the velocity. 
The law of the conservation of energy would even be satisfied if any given 
velocity imparted to a point, or supervening in the course of the ensuing 
motion, caused an acceleration which was at right angles to it. This result is 
physically nonsensical, of course, since acceleration is not at all determined by 
the requirement that it be perpendicular to the velocity; and no attention has 
been paid to it in the history of energetics. But it does show, in any case, that the 
equations of motion, and equations (5) or (8), cannot be derived from the law 
of energy conservation alone.
It follows generally from (2) that
(10) 
+ my"=Y + M, mz" = Z + N,
in which
(11) 
L=Qz'-Ry\ M = Rx'-Pzf, N = Pyf — Qxf
and P, Q and R are arbitrary quantities. L, M and N are components of a vector 
which is perpendicular to the vector P,Q,R, as well as to the velocity У,У,г', 
since, of course

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
261
(12) 
LP + MQ + NR = 0, Lx' + My' + Nz' = 0.
Again, however, it cannot be concluded from the law of the conservation of 
energy that P — Q = R = 0 and that, consequently, L = M = N = 0.
4. What emerges from these simple considerations above all, then, is the one 
point that energetics is not identical to the proposition in mechanics of the 
conservation of energy. Robert Mayer founded a new world view. Or, if this 
expression is thought to be too pretentious, he founded a new view of the course 
of nature, of the essence of force and causality.  And he was so convinced that 
this view was a comprehensive one that he obviously wanted to see the word 
“force” in its old sense eliminated. For him, and for energetics, the conservation 
of energy is not an aper^u - a property in which, as it were, in and of themselves 
completely different processes accidentally coincide - but rather the concept 
starting from which natural phenomena, including motion, can be described in a 
unified manner and understood in their fundamental nature. Energetics must 
therefore go beyond the well-established theorem of mechanics that kinetic 
energy always increases by the amount of the work performed - or it must give 
up being a view that encompasses the whole of nature.
13
13 Cf. Riehl, Der philosophische Kritizismus und seine Bedeutung fur die positive Wissenschaft, Vol.
2, Part 2 (Leipzig 1879), pp. 259f.
14 Wied. Ann. 57 (1896), p. 45.
In the domain of thermal phenomena, as well, we certainly do not get far 
with the proposition of the mechanical equivalent of heat, which corresponds 
to that of the mechanical conservation of energy. The second law must be 
introduced in order to piece together our knowledge of heat into a theoretical 
system. But, as Clausius has shown, this second law can be fit entirely into the 
Mayer-Helmholtz sphere of ideas where it appears, finally, only as the 
rendering of our knowledge of the heat differential occurring in the formula 
for the first law. Thus the task arises for energetics of forming its concepts in 
such a way that they lead beyond the law of energy conservation to encompass 
the concept of force, as well, and thereby permit the equations of motion to be 
derived. In a certain sense, Poncelet already set himself this task. Maxwell also 
concerned himself with it. And ten years ago, Planck and I took up the 
question.
5. Before I report on these attempts, however, it is necessary to repulse a 
fundamental objection which has been raised against any justification of them. 
Boltzmann  has maintained that these efforts violate the viewpoint - else­
where given the highest emphasis by energetics - of avoiding the hypothetical 
and of seeking to describe the phenomena directly. He asserts that the 
conception of bodies as systems of points, with all the tangle of internal forces 
that it requires, is, after all, entirely hypothetical, so that a single-minded 
energetics ought to avoid altogether the equations of motion of a material 
point.
14

262 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
This objection is completely invalid, however, since it is based on a 
conflation of atoms with material points. The material point, this fundamental 
concept of mechanics, does not arise from a body by ignoring it completely, or 
by disregarding its extension if at all possible,15 but rather by ignoring any 
rotational motion. When a ball rolls down an inclined plane, it descends with 
of the acceleration it would have in sliding down. It makes no difference 
whether it is an atom or a bowling ball, it cannot be regarded as a material 
point. Conversely, a celestial body can be regarded as a material point when its 
rotational motion is of no importance. If, however, we must take into 
consideration motions other than purely translational ones, we divide the 
bodies into parts - into volume elements - which again have nothing at all to 
do with atoms, with which we can then approach a material point having only 
translational motion to whatever approximation we wish.
Boltzmann, Vorlesungen uber die Prinzipe der Mechanik (Leipzig 1897), pp. 7 f.
It is thus a serious misunderstanding of the principles of mechanics when 
Boltzmann says that it has derived the equations of motion of rigid or elastic or 
fluid bodies via a “detour over the atomic hypothesis”. No, energetics does not 
need to assert that “bodies consist of material points,” as Boltzmann thinks, nor 
can any prudent account of dynamics represent the connection this super­
ficially.
6. Somewhat more troubling is the conception - which is essential to 
mechanics - of the body as an integral over translationally moving volume 
elements, of which, of course, the affinitively variable volume elements used in 
the treatment of elastic and fluid bodies are ultimately constructed. It might 
appear suspiciously unenergetic that forces have to be introduced as a 
replacement for geometrical connections. But this objection, too, has long since 
been removed by mechanics itself, before energetics even existed, and can crop 
up only because obscurities repeatedly creep into the fundamentals of me­
chanics. The geometrical connections in the differential equations of dynamics 
occasion the appearance of quantities which, in certain ways, behave analyti­
cally like physical forces. In elementary mechanics - and especially in applied 
mechanics, with its truss forces, its tensions and pressures - these quantities are 
always treated as forces of a special nature. Conversely, Hertz has designed a 
mechanics which attributes to physical forces precisely the character of those 
quantities expressing the geometrical connections. But analytical mechanics, as 
fashioned by Lagrange, keeps both conceptions open. It is familiar with 
methods that stress the similarity of those quantities to the physical forces. 
But also, and more importantly, it knows the methods by which to utilize the 
special nature of those quantities in order to eliminate them and to leave, 
finally, only the physical forces in the equations of dynamics.
It is perhaps also not superfluous to point out here that absolutely fixed 
coordinate axes, which cannot be eliminated from the foundations of me­
chanics, do not represent a relapse into the phantasm of the absolute. Their use 
does not violate the pure system of relations achievable by means of energetics.
15

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
263
It can certainly be determined by the course of motions relative to a given 
system of coordinates whether it is an absolute system.16 Or, in other words, 
certain conceivable systems of coordinates are denoted as absolute when the 
motions relative to them exhibit certain simple properties.
16 C. Neumann, Uber die Prinzipien der Galilei-Newton’schen Theorie (Leipzig 1870). Streintz, Die 
physikalischen Grundlagen der Mechanik (Leipzig 1883), p. 15.
7. In order, now, to get an overview of the attempts to date at an energetic 
conception of the dynamical equations of motion, we must start with the fact 
that in the case of the equilibrium of forces which are independent of the 
direction of motion, the law of energy conservation says essentially the same 
thing as the equations of motion or d’Alembert’s principle, which is identical to 
them. According to equations (1) or (5), no accelerations appear in the case of 
a single freely mobile point when 
(13)
X6x + YSy + Zbz = 0,
or when
(13b) 
X = 0, 
7 = 0, Z = 0.
And the kinetic energy does not change in any possible direction of motion 
when, for any possible choice of dx, dy, dz,
(14) 
Xdx+ Ydy + Zdz = Q,
(14b) 
X- V+ Y -у' + Z-z' = 0,
that is, when the force is perpendicular to the direction of the velocity. Now, if 
X, У, Z are functions only of x, y, z, and not also of У, у', У, then (14), as well as 
(13), can be satisfied only by (13b). In general, however, equation (14) is not 
sufficient to arrive at (13b). That can be reached only if it is required that not 
only the work Xdx + Ydy + Zdz performed in the direction actually taken 
vanish, but also the work performed in all possible different directions by one 
and the same force XYZ. The factors dx, dy, dz of XYZ cannot depend on the 
x^y^z' appearing in XYZ.
Thus, when a point located at xyz is displaced by the distance ds, whose 
components shall be dx, dy, dz, and in the process undergoes the effects of the 
force R with the components XYZ, a second and, indeed, arbitrary displace­
ment da must be thought of as imparted to it, whose components may be 
dax, day, daz. Moreover, it must then be required, not that

264 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Xdx -I- Ydy + Zdz = 0,
but rather that, for any arbitrary cr,
(15)
Xd„x + Yday + ZdGz — 0.
Or, in other words, not only the work
(16)
R wh>(R,s) • ds = 0
actually performed in the displacement in which the effect of R takes place, but 
also the work
(17)
R cos(R,a) - da = 0,
which would be performed by the force R if any displacement da should occur. 
Hence, in general, it will be a displacement which does not require R, but 
rather another force, since, of course, R is required only by the simple 
displacement ds. For example, if da is chosen in the x-, y-r or z-direction, each 
of the equations
(17b) R cos(JR,x) = 0, R cos(R,y) =0, R cos(i?,z) = 0 
X = 0,
Y = 0, Z = 0
would have to be satisfied - although, perhaps, if x were an actual direction of 
motion, it would in no way be the force iteos(j?x), but some new force, which 
would exert an influence.
a can be conceived of as an actual displacement, or dax, day, daz regarded as 
proportional to x',/, z', only if R is not affected by this conception, that is, only 
if X,Y,Z are independent of x7,/, z'.
Here it is not at all a question of something specifically energetic, but rather 
only of adapting the newer concepts of energetics to the old concept of force. 
What we call force simply possesses the properties of R indicated above; and if 
energetics wishes to operate with the old concept of force - which it certainly 
does not need to do in many cases - it must simply accept it.
Indeed, as long as the concept of work has been known, but especially since 
Poncelet, the condition of equilibrium (13) has been understood as work with 
respect to a possible displacement, hence, in the sense of equation (15). Or, 

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
265
always presupposing that the mobility of the point being considered is not 
subject to any geometrical constraint, fix has been understood as identical to 
dax above.
8. In recent times it has often not been understood that the mechanical 
foundation of energetics is to a much greater extent the principle of virtual 
displacements than it is the law of the conservation of energy. In recent times, 
this has frequently not been recognized. It is true that the latter law provided 
the proper measure of kinetic energy and the true measure of force, and above 
all proved to be the formula that could be transferred to all physical processes. 
But the fundamental energetic idea of indestructibility emerges much earlier 
and more clearly in the golden rule of mechanics. Above all, however, this 
golden rule - the principle of virtual displacements - has from ancient times 
been the refuge of the monistic conception of natural occurrence and decidedly 
hostile to the otherwise so popular distinction between cause and effect. It is 
not essential to the lever whether the hand or the moving weight takes hold on 
the left or the right side. For the quantitative relationship only one equation is 
essential, which found its simplest expression only lately through the concept of 
work: The sum of the works must be zero.
Moreover, if in a system of points one of them is free to carry out different 
motions, it then follows from the same basic idea that, for any possible motion 
of this point and for motions of other points connected to it for geometrical 
reasons, the sum of the works must vanish. During, and especially Mach, have 
taken enough trouble to show how more complicated equilibrium relations also 
follow from this conclusion - the line chain and the foundations of hydro­
statics, for example - that further elaborations are not needed here. Considered 
historically, therefore, it is by no means an extension of energy when it is used 
for any possible motion, and not just for the actual one. Rather, it was an 
entirely unjustified narrowing of the primordial, fundamental idea of energetics 
to use it only for the motion which actually takes place. To my knowledge, it 
was Helmholtz in his work on the conservation of force who gave rise to this 
limitation of the principle that, in Poncelet and Mayer, is unrestricted; and it 
was then silently adhered to until ten years ago.
Now it is necessary, however, to draw a sharp distinction between the two 
propositions - one that I have already held to in earlier publications. I shall 
therefore call the mechanical principle of the conservation of energy the energy 
law. But the fundamental energetic idea, that energy cannot change in any 
possible displacement, I shall call the energy principle. Then it is clear that the 
dynamical equations of motion cannot be derived from the energy law, since it 
is a consequence of them. However, the possibility indeed still remains open of 
framing the energy principle in such a way that, in its mechanical use, it is 
equivalent to the equations of motion, but without being constructed from 
ideas other than the fundamental ideas also required elsewhere in energetics.

266 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Section Three:
The Energetic Foundations of Mechanics in Poncelet, 
Maxwell, Planck, Helm
1. From the standpoint just developed, Poncelet’s principle of work (which 
was treated on p. [75]) appears as a simple procedure for interpreting 
d’Alembert’s principle energetically, namely, by means of the concept of work. 
Equilibrium exists when, for any possible displacement, the sum of all works 
vanishes. If motion ensues, this sum also vanishes when only the works 
necessary to cancel the motion that actually occurs are included in the 
calculation. However, in order to impart to a mass m at rest the velocity У in 
the direction x - that is, in order to produce the momentum mx - an impulse
(18) 
3dt — mx 
is needed, or the impulse
(19)
~dt — d(mxf),
to change its momentum in the time dt.
To cancel the acceleration mx" which is present, therefore, the force
(20)
—S = —mx”
is required. Thus, the result is that for the case of motion whose components of 
acceleration are 
and which comes about under the influence of the
force components XYZ, equilibrium must exist between the forces 
X - mx", Y - my" and Z - mz". If it is then imagined that the mass m is led, 
not in the actual direction dx, dy, dz, but in any direction that is open to it, 
d(jX = 6x, day = 6y, d(jZ = 8z, then for any such direction a the work
(21) 
(X - mx")dax + (Y — my'^d^y + (Z - mz")daz = 0 
must vanish.
2. The energetic manner in which Maxwell arrives at the equations of motion 
is entirely different from this approach.  He is concerned, of course, with 
Lagrangian differential equations of the second form, and he also seeks to 
derive the formulae for kinetic energy and impulse from fundamental energetic 
notions.
17
James Clerk Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (Oxford 1873), Volume 2, p. 184.
17

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
267
I have no reason to recount here the considerations - which are of a 
somewhat dubious and questionable character - that Maxwell offered to 
further these goals. My intent is only to state the connection of the energy 
principle with the equations of motion according to Maxwell’s theory.
What properly deserve our notice, to begin with, are the words with which 
Maxwell develops his plan for deriving the equations of motion: “Lagrange’s 
aim was to bring dynamics under the power of the calculus .... The mind is 
exercised in calculation and therefore desires to remain unmolested by 
dynamical notions. Our aim, on the other hand, is to cultivate our dynamical 
ideas. We shall therefore make use of the works of the mathematicians, and 
translate their results from the language of the calculus back into the language 
of dynamics, so that our words shall evoke the mental picture, not of certain 
algebraic processes, but rather of certain properties of moving bodies.”
“The language of dynamics has been expanded considerably by those who 
have discussed the theory of the conservation of energy in popular terms.” And 
Maxwell stresses that his explanations are influenced by the dynamics of 
Thomson and Tait, especially by their method of beginning with the theory of 
impulse.
Maxwell then imagines every mechanical system as connected by means of 
suitable mechanisms with a number of moveable pieces, each of which is able to 
move only along a straight line and is entirely independent of every other one. 
Indeed, we could now imagine that these pieces move only along the x- or y- or 
z-axis, whereas Maxwell is concerned with generalized coordinates. We shall 
also assume here something that Maxwell tries to derive from elementary 
considerations, namely, that the kinetic energy of a point is
(22) 
T =|m(x'  +y'  + z' ), 
I2
2
2
I have avoided here the impulses appearing in Maxwell, by replacing the 
impulse acting along x with mx’, for example, and its change with mx"8t.
Maxwell now writes
and that it is can change only by the amount of the work performed; thus, for 
all possible changes,
(23) 
8T = X8x + Y8y + Z8z.
The quantities appearing in (23) are functions of time, and so
(24) 
8T = m(x!x" + У/ + z'z")6t

268 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(25) 
bx = x'bt, by = bz = z’bt.
Accordingly, (23) can be represented in the form
(26) 
mx”bx + my”by -I- mz”bz = Xbx + Yby + Zbz,
which yields - since bx, by and bz are to be independent of one another - the 
equations of motion.
The same objection could properly be raised against this conclusion of 
Maxwell that Boltzmann has made against my works - that variations and 
differentials are conflated - if we forget Maxwell’s assumption that each of the 
moveable pieces can be moved independently of the others. I therefore consider 
it to be Maxwell’s opinion that by = 0, bz = 0 are to be chosen and, at the same 
time, bx = x'dt set, but chosen not equal to zero - an opinion which must be 
interpreted into equations (25), of course, to keep these equations consistent 
with the independence of bx, by and bz.
Given these reservations, it certainly seems necessary to set forth Maxwell’s 
ideas in a more careful manner; and that is what Planck and I did in 1887.
3. Planck  arrives at his energetic derivation of the equations of motion by 
simply making use of the conservation of energy of a single material point for 
each of the three directions x, y, z which are perpendicular to one another and 
absolutely fixed. Then
18
Max Planck, Das Prinzip der Erhaltung der Energie (Leipzig 1887), p. 148.
(27) 
d ^mxf2^ = Xdx, d ^тУ2^ — Ydy, 
— ^dz
or
(28) 
mx” = X, my” — У, mz” = Z.
Accordingly, the motion proceeds in such a manner as if three machines 
were active in every element of time dt - an x-, a y- and a z-machine - each of 
which is capable of admitting work and releasing it as kinetic energy to the 
moving point only in one definite direction. These three machines work 
completely independently of each other in three directions perpendicular to 
one another.
Planck does not assert this resolution only as a special property of mechanical 
energy, but accounts for it energetically - however painful that may be for him 
18

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
269
to admit today - as a property characteristic of the behavior of energy in 
general. He lays down a principle of the superposition of energies with the 
following words:19 “The energy of a material system is represented in 
accordance with experience as the sum of individual kinds of energy which 
are completely independent of one another; and so the total energy value is 
divided - conceptually, as well - into a series of individual energies each of 
which can be determined by itself. If influences are then exerted on the system 
from outside, through which energy is transferred into the system, then in 
general these influences can also be resolved into different kinds. Each kind of 
influence produces in the system a definite change in the kind of energy 
corresponding to it, so that the equation stating the connection of the change 
in the total energy with the external influences is split up into a series of 
individual equations, each of which governs the change of a definite kind of 
energy in its dependence upon a particular external influence.”
19 loc. cit., p. 127.
20 Wied. Ann. 57 (1896), p. 72.
It should be noted here that the essential part of the matter is only the 
analysis of the equation for energy - which has a purely mathematical basis (cf. 
p. [218]) - not the distinction of individual kinds of energy, which can be 
changed independently of one another, as self-sufficient components of the 
intrinsic energy. As our survey of the historical development has shown, the 
separation of kinds of energy in this sense has been attempted repeatedly 
without success. Moreover, no one has expressed himself against it more 
harshly than - Planck himself, who immediately gives up on energetics20 
because some of its representatives - indeed, as we have just seen, especially 
Planck! - reckoned with kinds of energy as physical quantities. To be sure, he 
directs his criticism only at volume energy; but he presents this as only a 
random example of energetic sins. And what is to the point in his criticism 
concerns every kind of energy as much as it does volume energy.
I will need to discuss elsewhere what is actually the case regarding the 
splitting up of the energy equation. Here what is important is only the 
incontestible fact that, in a great many cases, the differential of intrinsic energy 
can be separated into parts in such a way that each of these parts is equal only 
to certain changes supplied from without, or that the external changes can be 
resolved into those affecting only one or another part of the differential of 
intrinsic energy. Planck quite correctly points to the cases in which a moving 
body is exposed to distant forces and heat rays and where the former change 
only the velocity, the latter only the temperature. We infer from experience - 
which alone can decide whether such an analysis is permissible in a given case - 
that the kinetic energy of a moving point separates into three kinds of energy.
I take Boltzmann’s objection, that the principle of superposition becomes “a 
pure abstraction, since surely the coordinate axes exist only in our imagina­
tion,” to mean that it appears physically unfounded to choose three absolutely 
fixed directions, perpendicular to one another, for the resolution of kinetic 
energy and work. But this arbitrariness is certainly also present in the usual 

270 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
way of setting up the equations of motion; and it must afterwards be shown 
that, instead of those actually chosen, other directions of analysis can also be 
used. In any case, it seems to me more appropriate to introduce the separation 
of the energy equation immediately in the only form in which it is physically 
comprehensible, that is, as the requirement of the conservation of energy in 
every possible direction. But before I present the treatment of the problem that 
results in this way, I must still give a brief account of how Planck arrives at the 
general equations of motion from the differential equations of the individual 
point.
After he has first noted that geometrical conditions, such as constraints 
along fixed curves and surfaces, neither require nor produce work, it turns out 
that the work Xdx 4- Ydy + Zdz of the external forces acting on a moveable 
point must be positive if it is to pass from rest to motion. Thus, if only such 
changes 6x, fry, 6z are possible for which
(29) 
Xbx + Yby + Z8z < 0,
the point at rest remains at rest. From this condition of equilibrium, 
d’Alembert’s principle then follows, in d’Alembert’s manner, as we have come 
to know it in Poncelet. And Planck’s advance thus lies in the fact that he 
accounts for the accelerative forces, and with them also the quantities 
—mx!', —my", mz" in d’Alembert’s formula, by making use of the idea of energy 
instead of the notion of impulse, thereby constructing d’Alembert’s principle 
from fundamental energetic views. But it certainly seems to be a weakness of 
Planck’s principle - at least in its present form - that it operates with the very 
general concept of superposition, yet applies it only to the rectangular 
coordinates of a single point. Only experience will determine whether this 
concept is applicable elsewhere. However, since the splitting up of d’Alembert’s 
equation is possible in every case, it seems that the decisive point is not the 
superposition of rectangular coordinates.
4. At the same time as Planck, d’Alembert’s principle was given an energetic 
treatment by Helm, which was mathematically the same in form, but which 
differed in its physical approach. I then appended the following words to the 
discussion of the idea of viewing mechanical processes as transformations of 
energy, an idea which emerges in Carnot and was further elaborated by 
Poncelet:  “With this idea an application of the notions of energy is prepared 
which is essential for their later independent use and which has emerged more 
clearly since Maxwell. In the old mechanics, the law of kinetic energy is a law of 
actual, not of virtual, motion; it introduces us to a property of motion that 
actually takes place, not to a relation which is inherent in any possible motion. 
Thus, it gives the solution, through reduction to a quadrature, only for 
problems that depend on one independent variable. Although the law governs 
21
Helm, Die Lehre von der Energie (Leipzig 1887), p. 21.
21

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
271
thereby the most important applied case of constrained motion, it is never­
theless inadequate for general problems. It is generally applicable only in the 
company of the equations of motion. However, these equations can be 
encompassed by Poncelet’s principle of work, which really amounts formally 
to the principle of virtual velocities, by interpreting them as equations between 
the elementary work and the elementary increase in living force. For example, 
for a freely moveable point with the mass m and the rectangular coordinates x, 
y, z, on which there acts a force with the components X, Y, Z, the law of living 
force yields only the one equation
d< im(xa 4- ya 4- z'2) > = (Xdx 4- Ydy 4- Zdz).
If, however, the conservation of work holds for any virtual motion, then we 
obtain
— Xdx,
(2 J '
among other equations, and thus the equation of motion
mx" = X”
How unappreciated and misunderstood the author of such words was made 
to feel when he was accused at Lubeck of having himself undertaken to derive 
the equations of motion from the law of living force!
And how strange the written attack of Boltzmann following Lubeck now 
appears. Boltzmann declares Planck’s energetic acount of mechanics to be 
unassailable and does not consider it necessary to mention that I published a 
derivation of the equations of motion at the same time as Planck which, in its 
mathematical formulation, exactly coincides with Planck’s!
5. 
The occasion for Boltzmann’s attack against me was presented by a work 
that I published in 1890 - after the book just mentioned, which appeared in 
1887. More precisely, it is based on the fact that in my essay I used the 
designations dx, dy, dz instead of dax, day. daz introduced above. The essay is 
influenced, of course, by the idea that any possible path element can be turned 
into an actual one, namely, through an appropriate choice of the arbitrary 
initial velocity. This idea gave rise to the error of assuming that in the equation 
for the freely moveable point
(30)
(mx" - X)dx + (my" - Y)dy 4- (mz" - Z)dz — 0,

272 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
the equation
(31)
(mx” — X)dx — 0
is contained as a special case. It was assumed that only the velocity had to be 
chosen with which the position xyz is traversed parallel to the direction of the x 
in to obtain this specification. But that would be correct only if the force 
components and accelerations acting on a freely moveable point were functions 
of xyz alone, and thus independent of the direction in which the point is 
traversed.
If equation (30) in then recast into the form
(32)
^(ddT dT 1 
„
as I did elsewhere, by means of the Lagrangian transformation to arbitrary 
coordinates q, in which
(33)
dx 
dy _ dz
Ъ—Ъ—I” 
oq 
oq oq
represents the action with respect to the parameter q, then the conclusion that 
individually each
(34)
ddT дт ) 
dtdq' dq Q\ q
since all of the q1 except for one may be chosen equal to zero, is unjustified from 
the very start, because the derivatives of the kinetic energy T are dependent on 
the q'.
But from the fact that the inference of (34) from (32) and that of (31) from 
(30) is wrong - or, at least, not unconditionally correct - nothing, absolutely 
nothing follows against energetics itself The error in the mathematical formula­
tion can be corrected so simply that it would be empty polemicizing, pure and 
simple, to want to discredit energetics on its account. For when the sense of the 
words, “In any possible change, energy remains unchanged”, is clothed in the 
formally correct equation
(35)
(mf — X)dax + (my” - Y)day + (mz” — Z)daz = 0,

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
273
or in the equation
(36)
e(
ddT 
dtdq'
then the problems are eliminated. In other words, when by dx, dy, dz, dq is 
understood the quantities dax, day, daz, daq, respectively, and, correspondingly, 
by x'^y'^z'v the velocity components of a mass point proceeding in the 
arbitrary direction d, and so in general quantities different from the actual 
components 
then, as I have explained in response to Boltzmann’s
attack,22 the line of reasoning is indisputable.
22 Wied. Ann. 57 (1896), p. 648.
23 P. Gruner, “Die neueren Ansichten uber Materie und Energie,” Separat-Abdruck aus den 
Mitteilungen der Naturforschenden Gesellschaft in Bern (Bern 1897).
The mathematical error is not justified with this explanation, of course, and 
cannot be justified. Whether a superficial minor correction or a comprehensive 
one is required in general offers no measure of the mathematical offense. But 
the foundations of energetics - which certainly should have been discussed at 
Lfibeck - are not affected by the correction. It comes through clearly enough in 
my explanations of 1887 that my view was that it is not the formula for the law 
of energy conservation, but rather that of a more comprehensive principle 
which separates into the equations of motion. In the formula for this principle, 
one of the arbitrary displacements - dax. for example - cannot be linked with 
that force and that acceleration which would occur if this displacement dax 
were actual displacement. Instead, all eligible dax must be linked with one and 
the same force X and one and the same acceleration x". What is changed 
thereby in the importance and usefulness of energetics as a method, in its 
claims vis-a-vis the older theoretical physics?
6. 
In view of an energetic study that was published recently  which makes 
reference to my proposition, I shall explain here once again how the 
transformation of potential energy E into the kinetic energy
23
T = |m(x'2 +У2 + z'2)
of a freely moveable material point takes place. The equation 
(37) 
daT -|- daE — 0
must obtain for any possible direction of movement dax, day, daz. Then

274 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(38)
daT = m^'d^x + y"day + z^z)
and
(39)
J BE J BE J BE 
daE = — dax + —day + —daz;
Bx By Bz
consequently,
( „ 
BE\ J 
( „ BE\ J 
( „ BE}
\mx + — dax + \my + — \day + \mz + —^2 = 0,
I 
Bx J 
( By) 
( Bz J
and this equation separates into three equations of motion. It would thus have 
to be noted that the differentials designated as dT and dE in the work cited do 
not represent ordinary changes in accordance with an actual path element, but 
rather changes taken in accordance with a (possible) direction that is open to 
the moveable point. If one holds fast to this more specific definition of the 
meaning of those differentials, then no further objection can be made to the line 
of reasoning.
The example also shows, incidentally, that the problem of gravitation can be 
treated in a completely satisfactory manner with the principles of energetics - 
which perhaps could be called into question after Boltzmann’s objections24 to 
Ostwald’s treatment25 - while after the derivation of the general equations of 
motion, of course, no exposition is necessary. For forces having a potential 
even allow the work performed by them to be represented as changes of a 
function dependent on the state of the system alone, which may be regarded as 
the potential energy of the system.
24 Wied. Ann. 57 (1896), p. 39.
25 Ostwald, Allg. Chemie (1893), Vol. 2, Part 1, p. 26.
7. 
Just as I earlier made use of Carl Neumann’s exposition to summarize the 
foundations of thermodynamics created by Clausius and Thomson (p. [154]), I 
am now at an opportune place to report also the view this most reliable 
proponent of critical clarification has formed of the issue in dispute. He writes:
“Let a mass point m be in the process of motion under the influence of a 
given force. If an absolutely immovable rectangular axis system is taken as a 
basis, the coordinates of the point and the components of the force may be 
designated as x,y,z and X,Y,Z. The kinetic energy of the point then has the 
value

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
275
™(x'2+j/2+z'2).
The increase of this energy during the time element dt is therefore
m(x'x" + y'y" + z'z")dt.
that is,
(1*)
m(x"dx + y"dy + z"dz).
On the other hand, the work performed by the force X,Y,Z during the time dt 
will have the value
(2*)
Xdx 4- Ydy + Zdz.
Definitions'. In conformity with formulas (1) and (2), let the expression
(3‘)
mx"dx
then signify the increase in kinetic energy corresponding to direction x, and, on 
the other hand, the expression
(4*)
Xdx
the work performed in the direction x.
The system of axes taken as basis here (x,j, z) is to be conceived of as 
absolutely immovable, but otherwise entirely arbitrary. Accordingly, the 
definitions just put forth will therefore also be valid for any other absolutely 
immoveable system of axes (£, rj, £).
This being presupposed, the following new principle may now be introduced 
into mechanics:
New Principle'. For any absolutely immovable direction, the formula
(5*)
dT = dA
is valid, where dT is to be the increase in kinetic energy corresponding to this 
direction and dA the work performed in this direction.
Thus, if a new, absolutely immovable system of axes 77, £) is introduced, 
whose £-axis is parallel to that absolutely immovable direction, owing to

276 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
definitions (3) and (4), dT and dA will have the values
dT = m^d^
dA = Sd^
where £, 77, £ and 5, H, Z are to have the same meanings for the system (£, 77,0 
that x,y,z and X,Y,Z possess for the system (x,y,z). It thus follows from the new 
principle (5) that
(6*) 
m£"d£ = ~d£.
But then
£ = c + ax + (3y + 72,
-^aX + fiY + ^Z.
where a,/3,7 represent the direction cosines of the £-axis in the system of 
coordinates (x,y,z). Since both systems of coordinates, (x,^,2) and (£, 77, £), 
are to be absolutely immovable, q, /3,7 are thus constants; hence,
f = ох" + /3/ + 72",
~=aX + /ЗУ + 7Z.
Accordingly,
(7*) 
m(ax" + /3/ + 72")^ = (aX + 0Y + 7Z)
results from (6).
The principle is to have validity, however, for any (absolutely fixed) 
direction. Consequently, o, /3,7 are arbitrary constants (with the exception of 
the relation a2 + (32 + 72 = 1). And, so,
(8*) 
mx" = X, my" = У, mz" = Z
immediately result from (7).
Principle (5) thus leads to the familiar equations of motion. And the 
correctness of the principle is thereby placed beyond doubt.”

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
277
In a subsequent letter, Neumann adds the further remark: “It (therefore) 
makes no difference whether we apply principle (5) to £, 77, £ or to x, y, z. In the 
latter case, however, principle (5) immediately yields - taking into considera­
tion the premised definitions - the formulas
mx"dx — Xdx, 
my" dy — Ydy, mz" = Zdz\
and it seems to me to follow from this that the principle is essentially nothing 
other than the expression of the three fundamental equations:
mx" = X, my" = У, mz" = Z.”
The actual content of my works of 1887 and 1890 emerges admirably in these 
letters of Neumann. The direction earlier denoted by me as cr is termed £ in 
Neumann’s presentation; and the energy principle he sets forth as a new 
principle. We see, especially, how simple and clear the matter really is - indeed, 
how dynamically insignificant and energetically self-evident the turn is to which 
I called attention, and which people wanted to make use of at Lubeck to do 
away with energetics.
8. 
If instead of the rectangular coordinates x,y,z, different arbitrary coordi­
nates pi ,P2 • • Pn are to be introduced, and if the former are known as functions 
of the latter, then according to Lagrange’s well-known transformations,
, 
dx 
dxf 
dx' 
d f cbc)
dp? ’ 
dp 
dp' ’ 
dp 
dt [ dp J ’
and expression (3*)
mx"dx — mx"
is altered by means of the transformation
dx d 
mX l)p = dt
/dxf 
— mx . 
dp
The equation applying to the direction dp, like equation (7*) for d£
.. dx „ dy „ dz 
mx r \ my -—y-mz —
dp dp dp
dp dp dp

278 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
accordingly passes over into
(40)
dt [ dp' j dp
when the action effective in the direction dp is indicated by
(41)
dx 
dy _ dz
~f —h Z—~ 
op 
dp dp
and the work performed in the same direction by Pdp.
From this it can be concluded that when a is one of the parameters of the 
system, the changes denoted as daT and daA are carried out by the following 
operations:
f d (ST) 
dT\ 
f 
dx 
dy 
dz}
(42) 
daA = < X—+Y-^- +Z—>da
I dt I da I 
da I 
I 
da 
da 
da I
and that in general
(43)
dp dx dx dy dy dz dz 
da dxda dyda dzda
Section Four:
The Energetic Treatment of the Concept of Force
1. According to all of the preceding, in any case, it is not the law of kinetic 
energy on which mechanics is founded: What is needed is a principle (5*) that 
encompasses it. This can either be understood as a resolution of the law of 
conservation with respect to three components or it can be expresseed as a 
characteristic of mechanical energies as follows: Mechanical energy, taken with 
respect to any possible direction of motion, is invariable.
I see in this principle the summary expression of the most important 
properties of the concept of force.
Imagine, for example, one point led in the straight line x and another in the 
straight line у perpendicular to x on the same plane. If we then note that a 
relation obtains between the positions x and у simultaneously reached by the 
respective points, the possibility of a purely geometrical description of this 
connection suggests itself, which would turn out to be quite simple, for 
instance, if x2 + y1 were found to be constant. On the other hand, we could

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
279
attempt to render the relation dynamically by means of forces: properties 
attributed to the points as characteristic of them. To me this second procedure 
only seems to be reasonable and advantageous as compared with the first if it 
can happen that those points can again confront us, in precisely recognizable 
fashion, without the guidances along x and y, in other guidances or free. In any 
case, however, what is important about this second procedure is that the x- 
point is theoretically detached from the у-point and the motion of the x-point 
appears only as a special case of any possible motion along the x-guidance. It is 
immediately apparent what would happen to the x-point if it were guided in a 
direction other than x or were freely moveable.
This aspect of the concept of force is shown very clearly when elementary or 
even applied mechanics reduces a case of simple geometrical connection - the 
rigid linkage of both points, for example - to dynamical connection, by 
abolishing the rigid linkage and replacing it with forces standing in a relation­
ship of reciprocal action with one another. Instantly, each point is there for its 
own sake. It is considered, to begin with, as present by itself and is only later 
again joined to the other through the relation of reciprocal action.
Disconnection of the individual parts of the system, of the individual possible 
directions of a point from one another, the splitting up of what is in reality one 
relationship - that is what is essential to the concept of force.
Indeed, even more: We also make use of force in order to uncouple one form 
of energy from another when they are found joined together. If a point moves 
under the influence of the force XYZ in a resistant medium or along a rough 
path, then the heat dQ is developed in addition to the kinetic energy dT, and
(44) 
dT + dQ — Xdx + Ydy + Zdz.
In order to separate the heat from the kinetic energy, the force of resistance 
Xi, Yi, Z\ is introduced in such a manner that
(45)
dT = {X - Xx)dx + (У - Yx)dy + (Z - Zx)dz 
dQ — X\dx-y Y\dy + Z\dz
For example, if the point is at rest, so that x' — y' — z' = 0, then dQ — 0 and 
the point remains at rest when all possible Jx, dy and dz make the value of dT 
zero or negative, that is, when
(46)
X <Xb Y < Ti, Z<Zi.
Once again, therefore, it is the concept of force that makes possible any 
analysis of the process to be described into a mechanical and a thermal process.

280 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
2. That the force acting in the direction s can be resolved into forces acting in 
the direction a and a direction perpendicular to it in accordance with the 
parallelogram of forces - this is the reason, surely, that the concept of work in 
the direction a becomes possible at all. And when the principle establishes that 
the force R exerts on a point guided in the direction a the work Acos(A, a) da, 
then the parallelogram of forces is thereby established at the same time. It can be 
obtained quite naturally in the following way.
Let a mass point point m be guided from one spatial point to a neighboring 
one, one time on the paths dr], d(, another time on the paths dx, dy, dz. In 
both cases, the same work must be performed under the influences of the same 
force, since, of course, the total energy change does not depend on the choice of 
the system of coordinates, if only it is an absolutely fixed one. Consequently, we 
have
(47) 
Hd£ + Hdr] + 
= Xdx + Ydy + Zdz.
On the other hand,
d£ = adx 4- (3dy 4- ^dz, dr) = oldx 4- (3'dy 4- fdz, 
dQ = a" dx 4- (f'dy 4- fdz.
Therefore,
Xdx + Ydy + Zdz = (Ha + Ha1 + Zo!'}dx 4- (H/3 4- H0 4- Z/3”)dy
(49) 
+(Н7 4-Ят' + Zff)dz
But this equation holds for the transfer of the mass point m to any arbitrary 
neighboring place, dx, dy, and dz are therefore arbitrarily selectable indepen­
dently of one another. Accordingly, there follows - among other things
(50) 
X = Ha + Ho! 4- Za"
that is, the resolvability of the the force X in accordance with the parallelogram 
rule.
3. 
Moreover, the same procedure of changing the system of coordinates can 
also serve to elucidate the connection of the energy principle with the principle 
of reciprocal action. If it is permissible to resolve the forces of nature into forces 
which act between two mass points at a time in such a manner that, for 
instance, the pair of mass points mx and m2 is subject - apart from external 

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
281
forces - only to two forces dependent on the mutual positions of these points - 
namely, mi to a force with the components X], Lj, Zi and m2 to a force with the 
components Jf2, T2, Z2 - then the work of these forces must vanish in a parallel 
displacement of the pair of points, since this really amounts to a parallel shift of 
the system of reference x9y,z.
If we shift by dax, day. daz, then we obtain
(51) 
0 = Xidax + Yiday + Z\daz + X2dax + Y2day + Z2daz.
Since dax, day, daz may be chosen arbitrarily,
(52)
Xx + X2 - 0, n + Y2 - 0, Z1 + z2 - 0
follow - that is, the law of action and reaction. The assumption of the 
reducibility of all forces into those arising through the reciprocal action of 
two points at a time is thus compatible with the energy principle only when the 
action is equal and opposite to the reaction.
In addition, however, the work of the forces exerted on each other by the 
masses mi and m2 must also vanish in a rotation of the pair of points. After the 
parallel displacement is complete, it suffices to envisage a rotation about the 
one point mb assuming that the forces are dependent only on the position and 
not on the velocity of the points. Because in such a rotation the displacement of 
the point m2 is perpendicular to the line mxm2 connecting the points, the work 
vanishes when the connecting line is a line of force. The assumption of the 
reducibility of all forces into forces arising through the reciprocal action of two 
points at a time, dependent only on the mutual positions of the points, is thus 
compatible with the energy principle only when the forces are central forces.
4. The purpose of my work of 1890, which Boltzmann subjected to such a 
one-sided criticism, was to build further on the foundation provided by the 
standpoint just developed, a standpoint I then viewed as secure because no one 
had taken exception to it, and that now, after the violent attack, is more secure 
than ever, owing mainly to the discussions of Carl Neumann. The further 
construction would already have been completely finished if the changes 
dax, day. daz were identical with the variations of Lagrange; for then ordinary 
analytical mechanics would be precisely this further construction. But when 
conditions explicitly containing time are imposed on the motion of a point, dax 
cannot be regarded as equivalent in meaning to 6x, since, of course, d„x is a line 
that can actually be traversed by the motion, so that dax,day, and daz - 
together with other things - also yield the actual displacement of the point, 
while virtual displacements are generally not the components of the actual 
displacement and are generally not possible displacements.
Let the equation

282 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(53) 
cp\dx 4- cp2dy + pidz + tpodt = 0
be imposed on a moving point; that is, all changes that its position can undergo 
in the time dt have the coordinates dx, dy, and dz, which are linked to one 
another and to dt by the above condition. Here 921,^2^3 denote arbitrary 
functions of x,y,z9t. It could be prescribed, for example, that the point cannot 
leave the surface <^(x, f) = 0 during its motion. Then <£ь 
<£з would
be the partial derivatives of the function 99 with respect to t, x, y, and z.
D’Alembert’s principle
(54) 
(mx" - X)dx + (my" — Y)dy + (mz" — Z)dz — 0
is then satisfied by the equations of motion
(55) 
mx" = X + A</r, my" = Y + A992, 
mz" = Z + A923,
assuming that A is an arbitrary quantity and if
(56) 
921dx + (/?2^T + <£з& = 0.
D’Alembert’s principle thus yields the equations of motion (55) of the point, 
subject to condition (53), when the displacements <5x, dy, dz are applied to it 
which satisfy condition (56). These virtual displacements are therefore not 
possible displacements with respect to freedom of motion.
On the other hand, the energy principle
(57) 
(mx" — X)dax + (my" — Y)day + (mz" — Z)daz - dA = 0,
in which dA represents the work necessary to preserve condition (53), leads to 
the equations of motion (55) when
(58) 
dA = —X^dt,
hence, particularly in the case of time-free conditions (for which vanishes), 
when dA = 0.
That the work needed to preserve the stated conditions has the value given in 
(58) must be accepted as a description of experience with frictionless guidances 
or as a definition of the same, or it can also be derived from other expressions 
of our experiences with such processes.

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
283
These discussions once again bring out very clearly that one is obliged 
throughout to distinguish the differentials da from the variations 6. In general, 
of course, variations also can not be considered as identical to components of 
the element of the actual path.
Section Five:
The Energetic Treatment of Mechanics
1. 
It seems appropriate at the conclusion of this part of the book to say 
something about the form the structure of mechanics would actually take from 
the viewpoint of the energeticists. In the course of the last thirty years, it has 
chiefly been the many physicists, mathematicians and applied scientists who 
must teach the subject who have labored over the question of how mechanics 
should actually appear in the light of energetic ideas, pondering whether 
energetics was really capable of contributing to the clarification of the difficult 
fundamental problems of this science.
The knowledgeable person will not expect that anything substantial needs to 
be changed in the mathematical formulation of the problems. In the hands of 
the most outstanding scientists, mechanics has won its way through to a series 
of methods which, confronted with actual problems, scarcely leave anything to 
be desired. It can therefore only be a question of the systematization of these 
methods, of the structure of the system of ideas; and this is the very place where 
every teacher of mechanics repeatedly notices difficulties.
How far energetics is allowed to penetrate into the fundamentals of 
mechanics clearly depends on the taste of the lecturer and the preparation of 
his listeners. Maxwell, as has been mentioned, beginning from simple ideas of 
motion and mainly stressing the energy principle, tried to avoid completely the 
Galilean-Newtonian foundation. Since then we have had a whole series of 
works which, primarily with pedagogical intent, strive to obtain in this manner 
the simplest principles of mechanics, in order thus to be able to survey physics 
in its entire extent from the unified point of view of Robert Mayer. In this 
connection, above all Dressel,26 Heger27 and Januschke28 would have to be 
mentioned. But Ostwald, Duhem and others also occasionally make use of the 
methodology advocated by Poncelet, Planck or myself. Since they also use 
other energetic principles, however, their works will still need to be drawn into 
the sphere of our presentation elsewhere.
26 Dressel, Elementares Lehrbuch der Physik (Freiburg i. B. 1895).
27 Heger, Die Erhaltung der Arbeit (Hannover 1896).
28 Januschke, Das Prinzip der Erhaltung der Energie (Leipzig 1897).
As for myself, I place such a high value on an introduction to the historical 
development of science that in laying the foundations of mechanics, I would 
generally prefer to develop first the fundamental concepts of the Galilean- 
Newtonian standpoint - the concepts of velocity, acceleration, mass and force 
- making use of the simple historical problems of fall, projection and the 
inclined plane. When, beginning from this standpoint, the concepts of work 

284 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
and of kinetic and potential energy have been reached, it is then time to present 
mechanics as a special case of energetics and to introduce the energy principle 
as an axiom. Indeed, the Galilean-Newtonian system of ideas could be taken 
even further by allowing the energy principle to come in where d’Alembert’s 
principle, or a substitute for it, is usually introduced. After it has then been 
shown that the Galilean-Newtonian principles of inertia, of the parallelogram 
and of reciprocal action are all included in the energy principle, mechanics can 
then be constructed on the axiom introduced. And for the subsequent 
treatment of problems, it has nothing to do with energetics whether one prefers 
the principle in its original form, or Lagrange’s differential equations of the 
first or second form, which follow from it, or perhaps Hamilton’s principle.
Naturally, however, mechanics acquires a far more physical form than it has 
previously exhibited beginning with the moment at which the energy principle 
is introduced. Empirically, a system at rest undergoes changes in its intrinsic 
energy only when its parts are mutually displaced. As long as this is not the 
case, therefore, the system changes its intrinsic energy only in proportion to its 
state of movement: Its kinetic energy is its intrinsic energy. For geometrical 
reasons, the parts of the system are not mutually displaced when it carries out 
only translational and rotational motions. The abstraction is then formed that 
bodies exist which are not capable at all of carrying out other, internal motions; 
and the technical justification of applying this abstraction to actual bodies 
within certain limits is demonstrated. On the other hand, intrinsic energy in 
addition to the kinetic energy of their components - called their “intrinsic 
potential energy” - must be ascribed to systems whose components undergo 
mutual displacements. If the external forces exerted on individual bodies are 
known, and these bodies are then united into a system, the intrinsic potential 
energy of this system results in a simple manner, as soon as those forces are 
dependent only on the positions of the bodies joined to form the system.
2. At this point it seems appropriate to explain how the treatment of elastic 
and fluid bodies takes shape from the standpoint of energetics. It is primarily 
the works of Zeuner,  Gibbs,  Planck  and Carl Neumann  that lead to this 
manner of treatment.
29
30
31
32
29 Zeuner, Technische Thermodynamik I, p. 212.
30 Gibbs, Thermodynamische Studien, p. 218.
31 Planck, Erhaltung der Energie, p. 171.
32 C. Neumann, Leipziger Berichte (1894), p. 1.
We introduce an absolutely fixed, rectangular system of coordinates with 
reference to which an arbitrary point of the substance of the body being 
considered may possess the coordinates x,j>,z and the velocity components 
У,/,/. The mechanical works transmitted to the body from outside will be 
proportional in part to the elements of mass DM, like the effect of gravity, in 
part to the surface element Du through which they are conveyed to the 
substance. We then impart to all the points of the body arbitrary possible 
displacements with respect to the direction a which do not thereby disrupt their

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
285
continuous connection. If dax, day, daz are the components of these displace­
ments, the mechanical work proceeding to the body can be represented in the 
form
(1) (Xdax + Yday 4- Zdaz)DM + (Xndax + Ynday + Zndaz}Dw.
The components of the pressure exerted on the surface element ZXj, whose 
normal direction is designated as n, we shall represent as
(2)
' Xn — Xxcos(n,x) 4- A^cos^,^) 4- Xzcos(n,z)
< Yn = Yxcos(n,x) + Yycos(n,y) 4- Tzcos(«,z) 
k Zn — Zvcos(/?, x) 4- Zycos(n,y) 4- Z2cos(zz, z)
by introducing nine auxiliary quantities, Xx, Yy...Zz, which can again 
obviously be understood as components of certain surface pressures.
This makes possible a transformation of the surface integral into an integral 
over the volume elements DKof the body, and
(3)
y* [Xxdxcos(n, x) 4- Xydxcos(n,y) 4- Xzdxcos(n,z)]Duj
[ dx dy dz ) 
f(dXx dXy дХЛ J _
J [ dx 
dy dz J
If, in addition, the density /2 is now introduced, so that
(4)
DM = /j.DV,
and it is kept in mind that the above considerations are applicable to any 
arbitrarily small part of the mass, it then results that the energy proceeding to 
the element of mass DM from outside may be set as

286 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(5)
Г „ dXx dXy dXA 
DVlfiX - —\dax 
[ 
ox 
oy 
oz )
Г „ dYx 
dYy 
dYA J
+DVA1Y - —-------
[ 
ox 
oy 
oz J
J _ dzx 
dzy 
dzz\
+DV<nZ-—--------±-—-}d„z
[ 
ox 
oy 
OZ )
dd„x ddox 
Sdaz\
Xx^— + Xy-^—+... + Zz—-\DV + dQnDV, 
ox oy 
oz J
in which the heat proceeding to the unit of mass is still designated as dQ.
The energy principle now requires that this expression be a total differential 
for any possible choice of the direction a, and thus that it be capable of being 
represented in the form
dEDM = /j,DVdE,
when the energy change of the unit of mass is signified by dE. Moreover, it is a 
fundamental presupposition of any purely mechanical explanation of the 
phenomena of elastic and fluid bodies that
(6)
daE = daT + daEo = x'adx' + y'adyf + z'^dz' + daEo 
= x"dax + y"day + z daz + dGE§
can be set. That is, it is supposed that the difference between the intrinsic 
energy Eq of the resting and the moving unit of mass - or the kinetic energy of 
the unit of mass - depends only on its total motion and not, for example, on its 
state of stress and oscillation or on thermal quantities. Comparison of the 
expresion
(7)
yLdaEDV — iAx"daxDV + {jy"dayDV + [iz"dazDV 
+ iid^E^DV
with expression (5) immediately yields the equations of motion

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
287
(8)
' 
9ХУ dXl
dt2 
dx 
dy 
dz
d2y „ dYx 
dYy 
dYz
dt2 ~ 
dx 
dy 
dz
dZx dZy dZz
, dt2 
dx 
dy 
dz
If one calculates from these three equations through multiplication by x'a,y'a 
and z'a, respectively, and by then adding the resulting change in kinetic energy, 
one finds - as a look back at the previous development shows - that the change 
in kinetic energy is by no means equal to the works of the forces transmitted 
from outside, but rather to
(9)
У p\x!'dax + y" day + z"daz)D V 
= j p.(Xd„x + Yday + ZD„z)D V 
+ У (XndvX + Ynday + Zndaz)Dw 
+ ил+л+...+ли. 
J t ox z ay 
dz J
The expression
/Г dx' dx' _ dz'\ 7 ^iz
— 
+ Zz—\dtDV
J [ dx dy 
dz j
is called the change in the potential energy of the system and depends on the 
mutual displacements of the individual parts of the system.
The non-kinetic change of intrinsic energy, which Carl Neumann has termed 
the “change of syntactic energy,” could then be represented by
(10)
[ daEodM=- Ilxj^ + Xy^+... + Zz^]dt-DV
J 
J [ dx y dy 
dz J
as results from further comparison of expressions (7) and (5).

288 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Its further analysis takes different forms, depending on whether the body 
under consideration is elastic or fluid.
3. If it is elastic, then let the components of the elastic displacement of the 
point x,y,z be designated as w,v,w, so that if x — u,y — v,z — w are the 
coordinates of the mass actually present in the point x,y,z, no elastic forces 
are exerted on it. Then the intrinsic energy inherent in the body by virtue of its 
elasticity depends on changes of the quantities
(11)
du 
du 
dw
dx 
dy
dz Zz'
Since, moreover, the body’s intrinsic energy can be influenced by thermal 
changes, it is permissible to add
(12) DM • dEo = —{Exdxx + 3ydxy + ... + Zzdzz}DV + OdSo • DM,
where 0 represents the temperature of the element of mass and dS$ its change in 
entropy, to the extent that this is dependent only on the thermal changes and 
not also on the changes in deformation dxx, dxy,... dzz.
Let us now compare expressions (10) and (12).
Those changes in which dax, day, daz are proportional to u,v,w are obviously 
also included among the possible changes a of the system. Then follows 
(13) Ex = Xx, Zy = Xy, ... Zz = Zz, dQ = 0dSQ.
That is, when, after the deformations xXlxy,.. .zz, the negative differential 
coefficients Sx, .. Zz of the energy Eo coincide with the pressures 
Xx, Xy,... Xz which are caused in the elastic body from without, a reversible 
process will take place if the heat supplied from outside coincides with the 
thermal changes of entropy alone. If, however, this equality of the derivatives 
and the pressures caused from without does not obtain, a reversible process 
requires supplies of heat which depend on the changes in deformation as well as 
on the thermal changes. The increase of quantities of heat other than those 
hereby determined makes the process irreversible.
Also among the possible changes are those in which the elastic body behaves 
like a rigid body, so that, in conformity with equation (12), dE$ = 0. Such 
changes are the rotations about the coordinate axes when heat is not supplied. 
Thus, for example, if day is set proportional to z and daz proportional to -y, 
but dax and dQ equal to zero, it follows from (10) that Yz — Zy Through these 
and the corresponding considerations for rotations about thcx- andy- axes, the 
nine-term expression in equations (10) and (12), respectively, is reduced to six 
terms.

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
289
4. In addition to the motion of its parts, the energy of a fluid body is 
conceived as dependent only on its changes in volume. Nevertheless, the 
entropy S will be a function of the mutual displacements of the parts of the 
fluid, which give rise to internal friction. We set
(14)
DM = -P dDv + OdS DM,
and since, owing to the so-called “equation of continuity”, which runs
(15)
(dfl dy' dzf>\ 
dt fox oy oz)
the equation
(16) 
dDV =-ОМ^=-DV— = 
+ 
+ dt
(ox oy oz J
obtains, we have
(17)
dE0 DM = P-^DM + OdS DM 
d
= -p ftr + ir + 
D Vdt + edS DM
(ox oy oz)
By comparing this formula with (10), it can be seen that
Xx = Yy = Zz = P,Xy = Yx = Xz = Zx = Yz = Zy = 0
> 
dQ = OdS
must be the case if the heat supplied is to give rise to a reversible process in 
which dQ is, of course, always equal to OdS. The theory of frictionless fluids 
makes assumption (18) and thereby simplifies equations (8).
Those fluids for which the assumption that dDV is negligibly small is 
sufficient for representing the phenomena are called “incompressible fluids”. 
In their case the intrinsic energy is identical to the kinetic energy, in 
comformity with (14), as in the case of rigid bodies, because for them dE$ 
becomes equal to zero when thermal changes are excluded from consideration 
and thus dQ — 0. On the other hand, in consequence of equations (8) and (18), 
the external energy of the unit of volume which is transferred from the surface 

290 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
is found in the amount P for all fluids. The energy principle (9) assumes the 
form
p,(x"dax + y"day + zudaz)
x (dP J dP . dP J
= yL{Xdax + Yday + Zdaz) - \ dax + — day + — daz 
\dx oy oz
and the energy law reads
d /i(V2 + ya + z'2) = ii(Xdx + Ydy + Zdz) — dP.
If the external forces transmit the potential energy W to the unit of mass, that 
is, if
dW y__9JV z _ dw 
dx ' 
dy ’ 
dz
and if T = |(x'2 + ya + z/2) is the kinetic, and at the same time the intrinsic 
energy of the unit of mass, the energy integral then becomes
( dP
T + W + 
— = Const.
J M
In the case of ideal gases, finally, Eo = cv0, where cv represents the specific 
heat at constant volume, and (14) passes over into the fundamental equation of 
thermodynamics.
Section Six:
Ostwald’s Energetic Principles
1. 
In his search for immediately clear principles from which theoretical 
explanations could be obtained, Ostwald  called attention to a proposition 
which promises to lead beyond the energy law: The actual process is always an 
exceptional case among all the possible processes. For this reason he emphasizes 
that any function must prove to be a maximum for the actual process, 
assuming for it a greater value than for all processes that are only possible.
33
33 Leipziger Berichte (1893).
34 Vierteljahrsschrift/. wiss. Philosophie (1890).
On the other hand, Petzoldt34 had already stressed earlier that it is less the 

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
291
maximum property than singularity and uniqueness that are characteristic of 
the actual process. “The path that is in fact taken is distinguished from the 
other conceivable paths by being, in comparison with them, singular, unique” 
Of course, a way of transfer from A to В other than the way that really occurs 
under the present conditions is also conceivable. “Then, however, an infinite 
number of additional other ways would have been just as legitimate as this 
one.”
Let us consider again the energetic foundation of mechanics, but from this 
standpoint. The actual change, in any case, cannot be represented by a single 
differential equation between the possible variables. An equation between n 
accelerations, the velocities being given, really expresses a property belonging 
to all value groups in which (n - 1) accelerations occur, and thus to all possible 
changes of (n - 1) dimensions, with only the choice of the wth acceleration 
being limited.
With n variables, therefore, either n equations must be given in order to 
determine unique values of the variables - although not exactly a single 
solution, as Petzoldt assumes - or the actual change is not mathematically 
determined by means of differential equations at all.
The energy law as a differential equation is thus sufficient for determining the 
real motion only for constrained systems in the case of a single variable in 
addition to time. If more variables are present, the necessary number of 
differential equations can be obtained either by splitting up the energy equation 
into several equations in conformity with the principle of superposition - this is 
Planck’s approach - or by employing a mode of mathematical expression other 
than the differential equation - a mode of expression which in and of itself 
already emphasizes that the change sought is an exceptional case.
Now this is what happens in the energy principle I have advanced in the 
manner well-known from the principle of virtual velocities.
2. 
For the free motion of a single point, for example, the principle
(mV' - X}dax 4- (my" — Y)day + (mz" - Z)daz = 0
requires above all that a vector V be determined that is perpendicular to a 
single direction - namely, the one actually taken and determined by the initial 
state - and also requires that this be so for any possible direction a whose 
projections are called dax, day. daz. The components of this vector are then the 
quantities mx" - X, my" - Y and mz" — Z. The first requirement is satisfied by 
an infinite number of vectors V, namely by all those lying in the plane 
perpendicular to the path element. An infinite number of equally legitimate 
values for the acceleration can therefore be found with which the moveable 
point would move along the path element under the influence of the force XYZ. 
However, the acceleration that really occurs, and the vector that is actually 
found, have the distinguishing property - the energy principle requires it - that 
both are perpendicular to any direction a, and not only to that which is actually 
taken. It follows from this that the actual vector is V = 0, hence that 

292 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
mx" = X, my" = У, and mz" = Z. Thus, the energy principle really expresses a 
property of the actual motion which distinguishes it from any motion that is 
only possible.
In the original formulation of the energy principle on p. [272]: “In any 
possible change, the energy remains unchanged,” this property is admittedly 
not clearly expressed. This formulation instead creates the misleading impres­
sion that there is nothing in the energy principle to distinguish real change from 
change that is merely possible. However, the new formulation of the energy 
principle given on p. [278]: “Mechanical energy, taken with respect to any 
possible direction of motion, is invariable f is free from this reproach, just as is 
Neumann’s version on p. [277]. It distinguishes the mechanical energy actually 
found from any possible mechanical energy.
3. 
Lie has objected strenuously to the indefinite, mathematically incompre­
hensible form of Ostwald’s maximum principle.  And, indeed, with this 
principle, just as with the ideas directed to the same goal of Zolner, Fechner, 
Mach and Avenarius, as Petzoldt has critically compiled them,  it either 
remains simply undecided, or is at least not sharply formulated mathemati­
cally, which function it is whose values are defined for all possible processes, but 
exhibit an exceptional behavior for the actual process.
35
36
35 Lie, Leipziger Berichte (1894), p. 135; reply by Ostwald, ibid., p. 276.
36 J. Petzoldt, Maxima, Minima und Okonomie (Altenburg 1891). Also Vierteljahrsschrift f. wiss. 
Philos. 14 (1890) and the same journal, vol. 19 (1895).
But if Lie is certainly correct that no advance can be made analytically with 
such general truths, nevertheless a knowledge of them is by no means 
completely worthless. For example, if I had understood by a “possible motion” 
in my energy principle a motion that can become actual with a suitable choice 
of the initial conditions, I would have violated the principle of the exceptional 
case. I would have attempted by means of a statement about all processes 
which are only possible to say something about the actual process, whereas the 
latter surely must possess a property distinguishing it as singular. It is clear, 
therefore, that the expression “possible change” in the original version of my 
energy principle can be understood only by analogy with the expression 
“virtual,” which Neumann has suggested replacing by “facultative,” and so 
with reference to the actual motion. Any motion that can be conceived as a 
component of actual motion is a possible motion in the sense of the energy 
principle; and it seems appropriate to state this very definitely in the verbal 
formulation of the principle, as has just been done. The motions a which have 
to be used in order to describe the motion that actually takes place must unite 
two properties: first, they must be able to become actual motions through a 
suitable choice of the initial state, or else there would be no reason to claim for 
them the conservation of energy; but, second, they must be components of 
actual motions, or else nothing follows for actual motions from an assertion 
about them.
4. 
Before advancing his principle of the exceptional case, Ostwald had 

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
293
already succeeded in distinguishing the actual motion by stating a maximum 
property31 - hence in a manner quite common in mechanics since Maupertuis, 
namely in the various forms of the principles of least action and least 
constraint. He formulated his principle in the following words: “Of all possible 
energy transformations, that one will occur which in a given time yields the 
greatest possible conversion?
37 Ostwald, Lehrb. d. allg. Chem. (1892), Vol. 2, p. 37.
38 C. Neumann, Leipziger Berichte (1892), p. 184.
This principle of Ostwald has fared better than the energy principle that I set 
up. It did not find, like my principle, a merely destructive critic, but rather a 
judge who emphasized the mathematically justified core of the principle. Carl 
Neumann37
 38 arrives at the following proposition: “Let a material system subject 
to arbitrary conditions move under the influence of given forces having a 
potential. If this system is at rest at the beginning of an arbitrarily small 
element of time t, then among all the virtual motions which are compatible 
with those conditions and with the formula of the principle of kinetic energy, 
there will be one present whose kinetic energy is the greatest at the end of the 
given time r. The latter, then, will be the one that actually occurs under the 
influence of the given forces during the time t.”
5. 
Neumann proves this proposition in the following manner: At the begin­
ning of time r, let x,y,z be the coordinates of a system of points. During the 
time т they undergo the increases £, 77, £, while at the same time the velocity 
components increase from 0,0,0 to u,v,w, so that
rn 
C-UT _VT
( ) 
€ 2 ’ 
77 2 ’ 
2 ■
The total kinetic energy of the system at the end of the time t, that is
(2)
(и2 + v2 + W2),
is then to be a maximum, in conformity with Ostwald’s principle, under the 
condition that, first, the energy remains conserved, 
and, second, the geometrical conditions prescribed for the motion are 
observed, for example

294 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(4)
= 0,
where 921, ^2, <£3 shall be functions of x9y,z - for example, derivatives of a 
function 99 with respect to x9y,z. The potential of the forces acting on the system 
is here designated as V9 and the sums are to be extended over all of the mass 
points of the system. With adherence to conditions (3) and (4), function (2) is 
now a maximum according to familiar rules when, for any individual point,
(5)
x( тдУ) 
mu = A I mu + I 
t 2 dx J
and when analogous equations obtain for v and w. A and Ai signify unknown 
factors. There follows
(6)
x
(1 - A)ww = -A—+ Ai^.
When one multiplies this equation and those which hold true for v and w by 
w, v, and и’, respectively, adds them and finally sums them over all points m, the 
result is, taking into consideration (3) and (4), that A = 2 must be selected; and 
with this, (6) passes over into one of the equations of motion
(7)
—mt/
dV
= a7+W1’
in which xi — is an undetermined coefficient and u' = “ represents the 
acceleration component.
Moreover, Neumann’s proof also remains valid - as can be seen immediately 
- when the forces are not derivable from a potential. They must, however, be 
functions of x9y9z alone, just like the quantities which appear in the equations 
of state. But then it would also have to be stressed that the equations of state 
cannot explicitly contain the time, which is already stated in Neumann’s 
formulation by the requirement that “the principle of living force” - that is, 
here the energy integral - obtains.
6. 
Thomson and Tait  call attention to a law discovered by Euler and revised 
by Lagrange, Delaunay and Bertrand, which is in agreement with the one 
found by Ostwald and that is usually cited as “Bertrand’s Law”. This law can be 
developed in the following manner, in connection with either the energy 
principle or with d’Alembert’s principle:
39
Thomson and Tait, Treatise on Natural Philosophy (Cambridge 1890), Vol. 1, p. 285.
39

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
295
Assuming that all of the mass points m of a system are subject only to time- 
free conditions, the latter two principles are in agreement that
(8) 
£{(* - mx")6x + (Y — my")8y + (Z - mzff)8z} — 0,
when the sum is extended over all of the points. We shall imagine all of the 
points initially at rest, and that, after a lapse of the small time r, they may have 
attained the velocities ufv,w in the motion that actually occurs. Through 
multiplication by r,
(9) 
У^{(Хт — mu)6x + (Yr — mv)6y + (Zr - mw)6z] = 0
follows for the impulses.
Then, possible displacements are, to begin with, 
which occur
in the motion that actually takes place; and so
(10) 
+ Ytv + Zrw) = 
w(t/2 + v2 + и’2) = 2T
is in agreement with formula (3) above. Other possible displacements, however, 
are also those such as are caused by certain other velocities w, v, w; hence, also
(11) 
У^{(Хт — mu)u + (Yr — mv)v-y (Zr - mw)w} = 0.
If instead of the motion with the velocity components u,v,w, a motion with 
the velocity components
(12) 
l/ = w + w, K = v + W = w +
should occur, then, like equation (10),
(13) 
^(XrU + YtV + ZtW) 
V2 + W2) = 2T
would also obtain, assuming that the forces XYZ are dependent only on the 
position and not on the velocity of the points.
Taking into consideration (12), there follows from (10) and (13) both

296 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(14) 
2(T — T) = — 
+ v2 + w2) — 2^2m(uu + vv + w)
and
(15) 
2(T - T) = - ^(Ут • й + Yt-v + Zt-w).
In consequence of equation (11), there results from (15) and (14)
2(T-T) = + ^V да(й2 + г2 + й'2) + (Г-Т), 
(16) 
2 .
T — T = -^Pm(w2 + v2 + w2),
that is, the kinetic energy Tof the motion which actually occurs is always greater 
than the kinetic energy T of another motion that the point system, starting from 
the state of rest, would acquire under the influence of the same forces and 
wholly time-free conditions in the same infinitesimal time t. And, what is more, 
the kinetic energy T actually acquired is greater then the fictitious T by the 
amount of kinetic energy of that motion that would be necessary to convert the 
actual motion into the fictitious one.
If the values that Tand T possess according to (10) and (13) are inserted into 
(16), and (12) is taken into consideration, there results
(17) 
y^m(Uu+Vv+Ww) = f).
Now, according to (12), the velocity (U9V9W) is a resultant from (w,v,h’) and 
(w,v, vv). If, however, equation (17) is applied to a single material point, it 
indicates that (UyW) is perpendicular to (й, v, vv).
Equation (16) is thus connected in the simplest manner with the proposition 
that, under the stated conditions, the velocity (UyW) that a single material 
point acquires in the time т in a possible direction is the rectangular projection 
of the velocity (w,v,w) actually acquired.
Furthermore, if the system is not at rest at the beginning of the time t, but 
rather has the velocity components wo, vo, wo, all of the equations (10) to (16) 
still hold when и - uq, v - vo, w - W are used instead of z/,v,w, and likewise 
U — uq, V — vo, W - wo instead of UyW. If Te and Te are then understood to 
be the kinetic energy present at the end, and To the kinetic energy at the 
beginning, of the motions, then

THE ENERGETIC FOUNDATION OF MECHANICS
297
for T should be set Te -F Tq — (w«o + wo + wwo) 
and for T should be set Te + To - ( Uuq + Vvq + Wwq).
With this, (16) becomes
Te - Te + 
+ vvo + wwo) = 
+ v2 + w2),
Te - Te = 
- w)2 + (vo - v)2 + (m>0 - w)2} - To,
and it cannot then be maintained that either the kinetic energy at the end of the 
actual motion or the increase in energy during this motion is a maximum.
This damages the value of the maximum principle.
“If the material points should already be moving at the beginning, then the 
velocity they already have is superimposed during that moment of time on that 
which they would obtain in accordance with the principle if they were at rest at 
the beginning of the moment of time in question in the same relative 
position.”40
Boltzmann, Wied. Ann. 57 (1896), p. 45.
Since, from this result, superposition must be added to the maximum 
principle and - as we have seen above on p. [270] - d’Alembert’s principle 
must be added to the superposition principle in order to construct a complete 
mechanics of point systems, the energy principle I have advanced is likely the 
most appropriate form for putting mechanics on an energetic foundation.
40

PART SEVEN:
ENERGY FACTORS
Section One:
Zeuner’s Analogy Between Heat and the Work of Gravity
1. The attempt to distinguish different kinds, forms, species and types of 
energy is as old as energetics itself. For the statement that in every natural 
phenomenon the total amount of energy is conserved unchanged is not a 
complete description of the course of the phenomenon; the same total amount 
of energy can affect our sense perceptions in quite different ways. Robert 
Mayer already presents a table of energy forms, “of the principal forms of 
force” (cf. p. [84]); and Rankine, in order to explain the difference between 
energy and tendency, expressly calls attention to the fact that energy, in the 
usual simple cases of its appearance, can always be represented as the product 
of two factors, one of which measures the tendency to change (cf. p. [167]). But 
Rankine’s idea was forgotten, and only in the last decade has there been a 
return to the idea of distinguishing the forms of energy according to these 
tendency factors.
In the meantime, another idea was pursued - again only in isolated remarks, 
to be sure - which led to the same goal.
There was one form of energy, namely heat, which exhibited a very striking 
peculiarity; and its peculiarity was stated in the Carnot-Clausius principle: 
Heat has the tendency to pass from higher to lower temperatures. Or, stated 
more fully: Processes certainly exist in nature in which nothing occurs other 
than that a warmer body gives up heat to a colder one; but no process is 
possible in nature in which nothing more happens than that a colder body gives 
up heat and a warmer body absorbs it.
There remain only two paths open to the human mind confronted with a 
completely new empirical principle such as this, if it is not able - as is first 
attempted - to eliminate it as false. The first path is to try to show that the 
principle is only apparently new and that it follows on closer inspection, after 
all, from familiar and customary empirical principles. In the present case, that 
is, the attempt is made to invent a mechanical system that, in a certain respect, 
exhibits irreversibility, or for which functions can be stated which, like 
temperature and entropy in thermal processes, determines the direction in 
which the energy change spontaneously occurs. In so far as they belong in 
energetics at all, and are not instead opposed to it, the numerous attempts that 
299

300 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
were followed out with this end in view will be considered elsewhere (Part 8).
The other path we take when confronted with new empirical principles is 
that of adapting ourselves to them, of subordinating our older, accustomed 
experiences to them, of acknowledging heretofore existing knowledge as 
limited, and of learning to understand it in the light of the new experience.
2. Zeuner was the first to show - with predominantly pedagogical intent, of 
course - how the familiar concepts of mechanics must be arranged in order 
that they appear subordinate to Carnot’s idea. In the second edition of his 
Mechanical Theory of Heat (1866),1 Zeuner says:
Zeuner, GrundzUge der Mechanische Wdrmetheorie (Leipzig); 1st ed. 1859, 2nd ed. 1866, new 
printing 1877, newly published later in 1887 as Technische Thermodynamik.
“Let there be imagined three horizontal planes A,B, C lying one over the 
other. Plane В lies at h and plane C at hi over the lowest plane A, in which 
thus lies the point of origin from which we measure the distances h and hi.”
“On plane В there lies a body of weight G. If this weight is allowed to 
descend slowly and uniformly to the lowest level Л, a work would be gained 
which, as is well known, amounts to
Gh.
This work may be denoted as W, so let
W = G • h.
According to this result, it can be said that in the weight G at the height h a 
work W is at our disposal, that when the weight G was maneuvered to level 
B, a work W was delivered or conveyed to us.”
“If we now raise the weight G slowly and uniformly to level C, a certain 
work is thereby expended, which may be denoted as F and which can easily 
be defined; it is
(2) 
F = G(hx -h).
The work that is now at our disposal in the weight G at the height hi, and 
which may be called Wx, is simple; it is

ENERGY FACTORS
301
(3)
Wx = Ghx.
If G is now determined from equations (1) and (3), we find that
r _ W _ PFi 
h h\
and substitution into equation (2) yields
(4)
F = Wx - W 
W
W]
i.e. F = -±(hx-h)
hi
Accordingly, if a work W is supplied to the weight G at level B, followed by 
the elevation of the weight to level C and the delivery there of the work Wx now 
contained in the weight, an expenditure of work is thereby entailed which is 
defined by equations (4). Thus, we have conveyed or transferred work from a 
lower to a higher level; and this transfer corresponds to a work to be performed 
which, according to the last equations and with the heights remaining the same, 
is proportional to the difference Wx — W, as well as to the individual values, W 
and W\, themselves and to the difference in height. But the whole experiment 
can also be reversed. If a weight G is taken to level C, and thus with it the work 
Wx, and if the weight then descends slowly, performing work, to the lower level 
B, being delivered there once again with the work W now contained in it, there 
is a gain of work connected with this transfer from the higher to the lower level 
which is likewise determined in conformity with equations (4).”
Thus interpreted, the formulas of mechanics then prove to be exactly the 
same structurally as those for a simple cyclic process. Specifically, if Q is the 
heat given off at the absolute temperature в and Qx is the heat absorbed at the 
absolute temperature 0x, then according to equations (20b) (p. [142]) or (2) (p. 
[155]),
(5)
e = 2i
0 Ot
and the gained or expended work is

302 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(6) 
F = & - Q
or
(7) 
2,
i e- F =
01
The values Q and Q\ here represent quantities of heat, measured according 
to units of work, and prove to be identical to the quantities of work just 
designated as FTand W\. Furthermore, if 0 and are conceived as correspond­
ing to the heights h and /zb then the expression
Q 
e
can be regarded as a weight; and, avoiding the name “entropy,” Zeuner 
immediately calls this quotient the heat weight.
According to this result, Carnot’s process is then understood in the following 
manner.
The supplying of heat along the path KG (cf. p. [114], Figure 2) at a constant 
temperature 0 can be conceived as a maneuvering of a weight j in level 0 and 
the leading off of heat along the path EC as a withdrawal, a delivering of the 
same weight in level Finally, Frepresents the work that is required to raise 
the weight slowly and uniformly, from one level в to the higher lying 
level When the cyclic process is carried out in reverse, this weight descends 
slowing, performing work.
The complex cyclic process in which quantities of heat are supplied and 
removed in an arbitrary number of temperature levels can also be interpreted 
just as simply. If the quantities of heat supplied here are reckoned as positive 
and those removed as negative, and if a corresponding procedure is followed 
with the weights supplied from and delivered to arbitrary heights, then the 
cyclic process carried out with weights gives
(8)
F = E^ o = Et
and for the one accomplished with quantities of heat

ENERGY FACTORS
303
(9) 
= 
° = Ef-
The work taken up or gained is the algebraic sum of the quantities of heat 
supplied and removed, the latter being measured in units of work. And the sum 
of the heat weights added is equal to the sum of the heat weights released.
3. This approach assumes its real importance only when the case is also taken 
into account - as Zeuner has likewise done - in which the working weights do 
not rise and fall slowly and uniformly, but rather with perceptible change in 
their kinetic energies.
“We imagine that the weights Gx, 
G3... stand at the heights h\, Й2, A3...,
and hence that the works
(10)
W\ = GiA], W2 = G2h2, W3 = G3h3...
are at our disposal. Let us now allow these weights to descend, performing 
work, to the lower lying horizontal planes h\, A2, A'3.... If in doing so, however, 
we suppose that the resistance to be overcome by the decent of the weights is 
less than the weights, then the weights will arrive at the horizontal planes 
h\, h'2lh'3... with the velocities h’i, w2, w3..., and the works then to be delivered 
there will be 
(11)
or, if we denote the individual velocity heights as xi, *2, *3 •,
(1 lb) W[ = Gx+ xx\ W’2 = G2(A'2 + x2f W' = G3(hf3 + x3),...
There follows, accordingly, first the work gained
F = Wx + W2 + W3... - W[ - W2 - W3 - ... 
or

304 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(12) 
^ = £(П
which is identical to equation (5).
On the other hand, as far as the summation expression
(13)
rm w2 w3
ш -'йГ + 1Г+ h3 +”' ” h\ h'2 h'2
is concerned, this is determined with the help of equations (10) and (11) in the 
following manner. From (11)
= G1(1+^)
h\
follows. When the values of G\, G2, 63..., as they result from equation (10), are 
substituted here,
h\ 1 h\' h2 h2 2h'2'"'
also follows; and from this through addition, and by making use of the notation 
employed up to now, 
(14)
//
After Zeuner has indicated that this equation is identical to Clausius’ 
formula (10) on p. [150], when the sum standing on the right side is set equal 
to N, he continues: “This representation therefore provides a really clear 
insight into what happens in cyclic processes. We do not obtain the full value, 
the maximum of work, when heat passes in irreversible cyclic processes from a 
heat source of higher temperature to one of lower temperature. By way of 
comparison, we do not allow a weight to descend the entire given height of fall, 
but rather deliver it to a higher situated level.”
“Things are similar in the reverse case. When heat is conveyed in an 
irreversible cyclic process from a body of lower to one of higher temperature, 
the minimum of work is not expended. We raise a weight, as it were, from a 
lower situated into a higher situated level - not uniformly, however, but rather 
with increasing velocity.”
Thus, for the sake of analogy, the equivalence of potential and kinetic energy 

ENERGY FACTORS
305
adhered to elsewhere in mechanics is at first not observed here to a certain 
extent; but a description of the process thereby achieved is not lacking in value 
for mechanics, as well. In performances of work through the dropping of 
weights, the arrangements are indeed usually such that the energy converted 
into kinetic form, which manifests itself in percussion of the working bodies or 
as heat, has no value for the intended process of work and is kept as small as 
possible. If, therefore, we did not have the convenient point of reference for 
assessing the process that is provided by the weights through their corporeality, 
but instead had to take their operational efficiency as the standard of judgment, 
then in mechanical arrangements in which percussion is useless, the difference 
between the total and the useful operational efficiency would be represented 
quite suitably in the above manner, and N would appear as a measure of waste. 
Indeed, Zeuner also returned to his analogy in determining the efficiency of 
thermodynamic processes (cf. p. [255]), and thereby gained from it more than 
pedagogical advantage. Of course, the physically profound difference remains 
that in thermodynamic processes we physically waste the energy, while in the 
mechanical processes of work discussed here it only appears wasted with 
reference to these, and other mechanical work processes exploit the kinetic 
energy reckoned as loss.
Section Two:
Other Analogies Among the Forms of Energy
1. 
In 1871 Mach published a note in the Prague journal, Lotos, which deals 
with exactly the same subject as Zeuner. “The second law of the mechanical 
theory of heat can, as is well known, be expressed for a simple case by the 
equation2
Cf. equations (7) (p. [148]) or (2) and (3) (p. [155]).
=0, 
T * T) ’
in which Q denotes the quantity of heat transformed into work at the absolute 
temperature T, and Q' the quantity of heat which simultaneously dropped from 
the higher temperature T to the temperature 1\.
Now, we have not far to seek for the observation that this proposition is not 
limited to the phenomena of heat, but can also be transferred to other natural 
phenomena, if the potential of whatever agent is active in the phenomenon is 
put in place of the quantity of heat, and the potential function is put in place of 
the absolute temperature.
Then the proposition can be stated thus:
If a certain potential value P of an agent at the potential level V passes over 
into another form (for example, if the potential of an electrical discharge is 
transformed into heat), then another potential value, P', of the same agent 
2

306 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
drops simultaneously from the higher potential level Vto the lower one V\. The 
values in question, though, are connected with one another by the equation
In the application of the proposition, the only question is, what is to be 
conceived as potential (as equivalent of the mechanical work) and what as the 
potential function. In many cases this is a matter of course and has long since 
been established; in others it can easily be determined. If, for example, we wish 
to apply the proposition to the impact of inert masses, obviously the living 
force of these masses is to be understood as the potential, and their velocity as 
the potential function. Masses of equal velocity cannot impart any living force 
to one another; they are at the same potential level.”
Mach later developed his ideas at great length and presented them in 
connection with his entire conception of energy, of heat - indeed, of natural 
processes in general.3 In many places, these writings also laid the foundations 
for the views developed in the present book. At the moment, however, we are 
only concerned with the brief publication of 1871.
3 Especially relevant here is the essay “Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Carnot’schen Warmege- 
setzes,” Wiener Sitzungsber. 101, Ila (1892), p. 1589; and the book Die Prinzipien der 
Warmelehre (Leipzig 1896).
4 Lippmann, C.R. 82 (1876), p. 1425.
The ideas contained therein differ from those of Zeuner only in the system of 
notation, although they do not deal with irreversibility, whereas Zeuner devised 
his entire manner of thinking precisely in order to make comprehensible the 
difference between reversibility and irreversibility. Common to both presenta­
tions, however, is the essential point: In every transfer of energy, another 
quantity comes into question, in addition to the amount of the form of energy, 
as essentially determinative of the natural process. This quantity is temperature 
in the energy form of heat, velocity in the case of kinetic energy, the potential 
function in the case of potential energy, or height of fall in the special case of 
terrestrial gravity. If the name “intensity” is introduced as a general designa­
tion for this quantity, as I suggested later, in 1887, it can be said that the 
quotient resulting from the division of the intensity by the increase in the form 
of energy defines a third function by whose means the equation observed in the 
transfer of the form of energy can be represented especially simply. For the 
energy form of heat, this function is entropy, for terrestrial gravity, height. In 
1887 I denoted it generally as the “quantity function”; but Ostwald recom­
mended that it should instead be called the “capacity” of the system for the 
form of energy.
2. After Zeuner and Mach, the properties of these functions - which we shall 
need to treat in greater detail later on - were clearly understood in still other 
special cases. In 1876 Lippmann  arrived at ideas entirely similar to those of 
Mach. He recognizes that in the case of electrical energy, the potential function 
4

ENERGY FACTORS
307
and electric charge play precisely the roles belonging to temperature and 
entropy in thermal processes; that a formula can also be set up for electrical 
cyclic processes that is analogous to the entropy law for reversible changes; and 
that in any electrical cyclic process, just as in any reversible thermal one, the 
ratio of the energy transferred to the energy transformed - the net efficiency of 
the cyclic process - depends only on the values of intensity between which it 
takes place.
Moreover, Maxwell5 drew a parallel between the formula that expresses the 
differential heat, dQ, of a reversible change by means of the temperature 0 and 
the entropy S, and the formula through which the change of volume energy dA 
is made to depend on the pressure P and the volume V; and in 1885 von 
Oettingen extended the comparison still further.6 On the subject of these 
analogous formulae
5 Maxwell, Theorie der Warme (Braunschweig 1878), p. 222.
6 v. Oettingen, Die thermodynamischen Beziehungen antithetisch entwickelt. Mem. de I’academie 
de Petersbourg (7) 32 (1885).
dQ = OdS
dA = —PdV.
von Oettingen makes the following observations, among others:
“Heat as such can only pass from 
a warmer to a colder body.”
Only with a change of entropy 
can heat be supplied.
“A hot body can be compressed 
with the hand, while heat flows 
from the body into the hand.”
“On taking hold of a body, one 
feels its temperature. If this is lower, 
then the adiabat (entropy) of the 
body is increased, and in this sense 
one feels the change of the heat 
volume. In other words: We feel the 
existence of the adiabat in heat 
emission, and every body affirms its 
existence with respect to the external 
world through its temperature, but in 
proportion to the change of its 
adiabat or entropy.”
“Work can be carried out only by 
the body whose pressure has the 
higher value.”
Only with change of volume can 
volume energy be supplied.
“The pressure of the hand can be 
overcome by the elastic counter­
pressure of a body, while heat 
flows from the hand into the body.”
“On taking hold of a body, one feels 
its pressure. With more strongly 
exerted pressure, the volume of the 
body is diminished, and in this 
sense one feels the change of the 
work volume. In other words: We 
feel the existence of the volume in 
the performance of work, and every 
body affirms its existence with 
respect to the external world through 
its pressure, in proportion to its 
change of volume.”

308 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Von Oettingen then also develops analytically the analogy between the 
parameters
temperature 0 
as well as entropy S
and 
and
Pressure P, 
negative volume -V,
in such a way that he compares the functions that can be represented by these 
quantities and their derivatives with respect to one another.
I cannot agree with his rejection of the analogy originating with Zeuner. 
According to Zeuner,
temperature 0 
as well as entropy £
and 
and
height of fall H, 
weight G,
correspond to one another (cf. p. [302]).
It is von Oettingen’s opinion that, because the formula G(H\ — Ho) is 
analagous to P(V\ — Vo), 0 and V, as well as S and P, were conceived as 
corresponding functions, which contradicts the comparisons stated above. The 
work values G(H\ - Ho) and P(V\ - To) are certainly analogous; to convert 
the first into the second, it is only necessary to divide its first factor G by an 
area and multiply its second, H\ — Ho, by the result. But it is not correct that 
Zeuner understood by G(H\ - Ho) the works which are supplied to the lifting 
apparatus he devised. He says explicitly that he imagines weights supplied to 
his apparatus at level H, whereby the apparatus obtains a capacity for work in 
the amount H(G\ — Go). This formula is also analogous to von Oettingen’s 
P( V\ — Ko); it passes over into the latter expression when the first factor, H, is 
multiplied by the weight of the unit of volume and the second, (Gi — G)), is 
divided by the result. Accordingly, Zeuner’s analogy in no way contradicts the 
comparison between 
temperature 
entropy
and 
and
pressure, 
negative volume;
it mediates the former through height of fall and the latter through weight. 
Supplying weights to a system of heavy bodies is exactly analogous to 
supplying entropy and withdrawing volume; and this process makes really 
obvious the very relation between increase in entropy and decrease in volume 
that von Oettingen noticed.
On the crucial point, von Oettingen’s remarks agree with those of Zeuner 
and Mach: The change in a form of energy can be represented as a product in 
each of the cases under consideration. If one of the factors is called the 
“intensity” and the other the “change in capacity”, it can then be asserted that 
the intensities of different forms of energy - temperature and pressure in von 
Oettingen’s analogy - exhibit common characteristics, as do their capacities - 
entropy and negative volume, in von Oettingen’s comparison.

ENERGY FACTORS
309
This product representation of the forms of energy emerges most self- 
evidently, in geometrical clarity, in the thermodynamic diagrams and illustra­
tions which, since Rankine and Zeuner, have become a crucial aid for 
thermotechnics (cf. p. [212]).
3. 
Before I called attention to the general validity of these observations in 
1887, another treatise appeared of which I became aware only after the 
appearance of my book, and which already grasps the relationships in question 
from a truly general standpoint.7
7 Josef Popper, Die physikalischen Grundsdtze der elektrischen KraftUbertragung. Eine Einleitung in
das Studium der Elektrotechnik (Wien, Pest, Leipzig 1884).
The starting point of this treatise is already very characteristic of the original 
thinking of its author. He rightly emphasizes the futility of mechanical 
hypotheses from the standpoint of the applied scientist. We do not know the 
nature of electricity, he says, as the physicists claim we do, and yet calculation 
and measurement occur in the realm of electricity; and this is not only on a 
small scale but - in the transmission of electrical power, for instance - on the 
large dimensions of industrial enterprise. The oddness of this vanishes as soon 
as one reflects that, for questions of the transmission of electrical power which 
can be answered by calculation and measurement, it is not at all a matter of 
things limited to the field of electricity, but rather only of the transportation of 
work in general. And from this genuinely energetic standpoint, Popper then 
considers - coming quite close to Zeuner’s analogy - a ball machine driven by 
gravity: “Heavy balls are lifted to a certain height in one place. Having arrived 
there, they roll along an inclined track to a second place, where, for example, 
they fall with almost no velocity into an overshot wheel - a bucket wheel - and, 
in dropping, drive the wheel to the performance of mechanical work.” The balls 
are to act on the bucket wheel only with their weight, not through impact; as 
with Zeuner, the kinetic energy is regarded as useless and is completely 
consumed by friction in the path. Then the following immediately results for 
the efficiency of the machine: “The work expended has the same relation to the 
useful work (in the bucket wheel) as the height of lift to the height of fall, and 
the latter is less than the former precisely to the extent that the path of 
transport of the balls is inclined.”
Whereas the efficiency, which is completely independent of time, increases 
with decrease of incline, the question of the work to be obtained in a given time 
- the question of the useful effect - leads to a completely different result. Here 
it is a question of the extent to which the number of balls which are lifted during 
each second and delivered to the wheel can be increased. Under certain 
assumptions - for example, the track’s being rough enough to consume the 
kinetic energy, so that the balls traverse the track in a slowly uniform flow - the 
intensity of flow is measured by the inclination of the track. The product of 
intensity of flow and height of fall, which measures the useful effect, will then be 
a maximum - since the sum of these two factors yields the height of lift - when 
the height of fall is equal to half the height of lift. This consideration leads

310 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Popper to the following general formulation:
“In the process of lifting, an otherwise invariable mass is infused with a 
certain capacity for work; this is the product of a quantity of ponderable 
(heavy) mass and a state of work, which depends on acceleration and height of 
lift and is thus different at each point of the height of lift.”
“It is, therefore, the following two factors which are decisive:”
“One factor, which we may view as the carrier of the different states of work, 
and which otherwise undergoes no variation during the process of lifting (or 
fall), we shall call its “quantity” (of ponderable matter); and the other factor is 
just the momentary state of work of this quantity, which depends on height and 
the acceleration due to gravity. Through observation and investigation, we 
must just learn to express both factors correctly in a quantitative manner; and 
their product must then correctly reproduce the work of the quantity under all 
conditions and in all cases ...”
“We must therefore be capable of characterizing each state of energy in such 
a way that, as far as the quantity of work is concerned, it can be determined in 
advance. And since we are certainly fond of generalizing useful methods that 
are already available to achieve our end most rapidly, we shall above all try to 
find out whether we can make do in every physical domain, as we can in 
mechanics, with only two characteristic elements as an alphabet of work, 
singling out these two elements and then expressing them quantitatively.”
4. 
The realization of these admirable fundamental ideas, however, appears to 
me less successful. Popper classifies the different forms of energy under his 
general schema for work
M • (Ki - r2),
in which M is to signify an invariable quantity and V a variable state of work, in 
the following manner:
Gravity:
Kinetic energy:
Heat:
Chemical energy:
Electrical energy:
M ponderable matter
M ponderable matter
M mass x specific heat 
M ponderable matter
M flow intensity
V height of fall x 
acceleration due to gravity.
V one half velocity 
squared.
V temperature.
V quantity of heat 
produced.
V tension.
This choice of the factors M and V - which was probably determined too much 
from considering conduction processes alone - obviously misses in many ways 
the goal that Popper had set himself. It is most conspicuous that the energetic 
assessment was unsuccessful for the case of heat and that chemical energy was 
conceived erroneously.
The scientist to whom we owe a deeper insight into the latter kind of energy, 
namely Gibbs, would also have been able to give fruitful hints for the general 

ENERGY FACTORS
311
solution to the problem of finding equally legitimate, energetically justified ЛГ s 
and Ks. He represented the differential of chemical energy in a manner such 
that, with it, the way for the other forms of energy was also indicated.
And so I believe that, in 1887, I brought this question, which has been 
treated so often, to a kind of unified focus.
Section Three:
Intensity and Extensity
1. The change in the intrinsic energy of a system is always equal to the heat 
dQ supplied to the system being considered from outside and the remaining 
work dA (cf. p. [196]):
(1)
dE = dQ + dA.
In this equation, which expresses the first law of thermodynamics, E is a 
function determined by the momentary state of the system; while dQ and dA 
are of course infinitesimal quantities, but not differentials of such functions as 
are determined by the state of the system at the moment. In order to have such 
functions appear on the right side of the energy equations as well, the second 
law of thermodynamics must be taken into consideration with respect to dQ. 
and the special properties of the different forms of energy with respect to dA. If 
0 is understood to be the temperature of the heat reservoir from which dQ 
originates, then
(2)
dQ < OdS,
in which S is now a function dependent only on the momentary state of the 
system. Correspondingly, dA can be represented as a sum of products of the 
form
(3)
dA = ^2 J dM,
wherein the J’s, like 0. represent states of the energy reservoirs from which parts 
of dE originate, or to which such parts are delivered, but the ЛГs are functions 
depending only on the momentary state of the system being considered.
For example, one of the J quantities could be the external pressure lying on 
the surface parts of the system; but by no means could it be the so-called 
“internal pressure,” which in many cases can not be specified at all. The J 
quantities thus in no way measure the capabilities of the system to produce 
specific forms of energy; only after the appearance of a perfect state of 
equilibrium did they pass over into the values J, which can be viewed as a 

312 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
measure of such capabilities of the system and which can be ascribed to it as 
properties. The equation of Gibbs
dE = OtdS + 'ffjJidM
is therefore only a special case of the relation
dE < OdS + ^JdM,
as has been emphasized above in the discussion of Gibbs’s works (p. [202]). 
In the formula
(4)
dE< 0dS + f\jdM
there thus occur only differentials of functions of the parameters determining 
the state of the system; but, in addition, as factors 0 and J of these differentials, 
quantities that depend on the states of the energy reservoirs, and thus on the 
the states of bodies lying outside the system.
If the investigation is restricted to reversible changes, these factors, 0 and J, 
are also represented by the parameters of the system being considered itself. 
For a change obviously only proceeds reversibly when each of these factors has 
the same value outside the system that it does inside, so that without further 
ado the system itself can also act on its surroundings as an energy reservoir. In 
this case, the inequality (4) passes over into the equation
(5)
dE = 0dS + ^\jdM,
in which now nothing at all appears except functions of the parameters of the 
system being investigated.
As has already been said, I referred to the functions 0 and Jas intensities, and 
the functions S and M were called capacities by Ostwald,8 9 10
 after I had initially 
designated them as quantity functions? Confronted with the objections that 
were also made to this name, I later suggested the name extensity™ while 
Wiedeburg has recently returned again to the term quantity values. Januschke’s 
degree of efficacy is a felicitous German rendering of the word “intensity”.
8 Allg. Chemie, Vol. 2, Part 1, p. 44.
9 Lehre von der Energie (1887), p. 61.
10 Verhandlungen der deutschen Gesellschaft der Naturforscher und Arzte (1895), II, p. 29.
Ostwald’s “capacity” follows a usage that also occurs frequently elsewhere. 
Robert Mayer employs it, for example, in a letter to Griesinger (16 December 

ENERGY FACTORS
313
1842) when he calls “capacity for motion” what is normally called “specific 
gravity”. When, through the same expenditure of force, one cubic inch of iron 
acquires the same velocity as ten cubic inches of wood, then, in his opinion, the 
capacities for motion stand in a ratio of 10:1.
But “intensity” and “extensity” are also venerable expressions of the old 
school. In his first investigation, which remained unpublished (cf. p. [76]), 
Mayer speaks of the “in- and extensity” of motion as things which are 
determinative for the energy of motion.11 And in his essay of 1845 he says: “In 
the living animal, numerous devices are constantly occupied with filtering, with 
aspirating, in order to regulate, in part with expenditure of mechanical force, 
the chemical processes, to increase the intensity of these processes, to decrease 
their extensity....”12
11 Weyrauch, Kleinere Schriften und Briefe von R. Mayer (Stuttgart 1893), p. 102.
12 R. Mayer, Mechanik der Warme 3rd ed. (1893), p. 92.
13 Verhandlungen der deutschen Gesellschaft der Naturforscher und Arzte (1895), II, p. 30.
2. Boltzmann once asserted  of the development of the differential of 
intrinsic energy into the form OdS + JdM that, “for mathematical reasons 
it is, of course, always possible.” To me this way of expressing matters seems to 
contain a misunderstanding of my intentions. Of course, a great many different 
representations of dE in the above form are possible for mathematical reasons. 
The change in the intrinsic energy of the unit of mass of an ideal gas can be 
represented at one’s mathematical pleasure as
13
cvd0
or as
OdS + vdp — (cp - cv)dO,
when p and v denote the pressure and volume, and cp and cv the specific heats at 
constant pressure and constant volume; and an arbitrary number of other 
representations could also be added. But to the extent that the processes 
considered in ordinary thermodynamics are involved, only one
OdS —pdv
corresponds to the intentions I have pursued; only one reproduces the physical 
relationships. The names “intensity” and “capacity” would really have no 
purpose if they were not able to render conspicuous that which is physically of 
the same kind. The essential thing here is to develop dE into the form 
0 • dS + J ' dM, so that certain physical properties are common to the 
quantities 0 and J, the intensities, on the one hand, as well as to the functions 
S and M, the capacities, on the other.

314 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
3. Matters are different in Duhem’s  founding of energetics. To be sure, he 
sets the differential work for all virtual changes of the system as
14
14 Duhem, Mcchanique chimique (Paris 1897), pp. 32 and 96; J. de Math. (4) 9 (1893), p. 239 and 
(4) 10(1894), p. 207.
(6) 
dA — Ma 4- 
4-... 4- MX 4- 0J6f
by denoting arbitrary parameters of the system as o, (3 • • • Л and the temperature 
as 0.
Here A, B, • • Л and 0 are coefficients whose magnitude is determined by the 
external environment of the system. Only when the surroundings are in 
equilibrium with the system do these coefficients - and here Duhem does, after 
all, make use of an aspect of the intensity law - become functions of the 
parameters a,/?,••• A and 0. Equilibrium can indeed exist only when the 
intrinsic intensities of the system are equal to those of its environment. For 
the case of equilibrium, we thus have
(7) 
dA =fada +f0d(3 + ■ • • + fxd\ +fed0.
That the fajp • • • fxje introduced here represent functions of the parameters is 
assumed in classical thermodynamics; but in Duhem’s theory - to be discussed 
further below - it cannot in general be granted. However, let us here stick to the 
usual assumption for the time being. Then, since £ is a function of the 
parameters, it follows from the first law,
dE = dQ 4- dA,
that the differential heat can also be represented in the form
(8) 
dQ — Rada 4- R^dfi 4~ * • • 4~ R\dX 4~ cd0,
in which Ra.Re, ■ Rx and c denote functions of the parameters, namely
?q\ 
p _dE f » -дЕ г » _dE r _dE f
( ) a d<y fa, 0 
f0,-" A f\,C дв fe­
In addition, the energy law tells us that
(10) 
dE = (Ra +fa)da + (Tfy +f?)d(3 + • • • + (Ал +fx)dX + (c +fe)d0
is a total differential.

ENERGY FACTORS
315
In order now also to make use of the entropy law, Duhem restricts the 
variability of the parameters to the effect that only reversible changes are to be 
designated as da, d/3, • • • dX. dO. Then
(11) d^ = dS = ^da + ^dp+-+^dX + C-dO 
V 
V 
и 
V 
(7
is a total differential.
According to (10) and (11), equations hold of the form
(12)
' dRa_dR0 = _[dfa_df£\ dRa de _ (dfa d/H 
д/3 da [ d/3 da j ’ dO da [ dO da J
= 0 
ldRa Ra 19c: 0
. dp da ’ 
0 d0 02 Oda
The relations that first of all follow from this of the form
(13)
dfa_dh 
д/3 da
show that a function Fexists whose derivatives are the coefficients fa,fp • • 
Moreover, it can be seen that
(14)
( % de _ d (dfa d/H 
da)da~ dO[dO da J ’
and that analogous equations obtain for the differentials with respect to the 
other parameters.
At this point15 Duhem introduces a restriction which again shows that the 
development of dE into a form Kdk for purely mathematical reasons is not 
sufficient to reproduce the natural phenomena. Duhem assumes that it is 
always possible to choose the parameters in such a way that © = 0 for all 
external influences, and he calls the parameters thus chosen normal variables of 
the system. For these
(15)
dF = dA
is valid; and, if it is kept in mind that at constant temperature, dO = 0, the 
significance of /’as the thermodynamic potential finally becomes clear:
15 Duhem, Mechanique chimique (Paris 1897), p. 30; J. de Math. (4) 10 (1894), p. 219.

316 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
dF = d(E - OS).
In his recent works, then, Duhem arrives at the foundation of energetics he has 
always considered to be most important, namely the thermodynamic potential, 
through an investigation in which at least some of those properties of our 
natural phenomena are employed which are expressed in the laws of intensity 
and extensity.
4. Which functions must be chosen, then, to obtain from all the mathemati­
cally possible representations of dE in the form ffKdk those which are 
physically most favorable and which reproduce most perfectly our knowledge 
of the forms of energy? That has long since been established by the advantages 
which the functions sought have long provided in the treatment of the different 
forms of energy. Classical thermodynamics had found temperature as intensity 
and entropy as capacity for thermal processes, but for volume energy it had 
used pressure as intensity and negative volume as capacity. With respect to the 
energetic treatment of electrical forms of energy, electrical potential had been 
used as intensity and quantity of electricity as capacity, in particular by 
Helmholtz and Gibbs; and Gibbs adds that a new function must be introduced 
for chemical energy as chemical intensity, which he called the “chemical 
potential,” and that mass should be used as capacity.
5. These secure representations of individual forms of energy as products 
J • dM show that energy of a specific form passes from one body to another only 
when the two bodies have different intensities, and it then passes from the higher to 
the lower intensity)6 Thus, with equality of temperatures in two bodies, no 
energy passes between them as heat; and with equality of pressure, no energy 
passes between them as volume energy. Where a transfer of heat takes place, it 
happens in such a way that the body of higher temperature gives off energy and 
the body of lower temperature receives it; and where an energy transfer takes 
place through a change in volume, the body exerting the greater pressure loses 
energy and the body exerting less pressure gains it.
Mach16
 17 has emphasized very generally the fact stressed here, if also in a 
particular context. He sees in the principle of virtual displacements the 
recognition of a fact “that was instinctively familiar to us for a long time, 
except that we did not apprehend it so precisely and clearly. The fact consists in 
the circumstance that heavy bodies, by themselves, move only downwards. If 
several such bodies are joined together, so that they cannot be displaced 
independently of each other, they then move only when the heavy mass in this 
case is able on the whole of falling; or, as the principle - with more perfect 
adaptation of our ideas to the facts - more simply and exactly expresses it, only 
in the event that work can be performed. If, after expanding the concept of 
16 [The italicized portion is bolded in the text.]
17 Mach, Mechanik (Leipzig 1883), p. 71.

ENERGY FACTORS
317
force, we then transfer the principle to forces other than those due to gravity, 
there lies therein once again the recognition of the fact that the natural 
processes in question occur spontaneously only in one definite sense and not in 
the opposite one. Just as heavy bodies fall downwards, so differences of 
electrical potential and temperature cannot increase by themselves, but only 
diminish, and so on .... The equilibrium equation of the principle can always 
be reduced to the trivial statement that when nothing can happen, nothing does 
happen” It is the law of intensity that gives this fact noted by Mach its most 
general expression.
6. During a cyclic process, the change dM of the parameters of the system 
being considered is once again reversed. If this takes place in such a manner 
that the system absorbs the capacity dM from a reservoir at the intensity 
and then releases dM to another reservoir at the intensity J2, it has thus on the 
whole gained
(Ji - J2) * dM
in energy of this form. Under equal external conditions, that is, equal J\ and 
the greater the transferred capacity dM, therefore, the more energy of the form 
is absorbed (and, of course, again released in a different form during the cyclic 
process). This is the idea pursued by Popper, but with J having replaced 
Popper’s V.
7. 
Moreover, the capacity functions M have the characteristic that, in every 
energy transfer, one body - the energy reservoir - loses as much capacity as the 
other body - the working system - gains, so that the sum of the M function-values 
corresponding to one and the same form of energy is invariable. Thus, the volume 
of one body decreases by as much as the other’s volume increases; and the sum 
of all volumes in a system guarded against energy changes of all kinds is 
constant - namely, the volume of this system. In like manner, the quantity of 
electricity also does not change, nor does the chemically active mass. Entropy 
occupies a special position in that only with the restriction to reversible transfers of 
heat can it be asserted that the sum of the entropy remains constant. In general it 
increases. This is the reason why a special position had to be accorded to heat in 
the equations developed above.
8. 
For all forms of energy, excepting heat, it holds true that without change of the 
capacity function no transfer of the form of energy is possible. Only change of 
volume gives rise to the absorption or release of volume energy; without 
change of the chemically active masses, no chemical energy change is possible; 
and without change in the quantity of electricity, no change in electrical energy 
is possible. Heat is dependent on entropy in this manner only for reversible 
changes.
Looked at more closely, it can be seen that the latter property is really a 
definition: We call volume energy the change in energy that takes place when 
only the volume is changed, just as we call chemical energy the change of 

318 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
energy that occurs when the chemically active masses alone are changed. In the 
same way, a change in the quantity of electricity is our sign of electrical energy, 
and a change in entropy is the sign of the reversible entrance or exit of heat.
9. Finally, it is particularly noteworthy that, in virtue of the second law, the 
most important properties of the intensity and the capacity functions are 
dependent on one another. Gibbs has proved that if entropy possesses the 
property of never decreasing, and if the capacity functions of any form of 
energy yield an invariable sum, then the only transfer of energy possible is one 
from higher to lower intensity. The essentials of this proof have already been 
presented on p. [204]. But in order to give what was said there the general turn 
that is important now, let there be imagined a system of bodies isolated in 
Gibbs’s sense, that is, one capable only of absorption and emission of heat and 
otherwise protected from any outward change of energy. For the individual 
bodies of the system, the equations
(16)
' 8Ё = &8S' + ^J' -8M',
< 8E" = 9"8S" + 
-8м",
hold true, when functions of the same kind, referring to the same bodies, are 
distinguished by primes. In this case, for example, the temperature ff would be 
the one belonging to the first of the bodies, as well as to the heat reservoir from 
which it absorbs heat, supposing that the body carried out in a reversible 
manner the change of state which actually took place. If the change of state 
that actually occurred could not also be achieved reversibly, it would then not 
be possible to speak of the entropy S'. Now, Gibbs (p. [200]) has derived from 
the entropy law the proposition that equilibrium exists when, the entropy 
remaining constant, in any arbitrary reversible or irreversible change of the 
isolated system
(17)
8E' + 8E" + ... > 0.
If any arbitrary change is denoted by 6, it follows, accordingly, that
(18)
Ms’ + o"8s" +...
+ j"6m" +...
+J'28M'2 + J28M"_ +...
+ ...

ENERGY FACTORS
319
If we now assume that the conservation law holds true for the capacities, so 
that in any arbitrary change
dS' + dS" + ... = 0,
(19)
dM\ + dM" + ... = 0, 
dM'2 + dM2 + ... = 0,
- and thus for one, for instance, in which the first of any series of capacities of 
the same kind is dependent on others of the same kind then
dS' = - dS" - dS"'
(20)
dM\ = -dM" - dM'" 
dM'2 = -dM2 - dM2
Under this supposition, formula (18) becomes
(21)
(0" - O'^S” + (0"f - 
+ ... '
+(j;' - j'^mi + (/;" - 
+...
+(J^ - J')<5M" + W 
.
+ ...
and here the differentials are not subject to any restriction: Each of them can be 
chosen zero, positive or negative, independently of the others. The inequality 
can obtain for all possible values of the differentials only when the total 
differences of intensity are zero; hence
ff = 
= 0" =
(22)
Equilibrium thus exists only when the intensities of the same kind in all the 
bodies of the system have the same value. Difference in intensity is disturbance 
of equilibrium.
Any positive change that is, any transfer from another body to the one 
indicated with two primes, is ruled out when the differences

320 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
are positive - as can be seen when, instead of equations (20), the equations are 
also followed which represent changes of capacity other than those of the first 
body by means of those of the remaining bodies. Conversely, therefore, if one 
of the inequalities 
obtains, transfer takes place only from the higher to the lower intensity.
On the other hand, the conservation of the capacities also follows from the 
supposition that equality of intensity is a condition of equilibrium. For by 
means of (22), (18) passes over into (19), since the common value of intensities 
of the same kind may be selected arbitrarily.
10. Instead of using Gibbs’s method of prohibited changes (cf. p. [196-7] and 
[219]), which has been followed here, the proof can also be developed in 
accordance with the method of possible changes. If $ is understood to be the 
temperature of the heat reservoir from which the first of the bodies being 
considered derives its change in entropy dSf, and ti'dS' is replaced, if necessary, 
with a sum of products - namely, if the first body receives its change of heat 
from sources at different temperatures - and if all the intensities are then 
treated in a like manner, the result is that
(23)
dE' < 0’dS’ + dM',
and thus, taking into consideration (16), that
(24)
0 < (tf' - ff)dS' + 
- J')dM'.
While any change of the quantities S', Mf that is possible under the influence 
of the external intensities must satisfy this inequality, all those changes 
6S\ 6M' will be impossible that satisfy the condition
(25)
0 > (tf' -
Thus, if all 6Sf = 0, and in addition SM'2 = 6M3 = ... = 0, but 6M\ 
0,
every change is prohibited, supposing that that i\ conversely, therefore, 
i'x Jrx is the condition for dM[ 0. It is thus impossible for an individual

ENERGY FACTORS
321
extensity of a phase to increase, the others being kept constant, if the 
accompanying intensity J is greater in the phase than in the surroundings; on 
the contrary, it can then only decrease. And it is impossible for an extensity to 
decrease when the other extensities remain unchanged and the intensities 
belonging to them are less in the phase than in the surroundings; rather, in this 
case it can only increase. This fact can evidently be couched briefly in the 
words: Every form of energy has the tendency to pass from higher to lower 
intensity.
Section Four:
The Mechanical Forms of Energy
1. 
Faced with the existence of such far-reaching relationships and the striking 
analogies in the behavior of the forms of energy discussed up to now, it does not 
seem worthless to examine other forms of energy as well, the object being to 
discover whether they possess intensity and capacity factors.
In all cases where a potential function has successfully been found, the 
analogy sought is obvious and is furnished by the behavior of electrical energy. 
The potential function is the intensity, and the capacity is the amount of matter 
which is regarded as the carrier and receiver of the potential function, whether 
this matter is of a ponderable nature, and is also manifest through other 
properties, or whether it is definable only through the energetic relationship.
Thus, Zeuner’s analogy falls under this conception without further ado, for 
the potential function of terrestrial gravitation is given by the product of the 
height of fall h and the acceleration g due to gravity, and the capacity here is the 
heavy mass m. In the technical system of measure, h immediately becomes the 
potential function and gm the capacity, as the relation has been carried through 
by Zeuner. In general, however, the intensity of gravitational energy would be 
represented by
r ,
where M denotes the attractive masses and r their distances from the point of 
reference, and the capacity would be the gravitating mass m.
2. 
With regard to electrical and magnetic energy, we have the historically 
curious case in which scientists, guided by a material hypothesis now almost 
abandoned, at first considered the capacities as immediately given, and learned 
to express the intensities by means of them in such a manner that they found 
the empirical energies and forces. But increasing attention to the quantitative 
aspect of phenomena led to the realization that it is precisely the intensities 
which are directly accessible to measurement, as the states of the various loci of 

322 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
the field of force, and that the capacities must be introduced as numbers to 
yield those empirical energies and forces through the product of them and the 
potential functions. Supported by these three concepts - energy, intensity and 
extensity - the historical development creeps upward.
Lodge once18 raises the question of what electricity is. “Perhaps electricity is 
a material; it is not energy .... Electrification is the result of an accomplished 
work and is certainly a form of energy; it is generated and annihilated by a 
performance of work. Electricity, however, is neither created nor destroyed; it is 
simply moved or placed in a state of tension, like matter.” How simply goes the 
energetic reply to this question! Electricity is the extensity of the form of energy 
whose intensity is electrical tension. And this reply is by no means a play with 
empty names. Rather, definite properties - namely those specified above by 
Lodge - are conferred on electricity through the designation of extensity, just 
as very specific properties are bestowed on electrification by the name 
“energy”.
Lodge, Neueste Anschauungen Uber Elektrizitiit (Leipzig 1896), p. 7.
3. To bring the kinetic energy of a point under the concepts of intensity and 
capacity, it is first of all necessary to resolve the motion with respect to three 
directions which are perpendicular to one another and absolutely fixed. The 
kinetic energy of the x-component, 1nix'2, changes in an element of time by 
mxf • dx'. When this product is written as
У • d(mx'f
and xr - the velocity of the x-component - is understood as intensity, but mx1 - 
the momentum of the x-component - as capacity, then, as can easily be seen, 
the general properties characteristic of intensity and capacity exist here as well. 
If two points are able to move only along a straight line, which we wish to 
consider as the x-axis, then the kinetic energy of the x-component can pass 
from one point to the other only when the two points have different velocities; 
and then it always passes from the faster to the slower one. Of two different 
material points, both of which take in kinetic energy at the velocity x\ and give 
it off again at the velocity x^, the one to which a greater momentum has passed, 
and which thus has the greater mass, takes in more energy. Furthermore, with 
every transfer of kinetic energy, one body loses as much momentum as the 
other gains, the sum of all the momenta of the x-component is constant, and 
change in kinetic energy is impossible without change of momentum.
4. It has probably seemed strange to some that the analysis into intensity and 
extensity is undertaken with such a simple thing as the component of kinetic 
energy. And people have occasionally also had the candor to say that the 
energeticists want thereby only to introduce something new and unusual, and 
that for them it seems a secondary matter whether anything can be accom­
plished with it. Well, in the face of such views it is instructive to see that the 
18

ENERGY FACTORS
323
intensity feature of velocity was already known and usefully employed when the 
mechanics recognized today was first in the process of becoming. It is no less a 
man than Galileo who acknowledges as an axiom that velocity is an intensity. 
In order, namely, to reduce to absurdity the view that in free fall the body 
having the greater mass acquires a greater velocity, he makes use of the 
following line of reasoning. If it assumed that this view is correct, and that the 
mass M > m attains in a given time a velocity V greater than the velocity v 
attained by m, then the still greater mass M + m would attain a velocity even 
greater than V. If, however, the masses M and m, advancing with the velocities 
V and v, are connected to one another, the velocities balance out; that is, the 
total mass M + m receives a velocity lying between V and v and by no means 
exceeding И19 Here precisely the telling difference between intensive and 
extensive properties is employed as an argument: Intensive properties equalize; 
extensive ones are added in the joining of the bodies to which they belong. 
Velocity is intensive in nature and mass extensive.
Galilei, Unterredungerv, Ostwald’s edition, p. 58.
5. 
As soon as the intensity and extensity of a form of energy is established, it 
can be stated for a cyclic Carnot process which is composed of two changes with 
constant intensity and two with constant extensity. It will perhaps be worth­
while to carry this through for a case in which, at first glance, one might be 
tempted to deny that a reversible process exists at all. This is the loss of kinetic 
energy through friction. Obviously, the frictional work passes from higher to 
lower velocity. If a body rubs against a supporting surface that is moving more 
slowly than itself, then it loses and the supporting surface gains kinetic energy 
through the friction; however, if it moves just as rapidly as the supporting 
surface, energy cannot pass by means of friction.
Now let there be imagined a working body К led in a straight line, for 
example, and set up in such a way that during its motion it performs or receives 
work - raises a weight, for instance, or is accelerated by a descending weight. 
While К possesses the velocity a very large body t/1? whose velocity shall 
also be Vi, is brought into contact and frictional transfer with it. Indeed, let the 
friction too be so strong that the velocity Vi is maintained even though work A i 
is performed by K. It is the supporting body Ui that is the source of the work; it 
has been given off to К as the frictional work R].
After the connection between U\ and A? has been terminated, let К perform 
the work A' and thereby come to the velocity v2 < vi-
Third, let К be brought into frictional transfer with a large body U2 whose 
velocity shall be v2? and let there be transferred to this body through frictional 
work R2 on К the work A2 which a descending weight transfers to K, so that the 
velocity v2 remains constant.
Finally, let the contact between U2 and A? be broken off, and let the velocity v2 
be increased to iq by supplying the previously withdrawn work A'.
К has carried out a cyclic process that is reversible, and in the process the 
work A\ — A2 has been performed by K. The energy transferred to К as 
19

324 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
frictional work and transformed into the lifting of weight is Ri - R2 — 
Ai — Л2, while the frictional work R2 has been transferred as frictional work 
by Ui through К to U2.
All of the features of a Carnot process can be recognized in this process. 
Here the frictional work R replaces heat, velocity replaces temperature, and the 
isothermal and the adiabatic stages of the process are clearly reproduced.
6. In treating the kinetic energy of arbitrary systems, there is no need, then, to 
have recourse to analysis into material points - which is perhaps worthy of 
mention with regard to Boltzmann’s remark already discussed on p. [261]. 
Rather, through the treatment of the kinetic energy of the material point, every 
other case is reduced to familiar operations. Thus, the change in the kinetic 
energy of rigid bodies is resolved into six terms, of which three represent the 
translational and three the rotational change. In the former the velocity 
components of the center of gravity appear as intensities, in the latter the 
components of the instantaneous angular velocity; and the capacity functions 
of the former are the components of the momentum, while those of the latter 
are the components of the angular momentum.
7. The forms of energy caused by accelerating forces can also be brought 
under the concepts of intensity and capacity - as I did in 1887 in another work 
- if they are analyzed with respect to three directions perpendicular to each 
other and reciprocal action as an essential property is accorded them. Hence, in 
the expression for the mechanical work, Xdx, X is understood to be a 
component of the attractive force effective between two mass points, and x is 
understood as the component, or projection, of the distance between these 
mass points. According to this conception, Xdx does not belong to one point, 
as it is usually presented, but rather always to a pair of points. Then the 
properties in question at once hold true for this interaction energy. If, that is to 
say, three points are capable of being displaced in the direction of the x’s, 
interaction energy passes from one pair of points to another only when these 
pairs of points have different Jf-components, and it then passes from the pair of 
greater to the pair of lesser force. Of two pairs of points, both of which take on 
interaction energy with the force Xi and give it off with the force X2, that pair 
takes on more energy - and is capable of transforming it into a different form - 
which has undergone a greater change of distance dx. Moreover, with each 
transfer, one pair of points loses as much distance projection x as the other 
gains, while the sum of the distance projections of all pairs of points is 
constant. Finally, changes of the interaction energy in an arbitrary direction is 
impossible without a change of the distance projection in this direction.
8. For interaction energy, as for kinetic energy, resolution with respect to three 
directions perpendicular to one another is a necessary presupposition for the 
applicability of the concepts of intensity and extensity. It must then be added 
for both forms of energy that the choice of the directions is arbitrary, but that 
they must in general be absolutely fixed. Thus, if a pair of points P\P2 

ENERGY FACTORS
325
undergoes no change of its energy other than its interaction energy and the 
kinetic energies of its points Pi and P2, then the energy principle is expressed 
by the equation
0 = xjja(wixi) +y\d(T(m\y\) + 
+x'2dT(m2Xr2) + y^dr^mzy^ z2dT(m2Z2) 
+X(dTX2 - dax\) + Y(dTy2 - d^yx) + Z(dTz2 - daz\)
in which cr and т denote arbitrary directions; xi,yi,zi,wi represents the 
coordinates and mass of the point P^ X2.y2.z2. m2 the corresponding quan­
tities of the point P2; and
X = X2 = -Xx2, Y=Y2 = -YX2. z = z2 = -z\
the components of the attractive force effective between Px and P2, so that 
repulsive forces are represented by negative values of XYZ. X2 indicates the X- 
component exerted from P2 to Pb and X2 the Jf-component exerted from Pi to
If the x-direction is chosen as a and т respectively, there follows
Xj^^iXi) - Xdx\ — 0, 
x,2d(m2x'2) + Xdx2 — 0
x\ d(m\x\) = X2dx\, 
x2d (т2х'2) = X2 dx2.
mix" — X2, 
m2X2 = X2
and analogous equations result for the y- and z-components.
This is the place to return once again to the use of the energy principle in 
mechanics. We saw in Part Six of this book that it does not suffice to write down 
the differential equation of the energy law in order to establish thereby the 
equations of motion. To be able to provide an energetic foundation for 
mechanics, the conservation of energy must instead also be asserted for the 
components taken with respect to any arbitrary possible direction of motion. 
This might appear to be an unnatural makeshift. It might be asked why such 
aids are unnecessary for the energy forms of heat, volume energy or chemical 
energy, and why in those cases the simple differential equation of the 
conservation of energy is sufficient. We now have the answer to this question 
in our hands. A point can have as many forms of kinetic energy as there are 
directions issuing from it. Kinetic energy is not a form of energy in the way 
volume energy is; it is not, like volume energy, capable of only one change in its 
extensity. Its variety is also not nearly exhausted by only three changes in three 
directions perpendicular to one another, but rather only by changes in an 
arbitrary number of directions. And how this capacity for change can be 
described by means of three directions - precisely this is what is established by 
the energy principle of mechanics as we have set it up on pp. [27 l]ff.

326 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
9. In cases where directional differences are precluded, according to all this, a 
different - and for these cases, simpler - representation of kinetic energy is to 
be expected. As a matter of fact, Popper has analyzed the kinetic energy of 
points into mass and half the square of velocity; and Ostwald also makes use of 
Popper’s analysis, in addition to the one I have given. But it must be remarked 
from the outset that this analysis follows from the one treated above. More 
precisely, when the mass particle Dm is brought from rest to the velocity X' - 
for instance, by being caught up by a current sweeping along with this velocity 
in the direction x - its velocity then increases gradually from the amount 0 to 
that of X', and the increase of kinetic energy gained by the mass particle is 
therefore the integral | Xa • Dm formed over x' • d(Dm • x'). And that is the 
expression used by Popper for the change of kinetic energy.
Just as we possess two ways of representing the work transferred to a system 
from outside, the interaction energy Xdx and the potential energy Vdm, so we 
also have two forms of kinetic energy at our disposal, x!d{mxr} and |x/2 • dm. 
Only the latter cannot be applied generally, as can the former. As long as the 
kinetic energy T can be represented as a homogeneous function of the second 
degree of the coordinate velocities //,
1 fdT 1
T = 2^paP> = 2^',‘t‘1'
in which
, dz 
dp
dT 
dp'
fdx 
fdy
mx — + my — + mz 
dp dp
represents the momentum with respect to the coordinate p. The representation 
in Popper’s form | v2 • dm is of very limited applicability by comparison with 
that just given, and is thus unsuitable for the energetic grounding of mechanics.
10. Nevertheless, there is a very important and still really far-reaching case in 
which regard for directional differences is omitted and Popper’s representation 
is usable. These are the monocyclic systems introduced by Helmholtz.  The 
momentary state of a monocyclic (or rather of a “bound” polycyclic) system is 
determined, of course, by an arbitrary number of coordinates p, its parameters, 
but only by a single velocity p'. When V is the potential and T the kinetic energy 
of an arbitrary system, the former being a function of the p, and the latter being 
equal to p'2 multiplied by a function of the p, then the Lagrangian equations of 
motion yield
20
20 Helmholtz treated the subject in five publications in 1884. Wiss. Abh. Vol. 3, pp. 119ff. The 
notation in the text above follows Hertz’s presentation. Cf. Hertz, Mechanik (1894), p. 235.

ENERGY FACTORS
327
(1)
d_ (ЭТ1 
d(V-T)
dt (ojp'j dp
the action P with respect to the parameter p, so that Pdp represents the work 
performed with respect to this parameter.
Now, if the state of the system depends not on the coordinate p, but only on 
its change in velocity p = ^, as is characteristic of a monocyclic system, then
(2)
dt [ Эр' J
is the action that takes place with respect to this cyclic coordinate, and the 
work with respect to it is
(3)
й® = Wp = ^dt = p'<7q
when the canonical momentum with respect to the cyclic coordinate is set as
(4)
dT
Эр' ’
For all non-cyclic coordinates, however, we have
(5)
Э( К - T) 
dp
in conformity with the assumption. 
Now the kinetic energy is
(6)
\dT , 
1 ,
r = WP=24P
and one obtains
(7)
= 2T • — = IT • iZlogq. 
q
According to this result, then, the work taking place in the system with respect

328 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
to the cyclic coordinate can be represented in the form JdM\ and 2T might 
appear selectable as intensity, if infinitely many functions did not share with 2T 
the property of being an integrating denominator for JJB. Helmholtz now 
draws a second property of intensity into the investigation, by treating that case 
alone “where between two systems having equal values of one of their 
integrating denominators a mechanical connection is established in such a 
manner that, while this connection exists, the equality of the denominators in 
question must be maintained.” Helmholtz calls this kind of connection an 
“isomoric coupling” and indicates as examples of such coupling the contact of 
two bodies of equal temperature, the connection of the axes of two tops of an 
equal number of revolutions, and the joining of two closed circuits of equal 
current intensity to a single coil.
Now, if rj is the common value of the integrating denominator in the two 
coupled monocycles, then
(8) 
6®i = r]d(j\, 
d^2 =
are the works carried out in each of the systems with respect to the cyclic 
coordinate, which together yield
(9) 
dffi = r]d((j\ + cr2).
When the corresponding kinetic energies are set as
(10)
T1 = 7?Ф((Т1) T2 = ^((T2)
T — T\ + T2 — r]X(a\ + (T2)
there follows
(11)
+ fl2) = Ф(<Т1) + Ф((Т2).
According to this result, Ф, Ф and X are linear functions of their arguments:
(12)
Ф = fl + C(71 Ф = Ь + C(T2 
X = fl + Z> + c(fli + fl2)
From

ENERGY FACTORS
329
(13) 
— T]dai = 2T\ • dlogth,
Helmholtz then concludes further that
6®2 = TidG'i — TT^' dlogq2
(14)
-2^qi dai -2d(l2
a + c<j\ qi ’ b + co-г 42
or, integrated via the introduction of integration constants a and /3, that
(15)
2c
= a + gti ,
\ 2c
i) =b+c^-
The integrating denominator sought is hereby found; it is
z \ 2c 
✓ /□ \ 2c
(i6) 
7?=Г1[т1 =МЛ ’
iQi ) IQ2 )
which can thus be coupled as an integrating denominator to a multiple of the 
kinetic energy T and a power of the momentum q, in which, however, the 
exponent power for the two coupled systems must be the same.
Certainly, it should be of special interest that in the middle of the last decade, 
while the intensity law was being developed in response to so many different 
stimuli through purely physical, analogical considerations, Helmholtz arrived 
at the same ideas by means of profound mathematical investigations. For a 
knowledge of the function which must have the same value in two systems if 
they are to be able to be coupled without disrupting one another is just the 
knowledge of the most important component of our concept of intensity. It 
eludes Helmholtz’s mathematical approach that the difference in intensity also 
determines the sense in which the disturbance that happens with inequality of 
intensities takes its course. But this deficiency, too, can be remedied by Gibbs’s 
proof, as we have recounted it on p. [318]; and the specified second property of 
intensity can be represented as a mathematical consequence of the law of 
entropy.
In the same manner, certain properties of the capacity functions are also 
suggested by the mathematical approach. Any differential of energy reaching a 
system is in general an inexact differential. If an integrating denominator is 
added to it, it then becomes a total differential of a function that may be 
expressed as a capacity when it is due to certain additional properties, which 
once again are far removed from Helmholtz’s treatment.
Up to now, Hertz21 is the one who has worked through most thoroughly 
Helmholtz’s ideas on cyclic systems, that is, who has studied their intensity and 
21
Hertz, Mechanik, p. 235.

330 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
extensity properties. Depending on whether the intensity p' or the extensity - 
that is, the canonical momentum — q is held constant, the motion is called 
“isocyclic” or “adiabatic”; and so the close relation to thermal changes, and to 
those of different energetic disposition, is already emphasized in the terminol­
ogy-
Section Fiv e:
Conclusion of the Survey of the Forms of Energy
1. Among the remaining forms of energy exhibiting intensity and capacity 
factors, those necessary for describing the phenomena of motion in elastic and 
fluid bodies would now also have to be mentioned, if they were not reducible by 
means of familiar principles to the general forms of mechanical energy, to 
kinetic and potential energy and interaction energy, respectively.
By contrast, surface energy, which Maxwell and Gibbs have already 
represented in the form J dm, and which has been classified by Ostwald as a 
two-dimensional spatial energy between the one-dimensional interaction 
energy and the three-dimensional volume energy, still deserves special atten­
tion. If Q represents a segment of the surface of a homogeneous phase in a 
homogeneous fluid, then enlargement of this surface segment by t/Q requires 
the work
sd£l
The intensity S can here be conceived as a kind of force, by imagining that 
the surface Q has the tendency to shrink. If two surface segments, Qi and Q2, 
are bounded by one another along a line, the boundary will be displaced only 
when the surface tensions, 5i and S2, on the two sides are different; and it will 
then be displaced toward the side of the higher tension, so that the surface with 
the higher tension shrinks and loses intrinsic energy. Energy thus passes from 
the higher intensity to the other one in conformity with the law of intensity.
In addition, a surface which expands by d£l under the tension and then 
contracts by dQ. into its earlier state under the tension S2, will have taken in the 
energy (5i - S2) JQ, and at the end of the cyclic process will have transformed 
it from the form of surface energy into energy of another form.
Furthermore, the surface Q has the property of capacity that one of the 
surfaces decreases by the same amount as the other increases in any transfer of 
surface energy, and that no transfer of surface energy is possible without 
change in the surface size. Transfer of energy must not be confused here with 
transformation. When a drop is suspended in a fluid and changes its form until 
the size of its surface has assumed the attainable minimum, the surface, of 
course, does not remain constant; but here, as well, we do not have a case of a 
transfer of surface energy from one body to another. Rather, surface energy is 
here converted into another form, chiefly into volume energy and kinetic 
energy.

ENERGY FACTORS
331
2. At this point also (cf. p. [313]), it is perhaps appropriate to observe that the 
change in surface energy can certainly be expressed in still another way, in the 
form AdB. However, A and В do not have the properties of intensity and 
extensity with respect to this form of energy. If, for example, perpendicular 
lines are erected on the boundary points of the surface element Dw, and the 
same line segment, Dn, is plotted from all of them toward the outside of the 
surface, the end points then define a surface element and it can easily be 
seen that
Did — Dw = | 
| Dw Dn — 
—|£>v,
Ui r2J 
(n r2)
when Г1 and r2 represent the principal radii of curvature of the surface element 
Deo, and Dv is the volume element formed over Deo. Thus, if a drop of fluid 
expands at one point by the volume element dv through an equidistant 
displacement of its surface points on their perpendicular lines, the surface then 
undergoes an increase
dQ = (- + -1 dV
VI r-)
and the surface energy increases by PdV, when P stands for the expression 
which can be interpreted as capillary or surface pressure.
This transformation of the formula for surface energy is often very useful, 
namely, in all investigations of the conversion of surface energy into volume 
energy; but it is nevertheless only a mathematical transformation, like the 
introduction of suitable coordinates into mechanical problems. Only if all 
surface phenomena could be understood as phenomena of pressure would it 
be justified as a fundamental energetic representation. In other words: Our 
knowledge of a form of energy, our conception of its mode of action, is expressed in 
the choice of the intensities and capacities with which we represent it. Mathema­
tically, this is most prominent in the case of the mechanical energies, which are 
represented differently depending on the choice of coordinates.
3. 
It should not be surprising, therefore, that the last form of energy still 
remaining to be discussed - radiant energy, including electromagnetic energy - 
still has not received a definitive energetic representation. I am not speaking 
here, of course, of the representations that deal with individual aspects and 

332 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
phenomenal domains of radiation and of electromagnetic processes by exploit­
ing, hypothetically, their analogies with mechanical processes. The elasticity 
hypothesis of light certainly provides an energetic representation, as do the 
hydrodynamic analogies for electrical current. The lack of a more comprehen­
sive theory does not concern energetics alone; for, of course, as far as the 
mechanical consideration of nature extends, intensity and capacity are known 
to us as the functions characteristic of interpolated processes of motion.
In so far as he compares the phenomena of luminescence with the second 
law, Emil Wiedemann tried22 to arrive at an energetic explanation of radiation 
by taking the molecular hypothesis as his basis.
22 Wied. Ann. 38 (1889), p. 485.
23 Wied. Ann. 52 (1894).
24 H. Ebert, “Ableitung der Induktionsgesetze auf energetischem Wege,” Zeitschr. f phys. Chem. 18 
(1895), p. 321.
Wilhelm Wien23 has investigated radiant energy with respect to its tempera­
ture and entropy. The study originates in Kirchhoff’s proposition that in an 
empty space bounded on all sides by arbitrary substances, radiation is present 
after the preparation of equilibrium such as if the surrounding bodies were 
completely black, and that the radiation in the state of equilibrium thus 
depends only on the temperature and not on the nature of the bodies. 
“Accordingly,” Wien then concludes, “the radiation of a black body is the state 
of stable equilibrium; any radiation of another disposition in such an arrange­
ment is spontaneously transformed into that of a black body.” But since, in the 
subsequent pursuit of this starting point - which suggests so immediately the 
principles of energetics - the author makes no use of the intensity law, the rest 
of his work is not really relevant to our study.
Up to now, electromagnetic energy has been studied in an independent and 
purely energetic manner, with respect to its intensity and capacity functions, 
only in quite isolated cases. Ebert24 proposes the expression JdN as an 
energetic normal form for “the electromagnetic intrinsic energy of a stationary 
closed linear current,” and considers the current intensity J as the intensity 
factor and the number of lines of force N as the capacity factor of electro­
magnetic energy. “If two circuits are given with the current intensities J) and J2 
and the self-induction coefficients Lj and L2, then the number of lines of force 
passing through each circuit is
Ai = L\J\ + M\2J2^ N2 = L2J2 + M\2J\”
(in which MX2 denotes the coefficient of mutual induction), “and the magnetic 
energy entering one or the other circuit on any change of these numbers of lines 
of force is thus

ENERGY FACTORS
333
J\d(L\J\ + 
J2d(L2J2 + M\2J\).
Accordingly, the total energy present in the field of both circuits when the 
current intensities have increased from 0 to J\ and J2, respectively, amounts to
p2£i +р22£2+ЛЛЛГ12”
Now with this the energy that passes from one circuit to another can actually 
be represented. That is to say, the law of electrical induction results in the 
following manner. If and Д2 are the induced electromotive forces of the 
two circuits, and de\ and de2 the quantities of electricity discharged in them 
during an element of time, then we must have
Aidfei — £±\J\dt — J\d{L\J\ + M^Jf) — J\dN\,
Ai = ~t (L\J\ + M\2Jf) = —± 
dt 
dt
and analogously
A2 = ~t(L2J2 4- Л/12Л) = 
at 
at
In addition to electrical induction, Ebert also derives from his fundamental 
formula - at least, for simple conditions - the ponderomotive effects into which 
the transferred energy can be transformed.
Obviously, the far-reaching question cannot be regarded as settled after this 
first attempt, however important above all the emphasis on the number of lines 
of force might prove to be. In particular, according to the entire plan of Ebert’s 
investigation, the intrinsic energy, JN, of the total electromagnetic field of force 
of a stationary current, whose change must be a total differential, is not 
separated from the form of energy that is transferrable from one current to 
another, and whose change is represented as JdN. If one wishes to pursue the 
transfers of electromagnetic energy, one must consider the volume elements 
that it traverses, and one would evidently arrive thereby at results which can be 
carried over to radiant energy.
4. 
To conclude these remarks on the individual forms of energy, I here append 
an inventory of the results as I first presented them, in more limited compass, in 
my Theory of Energy.

334 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Form of Energy 
heat
Intensity
absolute temperature
Extensity 
entropy
component of kinetic 
energy
velocity component
component of 
momentum
potential energy
(actions at a 
distance, currents)
potential 
function
mass
work with respect to 
a cyclic coordinate
kinetic energy or a 
multiple of the same
a function 
belonging to it 
(p. [327])
work of the reciprocal 
action component
force component
path component
surface energy
surface tension
surface
volume energy
pressure
negative volume
chemical energy
chemical intensity
mass
5. Now, however simple these relations appear, and however illuminating the 
survey of the diverse analytical uniformities manifested in the various domains 
of theoretical physics proves itself to be from the standpoint obtained here - 
nonetheless, the displeasure with energetics that gained currency in 1895 also 
led to a kind of charge of vacuity against the intensity law, a charge which does 
not question its correctness, of course, but only its value and utility. Already at 
Lubeck, Boltzmann  wanted to grant only a very limited value to studies 
having to do with the intensity and capacity properties of the various forms of 
energy. It is a question here, Boltzmann said, only of stationary manifestations 
of energy; the intensity law certainly follows from the second law, with certain 
restrictions, but it is not identical to it and cannot take its place. But, in spite of 
that, he adds that the analogies noted by Zeuner and Mach are highly 
interesting. Planck,  however, immediately declares the law of the separability 
of the forms of energy into capacity and intensity factors, and all it entails, to 
be valid only for reversible processes; and for such processes, he says, 
Hamilton’s principle answers all questions “more unequivocally”(!) and much 
more completely than does energetics. After delivering this sovereign verdict, 
Planck still succeeds in trumping it - by naming as energetics only one 
direction of the unified development of energetic ideas - as follows: “Energetics 
has nothing, absolutely nothing at all, to point to in the way of positive 
accomplishments up to the present day!”
25
26
25 Verhandlungen der Gesellsch. der Naturf. und Arzte, II (1895), pp. 30 and 31.
26 Wied. Ann. 57, pp. 76 and 77.

ENERGY FACTORS
335
Here we must only vigorously call attention once more to the error expressed 
in the opinion that the properties of intensity and extensity do not reach as far 
as a mechanical view of nature. After mechanics has been energetically 
grounded, the intensity and extensity functions are obviously given, as a matter 
of course, for any mechanical conception of a process, and thus for any 
application of Hamilton’s principle. For any work proceeding to the mechan­
ical system, not only is it possible to state integrating divisors - since, of course, 
such work must itself again be represented as mechanical work - but also to 
carry out the analysis into such factors as possess the characteristic properties 
of intensity and extensity. Where the hypotheses vary - for example, as to 
whether a work should be regarded as kinetic or as potential energy - this is 
expressed very simply in the possibility of choosing different intensity func­
tions. When, for instance, Lodge27 renders electrical processes in the dielectric 
tangibly and mechanically by means of a clockwork with perfect cog action, the 
wheels of which are of molecular size, and uses wheels that slide imperfectly on 
one another for the electrical processes in conductors, it is thus the angular 
velocity of the wheels with which he visualizes the potential; a mechanical 
intensity takes the place of the electrical one. And the angular momentum, 
decreased or completely annihilated by sliding friction, as the case may be, 
must serve to replace the quantity of electricity; a mechanical extensity thus 
replaces an electrical one.
Lodge, Neueste Anschauungen uber Elektrizitat (Leipzig 1896).
But the intensity law liberates us from the compulsion to interpret everything 
that happens mechanically. Why, then, do we do this, why do we represent a 
phenomenon hypothetically as a process of motion? With no other intention 
than to declare that we describe it accurately in accordance with our experience 
when we regard certain of its parameters as velocities, others as forces and still 
others as line segments, masses, and so on. But since nothing is experienced of 
the system under observation other than the entry or exit of forms of energy, it 
thus becomes a matter in every case of forcing the intensities and extensities of 
these forms of energy to conform to the point of view that they are mechanical 
intensities and extensities. At best one thereby obtains a graphic, intuitive 
mechanical picture; but what is essentially beneficial in the process of thought 
is only the recognition that certain parameters of the system possess the 
properties of intensity and others those of capacity.
From the standpoint of the intensity law, the picture of all happening in the 
domain of mechanical processes is a special case; and it is only habituation to 
the abundance of the forms of space that speaks in favor of the mechanical 
energies. Indeed, it can be charged against mechanics, as a theoretical and 
logical deficiency of its usual form, that it already makes use of two forms of 
energy for representing pure processes of motion. (This is, of course, a 
circumstance that becomes prominent as a deficiency only in the theoretical 
foundation of mechanics; in practical application, it immediately proves to be 
an advantage, by giving rise to the high adaptability of mechanics.) Hertz 
eliminates this logical deficiency by allowing only a single form of energy to 
27

336 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
exist, namely kinetic energy. By introducing suitable parameters for them - 
that is, by introducing purely geometrical connections among the moving 
masses - the effects of force of the usual approach are successfully portrayed 
as appearance, as changes in kinetic energy with respect to fictitious para­
meters.
A far more naive reduction of mechanical processes to changes of kinetic 
energy is the conception of each action of force as a consequence of numerous 
collisions, as it has been upheld in the kinetic gas hypothesis.
Conversely, in the foundation of mechanics, and in applied mechanics, use is 
occasionally made of the notion of regarding changes in kinetic energy as the 
working of a force that exhibits throughout the character of forces caused by 
geometrical connections or actions at a distance. The characteristic quality of 
kinetic energy is temporarily so obliterated by this accelerative force that we 
would also like to see from this approach an attempt at a unified conception of 
all mechanical forms of energy.
In all these modifications, however, quantities of intensity must once again 
be represented by quantities of intensity, and extensities by extensities. I 
therefore find that the intensity law reduces a very general procedure of 
theoretical physics to its empirical causes, and I cannot assign to mechanics 
any other position in physics than belongs, for instance, to analytical geometry 
in geometry in general.
6. 
In view of the antipathy which has met the intensity law, and the modern 
energetics attached to it, I am unable to suppress a suspicion. Steps have been 
taken here, steps regarded by the energeticists as steps forward, which now 
appear so extraordinarily simple and self-evident. At least, energetics does not 
see the salvation of theoretical physics in recourse to elliptical functions and 
multidimensional spaces, but rather in a revision of fundamental concepts. Just 
as Herschel once balked at Rankine’s nomenclature for energy, complaining 
that with the introduction of actual and potential energy, whose sum now really 
appears so obviously constant, “a commonplace is put in place of a great 
truth,” so today energetics no doubt strikes some as too trivial. I suspect that 
opponents are ill-disposed towards energetics because it pays less attention to 
the most sublime things than it does to the most elementary ones. After all, 
Planck has already raised against the energeticists the old reproach of the 
Athenians against the innovators: that we are corruptors of the youth!
Certainly, energetics wishes to try a new start on fundamentally new paths; 
the old tracks are worn-out enough! Back to nature, to the nature of all 
theorizing, to our most basic ideas about natural events!
7. Of the simple clarifications constituting the yield of the new approach, let 
us point out one here through which a situation that has exercised Planck a 
great deal is placed in the correct light. The words were already cited on p. [269] 
in which Planck  explains how, in many cases, the “equation expressing the 
28
Planck, Erhaltungder Energie, p. 127.
28

ENERGY FACTORS
337
conservation of energy separates into several equations, the total energy into 
kinds of energy ...”. It must certainly be taken into consideration that the 
independence from one another both of the kinds of energy and of the kinds of 
external action in this case, as in all similar cases, can never be advanced a 
priori, but must always first be experimentally founded.” This separation of 
energies is the situation I wish to discuss here from the standpoint of the laws of 
intensity and extensity. Planck designates this fact, recounted elsewhere in his 
words, as the “principle of the superposition of energies.” But it is a question of 
a fact which holds true in some cases and for some kinds of energy, while for 
others it does not. Where is the character of principle here?
In principle, as we have seen (cf. p. [218] and [220]), the matter must surely be 
understood on the basis of Gibbs’s calculations. The extensities are functions of 
the parameters determining the state of the system. If we denote the parameters 
as р\тР2-..рп, then the individual forms of energy can be represented by 
expressions of the form
J' dM' 
dp, J'dM" = V J" dp,...
dp 
dp
On the other hand, since the intrinsic energy E is also a function of the 
parameters p, the energy law thus appears in the form
v~л dE 
, dM' y^ Tn dM”
> -7rdp<y J'—-dp+y J"--—dp +.... 
dp 
dp 
dp
Now, it is true that this equation falls into parts under certain frequently 
occurring conditions; and the process can be conceived as a superposition. This 
is occasioned by the law of extensity. The extensities of one and the same form 
of energy influence one another, since not only the masses of the individual 
chemical elements, but also the volumes of the bodies engaged in reaction, their 
electrical charges and momenta, etc. satisfy laws of conservation. Often, 
however, the extensities of the different forms of energy also influence one 
another; thus, the masses and volumes, or the masses and the electrical 
charges, can be linked with one another, as the examples of Gibbs that have 
been mentioned show. If the parameters are then successfully chosen in such a 
way that the individual equations of state which the extensities must satisfy 
influence only individual parts of the energy formula, then the latter, too, 
separates into parts. When Gibbs’s works were discussed, this was carried out 
according to various methods with a few examples; and I fail to see that there is 
a superposition of energies other than this one, founded in the law of the 
conservation of extensities and already used by Gibbs. According to this 
conclusion, what Planck is trying to express in his principle of superposition 
amounts to the methodological precept, which is self-evident for mathematical 

338 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
treatment, that the parameters of the system must be chosen appropriately 
when using the propositions about the conservation of extensities.
8. 
The attempt has repeatedly been made to distinguish individual forms of 
energy in intrinsic energy; and I have already pointed out the futility of these 
endeavors in the discussion of Rankine’s works (p. [163]), as well as in the 
discussion of free energy (p. [234]). The intrinsic energy of a body is a 
completely undifferentiated whole. According to circumstances, it can pass to 
other bodies completely, or in different partial amounts, in arbitrary forms of 
energy, in order once again to become in these a part of the undifferentiated 
whole that is called their “intrinsic energy”. That energy separates into special 
funds cannot in general be maintained. The man who has championed this 
claim most bluntly is the same man who has opposed it most vociferously - 
Planck. It emerges clearly from Planck’s own words, cited on p. [268-9], that he 
imagines the intrinsic energies of a system separated into components which 
are influenced individually by the different kinds of energy entering the system, 
so that kinds of energy can be distinguished in intrinsic energy. The serious 
complications to which this conception leads then caused him, in 1896, to 
oppose “energetics”, because volume energy represents a mathematical absurd­
ity.
Now, it is true that the intrinsic energy E has also been split up by others, in 
addition to Planck, according to the schema
E = ^JM.
This is certainly unjustified. We know nothing about the intrinsic energy of a 
system itself; we know only its differential
dE = ^JdM
with an approximation that must be sufficiently adapted to the given circum­
stances. And, insofar as heat must be taken into consideration in accordance 
with these circumstances, even this equation can be affirmed only in the ideal 
limiting case of reversibility. In general, then, it is only established that
dE <^J dM,
where E and all the ЛГ s here are functions of the parameters defining the state 
of the system in question.
The case occurring in mechanics, in which E is a function of the parameters 
and simultaneously of their derivatives with respect to time, even compels us to

ENERGY FACTORS
339
the still more general formulation 
d„E < J daM,
in which indicates certain differential operations that are developed in more 
detail above.
Our knowledge of the energy of a body is thus always represented 
mathematically only by differentials. About energy in general we know, more­
over, that the sum of the simultaneously resulting changes in energy, dE, of all 
bodies entering into a reaction vanishes - a proposition that is already 
contained in the above relations, but only for the case of reversibility. Any 
integration of the differential equations that obtains for reversible processes is 
correct only under certain conditions, for example, with constant J\ or 
constant M2, and the like.
According to this conception of the transformations of energy, energy exists 
in one of its forms only in the moment of transfer from one intrinsic energy into 
another. It leaves one body as kinetic energy, as volume energy, as heat, as 
reciprocal action, and so on, in order to incorporate itself into the intrinsic 
energy of another. Only the terms JdM of the total change of energy exhibit 
physical individualities, and their integration is meaningless.
This has been acknowledged with respect to heat, of course, as long as there 
has been a mechanical theory of heat. While the material theory of heat 
attributes to every body a store of heat, under the influence of thermodynamics 
there has now developed general consent to the finding that what enters a body 
as heat, or what exits it as heat, cannot also be denoted as heat in the body. No 
matter how and in what form a body may have taken in energy, it can give it off 
again as heat; but in no sense does it possess a store of heat.
One kilogram of liquid water does not “contain” 80 calories more than one 
kilogram of ice, but has received 80 calories in a certain kind of genesis from 
ice and discharges 80 calories in a certain kind of transition into ice. What it 
contains is always only undifferentiated energy.
But, it will then be objected, does not every body possess an entirely definite 
quantity of energy in the form of kinetic energy? By no means. Of course, as 
long as we are in the realm of the pure mechanics of material points, intrinsic 
energy is in general identical to kinetic energy; and then, of course, a definite 
kinetic energy may be ascribed to a body. But in the case of a physical body, 
there is no more reason to talk about its store of kinetic energy than there is to 
speak of its store of heat. Just as neither the product of temperature and heat 
capacity, nor any other function dependent on the momentary state of a body, 
can be regarded as its store of heat - because the heat obtainable from the body 
in the transition from one state into another does not at all depend only on 
these states, but rather on the kind of conversion - so in general no state 
function of the body can be designated its kinetic energy, in the sense that its 
change would represent the energy obtainable from the body in kinetic form. 
Each of its points possesses velocity and momentum; its mass is indestructible,

340 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
and, as a result of this, the value of the mathematical function 
22 
+У2 + z'2) can always be written down; but how much kinetic
energy an explosive material yields under given conditions depends on 
parameters which do not enter into the mathematical function at all. Momen­
tum, the extensity of kinetic energy, always depends only on the parameters 
describing the motion, but kinetic energy does not. Just as it is not heat that 
must be introduced and withdrawn in equal amounts during a reversible 
process, but rather entropy, in like manner it cannot be affirmed that the gains 
and losses of kinetic energy during a cyclic process (for example, inelastic 
impact) must balance out, as those of momentum - that is, the extensity of 
kinetic energy - certainly must. The special physical existence of kinetic energy 
does not follow from its great utility for analytical mechanics.
As long as we can give a purely mechanical explanation for a natural process, 
we are able to state the change of its intrinsic energy
dE = dT + dE$
as the sum of two differentials which are in general inexact. This is done by 
referring to dE$ as the change of the energy in the substance at rest, with
dT = 
• d^mx') 4- y' • d(myf) + zf • d(mz')}
= dx + my"dy + mzudz}
representing the change distinguishing the moving body from the body at rest. 
It is only because, up to now, consideration of the masses m as independent of 
all influences entering into dE$ could also be carried through with electrical 
and magnetic processes that kinetic energy plays its independent role as 
compared with other forms of energy. The reason for this, as can be seen, is 
the formulation of the concept of mass; technically, it has no energetic basis. 
Kinetic energy appears even more independent when dT is a total differential, 
hence in conservative systems.
Section Six :
Ostwald’s Treatment of the Energy Factors
1. The intensity law appears so general in its mathematical formulation that it 
is really desirable to bring the individual characteristics of its far-reaching 
relations into bold relief by means of striking turns of phrase. Ostwald has 
endeavored on many occasions, and from various perspectives, to shed light on 
the properties of the concept of intensity; and although some of his formula­
tions only concern special cases and many an expression is not sufficiently 
fortunate to guard against misunderstandings, nonetheless Ostwald’s attempts 
to arrive at a convincing formulation of these relations, so difficult to grasp in 

ENERGY FACTORS
341
their generality, appear worthy of very prominent notice. In this area, if 
anywhere, it is easy to find fault, but difficult to do better.
To begin with, Ostwald29 has worked out more fully the general viewpoints 
developed above for a frequently occurring special case. Let there be only two 
forms of energy under consideration; only the energy form J'dM1 and J"dM" 
can be supplied to the system or withdrawn from it. Let the system be in 
equilibrium and remain there, or let it pass reversibly into a new state of 
equilibrium without changing its intrinsic energy. Then
Leipziger Berichte (1892), p. 229.
0 = J'dM' + J"dM".
For many machines it is a question primarily of transforming energy of one 
form into energy of another form, excluding as much as is feasible both other 
forms of energy and the accumulation of intrinsic energy. For such machines, 
then, the relation between the two changes in capacity is fixed through a 
geometrical connection. Accordingly, we further assume that all possible 
changes of the system can be described by a single parameter p, so that
dAf T„dM" n 
dp dp
is the condition of equilibrium. If one sets
dMf dM" 
dp dp
there follows
-kJ1 = Г
By calling the factor к a machine factor and the expression kJ1 the reduced 
intensity, Ostwald expresses his result as a generalized law of intensity in these 
words: “Equilibrium occurs between two energies when the intensity of the one 
is equal and opposite to the reduced intensity of the other.” Of course, 
Ostwald’s mathematical formulae for this proposition look different from those 
appearing here. However, I believe that in the above manner I have provided 
proper mathematical clothing for the meaning contained in the development of 
his ideas.
29

342 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
For example,30 if a pressure P acts on one side of a piston confining a gas of 
volume V and a force X acts on the other side, then with a displacement dx of 
the piston, the change of energy would be
Ostwald, Allgemeine Chemie II, Pt. 1, p. 35.
- PdV + Xdx.
Only one parameter x is present here and
dV = q ■ dx,
where q stands for the surface area of the piston. This q is here a “machine 
factor” and
Pq = X
is the condition of equilibrium.
2. If, again with the help of a machine factor, the change in the intrinsic 
energy of a body be brought into the form
dE^= дм{ дМ'{ (тЧ: . г,.дМ'( 
dp 1 dp 1 dp 1 
1 dp
and if, correspondingly,
ЭЕ2 (T’k+J"xdMl 
—=(J2k2+J2)__.
holds good for a second body, then no change of energy will occur when
дЕ^дЕ^-П’к + Т"\дМ" + (Т'к
In addition, for reversible transfers of energy between the two bodies, 
dM" dM" n 
---- -H------- = 0 
dp dp
30

ENERGY FACTORS
343
is also valid, so that
- J'2k2) = J" -J2.
Ostwald formulates this relation in these words: “For equilibrium it is 
necessary that jumps present in the intensity of one kind of energy be 
compensated by equivalent opposed jumps in the intensity of other energy. 
The equivalence of the opposed jumps, however, is determined by a machine 
equation.”31
31 Ostwald, Allgemeine Chemie II, Pt. 1, p. 35.
32 ibid, p. 46.
3. Elsewhere, Ostwald takes as his starting point the law of intensity as I 
expressed it in 1887: “Any form of energy has the tendency to pass from places 
in which it is present at higher intensity to places of lower intensity.” In 
connection with this principle, he says: “When it is noted that everything which 
happens in the natural world amounts to transformations of energy, Helm’s 
principle can be expressed in another form as follows: In order for something 
to happen, it is a necessary condition that the intensity of the energy present be 
different at different places. However, this necessary condition of happening is 
not a sufficient one. For we can observe everywhere that, despite the intensity 
differences present, energy equalization does not result ” By then calling the 
condition in which a state of rest results, given the present intensity differences, 
a “compensation of intensities”, Ostwald arrives at the law of happening: “For 
something to happen, it is necessary and sufficient for non-compensated 
intensity differences of energy to be present.”32
To be sure, the energetic treatment of mechanics has shown the complica­
tions that immediately appear when the changes of a system, in addition to 
depending on parameters p, are also dependent on their derivatives p' with 
respect to time. In statics, where this twofold connection is lacking, because the 
velocities do not attain any finite value, application of the energy principle does 
not encounter any difficulties; and the theory of cyclic systems, in which at least 
each individual parameter appears either only as p alone or only as p' alone, 
also conforms easily to energetic principles. But it is still hazardous to give 
views obtained from such situations a formulation wherein they appear 
applicable to all transformations of energy. Of course, it could very well be the 
case that there are forms of energy which exhibit even more complicated 
relationships than do the dynamical forms; and the energy principle would 
then also have to hold good for these - for radiation, for example - if it is true 
at all. If, beginning from the individual forms of energy, we are therefore 
guided by inductive inference to form general propositions about the intensities 
and capacities, it is still desirable to secure a guarantee of the suspected general 
relationship in yet another way. Ostwald repeatedly makes use of such a truly 
far-reaching guarantee, by appealing to the perpetuum mobile principle.

344 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
4. More precisely, when it is established that energy transfers can be caused 
by differences of intensity, it can then also be demonstrated that intensities are 
quantities having a universal character, namely, that for them the proposition 
holds true whose value for energetic investigations was first pointed out by 
Helmholtz in 1884 in his study on monocyclic systems,  and which Ostwald  
formulates as follows: “Two intensities individually equal to a third are equal to 
one another.” Or: “If two bodies or systems are individually in equilibrium with 
a third with respect to one or several kinds of energy, then they are also in 
equilibrium with one another with respect to the same kinds of energy. By 
equilibrium is understood here a state in which any kind of energy present 
retains its value unchanged with respect to quantity and composition. There 
may be a temptation, perhaps, to regard this proposition as self-evident, since 
it is formed by analogy with the general principle: ‘Two quantities that are 
equal to a third are equal to each other.’ But precisely the empirical evidence 
that such a principle holds true for the intensities serves to prove that the 
intensities of energy are general quantities, that is, quantities of a character 
independent of the particular object in which they appear.”
33
34
33 Helmholtz, Wiss. Abhandlungen.Nck. 3, pp. 159 and 167.
34 Ostwald, Allgemeine Chemie, Vol. II, Pt. 1 (1893), p. 472.
“The proof of this proposition lies, to begin with, in the possibility of 
determining numerically quantities of intensity such as temperature, force, 
pressure, electrical potential, and so on, independently of their manner of 
occurrence. When we measure temperatures by means of a thermometer, and 
pressures by means of a manometer, we tacitly presuppose that proposition, for 
we assume that all bodies yielding equal readings with our measuring 
instruments are also equal among one another with respect to the quantity in 
question; and that, consequently, we have measured a quantity which is 
independent of the particular nature of those bodies and depends only on the 
kind of energy in question ”
“People can convince themselves of the correctness of our proposition in a 
much more comprehensive way from the impossibility of producing a perpe- 
tuum mobile?'
“That is to say, it is usually not taken into account that the principle of the 
perpetuum mobile has two sides. On the one hand - and this is usually the only 
side to receive attention - a perpetuum mobile (which we should like to call a 
perpetuum mobile of the ‘first kind’) could be produced if one were able to 
produce energy and use it for the operation of any machine. The expression of 
this impossibility is the first law of energetics, which states the impossibility of 
creating and annihilating energy.”
“On the other hand, however, a perpetuum mobile could also be operated 
without generating energy if it were possible to induce the resting energy, of 
which there is always an enormous quantity present, to take part in transforma­
tions. If, for example, the immense supply of thermal energy that is present in 
the water of the oceans could be transformed into mechanical and chemical 
energy, which in the course of time would once again assume the form of heat, 

ENERGY FACTORS
345
a perpetuum mobile could also be set in motion. Let such a perpetuum mobile be 
called one of the ‘second kind’. This is not possible because the supply of heat is 
at a uniform temperature and is thus not transformable (the relatively 
insignificant temperature differences which are actually present are not con­
sidered here).”
And, so, Ostwald refers to the second law as the claim that A perpetuum 
mobile of the second kind is impossible. However, the impossibility is caused by 
the property of the intensities that two intensities are equal to one another 
when they are equal to a third. For if this latter principle were not valid, and if 
two bodies A and В in contact with water assumed different temperatures, we 
could then use the difference in temperature to convert heat into other forms of 
energy and to repeat the process as often as we wish.
Thus, for example, Ostwald has demonstrated,35 following an idea of 
Konowalow,36 that it is necessary for two solutions in equilibrium with respect 
to diffusion to also be in equilibrium with respect to their vapor pressures. If, 
for example, we imagine a saturated solution of water and ether in contact with 
a saturated solution of ether in water to be contained in two vessels, both of 
which communicate above and below, then if the vapor over one of the fluids 
has a different pressure than that over the other fluid “or if it is differently 
composed, a continuous distillation or diffusion would take place from one 
side to the other without ever coming to a stop, since the fluids would also 
always be equalized by diffusion.”
35 Ostwald, Allgemeine Chemie, Vol. I (Leipzig 1891), p. 645.
36 Konowalow, Wied. Ann. 14(1881), p. 219.
The far-reaching nature of the concept of intensity seems to emerge most 
clearly in these remarks of Ostwald. What Sadi Carnot emphasizes about 
temperature is not limited to temperature. Every intensity has the properties 
which are stressed in the mechanical theory of heat as fundamental properties 
of temperature. What is special and exceptional about heat lies in the properties 
of its extensity, of entropy. Entropy exhibits peculiarities which have for a long 
time impeded a clear view of the general properties of heat that are common to 
all forms of energy.
Section Sev en:
Special Investigations of the Energy Factors of Heat
1. There is an extraordinarily large number of works which try to compre­
hend the second law of thermodynamics, and the irreversibility of many 
processes connected with it, under some mechanical or non-mechanical 
picture, or that instead try only to put it in order mathematically.
If E is the intrinsic energy of a homogeneous substance, V its volume and P 
the pressure exerted on it, then, according to the first law, in any reversible 
process in which the heat dQ is supplied to the substance,

346 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(1) 
dE = dQ-PdV.
However, the expression
(2) 
dE + PdV = dQ
is not a total differential, since, by supplying various quantities of heat, a state 
of the substance determined by P and V can be converted into a different one, 
allowing in the process variously large amounts of work PdV to be outwardly 
given off. On the other hand, expression (2) has an integrating divisor; that is, 
there is a function в of the quantities P and V considered as coordinates that, 
when divided into equation (2), yields a total differential - the differential of a 
function S of P and V- so that
(3) 
dQ = dE + PdV = OdS.
Moreover, this proposition - recognized by the founders of thermodynamics, 
and above all by Clausius - can be regarded as an application of a theorem of 
Lie concerning Pfaffian differential expressions, and thus also allows some 
mathematical relations to be opened up for the general case treated in modern 
energetics in which the state of a substance depends on more than two 
variables.
This theorem37 runs as follows: When a single relation exists between 2n + 1 
quantities y, q, then the expression
Cf. e.g. Forsyth, Theory of Differential Equations I, p. 248.
(4) 
dyo + ^qidyi
1
can be transformed into
(4b) 
EPidXi'
1
And when a single relation exists between In quantities y, q, then the 
expression
37

ENERGY FACTORS
347
(5) 
qidy,
1
can be transformed into
(5b)
к-1
+ y^Pidxj.
i
Through alternate application of the two propositions,
(6) 
dE-^JdM 
can be converted into the expression
(6b) 
OdS, 
if a sufficient number of conditions among the quantities £, J and M are at 
hand. It must be noted here that even one relation of a particular nature 
permits several steps in the reduction to be carried out.
The usual transformation (3) for the case of two variables is possible because 
a relation in fact does exist between £, P and V, for E is determined by P and V. 
With gases, for example, the equation of state of the substance yields an 
equation between P, V and the temperature в; and, since the intrinsic energy E 
is a function of 0 alone, E follows as a function of P and V.
If n homogeneous substances not in contact with one another were given, 
and if E = Ei were their total energy, then the expression
(7) 
dE + y^pjdvj
n
could only be reduced to the form
(7b) 
e'dS'-
n
That is, £ is a function of all j>z, vz , 0Z, and the equation of state of the substance 
in question obtains between each and the pi and vz belonging to it. The 
elimination of the 0i thus yields a single relation between E and all the /?z vz.

348 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
On the other hand, if the n substances are in contact with one another, their 
pressures are then mutually dependent; and, since they are equal, the expres­
sion YhnPidvican be contracted to one term,pJK, so that it then the same as the 
previous case.
In like manner, it can be concluded from the fact that the equation
dE + PdV - У2 П,ч/М( = OdS 
m
obtains for a homogeneous material composed of m different chemical 
components, that there is a certain number of relations present among the 
chemical intensities П and the masses M, as well as among the quantities E, P 
and V.
2. According to this result, the purely mathematical line of reasoning which 
seeks the integrating divisor offers a way of arriving at the entropy function. 
Zeuner has presented the matter in this manner in the second edition of his 
Mechanical Theory of Heat?* If
(8)
dE = XdP + ZdV,
where X and Z are functions of the variables P and V satisfying the equation
v ' 
dv dp'
then
(10) 
dQ = XdP+(Z + P)dV.
For this expression to have an integrating divisor 0, it must be the case that:
(11)
д _ d (Z + P) 
dV I?J - dP ( 6 J ’
from which follows, taking (9) into consideration,
(12)
O-(Z + P}de хдв 
e-{z + P)dP~Xdv-
38 Zeuner, Mechanische Warmetheorie, 2nd ed. (1866 and 1877), p. 41.

ENERGY FACTORS
349
Of course, it cannot be discerned in this way that the integrating divisor 0 - 
which nevertheless appears from this result as a function of P and V to be 
ascertained separately for each substance - is actually a function of tempera­
ture alone, that is, of the absolute temperature; and that it is, accordingly, a 
function which is independent of the nature of the substance being considered 
and the same for all bodies. Clausius39 found it necessary to call special, critical 
attention to this fact, even though Zeuner first expressly derives the justification 
for regarding the absolute temperature as that integrating divisor through his 
comparison (cf. p. [299]) of the intensity properties of heat and gravity. In any 
case, Zeuner’s line of reasoning is well suited from the start to make clear the 
existence of the function S.
Clausius, Mechanische Wdrmetheorie,No\. 1, p. 365.
Zeuner’s approach was taken up again much later by Helmholtz with 
another purpose. If s is introduced as a function of 5, dQ = OdS can also be 
affirmed, so that
(13) 
dQ = 0^- • ds = T] • ds;
ds
and now
<14>
is the integrating divisor of the expression
dQ = dE + PdV.
“But the important difference obtains that rj is no longer the quantity whose 
equality announces thermal equilibrium between two bodies. In the whole 
series of functions given by equation (14), this property belongs only to the one 
for which ту = 0? It is the property of intensity through which 0 is distinguished. 
“The essential physical significance of the temperature 0 is that its equality or 
inequality between two bodies determines whether, and in which direction, heat 
can pass from one to the other.” If, therefore, a monocyclic system is to be 
usable for picturing reversible thermal processes mechanically, not only is it 
important to show that kinetic energy - which is, of course, to take the place of 
temperature - can occur as an integrating denominator, but it must be 
demonstrated that two such monocyclic systems can be coupled when their 
kinetic energies are equal. And it must further be shown that when the coupling 
condition is observed for systems 1 and 2, as well as for 2 and 3, it is also 
satisfied by systems 1 and 3; for when each of the two bodies is in thermal 
39

350 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
equilibrium with the same third body, they are in thermal equilibrium with one 
another.
The value of such an approach should appear considerably diminished by the 
formalities these investigations require. Above all, however, it can be seen that 
even with mechanical analogies, it is not possible to dispense with the empirical 
properties of intensity, as we have already observed on p. [329].
3. 
Budde’s  investigation of the concept of temperature as an integrating 
divisor, which often refers to Lippmann’s  representation of the absolute 
temperature scale, is very instructive. Budde takes as his starting point the fact 
that the intensity of thermal energy can be indicated by a great many different 
things: The volume of a body with its own vapor pressure, its volume at 
constant pressure, the electrical resistance of a wire and the dissociation 
pressure of a substance are all such things as may be used as thermometers. 
For the sake of convenience, let there be chosen one quantity for the 
measurement of thermal intensity which always increases, within the limits of 
measurement, when heat is supplied to the thermometer. For a given thermal 
intensity, this quantity indicates an amount which is to be called the “scale 
magnitude” of intensity. Empirically, this is a universal quantity, that is, two 
bodies are in thermal equilibrium with respect to one another when each is in 
equilibrium with a thermometer of a given scale magnitude. Now, if the scale 
magnitude is actually to measure the intensity tendency of heat, it cannot be 
possible to convey unlimited amounts of heat from bodies of lesser scale 
magnitude to those of greater scale magnitude without any expenditure of 
work. And, according to the works of Clausius and Thomson, the necessary 
condition for this is that the ratio of the heat transformed to the heat 
transferred in an infinitesimal cyclic Carnot process is a pure function of the 
scale magnitude
40
41
40 Budde, Wied. Ann. 45 (1892), p. 751.
41 Lippmann, J. dephys. 3 (1884), pp. 53 and 277.
1 (дм BN] 
A 
.
й 
= 
= function of ,
M [dv 
dv ) 
C
in conformity with formula (2) (p. [137]) and (5) (p. [138]).
On the other hand, if 0 is an integrating denominator of the expression
dQ = Mdv + Nd#,
and if в is a function of d alone, then

ENERGY FACTORS
351
1 (ЭМ dN} di) dO
1 A
X°4=Aк c'
in conformity with equation (17) (p. [142]).
To these formulae, which are essentially Thomson’s, Budde then adds the 
proof that, assuming that neither M nor N vanishes at the outset, every other 
integrating denominator can be obtained from one of them through multi­
plication by a function of d and v.
That is, if D and KD are two integrating denominators of dQ, it follows from 
the conditions
d (M\ _d_ 
d [Ml _d_ ( N 1
дд l Л J “ dv (D J ’ dd {KDJ “ dv {KDJ ’
that the quotient К of both denominators must satisfy the equation
dK ак
du dv
and hence the equation
Mdv + Ndd 
dK.- -
must obtain. Given the stated assumptions, К is thus itself at the same time a 
function both of v and $
According to this result, if there is an integrating denominator 0 that is a 
function of d alone, then it is the only one which has this property. And, so, 
Budde arrives at the definition for 0:
Temperature is the name of the integrating denominator of the reversibly 
consumed heat differential that is a function of the scale magnitude alone.
4. 
The unsatisfying status of the entropy law, insofar as it is expressed by an 
inequality, and the disconcerting nature of the consequences for the future it 
necessitates, have given rise to various attempts to do away with the law 
altogether. The simplest procedure - ignoring it completely - was in part 
carried out successfully, even though the authority of Clausius supported the 
law; and even in France, it was abandoned only recently. The more serious 
opponents tried to replace the inequality of Clausius with an equation and to 
obtain thereby more comforting prospects for the future of the world. It was 
von Oettingen  who defended this point of view at greatest length. In so doing, 
42
Pogg. Ann., Supplementary Volume 7 (1876), p. 83.
42

352 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
however, he was able to refer to precursors who had occasionally put forth 
similar ideas.
Von Oettingen essentially considers only the irreversible process which 
occurs when the external pressure П weighing on a body is different from its 
internal pressure p. If the volume of the body changes in the process by dV, 
while at the same time the heat dQ is supplied to it from outside, he then writes
dQ+(p-W)dV = 0d£
In this equation, 0 is to represent the absolute temperature, and £ is to be a 
function determined by the momentary state of the body, which is called an 
“adiabat” and which becomes Clausius’ entropy in reversible processes, as they 
would occur when p = П. The amount of the energy could also be set as
dE + pdV = 0d£
when E represents the intrinsic energy of the body.
To justify his formulation, von Oettingen has recourse to views derived from 
the molecular hypothesis, particularly in Rankine’s manner: The amount of 
energy (p - n)dV assumes a thermal form, the form of actual energy, and 0d£ 
measures the energy contained in the body in such a form. In any case, von 
Oettingen does demonstrate that, for certain individual cyclic processes which 
lead to an increase of Clausius’ entropy, the adiabat again returns to its original 
value. On this point, cf. further p. [359].
5. 
If, from what has been said, certain mathematical difficulties inhibited a 
clear understanding of the characteristic relations between heat, temperature 
and entropy even for reversible processes, the behavior of energy and entropy 
appeared to be even less physically comprehensible, especially for irreversible 
processes. That entropy increases in the latter case; that nature always has a 
preference for one, and an aversion to the opposite, change of state; that 
transformations of energy exhibit not only a constancy, a balance, of total 
energy, but also reveal yet another tendency, as a consequence of which more 
and more energy assumes the form of heat; that even in the case of reversible 
processes only a part of the heat that enters into the process changes the form 
of energy, while another part remains as heat - these are truths which, around 
the year 1853, were certainly already known to the founders of thermody­
namics. But there was little success in making them truly comprehensible, 
really perspicuous, that is, in reducing them to customary ways of looking at 
things, by portraying them in terms of familiar ideas.
We have already surveyed how the modern development of the energy 
factors emerged from the efforts to assimilate these new facts. It still remains 
for us to treat a few twists that are independent of this development.

ENERGY FACTORS
353
Pfaundler43 compares the amount of heat Q which enters into a cyclic 
Carnot process with an amount of money whose value in gold is measured by 
the work equivalent of that amount of heat. Variously high qualities are 
attributed to the amounts of money, Pfaundler’s comparison then continues; 
payment can be made in gold, silver, copper and nickel, but a lesser quality is 
ascribed to the amounts of metal having a fixed value in gold than to the gold 
itself. Now, it is not the case in nature, as it is in the actual exchange of money, 
that, owing to the premium placed on gold, the lesser quality results in a loss of 
quantity, just as no loss occurs in nature corresponding to the money changer’s 
fee. Instead, anyone in nature who wishes to obtain the highest quality, namely 
gold, in exchange for silver must accept that he will receive his silver value 
converted partly into gold and partly into a medium of payment of a still lesser 
quality than silver. And, indeed, when the amount of money Q of quality 
measure #o is to be transformed into gold, its gold value is not paid in gold, 
but only
43 Pfaundler, “Die Entwertung der Energie,” lecture (Vienna 1888).
44 Wald, Energie und ihre Entwertung (Leipzig 1889).
qoq-Qu
A 0O
while the missing amount
Q0u
A 0o
is paid out in money of the lower quality 0U.
6. Wald  amplifies this point of view: Heat and mechanical work are 
equivalent with regard to their quantity; but the former cannot produce the 
effects of the latter, since they exhibit qualitative differences. During a change 
of state, to be sure, the total energy has not changed with respect to its quantity; 
and yet its capacity to effect this change of state has been lost. Indeed, the 
effective capacity of energy must be distinguished from the amount of energy. 
This effective capacity can never increase; energy does not vanish, but it does 
deteriorate, it becomes exhausted, it decays. Wald once again takes up Planck’s 
distinction between neutral and natural processes (p. [236]), calling the former 
“conservative” and the latter “finitive.” And he says: “If the word energy had 
come into use before the discovery of the first law of the mechanical theory of 
heat, then certainly only mechanical energy would have been called, simply, 
energy... . Then, too, no one would speak of the equivalence of different forms 
of energy; and we would have been spared the proof of what everyone must feel 
instinctively, namely that the so-called forms of energy are not equivalent in 
44

354 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
every respect.”
Whereas Wald essentially contrasts only mechanical work and heat, Ost­
wald45 distinguishes two species of energy: a higher one, in which he includes 
mechanical and electrical energy, and a lower one, in which he includes 
chemical energy and heat. Like Pfaundler, moreover, he compares the former 
energy forms with metal money and the latter with paper money, and refers to 
temperature as the exchange rate of heat.
45 Ostwald, Die Energie und ihre Wandlungen (Leipzig 1888).
46 Wronsky, Das Intensitatsgesetz und die Gleichartigkeit der analytischen Formen in der Lehre von 
der Energie (Frankfurt a. O.: Harnecker & Co. 1888).
47 Dressel, “Zur Orientierung in der Energielehre,” Natur und Offenbarung 39 (1893); Lehrbuch der 
Physik (Freiburg im Breisgau 1895), p. 207.
These considerations did not get beyond the stage of illustrating the actual 
relationships. Where more far-reaching attempts at quantitative statements are 
found, as in Wald, they seem to flow together with the findings contained in the 
concepts of intensity and extensity.
Section Eight:
Relations Between Intensity and Extensity
1. The function I initially termed the “quantity” of energy, and Ostwald its 
“capacity”, has become the object of further investigations. Soon after the 
appearance of my book, a pamphlet was published by Wronsky46 in 1888 which 
grasps the new concepts with lively interest and introduces an additional 
function. If the intensity is called J and, in accordance with the terminology 
obtaining at the time, the quantity of a form of energy is called M, Wronsky 
then sets
M = cJ
and calls c a constant of capacity. Mass and the electrical capacity of a 
conductor are such constants of capacity. Dressel47 has likewise incorporated 
this quantity c into his arguments as a factor of capacity. To avoid confusion of 
the factor c with the quantity M, for which Ostwald has introduced the term 
“capacity,” I suggested at Lubeck that M be called the “extensity” of a form of 
energy.
It is apparent, moreover, that the discussions of Wronsky and Dressel 
presuppose a state of equilibrium. In general, a quantity c can be called a 
capacity factor only when it is determined by the intensity J, together with the 
extensity M, that ensues after the onset of equilibrium.
But even with the restriction to reversible processes, and so to the validity of 
the equation
dE — J\dM\ T J^dM^ • • • T J^dM^

ENERGY FACTORS
355
in which all of the functions present depend solely on the parameters of the 
system, there is still no justification for regarding each J as a function only of 
the M belonging to it. Rather, each J is to be considered a function of all the 
ЛГs, so that the following can be set:
dJ{ = c\\dM\ + cndMz +----h c\ndMn,
dJi =■ C2\dM\ + czjdMz +----1- c2ndMn,
dJn — cn\dM\ 
cnod М2 + • • • + Cnnd^Myi
For reversible processes, then, the equation of the conservation of energy 
justifies only the assertions
Ъм~2~~дМ\" 
дМ~з~дМ~^’" ’
in general
dJj _ dJx 
dMx ~ dMi ’
or48
cix — cxi-
2. However, the representation of intensity that Wiedeburg has just given48
 49 
appears to me an especially fortunate and far-reaching one. He sets the 
intensity i of every form of energy de which passes into the differential dE of 
the intrinsic energy of a system equal to
48 Wiedeburg, Wied. Ann. 61 (1897), p. 710.
49 Ibid, and Wied. Ann. 62 and 63 (1897).
(1)
i = J + W J dt
where W, just as J, represents a function of the parameters of the system that is 
always positive. We thus have the relations
(2)
dE = de,
de = idM = JdM + W dM\ 
dt J
2
dt.

356 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
According to these relations, the intensity i of the energy transfer is indeed 
represented by quantities referring to the system being considered; but it is not 
represented solely by the parameters with which the states of the system are 
described, but also by the changes that these parameters undergo under the 
influence of i. The energy form de separates into two parts. The first part was 
hitherto considered almost exclusively as the form of energy belonging to the 
quantity function dM, since de approaches this part with decreasing dM, and 
since, until now, it was almost always reversible processes which were 
investigated, that is, sequences of states which approach a sequence of 
equilibrium states. This part JdM of de could be called the “reversible part” of 
the energy form de, and J the intrinsic intensity of this form of energy in the 
system. The other, irreversible, part of the energy form de, newly introduced by 
Wiedeburg, namely 
was hitherto regarded - when it was taken into consideration at all - as a 
special form of energy appearing along with with de, and was usually treated as 
kinetic energy via recourse to mechanical notions.
For example, if a gas under the external pressure p is enclosed in a cylinder 
with a moveable piston, it changes its volume V when the intrinsic pressure P 
deviates from p. And what is more, since -V must be regarded as a quantity 
function,
(3)
(dV\ 2 
de = pd(-V) = Pd(-V) + W — dt
may be written, since - in conformity with the previous view - kinetic energy 
proportional to will, of course, appear along with the volume energy.
Or, another example: When the ends of a conductor element in which a 
change in potential P must appear at one point are kept at the potential 
difference p, then the energy
(4) 
de = pde = Pde + W • J2dt
is supplied to the conductor element during a discharge of the quantity of 
electricity de = Jdt. And here, too, the irreversible part of the energy, WJ2dt, 
was hitherto regarded as a special form of energy, into which a part of de must 
be transformed.
According to Wiedeburg’s formulation, then,

ENERGY FACTORS
357
i = J, dependent on dM = 0.
Depending on whether energy of the form in question passes to the system or 
is given off by it, the transfer intensity i is greater or lesser than the intrinsic 
intensity J; only in the case of equilibrium does the difference vanish. 
Wiedeburg, by the way, also calls the function M of the parameters the 
“quantity value,” in accordance with my original suggestion.
Now, if the amount of energy de passes from one body K2 to another K\ 
without undergoing transformation, or if, in conformity with the previous 
view, it undergoes no transformation other than the one required by the 
irreversible generation of energy components - which, according to Wiede- 
burg’s formulation, is inseparably connected with the transfer of energy - then
(5)
de = J\dM\ 4- W\ —dt = —J2dM2 — W2 —t— dt.
{ dt ) 
( dt )
According to the law of the conservation of quantity values,
(6)
therefore
(7)
dMi + dM2 = 0;
de = idMi - J2dMx - W2
2
dt
can also be set, or
(8)
. r ttz 
T ttz
I = J\ + Wi ——— = j2- ^2—)—. 
dt dt
Thus, if - as must occur in the case of thermal energy - the energy of the heat 
reservoirs from which A15 the body being considered, receives the heat dQ or to 
which it gives off heat is expressed by the temperatures 02, then
(9)
dQ = 02dSx - W2 [ dt J
2
dt,

358 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(10) 
dQ<02dSb
when 5*! represents the entropy of K\.
According to these relations, the peculiarity of heat lies only in the 
circumstance that bodies cannot be found and employed as heat reservoirs 
which exhibit a negligibly small W for changes of entropy. This is not the case 
with other forms of energy: Pressure can be exerted without any noticeable 
influence by the kinetic energy - which certainly also appears with rapid 
change of volume - of the pressure reservoir, for example, when pressure is 
exerted by means of the atmosphere or in general by means of very rarified 
masses of gas. And electrical potentials can be kept constant despite extremely 
rapid flow if, for instance, they are preserved galvanically.
3. 
As far as the function W of the parmeters that Wiedeburg has newly 
introduced into energetics - a function he has called the “resistance of the 
system” - is concerned, it must now be pointed out, finally, that the amount of 
energy used in a given change of state depends on W. According to (2), with a 
given supply of energy de = idM, and a given intrinsic intensity J, the smaller 
W is, the greater is the velocity of the change of state. Furthermore, the 
relation
(11) 
+
follows from (8); and from this follows the intensity law, according to which 
energy passes to that body having the lower intrinsic intensity. According to 
Wiedeburg’s formulation, however, the transfer intensity is the same for the 
two bodies Kx and K2 in simple transfers.
Also contained in this formula of Wiedeburg’s is the general law of diffusion, 
since can be regarded as the flow velocity u. One obtains
(12) 
м = -/г^
ox
as a statement of the velocity и with which differences of intensity existing in 
the x-direction are equalized. Beginning from this equation, one always arrives 
at the experimentally established laws of diffusion for the energy forms in 
question,50 regardless of whether J is understood here as the electrical 
potential, or the temperature, or the chemical intensity, or the pressure in 
uniformly flowing liquids.
Helm, Math. Chemie, p. 11.
This way of thinking, according to which the tendency to expand is inherent 
in any intensity and the tendency of the stronger intensity prevails, is 
50

ENERGY FACTORS
359
occasionally also drawn on in order to explain diffusion and is suitable for 
explaining the temporal course of chemical reactions as well. It is also closely 
related to Wiedeburg’s formulations.51 For if J\ = 0 is put into his equation 
(11) above, 
(13) 
J2 = (W} +
results. Or, the velocity with which the quantity function changes is propor­
tional to the intensity under whose influence it changes. Thus, a reaction 
advances to still other unaffected molecules with a velocity that is proportional 
to the chemical intensity under which these molecules are found.
4. The most striking and far-reaching inference from Wiedeburg’s formula­
tion is that the function 5, which replaces entropy, does not increase in the 
course of natural processes, but remains constant, like any other quantity 
function, in any system guarded against all external influences. For to conclude 
from the inequality (10) that when dQ = 0, dS can be greater than zero is a 
questionable inference, as has already been described on p. [177]. In Wiede­
burg’s formulation (9), we have the case in which this conclusion is false, 
because, according to it, the difference between dQ and OdS vanishes with 
decreasing dQ. At dQ — 0, dS is equal to zero; and thus, in adiabatic 
processes, the entropy is constant. Since Wiedeburg’s formula is still by no 
means tested along all lines, it would be premature to portray this crucial 
consequence as an established truth. But this much is certain: that the increase 
of entropy, up to now already called into question so often, does not follow 
necessarily from unquestionable formulations of the second law.
If it is imagined, for example, that the quantity of heat dQ passes from the 
body Л?2, whose temperature shall be 02, to the body K\ with the temperature 
01 < #2, by bringing the two bodies into contact for a brief time, while both 
before and after the contact each one is in perfect equilibrium, then the entropy 
changes can of course be written in the old way as
dQ A
~T2 and
^2
Ox ’
and, since < 02, the total change in entropy is a positive quantity. However, 
if Wiedeburg is followed, by setting
51
ibid., p. 117.

360 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(14)
(
/n \ Z 
z то x Z
—± л = -e2ds2 - w21 ~г-1 dt, 
at J 
I dt I
dS\ + dSz — 0
then, indeed,
(15)
is also found to be positive, but yet is not regarded as a change in entropy.
If, like Wiedeburg, we employ the name “entropy” for the quantity S 
appearing here, we can say that the entropy of actual processes in isolated 
systems is constant, but that the entropy of certain fictitious processes 
increases. These invented processes must be so constructed that they reversibly 
convey the actual initial state of each individual body into the actual final state 
of the same. That is to say, the terms with W are omitted for such imaginary 
processes. If the individual bodies can remain in contact with one another 
during the imaginary processes, then the actual process was in general 
reversible and is not different from the invented ones; only then is the entropy 
also constant according to the old approach. Thus, the function that Planck 
was looking for (cf. p. [236]), which is to increase continuously during natural 
processes, is a special case of the entropy 5 introduced by Wiedeburg, namely 
the entropy of states of equilibrium obtained through fictitious processes. It 
could be called the entropy of equilibrium.
Of course, there would be no reason to rescue this entropy of equilibrium in 
order to indicate the sense in which natural changes take their course or 
measure Planck’s “preference of nature”. For the inequality that is represented 
by means of his special case also results very naturally from Wiedeburg’s 
entropy. On the other hand, Wiedeburg’s function exists - for the time being, 
at least - only in the formulations of differential equations, and is still not 
developed in any case as a quantity accessible to measurement.
5. That the distinction between an invariable entropy and a continuously 
increasing entropy of equilibrium is not limited to the quantity function of heat, 
but can also be identified for other quantity functions, may be shown by the 
following example.52
Helm, Math. Chem. (Leipzig 1894), p. 26.
Let a volume of gas V which is in a state of rest be compressed by dV - for 
example, through expansion of another gas - while P is the intrinsic pressure of 
52

ENERGY FACTORS
361
the gas. If this occurs slowly and reversibly, the work -PdV is required; if it 
occurs through sudden, irreversible compression, then the greater work
(16) 
dA = —PdV + dK
is required, since kinetic energy must be imparted to the gas. However, this 
kinetic energy again disappears, and a new state of equilibrium arises owing to 
increase of volume, so that the volume in comparison with the original state 
has decreased, not by dV, but by
(17) 
dVk < dV.
If, a reversible process is then constructed which, by making use of other 
appropriate arrangements, conveys the gas after separation from its previous 
environment from the initial state of equilibrium into the final one, as Planck 
does in applying the principle of the increase of entropy, then the change in 
entropy for this process would be found to be
(18) 
^=-dV + ^-=-dVk-
and, in agreement with the above consideration, the inequality
-dVk > —dV
would obtain.
Whereas, then, the sum of all the quantity functions -V belonging to the 
interacting gases is invariable, in conformity with the nature of these functions, 
the sum of all the “equilibrium quantities” — dVk is continually increasing. “On 
the other hand, Vk, like — V is a function which is completely determined by the 
momentary state of the body (including, of course, its instantaneous internal 
motions), and which does not depend on the manner in which it passes from 
one state into the other.”
Hence, not only is the change of entropy greater when the heat that produces 
it is supplied irreversibly than when it is supplied reversibly; the other forms of 
energy also possess this property. Excess pressure also at first yields a greater 
change of state - here a change of volume - than does constant pressure, and 
only as a result of the transformation of energy does the surplus decline.
6. Formula (1) leads to the idea of viewing i as an intensity that was present at 
a time t other than the time of observation Zo, and of representing it as a 
function of the extensity M present at that time. For from this idea

362 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(19)
dJ dM 
dM dt
dM 
dt
would follow, when by the resistance W is understood the expression 
which depends on a lapse of time т = t - /о- The further pursuit of such views 
could also lead to a new formulation, more general than Wiedeburg’s, namely
(20)
dM 
d2M
--- h К -
dt 
dt2
and
(21)
2 
>
de = idM = JdM + W f | dt + ^Kd f 
f dt ) 
2 
{ dt
in which an inertia constant К appears. Mechanics could be given a much 
simpler energetic foundation by means of this formulation than it now has, 
since one would deal only with mechanical energy instead of with potential and 
kinetic energy. If X is the intensity and x the extensity of a component of 
mechanical energy, then, with W = 0, the change de in mechanical energy - 
which in purely mechanical processes must vanish - would immediately lead to 
the equation of motion
de = 0 = Xdx — dx2 = Xdx — m'dx.
2 
’
X = mx".

PART EIGHT:
THE MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS AND 
MECHANICAL PICTURES
Section One:
The Differential Equations of Lagrange
1. Energetics would like to represent our experiences of natural processes as 
immediately as possible, without the aid of invented mechanical devices. The 
temporal changes in the parameters by means of which the states of a system 
are described are to be stated without hypothetically contriving a mechanical 
system whose components move as though the parameters of the actual system 
were their coordinates.
Nevertheless, mechanics can achieve this goal of energetics in a certain way 
with its own resources and can thereby contest the domain of energetics that 
was developed out of thermodynamics. I was therefore able to organize quite 
simply the survey of the state of the subject I prepared for the Lubeck 
Convention of German Scientists and Physicians by distinguishing two 
approaches to energetics, the mechanical and the thermodynamic. “To the 
mechanical approach, which begins with Helmholtz’s work of 1847, the various 
forms of energy appear as identical; to the thermodynamic approach, which 
goes back to Robert Mayer, they appear as equivalent but essentially different 
in character, and possess the same (mathematically or physically defined) 
properties only to the extent that they are subordinated to the concept of a 
form of energy.” It is the mechanical direction in energetics to which we must 
now devote our attention.
Mechanics has attained such a high level of analytical development that it is 
capable of describing the temporal changes of the parameters of a system even 
in those cases where the geometrical connection of the individual parts is not 
completely known. This connection must be known only insofar as it is 
necessary to set up certain functions of the parameters and velocities, namely, 
the kinetic and potential energy and the expressions denoted as forces - or, 
more generally, as actions - respectively.
If Fis the potential and T the kinetic energy, and thus
(1) 
E = F+T
is the total energy of a system, then let the “kinetic potential”1
1 Helmholtz, “Uber die physiaklische Bedeutung des Prinzips der kleinsten Wirkung,” Wiss. Abh.
Ill, p. 203.
363

364 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(2)
H = F-T
be formed. The Lagrangian differential equations of motion can now be set up 
in the form
(3)
(dH\ 
dp a dt [dpj
in which the difference between potential and kinetic energy is eliminated 
completely.
Here stands for any of the coordinates, which are independent of one 
another, that are sufficient for determining the momentary state of the system 
of bodies in question, and p'a represents the velocity of its change. Furthermore, 
Pa is the force - or, better, the action - with which the moving system of bodies 
works toward changing the coordinate pa - the action it exerts. -Pa, on the 
other hand, represents the external action that is exerted on the system in the 
direction pa, which must have an influence in order for the supposed motion of 
the system to proceed in the manner assumed. Finally, +Padpa represents the 
work released outward by the system when the coordinate pa changes into 
Pa + dpa.
If only equations (3) or Hamilton’s variational principle, which is identical to 
them, is employed as a starting point, but without taking into consideration the 
mechanical significance of H expressed in equation (2), the conservation of 
energy is then arrived at by multiplying each of equations (3) by p'a and 
addition:
\dHdpa_d_ (dH_ , 1 ^dPa \ = _ 
dt dt (dp'aPa) dp'a dt J 
a dt
Thus
(4) 
E = H-
represents the total energy proceeding to the system from outside.

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
365
If nothing is then assumed about a natural process, about any connection 
between two phenomena, other than that it is brought about through the pure 
transmission of motion - which includes assuming that the phenomena 
between which any connection is established are themselves functions of 
motion - then the above equations would have been applicable to it, regardless 
of which parameters p are used to describe the states in question. And the 
equations could actually be set up if the quantities H and P were known as 
functions of the p and pr.
2. To my knowledge, Maxwell was the first to direct his attention to 
Lagrange’s equations of motion beginning from this standpoint. He tried to 
derive these equations from views about motion that are as general as possible 
(cf. p. [267]) and then applied them to electrodynamic processes.
To this end, Maxwell2 sets the potential energy F = 0 and replaces the 
kinetic energy T, which is then identical to E and Я, with a function
Maxwell, Electricity and Magnetism (Oxford 1873), pp. 184ff.
(5) 
T = -Id/2 + 2^2^2 “*------ *" ^лгу 1^2 --------
that he calls the “electrokinetic energy”.
In this expression, 
denote the current intensities of the individual
circuits of the system, while Li,Z,2, •* designate the coefficients of self­
induction and Mn • • • those of the mutual induction of these circuits, both 
being functions of the coordinates indicating the positions of the circuits. 
Application of the Lagrangian equations of motion to two circuits then 
actually yields the electromotive force
(6) 
— (Lij'i + Л/12У2)
induced in the first one, and the ponderomotive force component 
(7)
У1Т2 dMn 
dx
exerted in the x direction.
Maxwell does not make the slightest effort in his account to replace the 
circuits with a mechanical system, or even merely to represent the current 
intensities as velocities of masses otherwise unknown to us. He simply shows 
that the phenomena can be described by means of Lagrange’s equations when 
2

366 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
the current intensities are introduced as quantities of velocity /, whose integral 
values у do not appear in the expression for the kinetic energy, and when the 
total electrodynamic energy of the system is also viewed as kinetic energy.
This is a genuinely energetic idea. For, obviously, it is only facts about the 
conservation and transformation of energy that are capable of leading to a 
suitable assumption about the energy quantities, Fand T, which are decisive in 
making use of Lagrange’s equations.
3. We are confronted here with two special kinds of coordinates: those which 
appear in the expression for H only by themselves without their derivatives, 
and those which appear there only in terms of their time derivatives. And, in 
accordance with Maxwell’s procedure, it is natural to explain other phenomena 
as well by assuming that the parameters changed by them belong to one or the 
other of these kinds of coordinates, without any need for first inventing a 
mechanism to visualize the actual conditions. Helmholtz  and J.J. Thomson  
proceeded in this way. The latter referred to coordinates of the second kind (of 
which the simplest example is the rectangular coordinates xyz, when they are 
free) as kinesthetic or velocity coordinates. Hertz  calls them cyclic coordinates, 
after Helmholtz had referred to the systems in which they appear as cyclic 
systems. Thomson conceives of H as depending on the position coordinates, as 
well as on those of velocity, which enter into expression for H both in 
themselves and as their derivatives with respect to time. Helmholtz, however, 
limits his consideration from the start to the case in which the coordinates 
(which he also calls parameters) appearing in H alongside the cyclic coordinates 
appear by themselves, without their derivatives - a case which, by the way, is 
realizable only in approximation, owing to the known properties of kinetic 
energy.
3
4
5
3 Berl. Sitzungsber (1884); Wiss. Abh. Ill, pp. 119ff.
4 Phil. Trans. (1885), II; Thomson, Anwendungen der Dynamik auf Physik und Chemie (Leipzig 
1890).
5 Hertz, Prinzipien der Mechanik, p. 235.
“For,” so Hertz explains, “if a quantity is a coordinate of a system, its change 
involves a displacement of at least one material point of the system. The energy 
of this point is thus a quadratic function of the rate of change of that 
coordinate; and, accordingly, the same holds for the energy of the system. 
Strictly speaking, therefore, the energy of any system necessarily contains the 
rates of change of all quantities which are in general coordinates of the system; 
hence, the energy of a cyclic system also contains the rates of change of its 
parameters.” However, the condition that the kinetic energy of a cyclic system 
must be a homogeneous quadratic function of the velocities of its cyclic 
coordinates can be satisfied to any arbitrary degree of approximation by 
choosing the velocities of the cyclic coordinates sufficiently large as compared 
with those of the parameters. “Thus,” Hertz remarks, “in electrodynamics the 
attractions between magnets are indeed independent of the velocity of their 
motion, but only so long as this velocity is much less than the velocity of light.” 

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
367
More precisely, it appears permissible to regard magnets as cyclic systems, 
whose parameters are the coordinates needed to determine their positions, only 
when the intensities of the molecular currents can be considered as velocities of 
the cyclic coordinates.
4. Helmholtz fixes his attention on Maxwell’s case of electrodynamics in this 
manner, and sets for the purpose
(ю 
h=
z b C
in which Qb c is a collective designation for the coefficients of induction L and 
M of equation (5). If the energy E of the system is then formed in accordance 
with (4), the result is that
(9)
and here the additional terms
(8b)
h = У2 кьУ1” 
b
which would have to be added to H to take into account the effect of permanent 
magnets, have no influence, because
(Ю) 
=
A glance at relations (1) and (2) then also shows that when one takes the 
function H as a starting point, as Helmholtz does, one is led to affirm that 
F = 0 and tha T = E = —H in the electrodynamic system.
5. Helmholtz then draws an analogy between this electrodynamic application 
of his basic formulae and a thermodynamic one. If T stands for the kinetic 
energy of the visible motions of the heavy masses, then, according to equations 
(11), (12) and (10) (p. [227]), reversible thermal processes indeed have the 
following properties:

368 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(И)
d(F — T) d f dT 3
dpa dt [ dp'a J
dt dt I 00 J
Moreover, if 
is introduced in addition to the free energy - indicated by F, which is a function 
of the p and 0 - and if s is taken to be any function of S and the relations 
(13)
(14)
are formed, then H and s can be regarded as functions of the p and of 77, and the 
above equations can be written as
From these relations, in conjunction with equations (3) and (4), H may be 
regarded as the kinetic potential, rj as the velocity, and 5 as the linear 
momentum of a cyclic coordinate with respect to which the work dQ is 
performed; and it remains to be determined the manner in which s depends 
on S.
The further assertion6 that kinetic energy is always an integrating denomi­
Helmholtz, Berl. Sitzungsber. (1884).
6

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
369
nator of dQ - more precisely, that
dQ = 2T-dty{T-t)
was retracted by Helmholtz7 in response to objections by Boltzmann,8 since it 
can be shown that T • t does not in general depend solely on the momentary 
state of the system. That is the reason I have not mentioned older works in this 
book that also proceed along similar lines, among which, especially, those of 
Szily9 have gotten much attention.
7 Helmholtz, Wiss. Abh. Vol. 3, p. 226.
8 Boltzmann, Wiener Sitzungsber. 92 (1885).
9 Pogg. Ann. 145 and Supplementary Volume 7 (1876).
If an action Pr] is introduced, so that
(16)
—Prj • rjdt = dQ,
then P7j also follows from equation (3)
(17)
P =
77 dt dr]
just as does Pa-
6. Finally, Helmholtz proposes as a purely mechanical analogy the example 
of a gyroscope with a fixed point. “Let the gyroscope be a body of revolution of 
Cardanian attachment. The external ring a may be in rotation around a vertical 
axis; the angle of rotation, calculated from a fixed vertical plane in space, we 
shall call a. Let the second ring b rotate in the first one in a horizontal axis; I 
shall refer to the angle between the planes of the rings a and b as /3. Let the axis 
of rotation of the gyroscope lie in ring b perpendicular to the axis of rotation 
between a and b; and let 7 be the angle between an indicated meridian of the 
gyroscope and the plane of b.” Moreover, let C be the moment of inertia of the 
gyroscope around its axis of rotation and В its moment of inertia around one of 
the equatorial axes; and let the moments of inertia of the rings be neglected. 
Then, the kinetic energy of the gyroscope is
(18) 
T - 
+ a'cos/3)2 + 
+ sin2/3 + 
and, according to equation (4),

370 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(19)
H=-T.
Equations (3) then yield for the actions Л,ДГ, by means of which the angles
<x /?, 7 tend to increase, the relations
(20)
A — - — {Ccos/3(y + c/cos/3) + #sin2/3 • o'}
< В = -Csin/3(y + a'cosfya' + Bsin/fcos/3 • a'2 - B(3" 
Г = -^{C(Y+ o'cos^)}.
It can be seen from this example, however, that even in purely mechanical 
applications, H does not always have to contain second-order powers of 
velocity. It is true, of course, that T is always a homogeneous function of the 
second order with respect to the p', when as many p are used as are needed to 
determine the system’s momentary state. But there are cases in which 
individual p's can be eliminated, thereby changing the form of the function H. 
If, for example, the moment of rotation is Г = 0, so that
(21)
7Z -F c/cos/3 =
c
C1
7Z can be eliminated by making use of this relation, thereby obtaining
(22)
Л = + —{ccos/3 - Ba'sin2/3}
В = -Fcsin/3 • a' + Bsin/3cos/3o'2 — В ft'.
But the same values can also be obtained by means of equations (3) when a 
new function
1 r2 1
(23) 
H' = +- - - -B(a'2sin2(3 + (3l2) + ca'cos/3
is set in place of H, a function for which equations (3) and, in consequence, 
relation (4) are valid, but which no longer has the form of the function H.
7. To obtain a general overview of the formation law for the function Hf, we 
shall assume that the system contains cyclic coordinates ръ with respect to

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
371
which no work is performed, so that
dt [dpj = 0.
The linear equations with respect to the p' and, indeed, with respect to the 
velocities of both the non-cyclic and the cyclic coordinates
(24)
dH
WT = cb 
dPb
can then be used to eliminate the p'b, whereby the value of H may pass over into 
h. Then
(25)
and
(25b)
If one now sets
(26)
we find that
(27)
dPa dpa bdp^b dp a
dH 
dpa
dH _ dH' 
dPa дра ’
and because

372 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
дН dH' 
дРа ~ дРа ’
follows in virtue of exactly the same reasons, equations (3) now emerge in the 
form
dHf d_ 
dPa + dt ( dp'a J ’
However, the case treated here is by no means the only one in which, by 
eliminating coordinates, functions H1 arise that diverge from H in their manner 
of construction and yet nevertheless permit a calculation of the actions and the 
energy by means of equations (3) and (4).
In addition to the gyroscope, the mechanics of ponderable masses also 
contributes the example of the motion of a system in the process of rotation 
relative to a rectangular system of coordinates - the motion of the earth, for 
example. And, in conformity with these analogies, Helmholtz generally refers 
to cases in which H contains terms that are linear with respect to the velocities 
as those with concealed motions. Thus, the reciprocal action between magnets 
and electrical currents belongs here as well, since concealed motions in the 
magnets have already been assumed by Ampere for just this purpose. The 
distinctive characteristic of cases involving concealed motion is that, when the 
conditions are observed, the motion cannot be made to reverse itself if the 
concealed motions are not reversed at the same time.
8. Helmholtz10 makes use of these ideas in an energetic direction by deriving 
relations between the actions from equations (3) which have a very general 
validity, extending far beyond mechanics. This emerges above all from the 
investigations of Konigsberger,11 which arrive at the same relations as does 
Helmholtz, although they (cf. p. [380]) take as their starting point far more 
general foundations, ones containing mechanics as a special case.
10 Wiss. Abh. Vol. 3, p. 231f.
11 Konigsberger, Bert. Sitzungsber. (1896 and 1897) as well as J. f. Math. 118 and 119.
It is well known that the outward-acting forces of systems at rest which satisfy 
the law of the constancy of energy exhibit certain lawful relations to one 
another that are expressed in the equations
<30) 
=
орь OPa
and that when these equations are satisfied the value of the potential energy can

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
373
be found. Similar relations follow for moving systems from Lagrange’s equa­
tions (3). If these are written as
(31)
эя у d2fI ' у » 
дРа+ ь dPbdPaPb+ b dP'bdP'a ’
it can be seen, to begin with, that
(32)
dPa_ d2H _dPb 
dti ~ dp'adp'b ~ dp" ■
Furthermore, from equation (31)
(33)
dPa _ 
</ ( 
1
9p'b ~ драдр'ь + dpbdp'a + dt (dp'adp'b j ‘
Therefore, taking into consideration (32),
(34)
dPa dPb d ( &H \ d (dPa M) 
dp'b + dp'a ~ dt ( dp'adpfb J ~ dt ( dp'^ + dp" J ’
and, in the numerous cases in which
(35)
dPa d2H
dPb ~ dPaWb
— Const.,
we have in still simpler form
(34b)
dPq = dPb 
dp'b dp'a ’
Finally, taking account of (33),
dPa dPb d ( 
d2H У Id (dPa dPb
dpb dpa dt (dp'adpb dp'bdpaJ 2dt (<% dp’a 
also results from (3).

374 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Equations (32), (34) and (35) express the reciprocal peculiarities possessed 
by all processes of motion. Hertz12 has explained the form they take for cyclic 
motions.
Helmholtz shows, in particular, how numerous are the phenomena that may 
be subsumed under equation (34b):
1. 
When the precession velocity a' increases with an increase of the 
force B, which increases the inclination /3 of the gyroscope axis 
towards the vertical, a force A, accelerating the precession motion, 
will bring the gyroscope axis closer to the vertical.
2. 
The motion of two electrical circuits which is sustained by ponder- 
omotive forces induces electromotive forces counteracting the 
currents (Lenz’s law of induction).
3. 
When an increase in temperature increases pressure, isothermal 
compression will be connected with the absorption of heat, or more 
briefly: Compression will increase temperature.
To bring this proposition under formula (34b), Helmholtz writes it as
d(Pv ■ Tj) = dPa
dp'a 
Slog// ’
or, in conformity with (16), as
(36)
d (dQ\ dPa 
dp'a [ dt J 
dlogz/ ’
and in the special case where rj = 0 (cf. equation (13)) as
(36b)
d (dQ\ _ dPa 
dp'a [ dt J dlog0'
Since the left side then represents the velocity with which heat enters when 
the parameter p increases with the velocity p', the temperature 0 remaining 
constant, the above formulation thus results.
12 Hertz, Mechanik, p. 242.

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
375
4. 
When heating one place in a closed circuit produces an electrical 
current, the same current will develop coldness there (Peltier’s 
phenomenon).
5. 
When heating of a constant galvanic element increases the electro­
motive force, the current in the element will render the heat latent.
Anyone who only sees Helmholtz’s train of thought before him as it exists in 
print would, in my opinion, have to be astonished by the boldness of these 
conclusions. But in 1886 no one was astonished any longer by this all­
embracing subsumption of the most various phenomena under what is 
basically a purely dynamical formula. As a result of the successes that simple 
analogy had achieved in electrotechnics and in the formulations of Gibbs, it no 
longer seemed at all peculiar that not only force and moment of rotation and 
mechanical action in general, but also electromotive force and heat and 
pressure were all regarded as entities sufficiently homogeneous that they can 
be inserted into Lagrange’s equations for the same term P. Similarly, velocities 
and currents and temperatures are lumped together as homogeneous in the 
above analogies and substituted for // as required. Is it possible that people still 
think it unnecessary to establish these sweeping relations in their simple 
conceptual clarity, as this is done in the laws of intensity and extensity?
9. A thoroughly energetic spirit prevails in these works, for it is essentially 
only the appearance of the energy quantities T, £, E and H in the equations of 
motions which provides the analogy its justification. Perhaps even today that 
will still not be conceded by everyone. Perhaps some still believe that - as 
Helmholtz represents it, certainly - only the purely mathematical formula of 
Hamilton’s principle holds the analogies together, a formula that harbors no 
physical meaning at all and that in Helmholtz, too, only serves as a foil for 
Lagrange’s differential equations, which alone are important. But anyone who 
adopts this standpoint must nevertheless concede that it is only the appearance 
of energy quantities in the differential equations that makes possible a 
quantitative verification of the analogies linked to them. For after the p have 
been arbitrarily chosen, the quantities P are also energetically defined by the 
fact that Pdp is an energy quantity, as is revealed most conspicuously by 
equation (16).
I therefore believed that I could single out in the following formulation as a 
special principle, which may be called the “principle of analogy,” the idea that 
has been pursued since Maxwell by a series of researchers, above all by J.J. 
Thomson and Helmholtz:
“Functions can be made to depend on the coordinates or parameters that 
determine a natural phenomenon (hence, for example, on the temperature, the 
electrical charge, the potentials) as in like manner in mechanics they can be 
made to depend on the spatial coordinates and velocities, functions with which 
one can calculate as mechanics calculates with kinetic and potential energy or 

376 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
mechanical work and which at the same time are physically equivalent to these 
mechanical quantities”13
13 Helm, “Uberblick liber den derzeitigen Zustand der Energetik,” Supplement to Wied. Ann. 
(1895).
14 J. J. Thomson, Anwendungen der Dynamik (Leipzig 1890).
If we wish to make mechanics useful for non-mechanical processes, but 
without a mechanical hypothesis, we are left with only two ways: the perpetuum 
mobile principle set up by Helmholtz in 1847 and the principle of analogy of the 
recent theorists just mentioned.
10. J.J. Thomson  follows the fundamental idea of Maxwell more directly 
than does Helmholtz. Given the influence of the more profound investigations 
of Helmholtz, the more comprehensive works of Thomson, which review the 
entire field of physics, have, in my view, still been too little appreciated. Just as 
Maxwell began to do, Thomson immediately tries to set up the general form of 
the kinetic potential of a system as a function of its coordinates. He begins by 
distinguishing the following kinds of coordinates:
14
1. 
Coordinates x for determining the position of rigid bodies;
2. 
Coordinates w for determining the deformations in the system;
3. 
Coordinates у for determining the electrical state. In a dielectric, у
would measure Maxwell’s electrical displacement and in a con­
ductor, the integral current, while У would measure the current 
intensity;
4. 
Coordinates ту, C, for determining the magnetic state. The position of 
the molecular magnets, or Ampere’s molecular currents, is to be 
represented by the the coordinates q, while the momentum of the 
molecular magnets, or the intensity of the molecular currents, is to 
be represented by the kinosthenic coordinates £. The corresponding 
moment of motion, £ = is also introduced instead of
As a homogeneous second-order function of velocity, the kinetic energy then 
consists partly of terms in which velocities of the same nature, such as xj • xf2 or 
y\ • y'2, are present, and partly of terms in which velocities of a different sort 
occur, such as Xх • У, x7 • £' or x' • £.
In conformity with Lagrange’s equations, every term of the sort
(pq)
in which (pq) represents any function of the coordinates, yields forces of the 
types

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
377
-^[(w) •/ </],
where r represents a coordinate that does not belong either to type p or to type 
q. If these forces are not empirically present in a natural phenomenon, the term 
p’ • q' does not appear in the kinetic potential. A review of dynamic and 
electrodynamic phenomena shows that only terms of the following types need 
to be considered:
л7 • У,У • У, w' • w',rf - rf£,x/ • w\y' •
Just as Thomson permits himself to be guided by mechanical hypotheses in 
this treatment of motion, electricity and elasticity, but needs only their general 
features, not their details, to set up the general form of energy, so too in the 
investigation of thermal processes he takes the mechanical hypothesis as his 
starting point and introduces coordinates и through which the positions of the 
molecules can be established. But here a difficulty appears. Within certain 
limits, any arbitrary value can be ascribed to coordinates of the first five types; 
Thomson therefore calls them “controllable” coordinates. It is different with 
the coordinates of type u. “We indeed have within our power the mean values 
of certain functions of a great number of these coordinates, but we have no 
control over the coordinates individually. We may thus call these coordinates 
‘unrestrictable coordinates’.” Thomson then arrives at the fundamental laws of 
thermodynamics by analyzing the kinetic energy of the system into two terms, 
one of which - this is to represent Helmholtz’s free energy - depends only on 
controllable coordinates, while the other is set proportional to the absolute 
temperature.
In addition, Thomson reduces the theory of reversible “scalar” phenomena 
to a study of the mean values of the kinetic potential. The coordinates cited 
previously were vectors; temperature, vapor density and molecular number, on 
the other hand, are scalar quantities. Thomson then limits the determination of 
the mean value of the kinetic potential to invariable states; that is, he assumes 
that the velocities of the controllable coordinates vanish, in so far as they are 
not kinosthenic, and that the kinosthenic velocities are constant.
If, for example, a unit mass of a gas is isolated in a cylinder by a moveable 
piston of surface area q, and if x is the distance of the piston from the bottom of 
the cylinder, the mean kinetic potential for the system of molecules constituting 
the gas will contain the coordinates x, because the gas pressure is a force which 
tries to change the x. In consequence of Lagrange’s equations, we have

378 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Now, if в is the absolute temperature, and R the gas constant, then
RO
P = ~'
and, taking into consideration that v = qx, there follows
dH R0dv_ 
dx v dx'
H = -R0\og—+f(0).
Vo
The mean kinetic potential thus stands in a very close relationship to 
entropy, so that with its help some reversible phenomena can be treated just 
as they are with entropy.
Like Helmholtz, Thomson shares Maxwell’s point of view regarding irrever­
sible phenomena - as will be discussed later. The reason for non-reversibility is 
the limitation of our means of influencing the system; we cannot act on the 
molecules individually, and unrestrictable coordinates in general make a 
process irreversible.
11. The works of Natanson, which start from Rayleigh’s dispersion function 
in order to include irreversible components in the energy equation, merit 
attention as a further development of Helmholtz’s manner of using Lagrange’s 
differential equations for describing natural phenomena.
Rayleigh15 showed that when viscosity can be represented by forces which 
are proportional to the velocity or to the differences in velocity of the 
interacting points, it can be expressed very simply in Lagrange’s equations. 
More precisely, viscosity can be represented by a second-order homogeneous 
function of the velocities, which is to be called the dispersion function Ф. 
Rayleigh also assumed that viscosity can always be represented in this way. 
According to his formulation, if T is the kinetic energy and V the potential 
energy of the system, the action P which is exerted from outside with respect to 
the parameter p would be given by the equation
15 Strutt, Baron Rayleigh, Die Theorie des Schalles, trans, by Neesen (Braunschweig 1880), Vol. 1, 
p. 109; Proc. London Math. Soc. (1873). Also compare Thomson and Tait, Natural Philosophy I 
(1890), p. 388.

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
379
d p7”) дТ дФ dV 
dt I dpf j dp dp1 + dp
Natanson16 then uses the function Ф to represent the irreversible part of the 
heat absorbed by the system, while the reversible part is gathered with the 
potential energy V to form the free energy F = V - OS. He thus arrives at the 
formulation
16 Bull. Akad. Krakau. (1896); also Ztschr. f. phys. Chemie 21 (1896).
17 Wassmuth, Wied. Ann. 62 (1897), p. 522.
18 Konigsberger, Berl. Sitzungsberichte 39 (1896), p. 899.
£ дф dF 
dt [ dp' J dp + dp' + dp
Natanson assumes of the dispersion function Ф, however, that its temporal 
change stems in part from the environment of the body in question and in part 
from the mutual interaction of its parts, and that this latter change is 
proportional to the function Ф itself. Designating this part of the change as D, 
he thus arrives at the formula
РФ _ 2Ф
Dt т ’
and calls т the “relaxation time”. To the applications of Natanson’s formulae 
presented by their author, Wassmuth17 has recently appended further elabora­
tions with reference to electrodynamics.
If we encounter effects of forces in the dispersion function which depend not 
only on the parameters p of the system, but also on its time derivatives pf, the 
further question then arises of what is left of the dynamical relationships when 
a function of the p,pr and still higher derivatives is admitted as the kinetic 
potential, and its behavior is assumed to be such that, in the usual case, 
dependency on p and p' alone leads to Lagrange’s equations. Like Carl 
Neumann before him, Konigsberger18 recently made the assumption that 
Hamilton’s principle also holds in the general case. From this assumption,
dp dt [ dp' j dt1 [ dp" j “ ‘ dF [ dp^ ) "*~ 
follow as a general form of Lagrange’s differential equations of the second 
form; and Konigsberger succeeds in showing, in particular, that Helmholtz’s 

380 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
reciprocity propositions (32), (34) and (35) “have nothing at all to do with the 
nature of the kinetic potential to depend only on the first derivatives of the 
coordinates.”
Section Two:
Mechanical Pictures
1. 
Boltzmann employed Lagrange’s differential equations to provide a 
theoretical representation for the part of physics to which they could be 
transferred most directly and to which Maxwell first applied them, namely, 
electrodynamics.  In so doing, he makes use of Helmholtz’s theory of cyclic 
systems and immediately devises a machine - that was actually constructed - 
whose kinetic energy can be represented essentially in the form of (5) (p. [365]) 
and in which the current intensities / are made tangible through angular 
velocities. The machine is therefore able to portray the phenomena of electrical 
induction and electrodynamic attractions and repulsions by means of mechan­
ical processes.
19
19 Boltzmann, Vorlesungen Uber Maxwell’s Theorie der Elektrizitat und des Lichtes (Leipzig 1891 
and 1893).
20 Boltzmann, “Uber die Methoden der theoretischen Physik,” in Dyck, Katalog mathematischer 
... Modelle (Munchen 1892), p. 89.
This confused portrayal of the phenomena inspired Boltzmann to a very 
remarkable historical and epistemological study.20 Thus, for example, he notes 
that Kirchhoff defined forces out of nature and turned physics into a really 
descriptive natural science. “Whether, with Kepler, we specify the shape of the 
orbit of a planet and indicate its velocity at every point, or, with Newton, we 
specify the force at any point, both methods are, according to Kirchhoff’s point 
of view, actually only different ways of describing the facts. And Newton’s 
merit is only that of having discovered that the description of the motions of 
the heavenly bodies becomes especially simple when the second derivatives of 
their coordinates with respect to time are indicated.”
In connection with this attitude, the view developed “that it cannot be the 
task of theory to see into the mechanism of nature, but only to set up the 
simplest possible equations, starting from the simplest possible assumptions, 
which allow the phenomena of nature to be calculated with the greatest 
possible approximation. Or, as Hertz characteristically expresses it, the task is 
only to represent the directly observed phenomena in naked equations, without 
the colorful cloaks of hypotheses draped on them by our imagination.” 
Moreover, views that originate with Faraday - who, admittedly, had a special 
fondness for the colorful cloaks of mechanical visualization - “saw in the 
mechanisms they devised, not those of nature, but merely pictures or 
analogies”. And, indeed, the most surprising and far-reaching analogies 
showed up between apparently very dissimilar natural processes. “It seemed 
as if nature had constructed the most various things on exactly the same plan; 
or, in the dry words of an analyst, the same differential equations hold true of 

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
381
the most different phenomena. Thus, heat conduction, diffusion and the 
distribution of electricity in conductors occur according to the same laws. The 
same equations may be regarded as the solution of a problem in hydrody­
namics and in potential theory. The theory of fluid vortices, as well as that of 
friction in gases, show the most surprising analogy with that of electromagnet­
ism, and so on.”
Thus, while he makes use of incompressible fluids and forces of resistance to 
visualize electrical processes, Maxwell in no way believes in the reality of these 
things. He constructs a mechanical model for electromagnetism out of fluid 
vortices and friction rollers only to advance research by means of a mechanical 
fiction, and he actually arrives in this way at his famous system of equations. 
This new direction of analogy formation dispenses with the idea of complete 
congruence with nature, and instead brings out all the more forcefully the 
points of similarity. “The old hypotheses could be upheld only so long as 
everything worked out. But now the occasional lack of agreement no longer did 
any harm, for it cannot be held against a mere analogy if it is defective in some 
respects. Soon, therefore, the old theories, such as the elastic theory of light, the 
theory of gases, the chemists’ schemata for benzene rings, etc., were also 
understood as nothing more than mechanical analogies; and, finally, philoso­
phy generalized Maxwell’s ideas into the doctrine that knowledge in general is 
nothing other than the discovery of analogies. With this the old scientific 
method was once again defined away, and science spoke only in similes.”
2. 
I quote these splendid remarks of Boltzmann in order to show that efforts 
originating in mechanics have the same goal in mind as those that grew out of 
thermodynamics, if only they keep themselves free of the inherited delusion 
that, since all experience is appearance, there is a mechanism standing behind 
sensuous appearance representing the truth, the detailed knowledge of which 
must be the aim of science.
Of course, if someone honestly takes the view that he cares only about a 
mechanical analogy, and does not silently yearn for the realization of this 
analogy, he will be easily persuaded that the thermodynamic approach to 
energetics is the more perfect and consistent one. More precisely, if a system 
gives off the amount of energy -de = Pdp while it changes one of its 
coordinates by dp, the other coordinates remaining unchanged, the mechanical 
approach to energetics asserts that a function H exists such that
ddH ЭН 
dt dp' dp '
and that from this function all the coordinates p of the system and their 
derivatives - all P’s and, accordingly, all Je’s - can be found. In other words, 
mechanical energetics asserts that relations of the kind set up by Helmholtz in 
equations (32), (34) and (35) always exist between the various actions P that a 
system is capable of performing with respect to the different coordinates p.

382 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
However, we know from simple cases of equilibrium that in these the 
equation
dp
does not always holds true, that instead forces also occur which are not 
derivable from a potential. Even though such cases can be eliminated via 
recourse to other systems and concealed motions, nevertheless the complica­
tions to which the claim that there always exists a kinetic potential leads are 
immediately apparent. Working through these complications naturally appears 
entirely justifiable and necessary when the mechanism is the highest goal to 
which research aspires; but when it is only a matter of a picture, an analogy, 
which, in any case, remains valid only to a certain degree - what is the point of 
all the trappings? It just seems everywhere to be the fate of mechanical 
hypotheses that they require too many accessories, that they ascribe to the 
systems in question superfluously many properties. It is not surprising that 
some of these properties become the starting points for new formulations of 
questions; but the rest remain as ballast.
The thermodynamic approach to energetics asserts nothing of the quantities 
Pdp except that all those simultaneously appearing as a sum yield the total 
differential dE. Furthermore, it shows in the laws of intensity and extensity that 
dE can be split up into terms JdM, whose components J and M fulfill certain 
properties having to do with the relation of the system to its environment. And 
without these properties, it also appears to be impossible to carry out the 
mechanical approach, as was already noted with respect to Helmholtz’s 
investigations of coupling.
If the mechanical approach does succeed in ascertaining the function Я in a 
given case, then the potential and kinetic parts of the energy are determined 
through Я and £ by means of formulas (1) and (2) (p. [363-4]); and with this an 
essential step towards a mechanical conception of the process being investi­
gated has successfully been taken.
3. 
For the history of the scientific idea that essentially originated with 
Maxwell and found its most perfect form in Helmholtz and Hertz, it is not 
without interest here to point out the interim structures which preceded its 
mature formulation. I include among these certain mechanical investigations 
of Clausius and William Thomson, two scientists for whom the effort to place 
their thermodynamic results on a mechanical basis must have occurred most 
naturally. Of course - and this is something that does not concern us here - 
both entered the picture as elaborators of mechanical hypotheses in the old 
sense', Clausius by reviving and giving new depth to the old hypotheses of 
atomic motions, above all in the kinetic gas hypothesis; Thomson by replacing 
the ancient atoms with vortex rings of a frictionless fluid, the intent being to 
find a universal mechanical world-view by means of Helmholtz’s vortex theory. 
But both also come near to the energetic point of view based on mechanics by 

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
383
dealing with the question of what can be stated in general about a system of the 
sort comprised of atomistically constituted bodies, without having to go into 
detail about the processes of motion which are intended for the atoms 
individually. Both therefore approach the treatment of those periodic motions 
that can still be attributed to the parts of a body which on the whole does not 
change. This is Thomson’s intent in compiling studies of the harmonic 
vibrations of which an arbitrary system is capable;21 and Clausius sketches a 
theory of stationary states and mean values -- a statistics of atoms, as it were.22 
The object of both investigations is not a definite mechanism, but rather the 
mechanism of atoms. However, the connection of their results with actually 
observable parameters - which becomes the focus of J. J. Thomson’s interest, as 
we have seen on p. [376] - remains, to be sure, a loose and questionable one.
21 Thomson and Tait, Natural Philosophy I (Cambridge 1890) (§343 on harmonic systems), pp. 370 
ff.
22 Clausius, Gott. Nachr. (1872); Math. Ann. 6 (1873); Pogg. Ann. 150 (1873).
23 Pogg. Ann. 142 (1871), p. 460.
24 Pogg. Ann. 93, p. 481.
25 Pogg. Ann. 116, p. 73.
26 Duhem, Theorie thermo dynamique de la visco site, du frottement et des faux equilibres chimiques 
(Paris 1896). Also: Mem. Soc. des Sciences de Bordeaux (5) II; Sur les deformations permanentes 
et I’hysteresis (Bruxelles 1896); Journ. de math. (4), 10 (1894); Traite elementaire de mechanique 
chimique (Paris 1897).
Clausius expresses himself very clearly on one occasion regarding his intent 
in pursuing his investigations of the molecular hypothesis. When, in 1871, he 
proved the theorem that the integral of extended over a reversible cyclic 
process vanishes - making use of his theory of stationary states, supplemented 
by certain assumptions about those internal states of motion of bodies that are 
to be called heat - he appends the observation:23 In 1854 I derived this 
equation “from the principle that heat cannot pass on its own from a colder 
body to a warmer one.24 Later,25 I derived the same equation in yet another 
way, very different from that one, namely, from the ... law that the work which 
heat can perform in changing the configuration of a body is proportional to the 
absolute temperature, in connection with the assumption that the heat actually 
present in a body depends only on its temperature and not on the configuration 
of its components. In so doing, I considered the fact that one could arrive in 
this way at the equation which had already been proved in another way as a 
main support of that law.” Now, he continues, he has once again reduced this 
law to other principles, namely to general mechanical ones.
It can be seen from these words of Clausius how an outstanding representa­
tive of theoretical physics regards the mutual support that theories provide one 
another as their chief strength, and not the autonomy and general validity of 
the process of mechanical visualization touted by his modern successors.
4. 
Among the works advancing energetics with the aid of mechanical 
analogies, there can also be included the investigations by means of which 
Duhem  is able to describe friction, viscosity, elastic aftereffect and hysteresis 
26

384 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
energetically, as well as an entire series of chemical phenomena which he 
summarizes under the heading of “false equilibria,” namely, the retardation of 
boiling and condensation, of decomposition and transformation, and the 
supercooling and supersaturation of solutions.
To be sure, Duhem’s work stands entirely on the foundation of thermo­
dynamics. But he makes use of mechanical analogies in order that he may be 
led beyond the limits of classical thermodynamics to relations encompassing 
the phenomena just mentioned, in addition to ordinary states of equilibrium. I 
call attention to this procedure to show that it is altogether unnecessary simply 
to sacrifice the ideas with which we are familiar from mechanics for the sake of 
energetics. That would indeed be a very foolish demand, for it is in connection 
with what is already familiar to us that our minds conquer what is new. But the 
great difference between the mechanical conception and Duhem’s energetic 
method is that the former wants to subjugate new experiences to the old ideas, 
while the latter revises old ideas by means of the new experiences.
Let a system of uniform temperature in all of its parts be determined by the 
normal variables (cf. p. [315]) p\ ,p2,... as well as by its temperature 0. Then, if 
Fis the free energy of the system - a function of p\,p2,... and в - and if the 
work transmitted from the external environment upon change of the para­
meters is represented by
—P\dp\ - P2dp2 - ...,
the equations (p. [364])
(1) 
-p
a dPa
that were developed in the form in which Duhem presents them on p. [315], 
hold when the system is in equilibrium.
According to d’Alembert’s principle, however, with changes in equilibrium 
the equations
(2)
d_ 
dT dF
dt l Фа J dp a dp a
would have to be satisfied, where the kinetic energy of the system is indicated 
by T and the time by t.
If one did not wish to make use of the free energy, one would have to set

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
385
(3)
dF dE0 0 dS 
dpa dpa dpa '
thus introducing, instead of F, the energy £0 and entropy S possessed by the 
system in the state of equilibrium. Equations (2) could also be combined into 
one formula
(4)
d„E = 6d„S — У Pdnp.
a
in which a signifies any possible change - for instance, that in which pi 
changes, but pi,p^... remain constant. In this formula
(5)
E = Eo + T
would indicate the total energy of the system; and, according to equation (42) 
(P- [278]),
(6)
— У dfjPy daS — У dap 
« dP 
v dp
would follow.
5. This is as far as the usual treatment of energetics extends. Duhem then 
refers to the cases enumerated above. It is simply not correct, he observes, that, 
for example, a heavy body resting on a horizontal base remains in a state of rest 
only when no horizontally directed force is acting on it - as would have to be 
the case, after all, in consequence of equations (2). Rather, the state of rest also 
continues to exist under the influence of a horizontal force of limited strength. 
The value of the force required for rest is not determined by an equation, but is 
included, in the limit, by means of inequalities.
Duhem then pursues further the assumption that equations (2) are not 
satisfied in all of the cases indicated above, but that additional terms must be 
included in order to satisfy them. And in constructing these additional terms, 
he also allows himself to be guided by the phenomena of friction and viscosity 
to a general hypothesis. It is enough here to limit the further exposition of 
Duhem’s hypothesis to the case in which the state of the system depends only 
on a single variable p, in addition to the temperature в, since we thereby avoid 
the analytical difficulties - treated at great length by Duhem - which occur 
when it depends on more variables.

386 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
For this case, Duhem sets
(7)
„ dF d рП 
dT r
+ 
+ ~t ttj — 
— f+ &
dp at \dp') 
dp
Here f denotes a function of p, p' and 0 which vanishes as p' goes to 0, and 
otherwise always has a sign opposite to p\ thus yielding negative work; it is to 
be called “viscosity”. Moreover, g denotes a function of p, P, p' and 0 which 
approaches a finite limit 7 when p' converges towards 0, and likewise always 
has a sign opposite to that of //; it is called “friction”.
It can then be shown that no motion can occur so long as the inequality
(S)
is satisfied. For 
changes continuously and thus, within the above limits, will retain the sign that 
it has for pf = 0, that is, will be negative. On the other hand,
dT —f dp
is a positive number, since f always yields negative work and dT is positive 
leaving the state of rest. Accordingly, taking (6) into consideration, and within 
limits of (8), equation (7)
dT -f dp = - [P + -dpTg-dp
cannot obtain - that is, no possible change can actually occur.
In cases where classical thermodynamics, disregarding friction and viscosity, 
yields an equilibrium point and an equilibrium curve, respectively, there always 
results from inequality (8) in Duhem’s generalized thermodynamics an equili­
brium area, an equilibrium band; and the proposition that the actions P can be 
represented as derivatives of a function F or, in general, as functions of 
• • • and 6 becomes untenable.
But even more far-reaching is the inference that Clausius’ entropy equation

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
387
for reversible processes becomes an inequality in irreversible processes only 
when friction and viscosity occur. More precisely, according to equation (7), 
(7b) 
hence, for isothermal changes,
(7c) 
P • dp + d(F + T) < 0.
According to the first law, however, for any change
dE — dEo + dT — dQ — Pdp 
dQ dEo dT P r
-Т = ^ + ^ + Т,р-
Taking into consideration the equations
£»=F~C
s = - dF
дв'
one obtains
(9)
and, as a result of the friction hypothesis expressed by formula (7),
(9b)
dQ < dS
<72 K n
follows.
Thus, 
extended over a cyclic process, will be the case when friction and viscosity have 
an effect. This conception of the second law is fundamentally in complete 
agreement with the view held by Wiedeburg which was discussed on p. [359].

388 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Section Three:
The Migration of Energy
1. The migration of electromagnetic energy, which developed out of the views 
and formulae of Maxwell and which was studied by Poynting,27 Heaviside28 
and Lodge,29 is also to be regarded as a mechanical picture - an analogy - for 
peculiar relations that were first expressed in equations. I shall limit myself here 
to treating the subject in the form originating with Hertz.30
27 Poynting, Phil. Trans. 2 (1885), p. 277; 2 (1884), p. 343.
28 Heaviside, Electrician (1885); Phil. Mag. 25 (1888), p. 153.
29 Lodge, Phil. Mag. (5), 19 (1885), p. 487.
30 Hertz, Wied Ann. 40, p. 577; or Ges. Werke, Vol. 2 (Leipzig 1894), p. 208.
Let the components of electrical force with respect to the directions xyz be 
XYZ and those of the magnetic force be LMN\ let the components of the 
electrical polarization be XyZ and those of the magnetic polarization be 
CMX' let the current components be uvw. Thus, if the dielectric constants are 
indicated by e, the magnetization constants by /a the conductivities by A and 
the electromotive forces caused by the nature of the substance by Xf YfZf, then 
equations of the sort
(1)
' X = eX
< C — (iL
м = А(У-Г)
hold for an isotropic medium.
Relations then exist among the quantities indicated here which Hertz has 
formulated as follows:
(2)
dt dy dz
. дм dX dZ
A-----=------------
dt dz dx
Ш _dY dX 
dt dx dy
dX
dM
dN „ ,
А -г— =
- —---- 4тгЛ • и
dt
dz
dy
, дУ
dN__ dL „ ,
A-^- =
—----47ГЛ • V
dt
dx
dz
dZ
dL_ dM л A
A — =
—-----4тгЛ • w
dt
dy
dx
Here A signifies a universal constant.
The expression
(3) 
XXX + yY + ZZ)+XtL + MM
О7Г 
О7Г
is then termed the electromagnetic energy of a unit volume.

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
389
We now calculate the electromagnetic energy S of a space t, bounded by the 
surface cj, by multiplying the equations separately, in order by L,M,N,X,Y,Z, 
besides multiplying them all by , and then adding everything and integrating 
over t. There follows
(4)
= A ( dr^-(NY - MZ) +~(LZ - NX} 
at 47ГЛ J dx 
oy
+ ^-(MX - LY}- [ (uX + vY + wZ)dt 
dz 
J
y* du(NY - MZ) cos(nx) + (LZ - NX) cos(«y) 
+(MX-LY) ws(nz)- [(uX + vY + wZ)dr
Here n represents the direction of the normal to the surface element du. 
Now, if the space т extends up to a surface и at which the forces vanish,
(5)
will be the case. That is, to conserve the energy in any space to which no 
electromagnetic forces are transmitted from outside, as much energy must be 
present per unit time in other than electromagnetic form as is indicated by the 
integral on the right.
The total energy in any bounded part of space, that is, the quantity 
(6)
— + (uX + vY + wZ}dr,
can thus be calculated accurately by means of a surface integral. We can 
assume that the energy migrates through the surface into the space t. The 
energy changes such as if it were “entering through the surface after the manner 
of a substance and, indeed, in such abundance that through every surface the 
amount

390 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(NY — MZ) cos(/7x) + (LZ — NX) cos(ny)
+(MX — LY) cos(nz)
enters per unit of surface. A geometrical discussion of this expression shows 
that our assumption is identical with the statement that the energy everywhere 
moves in a direction perpendicular to the directions of the magnetic and 
electric forces, and in such abundance that in this direction an amount equal 
to the product of the two forces, the sine of the enclosed angle, and the factor 
4^ enters through unit surface per unit time.”
2. 
Hertz has some critical remarks to make on this conception, which has its 
origins with Poynting. His chief reservation lies in the question of “the extent to 
which, given our present state of knowledge, the localization of energy and the 
tracking of it from point to point has any meaning at all. Analyses of this kind 
have not yet been carried out for the simplest energy conversions of ordinary 
mechanics, so that it is still an open question whether, and to what extent, the 
concept of energy admits of being treated in such a manner. When a steam 
engine drives an electrical generator by means of a belt running to the 
generator and back, and which in turn supplies an arc lamp by means of a wire 
that runs to the lamp and back again, it is certainly a usual and unobjectionable 
mode of expression to say that the energy is transmitted from the steam engine 
to the generator through the belt and then from the generator to the lamp by 
means of the wire. But does it have a clear physical meaning to assert that the 
energy travels from point to point along the stretched belt in a direction 
opposite to that of the belt’s motion? And if not, can it then have any clearer 
meaning to say that the energy moves from point to point along the wires or - 
following Poynting - in the intervening space between two wires? The 
conceptual obscurities found here are still much in need of clarification.”
They are in need of elucidation for those who regard the migration of energy 
as a general principle, as a mechanical property of energy. But no obscurities are 
present for those who see in the migration of electromagnetic energy nothing 
but an analogy, who see nothing but what Heaviside and Poynting intended to 
begin with and what alone comes into consideration in Hertz’s representation 
as well, namely, a mechanical description of the statement occasioned by 
equation (4). When the mass M is present in the space т within the surface w, 
and the mass with the current components uvw streams through the surface, 
then
(8) 
= J [u cos(nx) + v cos(wy) + w cos(nz)]dco.
The close relation of equation (4) to this formula is to be described - nothing 
more. If one wishes to test whether such a close relation to formula (8) is 

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
391
demonstrable in other cases of energy transmission as well, there is no 
objection to this. But the relation found above does not confer upon those 
sought any weighty probability; and still less can it be expected - after a single 
apposite case - that the supposition will prove correct for all possible 
transmissions of energy that they could lead to formula (8).
Those who consider such conclusions to be cogent from the start do not 
found their ideas on mechanical pictures, on analogies, but instead follow the 
more or less clear view that energy itself is an existing entity lurking behind the 
phenomena, a something that could also be there without the phenomena, an 
indestructible substance which is moveable from place to place. That is a 
completely groundless and also wholly useless notion: energy always gives 
expression only to relations.
3. 
Detached from equation (4), the general idea of the migration of energy 
has been pursued further by Lodge  and Foeppl  for cases involving 
machines, while Wien  has investigated the extent to which it is suitable for 
describing processes in continuously diffused media.
31
32
33
31 Lodge, Neueste Anschauungen Uber Elektrizitat (Leipzig 1896), p. 118.
32 Foeppl, Einfuhrung in die Maxwell’sche Theorie (Leipzig 1894), p. 296.
33 W. Wien, Wied. Ann. 45, p. 685.
It must indeed be regarded not as a rejection of Hertz’s remark, but rather as 
due to ignorance of it, that the German translation of Lodge’s work also 
declares that in drive belts the energy migrates with the matter on the stretched 
part of the belt. In a pressure roller, to be sure, the energy would have to 
migrate with the material; but in a traction roller, it would always migrate 
against it. If belt pulleys or gear wheels sit on one and the same roller, the 
energy migrates from one wheel to the other along the roller axis; on the other 
hand, it migrates radially in each wheel. Thus, in Foeppl’s conception, the 
complete machine complement of a factory appears permeated by a current of 
energy which, in so far as it is not consumed at individual points by friction, 
arrives at the processing machines in order there to be partially dissipated as 
heat and partially stored up as potential energy.
4. 
Wien expresses the temporal change undergone by the intrinsic energy E 
present in a unit volume of a system at the position xyz in the form
dE 
du 
db dto
9 
-^ = 7Г + 7Г + 7Г;
ot 
dx 
dy dz
and he then calls u, b,to the components of the “flowing energy”, because the 
integration of this equation over an arbitrary part of space V, bounded by the 
closed surface ш, yields the equation

392 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(9b) J -^dV = - j {u cos(«,x) +b cos(w,j) + to cos(«,z)}do>,
in which n stands for the inwardly directed normal. If, in addition,
nm 
.. rc ь 
h, r/-' 
<9r 3u dij
(10) 
. = r(1 t-4, to = r(. 
g^ + ^ + ^ + ^‘0
can be set, t can be called the “density” of the energy at the position xyz and
£ the “velocity components” of the energy. For these relations are formed 
in imitation of the equation of continuity of a liquid flowing with the velocity 
w,v,w, and whose density is /z, namely the equations
(11)
d[i 
(du dv сЫЛ
dt 
[ dx dy + dz J
or
(Hb)
Э/z d(yu) 
d(ptv) 
dfaw) _
dt dx dy dz
In the case of incompressible fluids, for example, the kinetic energy is 
nothing but intrinsic energy (cf. p. [290]), and the conservation of energy is 
thus expressed by the equation
(12)
f dE 
f dVV„
J dt J dt
+ y* P{u cos(«x) + v cos(rcy) + w cos(nz)}Dcu
Here P denotes the pressure exerted on the surface element Dev of the 
boundary of the fluid, DV the volume element,
(13) 
E = |//(w2 + v2 + vv2)
the kinetic energy of a unit volume filled with mass of density д, and W the 
potential energy transmitted by the external forces to a unit of mass in xyz.

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
393
Since W does not contain time explicitly,
dW dW dW dW
—— = W + -7— V + -7— ил
while
dE dE dE dE dE
~T~ ~ “БГ ТГ“ u + ~E~ v "д-K’' 
di dt ox dy dz
Furthermore, if the equation of continuity
du dv dw 
dx dy dz
is taken into consideration, one arrives at the relation
(14)
u cos(hx) + v cos(ny) 4- w cos(mz)]Z>cj
One can therefore choose
(15)
u = -u[E + ybW + P] 
b = -v[E + pW + P] 
to = — w[E + /iW + P]
and still also apend arbitrary additive constants. In particular, if the motion of 
the fluid follows from a velocity potential 7?, so that
dip 
dip 
dip
и = — v = —. w = —.
dx' 
dy 
dz
then, as is well-known,

394 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
(16)
dtp + E + 
+ P = Const.,
and one may choose
(17)
dtpdtp 
dtpdip 
d<pdp
dx dt' M dy dt’ 
dz dt '
But, as Wien adds,
(18)
is also an admissible choice, because really only the value of
du db dto 
dx + dy + dz
is important; and this turns out to be equally great in both cases, since the 
continuity condition Д92 = 0 applies.
From this simple case it can already be seen that the migration of energy is 
not an unequivocal problem, a circumstance which seems from the start to 
diminish any physical concerns about it.
As to Poynting’s expression (7), Birkeland34 has studied the functions that 
can be added to it without changing the value of the integral appearing in 
equation (4), which alone is important; and, in so doing, he has indeed found 
that Poynting’s choice seems to be entirely natural.
Wied. Ann. 52 (1894), p. 357.
Section Four:
The Limits of Description by Means of Mechanical Pictures
1. The real difficulty in reproducing the second law by means of mechanical 
processes, however, does not at all lie solely in the invention of forms of motion 
for which functions can be stated whose behavior reproduces that of tempera­
ture and of entropy in reversible processes. Rather, the analogy found must 
also be transferable to irreversible ones.
That would be a quite simple matter, of course, if recourse could be made to 
frictional or friction-like forces to describe irreversibility, as Duhem and 
Wiedeburg do. But such forces would contradict the first law if no information 
34

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
395
could be given about the whereabouts of the energy extracted by them. And 
since, in order to carry through the mechanical analogy, the energy used for 
friction by every mechanical hypothesis must again be intended for a mechan­
ical system, it is nevertheless clear that, ultimately, only conservative systems 
are able to yield a picture useful for the purely mechanical point of view.
Now, there is only one way to take from these conservative systems the 
reversibility which, for mechanical reasons, they always possess: the way first 
pointed out by Maxwell and carried through by Helmholtz. The changes 
investigated by Carnot and Clapeyron are completely reversible, as long as 
the state of the body being considered is at all times completely defined by one 
point in the plane and two variables. However, when a body treated by classical 
thermodynamics no longer passes through mere states of equilibrium - when 
for example, it no longer has the same temperature in all of its parts, or the 
same velocity, or when two parameters no longer suffice to define the states 
through which it has passed - then the possibility begins of its changes taking a 
irreversible course. Even then, it can also still be imagined that the course can 
be reversed, by influencing the individual parts individually and by taking into 
consideration the parameters which have not been considered; but it can no 
longer actually be carried out. This conclusion apparently still holds even 
when, at the outset, more than two parameters are applied to define the body’s 
states. Then either it is the possible changes not taken into consideration in the 
parameters applied which cause irreversibility, or parameters are applied which 
in practice cannot be controlled, parameters whose changes cannot be 
reversed.
The mechanical world-view can imitate these conditions in perfect analogy. 
According to the conception of the kinetic gas hypothesis, of course, the state 
of a mass of gas is fundamentally determined by entirely different data than its 
pressure, volume or temperature; these things only express with sufficient 
accuracy how this state is generally described for us. In truth, it is only defined 
when the location and velocity of each molecule - or, rather, each atom - are 
known. Although it was unfairly judged by Zollner, Maxwell35 here employs an 
appropriate picture: If there existed beings who could see the individual 
molecules and could influence their course, then the Carnot-Clausius principle 
would not hold. Indeed, these beings would only need to open a vent in the 
dividing wall between two gases, A and B, when a molecule of greater velocity 
is coming from A and, in return, to close the vent to the passage of slower 
molecules coming from Л, while inversely allowing only the slow molecules 
from В to pass. The temperature in В would then rise without any expenditure 
of work.
Maxwell, Theorie der Warme (Braunschweig 1878), p. 374.
Every conservative system is indeed reversible theoretically, but not in 
practice. We cannot reverse the course of the earth around the sun or the 
rotation of the pendulum plane at the surface of the rotating earth. In these 
examples the energy theoretically required for reversal remains inaccessible to 
us because of its magnitude] but in countless microscopic processes it is the 
35

396 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
arrangement of energy that creates insurmountable difficulties for reversal. 
Thus, we cannot reverse, in order to further motion, the usual resistances to 
motion - friction and mean resistance - nor the motion of foaming waves or 
the sound-filled air, although in these cases there is no doubt about the 
kinematic connection of the individual changes.
Now, the mechanical world-view takes such motions of the small parts of 
bodies to be present even when thermal phenomena, or electrical or chemical 
processes, confront our experience. Helmholtz has studied cases of the 
irreversible phenomena of motion - particularly with respect to those hypothe­
tical processes which are completely inaccessible to us as motions - and has 
summarized them as instances of concealed motion. “That we cannot seize 
upon and transform the thermal motion of the atoms more directly than is the 
case is nonetheless due only to the fact that we cannot isolate our influences to 
definite atoms proceeding in a definite direction, but must necessarily always 
affect all of the atoms in a definite region of space equally. It is due only to the 
limitation of the methods at our command and not to the nature of motion.”
It may also be noted here that the view that we are unable to influence many 
coordinates is obviously not tied to the mechanical conception of all natural 
occurrences. Even if the coordinates are partially of a non-mechanical nature, 
the possibility remains of dividing them into those which can be completely 
controlled by us and those not subject to our whim. I elaborated this idea 
further at Lubeck in order to use it to describe irreversibility. But since, in the 
meantime, Duhem and Wiedeburg have discovered far clearer and more 
graphic means for this purpose, attaining the same goal by means of much 
more definite assumptions, there is currently no reason to develop that idea 
further.
2. Now, the assumption that we cannot influence many of the coordinates in 
nature is certainly sufficient to explain the irreversibility of all those phenom­
ena for whose description such coordinates are necessary. But it still remains 
unexplained why the phenomena exhibit that remarkable conformity in 
consequence of which the totality of everything that happens proceeds in the 
same sense toward the dissipation of energy. The mechanical way of conceiving 
things must not only make comprehensible mechanically that a given process 
cannot be reversed at will; it must also explain why the energy present is 
transformed predominantly into the energy of concealed motions and not the 
reverse - hence, why the energy eludes our influence more and more.
Here, as well, the mechanical world-view has only one explanation: That is 
the probability of natural processes, which has been taken into consideration 
ever since the formation of the kinetic gas hypothesis. To be sure, Thomson and 
Tait have divided non-conservative systems into accumulative and dissipative 
ones.36 In the former case, it is forces dependent solely on position that make 
the system a non-conservative one; in the latter case, it is forces dependent on 
velocity. However, for the reasons just mentioned, the special character of the 
Thomson and Tait, Natural Philosophy I (Cambridge 1890), pp. 384ff.
36

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
397
dissipative systems emphasized thereby cannot be utilized for a kinetic 
hypothesis.
There is nothing left but to assume that in nature there exist far more 
concealed motions than motions which are accessible to our influence, so that, 
as Hertz expresses it, a very great probability speaks against the concentration 
of energy precisely in the special and distinct direction leading from the great 
number of concealed motions towards the small number of motions over which 
we have control.
Of the processes occuring in the molecular world, we have, so to speak, only 
a statistical knowledge. We are not beings, such as Maxwell invented, who are 
capable of directing the course of molecules; we only meet with the average 
result of their motions.
Loschmidt was the first to emphasize that the mechanics of conservative 
systems is incompatible with the second law.37 If at the beginning of a motion В 
at time 0, all of the material points have the same positions they had in the 
course of another motion - for example, a motion A - carried out by them 
earlier at time t, and also the same, but oppositely directed, velocities, then in 
motion В the points will pass through the same states in reverse that they 
passed through directly in motion A, and at time t reach the end state which 
was the initial state in motion A. If, therefore, as is usually thought, the 
quantities dQ and 0 depend only on the states of the system - whereby, of 
course, all material points entering into interaction at all during the motion are 
to be included in the world of the system - it is clear that if the integral
37 Wiener Sitzungsberichte II, 73 (1876), p. 139.
38 Wiener Sitzungsberichte II, 75 (1877), p. 67.
extended over motion A is zero or negative, it must be zero or positive when 
extended over motion B. Accordingly, to derive the principle of the increase of 
entropy from mechanics seems a vain endeavor; for it depends not only on the 
nature of the bodies and forces, but also on the initial conditions, whether the 
function referred to as the entropy of the mechanical system rises or falls 
during the motion.
Boltzmann sees in this conclusion of Loschmidt’s only an enticing soph­
ism.38 For if an infinite number of absolutely elastic spheres were present in a 
closed vessel in a completely non-uniform distribution with respect to velocity 
or density, then, according to Loschmidt’s thesis, it would have to be denied 
that their motion leads to a uniform distribution. The reason is that if they 
should be almost uniformly mixed at time Z, while they were non-uniformly 
distributed at time 0, then if the former almost-uniform distribution were 
chosen as the initial state, the latter would have to become completely non­
uniform in the course of the time t.

398 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Boltzmann does away with these objections by pointing to the probability of 
the states. “No proof can be given that after the passage of a certain time t the 
mixture of the spheres must, with absolute necessity, be a uniform one, 
whatever may have been the state distribution at the beginning of the time; ... 
for every state distribution, no matter how non-uniform it may be, is not 
absolutely impossible, even if it is extremely improbable.” Every possible 
individual state distribution, whether it is uniform or not, is equiprobable. 
“The greater probability that the state distribution becomes uniform with time 
stems only from the fact that there exist many more uniform than non-uniform 
state distributions. Hence it cannot be proved that, whatever the positions and 
velocities of the spheres may have been at the beginning, the distribution must 
always be uniform after a very long time has passed. It can only be proved that, 
after the passage of a definite very long time, more initial states lead infinitely 
often to a uniform than to a non-uniform state distribution, and that also in the 
latter case, after still more time has passed, the state distribution once again 
becomes uniform.”
In spite of the theory of concealed motions, we have come no farther than to 
this explanation,39 even to this day.
39 An informed, readily understandable development of these ideas is given in Boltzmann’s lecture 
contained in the paperback Die feierliche Sitzung der kaiserlichen Ak. d. Wiss. am 29 Mai 1886 
(Wien).
40 Zermelo, Wied. Ann. 57 (1896), p. 485.
41 Poincare, Acta. Math. 13 (1890), p. 67.
3. Of course, there is a difficulty attached to this explanation - or, rather, a 
very unwelcome encumbrance. However high the probability may be that 
natural phenomena proceed in the sense of the dissipation of energy, there 
nevertheless remains the possibility of the reverse process. Moreover, given the 
infinite number of tests which is theoretically assured by the boundlessness of 
space and time, the probability standpoint must acknowledge that periods may 
occur, and regions of the universe may be discovered, in which nature exhibits 
an aversion to the dissipation of energy, rather than a preference for it, as 
Planck maintains. And so, for the sake of the mechanical hypothesis, one must 
also accept into the bargain that the course of the world is occasionally 
reversed. And one must therefore also accept that, in the fullness of time, 
children will one day return to their mothers’ wombs - if one wishes to have the 
proud feeling that child-bearing follows from conservative forces in accordance 
with Lagrange’s differential equations.
It would certainly be foolish and unjust to want to prove, with this absurdity, 
that the mechanical world-view is simply a failure. Boltzmann was able to 
weaken an objection that was recently raised against the kinetic gas hypoth­
esis,40 and rightly so, by means of a number. Zermelo based his objection on a 
theorem of Poincare’s,41 which he formulated to the effect “that in a system of 
material points under the influence of forces depending only on position in 
space, in general any state of motion, characterized by configuration and 
velocity, once assumed, must recur, and indeed recur arbitrarily often, in the 

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
399
course of time, at least with arbitrary approximation, even if not exactly, if it is 
assumed that the coordinates as well as the velocities do not increase to 
infinity.” (The rigorous formulation of Poincare’s theorem, to which Boltz­
mann also adhered, need not be gone into here; the mathematical proof has 
been articulated in detail by Boltzmann himself in briefer form than is to be 
found in Poincare.42) According to this theorem, the reversibility of all 
phenomena is a necessary consequence of the mechanical world-view. More­
over, Poincare has shown elsewhere,43 and in a completely different manner, 
that an increase of entropy does not in general take place in Helmholtz’s 
cyclical systems with concealed motions. He is therefore led to assert “that 
irreversible processes and the theory of Clausius cannot be explained by the 
equations of Lagrange” or, briefly, “Mechanism is incompatible with Clausius’ 
theorem.”
42 Boltzmann, Wiener Sitzungsberichte II, 106 (1897), p. 12.
43 Poincare, Thermodynamik (Berlin 1894), pp. 294 and XII.
44 Wied. Ann. (1896), p. 773.
And so, in order to explain irreversibility, there remains nothing left for the 
mechanical world-view but the demonstration that, in the case of phenomena 
which are in fact irreversible, the recurrence of a present state is extremely 
improbable, even though it is not theoretically impossible. To rebut the 
objection that Zermelo, in particular, had raised against the consequences of 
the kinetic gas hypothesis, Boltzmann imagines44 a vessel having the volume of 
one cubic centimeter, in which air of ordinary density - hence, about one 
trillion molecules - is present. He sets the initial velocity of each molecule equal 
to 500 m/sec, the average distance between the centers of two neighboring 
molecules at 10 6 cm, and assumes that each molecule experiences 4 • 109 
collisions per second. According to Poincare’s theorem, the original state does 
not have to recur in approximate form until the velocities of the molecules have 
run through all possible combinations, and every collision brings the possibility 
of a different combination. From these suppositions Boltzmann finds, in 
accordance with the principles of the calculus of probabilities, that a velocity 
distribution approaching the original one within certain limits chosen by 
Boltzmann - or, in brief, the approximate recurrence of the initial state - will 
not take place until a number of seconds passes that “has many trillion digits.” 
“By contrast,” he continues, “if as many planets revolved around each fixed 
star visible with the best telescopes as revolve around the sun, and if on each of 
these planets there were as many people as there are on earth, and each of them 
lived a trillion years, then the number of seconds which all of them together 
experience would still be a number having far fewer than fifty digits.”
The last expression is not entirely fortunate, of course. For these people have 
the opportunity in this long time to observe, not only one cubic centimeter, but 
an enormous number of them, in their search for irreversibility; and the 
probability of finding a reverse formation once is not as small as it seems to 
be from Boltzmann’s expression. But it may still turn out in such a way that our 
possibilities of experience do not include the observation of a decrease in 

400 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
entropy. It may be true that the kinetic gas hypothesis can no more be rejected 
because of the consequence discussed above than a dice player can declare a die 
to be false because he has never been able to observe a one thrown a thousand 
times in succession, even though the probability of doing so is not exactly equal 
to zero. Indeed, cases otherwise occur often enough where, in practice, we 
dismiss as negligibly small a value which is only very small according to theory. 
At the same time, one can also agree with Boltzmann that the pure 
consequences of the increase of entropy, when they are applied to the universe 
in Clausius’ manner, are also far from satisfying.
Nevertheless, considered in the most advantageous light, what emerges from 
these results is only that the mechanical world-view is not simply invalid, but 
rather that it can hold its own even before the fact of irreversibility. It is another 
question whether such results are appropriately pursued and so whether, 
consistently carried through, atomism provides an appropriate picture of the 
world.45
45 Cf. Mach, Erhaltung der Arbeit (Prag 1872), pp. 30 and 32.
46 Wiener Sitsungsberichte 106 (1897), p. 83.
In fact, it seems everywhere to be the inexorable fate of the mechanical 
hypothesis that in order to describe experience it must burden itself with a 
crushing excess load of notions having nothing to do with experience. The 
means so admirably verified for producing a mechanical picture of a small area 
of experience become more and more inappropriate the greater is the area of 
experience that they are to reproduce, and, finally, they fail completely. It is like 
the diagrams which dioptrics can supply or the maps of which cartography 
makes use. The mechanical world-view is a universal method of picturing, but it 
does not furnish a universal world picture; its force disappears with its extension.
4. In an essay which appeared recently,  Boltzmann has found a striking 
expression for the standpoint of atomism and the mechanical world-view: 
Atoms exist. Now, we ascribe existence to certain things in our environment in 
order to secure for ourselves resting points in the flight of phenomena. Our 
observations always yield us relations; one thing depends upon the other. We 
need things to which we can relate other things and whose own relatedness we 
need not always think about. And we attribute objective existence to these 
things when we do not doubt that beings, whom in this regard we consider as 
justified as ourselves, acknowledge the same things as suitable points of 
support for thought. Thus, Venus exists and Newton’s force of attraction exists 
in the same way as this tree beside me or heaven above me. In this way we have 
catchwords under which we can conveniently retrieve our experiences.
46
But science easily becomes incautious in the use of such catchwords - much 
more incautious than everyday usage - and supposes that because it attributes 
force to the atom, as the human arm has force, it knows the atom as well as a 
person knows himself. It is dangerous, therefore, to say that atoms exist. To be 
sure, the atom is a good catchword under which to retrieve the experiences of 
stoichiometry, the constitution of bodies, frictional heat, and the like; but for 

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
401
thermodynamics and for many other areas of experience, it becomes very 
awkward and inconvenient. The atom exists, perhaps, as the firmament exists, 
which for most people is indeed an entirely satisfactory statement; but we think 
to better advantage when we think that it does not exist.
For natural science nothing exists but scientific observations. In order not to 
extend its domain too far, theoretical natural science could perhaps grant 
existence to those fundamental results of the art of observation and of the 
criticism of observation which, in the manner secured by use in everyday life, 
we designate as clear concepts, established experiences, discovered laws and 
detected objects. Moreover, each special theory may circumscribe its domain 
more narrowly and start from the premise that the ether exists, or atoms, or 
Newtonian force, or indestructible masses related by rigid geometric connec­
tions, and the like. But for general theoretical physics there exist neither atoms 
nor energy nor any other such concept, but only those experiences which are 
immediately derived from groups of observations.
I thus consider it also to be the best thing about energetics that it is capable to a 
much greater degree than the old theories of adapting itself directly to our 
experiences', and I see in the attempts to attribute substantial existence to 
energy a dubious departure from the original clarity of Robert Mayer’s views. 
There exists no absolute; only relations are accessible to our knowledge. And 
whenever the spirit of research has contentedly reclined on the sluggard’s bed 
of any kind of absolute, it has immediately expired there. It may be a 
comfortable dream that our questioning can find rest in atoms, but it remains 
a dream! And it would be no less a dream if we wished to see in energy an 
absolute, instead of only the most striking expression up to now of the 
quantitative relations among the phenomena of nature.
5. I also cannot regard as adequate Boltzmann’s new defense of atomism 
using the differential concept. “Whoever believes that he has gotten rid of 
atomism through differential equations,” says Boltzmann,  “does not see the 
wood for the trees. What is the use of concealing the requirement of imagining 
a great number of individuals, when, in the explanation of differential 
equations, that requirement has been used to define the value expressed by 
them?” On the contrary, it must be remarked that whether the metaphysics of 
numbers reduces the continuum to something discontinuous has nothing to do 
with physics. In fact, the ideas of the continuous and the discontinuous are 
both within us; and he who explains differential equations through operations 
with discrete numbers need not deny the relationship of continuity. It is just 
that he cannot grasp it conceptually with the precision which seems to him to 
be necessary. Passage to the limit may very well represent a change in quality. 
But what atomist understands his physical atoms in this way? Do they really 
see them as mere aids in concept formation? Don’t they instead attribute to 
them real existence?
47
47
Wied. Ann. 60, p. 234.

402 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
6. As often and as emphatically as all of these ideas have already been put 
forth in natural science - the connoisseur will, I should hope, recognize clearly 
enough the spheres of thought of Mach and Avenarius in many passages of this 
book - they have not yet gained the general acceptance they deserve. 
Otherwise, the more profound aspects of energetics would not have been so 
little understood at Lubeck.
The narrow-minded clinging to mechanical hypotheses as opposed to 
energetics, which looks beyond them, is certainly not the first case in which 
science has stubbornly persisted in conventional methods; and, in accordance 
with its greatest instance, this procedure may well be called “scholasticism”. 
But however much accustomed methods may be praised for their greater 
certainty and capacity for efficiency, which has been achieved through much 
use, or for their greater educational value - all of this is still of no avail. These 
methods remain limited in their applicability, and only new approaches, more 
directly linked to experience, can take us beyond their limits.
Maxwell once made an excellect remark on this subject,48 which almost 
prophesies the efforts of modern energetics: “It is very desirable that men of 
science invent methods of representation through which ideas, accurate as far 
as they reach, are conveyed to the mind, and that are nevertheless general 
enough to avoid the introduction of unwarranted details.” Energetics is such a 
method).
Proc. Cambr. Phil. Soc. II (1876); Scientific Papers II, p. 309.
Rosenberger has recently paralleled dynamics, energetics and kinetics as 
three nearly equally well-justified approaches to scientific knowledge; and it 
seems to me that he has thereby stated a rather widespread view. Now, 
depending on one’s taste, more emphasis can certainly be given to force or 
energy or the equations through which the different possibilities for change are 
linked. Each of these approaches can be enhanced to luxuriant mysticism and 
exuberant imagery; and each can modestly content itself with desiring to be, 
and to be active in, nothing more than the reproduction of experience. Thus, 
Newton’s dynamics, Hertz’s kinetics and, indeed, even the general kinetics of 
the ether in optics and electricity are free of unnecessary notions, while 
energetics, at least in the form of energy migration, betrays a strong tendency 
to empty ornamentation. So a parallel may very well be drawn among these 
three approaches to theoretical physics. But one should not suppose that this 
goes to the heart of the point of contention at Lubeck. What was opposed and 
defended there about energetics is the method of being able to talk about natural 
processes in a language free of pictures. And for this purpose, the method of 
energetics is unsurpassed; it is not even approximately equalled by any of the 
other approaches.
But one need not, on this acount, go as far as Ostwald has done and simply 
renounce pictures. Why, then, do hypotheses give molecular dimensions, if 
possible, to the mechanisms they have invented? Lagrange’s equations and 
Hertz’s rigid connections are by no means valid only for molecular dimensions. 
But if the desire is to fill with shapes the frame presented by the imagination, to 
48

MECHANICAL APPROACH TO ENERGETICS
403
reproduce, following Lodge, electromagnetic transmission with a clockwork, 
or to make clear a formula for how something is constituted with a geometric 
figure, a descent into the infinitesimal is necessary. Do not molecular dimen­
sions then serve us as a way of fleeing from the limits of the senses into the 
freedom of ideas? Is not the real significance of atomism, perhaps, that it 
secures for our mind a realm of freedom? But the freer play of the mind would 
become frivolous playfullness if it were not aware of the boundary between 
fiction and truth.
When inductive conclusions establish a relationship between natural phe­
nomena, the imagination is always provided elbow-room for further work. 
Thus, the relations in the planetary system revealed by Copernicus and Kepler 
led to gravitation; and this, in its turn, provides the imagination an opportunity 
and the power to develop its notions. This game is won when a notion arises by 
means of which experiences, until then unrelated, are placed into the correct 
relationships - the motion of Mars with terrestrial gravitation, for instance, or 
gravitation with electrical and magnetic actions at a distance. But when the 
imagined notion is taken to be the essence of the matter, when it is taken to be 
more valuable than the experiences from which it is invented - this is where 
scholasticism begins. And whoever rejects a completely adequate description of 
the phenomena such as energetics offers, a description not needing the aid of 
fictions - he has taken his stand with scholasticism. It is therefore not the old 
methods for describing the phenomena that I regard as dubious, but rather 
their excess, that blind faith in their general validity and infallibility which 
encourages all kinds of rescue efforts, invents the most peculiar notions, which 
are of no use for any purpose other than such a rescue, and then presents these 
fictions as the truth.
More and more, in fact, the mechanistic element is felt to be only clothing 
and ornament, as in the development of the atomic hypothesis to the ionic one; 
and the concealed motions of Helmholtz and Hertz claim to be nothing more 
fundamental than a graphic means of describing energetic relations which is 
required owing to Lagrange’s forms of thought. But there exists a description 
without Lagrange’s equations, just as there is conceptual thought as well as 
graphic, intuitive thought.
7. Indeed, there is still more! Energetics really does not need to combat 
pictures as enemies', for pictures are in fact subject to energetics, however 
independently they may behave. Because how do we recognize whether a 
picture is accurate? By its conformity with experience, or by the agreement of 
its logical consequences with experience, it is said. But then what? If the picture 
is not qualitatively different from the fact it pictures, how can it or its 
consequences then be compared with the fact? Where is the tertium compar- 
ationisl
Let us take an example. A picture is devised to describe thermal phenomena; 
a certain quantity which is not heat is to represent heat, another quantity, 
temperature. What does it mean, then, to test by experience whether the picture 
is useful? Not all of the features of the picture correspond to experiences 

404 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
regarding heat; otherwise it would not be a picture. Which features must 
correspond in order to satisfy the demands of exact research? Only energetics 
provides the answer to this question. We may affirm as heat only a quantity 
which can be conceived of as a form of energy, for example, one conforming to 
the law of energy conservation. And only a quantity sharing with temperature 
the property of intensity, for example, can be acknowledged as temperature. In 
brief, the features the picture must reproduce are precisely those which are 
necessary for the complete quantitative description of the experience, and these 
are precisely the ones retained in energetics. Thus, in every sense, energetics 
stands above mechanical pictures; it is their judge. Only through its criticism is 
it determined whether a picture is an accurate description of reality - not empty 
play of the imagination, but instead poetic truth. And without this critique, 
retaining the traditional modes of thinking, by devising new auxiliary notions 
only to salvage the old pictures, would be vain scholasticism.
And so, in the controversy kindled in 1895 at Lubeck as well, it is not really a 
question of atomism or of matter continuously filling space, not a matter of the 
inequality sign in thermodynamics, or of the energetic foundation of me­
chanics. All of these are only details. In the final analysis, what is at stake are 
the principles of our knowledge of nature. Against the omnipotence in 
theoretically reproducing our experiences claimed by the mechanical method, 
a youthful method comes forward, permitting us a much more direct descrip­
tion of experience, and yet achieving the generality that is indispensible to 
every appropriate theoretical reproduction of nature. If the field of energetics is 
comprehended in this breadth, in which alone justice can be done to its efforts, 
then the decision is very simple: Here scholasticism - here energetics - that is the 
choice!

INDEX
(page numbers refer to this translation)
Absorption 133, 135
Adiabats 114,311
Action and reaction 39, 41, 235, 281
Actions, relations between (Helmholtz) 330,
340
Actual (not virtual) 225
Accumulative 356
Aftereffect 343
Aggregation, change of 142
Akin 9
d‘Alembert’s Principle 210
Analogy 167, 178, 259, 340, 350
-principle of 333
Anaxagoras 6
Arrhenius 204
Atomism 144, 215, 361
- existence of atoms 361
Avenarius 247, 363
Cause 17
Cazin 164
Cells 136, 174, 176
Changes, excluded 148
-permissible 148,172
Chatelier 185
Chauveau 206
Chemical reaction, course of 318
Clapeyron 15, 32, 43, 58, 141, 164
Clapeyron’s formula 61, 85, 141, 199
- function 61, 63, 79, 86
Clausius 70, 96, 108, 120, 123, 207, 308, 342
- principle 101, 193 (cf. also Carnot’s 
principle)
- inequality 103, 319, 347
Clement and Desormes 65
Colding 129
Combustion 208
Concentration 200
Babo’s Law 134
Bauschinger 123
Bernoulli, Daniel 8
Bernoulli, Johann 2, 7
Berthelot 140
Bertrand 6, 7
Birkeland 353
Bloodletting 21
Bodies, elastic 239, 242
-fluid 239,243, 351
Bohn 8
Boltzmann 215, 224, 226, 268, 281, 292, 338,
357f
Budde 309
-cell 136
Conversion numbers 197
Coriolis 2, 5, 13
Conservative 11, 354
Coordinate system, absolute 16
Coordinates, cyclic 284, 325
- controllable 335
-equilibrium 325
-kinosthenic 325
-position 325
- unrestricted 325, 355
Continuity 362
Cosmological problems 207
Coupling 285
Caloricum 66
Capacity 268,273,314
Carnot, Lazare N.M. 13
Carnot, Sadi 15,32,43,50 
-principle 56,96, 101, 110, 193
- process 55, 73, 208, 279
Causality 214
Dalton’s Law 162
Davy 8
Democritus 6
Desormes 65
Deville, St. Claire 139
Diagrams 164 (cf. graphical representations)
Diesel 208
405

406 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Differential, total 38, 40, 75, 268
Diffusion 317
Disgregation 121
Dispersion 92, 94
- function 336
Dissipation 92, 94, 356
Dissociation 142
Dressel 238, 314
Du Bois-Reymond 178
Duhem 1, 153, 181,269, 343
Ebert 290
Efficacy, degree of 268
-function 100,131
Efficiency 208
Efflux 87
Electricity 44, 205, 278
Electrodynamics 46, 289, 326
Electrophorus 25
Electrotechnology 205
Empedocles 6
Energetics 117
-and Mechanics 47,48,81, 144, 178, 188,215,
237, 293, 338, 350
- mechanical approach to 322
Energy 18, 105
-actual 92, 111
-bound 181
-free 180f
-intrinsic 75, 84, 100, 163
-kinetic 42, 111,278,298
-motive 94, 186
-migration of 347
-potential 42,92, 111, 180
-radiant 110,289
- 
statical and dynamical 92
- 
surface 287
- sum of parts 105
- 
syntactic 242
- of the world 122
Energy and affinity 140
- 
and tendency 115
Energy equation, splitting of 171, 223, 233,
281,295
Energy, factors of 115, 253, 266
Energy, forms of 26, 291, 296
- 
independence of 171
- 
table of 26, 291
Energy law and energy principle 219
Energy principle 100, 225, 230, 245, 283
- 
proof of 100
Entropy 95 99, 104, 120, 142, 162, 191, 195,
319
- increase of 195
- sum of parts 105
-ofthe world 122
Epicurus 6
Equilibrium, condition of 149, 153, 158, 171,
174,211,218
-entropyof 319
-false 343
Equivalent 23, 33, 57, 64, 80
Equivalence is not identity 22, 43 322
Ergal 179
Euler 6
Expansion of vapor 79
- 
under pressure 24
Ex tensity 266, 273, 291
Faraday 32, 115,339
Fechner 247
Fick 206
Foeppl 350
Force 216,218,232
- 
central 40, 235
- dead 2
- 
= energy 18, 35, 185
- fall 18
- 
latent 2
-living 2, 11, 13, 38
- 
parallelogram of 234
- 
tensional 42
- 
transformation of 12
Fourier 51
Fresnel 8
Friction 280, 343
Fundamental equation 161
Functions, characteristic 160
Galilei 279
Galvanism 44
Gas 55, 75, 79, 156, 162, 244
Gauss 209
Gay-Lussac 24
Gehler
Gibbs 144f, 198,239,274
- 
surfaces 166
Good Words 128
Graphical representation 59, 166
Green 209
Griesbach 207
Grove 28
Gruner 228
Gyroscope 328
Hamilton 209, 323, 338
Happening, principle of 301
Heat, internal 121
- 
difference of 60, 75, 83, 99
- 
equivalent 23, 54, 57

INDEX
407
-solution 133
- 
source, reservoir 101
- 
specific 64
- 
substance 66
-transfer 153
- 
and internal work 121
- 
and motion 22, 43
- 
and temperature 7, 86
-of reaction 137,160
- 
of the sun 25
Heaviside 347
Hecht 15
Heger 238
Heinrich, Placidus 9
Helm 10, 149, 202, 207, 225
Helmholtz, Hermann von 4, 27, 35, 111, 114, 
136, 145, 175, 284, 308,331,325
Helmholtz, Robert von 183
Henry 206
Heraclitus 5
Hertz 286, 325, 347
Hess 33, 137
Hirn 108
Hobbes 6
Hoff, van‘t 203
Holtzmann 43, 62
Horstmann 14 If
Hysteris 343
Identity and equivalence 22, 43, 322
Impact 11, 43
Imponderables 19
Induction 45, 291, 324
Integrating denominator 285, 306
Intensity 266, 274, 291, 315
-chemical 160,169
- 
gravity and chemical 171
-intrinsic 155
- 
reduced 300
- 
universal character of 303
Intensity law 272, 276
- 
generalization of 300
Interference 43
Ions 202, 365
Irreversibility 336, 353
Isentropic 165
Isodynamic 165
Isometric 165
Isopiestic 165
Isotherms 114, 165
Jacobi 47
Januschke 238, 268
Joule 31,43, 127
Kaufmann 64
Kilogram-meter 13
Kirchhoff 131f, 338
Klein 10, 37
Konigsberger 178,331,338
Konowalow 304
Lagrange 11, 38, 322,338, 358
Lasswitz 207
Leibniz 2
Lenz 206
Lie 247, 306
Liebig 10
Lippmann 261, 309
Lipschitz 38
Living force, conservation of 11
Locke 7
Lodge 278, 293, 347
Lorentz 208
Loschmidt 357
Lucretius 6
Mach 20, 100, 125, 247, 259, 272, 363
Machine factor 300
Magnetism 44
Massieu 159, 182
Maximum principle 245, 248
Maxwell 166, 221, 261, 324, 339, 347, 354, 363
Mayer 9, 15, 16f, 26, 35, 48, 58, 126f, 139, 185, 
206, 214, 268
Mechanics, applied 12, 50, 117
Mechanics and energetics 47, 48, 81, 144, 178, 
188,215, 237, 293, 338, 350
Meteorology 207
Method, pictorial 36If
Mohr 9
Molecular hypothesis 111, 144, 188, 342
Mollier 165
Momentum 16
Monocycles 284
Motion, capacity for 19,268
- 
concealed 330, 356
- 
= kinetic energy 19
- 
and heat 22, 43
Motivity 94, 185
Moutier 143, 183
Mysticism 20
Natanson 337
Naumann 143
Navier 13
Nernst 185
Neumann, Carl 39, 70, 99, 109, 133, 216, 229, 
239, 248
Neumann, Franz E 70, 206

408 THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGETICS
Osmosis 158
Ostwald 207, 229, 245, 247, 248, 268, 299, 364
Pambour 79
Peltier 91
Perpetuum mobile 26, 36, 54, 304
Peslin 143
Petzoldt 245
Pfaffian differential expressions 306
Pfaundler 312
Pfeffer 206
Phase 154, 163
Phase rule 163
Philosophical 207
Phlogiston 139
Physiology 206
Planck 36, 46, 97, 115, 117, 124, 189, 239, 292,
295
Plato 6
Poggendorff 16, 47
Poincare 359
Poisson 4
Political-economical 207
Poncelet 13, 14, 218, 220
Popper 264
Popularization 48
Potential 42,92, 111, 180
-chemical 155, 169
-electrical 173
-kinetic 323
-mechanical 277
-thermodynamic 160,182
Poynting 347
Preference of nature 190
Preston 109
Principle, maximum 245, 248
-of Clausius 101
-of Planck 191
- of transformation 14
- of work 14
- of the greatest work 140
- of virtual velocities 14
Priority dispute 126
Probibility 356
Process, cyclic 36, 52, 68, 73, 104, 133, 192,
256, 279
- Carnot see Carnot
Quantity function 268
Quantity magnitude 316
Rankine 92, 110, 116, 164, 187, 207, 263
Rayleigh 336
Reaction, temporal course of 318
Redtenbacher 15
Reech 108
Reis 49
Relations, pure system of 20, 146, 362
Relativism 362
Relaxation time 337
Resistance 233
-function 317
Reversibility 52, 104, 153, 194, 354
Riehl 214
Ritter 166, 207
Rodewald 207
Roget 32
Rosenberger 363
Rotation of the earth 91
Riimelin 16, 21
Riihlmann, M 15
Riihlmann, R 5
St. Claire Deville 139
Scholasticism 19, 363f
Schroder van der Kolk 138
Seguin 127
Singularity 245
Solutions 201
-dilute 201
-salt 133
Specific heat 64, 80
State, equations of 236
Steam 53
Streintz 216
System, cyclical 284, 325
- 
isolated 151
Tait 109, 120, 128,211
Technology 116, 207
Temperature, definition 310
- 
absolute 65, 88, 310
- 
difference 52
- 
equalization of 93
- 
function 61, 63, 79, 86
- 
reaction 137
- 
and heat 67, 86
- 
of fusion 65, 68
Tendency and energy 115
Thermal currents 89
Thermodynamics, first law 72, 82, 100
- 
second law 77, 82, 96, 101, 118, 304
- 
and mechanics 327
- 
of chemical processes 175
Thermodynamic surfaces 166
- 
coordinates
-potential 160,182
Thermometer, air 88
Thermotechnology 116, 118, 207
Thomsen 137

INDEX
409
Thomson, James 68, 134, 137
Thomson, JJ 325, 334
Thomson, William 64, 81, 92, 128, 211, 342
Thomson effect 90
Thomson’s principle 102
“To transform” 19
Transformation value 96, 191
Transformations 14
- 
delay of 321
- 
equivalence of 96
Transfer 52, 153
Tyndall 126
Uncompensated 122
Uniqueness 245
von Oettingen 166, 261, 311
Wald 313
Watt 79
Wassmuth 337
Weisbach 4, 15, 116
Weyrauch 16
Wiedeburg 126,268,315
Wiedemann 289
Wien 289, 350
Work 13,38
-internal 121
World order 194
World principles 122
Wronsky 314
Vapor 53, 76,79
- 
pressure curves 135
Variables, normal 271
Variation coefficient 39
Virtual velocities 13, 218, 225, 272
Viscosity 343
Voigt 39
Young 13
Zermelo 359
Zeuner 116, 164, 165, 207, 
239,253, 263, 307
Zollner 16, 194, 247, 354

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
Editor: Robert S. Cohen, Boston University
1. 
M.W. Wartofsky (ed.): Proceedings of the Boston Colloquium for the Philosophy of Science, 
1961/1962. [Synthese Library 6] 1963 
ISBN 90-277-0021-4
2. 
R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Proceedings of the Boston Colloquium for the Philo­
sophy of Science, 1962/1964. In Honor of P. Frank. [Synthese Library 10] 1965
ISBN 90-277-9004-0
3. 
R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Proceedings of the Boston Colloquium for the Philo­
sophy of Science, 1964/1966. In Memory of Norwood Russell Hanson. [Synthese Library 14] 
1967 
ISBN 90-277-0013-3
4. 
R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Proceedings of the Boston Colloquium for the Philo­
sophy of Science, 1966/1968. [Synthese Library 18] 1969 
ISBN 90-277-0014-1
5. 
R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Proceedings of the Boston Colloquium for the Philo­
sophy of Science, 1966/1968. [Synthese Library 19] 1969 
ISBN 90-277-0015-X
6. 
R.S. Cohen and R.J. Seeger (eds.): Ernst Mach, Physicist and Philosopher. [Synthese Library 
27] 1970 
ISBN 90-277-0016-8
7. 
M. Capek: Bergson and Modem Physics. A Reinterpretation and Re-evaluation. [Synthese 
Library 37] 1971 
ISBN 90-277-0186-5
8. 
R.C. Buck and R.S. Cohen (eds.): PSA 1970. Proceedings of the 2nd Biennial Meeting of 
the Philosophy and Science Association (Boston, Fall 1970). In Memory of Rudolf Carnap. 
[Synthese Library 39] 1971 
ISBN 90-277-0187-3; Pb 90-277-0309-4
9. 
A. A. Zinov’ev: Foundations of the Logical Theory of Scientific Knowledge (Complex Logic).
Translated from Russian. Revised and enlarged English Edition, with an Appendix by G.A. 
Smirnov, E.A. Sidorenko, A.M. Fedina and L.A. Bobrova. [Synthese Library 46] 1973
ISBN 90-277-0193-8; Pb 90-277-0324-8
10. L. Tondl: Scientific Procedures. A Contribution Concerning the Methodological Problems of 
Scientific Concepts and Scientific Explanation.Translated from Czech. [Synthese Library 47]
1973 
ISBN 90-277-0147-4; Pb 90-277-0323-X
11. R.J. Seeger and R.S. Cohen (eds.): Philosophical Foundations of Science. Proceedings of 
Section L, 1969, American Association for the Advancement of Science. [Synthese Library
58] 1974 
ISBN 90-277-0390-6; Pb 90-277-0376-0
12. A. Gr~nbaum: Philosophical Problems of Space and Times. 2nd enlarged ed. [Synthese Library
55] 1973 
ISBN 90-277-0357-4; Pb 90-277-0358-2
13. R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Logical and Epistemological Studies in Contemporary 
Physics. Proceedings of the Boston Colloquium for the Philosophy of Science, 1969/72, Part 
I. [Synthese Library 59] 1974 
ISBN 90-277-0391-4; Pb 90-277-0377-9
14. R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Methodological and Historical Essays in the Natural 
and Social Sciences. Proceedings of the Boston Colloquium for the Philosophy of Science, 
1969/72, Part II. [Synthese Library 60] 1974 ISBN 90-277-0392-2; Pb 90-277-0378-7
15. R.S. Cohen, J.J. Stachel and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): For Dirk Struik. Scientific, Historical and 
Political Essays in Honor of Dirk J. Struik. [Synthese Library 61] 1974
ISBN 90-277-0393-0; Pb 90-277-0379-5
16. N. Geschwind: Selected Papers on Language and the Brains. [Synthese Library 68] 1974
ISBN 90-277-0262-4; Pb 90-277-0263-2
17. B.G. Kuznetsov: Reason and Being. Translated from Russian. Edited by C.R. Fawcett and R.S. 
Cohen. 1987 
ISBN 90-277-2181-5

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
18. P. Mittelstaedt: Philosophical Problems of Modem Physics. Translated from the revised 4th 
German edition by W. Riemer and edited by R.S. Cohen. [Synthese Library 95] 1976
ISBN 90-277-0285-3; Pb 90-277-0506-2
19. H. Mehlberg: Time, Causality, and the Quantum Theory. Studies in the Philosophy of Science. 
Vol. I: Essay on the Causal Theory of Time. Vol. II: Time in a Quantized Universe. Translated 
from French. Edited by R.S. Cohen. 1980 Vol. I: ISBN 90-277-0721-9; Pb 90-277-1074-0
Vol. II: ISBN 90-277-1075-9; Pb 90-277-1076-7
20. K.F. Schaffner and R.S. Cohen (eds.): PSA 1972. Proceedings of the 3rd Biennial Meeting of 
the Philosophy of Science Association (Lansing, Michigan, Fall 1972). [Synthese Library 64] 
1974 
ISBN 90-277-0408-2; Pb 90-277-0409-0
21. R.S. Cohen and J.J. Stachel (eds.): Selected Papers ofLQon Rosenfeld. [Synthese Library 100] 
1979 
ISBN 90-277-0651-4; Pb 90-277-0652-2
22. M. Capek (ed.): The Concepts of Space and Time. Their Structure and Their Development. 
[Synthese Library 74] 1976 
ISBN 90-277-0355-8; Pb 90-277-0375-2
23. M. Grene: The Understanding of Nature. Essays in the Philosophy of Biology. [Synthese 
Library 66] 1974 
ISBN 90-277-0462-7; Pb 90-277-0463-5
24. D. Ihde: Technics and Praxis. A Philosophy of Technology. [Synthese Library 130] 1979 
ISBN 90-277-0953-X; Pb 90-277-0954-8
25. J. Hintikka and U. Remes: The Method of Analysis. Its Geometrical Origin and Its General 
Significance. [Synthese Library 75] 1974 
ISBN 90-277-0532-1; Pb 90-277-0543-7
26. J.E. Murdoch and E.D. Sylla (eds.): The Cultural Context of Medieval Learning. Proceedings 
of the First International Colloquium on Philosophy, Science, and Theology in the Middle 
Ages, 1973. [Synthese Library 76] 1975 
ISBN 90-277-0560-7; Pb 90-277-0587-9
27. M. Grene and E. Mendelsohn (eds.): Topics in the Philosophy of Biology. [Synthese Library
84] 1976 
ISBN 90-277-0595-X; Pb 90-277-0596-8
28. J. Agassi: Science in Flux. [Synthese Library 80] 1975
ISBN 90-277-0584-4; Pb 90-277-0612-3
29. J.J. Wiatr (ed.): Polish Essays in the Methodology of the Social Sciences. [Synthese Library
131] 1979 
ISBN 90-277-0723-5; Pb 90-277-0956-4
30. P. Janich: Protophysics of Time. Constructive Foundation and History of Time Measurement. 
Translated from German. 1985 
ISBN 90-277-0724-3
31. R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Language, Logic, and Method. 1983
ISBN 90-277-0725-1
32. R.S. Cohen, C.A. Hooker, A.C. Michalos and J.W. van Evra (eds.): PSA 1974. Proceedings 
of the 4th Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association. [Synthese Library 101] 
1976 
ISBN 90-277-0647-6; Pb 90-277-0648-4
33. G. Holton and W.A. Blanpied (eds.): Science and Its Public. The Changing Relationship.
[Synthese Library 96] 1976 
ISBN 90-277-0657-3; Pb 90-277-0658-1
34. M.D. Grmek, R.S. Cohen and G. Cimino (eds.): On Scientific Discovery. The 1977 Erice 
Lectures. 1981 
ISBN 90-277-1122-4; Pb 90-277-1123-2
35. S. Amsterdamski: Between Experience and Metaphysics. Philosophical Problems of the Evol­
ution of Science. Translated from Polish. [Synthese Library 77] 1975
ISBN 90-277-0568-2; Pb 90-277-0580-1
36. M. Markovic and G. Petrovic (eds.): Praxis. Yugoslav Essays in the Philosophy and Method­
ology of the Social Sciences. [Synthese Library 134] 1979
ISBN 90-277-0727-8; Pb 90-277-0968-8

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
37. 
H. von Helmholtz: Epistemological Writings. The Paul Hertz / Moritz Schlick Centenary 
Edition of 1921. Translated from German by M.E Lowe. Edited with an Introduction and 
Bibliography by R.S. Cohen and Y. Elkana. [Synthese Library 79] 1977
ISBN 90-277-0290-X; Pb 90-277-0582-8
38. 
R.M. Martin: Pragmatics, Truth and Language. 1979
ISBN 90-277-0992-0; Pb 90-277-0993-9
39. 
R.S. Cohen, P.K. Feyerabend and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Essays in Memory of Imre Lakatos. 
[Synthese Library 99] 1976 
ISBN 90-277-0654-9; Pb 90-277-0655-7
40. 
Not published.
41. 
Not published.
42. 
H.R. Maturana and F.J. Varela: Autopoiesis and Cognition. The Realization of the Living. With 
a Preface to “Autopoiesis’ by S. Beer. 1980 ISBN 90-277-1015-5; Pb 90-277-1016-3
43. 
A. Kasher (ed.): Language in Focus: Foundations, Methods and Systems. Essays in Memory 
of Yehoshua Bar-Hillel. [Synthese Library 89] 1976
ISBN 90-277-0644-1; Pb 90-277-0645-X
44. 
T.D. Thao: Investigations into the Origin of Language and Consciousness. 1984
ISBN 90-277-0827-4
45. 
F.G.-I. Nagasaka (ed.): Japanese Studies in the Philosophy of Science. 1997
ISBN 0-7923-4781-1
46. 
P.L. Kapitza: Experiment, Theory, Practice. Articles and Addresses. Edited by R.S. Cohen.
1980 
ISBN 90-277-1061-9; Pb 90-277-1062-7
47. 
M.L. Dalia Chiara (ed.): Italian Studies in the Philosophy of Science. 1981
ISBN 90-277-0735-9; Pb 90-277-1073-2
48. 
M.W. Wartofsky: Models. Representation and the Scientific Understanding. [Synthese Library
129] 
1979 
ISBN 90-277-0736-7; Pb 90-277-0947-5
49. 
T.D. Thao: Phenomenology and Dialectical Materialism. Edited by R.S. Cohen. 1986
ISBN 90-277-0737-5
50. 
Y. Fried and J. Agassi: Paranoia. A Study in Diagnosis. [Synthese Library 102] 1976
ISBN 90-277-0704-9; Pb 90-277-0705-7
51. 
K.H. Wolff: Surrender and Cath. Experience and Inquiry Today. [Synthese Library 105] 1976
ISBN 90-277-0758-8; Pb 90-277-0765-0
52. 
K. Kosfk: Dialectics of the Concrete. A Study on Problems of Man and World. 1976
ISBN 90-277-0761-8; Pb 90-277-0764-2
53. 
N. Goodman: The Structure of Appearance. [Synthese Library 107] 1977
ISBN 90-277-0773-1; Pb 90-277-0774-X
54. 
H.A. Simon: Models of Discovery and Other Topics in the Methods of Science. [Synthese 
Library 114] 1977 
ISBN 90-277-0812-6; Pb 90-277-0858-4
55. 
M. Lazerowitz: The Language of Philosophy. Freud and Wittgenstein. [Synthese Library 117]
1977 
ISBN 90-277-0826-6; Pb 90-277-0862-2
56. 
T. Nickles (ed.): Scientific Discovery, Logic, and Rationality. 1980
ISBN 90-277-1069-4; Pb 90-277-1070-8
57. 
J. Margolis: Persons and Mind. The Prospects of Nonreductive Materialism. [Synthese Library
121] 
1978 
ISBN 90-277-0854-1; Pb 90-277-0863-0
58. 
G. Radnitzky and G. Andersson (eds.): Progress and Rationality in Science. [Synthese Library
125] 
1978 
ISBN 90-277-0921-1; Pb 90-277-0922-X
59. 
G. Radnitzky and G. Andersson (eds.): The Structure and Development of Science. [Synthese 
Library 136] 1979 
ISBN 90-277-0994-7; Pb 90-277-0995-5

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
60. 
T. Nickles (ed.): Scientific Discovery. Case Studies. 1980
ISBN 90-277-1092-9; Pb 90-277-1093-7
61. 
M.A. Finocchiaro: Galileo and the Art of Reasoning. Rhetorical Foundation of Logic and 
Scientific Method. 1980 
ISBN 90-277-1094-5; Pb 90-277-1095-3
62. 
W.A. Wallace: Prelude to Galileo. Essays on Medieval and 16th-Century Sources of Galileo’s 
Thought. 1981 
ISBN 90-277-1215-8; Pb 90-277-1216-6
63. 
F. Rapp: Analytical Philosophy of Technology. Translated from German. 1981
ISBN 90-277-1221-2; Pb 90-277-1222-0
64. 
R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Hegel and the Sciences. 1984 ISBN 90-277-0726-X
65. 
J. Agassi: Science and Society. Studies in the Sociology of Science. 1981
ISBN 90-277-1244-1; Pb 90-277-1245-X
66. 
L. Tondl: Problems of Semantics. A Contribution to the Analysis of the Language of Science. 
Translated from Czech. 1981 
ISBN 90-277-0148-2; Pb 90-277-0316-7
67. 
J. Agassi and R.S. Cohen (eds.): Scientific Philosophy Today. Essays in Honor of Mario Bunge.
1982 
ISBN 90-277-1262-X; Pb 90-277-1263-8
68. 
W. Krajewski (ed.): Polish Essays in the Philosophy of the Natural Sciences. Translated from 
Polish and edited by R.S. Cohen and C.R. Fawcett. 1982
ISBN 90-277-1286-7; Pb 90-277-1287-5
69. 
J.H. Fetzer: Scientific Knowledge. Causation, Explanation and Corroboration. 1981
ISBN 90-277-1335-9; Pb 90-277-1336-7
70. 
S. Grossberg: Studies of Mind and Brain. Neural Principles of Learning, Perception, Develop­
ment, Cognition, and Motor Control. 1982 ISBN 90-277-1359-6; Pb 90-277-1360-X
71. 
R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Epistemology, Methodology, and the Social Sciences.
1983. 
ISBN 90-277-1454-1
72. 
K. Berka: Measurement. Its Concepts, Theories and Problems. Translated from Czech. 1983 
ISBN 90-277-1416-9
73. 
G.L. Pandit: The Structure and Growth of Scientific Knowledge. A Study in the Methodology 
of Epistemic Appraisal. 1983 
ISBN 90-277-1434-7
74. 
A.A. Zinov’ev: Logical Physics. Translated from Russian. Edited by R.S. Cohen. 1983 
[see also Volume 9] 
ISBN 90-277-0734-0
75. 
G-G. Granger: Formal Thought and the Sciences of Man. Translated from French. With and 
Introduction by A. Rosenberg. 1983 
ISBN 90-277-1524-6
76. 
R.S. Cohen and L. Laudan (eds.): Physics, Philosophy and Psychoanalysis. Essays in Honor 
of Adolf Gr~nbaum. 1983 
ISBN 90-277-1533-5
77. 
G. Bhme, W. van den Daele, R. Hohlfeld, W. Krohn and W. Schlfer: Finalization in Science. 
The Social Orientation of Scientific Progress. Translated from German. Edited by W. Schlfer. 
1983 
ISBN 90-277-1549-1
78. 
D. Shapere: Reason and the Search for Knowledge. Investigations in the Philosophy of Science.
1984 
ISBN 90-277-1551-3; Pb 90-277-1641-2
79. 
G. Andersson (ed.): Rationality in Science and Politics. Translated from German. 1984
ISBN 90-277-1575-0; Pb 90-277-1953-5
80. 
P.T. Durbin and F. Rapp (eds.): Philosophy and Technology. [Also Philosophy and Technology 
Series, Vol. 1] 1983 
ISBN 90-277-1576-9
81. 
M. Markovic: Dialectical Theory of Meaning. Translated from Serbo-Croat. 1984
ISBN 90-277-1596-3
82. 
R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Physical Sciences and History of Physics. 1984.
ISBN 90-277-1615-3

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
83. Ё. Meyerson: The Relativistic Deduction. Epistemological Implications of the Theory of 
Relativity. Translated from French. With a Review by Albert Einstein and an Introduction 
by Milic Capek. 1985 
ISBN 90-277-1699-4
84. R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Methodology, Metaphysics and the History of Science.
In Memory of Benjamin Nelson. 1984 
ISBN 90-277-1711-7
85. 
G. Tams: The Logic of Categories. Translated from Hungarian. Edited by R.S. Cohen. 1986
ISBN 90-277-1742-7
86. S.L. de C. Fernandes: Foundations of Objective Knowledge. The Relations of Popper’s Theory 
of Knowledge to That of Kant. 1985 
ISBN 90-277-1809-1
87. R.S. Cohen and T. Schnelle (eds.): Cognition and Fact. Materials on Ludwik Fleck. 1986
ISBN 90-277-1902-0
88. G. Freudenthal: Atom and Individual in the Age of Newton. On the Genesis of the Mechanistic 
World View. Translated from German. 1986 
ISBN 90-277-1905-5
89. A. Donagan, A.N. Perovich Jr and M.V. Wedin (eds.): Human Nature and Natural Knowledge. 
Essays presented to Marjorie Grene on the Occasion of Her 75th Birthday. 1986
ISBN 90-277-1974-8
90. 
C. Mitcham and A. Hunning (eds.): Philosophy and Technology II. Information Technology 
and Computers in Theory and Practice. [Also Philosophy and Technology Series, Vol. 2] 1986
ISBN 90-277-1975-6
91. M. Grene and D. Nails (eds.): Spinoza and the Sciences. 1986 
ISBN 90-277-1976-4
92. 
S.P. Turner: The Search for a Methodology of Social Science. Durkheim, Weber, and the 
19th-Century Problem of Cause, Probability, and Action. 1986. ISBN 90-277-2067-3
93. I.C. Jarvie: Thinking about Society. Theory and Practice. 1986 ISBN 90-277-2068-1
94. E. Ullmann-Margalit (ed.): The Kaleidoscope of Science. The Israel Colloquium: Studies in 
History, Philosophy, and Sociology of Science, Vol. 1. 1986
ISBN 90-277-2158-0; Pb 90-277-2159-9
95. E. Ullmann-Margalit (ed.): The Prism of Science. The Israel Colloquium: Studies in History, 
Philosophy, and Sociology of Science, Vol. 2. 1986
ISBN 90-277-2160-2; Pb 90-277-2161-0
96. 
G. Mrkus: Language and Production. A Critique of the Paradigms. Translated from French.
1986 
ISBN 90-277-2169-6
97. 
F. Amrine, F.J. Zucker and H. Wheeler (eds.): Goethe and the Sciences: A Reappraisal. 1987 
ISBN 90-277-2265-X; Pb 90-277-2400-8
98. J.C. Pitt and M. Pera (eds.): Rational Changes in Science. Essays on Scientific Reasoning. 
Translated from Italian. 1987 
ISBN 90-277-2417-2
99. O. Costa de Beauregard: Time, the Physical Magnitude. 1987 
ISBN 90-277-2444-X
100. A. Shimony and D. Nails (eds.): Naturalistic Epistemology. A Symposium of Two Decades.
1987 
ISBN 90-277-2337-0
101. N. Rotenstreich: Time and Meaning in History. 1987 
ISBN 90-277-2467-9
102. D.B. Zilberman: The Birth of Meaning in Hindu Thought. Edited by R.S. Cohen. 1988
ISBN 90-277-2497-0
103. 
T.F. Glick (ed.): The Comparative Reception of Relativity. 1987 ISBN 90-277-2498-9
104. Z. Harris, M. Gottfried, T. Ryckman, P. Mattick Jr, A. Daladier, TN. Harris and S. Harris: The 
Form of Information in Science. Analysis of an Immunology Sublanguage. With a Preface by 
Hilary Putnam. 1989 
ISBN 90-277-2516-0
105. 
F. Burwick (ed.): Approaches to Organic Form. Permutations in Science and Culture. 1987 
ISBN 90-277-2541-1

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
106. M. Almsi: The Philosophy of Appearances. Translated from Hungarian. 1989
ISBN 90-277-2150-5
107. 
S. Hook, W.L. O’Neill and R. O’Toole (eds.): Philosophy, History and Social Action. Essays 
in Honor of Lewis Feuer. With an Autobiographical Essay by L. Feuer. 1988
ISBN 90-277-2644-2
108. 
I. Hronszky, M. FehQr and B. Dajka: Scientific Knowledge Socialized. Selected Proceedings 
of the 5th Joint International Conference on the History and Philosophy of Science organized 
by the IUHPS (VeszprQm, Hungary, 1984). 1988 
ISBN 90-277-2284-6
109. 
P. Tillers and E.D. Green (eds.): Probability and Inference in the Law of Evidence. The Uses 
and Limits of Bayesianism. 1988 
ISBN 90-277-2689-2
ПО. E. Ullmann-Margalit (ed.): Science in Reflection. The Israel Colloquium: Studies in History, 
Philosophy, and Sociology of Science, Vol. 3. 1988
ISBN 90-277-2712-0; Pb 90-277-2713-9
111. 
K. Gavroglu, Y. Goudaroulis and P. Nicolacopoulos (eds.): Imre Lakatos and Theories of 
Scientific Change. 1989 
ISBN 90-277-2766-X
112. B. Glassner and J.D. Moreno (eds.): The Qualitative-Quantitative Distinction in the Social 
Sciences. 1989 
ISBN 90-277-2829-1
113. K. Arens: Structures of Knowing. Psychologies of the 19th Century. 1989
ISBN 0-7923-0009-2
114. A. Janik: Style, Politics and the Future of Philosophy. 1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0056-4
115. 
F. Amrine (ed.): Literature and Science as Modes of Expression. With an Introduction by S.
Weininger. 1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0133-1
116. J.R. Brown and J. Mittelstrass (eds.): An Intimate Relation. Studies in the History and Philo­
sophy of Science. Presented to Robert E. Butts on His 60th Birthday. 1989
ISBN 0-7923-0169-2
117. 
F. D’Agostino and I.C. Jarvie (eds.): Freedom and Rationality. Essays in Honor of John 
Watkins. 1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0264-8
118. D. Zolo: Reflexive Epistemology. The Philosophical Legacy of Otto Neurath. 1989
ISBN 0-7923-0320-2
119. M. Keam, B.S. Philips and R.S. Cohen (eds.): Georg Simmel and Contemporary Sociology.
1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0407-1
120. Т.Н. Levere and W.R. Shea (eds.): Nature, Experiment and the Science. Essays on Galileo and 
the Nature of Science. In Honour of Stillman Drake. 1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0420-9
121. 
P. Nicolacopoulos (ed.): Greek Studies in the Philosophy and History of Science. 1990
ISBN 0-7923-0717-8
122. R. Cooke and D. Costantini (eds.): Statistics in Science. The Foundations of Statistical Methods 
in Biology, Physics and Economics. 1990 
ISBN 0-7923-0797-6
123. 
P. Duhem: The Origins of Statics. Translated from French by G.F. Leneaux, V.N. Vagliente 
and G.H. Wagner. With an Introduction by S.L. Jaki. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-0898-0
124. H. Kamerlingh Onnes: Through Measurement to Knowledge. The Selected Papers, 1853-1926.
Edited and with an Introduction by K. Gavroglu and Y. Goudaroulis. 1991
ISBN 0-7923-0825-5
125. M. Capek: The New Aspects of Time: Its Continuity and Novelties. Selected Papers in the 
Philosophy of Science. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-0911-1
126. 
S. Unguru (ed.): Physics, Cosmology and Astronomy, 1300-1700. Tension and Accommoda­
tion. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1022-5

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
127. Z. Bechler: Newton's Physics on the Conceptual Structure of the Scientific Revolution. 1991
ISBN 0-7923-1054-3
128. 
Ё. Meyerson: Explanation in the Sciences. Translated from French by M-A. Siple and D.A.
Siple. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1129-9
129. A.I. Tauber (ed.): Organism and the Origins of Self. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1185-X
130. 
F.J. Varela and J-P. Dupuy (eds.): Understanding Origins. Contemporary Views on the Origin 
of Life, Mind and Society. 1992 
ISBN 0-7923-1251-1
131. G.L. Pandit: Methodological Variance. Essays in Epistemological Ontology and the Method­
ology of Science. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1263-5
132. G. MunQvar (ed.): Beyond Reason. Essays on the Philosophy of Paul Feyerabend. 1991
ISBN 0-7923-1272-4 
133. T.E. Uebel (ed.): Rediscovering the Forgotten Vienna Circle. Austrian Studies on Otto Neurath 
and the Vienna Circle. Partly translated from German. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1276-7
134. W.R. Woodward and R.S. Cohen (eds.): World Views and Scientific Discipline Formation.
Science Studies in the [former] German Democratic Republic. Partly translated from German 
by W.R. Woodward. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1286-4
135. 
P. Zambelli: The Speculum Astronomiae and Its Enigma. Astrology, Theology and Science in
Albertus Magnus and His Contemporaries. 1992 
ISBN 0-7923-1380-1
136. 
P. Petitjean, C. Jami and A.M. Moulin (eds.): Science and Empires. Historical Studies about
Scientific Development and European Expansion. 
ISBN 0-7923-1518-9
137. W.A. Wallace: Galileo's Logic of Discovery and Proof. The Background, Content, and Use of
His Appropriated Treatises on Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics. 1992 ISBN 0-7923-1577-4 
138. W.A. Wallace: Galileo's Logical Treatises. A Translation, with Notes and Commentary, of His
Appropriated Latin Questions on Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics. 1992 ISBN 0-7923-1578-2
Set (137 + 138) ISBN 0-7923-1579-0 
139. M.J. Nye, J.L. Richards and R.H. Stuewer (eds.): The Invention of Physical Science. Intersec­
tions of Mathematics, Theology and Natural Philosophy since the Seventeenth Century. Essays 
in Honor of Erwin N. Hiebert. 1992 
ISBN 0-7923-1753-X
140. G. Corsi, M.L. dalla Chiara and G.C. Ghirardi (eds.): Bridging the Gap: Philosophy, Mathem­
atics and Physics. Lectures on the Foundations of Science. 1992 ISBN 0-7923-1761-0 
141. C.-H. Lin and D. Fu (eds.): Philosophy and Conceptual History of Science in Taiwan. 1992
ISBN 0-7923-1766-1
142. 
S. Sarkar (ed.): The Founders of Evolutionary Genetics. A Centenary Reappraisal. 1992
ISBN 0-7923-1777-7
143. J. Blackmore (ed.): Ernst Mach -A Deeper Look. Documents and New Perspectives. 1992
ISBN 0-7923-1853-6 
144. P. Kroes and M. Bakker (eds.): Technological Development and Science in the Industrial Age.
New Perspectives on the Science-Technology Relationship. 1992 ISBN 0-7923-1898-6 
145. S. Amsterdamski: Between History and Method. Disputes about the Rationality of Science. 
1992 
ISBN 0-7923-1941-9
146. E. UIlmann-Margalit (ed.): The Scientific Enterprise. The Bar-Hillel Colloquium: Studies in
History, Philosophy, and Sociology of Science, Volume 4. 1992 ISBN 0-7923-1992-3 
147. L. Embree (ed.): Metaarchaeology. Reflections by Archaeologists and Philosophers. 1992
ISBN 0-7923-2023-9
148. S. French and H. Kamminga (eds.): Correspondence, Invariance and Heuristics. Essays in 
Honour of Heinz Post. 1993 
ISBN 0-7923-2085-9
149. M. Bunzl: The Context of Explanation. 1993 
ISBN 0-7923-2153-7

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
150. 
LB. Cohen (ed.): The Natural Sciences and the Social Sciences. Some Critical and Historical
Perspectives. 1994 
ISBN 0-7923-2223-1
151. 
K. Gavroglu, Y. Christianidis and E. Nicolaidis (eds.): Trends in the Historiography of Science.
1994 
ISBN 0-7923-2255-X
152. 
S. Poggi and M. Bossi (eds.): Romanticism in Science. Science in Europe, 1790-1840. 1994
ISBN 0-7923-2336-X
153. 
J. Faye and H.J. Folse (eds.): Niels Bohr and Contemporary Philosophy. 1994
ISBN 0-7923-2378-5
154. 
C.C. Gould and R.S. Cohen (eds.): Artifacts, Representations, and Social Practice. Essays for
Marx W. Wartofsky. 1994 
ISBN 0-7923-2481 -1
155. 
R.E. Butts: Historical Pragmatics. Philosophical Essays. 1993 ISBN 0-7923-2498-6 
156. R. Rashed: The Development of Arabic Mathematics: Between Arithmetic and Algebra. Trans­
lated from French by A.F.W. Armstrong. 1994 
ISBN 0-7923-2565-6
157. 
I. Szumilewicz-Lachman (ed.): Zygmunt Zawirski: His Life and Work. With Selected Writings 
on Time, Logic and the Methodology of Science. Translations by Feliks Lachman. Ed. by R.S.
Cohen, with the assistance of B. Bergo. 1994 
ISBN 0-7923-2566-4
158. 
S.N. Haq: Names, Natures and Things. The Alchemist Jabir ibn Hayyan and His Kitab al-Ahjar 
(Book of Stones). 1994 
ISBN 0-7923-2587-7
159. 
P. Plaass: Kant’s Theory of Natural Science. Translation, Analytic Introduction and Comment­
ary by Alfred E. and Maria G. Miller. 1994 
ISBN 0-7923-2750-0
160. 
J. Misiek (ed.): The Problem of Rationality in Science and its Philosophy. On Popper vs.
Polanyi. The Polish Conferences 1988-89. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-2925-2
161. 
I.C. Jarvie and N. Laor (eds.): Critical Rationalism, Metaphysics and Science. Essays for
Joseph Agassi, Volume I. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-2960-0
162. 
I.C. Jarvie and N. Laor (eds.): Critical Rationalism, the Social Sciences and the Humanities.
Essays for Joseph Agassi, Volume II. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-2961-9
Set (161-162) ISBN 0-7923-2962-7
163. 
K. Gavroglu, J. Stachel and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Physics, Philosophy, and the Scientific 
Community. Essays in the Philosophy and History of the Natural Sciences and Mathematics.
In Honor of Robert S. Cohen. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-2988-0
164. 
K. Gavroglu, J. Stachel and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Science, Politics and Social Practice.
Essays on Marxism and Science, Philosophy of Culture and the Social Sciences. In Honor of
Robert S. Cohen. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-2989-9
165. 
K. Gavroglu, J. Stachel and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): Science, Mind and Art. Essays on Science 
and the Humanistic Understanding in Art, Epistemology, Religion and Ethics. Essays in Honor 
of Robert S. Cohen. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-2990-2
Set (163-165) ISBN 0-7923-2991-0
166. 
K.H. Wolff: Transformation in the Writing. A Case of Surrender-and-Catch. 1995
ISBN 0-7923-3178-8
167. 
A.J. Kox and D.M. Siegel (eds.): No Truth Except in the Details. Essays in Honor of Martin J.
Klein. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-3195-8
168. 
J. Blackmore: Ludwig Boltzmann, His Later Life and Philosophy, 1900-1906. Book One: A
Documentary History. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-3231-8
169. 
R.S. Cohen, R. Hilpinen and R. Qiu (eds.): Realism and Anti-Realism in the Philosophy of
Science. Beijing International Conference, 1992. 1996 
ISBN 0-7923-3233-4
170. 
I. Kuguradi and R.S. Cohen (eds.): The Concept of Knowledge. The Ankara Seminar. 1995
ISBN 0-7923-3241-5

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
171. M.A. Grodin (ed.): Meta Medical Ethics: The Philosophical Foundations of Bioethics. 1995
ISBN 0-7923-3344-6
172. 
S. Ramirez and R.S. Cohen (eds.): Mexican Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science.
1995 
ISBN 0-7923-3462-0
173. 
C. Dilworth: The Metaphysics of Science. An Account of Modem Science in Terms of Prin­
ciples, Laws and Theories. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-3693-3
174. 
J. Blackmore: Ludwig Boltzmann, His Later Life and Philosophy, 1900-1906 Book Two: The 
Philosopher. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-3464-7
175. 
P. Damerow: Abstraction and Representation. Essays on the Cultural Evolution of Thinking.
1996 
ISBN 0-7923-3816-2
176. M.S. Macrakis: Scarcity’s Ways: The Origins of Capital. A Critical Essay on Thermodynamics, 
Statistical Mechanics and Economics. 1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4760-9
177. M. Marion and R.S. Cohen (eds.): Quebec Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Part I: Logic, 
Mathematics, Physics and History of Science. Essays in Honor of Hugues Leblanc. 1995
ISBN 0-7923-3559-7
178. 
M. Marion and R.S. Cohen (eds.): Quebec Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Part II: 
Biology, Psychology, Cognitive Science and Economics. Essays in Honor of Hugues Leblanc. 
1996
ISBN 0-7923-3560-0
Set (177-178) ISBN 0-7923-3561-9
179. Fan Dainian and R.S. Cohen (eds.): Chinese Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science 
and Technology. 1996 
ISBN 0-7923-3463-9
180. 
P. Forman and J.M. Snchez-Ron (eds.): National Military Establishments and the Advancement 
of Science and Technology. Studies in 20th Century History. 1996
ISBN 0-7923-3541-4
181. E.J. Post: Quantum Reprogramming. Ensembles and Single Systems: A Two-Tier Approach 
to Quantum Mechanics. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-3565-1
182. A.I. Tauber (ed.): The Elusive Synthesis: Aesthetics and Science. 1996 ISBN 0-7923-3904-5
183. 
S. Sarkar (ed.): The Philosophy and History of Molecular Biology: New Perspectives. 1996
ISBN 0-7923-3947-9
184. 
J.T. Cushing, A. Fine and S. Goldstein (eds.): Bohmian Mechanics and Quantum Theory: An 
Appraisal. 1996 
ISBN 0-7923-4028-0
185. 
K. Michalski: Logic and Time. An Essay on Husserl’s Theory of Meaning. 1996
ISBN 0-7923-4082-5
186. G. MunQvar (ed.): Spanish Studies in the Philosophy of Science. 1996 ISBN 0-7923-4147-3
187. 
G. Schubring (ed.): Hermann G~nther Grafimann (1809-1877): Visionary Mathematician, 
Scientist and Neohumanist Scholar. Papers from a Sesquicentennial Conference. 1996
ISBN 0-7923-4261-5
188. 
M. Bitbol: Schrdinger’s Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics. 1996 ISBN 0-7923-4266-6
189. 
J. Faye, U. Scheffler and M. Urchs (eds.): Perspectives on Time. 1997 ISBN 0-7923-4330-1
190. 
K. Lehrer and J.C. Marek (eds.): Austrian Philosophy Past and Present. Essays in Honor of 
Rudolf Haller. 1996 
ISBN 0-7923-4347-6
191. J.L. Lagrange: Analytical Mechanics. Translated and edited by Auguste Boissonade and Victor 
N. Vagliente. Translated from the MQcanique Analytique, novelle Qdition of 1811. 1997
ISBN 0-7923-4349-2
192. D. Ginev and R.S. Cohen (eds.): Issues and Images in the Philosophy of Science. Scientific 
and Philosophical Essays in Honour of Azarya Polikarov. 1997 ISBN 0-7923-4444-8

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
193. 
R.S. Cohen, M. Home and J. Stachel (eds.): Experimental Metaphysics. Quantum Mechanical 
Studies for Abner Shimony, Volume One. 1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4452-9
194. 
R.S. Cohen, M. Home and J. Stachel (eds.): Potentiality, Entanglement and Passion-at-a- 
Distance. Quantum Mechanical Studies for Abner Shimony, Volume Two. 1997
ISBN 0-7923-4453-7; Set 0-7923-4454-5
195. 
R.S. Cohen and A.I. Tauber (eds.): Philosophies of Nature: The Human Dimension. 1997
ISBN 0-7923-4579-7
196. 
M. Otte and M. Panza (eds.): Analysis and Synthesis in Mathematics. History and Philosophy. 
1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4570-3
197. 
A. Denkel: The Natural Background of Meaning. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5331-5
198. 
D. Baird, R.I.G. Hughes and A. Nordmann (eds.): Heinrich Hertz: Classical Physicist, Modem 
Philosopher. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-4653-X
199. 
A. Franklin: Can That be Right? Essays on Experiment, Evidence, and Science. 1999
ISBN 0-7923-5464-8
200. 
Reserved
201. 
Reserved
202. 
Reserved
203. 
B. Babich and R.S. Cohen (eds.): Nietzsche, Theories of Knowledge, and Critical Theory.
Nietzsche and the Sciences I. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5742-6
204. 
B. Babich and R.S. Cohen (eds.): Nietzsche, Epistemology, and Philosophy of Science. Nietz­
sche and the Science II. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5778-7
205. 
R. Hooykaas; H.F. Cohen, J.C. Boudri and V. Mackay (eds.): Fact, Faith and Fiction in the 
Development of Science. The Gifford Lectures given in the University of St Andrews 1976.
1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5774-4
206. 
M. Feher, O. Kiss and L. Ropolyi (eds.): Hermeneutics and Science. 1999 ISBN 0-7923-5798-1
207. 
R.M. MacLeod (ed.): Science and the Pacific War. Science and Survival in the Pacific, 1939-
1945. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5851-1
208. 
I. Hanzel: The Concept of Scientific Law in the Philosophy of Science and Epistemology. A 
Study of Theoretical Reason. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5852-X
209. 
G. Helm; R.J. Deltete (ed./transl.): The Historical Development of Energetics. 1999
ISBN 0-7923-5874-0
210. 
A. Orenstein and P. Kotatko (eds.): Knowledge, Language and Logic. Questions for Quine. 
1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5986-0
A Iso of interest:
R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): A Portrait of Twenty-Five Years Boston Colloquia for the
Philosophy of Science, 1960-1985. 1985 
ISBN Pb 90-277-1971-3
Previous volumes are still available.
KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISHERS - DORDRECHT / BOSTON / LONDON

