Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics
Volume 22
Editors
S.S, Antman 
J.E. Miirsdrn
L. Sirovich 
S. Wiggins
Geophysics and Planetary Sciences
Mathematical Biology
L, Glass, J.D. Murray
Mechanics and Materials
R.V. Kohn
Systems and Control
S.S. Sastry, P.S. Krishnaprasad
Problems in engineering, computational science, and the physical and biological
sciences are using increasingly sophisticated mathematical techniques. Thus, the
bridge between the mathematical sciences and other disciplines is heavily trav-
eled. The correspondingly increased dialog between the disciplines has led to the
establishment of the series: interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics.
The purpose of this series is to meet Ihe current and future needs for the interac-
tion between various science and technology areas on Ihe one hand and mathe-
matics on Ihe other. This is done, firstly, by encouraging the ways thai mathe-
matics may be applied in traditional areas, and well as point towards new and
innovative areas of applications; and, secondly, by encouraging other scientific
disciplines lo engage in a dialog with mathematicians outlining their problems to
both access new methods and suggest innovative developments within mathe-
matics itself.
The series will consist of monographs and high-level texts from researchers
working on the interplay between mathematics and other fields of science and
technology.

Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics
Volumes published are listed al the end of Ihis book.
Springer
New York
Berlin
Heidelberg
Hong Kong
London
Milan
Parti
Tokyo

Muhammad Sahimi
Heterogeneous Materials I
Linear Transport and Optical Properties
With 145 Illustrations
Springer

Muhammad Sahimi
Department of Chemical Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles. CA 90089-1211
USA
and
Institute for Advanced Studies in Basic Sciences
Gava Zang. Zanjan 45195-159
Iran
moe@iran.usc.edu
Editors
S.S. Antman 
J.E. Marsden
Department of Mathematics 
Control and Dynamical Systems
and 
Mail Code 107-81
Institute for Physical Science 
California Institute of Technology
and Technology 
Pasadena. CA 91125
University of Maryland 
USA
College Park, MD 20742 
marsden@cds.caltech.edu
USAssa@math.umd.edu
L. Sirovich 
University of Bristol
Division of Applied Mathematics 
Bristol BS8 1TW
Brown University 
UK
Providence, Rl 02912 
s.wiggins@bris.ac.uk
USA
chico@camelot.mssm.edu
Mathematics Subject Classification (2000); 82-02, 65M
Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data
Sahimi, Muhammad,
Heterogeneous materials/ Muhammad Sahimi.
p. cm, — (Interdisciplinary applied mathematics : 22-23)
Includes bibliographical references and indexes.
Contents: [1] Linear transport and optical properties — [2] Nonlinear and breakdown
properties and atomistic modeling.
ISBN 0-387-00167-0 (v. 1 : alk. paper) — ISBN 0-387-00166-2 (v. 2 : alk. paper)
1. InhomogenecHis materials. 
2- Composite materials. I. Title. 
II. Interdisciplinary
applied mathematics ; v. 22-23.
TA418.9.153S24 2003
620, 1'l— dc21 
2002042744
ISBN 0-387-00167-0 
Printed on acid-free paper.
6 2003 Springer- Verlag New York. Inc.
All righis reserved. This work may not be translated or copied in whole or in part without the writ
ten permission of The publisher (Springer- Verlag New York, Inc., 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY
10010,USA), 
except for brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis. Use in
connection with any form of information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer
software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed is forbidden,
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if
they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not
they are subject to proprietary rights.
Printed in the United States of America.
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
SPIN 10900956
www.springer-ny.com
Springer-Verlag New York Berlin 
Heidelberg
A member of BertetsmannSpriger Science+Business Media GmbH

Heterogeneous Materials
Volume I
Morphology, and Linear Transport and Optical Properties
Muhammad Sahimi
University of Southern California, Los Angeles
and
Institute for Advanced Studies in Basic Sciences, Zanjan, Iran
i

To children of the third world
who have the talent but not the means to succeed
and to
the memory of my father, Habibollah Sahimi
who instilled in me, a third world child, the love of reading
ii

CONTENTS
Preface
1. Introduction
1.0 Historical Perspective
1.1 Heterogeneous Materials
1.2 Eﬀective Properties of Heterogeneous Materials
1.3 Linear Transport Properties
1.3.1 The eﬀective conductivity
1.3.2 The eﬀective dielectric constant
1.3.3 The eﬀective elastic moduli
1.4 Non-linear Transport Properties
1.4.1 Constitutive non-linearity
1.4.2 Threshold non-linearity
1.5 Predicting the Eﬀective Properties of Heterogeneous Materials
1.5.1 The continuum models
1.5.2 The discrete models
1.6 The Organization of the Book
PART I:
CHARACTERIZATION AND MODELLING OF THE MORPHOLOGY
2. Characterization of Connectivity and Clustering
2.0 Introduction
2.1 Characterization of the Geometry: Self-Similar Fractal Microstructures
2.2 Statistical Self-Similarity
2.3 Measurement of the Fractal Dimension
2.3.1 The correlation function method
2.3.2 Small-angle scattering
2.4 Self-Aﬃne Fractals
2.5 Characterization of Connectivity and Clustering
iii

2.5.1 Random bond and site percolation
2.5.2 Percolation thresholds
2.5.3 Bicontinuous materials, phase-inversion symmetry, and percolation
2.5.3 Computer generation of a single cluster
2.6 Percolation Properties
2.6.1 Morphological properties
2.6.2 Transport properties
2.6.3 The structure of the sample-spanning cluster
2.7 Universal Scaling Properties of Percolation
2.7.1 Morphological properties
2.7.2 Transport properties
2.7.3 Practical signiﬁcance of the critical exponents
2.8 Scale-Dependent Properties of Percolation Composites
2.9 Finite-Size Scaling
2.10 Percolation in Random Networks and Continua
2.10.1 Percolation thresholds: Materials with very low or high thresholds
2.10.2 The Ornstein-Zernike formulation
2.11 Diﬀerences between Lattice and Continuum Percolation
2.12 Correlated Percolation
2.12.1 Short-range correlations
2.12.2 Long-range correlations
2.13 Experimental Measurement of Percolation Properties
Summary
3. Characterization and Modelling of the Morphology
3.0 Introduction
3.1 Models of Heterogeneous Materials
3.2 One-Dimensional Models
3.3 Spatially-Periodic Models
3.4 Continuum Models
3.4.1 Dispersion of spheres
iv

3.4.1.1 Equilibrium hard-sphere model
3.4.1.2 Random close packing versus maximally random jamming
3.4.1.3 Particle distribution and correlation functions
3.4.1.4 The n−particle probability density
3.4.2 Distribution of equal-size particles
3.4.2.1 Fully-penetrable spheres
3.4.2.2 Fully-impenetrable spheres
3.4.2.3 Interpenetrable spheres
3.4.3 Distribution of polydispersed spheres
3.4.3.1 Fully-penetrable spheres
3.4.3.2 Fully-impenetrable spheres
3.4.4 Simulation of dispersion of spheres
3.4.5 Models of anisotropic materials
3.4.6 Tessellation models of cellular materials
3.4.7 Gaussian random ﬁeld models of amorphous materials
3.5 Discrete Models
3.5.1 Network models
3.5.2 Bethe lattice models
3.6 Reconstruction of Heterogeneous Materials: Simulated Annealing
Summary
PART II:
LINEAR TRANSPORT AND OPTICAL PROPERTIES
4. Eﬀective Conductivity, Dielectric Constant and Optical Properties: The Con-
tinuum Approach
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Symmetry Properties of the Conductivity Tensor
4.2 General Results
4.3 Eﬀective Conductivity of Dispersion of Spheres: Exact Results
4.3.1 Three-dimensional regular arrays of spheres
4.3.1.1 Simple-cubic arrays
v

4.3.1.2 Body-centered and face-centered cubic arrays
4.3.2 Two-dimensional arrays of cylinders
4.3.2.1 Hexagonal arrays
4.3.2.2 Square arrays
4.4 Exact Results for Coated Spheres and Laminates
4.5 Perturbation Expansion for the Eﬀective Conductivity
4.5.1 Isotropic materials: Strong contrast expansion
4.5.2 Approximations
4.5.3 The microstructural parameter ζ2
4.5.4 Anisotropic materials
4.6 Bounds to the Eﬀective Conductivity
4.6.1 Isotropic materials
4.6.1.1 Two-point bounds
4.6.1.2 Cluster bounds
4.6.1.3 Three- and four-point bounds
4.6.1.4 Cluster expansions for the eﬀective conductivity
4.6.2 Anisotropic materials
4.6.2.1 Two-point bounds
4.6.2.2 Three- and four-point bounds
4.6.2.3 Simpliﬁcation of the bounds
4.6.2.4 Cluster expansions for the eﬀective conductivity
4.7 The Eﬀect of the Interface on the Eﬀective conductivity
4.8 Exact Duality Relations
4.9 Eﬀective-Medium Approximation
4.9.1 Isotropic materials
4.9.2 Anisotropic materials
4.9.3 Critique of the eﬀective-medium approximation
4.9.4 The Maxwell-Garnett approximation
4.10 The Random Walk Method
4.11 The Eﬀective Dielectric Constant
4.11.1 Spectral representation
vi

4.11.2 Perturbation expansion
4.11.3 Rigorous bounds
4.12 Optical Properties
4.12.1 Conductor-insulator composites
4.12.2 Conductor-superconductor composites
4.12.3 Anisotropic materials
4.12.4 The Cole-Cole representation
4.13 Beyond Quasi-Static Approximation: Mie Scattering
4.14 Dynamical Eﬀective-Medium Approximation
4.15 The Eﬀect of Large-Scale Morphology
4.16 Multiple-Scattering Approach
Summary
5. Eﬀective Conductivity and Dielectric Constant: The Discrete Approach
5.0 Introduction
5.1 Experimental Data for Conduction in Heterogeneous Materials
5.1.1 Powders
5.1.2 Polymer composites
5.1.3 Conductor-insulator composites
5.2 Conductivity of a Random Resistor Network
5.3 Exact Solution for the Bethe Lattices
5.3.1 The microscopic conductivity
5.3.2 Eﬀective-medium approximation
5.3.3 Conductor-insulator composites
5.3.4 Conductor-superconductor composites
5.4 Exact Results for Two-Dimensional Composites
5.4.1 Exact duality relations
5.4.2 Log-normal conductance distribution
5.5 Green Function Formulation and Perturbation Expansion
5.5.1 Properties of the Green Functions
5.6 Eﬀective-medium approximation
vii

5.6.1 Conductor-insulator composites
5.6.2 Conductor-superconductor composites
5.6.3 Resistor networks with multiple coordination numbers
5.6.4 Materials with zero percolation threshold
5.6.5 Comparison with the experimental data
5.6.6 Accuracy of the eﬀective-medium approximation
5.6.7 Cluster eﬀective-medium approximation
5.6.8 Coherent-potential approximation
5.7 Eﬀective-Medium Approximation for Site Percolation
5.8 Eﬀective-Medium Approximation for Correlated Composites
5.9 Eﬀective-Medium Approximation for Anisotropic Materials
5.9.1 The Green functions
5.9.2 Conductivity anisotropy near the percolation threshold
5.9.3 Comparison with the experimental data
5.10 Cumulant Approximation
5.10.1 The Lorentz ﬁeld
5.10.2 Perturbation expansion
5.10.3 Computation of the lowest-order terms
5.10.4 Bond percolation
5.11 Position-Space Renormalization Group Methods
5.12 Renormalized Eﬀective-Medium Approximation
5.13 The Critical Path Method
5.14 Numerical Computation of the Eﬀective Conductivity
5.14.1 The conjugate-gradient method
5.14.2 Transfer-matrix method
5.14.3 Network reduction: The Lobb-Frank-Fogelholm methods
5.14.4 Random walk method
5.15 Estimation of the Critical Exponent of Conductivity
5.15.1 Finite-size scaling
5.15.2 Position-space renormalization group method
5.15.3 Series expansion
viii

5.15.4 Field-theoretic approach
5.15.5 Comparison with the experimental data
5.16 Resistance Fluctuations, Moments of the Current Distribution, and Flicker Noise
5.16.1 Tellegen’s theorems
5.16.2 Cohn’s theorems
5.16.3 Scaling properties
5.16.4 Comparison with the experimental data
5.17 Hall Conductivity
5.17.1 Eﬀective-medium approximation
5.17.2 Network model
5.17.3 Exact duality relations
5.17.4 Scaling properties
5.17.5 Comparison with the experimental data
5.18 Classical Aspects of Superconductivity
5.18.1 Magnetoconductivity
5.18.2 Magnetic properties
5.18.3 Comparison with the experimental data
5.18.3.1 The London penetration depth
5.18.3.2 The speciﬁc heat
5.18.3.3 The critical current
5.18.3.4 The critical ﬁelds
5.18.3.5 Diﬀerential diamagnetic susceptibility
Summary
6. Frequency-Dependent Properties: The Discrete Approch
6.0 Introduction
6.1 Diﬀusion in Heterogeneous Materials
6.1.1 Green function formulation and perturbation expansion
6.1.2 Self-consistent approach
6.1.3 Self-consistent, generalized master equation, and continuous-time random walks
6.1.4 The Green functions
ix

6.1.5 Eﬀective-medium approximation
6.1.6 The mean square displacement
6.1.7 Diﬀerence between transport in low- and high-dimensional materials
6.1.8 Predictions of the eﬀective-medium approximation
6.1.8.1 One-dimensional materials
6.1.8.2 Two- and three-dimensional materials
6.1.9 Anomalous diﬀusion
6.1.10 Scaling theory of anomalous diﬀusion
6.1.11 Comparison with the experimental data
6.1.12 The governing equation for anomalous equation
6.2 Hopping Conductivity
6.2.1 The Miller-Abraham network model
6.2.2 The symmetric hopping model
6.2.2.1 Exact solution for one-dimensional materials
6.2.2.2 Exact solution for Bethe lattices
6.2.2.3 Perturbation expansion and eﬀective-medium approximation
6.2.3 The asymmetric hopping model: Perturbation expansion
6.2.3.1 Exact solution for Bethe lattices
6.2.3.2 Two-site self-consistent approximation
6.2.3.3 Two-site eﬀective-medium approximation
6.2.3.4 Energy-dependent eﬀective-medium approximation
6.2.4 Variable-range hopping: The critical path method
6.2.4.1 Eﬀect of a variable density of states
6.2.4.2 Eﬀect of Coulomb interactions
6.2.4.3 Comparison with the experimental data
6.2.4.4 Fractal morphology and superlocalization
6.2.5 Continuous-time random walk model
6.3 AC Conductivity
6.3.1 Universality of AC conductivity
6.3.2 Resistor-capacitor model
6.3.3 Universal AC conductivity: Eﬀective-medium approximation
x

6.3.4 Universal AC conductivity: Symmetric hopping model
6.3.5 Role of percolation in universality of AC conductivity
6.4 Dielectric Constant and Optical Properties
6.4.1 Resistor-capacitor model
6.4.2 Resistor-capacitor-inductor model
6.4.3 Position-space renormalization group approach
6.4.4 Eﬀective-medium approximation
6.4.5 Random walk model
6.5 Scaling Properties of AC Conductivity and Dielectric Constant
6.5.1 Comparison with the experimental data
6.6 Vibrational DEnsity of States: The Scalar Approximation
6.6.1 Numerical computations
6.6.2 Eﬀective-medium approximation
6.6.3 Cluster eﬀective-medium approximation
6.6.4 Scaling theory: Phonons versus fractons
6.6.5 Characteristics of fractons
6.6.5.1 Localization
6.6.5.2 Dispersion relation
6.6.5.3 Crossover from phonons to fractons
6.6.6 Large-scale computer simulations
6.6.7 Missing modes
6.6.8 Localization properties of fractons
6.6.8.1 Modes patterns of fractons
6.6.8.2 Ensemble-averaged fractons
6.6.9 Comparison with the experimental data
6.7 The Dynamical Structure Factor
6.7.1 Theoretical analysis
6.7.2 Scaling analysis
6.7.3 Numerical computation
6.8 Fractons and Thermal Transport in Inhomogeneous Materials
6.8.1 Anharmonicity
xi

6.8.2 Phonon-assisted fracton hopping
6.8.3 Dependence of sound velocity on temperature
Summary
7. Rigidity and Elastic Properties: The Continuum Approach
7.0 Introduction
7.1 The Stress and Strain Tensors
7.1.1 Symmetry Properties of the stiﬀness tensor
7.1.2 Theorems of minimum energy
7.1.3 The strain energy of a composite material
7.1.4 Volume averaging
7.2 Exact Results
7.2.1 Interrelations between two- and three-dimensional moduli
7.2.2 Exact results for regular arrays of spheres
7.2.3 Exact results for coated spheres and laminates
7.2.4 Connection to two-dimensional conductivity
7.2.5 Exact duality relations
7.2.6 The Cherkaev-Lurie-Milton theorem and transformation
7.2.7 Universality of Poisson’s ratio in percolation composites
7.2.8 Composite materials with equal shear moduli
7.2.9 Dundurs constants
7.2.10 Relation between elastic moduli and thermoelastic properties
7.3 Dispersion of Spherical Inclusions
7.3.1 The dilute limit: A single sphere
7.3.2 Non-dilute systems
7.3.3 Two spherical inclusions
7.4 Exact Strong-Contrast Expansions
7.4.1 Integral equation for the cavity strain ﬁeld
7.4.2 Exact series expansions
7.4.3 Exact series expansions for isotropic materials
7.4.4 Macroscopically-anisotropic materials
xii

7.4.5 The microstructural parameter η2
7.4.6 Comparison with numerical simulation
7.4.6.1 Two-dimensional materials
7.4.6.2 Three-dimensional materials
7.5 Rigorous Bounds
7.5.1 Isotropic materials
7.5.1.1 One-point bounds
7.5.1.2 Two-point bounds
7.5.1.3 Cluster bounds
7.5.1.4 Three- and four-point bounds
7.5.2 Anisotropic materials
7.6 Multiple Scattering Method
7.6.1 The dilute limit
7.6.2 Non-dilute systems
7.6.3 Comparison with the experimental data
7.7 Eﬀective-Medium Approximation
7.7.1 Fundamental tensors and invariant propertries
7.7.2 Symmetric eﬀective-medium approximation
7.7.3 Asymmetric eﬀective-medium approximation
7.7.4 The Maxwell-Garnett approximations
7.8 Numerical Simulation
7.8.1 Finite-diﬀerence methods
7.8.2 Boundary-element and ﬁnite-element methods
7.9 Links between the Conductivity and Elastic Moduli
7.9.1 Two-dimensional materials
7.9.1.1 Conductivity-bulk modulus bounds
7.9.1.2 Conductivity-shear modulus bounds
7.9.1.3 Applications
7.9.2 Three-dimensional materials
7.9.2.1 Conductivity-bulk modulus bounds
7.9.2.2 Applications
xiii

Summary
8. Rigidity and Elastic Properties: The Discrete Approach
8.0 Introduction
8.1 Elastic Networks in Biological Materials
8.2 Number of Elastic Moduli of a Lattice
8.3 Numerical Simulation and Finite-Size Scaling
8.4 Derivation of Elastic Networks from Continuum Elasticity
8.4.1 The Born model
8.4.2 Shortcomings of the Born model
8.5 The Central-Force Network
8.6 Rigidity Percolation
8.6.1 Static and dynamic rigidity and ﬂoppiness of networks
8.6.2 The correlation length of rigidity percolation
8.6.3 The force distribution
8.6.4 Determination of the percolation threshold
8.6.4.1 Moments of the force distribution
8.6.4.2 The pebble game
8.6.4.3 Constraint-counting method
8.6.5 Mapping between rigidity percolation and resistor networks
8.6.6 Nature of phase transition in rigidity percolation
8.6.7 Scaling properties of the elastic moduli
8.7 Green Function Formulation and Perturbation Expansion
8.7.1 Eﬀective-medium approximation
8.7.2 The Born model
8.7.3 Rigidity percolation
8.8 The Critical Path Method
8.9 Central-Force Networks at Non-zero Temperature and under Stress
8.10 Shortcomings of the Central-Force Networks
8.11 Elastic Percolation Networks with Bond-Bending Forces
8.11.1 The Kirkwood-Keating model
xiv

8.11.2 The bond-bending model
8.11.3 The percolation thresholds
8.11.4 The force distribution
8.11.5 Comparison of the central-force and bond-bending networks
8.11.6 Scaling properties
8.11.7 Relation with scalar percolation
8.11.8 Fixed points of vector percolation: Universality of the Poisson’s ratio
8.11.9 Position-space renormalization group method
8.11.10 Eﬀective-medium approximation
8.12 Transfer-Matrix Method
8.13 The Beam Model
8.14 The Granular Model
8.15 Entropic Networks
Summary
9. Rigidity and Elastic Properties of Network Glasses, Polymers, and Composite
Solids:
The Discrete Approach
9.0 Introduction
9.1 Network Glasses
9.1.1 Rigidity transition
9.1.2 Comparison with the experimental data
9.1.3 Rigidity transition at high coordination numbers
9.1.4 Eﬀect of onefold-coordinated atoms
9.1.5 Stress-free versus stressed transition
9.2 Branched Polymers and Gels
9.2.1 Percolation model of polymerization and gelation
9.2.2 Morphological properties of branched polymers and gels
9.2.2.1 Gel polymers
9.2.2.2 Comparison with the experimental data
9.2.2.3 Branched polymers
xv

9.2.2.4 Comparison with the experimental data
9.2.3 Rheology of critical gels: Dynamic-mechanical experiments
9.2.4 The relaxation time spectrum
9.2.5 Comparison with the experimental data
9.2.5.1 Physical gels
9.2.5.2 Chemical gels
9.2.5.3 Enthalpic versus entropic elasticity
9.2.5.4 Viscosity of near critical gelling solutions
9.3 Mechanical Properties of Foams
9.4 Mechanical Properties of Composite Solids
9.4.1 Porous materials
9.4.2 Superrigid materials
9.5 Wave speeds in Porous Materials
9.6 Elastic Properties of Composite Materials with Length Mismatch
9.7 Materials with Negative Poisson’s Ratio
9.8 Vibrational Density of States: Vector Percolation Model
9.8.1 Scaling theory
9.8.2 Crossover between scalar approximation and vector density of states
9.8.3 Large-scale computer simulation
9.8.4 Comparison with the experimental data
Summary
References
Index
xvi

Preface
Disorder plays a fundamental role in many natural and man-made systems that are of
industrial and scientiﬁc importance. Of all the disordered systems, heterogeneous materials are
perhaps the most heavily utilized in all aspects of our daily lives, and hence have been studied
for a long time. With the advent of new experimental techniques, it is now possible to study the
morphology of disordered materials and gain a much deeper understanding of their properties.
Novel techniques have also allowed us to design materials’ morphology with the properties that
are suitable for intended applications.
With the development of a class of powerful theoretical methods, we now have the ability for
interpreting the experimental data and predicting many properties of disordered materials at
many length scales. Included in this class are the renormalisation group theory, various versions
of the eﬀective-medium approximation, percolation theory, variational principles that lead to
rigorous bounds to the eﬀective properties, and Green function formulations and perturbation
expansions. The theoretical developments have been accompanied by a tremendous increase
in the computational power and the emergence of massively-parallel computational strategies.
Hence, we are now able to model many materials at molecular scales and predict many of their
properties based on ﬁrst-principle computations.
In this two-volume book we describe and discuss various theoretical and computational ap-
proaches for understanding and predicting the eﬀective macroscopic properties of heterogeneous
materials. Most of the book is devoted to comparing and contrasting the two main classes of,
and approaches to, disordered materials, namely, the continuum models and the discrete mod-
els. Predicting the eﬀective properties of composite materials based on the continuum models,
which are based on solving the classical continuum equations of transport, has a long history
and goes back to at least the middle of the nineteenth century. Even a glance at the literature
on the subject of heterogeneous materials will reveal the tremendous amount of work that has
been carried out in the area of the continuum modelling. Rarely, however, can such contin-
uum models provide accurate predictions for the eﬀective macroscopic properties of strongly
disordered, multiphase materials. In particular, if the contrast between the properties of a
material’s phases is large, and the phases form large clusters, most continuum models break
down. At the same time, due to their very nature, the discrete models, which are based on a
xvii

lattice representation of a material’s morphology, have the ability of providing accurate pre-
dictions for the eﬀective properties of heterogeneous materials, even when the heterogeneities
are strong, while another class of discrete models which represents a material as a collection
of its constituent atoms and molecules provides accurate predictions for the material’s prop-
erties at mesoscopic scales, and thus, in this sense, the discrete models are complementary to
the continuum models. Last three decades of the twentieth century witnessed great advances
in discrete modelling of materials and predicting their macroscopic properties, and one main
goal of this book is to describe these advances and compare their predictions with those of the
continuum models. In Volume I, we consider characterization and modelling of the morphology
of disordered materials, and describe theoretical and computational approaches for predicting
their linear transport and optical properties, while Volume II focusses on non-linear properties,
and fracture and breakdown of disordered materials, in addition to describing their atomistic.
Some of the theoretical and computational approaches are rather old, while others are very new,
and therefore we attempt to take the reader through a journey to see the history of the devel-
opment of the subjects that are discussed in this book. Most importantly, we alway compare
the predictions with the relevant experimental data in order to gain a better understanding of
the strengths and/or shortcomings of the two classes of models.
A large number of people have helped me gain deeper understanding of the topics discussed
in this book, and hence have helped me to write about them. Not being able to name them all,
I limit myself to a few of them who, directly or indirectly, inﬂuenced the style and contents of
this book. Dietrich Stauﬀer has greatly contributed to my understanding of percolation theory,
disordered media, and critical phenomena, some of the main themes of this book; I am deeply
grateful to him. For their tireless help in the preparation of various portions of this book,
I would like to thank two of my graduate students, Sushma Dhulipala and Alberto Schroth.
Although they may not be aware of it, Professors Pedro Ponte Casta˜neda of the University of
Pennsylvania and Salvatore Torquato of Princeton University provided great help by guiding me
through their excellent work which is described in this book; I would like to thank them both.
Some of my own work described in this book has been carried out in collaboration with many
people; I am pleased to acknowledge their great contributions, especially those of Dr. Sepehr
Arbabi, my former doctoral student. Constant encouragement and support oﬀered by many of
my colleagues, a list of whom is too long to be given here, are also gratefully acknowledged. I
xviii

would like to particularly express my deep gratitude to my former doctoral student, Dr. Jaleh
Ghassemzadeh, who provided me with critical help at all stages of preparation of this book.
Several chapters of this book have been used, in their preliminary versions, in some of the
courses that I teach, and I would like to acknowledge the comments that I received from my
students.
My wife Mahnoush and son Ali put up with the countless number of hours, days, and weeks
of work that I spent for preparing this book, and my almost complete absence during the time
that I was writing this book, but never denied me the love and support without which this
book would have never been completed; I love and cherish them both.
Muhammad Sahimi
Los Angeles
May 2002
xix

It is vain to do with more what can be done with less.1
1
Introduction
1.0 Historical Perspective
This two-volume book was written at the dawn of the 21st century. Although development
of materials science was actually commenced about 2 million years ago, at the beginning of the
Stone Age, human civilization would not have been where it is now, had it not been for the
astonishing progress that materials science has made since 5000 years ago, when the Bronze Age
started in the Far East, and especially since about 3000 years ago when the Iron Age began
in Asia Minor. The last 100 years have, however, witnessed stunning advances in materials
science which far exceed those of all prior centuries combined. Whereas at the beginning of the
20th century the atomic structure of any material was not known, today we are able
(1) to make materials in which atoms are placed at speciﬁc locations;
(2) to manufacture composites with properties that Nature cannot produce;
(3) to make materials that can change some of their speciﬁc features as the environment
around them also varies - the so-called smart materials, and
(4) to even manipulate individual atoms in a material so as to investigate the most funda-
mental issues in science.
Despite the huge progress, the goal in developing and advancing the science of materials has
not changed over the past 2 million years: Elevating the quality of people’s lives and making
eﬃcient and better use of the resources that are available on our planet.
The advances of materials research can perhaps be best illustrated by three classes of ma-
terials that are of prime interest today, namely, structural, polymeric, and electronic materials.
Modern materials science owes its development to structural materials, and in particular to
metallurgy and metal physics. It has been a long journey from the Bronze Age to sending
the Pioneer 1 spacecraft outside the Solar System, but after this long and tortuous journey
we can now claim that we have mastered air travel, surface transportation, housing, and to
1B. Russell, A History of Western Philosophy (George Allen and Unwin Ltd., London, 1946).
1

some extent space ﬂights, owing all of them to structural materials. Even before we discovered
and understood them, polymeric materials were being used by Nature to perform extremely
complex functions, some of which we do not quite understand yet. In fact, human beings, and
more generally every living being as we know it, are made of carbon-based materials and are
probably the most complex polymers that can be made. However, over the last 100 years, the
science of polymeric materials has progressed so much that we now use polymers in fabrics,
food packaging, structural applications, and many other instances. In fact, polymers are playing
an increasingly important role in a new branch of materials, namely, biomaterials. Electronic
materials, on the other hand, could not have been conceived before quantum mechanics was
discovered in the ﬁrst few decades of the 20th century. Our understanding of such materials
has progressed so much that it is extremely diﬃcult to even imagine our world today with-
out telecommunication, computers, radio, and television, all of which use electronic materials.
In fact, the astonishing advances in increasing the speed of computers are largely due to the
progress that has been made in understanding the properties of electronic materials, which in
turn has helped us in their design and manufacturing.
1.1 Heterogeneous Materials
The advances in materials science and research have not, however, come easily. The fact
is that Nature is disordered, and so also are most materials that she produces.
Over the
past few decades, it has become increasingly clear that what Nature produces often has an
optimized structure. Therefore, heterogeneous materials that Nature produces must also have
this property. This fact has been recognized by human beings, since throughout history the
use of composites and heterogeneous materials has been widespread. However, this recognition
was at ﬁrst only empirical; only the last few decades have witnessed further development of
heterogeneous materials in a scientiﬁc manner. We now recognize that only in our imagination
can we buy clean, pure, completely characterized and geometrically perfect materials. Engineers
and materials scientists work in a world of composites and mixtures, and biologists do so even
more. Even an experimentalist who focusses on the purest of materials, such as carefully grown
crystals, can seldom escape the eﬀects of defects, trace impurities, and ﬁnite boundaries. There
are few concepts in science more elegant to contemplate than an inﬁnite, perfectly periodic
crystal lattice, and few systems as remote from reality. We must therefore come to terms with
2

heterogeneous materials. The heterogeneities manifest themselves in the apparent randomness
in the morphology of materials. The morphology of a material has two major aspects: topology,
the interconnectiveness of its individual elements; and geometry, the shape and size of these
individual elements.
However, a heterogeneous morphology is only half of the story. We know that however
random the stage upon which the drama of Nature is played out, it is also at times very
diﬃcult to follow the script.
We believe, at least above the quantum mechanical level, in
the doctrine of determinism, yet important continuous systems exist in which deterministic
descriptions are beyond hope. Typical examples are diﬀusion and Brownian motion where,
over certain length scales, we observe an apparent random process, or disordered dynamics.
Hence, Nature is disordered both in her structure and the processes she supports. Indeed, the
two types of disorder are often coupled. An example is ﬂuid ﬂow through a porous material
where the interplay between the disordered morphology of the pore space and the dynamics of
ﬂuid motion gives rise to a rich variety of phenomena. Therefore, to understand and predict the
properties of a wide variety of materials, and to develop the capability for manipulating their
morphology to suite a particular application, we must understand the role of heterogeneity in
the materials’ structure and the processes that take place therein.
Although the existence and role of the heterogeneities seem rather obvious, these topics
were, for several decades, familiar to most physicists, engineers, and materials scientists either in
empirical manners, or in the form of statistical mechanics, and the application of such equations
as the Boltzmann’s equation. Researchers in these ﬁelds made remarkable progress by taking
advantage of periodic structures. Despite their impressive progress though, it was always felt
that something was missing because, as always, one still had to face the real materials which
are usually disodered. Therefore, it became clear that a statistical physics of disordered media
must be devised to provide methods for deriving macroscopic properties of such materials from
the laws that govern the microscopic world or, alternatively, for deducing their microscopic
properties from the macroscopic data that can be obtained by experimental techniques. To
be successful and accurate, such a statistical physics of disordered materials must take into
account the eﬀect of the materials’ topology and geometry. While the role of the latter was
already appreciated in the early years of the 20th century, the eﬀect of the former was ignored
for many decades, or at best was treated in an unrealistic or empirical manner, simply because
3

it was thought to be too diﬃcult to be taken into account.
The eﬀort for devising such a statistical physics of disordered materials was begun in earnest
in the 1960s and has been, ever since, in a rapid stage of progress. The reason for this progress
is fourfold.
(1) Advanced theoretical methods for predicting the macroscopic properties of such mate-
rials have been established.
(2) The vast increase in computational power has enabled us to study by computer sim-
ulations very complex materials at several disparate length scales, ranging from molecular to
macroscopic scales.
(3) The advent of novel experimental techniques has allowed us to collect highly precise
data.
(4) The crucial role of interconnectivity of the microscopic elements of heterogeneous ma-
terials and its eﬀect on their macroscopic properties have been recognized and understood.
The net result of these developments is that we now have a much better understanding of
many properties of a wide variety of heterogeneous materials. The goal of this two-volume book
is to describe and discuss these developments for several classes of such materials.
1.2 Eﬀective Properties of Heterogeneous Materials
Transport processes in disordered materials, the main focus of this book, constitute an im-
portant class of problems, in view of their relevance to understanding and modelling of a wide
variety of phenomena in natural and industrial processes. A partial list of examples of a trans-
port process in a disordered material includes hopping transport in amorphous semiconductors,
frequency-dependent conduction in superionic conductors, diﬀusion in microporous materials
and through biological tissues, conduction in, and deformation, electrical and dielectric break-
down and fracture of, composite solids, optical processes in heterogeneous materials, and many
more.
What are the eﬀective properties that are of interest to us in this book?
Some of the
eﬀective properties of heterogeneous materials that will be studied in this two-volume book are
as follows.
1. The eﬀective (electrical, thermal, hopping, and Hall) conductivity
2. The eﬀective dielectric constant
4

3. The eﬀective elastic moduli
4. The electrical and dielectric breakdown ﬁelds
5. The eﬀective yield strength
In addition, we also consider some aspects of the classical (as opposed to quantum-mechanical)
superconductivity of composite materials. Because of the exact mathematical analogy between
the formulations of the thermal and electrical conduction in heterogeneous materials, and due to
the fact that their meachanisms in solid materials are the same, in most cases that are discussed
in this book, we do not distinguish between thermal and electrical conductivities. Moreover,
the eﬀective diﬀusivity tensor De is directly related to the eﬀective conductivity tensor ge, and
therefore from knowledge of ge one obtains an estimate of De, and vice versa. In addition, we
also consider closely-related properties, such as the vibrational density of states of heterogeneous
materials (which are related to other properties, such as the thermal conductivity), as well as
the optical properties that are directly linked to the eﬀective frequency-dependent dielectric
constant.
To deﬁne such eﬀective macroscopic properties, one must start from local transport equa-
tions that govern the transport processes at the microscopic length scales. If, for example, a
heterogeneous material is composed of domains of diﬀerent materials, then the relevant mi-
croscopic length scale is the typical or average domain size. If the length scale over which a
material can be considered as heterogeneous is much smaller than the macroscopic length of the
sample, then the average or eﬀective properties of the heterogeneous material are well-deﬁned
and independent of the sample size. Otherwise, the material is macroscopically heterogeneous,
and its eﬀective properties depend on the sample size. To make the discussion more speciﬁc, we
consider linear and non-linear transport properties separately. Volume I describes prediction
of the eﬀective linear properties, while non-linear properties will be taken up in Volume II.
1.3 Linear Transport Properties
Suppose that a heterogeneous material is a domain of space with volume Ωwhich is com-
posed of two regions or phases: phase 1 of volume fraction φ1 and phase 2 of volume fraction
φ2. For clarity and simplicity of our discussion we assume that the material is statistically
homogeneous, but contains microscopic heterogeneities (although in at least some instances
5

that will be considered in this book this condition may be violated). We now consider some of
the properties of interest.
1.3.1 The eﬀective conductivity
Consider the thermal conductivity of a two-phase heterogeneous linear material, such that
phases 1 and 2 have isotropic thermal conductivities g1 and g2, respectively (the extension to
a material with more than two phases is obvious). The governing equation for steady-state
conduction in the material at a point x is given by
∇· q(x) = 0 ,
for both phases,
(1)
where q is the local heat ﬂux. We also need a local constitutive relation that relates the ﬂux q
to the thermal conductivities, namely, the Fourier’s law,
q(x) = −g(x)∇T(x) ,
for both phases,
(2)
where T(x) and g(x) are the local temperature and thermal conductivity at point x, respec-
tively. We assume that T and the normal component of q across the interface (or surface)
between phases 1 and 2 are continuous.
We now deﬁne an ensemble-averaged constitutive relation that deﬁnes the symmetric, second-
rank eﬀective conductivity tensor ge:
⟨q(x)⟩= −ge · ⟨∇T(x)⟩
(3)
where ⟨·⟩denotes an ensemble average, i.e., the average over a large number of samples which are
idential in their macroscopic details but are diﬀerent at the microscopic length scale. Such an
ensemble-averaged eﬀective conductivity ge exists in the limit that the ratio of the microscopic
and macroscopic length scales approaches 0. Note that, although we assumed that phases 1 and
2 have isotropic conductivities, the eﬀective conductivity ge is in general a tensor, and hence
the system behaves anisotropically. The anisotropy can be due to a variety of factors, such as
layering, embedding of oriented inclusions in a matrix, etc.
1.3.2 The eﬀective dielectric constant
For simplicity we restrict our discussion here to the zero frequency (static) limit (in this
book and Volume II we will, however, consider frequency-dependent dielectric constant). In
6

this limit the electric ﬁeld E is curl-free, i.e., one has ∇× E = 0, and satisﬁes the following
equation,
∇· (ϵE) = 0 ,
(4)
where ϵ(x) is the local value of the dielectric constant which varies from ϵ1 for phase 1 to ϵ2 for
phase 2.
To deﬁne the eﬀective dielectric constant of the material we consider the electrostatic energy
stored in the system if a given potential drop is applied across the material. The average electric
ﬁeld ⟨E⟩in the system is given by
⟨E⟩= 1
Ω

E(x)dΩ,
(5)
where Ωis the volume of the material. The average electric ﬁeld depends only on the applied
potential. The eﬀective dielectric constant ϵe of the heterogeneous material is then deﬁned by
ϵe⟨E⟩2 = 1
Ω

ϵ(x)E2(x)dΩ.
(6)
One can also calculate ϵe by an alternative method based on the local and average electric
displacement ﬁelds, D(x) and ⟨D⟩, respectively, which are deﬁned by
D(x) = ϵE(x) ,
⟨D⟩= ϵe⟨E⟩.
(7)
In terms of these two quantities, the eﬀective dielectric constant ϵe is given by
⟨D⟩2
ϵe
= 1
Ω
 D2(x)
ϵ(x) dΩ.
(8)
1.3.3 The eﬀective elastic moduli
To formally deﬁne the eﬀective stiﬀness tensor Ce one proceeds in a similar manner. Sup-
pose, for example, that a linear heterogeneous material is composed of isotropic phases 1 and 2
with elastic bulk moduli K1 and K2 and shear moduli µ1 and µ2, respectively. At equilibrium
we must have
∇· σ(x) = 0
for both phases,
(9)
where σ(x) is the symmetric, second-rank local stress tensor. The local constitutive equation
is given by
σ(x) = λ(x)tr[ϵ(x)]U + 2µ(x)ϵ(x) ,
for both phases,
(10)
7

with
ϵ(x) = 1
2

∇u(x) + ∇u(x)T
.
(11)
Here ϵ(x) is the symmetric, second-rank local strain stensor, u(x) is the local displacement,
λ(x) and µ(x) are the local Lam´e constants, U is the unit dyadic, and superscript T denotes
transpose operation on the tensor.
Given the above local constitutive relation, the symmetric, fourth-rank eﬀective stiﬀness
tensor Ce is deﬁned by the following ensemble-averaged relation:
⟨σ(x)⟩= Ce : ⟨ϵ(x)⟩.
(12)
The conditions under which the above equation holds are similar to those for the conduction
problem discussed above. For macroscopically-isotropic materials Ce can be expressed in terms
of only two independent eﬀective elastic moduli Ke and µe, since,
⟨σ(x)⟩=

Ke −2µe
d

tr⟨ϵ⟩U + 2µe⟨ϵ⟩,
(13)
where d is the dimensionality of the system. To characterize anisotropic materials one needs
more than two eﬀective elastic moduli. For example, it can be shown that there are ﬁve eﬀective
elastic moduli for transversely isotropic ﬁber-reinforced two-phase materials, but only three of
them are independent, and hence the remaining two moduli can be obtained from a combination
of the three independent moduli which usually are the eﬀective axial shear modulus µa
e, the
eﬀective bulk modulus Ke, and the eﬀective transverse shear modulus µt
e.
1.4 Non-linear Transport Properties
For several decades most of the transport phenomena in heterogeneous materials that were
studied were linear processes.
In practice, however, there are many natural and industrial
processes in which a non-linear transport phenomenon takes place. Volume II will consider
such non-linear transport processes, where we divide them into two groups.
1.4.1 Constitutive non-linearity
Materials and media of this type always behave non-linearly. For example, if in a composite
material the relation between the current I and voltage V is given by
I = gV n
(14)
8

where g is a generalized conductance of the material, then, as far as the electrical conductivity
is concerned, for n ̸= 1 the material always behaves non-linearly. Another example is provided
by ﬂow of polymers in a porous medium which is always a non-linear process, as the relation
between the volumetric ﬂow rate of the polymer and the pressure gradient applied to the
medium is always non-linear. We will discuss such non-linear phenomena in Chapters 2-4 of
Volume II.
1.4.2 Threshold non-linearity
In this class of materials are those for which the non-linearity arises as a result of imposing
on them an external ﬁeld of suﬃcient intensity. Brittle fracture and dielectric breakdown of
composite solids are two important examples of such non-linear transport processes. In brittle
fracture, for example, the elastic response of a solid material is governed by the equations of
linear elasticity until the external stress or strain that has been imposed on the material exceeds
a critical value, at which time the material breaks down and microcracks begin to emerge. In
many doped polycrystalline semiconductors (for example, ZnO) the electrical conductivity is
highly non-linear above a threshold voltage. Non-linear conduction has also been observed in
many ceramic conductors (Einziger, 1987; Niklasson, 1989b). A list of all possible non-linear
transport processes of this type is very long. One important point to remember is that, the
interplay between a non-linear transport process and the disordered morphology of a composite
material gives rise to a rich variety of phenomena that are usually far more complex than what
one usually must deal with in linear processes. Over the past 15 years, an increasing number
of investigations have been devoted to such non-linear transport processes, and deeper insight
into their properties has been acquired. A major goal of Volume II is to describe this progress
and compare various properties of non-linear transport processes in heterogeneous materials
with their linear counterparts.
Note that while for linear materials the nature of the boundary conditions does not play
a critical role, for non-linear materials the boundary conditions must be precisely deﬁned;
otherwise, one may not even be able to deﬁne the eﬀective (ensemble-averaged) macroscopic
properties. For example, Chapters 2 and 3 of Volume II will make it clear that the eﬀective
non-linear conductivity of materials that follow Eq. (14) can be deﬁned only for two-terminal
systems, i.e., one for which a current is injected into the material at one point and extracted
9

at a second point (or one in which a potential gradient is established between two points).
However, if there are more than one injection and/or extraction points, then it is not even clear
how the eﬀective non-linear conductivity of the material should be deﬁned.
1.5 Predicting the Eﬀective Properties of Heterogeneous Materials
Now that we have stated the types of eﬀective properties of heterogeneous materials that we
are interested in, it is also essential to consider the types of models that have been developed
over the past several decades for describing transport phenomena in composite materials. The
analysis of transport processes in solid materials has a long history. However, it is only in the
past three decades that this analysis has been extended to include detailed structural properties
of the materials, and in particular the distribution of their heterogeneities.
Making exact predictions for the eﬀective properties of composite materials with anything
but the simplest morphologies is extremely diﬃcult, if not impossible. With the advent of
powerful computers, eﬃcient computational algorithms have been developed for estimating
various properties of heterogeneous materials. Large-scale computer simulations that are based
on such algorithms either numerically solve the governing equations, or use the analogy between
various phenomena (for example, the analogy between random walk processes and diﬀusion and
conduction) in order to estimate the eﬀective transport properties. While the applications of
such methods and techniques to linear transport processes have proven fruitful, devising similar
algorithms for non-linear transport processes has been considerably more diﬃcult. Despite this
diﬃculty, considerable progress has also been made in this arena which will be described in this
book.
To describe the theoretical approaches for estimating the eﬀective properties of composite
materials, we divide them into two classes. In the ﬁrst class of models are what we refer to
as the continuum models, while the second class is made of the discrete models. Both types
of models are described and analyzed in this book and Volume II, and what follows is a brief
description of the general features of each class of models.
1.5.1 The continuum models
Continuum models represent the classical approach to describing and analyzing transport
processes in materials of complex and irregular morphology. The physical laws that govern the
transport processes at the microscopic level are well understood. One can, in principle, write
10

down the diﬀerential equations that describe transport of energy, charge, or stress in a material
and specify the associated initial and boundary conditions. However, as the morphology of most
real composite materials is very irregular, practical and economically feasible computations for
exact estimation of the eﬀective properties are still very diﬃcult - even in the event that one
knows the detailed morphology of the material. Moreover, even if the solution of the problem
could be obtained in such great detail, it would contain much more information than would be
useful in any practical sense. Thus, it becomes essential to adopt a macroscopic description at
a length scale much larger than the dimension of the individual phases of a composite material.
As described above, the eﬀective properties of a material are deﬁned as averages of the
corresponding microscopic quantities. The averages must be taken over a volume that is small
enough compared with the volume of the material, yet large enough for the equations of change
to hold when applied to that volume. At every point in the material one uses the smallest such
volume, and thereby generates macroscopic ﬁeld variables that follow equations such as Eq.
(14) for electrical conduction, or Fourier’s law of thermal conduction. Even when the averaging
is theoretically sound, due to the complex morphology of composite materials, predicting the
eﬀective properties, without resorting to numerical simulations, is often very diﬃcult.
As
mentioned above, many of such past theoretical attempts to derive expressions for the eﬀective
transport coeﬃcients of disordered materials from their microstructure entailed a simpliﬁed
representation of the morphology. Having derived the macroscopic governing equations, one
has the classical description of a composite material as a continuum.
These equations are
then discretized and solved numerically, provided that the eﬀective properties that appear in
the transport equations are either supplied as the inputs (through, for example, experimental
measurements), or else a model for the morphology of the material is assumed so that the
eﬀective transport properties can be somehow estimated, so that the numerical solution yields
other quantities of interest, such as the potential distribution in the material. We refer to various
models associated with this classical description as the continuum models. These models have
been widely used because of their convenience and familiarity to the engineers and materials
scientists. They do have some limitations, one of which was noted above in the discussion
concerning scales and averaging. They are also not well-suited for describing those phenomena
in which the interconnectivity of diﬀerent parts of a material plays a major role. Such models
also break down if there are correlations in the morphology of the composite material with an
11

extent that is comparable with the material’s linear size.
In addition to deriving the eﬀective macroscopic equations and obtaining their solution by
numerical calculations, one may also derive exact results in terms of rigorous upper and lower
bounds to the properties of interest. Hence, powerful tools have been developed for deriving
accurate upper and lower bounds and estimates. Finally, various approximations, such as the
mean-ﬁeld and eﬀective-medium approximations, have also been developed in the context of
the continuum models. We will describe most of these theoretical approaches throughout both
this book and Volume II.
1.5.2 The discrete models
The second class of models, the discrete models, are free of many limitations of the continuum
models. They themselves are divided into two groups.
(1) In the ﬁrst class of discrete models, a material is represented by a discrete set of atoms
and molecules that interact with each other through interatomic potentials. In a solid material,
the distance between the atoms is ﬁxed. One then carries out atomistic simulations of the
materials’ behavior under a variety of conditions. Several types of such simulations have been
developed over the past few decades.
With the advent of massively-parallel computational
algorithms, atomistic simulations have increasingly become a viable and quantitative method
of predicting the eﬀective properties of materials.
(2) In the second class are lattice models of composite materials. The bonds of the lattices
represent microscopic elements of the material. For example, they represent a conducting or
insulating elements, or an elastic or a plastic region. They do not represent molecular bonds,
and therefore such lattice models are appropriate for length scales that are much larger than
molecular scales.
These models have been advanced to describe various phenomena at the
microscopic level and have been extended in the last several years to also describe them at the
macroscopic length scales. We will describe both classes of discrete models in this book and
Volume II.
The main shortcoming of both groups of the discrete models, from a practical point of view,
is the large computational eﬀort required for a realistic discrete representation of the material
and simulating its behavior, although the ever-increasing computational power is addressing
this diﬃculty. Although the original idea of lattice representation of a material is rather old and
12

goes back to the early 1950s, but it was only in the early 1970s that systematic and rigorous
procedures were developed to map, in principle, any disordered material onto an equivalent
lattice model. Moreover, it was recognized in the late 1960s that percolation theory is the
natural language for describing the eﬀect of interconnectivity of the microscopic elements of a
disordered material on its eﬀective macroscopic properties. Describing application of percola-
tion theory to estimating the eﬀective properties of materials constitutes an important aspect
of both Volume I and II.
1.6 The Organization of the Book
What we intend to do in this book and Volume II is describing the most important devel-
opments in predicting the eﬀective properties of linear and non-linear composite materials, and
comparing the predictions with the relevant experimental data. To accomplish our goal, for
each eﬀective property we describe and discuss the continuum and discrete models separately.
The, in the last chapter of Volume II we will describe recent advances in multiscaling modelling
of materials’ properties - a method that combines a discrete approach with a continuum model.
The structure of each chapter in both Volume I and Volume II is as follows.
(1) The main problem(s) of interest is (are) introduced.
(2) The problem(s) is (are) then analyzed by several methods, each of which provide valuable
insight into the solution of the problem(s) and the physical phenomena that it (they) repre-
sent. Typically, each chapter starts with exact and rigorous results, then describes analytical
approximations, and ﬁnally discusses the numerical and computer simulation methods. The
weakness and strengths of each method are also pointed out. In this way, the most important
progress in understanding the physical phenomena of interest is described and discussed.
(3) When possible (which is almost always the case), we compare the theoretical predictions
with the experimental data and/or high-resolution computer simulation results.
(4) We also emphasize an important aspect of the phenomena that are studied, namely,
their universal properties, i.e., those that are independent of the microscopic features and the
structure of the distribution of the heterogeneities and depend only on the dimensionality of the
materials. The existence of such universal properties is particularly important because, if these
phenomena do possess universal properties, then one may employ the simplest models that can
produce such universal properties in order to study the phenomena of interest in composite
13

materials. In addition, such universal properties provide a guide for developing either accurate
correlations for the experimental data, or accurate approximate expressions.
We divide the present volume into two major parts. In Part I (Chapters 2 and 3) we describe
characterization of the microstructure of composite materials and the various models that have
been developed for representing them, while Part II (Chapters 4-9) contains the description
and discussion of the methods for predicting the eﬀective linear properties of heterogeneous
materials, and their comparison with the experimental data.
Some aspects of characterization of materials’ morphology, which are more relevant to what
is discussed Volume II, will be described in its Chapter 1. Aside from this chapter, Volume II is
divided into three parts. In Part I (Chapters 2-4) we study transport processes in heterogeneous
materials that are characterized by constitutive non-linearities. Part II (Chapters 5-8) contains
the description and discussion of transport processes with threshold non-linearity, including
electrical and dielectric breakdown, and brittle fracture of disordered materials. Finally, in
Part III we will describe (in Chapters 9 and 10) advances in atomistic modelling of materials,
and how a powerful new approach that combines atomistic simulations with the continuum
description - in eﬀect a combination of a discrete approach with a continuum model - promises
to provide much deeper understanding of materials, and deliver quantitative predictions for
their eﬀective properties.
Let us emphasize that, although every attempt has been made to discuss and cite the
relevant literature on every subject that we consider, what we do cite and bring to the attention
of the reader represents what was known to us at the time of writing this book, and/or what
we considered to be the most relevant. As such, this two-volume book represents the author’s
biased view of the subject of composite materials.
14

PART I:
CHARACTERIZATION AND MODELLING OF THE
MORPHOLOGY
15

2
Characterization of Connectivity and Clustering
2.0 Introduction
As pointed out in Chapter 1, Nature produces a wide variety of materials with enormous
variations in their morphology. The same is true about man-made materials. The morphol-
ogy of materials’ microstructure consists of its geometry, topology and surface structure. The
geometry describes the shapes and sizes of the micro- and mesoscale elements of the mate-
rial. The shapes can vary anywhere from completely ordered and Euclidean to complex and
seemingly chaotic patterns. In general, Euclidean shapes are formed under close-to-equilibrium
conditions, although even in such cases equilibrium thermodynamics is often inadequate for
describing the process that gives rise to such shapes. The topology of materials’ structure
describes how the micro- or mesoscale elements are connected to one another. In addition,
many materials, especially those that are made under far-from-equilibrium conditions, have
very complex surface structure. In particular, many materials have very rough surface with the
roughness seemingly following a very complex pattern which, however, is amenable to precise
characterization. In recent years, it has become clear that characterizing surface roughness
will go a long way toward providing us with a much better understanding of materials’ mi-
crostructure and hence their eﬀective properties. In particular, materials’ rough surfaces are
often directly linked with the non-linear phenomena that will be described in Volume II, and
therefore we will describe their characterization and modelling in Volume II. However, when
we speak of the surface roughness, it is important to specify the length scales over which the
roughness is observed. Even the most rugged mountains look perfectly smooth when viewed
from the outer space! Therefore, surface roughness, and more generally the characteristics of
the morphology, depend on the length scale of observations or measurements.
Examples of such disordered morphologies, and in particular rough surfaces, are abundant.
Some of the well-known examples are microporous materials, such as membranes, catalysts and
adsorbent. The geometry of these materials is disordered, as their pores have a wide variety of
shapes and sizes. Their topology is also disordered, since the connectivity of the pores varies
in the pore space, with some pores being connected to a larger number of pores than others.
The surface of the pores is, over certain length scales which depend on the type of the material,
16

also rough. One of the best examples of a material with a rough surface is the thin ﬁlms that
are made by molecular beam epitaxy and are used for manufacturing of semiconductors and
computer chips. Such thin ﬁlms are made of silicon and other elements, and are formed by
deposition of atoms on a very clean surface. Thin ﬁlms with rough surfaces are also made
by sputtering in which an energized beam of particles is sent toward the bulk of a material.
Collision of the beam particles with the material causes ejection of some particles from the
material’s surface, which then deposit on another surface and start to grow a thin ﬁlm of the
original material.
The enormous variations in the morphology of the natural, or even man-made, materials are
such that, up until a few decades ago, the task of describing and quantifying such morphologies
seemed hopeless. This task was complicated further by the fact that in many instances the
materials’ morphology undergoes a type of phase transition, i.e., it changes from one distinct
structure to another, as the conditions that give rise to the morphology change.
A well-
known example is electrochemical deposition where the electrochemical patterns change as the
deposition conditions are varied. This morphological phase transition is reminiscent of ordinary
or thermal phase transitions which are now well-understood. Hence, similar to thermal phase
transitions, one may have a morphological phase diagram in terms of the parameters that control
the material’s morphology. Such a diagram maps out all the possible morphologies that a given
material made by a given process can possess. Unlike thermal phase transitions, however, and
despite extensive studies, the nature of the transitions between various morphological phases
is not well-understood yet.
However, several developments have considerably changed the bleak outlook for characteriz-
ing the morphology of materials that had persisted for several decades, and have brightened the
prospects for deeper understanding of materials’ microstructures. Some of these developments
were already discussed in Chapter 1. Among them are the advent of powerful computers and
novel experimental techniques that allow highly sophisticated computations of materials’ prop-
erties and their measurement. Two other developments that have advanced our understanding
of materials’ microstructure and properties are as follows.
(1) It has been widely recognized that the complex microstructure and behavior of a wide
variety of materials can be quantitatively characterized by using the ideas of fractal distribu-
tions, which correspond in a unique way to the geometrical and dynamical properties of the
17

systems under study. As we discuss in this chapter (and in Chapter 1 of Volume II), fractal con-
cepts provide us with an important tool for characterizing the geometry and surface structure
of heterogeneous materials, and long-range correlations that often exist in their morphology.
Even if a material’s morphology does not possess fractal properties at signiﬁcant length scales,
the concepts of fractal geometry often provide useful means of obtaining deeper insights into
the structure of the material.
(2) Another important tool for characterizing the eﬀect of the topology, i.e., connectivity,
of a disordered material on its transport properties is the concepts of percolation theory. For
example, how the conducting parts of a composite material that consists of conducting and
insulating phases cluster together and form sample-spanning paths for transport of current,
heat, or stress across the material is precisely quantiﬁed by percolation theory. Moreover, as we
discuss in the subsequent chapters, percolation concepts are essential to correct interpretation
of the experimental data for various properties of disordered materials.
Thus, the purpose of this chapter is to review and discuss the essential concepts and ideas
of fractal structures and percolation processes. We begin by describing and discussing the basic
principles of fractal geometry, after which percolation processes and their essential features will
be described.
2.1 Characterization of the Geometry: Self-Similar Fractal Microstructures
Although it is possible to give a formal mathematical deﬁnition of a fractal system or set
(Mandelbrot, 1982), an intuitive and less formal deﬁnition of a fractal system may be more
useful: In a fractal structure the part is reminiscent of the whole. This implies that the system
is self-similar and possesses scale-invariant properties, i.e., its morphology repeats itself at
diﬀerent length scales. That is, there exist pieces of the system above a certain length scale –
the lower cutoﬀscale for fractality – that can be magniﬁed to recover the structure of the system
at larger length scales up to another length scale – the upper cutoﬀfor its fractality. Below
the lower cutoﬀand above the upper cutoﬀscales the system loses its self-similarity. There are
disordered media that are self-similar at any length scale, while natural materials and media
that exhibit fractal properties typically lose their fractal characteristics at suﬃciently small or
large length scales. Moreover, it should be pointed out that natural systems are generally not,
in the strict mathematical sense, fractal; rather their behavior approaches what is envisioned
18

in fractal geometry, which explains why it is useful to use fractals for describing them.
One of the simplest characteristics of a fractal is its fractal dimension Df, which is deﬁned
as follows. We cover the fractal system by non-overlapping d-dimensional spheres of Euclidean
radius r, or boxes of linear size R, and count the number N(r) of such spheres that is required
for complete coverage. The fractal dimension of the system is then deﬁned by
Df = lim
r→0
ln N
ln(1/r) .
(15)
Estimating Df based on Eq. (1) is called the box-counting method. Non-fractal objects, such
as a straight line, a square, or a sphere, are Euclidean and their eﬀective dimensionality is d,
the dimensionality of the space in which they are embedded. Note that, in order to be able to
write down Eq. (1), we have implicitly assumed the existence of a lower and an upper cutoﬀ
length scale for the fractality of the system which are, respectively, the radius r of the spheres
and the linear size L of the system.
One may also deﬁne the fractal dimension Df through the relation between the system’s
mass M and its characteristic length scale L. If the system is composed of particles of radius
r and mass m, then
M = cm(L/r)Df ,
(16)
where c is a geometrical constant of order 1. Since we can ﬁx the dependence of M on m and
r, we can write
M(L) ∼LDf .
(17)
Equation (3) is consistent with the corresponding scaling relationship M ∼Ld for Euclidean
objects. Often, measuring M entails using an ensemble of samples with similar structures,
rather than a single sample. In this case
⟨M⟩= cm(L/r)Df ,
(18)
where ⟨·⟩indicates an average over the mass of a large number of samples with linear sizes in the
range L ± δL, centered on L. It is clear that Eqs. (2)-(4) suggest a method for estimating the
fractal dimension from a logarithmic plot of the mass M versus the length scale L. Equations
(2) and (4) both imply that the mean density ρ = M/Ω, where Ωis the volume of the system
that contains the fractal in the embedding space, is not a constant, but decreases with the
19

length scale L according to
ρ ∼LDf−d ∼M (Df−d)/Df .
(19)
Equation (5) is one of the most important characteristics of self-similar fractal objects.
A
fractal dimension less than the Euclidean dimension of the space and a decreasing density with
increasing length scales both imply that the fractal object cannot ﬁll the space and has a sparse
structure.
In Figure 2.1 we show the construction of a classical self-similar fractal called the Sierpinski
gasket. Every trinagle in each generation is replaced by N = 3 smaller triangles that have been
scaled down by a factor r = 1/2, and therefore using Eq. (1) we obtain Df = ln 3/ ln 2 ≃1.58,
while for the three-dimensional (3D) version of the gasket we obtain Df = ln 4/ ln 2 = 2.
Another example is provided by the Sierpinski carpet; see Figure 2.2. To construct this fractal,
we start with a black square and subdivide it into nine equal squares. We then earase the central
square and apply the same procedure to each of the remaining eight black squares and continue
this ad inﬁnitum. Then, Df = ln 8/ ln 3 ≃1.893. More generally, we can subdivide the squares
into (2n + 1)2 identical parts and generate a carpet with Df = ln[(2n + 1)2 −1]/ ln(2n + 1),
where n = 1 corresponds to Figure 2.2.
2.2 Statistical Self-Similarity
The Sierpinski gasket and carpet are examples of what are usually referred to as exact
fractals, because their self-similarity is exact at any length scale. Most natural or even man-
made fractals are, however, statistically self-similar fractals, because their self-similarity is only
in an average sense.
One of the most important examples of such fractals is one which is
generated by the diﬀusion-limited aggregation model (Witten and Sander, 1981). In this model
the site at the center of a lattice is occupied by a stationary particle. A new particle is then
injected into the lattice, far from the center, which diﬀuses on the lattice until it reaches a
surface site, i.e., an empty site which is a nearest neighbor of the stationary particle. The
diﬀusing particle then sticks to surface site and remains there permanently. Another diﬀusing
particle is injected into the lattice to reach another surface (empty) site and stick to it, and
so on. If this process is continued for a long time, a large aggregate is formed. The most
important property of diﬀusion-limited aggregates is that they are self-similar and fractal.
Extensive computer simulations (for a review see, for example, Meakin, 1998) indicate that
20

Df ≃1.7 and 2.45 for 2D and 3D aggregates, respectively. A 2D example of such aggregates is
shown in Figure 2.3. Diﬀusion-limited aggregates have found wide applications, ranging from
colloidal systems to miscible displacement processes in porous media. We will come back to
this model in Chapters 5 and 8 of Volume II, where we describe models of dielectric breakdown
and fracture of composite materials.
2.3 Measurement of the Fractal Dimension
If a fractal morphology is to be formed at small length scales, it will require formation of
a large surface that separates the material from the embedding space. Since formation of a
large surface requires a large amount of energy, fractal materials do not usually form under
equilibrium conditions. However, constrained materials, such as polymers, membranes, and
froths, are exceptions to this general rule. A polymer, for example, is a constrained material
because, although it is in equilibrium, its structure is subject to a constraint which is the way
its monomers are joined. Therefore, a large surface is formed without forcing the polymer to
collapse. But in any case, regardless of whether a fractal structure has been formed under
equilibrium or non-equilibrium conditions, it is usually highly disordered, because of which its
self-similarity is only in a statistical sense. Therefore, it may be more appropriate to refer
to disordered fractals as scale-invariant rather than self-similar structures. A visual check of
self-similarity of disordered materials is clearly impossible, and thus one must estimate their
fractal dimension in order to ascertain their fractality. In addition to the box-counting method
described above, there are several other methods of estimating the fractal dimension, two of
which are now described.
2.3.1 The correlation function method
A powerful method for testing self-similarity of disordered materials is to construct a cor-
relation function Cn(rn) deﬁned by
Cn(rn) = ⟨ρ(r0)ρ(r0 + r1) + · · · + ρ(r0 + rn)⟩,
(20)
where ρ(r) is the density at position r, and the average is taken over all possible values of
r0. Here rn denotes the set of points, {r1, · · · , rn}. If an object is fractal, then its correlation
function deﬁned by Eq. (6) should remain the same, up to a constant factor, if all the length
21

scales of the system are rescaled by a constant factor b. Thus, one must have
Cn(br1, br2, · · · , brn) = b−nxCn(r1, · · · , rn) .
(21)
It is not diﬃcult to see that only a power-law correlation function can satisfy Eq. (7). Moreover,
it can be shown that one must have x = d −Df, where the quantity x is called the co-
dimensionality. However, in most cases only the two-point, or the direct, correlation function
can be computed or measured with high precisions, and therefore we focus on this quanity. In
practice, to construct the direct correlation function for use in analyzing a fractal structure,
one typically employs a digitized image of the system. The correlation function is then written
as
C(r) = 1
Ω

r′
s(r′)s(r + r′) ,
(22)
where s(r) is a function such that s(r) = 1 if a point at r belongs to the system, s(r) = 0
otherwise, and r = |r|. There are also indirect methods of measuring the correlation function;
see below. Because of self-similarity of the fractal structure, the direct correlation function
C(r) decays as
C(r) ∼rDf−d .
(23)
Such power-law decay of C(r) not only provides a test of self-similarity of a disordered medium
or material, but also provides us with a means of estimating its fractal dimension since, accord-
ing to Eq. (9), if one prepares a logarithmic plot of C(r) versus r, then for a fractal object one
should obtain a straight line with a slope Df −d. Estimating the fractal dimension based on the
direct correlation function has proven to be a very robust and reliable method. Note that Eq.
(9) has an important implication: In a fractal system there are long-range correlations, since
C(r) →0 only as r →∞. The existence of such correlations has important implications for
estimating the eﬀective transport properties of disoredered materials which will be discussed in
the subsequent chapters.
2.3.2 Small-angle scattering
Small-angle scattering provides a measure of fractal behavior at length scales between 0.5
and 50 mm. In a scattering experiment the observed scattering density I(q) is given by the
Fourier transform of the direct correlation function C(r):
I(q) =
 ∞
0
C(r) exp(iq · r)d3r ,
(24)
22

where q is the scattering vector, the magnitude of which is given by
q = 4π
λ sin
1
2θ

(25)
where λ is the wavelength of the radiation scattered by the sample through an angle θ. In a
scattering experiment, C(r) refers to spatial variations in scattering amplitude per unit volume,
rather than its physical density. In many cases it is not unreasonable to assume that, to a good
approximation, there is no interference scattering, and therefore the total scattering intensity is
the sum of the scattering from all portions of the system. For an isotropic medium, C(r) = C(r),
where r = |r|, and Eq. (10) becomes
I(q) =
 ∞
0
4πr2sin(qr)
qr
C(r)dr .
(26)
Since the correlation function for a 3D system is given by [see Eq. (9)], C(r) ∼rDf−3, we
obtain
I(q) ∼q−DfΓ(Df −1) sin[(Df −1)π/2] ,
(27)
where Γ is the gamma function. Equation (13) is valid if qdp ≪1 and qDm ≫1, where dp
and Dm are, respectively, the eﬀective diameters of an individual scattering particle and the
material. Both light scattering and small-angle x-ray scattering from silica aggregation clusters
conﬁrmed Eq. (13) (Schaefer et al., 1984). Note that a small-angle scattering experiment also
provides an indirect way of measuring the direct correlation function C(r).
As discussed above, the range of scale-invariance and fractal behavior in real materials
may be limited by the lower and upper cutoﬀlength scales ℓl and ℓu. Finite size of a system
also limits the range of self-similarity. Under such conditions, the assumption that the total
scattering intensity is simply the sum of scatterings by the individual portions may break down,
leading to interference scattering. To remedy this situation, Sinha et al. (1984) included in
C(r) an exponentially decaying term, incorporating a scattering correlation length ξs which
reﬂects the upper limit of self-similarity, namely,
C(r) ∼rDf−3 exp(−r/ξs) ,
(28)
which, when used in Eq. (12), yields
I(q) ∼q−1Γ(Df −1)ξDf−1
s
sin [(Df −1) tan−1(qξs)][1 + (qξs)2](1−Df)/2 .
(29)
23

The validity of Eq. (15) was conﬁrmed by the scattering experiments of Sinha et al. (1984) on
silica particle aggregates. Note that in the limit ξs →∞, we recover Eq. (13), and for small
values of qξs and Df = 3 (homogeneous materials) we obtain
I(q) =
8πξ2
s
1 + (qξs)2 ,
(30)
which is the classical result of Debye et al. (1957).
If r is small, i.e., scattering is at larger values of q but still within the small-angle approx-
imation, then the scattering reﬂects the nature of the boundaries between, for example, the
micropores of a material and their surfaces. When the surface is rough and the roughness
pattern is self-similar, one may characterize the surface by a fractal dimension Ds which can
be estimated by the scattering technique. If S is the surface area and ℓis a basic characteristic
length scale of the rough, fractal surface, then Ds is deﬁned by S ∼ℓDs, implying that the
actual area of a fractal surface is larger than what is expected of a smooth surface, and hence
one usually has Ds > 2. The surface fractal dimension Ds may or may not be the same as the
fractal dimension Df of the bulk of the material. One may also have a non-fractal material
which, however, possesses a fractal surface, and vice-versa. Bale and Schmidt (1984) showed
that for rough surfaces described by a surface fractal dimension Ds > 2, the direct correlation
function takes on the following form
C(r) ∼1 −ar3−Ds ,
(31)
in which a = S0[4φ(1−φ)Ω]−1, where Ωis the sample volume, φ the porosity, and S0 a material-
dependent constant having the dimensions of area, which is equal to the pore surface area when
the surface is smooth and non-fractal. Substituting Eq. (17) into (10) yields
I(q) ∼qDs−6Γ(5 −Ds) sin[(Ds −1)π/2] ,
(32)
which reduces to I(q) ∼q−4, the classical Porod law for smooth surfaces for which Ds = 2,
which is valid at the shortest length scales. Bale and Schmidt (1984) were able to conﬁrm Eq.
(18) for pores in lignites and sub-bituminous coals using small-angle x-ray scattering. If both
the bulk material and the surface are fractal and Df ̸= Ds, then it is not diﬃcult to show that
I(q) ∼qDs−2Df .
(33)
24

Therefore, one has a crossover from the q−Df behavior of I(q) to the qDs−2Df behavior, and to
the qDs−6 law. The crossover between the q−Df and qDs−6 laws occurs at ξs ∼q−1. If Ds is close
to 3, the crossover between the q−Df and qDs−6 regimes may be diﬃcult to discern. Finally, if
the direct correlation function is not isotropic, but only possesses rotational symmetry around a
unique axis, one would obtain a scattering law which has an elliptically symmetric dependence
on the azimuthal orientation of q. This elliptical dependence can be removed by averaging
the scattering law in terms of a reduced scattering vector. Typically, small-angle scattering
methods encounter diﬃculty at the smallest length scales.
In practice, estimating the fractal dimension by an scattering experiment may not be as
straightforward as making a logarithmic plot of I(q) versus q. One reason for this is that the
range of scaling is limited, and hence one must be careful about the possible crossover eﬀects,
such as those disscused above. Moreover, it is diﬃcult sometimes to distinguish scattering data
for a fractal material from those for Euclidean materials that are made of particles of diﬀerent
sizes with a power-law size distribution. It is also clear that in all the methods of estimating
the fractal dimension of a heterogeneous material one always deals with power laws and hence
ends up making a logarithmic plot of one quantity, e.g., the scattering intensity, versus another
quantity. However, if the power law, and hence the resulting straight line, are observed over less
than one order of magnitude variations in the independent parameter (for example, the length
scale L or the magnitude of the scattering vector q), then interpreting the straight line as an
indication of the existence of a fractal structure should be done with caution. Crossover and
ﬁnite-size eﬀects may signiﬁcantly aﬀect the quality of the data, and thus their eﬀect should be
taken into account. Often, a material is complex enough that a simple fractal analysis of the
type discussed above may not be suﬃcient for analyzing its structure, and more sophisticated
methods may be needed.
One major problem with equations such as (13) and (15) is that, they cannot distinguish
diﬀerent types of fractal materials which have similar fractal dimensions. For example, while
3D diﬀusion-limited aggregates and percolation composites (see below) both have a fractal
dimension of about 2.5, their morphologies are completely diﬀerent. Various methods have been
suggested for distinguishing such materials, none of which is deﬁnitive. For example, Chen et al.
(1987) suggested that second-order light scattering (SOLS) can distinguish between materials
that have roughly the same fractal dimension Df.
In SOLS, each electric ﬁeld amplitude
25

contributing to the detected signal involves polarization of two particles (as opposed to the
usual small-angle scattering that involves contributions from individual particles). Chen et al.
(1987) showed that adding these amplitudes, and squaring and ensemble averaging them yield
the observed intensity I(2) of SOLS. Therefore, two-, three-, and four-body correlation eﬀects
all contribute to SOLS. For self-similar materials, one has, I(2) ∼M x, where M is the mass of
the material, and x is a material-dependent exponent. For example, for 3D diﬀusion-limited
aggregates, x ≃1.1, while for 3D percolation composites, x ≃1.5, and therefore the two types
of materials exhibit diﬀerent scaling of the intensity of SOLS.
2.4 Self-Aﬃne Fractals
The self-similarity of a fractal structure implies that its microstructure is invariant under
an isotropic rescaling of lengths, i.e., if all the lengths in all the directions are rescaled by the
same scale factor. However, there are many fractals that preserve their scale-invariance only
if all the lengths in diﬀerent directions are rescaled by direction-dependent scale factors. In
other words, the scale-invariance of such systems is preserved only if lengths in the x−, y−,
and z−directions are scaled by scale factors bx, by, and bz, where in general these scale factors
are not equal. This type of scale-invariance - under a direction-dependent rescaling - implies
that the fractal system is anisotropic. Such fractal systems are called self-aﬃne, a term that
was used ﬁrst by Mandelbrot (1985). An example is shown in Figure 2.4, which can be thought
of as the self-aﬃne version of the Sierpinski carpet of Figure 2.2.
Unlike self-similar system, a self-aﬃne fractal cannot be described by a single fractal dimen-
sion Df, and in fact if one utilizes any of the methods of estimating Df that were described
above, then the resulting fractal dimension would depend on the length scales over which the
method is utilized. Despite this diﬃculty, Mandelbrot (1986) showed that for a self-aﬃne frac-
tal that has scaling factors b1, b2, · · · , bn for a subdivision into N parts, one may deﬁne a useful
quantity, the gap dimension Dg, given by
Dg =
log N
log(b1b2 · · · bn)1/n .
(34)
In general, Dg and Df are not equal.
A simple example of a self-aﬃne random fractal is the curve in the (x, t) plane, generated
by the equation, x = F(t), where F(t) is the displacement of a particle undergoing 1D diﬀusion
(Brownian motion). In this example, for any b > 0, F(t) and b−1/2F(bt) are statistically idential.
26

To see this, recall that the probability density function P(x, t) for ﬁnding a diﬀusing particle
at position x at time t satisﬁes the usual diﬀusion equation,
∂P
∂t = D∂2P
∂x2 ,
(35)
where D is the diﬀusivity. It is straightforward to show that Eq. (21) is invariant under the
rescaling, (x, t) →(b1/2x, bt), i.e., the invariance is preserved by rescaling the x and t axes by
diﬀerent scale factors.
Another well-known example of a process that gives rise to a self-aﬃne fractal is the
marginally stable growth of an interface betweem, for example, two ﬂuids. For example, if
water displaces oil in a porous medium, the interface between water and oil is a self-aﬃne
fractal. Well-known examples of man-made materials with self-aﬃne surfaces include thin ﬁlms
that are formed by molecular beam epitaxy, and fracture surface of composite materials (see
Volume II). Among natural surfaces that have self-aﬃne properties are bacterial colonies, and
pores and fractures of rock and other types of porous media. Many properties of such materials
are described by a function f(x) that also possesses a self-aﬃne structure. For example, the
surface height h(x, y) at a lateral position x of a rough surface, e.g., the internal surface of a
rock fracture, and the porosity distribution of rock along a well at depths x, both have self-aﬃne
property. Self-aﬃnity of many natural systems that are associated with Earth, such as various
properties of rock, is quite understandable, since gravity plays a dominant role in one direction
but has very little eﬀect in the other directions, hence generating anisotropy in the structure of
rock. The interested reader is referred to Family and Vicsek (1991) for an excellent collection
of articles which describe a wide variety of rough surfaces with self-aﬃne properties. It should
be clear to the reader that, similar to exactly self-similar fractals, exactly self-aﬃne fractals are
not of great practical interest. Indeed, natural exactly self-aﬃne fractals are very rare. Instead,
self-aﬃne fractals that one encounters in practical situations are typically disordered, and thus
their self-aﬃnity is only in a statistical sense.
2.5 Characterization of Connectivity and Clustering
As already pointed out in the Introduction, the eﬀect of connectivity of microscopic elements
of a heterogeneous material on its macroscopic properties is quantiﬁed by percolation theory.
In this section, we describe the essential concepts of this theory, and outline their application to
27

not only characterizing the morphology of a material, but also estimating its eﬀective properties.
In subsequent chapters, such applications will be described in considerable details.
Percolation processes were ﬁrst developed by Flory (1941) and Stockmayer (1943) for
describing polymerization by which small branching molecules react and form large macro-
molecules. It also appeared in the work of Good (1949) on the theory of branching processes.
However, they did not use the terminology of percolation theory, and in particular Flory and
Stockmayer developed their theory of polymerization using a special lattice, namely, the Bethe
lattice, an endlessly-branching structure without any closed loops, an example of which is shown
in Figure 2.5. We will come back to their theory in Chapter 9.
In its present form, percolation theory ﬁrst appeared in the mathematics literature, and
was introduced by Broadbent and Hammersley (1957), who dealt with the problem of spread
of a hypothetical ﬂuid through a random medium. This process usually involves some random
elements. However, the underlying randomness might be of two very diﬀerent types. In one
type, the randomness is imposed by the ﬂuid, in that it is the ﬂuid that decides what path to
take in the medium. In this case the motion of the ﬂuid is described by the classical diﬀusion
process. On the other hand, the randomness may also be imposed by the medium itself; this was
the new situation that was studied by Broadbent and Hammersley (1957). They dubbed the
new phenomenon a percolation process, since they thought that the spread of a ﬂuid through
the random medium resembled ﬂow of coﬀee in a percolator!
2.5.1 Random bond and site percolation
Since percolation deals with the eﬀect of the connectivity and clustering of microscopic ele-
ments of a disordered medium, such as a heterogeneous material, on its eﬀective properties, to
make our discussions concrete we need a model of the material. Although models of microstruc-
ture of heterogeneous materials will be described in detail in Chapter 3, for now we assume that
we can represent a composite material by a network or lattice in which each bond represents
a microscopic piece of the material. In their original paper, Broadbent and Hammersley stud-
ied two diﬀerent problems. One was the bond percolation problem, in which the bonds of the
network are either randomly and independently occupied or intact with probability p, or they
are vacant or removed with probability 1 −p. For a large lattice, this assignment is equivalent
to removing a fraction 1 −p of all the bonds at random. Figure 2.6 shows a random square
28

network in which a fraction 0.4 of the bonds has been removed at random, i.e., p = 0.6. The
intact bonds represent, for example, the conducting regions of a composite material through
which electrical or thermal current ﬂows, in which case the vacant bonds represent the insulat-
ing portion of the composite. In a heterogeneous solid the conducting and insulating materials
are not necessarily distributed randomly throughout the system, but for now we ignore such
complications. In Section 2.12 we consider a more general percolation process in which the
correlations between various regions of a disordered material are not ignored.
Two sites are considered connected if there exists at least one path between them consisting
solely of occupied bonds. A set of connected sites surrounded by vacant bonds is called a
cluster. If the network is of very large extent and if p is suﬃciently small, the size of any
connected cluster is likely to be small. But if p is close to 1, the network should be entirely
connected, except for occasional small holes created by the removed bonds. Therefore, at some
well-deﬁned value of p, there should be a transition in the topological (connectivity) structure
of the network; this value is called the bond percolation threshold pcb which is the largest fraction
of occupied bonds such that for p < pcb there is no sample-spanning cluster of occupied bonds,
whereas for p > pcb a sample-spanning cluster of occupied bonds does form.
The second problem that was studied by Broadbent and Hammersley was a site percolation
process in which sites of the network are occupied with probability p and vacant with probability
1 −p. Two nearest-neighbor sites are considered connected if they are both occupied, and
connected clusters on the network are deﬁned in a manner similar to that for bond percolation.
There also exists a site percolation threshold pcs such that for p > pcs there is an inﬁnite
(sample-spanning) cluster of occupied sites, whereas for p < pcs the network is macroscopically
disconnected. Figure 2.7 shows site percolation clusters on a square network.
We point out that the percolation processes as deﬁned here are static processes; that is,
once a percolation network is generated, its conﬁguration does not change with time. Many
variants of the classical random bond or site percolation processes have been developed in order
to explain a wide variety of phenomena in disordered media. We refer the interested reader
to Stauﬀer et al. (1982) and Sahimi (1994a) for discussions of such variants of the classical
percolation problem and their applications.
2.5.2 Percolation thresholds
29

The derivation of the exact values of pcb and pcs is an extremely diﬃcult problem. In fact,
such a derivation has been possible to date only for certain lattices related to the Bethe lattice
and for a few 2D networks. For the Bethe lattice Fisher and Essam (1961) showed that
pcb = pcs =
1
Z −1
(36)
where Z is the coordination number of the lattice, i.e., the number of bonds connected to the
same site. We compile the current estimates of pcb and pcs (or their exact values if they are
known) for three common 2D lattices in Table 2.1, while the most accurate numerical values of
pcb and pcs for four common 3D lattices are listed in Table 2.2. The bond percolation thresholds
of d−dimensional lattices is well-approximated by
pcb ≃
d
Z(d −1) .
(37)
Table 2.1
Values of bond percolation threshold pcb, site percolation threshold pcs, and Bc = Zpcb for three
common two-dimensional networks.
Network
Z
pcb
Bc
pcs
Honeycomb
3
1 −2 sin(π/18) ≃0.6527∗
1.96
0.6962
Square
4
1/2∗
2
0.5927
Triangular
6
2 sin(π/18) ≃0.3473∗
2.08
1/2∗
∗Exact result
Table 2.2
Numerical estimates of bond percolation threshold pcb, site percolation threshold pcs, and Bc =
Zpcb for four common three-dimensional networks.
Network
Z
pcb
Bc
pcs
Diamond
4
0.3886
1.55
0.4299
Simple-Cubic
6
0.2488
1.49
0.3116
BCC
8
0.1795
1.44
0.2464
FCC
12
0.119
1.43
0.199
30

Also shown in these tables is the product Bc = Zpcb which, as can be seen, is an almost
invariant of percolation networks with
Bc ≃
d
d −1 .
(38)
The signiﬁcance of Bc is discussed below. Generally speaking, since in any lattice a bond has
more nearest-neighbor bonds than a site has nearest-neighbor sites, we have pcs ≥pcb. Moreover,
because lattices in higher dimensions are better connected than those in lower dimensions,
percolation thresholds decrease with increasing d. This is also clearly manifested by Eq. (24).
2.5.3 Bicontinuous materials, phase-inversion symmetry, and percolation
An important problem is whether both phases of a two-phase material can simultaneously
form sample-spanning clusters. If this is possible, then the material is called bicontinuous. If
the present and vacant bonds or sites of a lattice model of a disordered material are thought of
as constituting its two phases, then percolation theory provides a clear answer to the question
of bicontinuity of the material. Random percolation systems possess phase-inversion symmetry,
i.e., the morphology of phase 1 at volume fraction p is statistically identical to that of phase 2
with the same volume fraction. Clearly, then, no random 1D material can be bicontinuous, as
its (bond or site) percolation threshold pc is 1 (since removal of even a single bond or site breaks
the 1D system into two pieces). For d ≥2, any system possessing phase-inversion symmetry will
be bicontinuous for pc < p < 1 −pc (where pc is either the site or bond percolation threshold),
provided that pc < 1/2. Thus, all the 3D lattices listed in Table 2.2 can be bicontinuous in
either bond or site percolation. However, for 3D systems, neither pc < 1/2 nor phase-inversion
symmetry is a necessary condition for bicontinuity.
Two-dimensional materials are much more diﬃcult to be made bicontinuous.
In many
respects, randomly disordered two-phase materials correspond to site percolation systems. If
so, then since there is no 2D lattice with a site percolation threshold pcs < 1/2 (see Table 2.1),
we may conclude that no 2D randomly-disordered material can be bicontinuous. We will come
back to this issue in Section 2.10.1.
2.5.4 Computer generation of a single cluster
Random (or correlated) removal of sites or bonds, i.e., random assignment of bonds or sites
as insulating, may not be suitable for many applications, because such a procedure generates,
31

in addition to the sample-spanning cluster, isolated ﬁnite clusters as well. In some applications
only the sample-spanning cluster is of interest, or at least the process of interest begins with
a single cluster, and therefore we must ﬁrst delete all the isolated clusters from the system.
A method that was originally developed by Leath (1976) and Alexandrowicz (1980) generates
only the sample-spanning cluster for p > pc, or the largest cluster for p ≤pc. In their method
one begins with a single occupied site which is usually selected to be the center of the network.
One then identiﬁes the nearest-neighbor sites of the occupied site and considers them occupied
and adds them to the cluster if random numbers R, uniformly distributed in (0,1) and assigned
to the sites, are less than the ﬁxed value p. The perimeter (the nearest-neighbor empty sites) of
these sites are then identiﬁed and the process of occupying the sites continues in the same way.
If a selected perimeter site is not designated as occupied, then it remains unoccupied forever.
The generalization of this method for generating a cluster of occupied bonds is obvious. The
main advantage of this method is its eﬃciency which makes it possible to generate very large
clusters. Figure 2.8 presents the largest percolation cluster at the site percolation threshold
pcs = 1/2 of a 104 × 104 triangular lattice.
An important quantity in percolation systems is the number of clusters of a given size.
For example, in a composite solid which is a random mixture of conducting and insulating
materials, one may be interested in the number of insulating or conducting islands in the
material. Counting the number of such clusters in computer simulation of percolation systems
is a diﬃcult task. An algorithm due to Hoshen and Kopelman (1976), and its modiﬁcation by
Newman and Ziﬀ(2000), performs this task very eﬃciently.
2.6 Percolation Properties
In addition to the percolation thresholds pcb and pcs, the behavior of percolation systems
is quantiﬁed by several other important quantities.
Some of these quantities describe the
topology and geometry of percolation systems, while others characterize their eﬀective transport
properties. We now describe these properties.
2.6.1. Morphological properties
Some of the most important properties of percolation systems that describe their topology
and geometry are as follows. For simplicity, we use pc to denote pcs or pcb.
1. The percolation probability P(p) is the probability that, when the fraction of occupied
32

bonds is p, a given site belongs to the inﬁnite (sample-spanning) cluster of occupied
bonds.
2. The accessible fraction XA(p) is that fraction of occupied bonds (or sites) belonging to
the inﬁnite cluster.
3. The backbone fraction XB(p) is the fraction of occupied bonds in the inﬁnite cluster
which actually participate in a transport process, such as conduction, since some of the
bonds in the inﬁnite cluster are dead-end and do not carry any current, and therefore,
XA(p) ≥XB(p).
4. The correlation length ξp(p) is the typical radius of percolation clusters for p < pc, and the
typical radius of the “holes” above pc which are generated by the vacant bonds or sites.
For p > pc, ξp is the length scale over which the system is macroscopically homogeneous.
Thus, in any Monte Carlo simulation of a percolation model, the linear size L of the
network must be larger than ξp in order for the results to be independent of L.
5. The average number of clusters of size s (per lattice site) ns(p) is an important quantity in
many of the problems of interest here because it corresponds to, for example, the number
of conducting or insulating islands of a given size in a conductor-insulator composite solid.
Figure 2.9 shows the typical p−dependence of some of these quantities in site percolation
on the simple-cubic lattice.
6. The probability that two sites, one at the origin and another one at a distance r, are
both occupied and belong to the same cluster of occupied sites, is p2P2(r), where P2(r)
is called the pair-connectedness function.
7. The mean cluster size S (also called the site-averaged cluster number) is the average
number of sites in the cluster that contains a randomly-selected site, and is given by,
S =

s s2ns(p)

s sns(p) .
(39)
Essam (1972) showed that S and the pair-connectedness function P2(r) are related through
a simple relation:
S = 1 + p

r
P2(r) .
(40)
33

2.6.2 Transport properties
Because a major application of percolation theory has been modelling of transport in disor-
dered materials, and in particular composite solids, we must also consider the eﬀective transport
properties of percolation system, namely, their conductivity, diﬀusivity, elastic moduli, and di-
electric constant. We ﬁrst consider the conductivity of a two-phase composite material modelled
as a two-component network in which each (randomly-selected) bond has a conductance g1 with
probability p or g2 with probability q = 1 −p. It is straightforward to show that the eﬀective
electrical conductivity ge (or the thermal conductivity ke) of the network is a homogeneous
function and takes on the following form,
ge(p, g1, g2) = g1F(p, h) ,
(41)
where h = g2/g1. Due to the assumption of randomness of the material’s morphology, ge is
invariant under the interchange of g1 and g2 (phase-inversion symmetry), and therefore we must
have
ge(p, g1, g2) = ge(q, g2, g1) ,
and F(p, h) = hF(q, 1/h) .
(42)
The limit in which g2 = 0 and g1 is ﬁnite corresponds to a conductor-insulator mixture. In
this case, as p →pc, more and more bonds are insulating, the conduction paths become
very tortuous, and therefore ge decreases; at pc one has ge(pc) = 0, since no sample-spanning
conduction path exists any more. More generally, the conductance g1 can be selected from
a statistical distribution, which is in fact the case in most practical systems, such as porous
materials and composite solids.
The limit in which g1 = ∞and g2 is ﬁnite a represents a conductor-superconductor mixture.
All quantum-mechanical aspects of real superconductors are ignored in this deﬁnition, and we
are concerned only with the eﬀect of the local connectivity of the material on this conductivity.
It is clear that the eﬀective conductivity ge of this system is dominated by the superconducting
bonds. If p < pc, then a sample-spanning cluster of the superconducting bonds does not exist,
and ge is ﬁnite. As p →p−
c , the eﬀective conductivity ge increases until a sample-spanning
cluster of the superconducting bonds is formed for the ﬁrst time at p = pc, where ge diverges.
The practical signiﬁcance of superconducting percolation networks will be discussed in Chapters
5, 6, and 9 (see also Chapter 3 of Volume II). Note that both limits correspond to h = 0, and
therefore the point h = 0 at p = pc is particularly important.
34

In a similar manner, the elastic moduli of a two-phase composite solid, modelled by a
percolation network, are deﬁned. Consider a two-component network in which each bond is an
elastic element (a spring or beam) which has an elastic constant conductance e1 with probability
p or e2 with probability q = 1 −p. The limit in which e2 = 0 and e1 is ﬁnite corresponds to
composites of rigid materials and holes (for example, porous solids).
In such networks, as
p →pc, more bonds have no rigidity, the paths for transmission of stress or elastic forces
become very tortuous, and therefore the eﬀective elastic moduli Ee (Young’s, bulk, or shear
moduli) decrease; at pc one has Ee(pc) = 0. In general, the elastic constant e1 can be selected
from a statistical distribution.
The limit in which e1 = ∞and e2 is ﬁnite represents mixtures of rigid-superrigid materials.
In this case the eﬀective elastic moduli Ee of the system are dominated by the superrigid bonds.
If p < pc, then a sample-spanning cluster of the superrigid bonds cannot form, and Ee is ﬁnite.
As p →p−
c , the eﬀective elastic moduli increase until the percolation threshold pc of the rigid
phase is reached at which a sample-spanning cluster of the superrigid bonds is formed for the
ﬁrst time, and the eﬀective elastic moduli diverge. The signiﬁcance of superrigid percolation
networks will be discussed in Chapters 8 and 9.
Similarly, the eﬀective dielectric constant ϵe of a two-phase composite (and insulating)
material, modelled by a percolation network, may be deﬁned and in fact, as shown in Chapters
5 and 6, ϵe is closely related to the conductor-superconductor model described above. Finally,
the eﬀective diﬀusivity De of a porous material can also be deﬁned in a similar manner.
2.6.3 The structure of the sample-spanning cluster
The sample-spanning cluster, through which transport of current or stress takes place, can
be divided into two parts: The dead-end part that carries no current or stress, and the backbone
which is the multiply-connected part of the cluster deﬁned above. Near pc the bonds in the
backbone are also divided into two groups: Those that are in the blobs which are multiply
connected and make the transport paths very tortuous, and the red bonds which are those that,
if cut, would split the backbone into two parts. Such bonds are called red because in transport of
heat or electrical currents they carry the largest current ﬂuxes and therefore, in analogy with a
real network, become very hot and hence red. Figure 2.10 shows a sample-spanning percolation
cluster and its backbone on the square network. Currently, the most eﬃcient algorithm for
identifying the backbone of a percolation network is due to Knackstedt et al. (2000).
35

2.7 Universal Scaling Properties of Percolation
One of the most important characteristics of percolation systems is their universal proper-
ties. The behavior of many percolation quantities near pc is insensitive to the microstructure
(for example, the coordination number) of the network, and to whether the percolation process
is a site or a bond problem. The quantitative statement of this universality is that many per-
colation properties follow power laws near pc, and the critical exponents that characterize such
power laws are universal and depend only on the Euclidean dimensionality d of the system.
We ﬁrst describe the universal properties of the quantities that characterize the morphology of
percolation systems, and then present and discuss those of transport properties.
2.7.1 Morphological properties
In general, the following power laws hold near pc,
P(p)
∼
(p −pc)β ,
(43)
XA(p)
∼
(p −pc)β ,
(44)
XB(p)
∼
(p −pc)βbb ,
(45)
ξp(p)
∼
|p −pc|−ν ,
(46)
S(p)
∼
|p −pc|−γ ,
(47)
P2(r) ∼
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
r2−d−η,
p = pc ,
exp(−r/ξp),
otherwise ,
(48)
where r = |r|. For large clusters near pc, the cluster size distribution ns(p) is described by the
following scaling law,
ns ∼s−τf[(p −pc)sσ] ,
(49)
where τ and σ are two more universal critical exponents, and f(x) is a scaling function such
that f(0) is not singular.
The morphological exponents deﬁned above are not all independent. For example, one has,
τ = 2 + βσ, νd = β + 1/σ = 2β + γ, and γ = (2 −η)ν. In fact, knowledge of ν and another
exponent is suﬃcient for determining all of the above percolation exponents.
For random
percolation models, or for correlated percolation in which the correlations are short-ranged, all
the above critical exponents (as well as the fractal dimensions described below) are completely
universal.
36

2.7.2 Transport properties
Similar power laws are also followed by the transport properties of percolation composites.
In particular,
ge(p)
∼
(p −pc)µ ,
conductor-insulator composites
(50)
ge(p)
∼
(pc −p)−s ,
conductor-superconductor composites
(51)
Ee(p)
∼
(p −pc)f ,
rigid-soft composites
(52)
Ee(p)
∼
(pc −p)−χ ,
rigid-superrigid composites .
(53)
The power law that characterizes the behavior of the eﬀective diﬀusivity De(p) near pc is derived
from that of ge(p). According to Einstein’s relation, ge ∼ρDe, where ρ is the density of the
carriers. Although a diﬀusing species can move on all the clusters, above pc only diﬀusion
on the sample-spanning cluster contributes signiﬁcantly to De, so that ρ ∼XA(p). Hence,
ge(p) ∼XA(p)De(p), and therefore
De(p) ∼(p −pc)µ−β .
(54)
For length scales L < ξp, the resistance R between two end points of a box of linear size L
scales with L as R ∼L
˜ζ. It is not diﬃcult to show that
µ = (d −2)ν + ζ ,
(55)
where, ζ = ˜ζν. It has been shown (Straley, 1977b) that in 2D, µ = s (see also Chapters 4 and
5).
Equations (36) and (37) can be uniﬁed by using the two-component resistor network de-
scribed above. In the critical region, i.e., the region near pc, where both |p −pc| and h = g2/g1
are small, the eﬀective conductivity ge follows the following scaling law (Efros and Shklovskii,
1976; Straley, 1976)
ge ∼g1|p −pc|µΦ±(h|p −pc|−µ−s) .
(56)
where Φ+ and Φ−are two homogeneous functions corresponding, respectively, to the regions
above and below pc, and are, similar to µ and s, universal. For any ﬁxed and non-zero h, ge
has a smooth dependence on p −pc. This becomes clearer if we rewrite Eq. (42) as
ge ∼g1hµ/(µ+s)Ψ

|p −pc|h−1/(µ+s)
,
(57)
37

where Ψ(x) = xµΦ+(x−µ−s) = (−x)µΦ−[(−x)−µ−s]. Since the function Ψ(x) is universal, the
implication of Eq. (43) is that if one plots ge/[g1hµ/(µ+s)] versus |p−pc|h−1/(µ+s) for all networks
(or randomly-disordered materials) which have the same Euclidean dimensionality, all the re-
sults (or measurements) should collapse onto a single universal curve. This provides a powerful
tool for estimating the conductivity of a composite for any value of h given the conductivities
for two other values of h (so that the universal curve can be constructed). Somewhat similar,
but more complex, scaling equations can be developed for the elastic moduli, dielectric con-
stant and other properties of percolation composites, but we defer their description to future
chapters. The implied prefactors in all the above power laws depend on the type of lattice and
are not universal.
No exact relation is known between the transport and morphological exponents. This is
perhaps because the transport exponents describe dynamical properties of percolation systems,
whereas the morphological exponents describe the static properties, and in general there is no
reason to expect a direct relation between the two.
The exponents µ, s, f and χ are universal if two conditions are satisﬁed. (1) There should
not be any long-range correlations in the system. (2) The distribution ψ(x) of the conductance
or elastic constant of the bonds should be such that (Kogut and Straley, 1979; Straley, 1982;
Sahimi et al., 1983a)
ψ−1 =
 ∞
0
1
xψ(x)dx < ∞.
(58)
Some correlated or continuous systems violate one or both of these conditions. Later in this
chapter, we will discuss the implications of this violation. In Table 2.3 the current estimates of
the critical exponents in 2D and 3D are compiled.
Table 2.3
Values of the critical exponents and fractal dimensions of percolation. The geometrical ex-
ponents and the fractal dimension Df for 2D systems, as well as all the quantities for Bethe
lattices, are exact. Values of µ and s for 2D and 3d systems represent the exponents for dis-
ordered composites with a conductance distribution that does not violate inequality (44). The
elasticity exponents f and χ are described and tabulated in Chapter 8.
38

Exponent
d = 2
d = 3
Bethe Lattice
β
5/36
0.41
1
βB
0.48
1.05
2
τ
187/91
2.18
5/2
σ
36/91
0.45
1/2
ν
4/3
0.88
1/2
η
5/24
-0.068
0
Df
91/48
2.53
4
Dbb
1.64
1.87
2
Dr
3/4
1.36
2
Dmin
1.13
1.34
2
µ
1.3
2.0
3
s
1.3
0.73
0
2.7.3 Practical signiﬁcance of the critical exponents
If two physical phenomena in heterogeneous materials that contain percolation disorder are
described by two diﬀerent sets of critical exponents, then the physical laws governing the two
phenomena must be fundamentally diﬀerent. Thus, critical exponents help one to distinguish
between diﬀerent classes of problems and the physical laws that govern them. Moreover, since
the numerical values of the percolation properties are not universal and vary from one system to
another, but the scaling and power laws that they follow near pc are universal and do not depend
on the details of the system, estimates of the critical exponents for a certain phenomenon are
used for establishing the relevance of a particular percolation model to that phenomenon in
disordered materials. Finally, in many conductor-insulator composite materials, power laws
such as (36), (37), (42), and (43) have been found to be valid over a wide range of the volume
fraction of the conducting component of the composite, and therefore such power laws are very
useful for correlating the data and interpreting them in terms of a well-understood theory, i.e.,
percolation theory.
2.8 Scale-Dependent Properties of Percolation Composites
As mentioned above, the correlation length ξp has the physical signiﬁcance that for length
scales L > ξp the percolation system is macroscopically homogeneous. However, for L < ξp the
39

system is not homogeneous and its macroscopic properties do depend on L. In this regime, the
sample-spanning cluster is statistically self-similar at all length scales less than ξp, and its mass
M (the total number of occupied bonds or sites that it contains) scales with L as
M ∝LDf ,
L < ξp
(59)
where Df is the fractal dimension of the cluster.
For L > ξp one has, M ∝Ld and thus
Df = d, where d is the Euclidean dimension of the system. The crossover between the fractal
and Euclidean regimes takes place at L ≃ξp. Thus, we can combine the two regimes and write
down a uniﬁed scaling equation for M(L, ξp):
M(L, ξp) = LDfh(L/ξp) ,
(60)
where h(x) is a scaling function. For L ≫ξp (x ≫1) we expect to have M ∼Ld, and hence
h(x) ∼xDf−d, whereas for x ≪1 we must have h(x) ≃constant. The fractal dimension Df of
the sample-spanning percolation cluster is related to the percolation exponents deﬁned above.
The mass M of the cluster is proportional to XA(p)ξd
p, since only a fraction XA(p) of all the
occupied bonds or sites are in the cluster. Therefore, we must have M ∝ξd−β/ν
p
. For L < ξp we
must replace ξp with L, since in this regime L is the dominant (and the only relevant) length
scale of the system. Thus, M ∝Ld−β/ν, which, when compared with Eq. (45), yields
Df = d −β/ν ,
(61)
so that Df(d = 2) = 91/48 ≃1.9 and Df(d = 3) ≃2.53. Similarly, for L < ξp the backbone is
also a fractal object and its fractal dimension Dbb is given by
Dbb = d −βbb/ν .
(62)
Note that at p = pc the correlation length is divergent, so that at this point the sample-spanning
cluster and its backbone are fractal objects at any length scale.
The number Mr of the red bonds of the backbone that are in a box of linear size L < ξp
scales with L as Mr ∝LDr, where Dr is the fractal dimension of the set of the red bonds. It
has been shown (Coniglio, 1981) that
Dr = ν−1 .
(63)
40

Another important concept is the minimum or chemical path between two points of a percola-
tion cluster, which is the shortest path between the two points. For L < ξp, the length Lmin of
the path scales with L as
Lmin ∼LDmin ,
(64)
so that Dmin is the fractal dimension of the minimal path.
If L < ξp, i.e., if the percolation system is in the fractal regime, all the percolation properties
become scale dependent. Since |p −pc| ∼ξ−1/ν
p
, one can rewrite all the above power laws in
terms of ξp. For example, Eq. (29) is rewritten as, P(p) ∼ξ−β/ν
p
. For L < ξp one replaces ξp by
L, since in this regime L is the dominant length scale in the system (for L > ξp the correlation
length ξp is the dominant length scale), and therefore
P(L)
∼
L−β/ν ,
(65)
XA(L)
∼
L−β/ν ,
(66)
XB(L)
∼
L−βbb/ν ,
(67)
ge(L)
∼
L−µ/ν , conductor-insulator composites
(68)
ge(L)
∼
Ls/ν , conductor-superconductor composites
(69)
Ee(L)
∼
L−f/ν , rigid-soft composites
(70)
Ee(L)
∼
Lχ/ν , rigid-superrigid composites
(71)
De(L)
∼
L−θ ,
(72)
where θ = (µ −β)/ν. Thus, scale-dependent properties are a signature of a fractal morphology.
Similar to the mass of the sample-spanning cluster for which we could write down scaling
Eq. (46), we can also write down scaling equations for lenght-scale dependence of all other
percolation properties. For example, Eqs. (36) and (54) are combined to yield
ge(L, ξp) = ξ−µ/ν
p
G(L/ξp) ,
(73)
where G(x) is a (universal) scaling function. Once it is established that a material possesses a
fractal morphology, many classical laws of physics must be signiﬁcantly modiﬁed. For example,
Fick’s law of diﬀusion with a constant diﬀusivity can no longer describe diﬀusion processes in
fractal materials, a subject that will be described and discussed in Chapter 6.
2.9 Finite-Size Scaling
41

So far we have described percolation in disordered materials that are of inﬁnite extent.
However, percolation in ﬁnite systems deserves discussion since, both in practical applications
and in computer simulations, one usually deals with a system of a ﬁnite extent. In such systems,
as pc is approached ξp eventually exceeds the linear size L of the material, in which case, as
discussed above, L becomes the dominant length scale of the system. Fisher (1971) developed
a theory for the scaling properties of a ﬁnite system near a critical point, such as a percolation
threshold, which is usually called ﬁnite-size scaling. According to Fisher’s theory, the variation
of any property PL of a system of linear size L is written as
PL ∼L−ζf(u)
(74)
with u = L1/ν(p−pc) ∼(L/ξp)1/ν, where f(u) is a non-singular function. If, in the limit L →∞,
P∞follows a power law such as, P∞∼(p −pc)δ, then one must have ζ = δ/ν. Therefore, the
variations with L of PL(p) in a ﬁnite network at pc of the inﬁnite network can be used to obtain
information about the quantities of interest for an inﬁnite network near pc.
Finite-size scaling theory has been used successfully for obtaining accurate estimates of the
critical exponents, and even the percolation thresholds, from simulation of ﬁnite systems. The
ﬁnite size of a network causes a shift in its percolation threshold (Levinshtein et al., 1976;
Reynolds et al., 1980):
pc −pc(L) ∼L−1/ν .
(75)
In this equation pc is the percolation threshold of the inﬁnite system, and pc(L) is an eﬀective
percolation threshold for a ﬁnite system of linear dimension L. However, we should point out
that Eqs. (60) and (61) are valid for very large network size L, whereas in practice very large
systems cannot easily be simulated. To remedy this situation, Eq. (60) is modiﬁed to
PL ∼L−ζ[a1 + a2h1(L) + a2h2(L) + · · ·] ,
(76)
where a1, a2 and a3 are three ﬁtting parameters, and h1 and h2 are called the correction-to-
scaling functions. These functions are particularly important when small and moderate system
size L are used in the simulations. For transport properties, h1 = (ln L)−1 and h2 = L−1 often
provide accurate estimates of ζ (Sahimi and Arbabi, 1991). Equation (62) provides us with a
means of estimating a critical exponent: Calculate PL at p = pc for several system sizes L and
ﬁt the results to Eq. (62) to estimate ζ and thus δ = ζν.
42

2.10 Percolation in Random Networks and Continua
Although percolation in regular networks - those in which the coordination number Z is
the same everywhere - has been extensively invoked for investigating transport in disordered
materials, percolation in continua and in topologically-random networks - those in which the
coordination number varies from site to site - are of great interest, since in most practical
situations one must deal with such irregular and continuous systems. For example, continuum
percolation is directly applicable to characterization and modelling of the morphology and
eﬀective transport properties of microemulsions (see Chapter 6), polymer blends (see Chapter
9), sintered materials (see Chapter 5), sol-gel transitions (see Chapter 9) and many more,
although discrete percolation models that take into account the ﬁne details of the morphology
of such materials are equally applicable, and in fact are easier to use.
There are at least three ways of realizing a percolating continuum. In the ﬁrst method, one
inserts a random (or correlated) distribution of inclusions, such as circles, spheres or ellipses, in
an otherwise uniform background. The correlations arise when one imposes certain constraints
on the system. For example, if the particles are not allowed to overlap, or if the extent of their
penetrability or overlap is ﬁxed, then the resulting morphology contains correlations the extent
of which depends on the type of the constraints imosed. In such models percolation is deﬁned
either as the formation of a sample-spanning cluster of the channels between the inclusions,
or as the formation of a sample-spanning cluster of touching or overlapping inclusions. In the
second method, the percolating composite is generated by tessellating the space into regular or
random polyhedra (Winterfeld et al., 1981). A (volume) fraction of the polygons or polyhedra
are designated as one phase of the material, while the rest constitutes the second phase, with
each phase having its own distinct eﬀective properties. Figure 2.11 presents an example of
such a model. The characterization of the microstructure of these models, and how they are
utilized for modelling heterogeneous materials, will be described in Chapter 3. Finally, the third
method consists of constructing a distribution of conducting sticks of a given aspect ratio, or
plates of a given extent, inserted in a uniform background. Such models have been proposed
for representing ﬁbrous materials. An example is shown in Figure 2.12.
2.10.1 Percolation thresholds: Materials with very low or high thresholds
There are several techniques by which one can estimate the percolation threshold of a con-
43

tinuum percolation system. Somewhat similar to lattice percolation, the percolation thresholds
of continuum d−dimensional systems with d ≥2 are not known exactly, except in one special
case. The exceptions are for certain 2D symmetric-cell models. Two-phase symmetric-cell mod-
els are constructed by partitioning space into cells of arbitrary shapes and sizes, with the cells
being randomly designated as phases 1 and 2 with probabilities φ1 and φ2. A simple example
is a 2D system which is tessellated into square cells, where each cell belongs either to phase
1 or phase 2 with probabilities φ1 and φ2. The Voronoi tessellation described above provides
another example of such models. We will come back to these models in Chapter 3 where we
consider them as models of composite materials. Unlike distributions of particles in a matrix,
the symmetric-cell models possess phase-inversion symmetry deﬁned in Section 2.5.3.
It is generally believed that for any 2D symmetric-cell model in which the the centers of the
cells are the sites of a fully triangulated lattice one has, φ1c = φ2c = 1/2, although we are not
aware of any rigorous proof of this prediction. In this case, the continuum percolation threshold
and the site percolation threshold of the lattice are identical. Examples include hexagonal and
Voronoi tessellations, both of which have site percolation thresholds of 1/2.
Suppose that particles that are distributed in a uniform matrix constitute phase 2 of a
continuum percolation model of a composite. Pike and Seager (1974) and Haan and Zwanzig
(1977) were among the ﬁrst to obtain accurate estimates of the percolation threshold φ2c for
randomly-distributed overlapping disks and spheres. The most accurate estimate of φ2c for
2D (disk) systems that is currently available is due to Quintanilla et al. (2000) who reported
that φ2c ≃0.67637 ± 0.00005, while for 3D (spherical particles) systems, Rintoul and Torquato
(1997) provided the estimate, φ2c ≃0.2895±0.00005. The corresponding values for overlapping
oriented squares and cubes are (Pike and Seager, 1974; Haan and Zwanzig, 1977), φ2c ≃
0.67 ± 0.01 and 0.28 ± 0.01, respectively. In these models, all the particles had the same size.
In general, if the paritcles do not all have the same size, then φ2c depends continuously on
the size distribution of the particles. Numerical simulations indicate (see, for example, Pike
and Seager, 1974, Lorenz et al., 1993), however, that φ2c depends only weakly on the particle
size distribution, although certain pathological exceptions to this general result can also be
constructed. Meester et al. (1994) conjectured that the monodisperse distribution minimizes
the percolation threshold.
One may prepare materials that have exceedingly small percolation thresholds. A well-
44

known example is an aerogel, an ultra-light material which is formed by a sort of a gelation
process (see Chapter 9 for description and discussion of gelation).
Aerogels have a fractal
structure and the volume fraction of solid materials in them is typically 0.5%, indicating that the
percolation threshold of the solid phase is even smaller than 0.5%. In Chapter 9 we will describe
more some fundamental properties of aerogels and their characterization and modelling. One
may also prepare two-phase composite materials by compacting binary mixtures of particles of
widely disparate sizes in such a way that the smaller particles form a sample-spanning cluster
that resides essentially on the surfaces of the larger particles (see, for example, Malliaris and
Turner, 1971; Kusy, 1977).
In the opposite limit, one may also prepare composite materials with percolation thresholds
that approach unity. This can be achieved if the particle size distribution is very broad, and
each particle possesses a “soft” repulsive interparticle potential with a range which is larger
than the size of the particle. Unlike monodisperse particles, polydispersivity causes the particles
to ﬁll the space, but the repulsive interactions prevent formation of a sample-spanning cluster
until the system is essentially completely ﬁlled by the particles. An example of this type of
materials is colloidal dispersions.
One of the most important discoveries for continuum percolation is (Scher and Zallen, 1970)
that a critical occupied volume fraction φc, which is deﬁned as
φ2c = pcsfl ,
(77)
where fl is the ﬁlling factor of a lattice when each site of the lattice is occupied by a sphere in
such a way that two nearest-neighbor impermeable spheres touch one another at the midpoint,
appears to be an almost invariant of the system with a value of about 0.17 for 3D systems.
Shante and Kirkpatrick (1971) generalized this idea to permeable spheres and showed that the
average number Bc of bonds per sites at pc is related to φc by
φ2c = 1 −exp(−1
8Bc) ,
(78)
and that for continuous systems, Bc →pcsZ, as Z becomes large. It is clear from Table 2.3 and
Eq. (24) that in 3D, Bc ≃1.5. It has been shown (see, for example, Balberg and Binenbaum,
1985, and references therein) that the morphological exponents, deﬁned by Eqs. (29)-(35), are
equal for lattice and continuous systems.
45

Similar to lattice systems described earlier, one may also speak of two-phase continuum com-
posites that are bicontinuous. Hence, extending the criteria of bicontinuity for lattice systems,
described above, to continuum systems, we say that a d−dimensional two-phase continuum
system that possesses phase-inversion symmetry is bicontinuous for φ2c < φ2 < 1 −φ2c for
d ≥2.
However, these are not necessary conditions.For example, a bicontinuous structure
without phase-inversion symmetry but with φ2c < 1/2 is a 3D distribution of identical over-
lapping spheres, where for 0.29 < φ2 < 0.97 both the particle phase and the space between
the particles are percolating. An example of a bicontinuous composite without phase-inversion
symmetry and with φ2c is a close-packed face-centered-cubic lattice. For example, at the per-
colation threshold of the particle (sphere) phase, φ2c = π/
√
18, the space between the particles
also percolates.
2.10.2 The Ornstein-Zernike formulation
Continuum percolation can be described by an Ornstein-Zernike (OZ) formulation.
In
words, the OZ formulation states that the total correlation between two particles at r1 and
r2 can be written as the sum of two contributions: (1) A direct eﬀect of the paricle at r1 on
the particle at r2, which is generally short-ranged and is characterized by a type of correlation
function D2(r), and (2) an indirect eﬀect in which a particle at r1 aﬀects a particle at r3, which
in turn aﬀects a particle at r2, directly or indirectly through other particles.
The indirect
eﬀect is weighted by the density and averaged over all possible r3. It should be clear to the
reader that the indirect eﬀect has a longer range than D2(r). We do not give the details of
the OZ formulation (see Section 3.4.1.4 for more details), but note that Coniglio et al. (1977)
utilized this formulation to derive the following equation for the pair-connectedness function
P2(r) deﬁned above:
P2(r) = D2(r) + ρD2(r) ⊗P2(r) ,
(79)
where D2(r) is the direct connectedness function [D2(r) is in fact the analogue of the correlation
function C(r) deﬁned in Section 2.3.1], ρ is the number density of the particles, and ⊗denotes
a convolution integral. Taking the Fourier transform of both sides of Eq. (65) yields
˜P2(ω) =
˜D2(ω)
1 −ρ ˜D2(ω) .
(80)
46

On the other hand, the mean cluster size is related to P2(r) through the relation
S = 1 + ρ

P2(r)dr
(81)
which is in fact the continuum analogue of Eq. (26). Equations (65)-(67) are the basis for
studying continuum percolation system using a variety of models and approximations.
Note that Eq. (67) implies that
S = 1 + ρ ˜P2(0) = [1 −ρ ˜D2(0)]−1 .
(82)
Since at the percolation threshold the mean cluster size S diverges, Eq. (68) immediately yields
an estimate for the critical value ρc of the number density ρ:
ρc = [ ˜D2(0)]−1 =

D2(r)dr
−1
.
(83)
In the OZ formulation, the average coordination number ⟨Z⟩of the system is given by
⟨Z⟩= ρΩs(d)
 D
0
rd−1P2(r)dr ,
(84)
where Ωs(d) is the total solid angle contained in a d−dimensional sphere, Ωs(d) = 2πd/2/Γ(d/2),
with Γ being the gamma function, and D is the diameter of the (possibly overlapping) spheres.
2.11 Diﬀerences between Lattice and Continuum Percolation
Transport in percolating continua can be quite diﬀerent from that in percolation networks.
Consider, for example, a model in which one inserts at random circular or spherical inclusions in
an otherwise homogeneous medium. For the obvious reason, this is called the Swiss-cheese model
(see Figure 2.13). If transport takes place through the matrix (through the channels between
the non-overlapping spheres), then the problem is mapped onto an equivalent problem on the
edges of the Voronoi polygons or polyhedra (Kerstein, 1983). Such a network has an exact
coordination number of 4 in 3D. To generate a Voronoi tessellation of space one distributes
Poisson (random) points in the space, each of which is the basis for a Voronoi polygon or
polyhedron, which is that part of the space that is closer to its Poisson point than to any
other Poisson point. A Voronoi network is constructed by connecting to each other the Poisson
points in the neighboring polygons or polyhedra (see Figure 2.11). One may also construct the
inverted Swiss-cheese model in which the roles of the two phases in the Swiss-cheese model are
47

switched, i.e., transport takes place through the circular or spherical inclusions, in which case
the transport problem can be mapped onto an equivalent one in the Voronoi network. In both
models it is assumed that all the inclusions have the same size. van der Marck (1996) proposed
a more general method for mapping transport in continua that consists of a distribution of
inclusions of various sizes in a uniform background, onto an equivalent problem in an equivalent
network model. We should, however, point out that if one utilizes the equivalent network of a
given continuum, one can no longer assign the transport properties of the network’s bonds from
an arbitrary distribution, because there is a natural distribution of the conductances (or other
transport properties) of the transport channels in the continuum which must be constructed
based on the shapes and sizes that the channels take on (see below).
The Voronoi network was utilized by Jerauld et al. (1984a,b) and Sahimi and Tostsis (1997)
as a prototype of irregular networks to study transport in disordered composites. The average
coordination number of the Voronoi network is about 6 and 15.5 in 2D and 3D, respectively.
Jerauld et al. (1984a,b) showed that the geometrical critical exponents of percolation in such
random networks are the same as those for regular networks. Moreover, they established that
as long as the average coordination number of a regular network and a topologically-random
one (for example, the 2D Voronoi and triangular networks) are about the same, many transport
properties of the two systems are, for all practical purposes, identical.
However, certain continuous percolation models violate the condition expressed by inequality
(44) for the universality of the transport exponents (Halperin et al., 1985; Feng et al., 1987),
in which case the transport exponents for the continuous models are not necessarily the same
as those in random networks, and thus they must be estimated separately. The diﬀerences
between the critical exponents of lattice and continuum percolation are caused by the natural
distributions of the transport properties that give rise to new scaling laws which cannot be
predicted by the network models, unless the same natural distributions are also utilized in the
network models as well.
Consider, as an example, the Swiss-cheese model.
Figure 2.14 shows a typical channel
between two spheres (disks in 2D) of radius a. We imagine that a rectangular strip of width
δ is formed, in which case the length 2l of the strip is of the order of
√
δa. This is due to
the fact that the length l forms the base of a right-angled triangle with the apex at the center
of a sphere, the sphere’s center being the adjacent site, and the hypotenuse being of length
48

a + δ, so that a2 + l2 = (a + δ)2, hence yielding l ∼
√
δa. The conductivity g of any such
bond in d dimensions is then, g ∼δd−1/l ∼δd−3/2/
√
l. The distribution function ψ(g) of such
conductivities is then ﬁnite as δ →δmin. The node-link model described above can then be
utilized for estimating the eﬀective conductivity of such a model (Halperin et al., 1985), which
is then given by
ge ∼ξ−(d−1)
p
ξpΣL ∼ξ2−d
p
ΣL ,
(85)
where
Σ−1
L =

i
g−1
i
∼
 ∞
δmin
ψ(g)g−xdg ,
(86)
so that the eﬀective conductivity depends on the structure of ψ(g).
Based on such considerations, Halperin et al. (1985) and Feng et al. (1987) showed that the
critical exponents that characterize the power laws for the transport properties of the Swiss-
cheese and the inverted Swiss-cheese models near their percolation thresholds can be very
diﬀerent from those of a random network. In particular, if µsc and µisc denote, respectively, the
critical exponents of the conductivity of the Swiss-cheese and the inverted Swiss-cheese models,
then in 2D, µsc = µisc = µ, while in 3D, µisc = µ, and
µsc ≃µ + 1/2 .
(87)
Moreover, the critical exponent fsc of the elastic moduli of the Swiss-cheese model in related
to that of the discrete models f through
fsc ≃f + 3/2 ,
(88)
in 2D, whereas in 3D
fsc ≃f + 5/2 ,
(89)
so that the elastic moduli are much more strongly aﬀected by the continuous structure of the
system. Equations (73)-(75) imply that near pc the conductivity and elastic moduli curves
of the Swiss-cheese model are much ﬂatter than those of lattice systems. As for the inverted
Swiss-cheese model, one has, µisc = µ, in both 2D and 3D, while fisc = f in 2D, whereas in 3D
fisc ≃f + 1/2 .
(90)
It was also established by Straley (1982), Halperin et al.
(1985), and Feng et al.
(1987)
that if the conductance distribution of a random continuum is of power-law form, ψ(g) =
49

(1 −p)δ(g) + p(1 −α)g−α, where 0 ≤α ≤1, then the conductivity critical exponent µ(α) of
the continuum is not universal, but is given by
µl(α) = 1 + (d −2)ν +
α
1 −α ≤µ(α) ≤µu(α) = µ +
1
1 −α .
(91)
Such power-law conductance distributions are actually very common among disordered con-
tinua. For example, for the Swiss-cheese models in d-dimensions one has, α = (2d−5)/(2d−3).
In 2D, α = −1, and the conductance distribution is not singular at g = 0, and therefore µsc = µ.
In 3D, α = 1/3, and the conductance distribution is singular at g = 0, hence giving rise to Eq.
(73). Moreover, Straley (1982) argued that
µ(α) = min[µ, µl(α)].
(92)
These results have not only been conﬁrmed by computer simulations, but have also received
experimental veriﬁcation (see, for example, Garfunkel and Wiessman, 1985; Koch et al., 1985;
Chen and Chou, 1985; Rudman et al., 1986), some of which will be discussed in later in this
book. A more detailed discussion of continuum percolation is given by Balberg (1987).
2.12 Correlated Percolation
In the percolation phenomena described so far, no correlations between various segments
of the system were assumed. However, disorder in many important heterogeneous materials is
not completely random, as there usually are correlations with a range that may be ﬁnite but
large. For example, in packing of solid particles, the microstructure of which will be described
in Chapter 3, there are short-range correlations. The universal scaling properties of percolation
systems with ﬁnite-range correlations are the same as those of random percolation, if the length
scale of interest is larger than the correlation length. Moreover, if the correlation function C(r)
decays as r−d or faster, where d is the Euclidean dimensionality of the system, then the scaling
properties of the system are identical with those of random percolation. This is not totally
unexpected because even in random percolation, as p decreases toward pc, correlations start to
build up (recall that, as discussed above, for length scales L < ξp the sample-spanning cluster
is a fractal object), and hence the introduction of any type of correlations with a range shorter
than ξp cannot change its scaling properties. In many other cases, e.g., in some disordered
elastic materials, there are long-range correlations (see Chapter 8 and 9). We now describe
50

and discuss a few models of correlated percolation and point out their relevance to the physical
phenomena of interest to us in this book.
2.12.1 Short-range correlations
The earliest correlated percolation model that we are aware of is a correlated bond percola-
tion mode due to Kirkpatrick (1973). In his model, which was intended for hopping conduction
in disordered solids (see Chapters 5 and 6), to each site of a lattice is assigned a random number
si, uniformly distributed between -1 and +1. Each bone ij is assigned a number bij which is
calculated by
bij = 1
2(|si| + |sj| + |si −sj|) ,
(93)
and all bonds with bij > ϵ are removed, where ϵ is some selected value. Thus, a bond remains
intact only if bij is suﬃciently small, implying that |si| and |sj| must both be small. Therefore,
if a bond is present or conducting, its neighbors are also likely to be conducting, and hence
the conducting bonds are clustered together. Many other percolation models with short-range
correlations have been developed, most of which are described elsewhere (Sahimi, 1998).
Positive correlations (that is, correlations that cluster the conducting bonds together, as
opposed to negative correlations that make it more likely that a conducting bond is next to an
insulating one, and vice versa), whether short- or long-ranged, usually reduce the percolation
threshold of the system. For example, in Kirkpatrick’s model, pcb ≃0.1 for the simple-cubic
lattice, sharply lower than pcb ≃0.249 for random bond percolation (see Table 2.2). This is
due to the clustering of the conducting bonds caused by the positive correlations, as a result
of which formation of sample-spanning transport paths is possible even at low values of the
fraction of the conducting phase. On the other hand, Bug et al. (1985) presented evidence
based on computer simulations that indicate that positive correlations may sometimes increase
the percolation threshold and at other times decrease it, depending on the distance between
two occupied sites that are considered connected, the dimensionality of the system, and its
temperature.
2.12.2 Long-range correlations
Interesting percolation models with long-range correlations, in which the correlations decay
with the distance between 2 points on the sample-spanning percolation cluster, were developed
by Weinrib (1984; see also Weinrib and Halperin, 1983) and Prakash et al. (1992). In the latter
51

case, the correlation function C(r) in a d−dimensional system was assumed to be given by
C(r) ∼r−(d−λ) ,
(94)
where −2 ≤λ ≤2 is a parameter of the model, such that 0 ≤λ ≤2 represents positive
correlations, while −2 ≤λ ≤0 corresponds to negative correlations. Percolation models in
which the correlations increase with the distance between two sites or bonds on the sample-
spanning cluster were ﬁrst studied by Sahimi (1994b, 1995a) and Sahimi and Mukhopadhyay
(1996). However, their model was motivated by its applications to ﬂow in geological formations,
and thus is not described here.
The ﬁrst percolation model with long-range correlations that we are aware of, which is also
relevant to the problems we discuss in this book, was proposed by Pollak and Riess (1975) and
Chalupa et al. (1979), and is known as the bootstrap percolation. In this problem sites of a lattice
are initially randomly occupied. Then, those sites that do not have at least Zc nearest-neighbor
occupied sites are removed (note that Zc = 0 is the usual random percolation). The interactions
between the sites are short-ranged, but the correlations between them increase as the distance
between two occupied sites also increases. Figure 2.15 shows a 2D example of a bootstrap
percolation cluster.
The original motivation for developing this model was to explain the
behavior of some disordered materials in which magnetic impurities are randomly distributed
in a host of non-magnetic metals. It is believed that in some of such materials an impurity atom
cannot sustain a localized magnetic moment unless it is surrounded by a minimum number of
magnetic neighbors (see, for example, Jaccarino and Walker, 1965). Bootstrap percolation has
also been used for studying orientational order in orthoparahydrogen mixtures (Adler et al.,
1987) and dynamics of glass transitions (Ertel et al., 1988).
Extensive numerical studies of bootstrap percolation were begun by Kogut and Leath (1981).
Since then, bootstrap percolation has been studied extensively (for a review see Adler, 1991;
see also Stauﬀer and de Arcangelis, 1996, for more recent developments), and has proven to
contain a rich variety of behavior which is a strong function of the parameter Zc. For example,
an important question is the nature of the percolation transition in this model. It now appears
that for suﬃciently high values of Zc ≤Z (where Z is the coordination number of the lattice),
the percolation transition is ﬁrst-order, i.e., discontinuous, whereas for low values of Zc the
transition is continuous and second-order. A ﬁrst-order phase transition is characterized by
52

sharp discontinuities at pc, namely, percolation quantities vary smoothly with p anywhere from
p = 1 or p = 0 to just above pc, but at pc abruptly (discontinuously) changes their value to
zero. If the phase transition is ﬁrst-order, then the percolation threshold of the system is in fact
pc = 1, the sample-spanning cluster is compact (i.e., its fractal dimension Df = d), and power
laws (29)-(35) are no longer valid. For example, bootstrap percolation transition is ﬁrst-order
in the simple-cubic lattice with Zc ≥4, in the triangular lattice with Zc ≥4, and in the square
lattice with Zc ≥3.
However, we must point out that, although when bootstrap percolation transition is ﬁrst-
order, the percolation threshold is pc = 1, extensive simulations have shown that sample-size
eﬀects are very large and strong, so that the approach to the asymptotic value of pc = 1 is very
slow, so that in small or even moderately large lattices one may obtain an eﬀective percolation
threshold pc which is less than 1. Sample-size eﬀect also smear the ﬁrst-order phase transition.
The reason for the peculiar behavior of this model seems to be the long-range nature of the
correlations between two occupied sites, and the fact that for large enough Zc these correlations
do not decay with the distance between the two sites, rather they increase with the distance.
The richness of bootstrap percolation is not, however, limited to the nature of the percolation
transition at pc. In the ﬁrst simulation of this model, Kogut and Leath (1981) found that in the
triangular and simple-cubic lattices with Zc = 3 the value of the critical exponent β, deﬁned by
Eqs. (29) and (30), seems to be diﬀerent from that of random percolation. Adler and Stauﬀer
(1990) carried out an extensive study of this model in the simple-cubic lattice and found that,
β(Zc = 0) = β(Zc = 1) = β(Zc = 2) ≃0.41, the same as that of random percolation (see Table
2.3), but that, β(Zc = 3) ≃0.6, whereas the corresponding value of ν appeared to be the same
as in random percolation for 0 ≤Zc ≤3. Conduction in bootstrap percolation systems was
studied by Sahimi and Ray (1991) in both 2D and 3D, who showed that in the simple-cubic
lattice the critical exponent µ of the conductivity for Zc = 0, 1, 2, and 3 is the same as that
of random percolation listed in Table 2.3. Figure 2.16 shows the behavior of the conductivity,
which also demonstrates the ﬁrst-order phase transition when Zc is large enough. Sahimi and
Ray also speculated that bootstrap percolation with large enough Zc (i.e., when the percolation
transition is ﬁrst-order) may be relevant to modelling of mechanical (see Chapter 8) and fracture
properties (see Chapter 8 of Volume II) of solids since, similar to bootstrap percolation with
large enough Zc, one may also have ﬁrst-order phase transitions in such phenomena. Their
53

speculation has in fact turned out to be true.
2.13 Experimental Measurement of Percolation Properties
Let us now discuss experimental measurements of percolation quantities in composite mate-
rials in order to establish their relevance. To do this, we consider conductor-insulator compos-
ites that have wide applications, and describe and discuss measurement of their morphological
properties. Measurement of their transport properties will be described and analyzed in the
subsequent chapters.
Thin metal ﬁlms are two-phase mixtures of metal and non-metal components that have
interesting morphological and transport properties. Their electrical conductivity varies contin-
uously with the volume fraction φ of the metallic phase. If φ is large enough, the metal phase
forms a sample-spanning cluster, while the non-metallic phase is dispersed in the composite in
the form of isolated islands. In this regime, the electrical conductivity of the system is large
and its temperature coeﬃcient of resistance is positive. If the volume fraction of the metallic
phase is close to its percolation threshold φc, one has a complex composite of isolated metallic
islands, a tortuous and sample-spanning cluster of the metallic component, as well as islands
of the non-metallic component. If the non-metallic phase forms a sample-spanning cluster, the
system is in the dielectric regime, and its electrical conductivity is very small. Transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) indicates that thin metal ﬁlms have a discontinuous structure in
which the metallic phase constitutes only a fraction of the total volume of the system. Such
ﬁlms have a nearly 2D structure and are formed in the early stages of ﬁlm growth by a variety
of techniques, such as evaporation or sputtering. The metallic phase ﬁrst forms isolated islands
that at later stages of the process join together and form a continuous ﬁlm. Generally speaking,
a metal ﬁlm is considered thin if its thickness ℓis less than the percolation correlation length
ξp of the 3D composite.
Important studies of the morphological properties of thin metallic ﬁlms were carried out by
Voss et al. (1982) and Kapitulnik and Deutscher (1982), the results of which were published in
back-to-back papers in the Physical Review Letters. Voss et al. prepared Au ﬁlms by electron-
beam evaporation onto 30 nm-thick amorphous Si3N4 windows grown on a Si wafer frame. A
series of samples were prepared simultaneously which ranged from 6 to 10 nm thick and varied
from electrically insulating to conducting. Transmission electron micrographs were digitized,
54

and with the use of threshold detection and a connectivity-checking algorithm the individual
Au clusters were isolated and their statistical properties were analyzed. Voss et al. found
that the Au clusters were irregularly shaped and ramiﬁed. At large scales most of the ﬁlm
properties were uniform, but at small scales they were not. Since the deposited Au atoms
had some initial mobility, the Au clusters were not totally random, as a result of which the
percolation threshold of the system, φc ≃0.74, was larger than 0.5, the expected value for 2D
continuum percolation (see above). However, Voss et al. found that at φc the largest Au cluster
is a fractal object with a fractal dimension, Df ≃1.9, in excellent agreement with that of 2D
percolation, Df = 91/48 ≃1.896.
Kapitulnik and Deutscher (1982) prepared samples by successive deposition of amorphous
Ge as the substrate, and of thin Pb ﬁlms as the metal. This allowed them to obtain deposition
with only short-range correlations. The size of the Pb crystallites, deﬁned as the average Pb
thickness, was about 200 ˚A. Since the continuity of the metallic cluster is controlled by its
thickness, varying the sample thickness is equivalent to generating percolation networks with
varying fractions of conducting components. Kapitulnik and Deutscher (1982) deposited the
thin ﬁlms on TEM grids and photographed it with a very large magniﬁcation. The pictures
were then analyzed for various percolation properties. Figure 2.17 presents their results for
the density ρ = M/L2 of the sample-spanning cluster and its backbone.
Over about one
order of magnitude variations in L the sample-spanning cluster and its backbone exhibit fractal
behavior, with Df ≃1.9 for the cluster and Dbb ≃1.65 for the backbone, in excellent agreement
with the fractal dimensions for 2D percolation (see Table 2.3). Kapitulnick and Deutscher
(1982) also measured ns, the number of metallic clusters of mass s below the percolation
threshold. According to Eq. (35), one must have ns ∼s−τ, and measurements of Kapitulnik
and Deutscher yielded, τ ≃2.1 ± 0.2, completely consistent with τ = 187/91 ≃2.054 for 2D
percolation (see Table 2.3).
More recently, Viswanathan and Heaney (1995) succeeded in direct imaging of a percola-
tion network in a 3D conductor-insulator composite, and obtaining accurate estimates of its
percolation properties. They used electric force microscopy (EFM) which is a type of scanning
probe microscopy that measures electric ﬁeld gradients near the surface of a sample using a
sharp conductive tip. The gradients are measured by the grounded tip which is oscillated near
its resonant frequency. By altering the eﬀective spring constant of the tip as it encounters a
55

force gradient from the electric ﬁeld, the cantilever’s resonant frequency is varied. The resulting
change is then monitored, producing a map of the strength of the electric ﬁeld gradients. The
EFM mode generates two images, one of topography and the other of electric ﬁeld gradients.
These maps are generated by the “lift mode” technique by which a line is scanned to give to-
pography; a second pass is made over the same line a prescribed distance above the topography
to image the electric ﬁeld gradients. A commercial Digital Instruments Nanoscope Multimode
Atomic Force Microscopy (for EFM imaging) was used for imaging the composites. Tips were
metal coated and made of single-crystal silicon with a 5 nm radius curvature. The composite
samples were attached on top of the metal substrates using conductive silver paint. The samples
were composed of commercial carbon-black and polymer. The carbon-black resistivity was of
order of 10−2 Ωcm. It consisted of 200 nm mean diameter aggregates composed of smaller fused
semi-spherical particles of 80 nm mean diameter. The polymer was high density polyethylene
with a resistivity of 1018 Ωcm.
To quantify the morphology of the sample, the EFM image was binarized in order to high-
light the conductive features. The resulting image was then analyzed in terms of the scaling
theory of percolation described above. A point that was part of the conductive area or “mass”
M in squares centered on this origin was counted as a function of the square linear size L.
The density ρ(L) = M(L)/L2 of the conductive area was then computed. The procedure was
repeated for 25 non-overlapping areas on the binarized image, and the results were averaged.
Figure 2.18 shows the results and indicates the existence of three regimes. For L < 0.6µm, the
density satisﬁes a power law corresponding to M(L) ∝LDeﬀ, where Deﬀis the eﬀective fractal
dimension of the conductive areas. The data yield, Deﬀ≃0.9±0.1. Since the fractal dimension
Deﬀof an object embedded in a d−dimensional space and cut by a surface of dimensionality
Ds is given by
Deﬀ= Df −(d −Ds) ,
(95)
the fractal dimension Df of the carbon-black aggregate is estimated to be Df ≃1.9 ± 0.1, in
excellent agreement with that of 2D percolation.
For 0.8µm < L < 2µm, the density follows the same type of power law that corresponds
to Df ≃2.6 ± 0.1, in good agreement with the fractal dimension of 3D percolation clusters at
the percolation threshold, Df ≃2.53 (see Table 2.3), while for L > 3µm the density is roughly
constant, corresponding to Df = 3 for a homogeneous material. The crossover from the power
56

law behavior occurs at L ≃ξp, where ξp is the correlation length of percolation, and hence for
these materials ξp ≃3µm. These measurements all agree with the predictions of percolation
theory, hence ﬁrmly establishing the quantitative relevance of percolation to describing the
morphology (and transport properties) of heterogeneous materials.
Summary
Two important characteristics of the morphology of disordered multiphase materials are
the connectivity and clustering of their phases, and the shape and size of the sample-spanning
cluster that allows a transport process occur in the materials. The concepts of modern statistical
physics of disordered materials can now quantify these characteristics. In particular, percolation
theory is an indispensable tool for quantitative characterization of the morphology of composite
materials, and the eﬀect of the connectivity and clustering of their phases on their eﬀective
macroscopic characteristics, and in particular transport properties.
The morphology of a material, and in particular the shape of the sample-spanning cluster
that allows a transport process to occur in the material, can also be characterized based on the
concepts of self-similarity, self-aﬃnity, and fractality. These concepts enable us to characterize
the geometry and surface roughness of disordered materials, which would otherwise seem very
diﬃcult to understand. Even if our experimental data are limited and have been measured over
a limited range, there are several incentives for using the ideas of fractal geometry to interpret
the data, some of which are,
1. correlating the data by power laws, a main tool of fractal geometry, condenses the de-
scription of a complex morphology.
2. Self-similarity and self-aﬃnity allow us to correlate in a simple way properties and per-
formance of a material with its morphology and, possibly, dynamics of its formation, as
with the case of rough surfaces that will be described in Volume II.
3. If we choose not to use the concepts of fractal geometry, then, in many instances our only
choice will be to discard the data altogether, whereas fractals provide us with at least an
approximate description and correlation of the data.
Moreover, both percolation theory and fractal gemoetry point to the fundamental role of
the length scale and long-range correlations in the macroscopic homogeneity of a heterogeneous
57

material. If the largest relevant length scale of a material, e.g., its linear size, is less than
the length scale at which it can be considered homogeneous, which for percolation disorder
is the correlation length ξp, then the classical equations that describe transport processes in
the material must be fundamentally modiﬁed. These issues will be discussed in detail in the
subsequent chapters, where the relevance of the concepts that were described in the present
chapter will be demonstrated.
58

Captions
Figure 2.1 A two-dimensional Sierpinski gasket.
Figure 2.2 A two-dimensional Sierpinski carpet.
Figure 2.3 A two-dimensional diﬀusion-limited aggregate.
Figure 2.4 An example of a two-dimensional self-aﬃne fractal.
Figure 2.5 A Bethe lattice of coordination number 3.
Figure 2.6 Bond percolation on the square network in which a fraction p = 0.6 of the bonds
are intact.
Figure 2.7 Site percolation on the square network in which a fraction p = 0.59 of the sites
are intact.
Figure 2.8 The largest percolation cluster at the site percolation threshold pc = 1/2 of a
104 × 104 triangular lattice.
Figure 2.9 Typical dependence of several percolation quantities on the fraction p of the
active sites in a simple-cubic lattice. XI is the fraction of the isolated active sites; that is,
XI = p −XA.
Figure 2.10 The sample-spanning cluster (top) and its backbone (bottom) in bond percola-
tion in the square network, in which the fraction of conducting bonds is p = 0.55.
Figure 2.11 Two-dimensional Voronoi tessellation of space (thin lines) and the corresponding
Voronoi network (thick lines).
Figure 2.12 A two-dimensional model of ﬁbrous materials.
Figure 2.13 Two-dimensional Swiss-cheese model.
Figure 2.14 The conducting necks (upper part of the ﬁgure) in the Swiss-cheese model, and
determining the approximate channels (the dashed lines) that represent them.
Figure 2.15 Two-dimensional bootstrap percolation on the square network. White areas
indicate the absent or cut bonds.
Figure 2.16 Conductivity of bootstrap percolation in a L × L × L simple-cubix network,
versus the fraction p of occupied sites, with Zc = 5, where (×) are the results for L = 25, while
(△) are for L = 45.
Figure 2.17 The mass M of the sample-spanning cluster cluster and its backbone (upper
data) for Pb ﬁlms versus the linear size L of the material (after Kapitulnik and Deutscher,
1982).
59

Figure 2.18 Logarithmic plot of the average density ρ(L) of the conducting regions versus
the linear size L of the sample. The minimum conducting unit is a square of size L = 0.037 µm
(after Viswanathan and Heaney, 1995).
60

3
Characterization and Modelling of the Morphology
3.0 Introduction
In Chapter 2 we learned how to characterize two important aspects of the morphology of
a disordered multiphase material, namely, the connectivity and clustering of its phases, and
pointed out their deep eﬀect on the material’s macroscopic properties. We also described how
the correlations, especially long-range correlations, in the morphology of a material are charac-
terized in terms of fractal geometry. The next step is to complete the task of characterization
of the morphology, and develop models that can realistically represent the connectivity and
correlation properties of a heterogeneous material, as investigation of transport phenomena in
such materials must include as the ﬁrst, and perhaps the most important, ingredient, a real-
istic model of the material itself. However, such models must logically depend on the type of
material that one wishes to deal with, and on the computational resources that are available to
one, since there is no “universal” model that can represent every type of material. Of course,
as more microstructural details are added to a model of a heterogeneous material, it becomes
more realistic but also, by necessity, more complex.
However, the process of adding more
microstructural details to a model of a material cannot go on ad inﬁnitum, because our com-
putational power is not unlimited and thus cannot handle a model with “inﬁnite” complexity.
Hence, we face the task of deciding which aspects of a material’s microstructure is crucial to its
macroscopic properties, and in particular to its transport properties which are the focus of this
book. Before making this decision, we must answer the following key question: do we wish to
only gain qualitative insight into a given phenomenon that occurs in a heterogeneous material,
or is our model intended for quantitative modelling of the phenomenon? If the former is of
prime interest to us, then we should develop the simplest model that allows us to investigate
the transport process of interest in the material with a reasonable computation time and can
predict the essential features of the phenomenon of interest. If the predictions of the model are
intended to be quantitative, then two key ingredients must be included in the model:
(1) The material’s morphology must be accurately represented by the model, and
(2) the mechanism(s) of the transport process must also be accurately described.
In this chapter we consider the ﬁrst ingredient - the morphology of a material - and describe
61

and discuss various models in which the fundamental aspects of materials’ heterogeneities have
been, to various degrees of details, incorporated.
Before describing the models, let us discuss a few important concepts that will be referred
to throughout this chapter. If a material is statistically homogeneous, we may invoke an ergodic
hypothesis to compute its volume-averaged properties. According to this hypothesis, averaging
a property over all realizations of an ensemble is equivalent to averaging over the volume of one
realization in the limit of inﬁnite volume. In addition, a material is considered strictly isotropic
if the joint distributions that describe some stochastic process in the material are rotationally
invariant, i.e., they are invariant under rigid-body rotation of the spatial coordinates. Finally,
as described in Chapter 2 (see Section 2.5.3), a two-phase material is said to possess phase-
inversion symmetry if the morphology of phase 1 at volume fraction φ1 is statistically identical
with that of phase 2 when its volume fraction is φ1.
3.1 Models of Heterogeneous Materials
Accurate models are needed for evaluating the transport coeﬃcients and other important
dynamical properties of heterogeneous materials. The simplest of such properties is perhaps
the eﬀective thermal or electrical conductivity ge.
Thus, one major goal of modelling the
morphology of a material has always been predicting such properties, given some information
or data about the material’s morphology. If, for example, a material consists of two diﬀferent
constituents or phases, each having its own distinct thermal or electrical conductivity, then, one
would like to be able to predict the overall eﬀective conductivity of the material as a function
of the volume fractions of its constituents.
Over the years, many models of heterogeneous
materials have been developed, most of which have been motivated by a certain application.
It may happen that a model is useful for studying a particular phenomenon and can provide
reasonable predictions for some of its properties. However, if the model does not realistically
represent the material’s morphology, then it will not be useful for investigating other types
of transport phenomena in the same material and providing accurate predictions for their
properties. Such models typically contain parameters that are either deﬁned very vaguely, or
have no physical meaning whatsoever; their sole purpose is to make the models’ predictions
agree with the experimental data for a particular phenomenon. We intend to do in this chapter is
not describing such models, but those that are useful for predicting several transport properties
62

of heterogeneous materials.
Aside from one-dimensional (1D) models, one can divide useful models of heterogeneous
materials into two groups. In one group are what we referred to, in Chapter 1, as the continuum
models, while the second group consists of the discrete or lattice models of heterogeneous
materials. Models in each group have their own strengths as well as shortcomings which will
be pointed out throughout this chapter.
3.2 One-Dimensional Models
If a set of atoms lie along a line, then we have a 1D model, or a linear chain. If the distance
rij between two neighbouring atoms i and j is the same everywhere in the system, then the
1D model is usually called an ordered chain. In practice, this cannot be achieved exactly. At
best, the variable rij is a stochastically distributed quantity with a very small variance. If,
however, the rij are random variables with a signiﬁcant variance, then the resulting linear
chain is sometimes called a 1D liquid or a 1D glass. If each rij is an independent variable,
distributed with uniform probability along the entire length of the chain, then the system is
called a linear gas. It is clear that a 1D system cannot be topologically disordered, as every
atom is a neighbour to exactly two other atoms everywhere in the chain. Therefore, the chain’s
disorder must be compositional (i.e., the disorder must be in the local transport properties).
Consider, as an example, diﬀusion of a particle on a linear chain which is usually described by
the following master equation
∂Pi
∂t = Wi,i−1(Pi−1 −Pi) + Wi,i+1(Pi+1 −Pi) ,
(96)
where Pi is the probability of ﬁnding the particle at site (or atom) i at time t, and Wij is
the transition rate for making a jump from site i to site j.
If the transition probabilities
are independent random variables, then Eq. (1) describes diﬀusion in a compositionally or
substitutionally disordered linear chain, a problem of considerable interest in the late 1970s
and early 1980s. We will come back to this problem in Chapter 6.
Another well-studied 1D model is the so-called 1D hard rod model, in which rods of length
ℓare randomly, sequentially, and irreversibly placed on a line of length L at a rate J of per
unit length and per unit time. A problem of interest would then be the expected value for
coverage at the saturation limit as L →∞. This problem belongs to the more general class
of problems known as random sequential additional (RSA) processes (see, for example, Re´nyi,
63

1963; Widom, 1966; Feder, 1980; Cooper, 1988; Viot et al., 1993). In these problems, non-
overlapping objects (rods, disks, spheres, etc.)
are randomly, irreversibly, and sequentially
placed into a system, a problem that was apparently ﬁrst studied by Widom (1966), when the
objects are d−dimensional identical spheres. The particles do not sample the conﬁguration
space uniformly, as their locations are frozen after they are placed into the system. If the
objects are d−dimensional identical spheres, then the ﬁlling process ends at the saturation, or
jamming, limit, beyond which no addition will be possible. For the 1D hard rod model, which
is also known as the car-parking problem, the saturation limit is reached when the coverage is
about 0.7476. We will come back to the RSA problem later in this chapter.
There has been considerable interest over the past few years in the fabrication and charac-
terization of nanoscale structures, such as quantum dots and wires. Electronic, magnetic, and
mechanical properties of such materials are of great interest, since they are believed to play
important roles in high-storage capacity, and high-performance transport devices. With the aid
of advanced experimental techniques, materials of this type have been fabricated which exhibit
1D properties. However, quantum eﬀects play a prominent role in most of such materials, and
therefore we do not consider them in this book. The interested reader should consult Materials
Research Society Bulletin, volume 24 (No. 8) (1999) for a current review of this subject.
Aside from nanoscale structures, materials that are truly 1D are very rare. What are usu-
ally referred to as 1D materials are in fact quasi-1D systems. For example, one may have
a magnetic chain if one can ﬁnd a crystalline material in which the magnetic ions interact
with each other along chains that are isolated from each other by, for example, large non-
magnetic ions, or radicals, or molecular groupings. Well-known examples include copper ben-
zoate [Cu(C6H5COO)2·3H2O], copper dipyridine dichloride ( CuCl2·2NC5H5), superionic con-
ductors such as β−eucryptite (LiAlSO4) in which fast ionic motion takes place mostly along 1D
channels, organic materials such as tetrathiafulvalene-tetracyanoquinodimethne (TTF-TCNQ)
which displays anisotropic, essentially 1D conductivity, and many polymeric chains. In copper
benzoate, for example, the packing of large ﬂat benzoate groups allows the magnetic Cu++ ions
to come within exchange distance along the c axis (see Figure 3.1), but keeps these chains well
apart in the a and b directions of the monoclinic lattice. This material is known to be a linear
Heisenberg antiferromagnet, a subject of many studies.
Steady-state diﬀusion and conduction, and mechanical properties of such linear chains are
64

simple problems that can be solved exactly. However, unsteady-state diﬀusion and frequency-
dependent AC conductivity of disordered linear chains are non-trivial problems that are de-
scribed by the master equation (1). We will come back to these problems in Chapter 6.
3.3 Spatially-Periodic Models
In this class of models the material’s microstructure is represented by a periodic arrangement
of microscopic elements in repeatative units called unit cells. The unit cell can have an ordered
structure or contain a small degree of heterogeneity. An example is the so-called Wigner-Seitz
cell shown in Figure 3.2 which exhibits translational invariance. A spatially-periodic model is
also characterized by an associated lattice that contains the translational symmetries of the
material for which the model is intended. Because of its periodic structure, the lattice is of
inﬁnite extent and is generated from any one lattice point by discrete displacements of the
form,
R = i1e1 + i2e2 + i3e3 ,
(97)
where I=(i1, i2, i3) is a triplet of integers, and {e1, e2, e3} is a triad of basic lattice vectors. This
triad is not unique because, by applying any unimodular 3 × 3 matrix with entries that are
integer to the basis {e1, e2, e3}, one can obtain another equally valid basis. It is often convenient
to use cells that are parallelepipeds built on a given choice of basic lattice vectors. Given the
ﬂexibility that one has with the choice of the unit cells, their shapes are often ambiguously
deﬁned.
Spatially-periodic systems are also characterized by two basic length scales. One is the
microscopic length scale of the lattice lm deﬁned as, lm =max[dmin(r)], where dmin(r) is the
distance between a point at r and the nearest lattice points. For example, for a cubic lattice
of size a, lm =
√
3a/2. The second scale is the length scale L over which the averages of some
physical ﬁelds, e.g., an electric or stress ﬁeld, vary in a reasonably smooth manner. This length
scale is typically of the order of the linear size of the material for which the model is intended.
For the material to be macroscopically homogeneous, one must have L ≫lm.
The simplest spatially-periodic model consists of a 2D array of inﬁnitely-long circular cylin-
ders which is in fact a reasonable model for ﬁber-reinforced materials, and as such was ﬁrst
introduced by Hashin and Rosen (1964). Each individual ﬁber is represented by a cylinder of
radius Rc. Associated with each cylinder is an annulus of matrix material of radius Rs, and
65

each of such combination is called a composite cylinder. Due to its anisotropy, the system
is characterized by ﬁve elastic moduli, and it can be shown that the analysis of a composite
cylinder will suﬃce for determining four of the ﬁve elastic moduli. This model is in fact the
2D analog of a 3D spatially-periodic model - a composite sphere model - in which the spheres
sit on the sites of a regular periodic lattice and are surrounded by the matrix (the remaining
of the lattice). The spheres can be rigid, and it is well-known that such rigid inclusions can
degrade the strength of the matrix. However, the stiﬀening eﬀect is usually not large, and the
(spherical) inclusions improve other important parameters of the material, such as its cost, or
the characteristics of its dynamic response. We will come back to these models in Chapters 4
and 7.
The analysis of transport processes in such models is a relatively simple task, when numerical
or analytical calculations are conﬁned to a unit cell. In principle, the unit cell can have an
arbitrary shape, but if one is to analyze a disordered unit cell of arbitrary shape, the analysis
would be no easier than that of other models of heterogeneous materials, described below, that
are in fact more realistic than the spatially-periodic models. In a sense, a spatially-periodic
model represents a sort of mean-ﬁeld approximation to truly disordered materials because
it does not contain any true heterogeneities.
Instead, it predicts the material’s properties
in some average sense. In some cases, e.g., ﬁber reinforced materials, the predicted eﬀective
properties do come close to those of the real disordered material for which the model is intended.
Nonetheless, the usefulness of such models for simulation of various transport phenomena in
heterogeneous materials and predicting their eﬀective properties is relatively limited. We will
describe computation of the eﬀective conductivity of the spatially-periodic models in Chapter
4 to demonstrate the elegant techniques that have been developed for such models. Nitsche
and Brenner (1989) provide an extensive list of references for the spatially-periodic models and
their applications.
3.4 Continuum Models
Although the eﬀective transport properties of spatially-periodic models of heterogeneous
materials have been extensively studied (see Chapter 4), transport processes in models in
which some type of disorder is explicitly included have also been of great interest, since in most
practical situations one must deal with materials that are, at least over certain length scales,
66

heterogeneous. There are several such models which, as discussed above, can be classiﬁed into
two major groups - the continuum and the discrete or lattice models.
Generally speaking, there are at least three diﬀerent classes of continuum models. In the
ﬁrst class of models, one has a distribution of inclusions, such as circles, ellipses, cylinders,
spheres, or ellipsoids, in an otherwise uniform matrix. The inclusions and the matrix represent
the two phases of the material. By a phase we mean a portion of the material which has eﬀective
properties (conductivity, elastic constants, etc.) that are distinct from those of other portions
of the material. In the second class of continuum models, one generates a model composite
material by tessellating the space into regular or random polygons or polyhedra and designating
at random (or in prescribed manner) some of the polygons or polyhedra as representing one
phase of the composite, with the rest representing the second phase. Finally, the third class of
models consists of those in which one distributes conducting (or elastic) sticks of a given aspect
ratio, or plates of given extents, and studies transport in such systems. Each of these classes
of models has been designed for representing a particular type of heterogeneous materials. For
example, the models in the third class have been used for representing ﬁbrous materials, with
the sticks representing the ﬁbers. In what follows we describe these models in detail, and discuss
their properties.
However, before describing the continuum models let us point out that the main attractive
feature of such models is that, with the appropriate choice of the parameters (to be described
below), they can be used to represent many real heterogeneous materials. The main disadvan-
tage of these models is the complexities that are involved if one is to utilize them for studying
transport processes in real heterogeneous materials. Thus, although the eﬀective transport
properties of such continuum models can be and have been calculated using a variety of tech-
niques (see Chapters 4 and 7), they are still too complex for routine use in the investigation of
many important phenomena in heterogeneous materials
3.4.1 Dispersion of spheres
Consider a statistical distribution of N identical d-dimensional spheres of radius R, which
we call it phase 2, distributed in an otherwise uniform matrix that represents phase 1 of a
two-phase disordered materials. The total volume of the system is Ω. This model is not as
simple or restricted as it may seem. For example, if the particles do overlap and form clusters,
67

one can generate a wide variety of models with complex microstructures. Its 1D version, i.e., a
system of rods mentioned earlier, can represent certain laminates. Its 2D version, i.e., a system
of disks or, equivalently, a system of inﬁnitely-long cylinders, distributed in the matrix, can be
utilized for modelling ﬁber-reinforced materials and thin ﬁlms. An example is shown in Figure
3.3, where the disks’ sizes are distributed according to a uniform probability density function.
The 3D version can be used for modelling unconsolidated media (for example, suspensions
of particles), if the spheres do not overlap, as well as consolidated systems such as sintered
materials and cements and a variety of other composite materials, if the spheres are allowed to
overlap.
If the spheres are not allowed to overlap at all, then one obtains what is popularly referred
to as fully-impenetrable or hard-particle model. This model has been used for studying liquids
(see, for example, Reiss et al., 1959; Hansen and McDonald, 1986), glasses (see, for example,
Zallen, 1983), powders (Shahinpour, 1980), cell membranes (Cornell et al., 1981), thin ﬁlms
(Quickenden and Tan, 1974), particulate composites, to be discussed in this book, colloidal
dispersions (Russel et al., 1989), granular materials, and many other types of material. However,
the model becomes quite general if the spheres are allowed to overlap (Weissberg, 1963). The
intersection of the spheres does not have to represent a true physical entity, but can be only
a way of generating a heterogeneous material with a certain microstructure. An example is
the penetrable-concentric shell model or the cherry-pit model (Torquato, 1984), in which each
d−dimensional sphere of diameter 2R is composed of a hard impenetrable core of diameter
2λR, encompassed by a perfectly penetrable shell of thickness (1 −λ)R, an example of which
is shown in Figure 3.4.
The limits λ = 0 and 1 correspond, respectively, to the cases of
fully-penetrable sphere model, also called the Swiss-cheese model (see Section 2.11), and the
totally-impenetrable sphere model. Thus, varying λ between 0 and 1 allows one to tune the
connectivity of the particles (i.e., the number of particles that are in contact with a given
particle) and obtain a wide variety of models with desired morphology.
In the fully-penetrable sphere model (the limit λ = 0) there is no correlation between the
particles’ positions. If φ2 is the volume fraction of the particle phase, then this phase becomes
sample spanning (i.e., it percolates) for φ2c ≃0.67 and 0.29, for d = 2 and 3, respectively (see
Section 2.10.1 for the precise values of φ2c). Note that, as discussed in Chapter 2, no bicon-
tinuous structure can exist in 2D, and therefore when the particle phase is sample-spanning,
68

the matrix is discontinuous. On the other hand, for d = 3 the system can be bicontinuous. In
particular, both the particle phase and the matrix are sample spanning for 0.3 ≤φ2 ≤0.97.
3.4.1.1 Equilibrium hard-sphere model
In this model, the particles do not interact if the interparticle separation is larger than the
sphere diameter, but there is an inﬁnite repulsive force between them if the distance is less than
or equal to the sphere diameter. An important property of this model is that the impenetrability
constraint does not uniquely specify the statistical ensemble. That is, the system can be either
in thermal equilibrium, or in one of the inﬁnitely many non-equilibrium states, such as the
random sequential adsorption mentioned earlier.
Although the equilibrium hard-sphere model may appear to be simple, it exhibits sur-
prisingly rich behavior. For example, extensive experimental data and large-scale computer
simulations indicate that the model in d ≥2 undergoes a disorder-order phase transition, if
the particle density is high enough (see, for example, Reiss and Hammerich, 1986). Moreover,
although the existence of a ﬁrst-order liquid-solid phase transition in 3D has not been proven
rigorously, computer simulations which started with the work of Hoover and Ree (1968), as
well as experiments on colloidal hard-sphere systems (Pusey and van Megan, 1986; Rutgers et
al., 1996), do provide strong evidence for the existence of this phase transition. The situation
for the 2D systems, i.e., systems of hard disks, is not yet completely clear.
We should note a fundamental diﬀerence between equilibrium 2D hard-sphere model and
its 3D counterpart. The diﬀerence is due to the fact that in 2D the densest global packing
is consistent with densest local packing.
The maximum number of d−dimensional spheres
that can be packed in such a way that each sphere touches the others is d + 1 (which is why
the coordination number of the 3D network that results from mapping the channels between
the touching spheres onto a lattice is exactly 4). The d−dimensional polyhedron that results
by taking the sphere centers as vertices is a simplex, resulting in line segments, equilateral
triangles, and regular tetrahedra for d = 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Whereas identical simplices
can ﬁll 1D and 2D systems with overlapping, the same is not possible for 3D systems, i.e., one
cannot ﬁll them with identical non-overlapping regular tetrahedra. Due to this inconsistency
between the local packing rules and the global packing constraints, the 3D systems are said to
be geometrically frustrated.
69

3.4.1.2 Random close packing versus maximally random jamming
The notion of random close packing (RCP) has been used for decades. This state is usu-
ally deﬁned as the maximum volume fraction φcp that a large, random collection of spheres
can attain. It has been assumed that this state is well-deﬁned and unique. However, in prac-
tice, there has been some diﬃculty testing this hypothesis. For example, in the now-classic
experiments of Scott and Kilgour (1969), an estimate, φcp ≃0.637, was obtained by pouring
ball bearings into a large container, vibrating the system vertically for a long time to achieve
maximum densiﬁcation, and then, in order to eliminate the ﬁnite-size eﬀects, extrapolating
the measured volume fractions. However, the estimate of φcp obtained this way may depend
on the pouring rate and the frequency and amplitude of the vibrations. Indeed, Pouliquen et
al. (1997) showed that one can obtain denser, partially crystalline packings, if one pours the
ball bearings at low rates in horizontally-shaken containers! Computer simulations of the same
problem have not been of much help either, yielding estimates of φcp that vary anywhere from
0.6 (Visscher and Bolsterli, 1972) to 0.68 (Tobochnik and Chapin, 1988), presumably because
diﬀerent algorithms have been used in such simulations.
Torquato et al. (2000) have argued that these inconsistensies are due to RCP being an ill-
deﬁned state, pointing out that the words “random” and “close packed” are in fact inconsistent
with each other, since close packed implies that the spheres are in contact with each other such
that the average coordination number is maximum, but as the coordination number increases,
the system’s disorder decreases in some sense. Torquato et al. (2000) have instead suggested the
notion of maximally random jamming (MRJ). A particle is considered jammed if it cannot be
translated while ﬁxing the positions of all other particles in the system. A system of particles
is jammed if each of its particles is jammed, and there can be no collective motion of any
contacting subset of its particles that leads to unjamming. The advantage of a MRJ process
over a RCP one is that, the former can be deﬁned in a mathematically rigorous manner.
Torquato et al. (2000; see also Truskett et al., 2000), using Molecular Dynamics simulations
(see Chapter 9 of Volume II for detailed discussion of this simulation method) and an algorithm
due to Lubachevsky and Stillinger (1990), obtained an estimate φrj ≃0.64 for the volume
fraction at MRJ, which is in fact very close to the estimate of Scott and Kilgour (1969).
There are still many unresolved issues concerning a maximally jammed state. Therefore, while
throughout this book we may use the notion of RCP, we should keep in mind its ambiguity and
70

the alternative packing or jamming states that have been proposed by Torquato et al. (2000).
3.4.1.3 Particle distribution and correlation functions
A heterogeneous material and the model that represents it, including a dispersion of spheres,
can be characterized by a number of fundamental microstructural properties, including several
n−point correlation and distribution functions (Torquato, 2002). The most important of such
distribution, correlation functions, and microstructural properties, are as follows.
(1) The most fundamental distribution function is perhaps ρn(rn), where ρn(rn)dr1dr2 · · · drn
is the probability of simultaneously ﬁnding a particle centered in volume element around dr1, an-
other particle centered in volume element around dr2, etc, where rn represents the set {r1 · · · rn}.
For statistically homogeneous media the probability density ρn(rn) depends only upon the rel-
ative distances r12, · · · , r1n, where r1i = ri −r1. Thus, for example, ρ2(r1, r2) = ρ2(r12). Note
also that ρ1(r1) = ρ, where ρ is the density of the particles
(2) An important probability distribution function is Sn(xn), which is deﬁned as the prob-
ability of simultaneously ﬁnding n points at positions x1, x2 · · · , xn in one of the phases.
Similarly, S(i)
n (xn) is the probability that the n points at x1, x2, · · · , xn are in phase i of a
multiphase material. If the material is statistically homogeneous, then S(i)
1
is simply the vol-
ume fraction φi of phase i.
Moreover, S2(r1, r2) = S2(r12).
If the material is statistically
heterogeneous, then the correlation functions Sn can be systematically represented in terms of
the n−particle probability density function ρn(rn) described above (see below). Such n−point
probability functions were originally introduced by Brown (1955) in the context of determining
the eﬀective transport properties of composite materials. Chapters 4 and 7, as well as Chapters
2 and 4 of Volume II, will demonstrate the signiﬁcance of such n−point probability functions.
If a material is statistically heterogeneous, then the probability function S(i)
n
depends on
the absolute positions x1, x2 · · · , xn. In this case, S(i)
1
varies in space and denotes the local
volume fraction of phase i. For statistically homogeneous (or strictly stationary) materials,
on the other hand, the joint probability distributions are translationally invariant, so that,
S(i)
n (xn) = S(i)
n (xn + y).
If a two-phase material possesses phase-inversion symmetry, then
S(1)
n (xn; φ1, φ2) = S(2)
n (xn; φ2, φ1).
(3) One may also deﬁne the point/q−particle distribution functions G(i)
n (x1; rq) which char-
acterize the probability of ﬁnding a point at x1 in phase i and a conﬁguration of q spheres with
71

their centers at rn, respectively, with n = q + 1. More general functions, such as G(s)(xs; rn)
with obvious meanings, can also be deﬁned.
(4) An important aspect of the microstructure of disordered two-phase materials is the
properties of the interface between the two phases, which can be characterized by surface
correlation functions. For example, one can deﬁne surface-surface, surface-matrix, and surface-
void correlation functions Fss(x1, x2), Fsm(x1, x2), and Fsv(x1, x2), associated with ﬁnding a
point on the interface between the two phases and another point in the matrix phase, or on
the interface, or in the pore space (for porous materials), respectively. In similar fashions,
higher-order correlation functions, such as Fssm and Fsmm can be deﬁned.
Other valuable
informations may be gained from a surface-particle correlation function Fsp which yields the
correlations associated with ﬁnding a point on the particle-matrix interface and the center of a
sphere in some volume element.
The functions Fss and Fsv can be obtained from any plane cut through an isotropic material.
For homogeneous and isotropic materials, these functions depend only on |r| = |x2 −x1|. If
the two points are widely separated in materials without long-range order, then Fss(x1, x2) →
s(x1)s(x2), and Fsv(x1, x2) →s(x1)S1(x2), where s(x1) is the speciﬁc surface area (surface
area per unit volume) at x1.
Thus, for homogeneous materials, as |r| →∞, one obtains,
Fsv(r) →sφ1 and Fss(r) →s2.
(5) Another important property of heterogeneous materials are the exclusion probabili-
ties EV (r) and EP(r). The former is the probability of ﬁnding a region ΩV - taken to be a
d−dimensional spherical cavity of radius r, centered at some arbitrary point - to be empty of
inclusion centers. Physically, EV (r) is the expected fraction of space available to a test sphere
of radius r −R, inserted into the system. EP(r), on the other hand, is the probability of ﬁnd-
ing a region ΩP - taken to be a d−dimensional spherical cavity of radius r, centered at some
arbitrary particle center - to be empty of other particle centers.
(6) One can also deﬁne void nearest-neighbor probability density functions HV (r) and HP(r).
HV (r)dr is the probability that at an arbitrary point in the system the center of the nearest
particle lies at a distance in the interval (r, r + dr), while HP(r)dr is the probability that at
an arbitrary particle center in the system the center of the nearest particle lies at a distance in
the interval (r, r + dr).
From the deﬁnitions of the void nearest-neighbor and exclusion probabilities, it should be
72

clear that
Ei(r) = 1 −
 r
0 Hi(x)dx ,
i = V, P
(98)
or, equivalently, Hi(r) = −∂Ei/∂r. One can also deﬁne a mean nearest-neighbor distance ⟨ℓP⟩
by
⟨ℓP⟩=
 ∞
0
rH(r)dr = 2R +
 ∞
0
EP(r)dr ,
(99)
which is an important characteristic of packing of spheres. Utilizing ⟨ℓP⟩, one can precisely
deﬁne the random-close packing fraction φcp in the fully-impenetrable spheres model. Speciﬁ-
cally, φcp can be deﬁned as the maximum of packing fraction φ2 over all the homogeneous and
isotropic ensembles of the packings at which ⟨ℓP⟩= 2R, where R is the spheres’ radius. If
the spheres are polydispersed with a mean radius ⟨R⟩, then one may deﬁne φcp in the same
manner by ⟨ℓP⟩= 2⟨R⟩. Practically, φcp is the packing fraction at which randomly-arranged
hard (impenetrable) spheres cannot further be compressed if a hydrostatic pressure is applied
to the system. At φc the exclusion and the void nearest-neighbor probabilities are both zero
for r > 2R. The numerical estimates for φcp, as mentioned earlier, are φcp ≃0.82 and 0.64 for
d = 2 and 3, respectively. Note that φcp is diﬀerent from the closest packing fraction which are
π/(2
√
3) ≃0.907 and π/(3
√
2) ≃0.74 for d = 2 and 3, respectively. It is also diﬀerent from
the freezing packing fraction φf for which the numerical estimates are φf ≃0.69 and 0.49 for
d = 2 and 3, respectively.
(7) A particularly important property is the pore-size probability density function P(δ),
where P(δ)dδ yields the probability that a point in phase 1 lies at a distance between δ and
δ +dδ from the nearest point on the pore-solid interface. However, we should keep in mind that
for porous materials, P(δ) is not the standard pore-size distribution (Sahimi, 1993b, 1995b)
which is measured by many experimental techniques. Two limiting values of P are P(0) = s/φ1
and P(∞) = 0, where s/φ1 is the interfacial area per unit volume.
The pore-size probability density function P(δ) is actually related to the void nearest-
neighbor probability density function HV deﬁned above. As an example, we consider a system
of interacting identical spheres of radius R.
Using the deﬁnition of HV (r), it is clear that
δ = r −R, and therefore, P(δ) = φ−1
1 HV (δ + R), for δ ≥0.
(8) Two other important characteristic properties of multiphase heterogeneous materials
are the lineal-path function L(i)
p (z) (Lu and Torquato, 1992a) and the chord-length distribution
73

function L(i)
c (z) (Torquato and Lu, 1993). L(i)
p (z) is the probability that a line segment of
length z is entirely in phase i, when randomly thrown into the sample. For 3D systems, L(i)
p (z)
is equivalent to the area fraction of phase i measured from the projected image onto a plane,
a highly important problem in stereology (Underwood, 1970).
Moreover, L(i)
p (0) = φi and
L(i)
p (∞) = 0. Moreover, L(i)
p (z) contains information on the microscopic connectivity of the
material, and thus it is a useful quantity. In stochastic geometry, the quantity φi[1 −L(i)
p (z)] is
sometimes referred to as the linear contact distribution function (Stoyan et al., 1995).
L(i)
c (z)dz, on the other hand, is the probability of ﬁnding a chord of length between z and
z + dz in phase i [thus, L(i)
c (z) is actually a probability density]. Chords are distributions of
lengths between intersections of lines with the interface between the phases. An example is
shown in Figure 3.5. Chord-length distributions are relevant to transport processes in hetero-
geneous media, such as diﬀusion, radiative heat transfer (Ho and Strieder, 1979; Tassopoulos
and Rosner, 1992), and ﬂow and conduction in porous materials (Krohn and Thompson, 1986).
The quantities L(i)
p (z) and L(i)
c (z) are in fact closely related; their exact mathematical relation
will be derived below.
(9) A very general distribution function for characterizing the microstructure of a hetero-
geneous material is Gn(xp; rq), which is the n−point distribution function that characterizes
the correlations associated with ﬁnding p particles centered at positions xp = {x1, · · · , xp} and
q particles centered at positions rq = {r1, · · · , rq}, with n = p + q. Clearly, for q = 0 we have
Gn(xn; ∅) = Sn(xn), where ∅denotes the null set, and in the limit p = 0, Gn(∅; rq) = ρn(rn).
Moreover, if p = 1 and the radius of the p−particles is taken to be zero, then, Gn(x1; rq) =
G(1)(x1; rq), already deﬁned above.
Note that Gn(xp; rq) is not a pure probability function, but, rather, is a hybrid quantity. It
is a probability function with respect to the positions xp and, if properly scaled, is a probability
density function with respect to the positions rq.
(10) One can deﬁne a most general n−point distribution function Hn(xm; xp−m; rq) (Torquato,
1986b), deﬁned to be the correlation function associated with ﬁnding m points with positions
xm on certain surfaces within the material, p−m with positions xp−m in certain spaces exterior
to the spheres, and q sphere centers with positions rq with n = p+q, in a statistically heteroge-
neous material of N identical d−dimensional spheres. As discussed below, most of the n−point
correlation and distribution functions that were discussed above represent some limiting cases
74

of Hn(xm; xp−m; rq).
By the way of its construction, the function Hn, unlike the less general function Gn, constain
interfacial information about the available surfaces associated with the ﬁrst m test particles.
However, this part of Hn does not have a probabilistic interpretation, but it can be inter-
preted probabilistically by considering inﬁnitesimal dilations of the exclusion spheres. That
is, Hn(xn; ∅; ∅) is proportional to the probability that the points xn lie in the dilated regions
surrounding the interfaces A1, A2, · · · , Am, respectively. Finally, note that in the cherry-pit
model, Hn(xm; xp−m; rq) is identically zero for certain rq. In particular, for any value of the
impenetrability λ (see above), we have, Hn(xm; xp−m; rq) = 0, if |ri −rj| < 2λR, where R is
the radius of the spheres.
These functions are not all independent and are in fact related to one another. To obtain
their interrelationships, suppose that the d−dimensional spheres are spatially distributed ac-
cording to a speciﬁc N−particle probability density PN(rN). Then, the ensemble average of
any many-body function F(rN) is deﬁned by
⟨F(rN)⟩=

F(rN)PN(rN)drN .
(100)
ρn(rn), which is sometimes called the n−particle generic probability density, is related to
PN(rN) by
ρn(rn) =
N!
(N −n)!

PN(rN)drn+1 · · · drN .
(101)
Torquato (1986b) developed an exact series representation of Hn which is given by
Hn(xm; xp−m; rq) = (−1)m ∂
∂a1
· · ·
∂
∂am
Gn(xp; rq) ,
(102)
with
Gn(xp; rq) =
∞

s=0
(−1)sG(s)
n (xp; rq) ,
(103)
G(s)
n (xp; rq) = 1
s!
q

i=1
p

k=1
e(yki; ak)

ρq+s(rq+s)
q+s

j=q+1
m(p)(xp; rj)drj ,
(104)
m(p)(xp; rj) = 1 −
p

i=1
[1 −m(yij; ai)] .
(105)
Here m(yij; a) is an exclusion indicator function deﬁned by
m(yij; a) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 ,
yij < a
0 ,
otherwise
(106)
75

with
e(yij; a) = 1 −m(yij; a) ,
yij = |xi −rj|
(107)
Note that, in the limit q = 0, the factor multiplying the integral of Eq. (9) is by deﬁnition
equal to unity.
In order to derive Eq. (7), Torquato (1986b) developed the following key idea. One must
consider adding p test particles of radii b1, · · · · · · , bp to the system of N spherical inclusions
of radius R, with p ≪N. Because the ith test particle is capable of excluding the centers of
the actual inclusions from spheres of radius ai (where, for bi > 0, ai = R + bi, and, for bi = 0,
ai = R −ci, 0 ≤ci ≤R), then it is natural to associate with each test particle a subdivision of
space into two regions: Ωi, the space available to the ith test particle, i.e., the space outside N
spheres of radius ai centered at ri, and the complement space Ω∗
i . Suppose that Si is the surface
between Ωi and Ω∗
i . Then, Hn(xm; xp−m; rq) yields the correlations associated with ﬁnding the
center of a test particle of radius b1 at x1 on S1, · · · · · ·, the center of a test particle of radius
bm at xm on Sm, the center of a test particle of radius bm+1 at xm+1, · · · · · ·, the center of a test
particle of radius bp at xp in Ωp, and of ﬁnding any q inclusions with conﬁguration rq, where
xp−m ≡{xm+1 · · · · · · xp}, with n = p + q. Torquato (1986b) has given upper and lower bounds
for Hn for various limits of the dispersion of spheres model.
Given the n−point distribution function Hn, the other correlation and distribution functions
deﬁned above can be computed. Hence
Sn(xn) = lim
ai→R Hn(∅; xn; ∅) , ∀i ,
(108)
Gn(x1; rq) = lim
a1→R Hn(∅; x1; rq) ,
(109)
Fss(x1; x2) = lim
ai→R H2(x1, x2; ∅, ∅) , ∀i.
(110)
HV (r) = H1(x1; ∅, ∅) ,
EV (r) = H1(∅; x1; ∅) .
(111)
One can also show that EP(r) is the limiting value of H2(∅; x1; r1)/ρ1(r1), as |x1 −r1| →0,
from which HP(r) = −∂EP/∂r is obtained easily.
To derive a general equation for the lineal-path function L(i)
p (z) for a multiphase material,
we focus on the corresponding quantity Lp(z) for a two-phase heterogeneous material; the
generalization of the result to a material with more than two phases will then be obvious. The
key idea is that Lp(z), which is a sort of exclusion probability function, yields the probability of
76

inserting a test particle – a line of length z – into the system, which is equal to the probability of
ﬁnding an exclusion zone ΩE(z) between a line of length z and a sphere of radius R. The region
ΩE is a d−dimensional spherocylinder of cylindrical length z and radius R with hemispherical
caps of radius R on either end; see Figure 3.6. Therefore, if we deﬁne the exclusion indicator
function m(y; z) by
m(y; z) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 ,
y ∈ΩE(z)
0 ,
otherwise
(112)
then, Lp(z) is given by (Lu and Torquato, 1992a)
Lp(z) = 1 +
∞

k=1
(−1)k
k!

ρk(rk)
k

j=1
mj(x −rj; z)drj .
(113)
Lu and Torquato (1993a,b) showed that for statistically isotropic two-phase materials of arbi-
trary microgeometry the chord-length distribution function is related to the lineal-path function
Lp(z) by
Lc(z) = ℓC
φ1
d2Lp(z)
dz2
,
(114)
where ℓC is the average of Lc(z) and is given by
ℓC =
 ∞
0
zLc(z)dz .
(115)
Lu and Torquato (1991) generalized the above formulation, Eqs. (7)-(18), to a polydispersed
composite material in which the spheres’ radii follow a probability density function. The most
important results obtained from such a formulation will be described below.
3.4.1.4 The n-particle probability density
The above formulation of the various microstructural properties, the correlation and distri-
bution functions, and the relationships between them imply that, given the n−particle probabil-
ity density ρn, one can compute the correlation function Hn, from which most other properties
follow. The advantage of this formulation is that, the function ρn has been studied in great
details in the context of the statistical mechanics of liquids (see, for example, Hansen and Mc-
Donald, 1986), and therefore the extensive results obtained in those studies can be immediately
employed for modelling composite materials. For example, in the fully-penetrable sphere model
(i.e., the limit λ = 0 of the impenetrability parameter λ) with a particle density (number of
77

particles per unit volume) ρ, there is no spatial correlation between the particles. Therefore,
one has the exact relation
ρn(rn) = ρn ,
∀n.
(116)
In this case, it is easy to see that
Sn(rn) = exp(−ρVn) ,
(117)
where Vn is the union volume of the n spheres (see below).
Determining ρn(rn) for other types of the dispersion of spheres is considerably more diﬃ-
cult. For example, for fully-impenetrable spheres the impenetrability condition cannot by itself
uniquely determine the ensemble, and one must supply more information. One must, for exam-
ple, state that the spheres are distributed in the most random fashion which, together with the
impenetrability condition, can determine the state of the system. Among all the ρn(rn), the
two-particle probability density ρ2(r1, r2) is one of the most important properties. For isotropic
equilibrium distribution of the particles, the Ornstein-Zernike equation (Ornstein and Zernike,
1914)
h(r12) = C(r12) + ρ

C(|r23 −r12|)h(r23)dr3 ,
(118)
[see also Section 2.10.2 where, for percolation, we used P2(r) and D2(r) instead of h(r) and
C(r), respectively] is an important working tool, where h(r) is the total correlation function,
given by
h(r) = 1
ρρ2(r) −1 ,
(119)
with ρ being the particle density, rij ≡rj −ri, and rij ≡|rij|. Here C(r) is the usual direct
correlation function, as it measures the direct eﬀect of particle 1 on particle 2, whereas h(r12)
is a measure of the total eﬀect, direct and indirect, of particle 1 on 2. In general, C(r) →0
as r →∞. Therefore, if C(r) can somehow be computed or guessed, then Eq. (23) is solved
numerically in order to determine h(r) and hence ρ2(r). For hard spheres (i.e., the limit λ = 1
in which no overlap between the spherical particles is allowed) a widely-used and very accurate
approximation to C(r) is the Percus-Yevick approximation (Percus and Yevick, 1958):
C(r) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
c0 + c1(r/2R) + c3(r/2R)3 ,
r < 2R
0
r > 2R
(120)
78

where the three constants are given by
c0 = −1 + 2φ2
(1 −φ2)4 ,
(121)
c1 = 6φ2
1 + φ2/2
(1 −φ2)4 ,
c3 = φ2c1
2
,
(122)
with φ2 being the volume fraction of the spherical particles.
Integral equations similar to Eq. (23) have also been derived for the higher order ρn (see,
for example, Hansen and McDonald, 1986), but as n increases they become very diﬃcult to
solve. For low particle densties, the following approximation has proven to be very useful:
ρ3(r12, r13, r23) = 1
ρ3ρ2(r12)ρ2(r13)ρ2(r23) .
(123)
For the fully-impenetrable spheres model, the following low-density expansions have been de-
rived (Widom, 1966),
ρ2(r12) = ρ2Θ(r12 −2R)[1 + ρvi
2(r12; 2R)] + O(ρ4) ,
(124)
ρ3(r12, r13, r23) = ρ3Θ(r12 −2R)Θ(r13 −2R)Θ(r23 −2R) + O(ρ4) ,
(125)
where
Θ(x) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 ,
r > 0
0 ,
r < 0
(126)
Here, vi
2(r; R, R), which is the intersection volume of two identical d−dimensional spheres of
radius R with their centers separated by a distance r, is given by
vi
2(r; R, R) = (2R −r)Θ(2R −r) ,
d = 1
(127)
vi
2(r; R, R) = 2R2
⎡
⎣cos−1
 r
2R

−r
2R

1 −r2
4R2
1/2⎤
⎦Θ(2R −r) ,
d = 2
(128)
vi
2(r; R, R) = 4πR3
3

1 −3r
4R +
r3
16R3

Θ(2R −r) ,
d = 3
(129)
Determining the intersection volume of three or more spheres is non-trivial, especially if the
spheres’ radii are not the same. Powell (1964) carried out the computations for three spheres of
equal volume, Helte (1994) presented the results for four spheres, while Roberts and Knackstedt
(1996) gave the corresponding expression for three unequal spheres.
3.4.2 Distribution of equal-size particles
79

Let us now describe and summarize some microstructural properties of the dispersion of
spheres model. Its transport properties will be described in Chapters 4 and 7. We ﬁrst con-
sider the case in which all the spheres have the same radius. In the next section we consider
a polydisperse system in which the spheres’ radii are distributed according to a statistical
distribution. Torquato (2002) reviewed many other properties of these models.
Consider ﬁrst a system of identical particles of arbitrary shapes with number density ρ. We
deﬁne a dimensionless density η = ρv, where v is the volume of a particle which, for example,
for a d−dimensional sphere of radius R is given by
v(R) =
πd/2Rd
Γ(1 + d/2) ,
(130)
where Γ(x) is the gamma function. For fully-impenetrable particles, the reduced density η is
exactly the particle volume fraction φ2, i.e.,
η = φ2 = 1 −φ1 .
(131)
This equality is not obeyed if the particles can overlap.
In particular, for the penetrable-
concentric shell model one has
η(λ) ≥φ2(λ) ,
(132)
where λ is the impenetrability index deﬁned above, so that the equality applies when λ =
1. Having deﬁned these essential quantities, we can now summarize various microstructural
properties for the dispersion of spheres model.
3.4.2.1 Fully-penetrable spheres
For this model, which represents the limit λ = 0, the ﬁrst two functions S1 and S2 are given
by
Sn =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
φ1 = 1 −φ2 = exp(−η) ,
n = 1,
exp

−ηV2(r; R)
v

,
n = 2,
(133)
where V2 is the union volume of two spheres, to be difned shortly. Since for this model the
n−particle probability density function is given by Eq. (21), calculation of Hn(xm; xp−m; rq) is
straightforward. In fact, according to Eqs. (7) and (21) Hn is expressible in terms of purely
geometrical properties of the system. In particular, if we let m = q = 0, then Hn(xn), the
probability of inserting n spheres of radii a1, ··, an [see Eq. (7)] into a system of N spheres of
80

radius R at positions x1, · · · · · · , xn, i.e., inserting the particles into the available space of the
composite, is given by
Hn(xn) = exp [−ρVn(xn; a1, · · · , an)] .
(134)
Here Vn(xn; a1, · · · , an) is the union volume of n d−dimensional spheres of radii a1, · · · , an,
centered at x1, · · · , xn, respectively. In the limit that ai →R for ∀i, one recovers Eq. (22).
Note that the union volume V2(r12; a1, a2) of two spheres is given by, V2(r12; a1, a2) = v(a1) +
v(a2) −vi
2(r12; a1, a2), and
V3(r12, r13, r23; a1, a2, a3) = v(a1) + v(a2) + v(a3) −vi
2(r12; a1, a2)
−vi
2(r13; a1, a3) −vi
2(r23; a2, a3) + vi
3(r12, r13, r23; a1, a2, a3) ,
(135)
with rij = |xi −xj|, and v being the volume of one sphere given by Eq. (35).
Other properties of this model can also be computed. The speciﬁc surface area s of the
model is given by
s = lim
a1→R H1(x1; ∅, ∅) = ρφ1
dv
dR = ηφ1d
R
,
(136)
where v and φ1 are given by Eqs. (35) and (38), respectively. Equation (41) must be compared
with the corresponding results for the impenetrable sphere model: s = ρdv/dR. The surface
correlation functions deﬁned above can also be computed. For example, the surface-surface
correlation function Fss [that is, the limit m = 2, p = 2, and q = 0 of Hn(xn; xp−m; rq)] is given
by
Fss(x1, x2) = −lim
ai→R
∂
∂a1
∂
∂a2
exp[−ρV2(x1, x2; a1, a2)] , ∀i
(137)
and the surface-void correlation function Fsv [that is, the limit m = 1, p = 2, and q = 0 of
Hn(xn; xp−m; rq)] is given by
Fsv(x1, x2) = −lim
a1→R
∂
∂a1
exp[−ρV2(x1, x2; a1, R)] ,
(138)
both of which were ﬁrst derived by Doi (1976). Thus, in general, we need the union volume
V2 of two spheres of radii a1 and a2. The non-trivial part of this computations is determining
the intersection volume vi
2(r; a1, a2). For example, for d = 3 one has vi
2(r; a1, a2) = v(a1) for
0 ≤r ≤a2 −a1; vi
2(r; a1, a2) = 4πf(r; a1, a2)/3 for a2 −a1 ≤r ≤a2 + a1, and vi
2(r; a1, a2) = 0
for r ≥a2 + a1, where
f(r; a1, a2) = −3
16r(a2
2 −a2
1)2 + 1
2(a3
2 + a3
1) −3r
8 (a2
2 + a2
1) + 1
16r3 .
(139)
81

Since there are no correlations in this model, there is no diﬀerence between the void and
particle nearest-neighbor functions, HP(r) = HV (r) = H(r). We can easily see that,
H(r) = ρdv(r)
dr
exp[−ρv(r)] ,
(140)
where v(r) is given by Eq. (35). Using Eqs. (3) and (45), we then obtain
E(r) = exp

−ηvd(x)
vd(1)

,
(141)
where
vd(x) = 1
2d
πd/2xd
Γ(1 + d/2) .
(142)
We can also compute the lineal-path function Lp(z) = L(1)
p (z) for this model. Using Eqs.
(18) and (21), it is not diﬃcult to see that
Lp(z) = exp[−ρvE(z)] ,
(143)
where vE(z) is the d−dimensional volume of the exclusion zone ΩE deﬁned by Eq. (17), which
in d dimensions is given by
vE(z) =
πd/2Rd
Γ(1 + d/2) +
π(d−1)/2Rd−1
Γ[1 + (d −1)/2]z .
(144)
Once Lp(z) is known, the chord-length distribution Lc(z) can be immediately computed using
Eq. (19). Utilizing Eq. (38), we can rewrite the results for Lp(z) in terms of the volume fraction
φ1 of the matrix with the results being,
Lp(x) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
φ1+x
1
,
d = 1 ,
φ1+(4/π)x
1
,
d = 2 ,
φ1+(3/2)x
1
,
d = 3 ,
(145)
where x = z/(2R). Equations (50) indicate that with increasing z the lineal-path function
decreases with the matrix volume fraction, since it becomes increasingly more diﬃcult to insert
a line segment of length z in the matrix.
It will not be diﬃcult to show that, the pore-
size distribution P(δ) is given by, P(δ) = ρφ−1
1 dv/dr exp[−ρV(R + δ)], where the derivative is
evaluated at r = R + δ.
3.4.2.2 Fully-impenetrable spheres
82

Unlike the case of fully-penetrable spheres, the totally-impenetrable sphere model is much
more diﬃcult to analyze, because there are signiﬁcant correlations in the system imposed by
the impenetrability condition. Despite this diﬃculty, signiﬁcant progress has been made.
Torquato (1986b) proved that for fully-impenetrable spheres, and more generally particles
of any shape, many of the n−point correlation functions truncate exactly after n−body terms.
For example,
S2(r) = 1 −2φ2 + ρm ⊗m + ρ2 ⊗m ⊗m ,
(146)
G2(r) = e(r; R)[ρ −ρ2 ⊗m] ,
(147)
Fss(r) = ρδ(r −R) ⊗δ(r −R) + ρ2 ⊗δ(r −R) ⊗δ(r −R) ,
(148)
Fsm(r) = s −ρδ(r −R) ⊗m −ρ2 ⊗δ(r −R) ⊗m ,
(149)
where φ2 is the sphere volume fraction, s is the speciﬁc surface area given, s = ρdv/dR = dη/R,
ρ2(r) is the two-particle probability density, m(r; R) is the exclusion indicator function deﬁned
by Eq. (11) with a = R, e(r; R) is deﬁned by Eq. (12), and ⊗denotes a convolution integral
such that, for example, ρ2⊗m ≡
 ρ2(r′)m(r−r′; R)dr′. For example, for an equilibrium system
of hard rods of length D, an exact expression for S2(x) has been obtained (Torquato and Lado,
1985; Quintanilla and Torquato, 1996):
S2(x) = (1 −η)
M

k=0
1
k!
(x −k)η
1 −η
k
exp

−(x −k)η
1 −η

,
(150)
where x = r12/D and M ≤x ≤M + 1.
Torquato and Stell (1985) evaluated the above convolution integrals for d = 2 and 3 using
a variety of approximations to ρ2(r), such as the Percus-Yevik approximation described above,
and Seaton and Glandt (1986) did done the same using computer simulations.
Figure 3.7
compares the results for S2(r) for fully-penetrable and completely-impenetrable sphere models
for d = 3 and a sphere volume fraction φ2 = 0.6. The diameter of the spheres is unity. As can be
seen, in the case of fully-penetrable spheres S2(r) decreases exponentially until it approaches
its asymptotic value S2(r = 2R) = φ2
1. However, in the case of fully-impenetrable spheres
and for small r, S2(r) oscillates about its long-range value. The oscillations are indicative of
short-range order which is caused by the excluded volume eﬀect. Three-point and higher-order
correlation functions for such models were also evaluated by Torquato (1986b).
83

Similarly, it is diﬃcult to derive analytical, easy-to-use, expressions for the nearest-neighbor
functions for fully-impenetrable sphere model. Note that one must have EP(r) = 1 and HP(r) =
0 for 0 ≤r < 2R. It can also be shown that EV (r) = 1 −ρv(r) and HV (r) = ρs for 0 ≤r ≤R,
where v is the volume of a cavity of radius r. In general, the functions HP(r) and HV (r) are
not truncated series, but are expressed as inﬁnite series. Since for d = 1, i.e., for hard rods, the
n−particle probability density ρn(r) is known exactly for an equilibrium ensemble, HP(r) and
HV (r) can be calculated exactly as well. In fact, Torquato et al. (1990) showed that for rods
Hi(x) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
η
R exp

−η(2x −1)
1 −η

,
x ≥1/2 and i = V ,
2η
D(1 −η) exp

−2η(x −1)
1 −η

,
x ≥1 and i = P,
(151)
where η = ρv is the dimensionless density (volume fraction of the particles) deﬁned above, and
x = r/(2R). For d = 2 an accurate approximation to HP(x) is given by (Torquato et al., 1990)
HP(x) = 4η(2r −η)
(1 −η)2
exp

−
4η
(1 −η)2[x2 −1 + η(x −1)]

, x > 1 ,
(152)
while for d = 3 it is given by
HP(x) = 24η(f1 + f2x + f3x3) exp

−η[24f1(x −1) + 12f2(x2 −1) + 8f3(x3 −1)]

, x > 1 ,
(153)
with
f1 = 1
2η2f(η) ,
f2 = −1
2η(3 + η)f(η) ,
f3 = (1 + η)f(η) ,
(154)
where f(η) = (1−η)−3. Other accurate expressions for HP(x) and HV (x) are given by Torquato
(1995). Given expressions such as Eqs. (56)-(58) for HP(r) and HV (r), the corresponding
equations for EP(r) and EV (r) can be immediately computed using Eq. (3). Accurate approx-
imations for Lp(z) = L(1)
p (z) are given by (Lu and Torquato, 1992a)
Lp(z) = (1 −η) exp

−
ηz
2R(1 −η)

,
d = 1 ,
(155)
Lp(z) = (1 −η) exp

−
2ηz
πR(1 −η)

,
d = 2 ,
(156)
Lp(z) = (1 −η) exp

−
3ηz
4R(1 −η)

,
d = 3 ,
(157)
from which the corresponding expressions for the chord-length distribution Lc(z) can be ob-
tained using Eq. (19). Note that Eq. (60) is exact.
84

Another important property of fully-impenetrable spheres, that can be measured indirectly
by x-ray scattering, is the radial distribution function g(r), where g(r)dr is proportional to the
probability of ﬁnding a particle in the volume element dr at a distance r from a given particle
[in 3D g(r)r2∆r is proportional to the mean number of particles in a shell of radius r and
thickness ∆r surrounding the particle]. Near the random close-packing fraction φcp, the radial
distribution function g(r) follows the following power law (Song et al., 1988; Tobochnick and
Chapin, 1988)
g(r) ∼(φcp −φ)−ζ , r = 2R , φ →φcp ,
(158)
where it appears that ζ = 1 in both 2D and 3D.
Finally, it can be shown that, for any ergodic ensemble of isotropic packings of identical
d−dimensional hard spheres, the mean nearest-neighbor distance ⟨ℓP⟩, deﬁned by Eq. (4), is
bounded from above: ⟨ℓP⟩≤1 + (2dηd)−1.
3.4.2.3 Interpenetrable spheres
Lee and Torquato (1988) calculated by computer simulations the matrix volume fraction
φ1 in the penetrable concentric shell model as a function of the parameter λ. The following
approximate, but very accurate, formulae for φ1 were derived by Rikvold and Stell (1985) which
are in excellent agreement with the numerical results of Lee and Torquato (1988):
φ1(η, λ) = (1 −λdη) exp

−(1 −λd)η
(1 −λdη)d

Ψd(η, λ) ,
(159)
where Ψd(η, λ) is a d−dependent function such that Ψ1 = 1, and
Ψ2(η, λ) = exp

−λ2η2(1 −λ)2
(1 −λ2η)2

,
(160)
Ψ3(η, λ) = exp

−
3λ3η2
2(1 −λ3η)3(2 −3λ + λ3 −3λ4η + 6λ5η −3λ6η)

.
(161)
Note that ηλd represents the hard-core volume fraction in d dimensions.
3.4.3 Distribution of polydispersed spheres
A more realistic version of model of dispersion of spheres is one in which the radii of the
spheres are distributed according to a normalized probability density function f(R). Polydis-
persivity leads to more ﬂexibility in the model and hence can be exploited for a variety of
purposes. It also results in a wider choice of possible deﬁnitions for the various distribution
85

functions discussed above. For example, in studying the nearest-neighbor distribution, one can
specify the nearest sphere surface to a reference point, or the nearest sphere center to a refer-
ence point. These matters have been discussed by Lu and Torquato (1992a,b). What follows
is a summary of the most important results for the microstructure of this class of models in
which every averaged property is deﬁned with respect to the distribution f(R).
3.4.3.1 Fully-penetrable spheres
For this class of models the volume fraction of the matrix can be obtained from a modiﬁca-
tion of Eq. (38) (Chiew and Glandt, 1984),
S1 = φ1 = exp[−ρ⟨v(R)⟩] ,
(162)
and the speciﬁc surface s area is given by
s = ρ∂⟨v(R)⟩
∂R
exp[−ρ⟨v(R)⟩] .
(163)
Stell and Rikvold (1987) showed that
Sn(xn) = exp[−ρ⟨Vn(xn; R, · · · , R)⟩] ,
(164)
where Vn is the union volume of n spheres of radius R deﬁned and discussed above. Moreover,
G2(r) = ρφ1⟨Θ(R −r)⟩.
(165)
The surface correlation functions have also been computed for this class of models. In particular,
for d = 3 one has (Torquato and Lu, 1990)
Fss(r) =

16π2ρ2⟨I(R)2⟩+ 2πρ
r ⟨R2Θ(2R −r)⟩

S2(r) ,
(166)
Fsv(r) = 4πρ⟨I(R)⟩S2(r) ,
(167)
where
I(R) = R2 −
R2
2 −rR
4

Θ(2R −r) ,
(168)
and S2(r) is obtained from Eq. (69).
The lineal-path function has also been computed for this class of models. In order to compute
this function, the exclusion indicator function deﬁned by Eq. (17) must be generalized for a
polydispersed system. In this case one deﬁnes an exclusion region indicator function by
mj(x; z) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 ,
x ∈ΩE(z, Rj)
0 ,
otherwise ,
(169)
86

where Rj is the radius of the jth sphere. The lineal-path function Lp(z) = L(i)
p (z) is then given
by (Lu and Torquato, 1993a,b)
Lp(z) = 1 +
∞

k=1
(−1)k
k!

dR1 · · · dRkf(Rk)ρk(rk; R1, · · · , Rk)
k

j=1
mj(x; z)drj ,
(170)
which is a generalization of Eq. (18) to polydispersed systems. Then, using Eqs. (21) and (75),
one obtains
Lp(z) = exp[−ρ⟨vE(z, R)⟩] ,
(171)
where vE(z, R) is given by Eq. (49). Combining Eqs. (38), (49) and (76), and proceeding in
the same manner as that for the equal-sized particles, we obtain the analogs of Eqs. (50) for
polydispersed systems:
Lp(z) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
φ1+2⟨R⟩z/(π⟨R2⟩)
1
,
d = 2 ,
φ1+3⟨R2⟩z/(4⟨R3⟩)
1
,
d = 3 .
(172)
The corresponding equation for d = 1 is obvious. Using Eqs. (19) and (77), the corresponding
results for the chord-length distribution Lc(z) can be immediately computed.
3.4.3.2 Fully-impenetrable spheres
These models have many intriguing properties, much of which is not well-understood yet.
For example, Henderson et al.
(1996) showed that even a relatively small degree of poly-
dispersivity can completely suppress the order-disorder phase transition seen in monodisperse
hard-sphere model, mentioned in Section 3.4.1.1. In addition, equilibrium mixtures of small
and large hard spheres can phase separate, i.e., the small and large hard spheres demix, at
suﬃciently high densities. However, the nature of such phase transitions (ﬁrst-order versus
second-order) is not understood yet.
Very little is also known about the packing characteristics of polydisperse hard spheres. For
example, even if we consider one of simplest of such polydisperse packings, namely, a binary
mixture of hard spheres of arbitrary radii R1 and R2, its largest achievable packing fraction is
not known. Despite such diﬃculties, some progress has been made which is now summarized.
For polydisperse impenetrable spheres, the following results are known:
S1 = φ1 = 1 −ρ⟨v(R)⟩,
(173)
and the speciﬁc surface area s is given by
s = ρd⟨v(R)⟩
dR
= dη⟨Rd−1⟩
⟨Rd⟩
.
(174)
87

Accurate approximations for the lineal-path function Lp(z) = L(1)
p (z) have also been derived
for this class of models, with the result for a d−dimensional system being,
Lp(z) = φ1 exp

−Γ(1 + 1
2d)η⟨Rd−1⟩
πd/2φ1⟨Rd⟩

.
(175)
If we compare Eq. (80) with Eq. (62), then generalizations of Eqs. (60) and (61) to polydisperse
system become obvious. Given Lp(z), the chord-length distribution Lc(z) can be immediately
computed using Eq. (19).
3.4.4 Simulation of dispersion of spheres
How does one carry out computer simulation of a system of spherical particles? If the spheres
are allowed to overlap, then the simulation is rather straightforward. The problem is more
diﬃcult if one wishes to model the fully-impenetrable spheres model, or to take into account
the eﬀect of the hard cores that the spheres may have (represented by the impenetrability
parameter λ).
The classical method of computer generation of a packing of spherical particles in the fully-
impenetrable spheres model is that of Visscher and Bolsterli (1972).
In their algorithm, a
sphere is dropped into the simulation box from the top. If the particle hits the “ﬂoor,” it stops.
If it hits another particle, say p1, it rolls down on p1 until it hit another particle p2. Then it
rolls on both p1 and p2 until it hits particle p3. If its contact with p1, p2, and p3 is stable, then
it stops. Otherwise, it rolls on the double contacts, and so on. Since the particle’s motion is
always downward, the eﬀect of the gravity is automatically taken into account.
As a simple method that takes into account the eﬀect of the hard core of spherical particles,
consider, for example, a system of d-dimensional spheres. The number N of the particles and
the volume Ωof the system are ﬁxed. The particles are initially placed in a cubical cell (with
volume Ω= Ld) on the sites of a regular lattice, e.g., the face-centered or body-centered lattice.
No hard core overlap is assumed initially. The particles are then moved randomly by a small
distance to new positions. These new positions are either accepted or rejected according to
whether or not the hard cores overlap. One usually uses periodic boundary conditions which
means that if a particle exits from an external face of the system, an idential particle enters the
system from the opposite face of the system. This sort of boundary condition eliminates the
boundary eﬀects, hence allowing one to essentially simulate an inﬁnitely-large system. After the
88

particles have been moved a suﬃciently large number of times, the system reaches equilibrium,
and its conﬁguration no longer changes.
Using such algorithms, Smith and Torquato (1989), Lee and Torquato (1989) and Miller
and Torquato (1990) calculated various mictrostructural and transport properties of the sphere
model, and compared the results with the theoretical results discussed above.
3.4.5 Models of anisotropic materials
The models based on dispersion of spheres can be signiﬁcantly generalized to anisotropic
media, either particulate or ﬁbrous, that are composed of particles of arbitrary shapes inserted
in a matrix. For example, a two-phase anisotropic material may be composed of a background
matrix and ellipsoidal inclusions inserted in the matrix, an example of which is shown in Figure
3.8. Alternatively, the material may be composed of a background matrix with long ﬁbers,
represented by sticks of ﬁxed aspect ratios, inserted in the matrix. Many of the results for
dispersion of spheres that were discussed above can be generalized to such models. The key
idea, developed by Torquato and Sen (1990), is to generalize the inclusion indicator function
m(x), deﬁned by Eq. (11), to non-spherical inclusions in which each conﬁgurational coordinate
is fully speciﬁed by its center-of-mass position. Consider a point x = (x1, · · · , xd), where xi
denotes the component of x in the principal axes coordinate system with i = 1, · · · , d. Then,
for a rectangle with sides of lengths 2a and 2b one has
m(x) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 ,
|x1| ≤a and |x2| ≤b ,
0 ,
otherwise.
(176)
For a rectangular parallelepiped with sides 2a, 2b, and 2c, we have
m(x) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 ,
|x1| ≤a and |x2| ≤b and |x3| ≤c ,
0 ,
otherwise.
(177)
For an ellipse with axes of lengths 2a and 2b, one has
m(x) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 ,
x2
1/a2 + x2
2/b2 ≤1 ,
0 ,
otherwise.
(178)
For an ellipsoidal inclusion with axes of lengths 2a, 2b and 2c, the inclusion indicator function
is given by
m(x) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 ,
x2
1/a2 + x2
2/b2 + x2
3/c2 ≤1 ,
0 ,
otherwise.
(179)
89

Finally, the inclusion indicator function for a circular cylinder of diameter 2R and length 2ℓis
given by
m(x) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 ,
x2
1 + x2
2 ≤R2 and |x3| ≤ℓ,
0 ,
otherwise.
(180)
In these examples, the material’s microstructure is similar to that of an idealized nematic
liquid crystal in which there are long-range orientational order and short-range positional order.
Clearly, one may also consider cylindrical inclusions with elliptical or rectangular cross sections.
The n−point matrix probability functions Sn(xn) for fully-penetrable inclusions are still
given by Eq. (22), except that Vn, the union volume of n oriented inclusions centered at xn,
must be computed. For n = 2 or 3 this can be done analytically. For example, for rectangular
inclusions and oriented parallelepipeds, one has
V2(x) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
8ab −(2a −x)(2b −y)Θ(2a −x)Θ(2b −y) ,
d = 2 ,
16abc −(2a −x)(2b −y)(2c −z)Θ(2a −x)Θ(2b −y)Θ(2c −z) ,
d = 3 ,
(181)
where, for example, x = |x|, and x, y and z are the distances between the centroids of the
two rectangular or parallelepiped regions in the x1, x2 and x3 directions, respectively. For
spheroidal inclusions in which a = c, and their symmetry axis is alligned with the z−axis, we
have V2(r) = 8
3πa2b −vi
2(r), where
vi
2 = 4
3πa2b
⎧
⎨
⎩1 −3
4
r
R(θ) + 1
16

r
R(θ)
3⎫
⎬
⎭Θ[2R(θ) −r] ,
(182)
where R(θ) = a[1 −(1 −a2/b2) cos2 θ]−1/2.
For circular cylindrical inclusions we have
V2(x) = 4πa2b −(2b −|x cos θ|)I(|x sin θ|)Θ(2a −|x sin θ|)Θ(2b −|x sin θ|) ,
(183)
where θ is the polar angle that x makes with the x3 axis, and
I(x) = 2a2
⎛
⎝cos−1 x
2a −x
2a
!
1 −x2
4a2
⎞
⎠Θ(2a −r)
(184)
Clearly, one may still generalize the above methodology to the cases where the inclusions are,
for example, long sticks or ﬁbers, which are reasonable models of ﬁbrous materials, such as
printing papers.
3.4.6 Tessellation models of cellular materials
90

There is a large class of natural or man-made materials that have cellular microstructure.
Examples include corks, balsa, sponge, cancellous bone, wood, foods such as chocolate bar,
foams, emulsions, a wide variety of biological materials, cracked mud, surfaces of shrunken gels,
and many more. Materials can also be fabricated to have a cellular microstructure. Examples
include metals, ceramics, glasses, and composites. Such materials have wide applications in
thermal insulation, packaging, structural materials (for example, wood, cancellous bone, and
coral), ﬂoating materials (for example, plastic foams used for ﬂotation in boats), and many
other applications. Moreover, foams are used (Weaire and Hutzler, 1999) as ﬁlters, carriers
for inks, dyes, lubricants and enzymes, and as water-repellent membranes. Gibson and Ashby
(1997) provide a detailed discussion of cellular solids and their properties. We will discuss in
the subsequent chapters the transport properties of some of such materials.
A cellular solid is composed of an interconnected network of solid struts or plates which form
the edges and faces of the cell. Figure 3.9 shows two well-known examples, a 2D honeycomb
and a 3D foam. Honeycomb represents the simplest type of such materials as it is made of
regular and equal-size polygons which pack to ﬁll a plane. More generally, one may consider
3D structures in which polyhedra pack to ﬁll the space, an example of which is the foam shown
in Figure 3.9. An important characteristic of a cellular solid is its relative density, ρr = ρc/ρs,
where ρc is the density of the cellular material, and ρs is the density of the material from which
the cells are made. There are foams with ρr as low as 10−3. Polymeric foams, which have wide
applications in cushioning, packaging and insulation, have 0.05 < ρr < 0.2.
The ubiquity of cellular materials has inspired development of a class of models for their mi-
crostructure which we call the tessellation models. Such models are constructed by partitioning
or tessellating the space into cells - polygons or polyhedra - and designating, either randomly
or according to a given correlation function, some of the cells as phase 1, some as phase 2,
etc. The morphology of the model and the corresponding cellular material, and hence their
overall properties, depend on the size, shape and connectivity of the cells. However, while the
cells’ sizes do have an eﬀect on the overall properties of the model and material, their shapes
are more important to their macroscopic features. Depending on the intended application, the
cells can have a variety of shapes. In some cases they have regular shapes, while in other cases
they may have very irregular structures. If the cells are isotropic, i.e., if they are equiaxed,
the material’s macroscopic properties are also isotropic. However, if the cells are even slightly
91

anisotropic, e.g., if they are slightly elongated, then the material has direction-dependent prop-
erties and behaves anisotropically. Each cell has two connectivity characteristics. One is the
connectivity Zf of cell faces which is the number of faces that meet at an edge. Its value can
be as high as six, although it is typically three. The second one is Ze, the connectivity of the
cell edges, which is the number of edges that meet at a node or vertex. For example, in a
honeycomb made of hexagons the edge connectivity is Ze = 3, while in foams it is usually 4,
but can be higher. In more general multiphase materials the local connectivity of cells of the
same type plays a crucial role in the materials’ macroscopic properties. For example, if cells
of phase 1 form sample-spanning pathways between two opposite faces of the material, then
the material’s properties are dominated by those of phase 1. The eﬀect of the connectivity is
quantiﬁed by percolation theory which was the subject of Chapter 2. Due to the ﬂexibility
that one is aﬀorded in developing a tessellation models of cellular materials, such models can
be tailored to closely mimic the materials’ microstructure.
Compared with 2D cellular materials and their models, the 3D materials are much more
complex. Although the Greek mathematician Plateau identiﬁed a rhombic dodecahedron, a
twelve-faced, garnet shaped ﬁgure, as the basic building block of 3D cellular solids which can
ﬁll the space, this does not provide the most eﬃcient way of doing so, in the sense of minimizing
the surface area per unit volume. Up until recently, it was believed that the space-ﬁlling 3D
cell that has this property is Kelvin’s tetrakaidecahedron with slightly curved faces; see Figure
3.10. However, using computer simulations Weaire and Phelan (1994) identiﬁed a unit cell with
a surface area per unit volume which is lower than that of Kelvin’s cell by about 0.3%; this
is also shown in Figure 3.10. The Weaire-Phelan unit cell is made of six 14-sided cells, with
12 pentagonal and 2 hexagonal faces, and two pentagonal dodecahedra, all of equal volume.
While the hexagonal faces are planar, the pentagonal faces are curved. The 14-sided cells are
arranged in three orthogonal axes with the 12-sided cells lying in the interstices between them.
This generates an overall simple-cubic lattice structure.
It may be useful to think of the tessellation models as consistying of vertices, joined by
edges, which surround faces, which enclose cells (in 2D faces and cells become the same). If V ,
E, F and C are, respectively, the number of vertices, edges, faces and cells, then according to
Euler’s law
F −E + V = 1 ,
2D ,
(185)
92

−C + F −E + V = 1 , 3D .
(186)
Euler’s law has several interesting consequences.
For example, a honeycomb with regular
hexagonal cells has six edges surrounding each face.
Euler’s law dictates that an irregular
three-connected honeycomb also has, on average, six sides per face. Hence, if, for example, a
four-sided face is introduced into the system, then an eight-sided face should also be inserted
somewhere in the system; insertion of a ﬁve-sided face requires a complementary insertion of a
seven-sided face, and so on. The practical implication of Euler’s law is that, most cells have six
sides, and those which do not are paired. To see how Euler’s law dictates this, note that since
Ze = 3 and each edge is shared between two vertices, we have E/V = 3/2. If fn is the number
of faces with n sides, since an edge separates 2 faces, we must have,

n nfn/2 = E. We then
have, from Euler’s law, 6 −

n nfn/F = 6/F. As F increases, 6/F becomes negligibly small.
Moreover,

n nfn/F is just the average number of sides per face, ⟨n⟩, and therefore ⟨n⟩= 6 in
2D. More generally, with an edge-coordination number Ze we have
⟨n⟩=
2Ze
Ze −2 ,
(187)
so that with Ze = 3 one obtains ⟨n⟩= 6. It is not easy to generalize Eq. (92) to 3D. However,
for an isolated cell (C = 1) with an edge connectivity of Ze and face-connectivity of Zf we have
⟨n⟩= ZeZf
Ze −2

1 −2
f

,
(188)
where f is the number of faces. Typically, of course, Ze = 3 and Zf = 2, so that
⟨n⟩= 6

1 −2
f

.
(189)
Observe that, Eq. (94) predicts that if f varies from 12 (for dodecahedra cells) to 20 (for
icosdahedra), ⟨n⟩varies only between 5 and 5.4. This explains why most foams have faces with
ﬁve edges, regardless of the shape of their basic cell. Many grain boundaries in metals and
ceramics have f ≈14 and ⟨n⟩≈5.1.
As mentioned above, it is generally true that a cell with more sides than the average has
neighbors which, taken together, have less than the average number. This observation is de-
scribed for honeycombs by the Aboav-Weaire rule (Aboav, 1970; Weaire, 1974):
⟨m⟩= 5 + 6
n ,
(190)
93

where n is the number of edges of the candidate call and ⟨m⟩is the average number of edges
of its n neighbors. Equation (95) is sometimes written in a more general form, ⟨m⟩= 6 −a +
n−1(6a + µ2), where a is a parameter that is of the order of unity for many natural structures,
and µ2 is the second moment of the probability distribution of ﬁnding a cell with n edges. On
the other hand, Lewis (1923) (see Lewis, 1946, for details) observed that in a variety of 2D
cellular patterns the area A(n) of a cell with n sides is given by
A(n)
A(⟨n⟩) = n −2
⟨n⟩−2 ,
(191)
where A(⟨n⟩) is the area of a cell with the average number of sides ⟨n⟩. This rule was actually
proven by Rivier and Lessowski (1982). Moreover, Rivier (1982) generalized Eq. (96) to 3D to
show that the volume Ω(f) of a polyhedron cell with f faces satisﬁes the following equation
Ω(f)
Ω(⟨f⟩) = f −3
⟨f⟩−3 .
(192)
A particularly simple model is constructed by tessellating a d−dimensional cubical subspace
into M d identical d−dimensional cubical cells, with the cells randomly and independently des-
ignated as phase 1 (say, white cells) or phase 2 (say, black cells) with probabilities (volume
fractions) φ1 and φ2, respectively. The black cells correspond to the particles in the fully-
impenetrable spheres model. Suppose that N is the total number of the black cells, so that the
black cells’ volume fraction is φ2 = N/M d. Lu and Torquato (1990) showed that for this model
ρn(rn) =
N!
(N −n)!
(M d −n)!
M d!
n

i=1
⎡
⎣
Md

j=1
δ(ri −Rj)
⎤
⎦
i,j
θ(i, j) ,
(193)
where
θ(i, j) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
0 ,
ri = rj ,
1 ,
otherwise,
(194)
and Rj denotes the position of the center of the jth cell. Given ρn(rn), one can calculate other
important properties of the model. For example, an important property of this model is that,
although S1(x) = φ1 = 1 −N/M d, for points within the system the higher-order quantities
depend on the absolute positions rn, indicating that the system is statistically inhomogeneous.
Suppose, for example, that x1 and x2 lie anywhere in the same white cell. Then,
S2(x1, x2) = φ1 ,
(195)
94

whereas if x1 and x2 lie anywhere in diﬀerent white cells, then
S2(x1, x2) = 1 −2φ2 + φ2
φ2 −1/M
1 −1/M .
(196)
So far, we have discussed tessellation models in which all the cells have the same size. How-
ever, natural cellular materials usually have a range of cell sizes. The size distribution can be
very narrow or very broad, with over two orders of magnitude diﬀerence between the smallest
and largest cell sizes. One particularly well-known model for such cases is the Voronoi tessel-
lation (Voronoi, 1908), mentioned in Chapter 2, which is also known as Dirichlet tessellation,
and is sometimes referred to as the Wigner-Seitz cell (see Figure 3.2). In this model one ﬁrst
creates a 2D or 3D simulation box and tessellate it by inserting a number of random (Poisson)
points in it, each of which is the basis for a Voronoi polygon or polyhedron, which is that part
of the space which is nearer to its Poisson point than to any other Poisson point. In practice,
the Voronoi tessellation of space is done by ﬁrst joining the Poisson points by straight lines and
then bisecting these by plane surfaces. The envelope of the surface which surrounds a point
is its Voronoi polyhedron or cell. In 2D, the boundary of the Voronoi polygon is composed
of segments of the perpendicular bisectors of each edge that connects a Poisson point to its
nearest-neighbor sites, which are the points that share a Voronoi edge. In 3D, the boundary of
a Voronoi polyhedron consists of planes that perpendicularly bisect each edge that connects a
Poisson point to its nearest-neighbor sites, which are those points that share a Voronoi face. A
2D example is shown in Figure 3.11.
Although this model may seem somewhat artiﬁcial, it in fact arises naturally in several
important problems. For example, if in the fully-impenetrable spheres model the spheres are
non-conducting and transport in the composite is through the matrix in between the non-
overlapping spheres, then the transport problem can be mapped exactly onto an equivalent
problem on the edges of the Voronoi polyhedra. The model also has applications in theory
of liquids, ﬂow through packed-bed reactors, biology, metreology, metallurgy, crystallography,
forestry, ecology, and several other important problems and phenomena. Note that for the
Voronoi model in 2D, ⟨n⟩= 6 (which is dictated by Euler’s law), while in 3D each Voronoi
polyhedron has on average f ≈15.54 faces not 14. The surface (in 2D) and volume (in 3D)
of the Voronoi cells also follow Eq. (96) and Eq. (97), respectively. Moreover, Gilbert (1962)
showed that for the Voronoi model the two-point probability function S2(r) deﬁned above is
95

given by a double quadrature. Many other properties of this model have been determined either
analytically (see, for example, Meijering, 1953) or by computer simulations (see, for example,
Winterfeld et al., 1981).
3.4.7 Gaussian random ﬁeld models of amorphous materials
Neither dispersion of spheres nor the tessellation models can be accurate representation of
amorphous materials which arise in alloys, microemulsions, some polymers, and many other
materials. Although the overlapping spheres model can capture certain features of such mate-
rials, it also suﬀers from several shortcomings. For example, the inclusion and matrix phases
are not topologically equivalent; due to overlap between the spheres there are not long-range
correlations in the system, and the interface between the matrix and the inclusion phase is
spherical. For these reasons, the overlapping spheres model has not been used extensively for
modelling amorphous materials.
To remedy these shortcomings, a new class of models has been developed in which the
interface between the phases is taken to be a level cut of a random ﬁeld. The original idea was
developed by Cahn (1965) who was studying the morphology that is inﬂuenced by spinodal
decomposition in isotropic two-phase systems.
Berk (1987, 1991) generalized the model in
order to study scattering properties of microemulsions, while Roberts and Teubner (1995) and
Roberts and Knackstedt (1996) made further reﬁnements in order to study transport properties
of amorphous heterogeneous materials. We follow the last two papers and describe the essentials
of this interesting class of models.
Consider a Gaussian random ﬁeld (GRF) y(r) and let the level sets y(r) = α deﬁne the
interface between the two phases of a two-phase material, with y > α being phase 1. The
probability distribution function Sn(rn) is given by the volume average
Sn(rn) = ⟨H(y1 −α) · · · H(yn −α)⟩,
(197)
where H(y) is the Heaviside function and yi = y(ri). We assume that the material is macro-
scopically homogeneous and isotropic, so that volume and ensemble averages are equivalent.
The joint probability density function of yi is assumed to be given by
Pn(y1, y2, · · · , yn) =
1
$
(2π)n|G|
exp

−1
2yTG−1y

,
(198)
96

where the elements of G, gij = ⟨yiyj⟩, usually referred to as the ﬁeld-ﬁeld correlation functions,
are given by
gij = 4π
 ∞
0
ω2S(ω)sin ω|ri −rj|
ω|ri −rj| dω ,
(199)
where S(ω) is the spectral density of the random ﬁeld, i.e., the Fourier transformation of its
covariance. However, in general, Pn(y) does not have to be Gaussian. The lower-order n−point
probability functions Sn(xn), deﬁned by
Sn(xn) = ⟨Πn
i=1Θ[y(xi) −y0]⟩=
 ∞
−∞· · ·

) −∞∞{Πn
i=1Θ[y(xi) −y0]} Pn(y)dy ,
(200)
from which we can immediately obtain
Sn =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
φ1 =
1
√
2π
 ∞
α
exp

−1
2t2

dt ,
n = 1 ,
1
2π
 gij
0
exp

−y2
0
1 + t

1
√
1 −t2dt + φ2
1 ,
n = 2 ,
(201)
so that if we specify φ1, the corresponding value of α can be computed (for example, α = 0 for
φ1 = 0.5). Therefore, if the spectral density S(ω) is speciﬁed, the ﬁeld-ﬁeld correlation function
and hence the GRF can be generated. Then, phase 1 is identiﬁed by the region y > α and the
interface between the two phases is deﬁned by the level sets y(r) = α.
The above model has proven to be very useful for describing many materials. However, it
is not completely appropriate for describing a class of two-phase materials in which one of the
phases remains sample-spanning down to very low values of its volume fraction. An example
is polystyrene foam, a highly porous material shown in Figure 3.12. The solid phase has a
sheet-like structure which is quite diﬀerent from those found in cellular, particulate, or even
the one-level cut GRF models described above. As a result, the one-level cut GRF model is not
capable of producing the mictrostructure of this material, and in particular the sample-spanning
solid phase at very low volume fractions. To address this problem, Roberts and Knackstedt
(1996) deﬁned phase 1 to be the region in space where α ≤y(r) ≤β, with the remaining space
being phase 2, and therefore the interface between the two phases is deﬁned by a two-level
cut. In the limit β →∞one recovers the one-level cut model described above. This model is
much more ﬂexible than the one-level cut model. Roberts and Knackstedt (1996) considered a
ﬁeld-ﬁeld correlation function similar to Eq. (104), except that the upper limit of the integral
was cut oﬀat a value K, so that
gK(r) = 4π
 K
0
ω2S(ω)sin ωr
ωr
dω ,
(202)
97

where K is a parameter of the model. Given the volume fraction φ1 one must now specify the
parameters α and β. There are several ways of doing so. For example, one requires that an
equivalent fraction of phase 1 lie on either side of a particular level cut y(r) = γ, so that the
model is in some sense “symmetric.” Then, a parameter s deﬁned by
s =
1
√
2π
 ∞
γ
exp

−1
2t2

dt ,
(203)
is introduced; clearly s ∈[0, 1]. For a given φ1, the parameters α and β are deﬁned through
the relations
1
2φ1 =
1
√
2π
 γ
α exp

−1
2t2

dt =
1
√
2π
 β
γ exp

−1
2t2

dt .
(204)
Roberts and Knackstedt (1996) considered two classes of models. One, model I, was deﬁned by
S(ω) =
1
Nπ2[(1 −ν2 + ω2)2 + 4ν2] ,
(205)
where N is a renormalization constant to ensure that gK(0) = 1, ν is a model parameter, and
lim
K→∞gK(r) = e−r sin νr
νr
.
(206)
Model II was deﬁned by
S(ω) =
3
4π(µ3 −1)[H(µ) −H(1)] , µ > 1 ,
(207)
gK(r) = 3(sin µr −µr cos µr −sin r + r cos r)
r3(µ3 −1)
, µ ≤K .
(208)
Figure 3.13 shows the resulting model material using model II with s = 0.5, µ = 1.5 and
φ1 = 0.2. The dark region is deﬁned by −0.253 < y(r) < 0.253. In this case the model contains
highly connected structures. Figure 3.14 presents the result using model I with s = 0.5, φ1 = 0.2
and ν = 0. The light region corresponds to −0.253 < y(r) < 0.253. Finally, Figure 3.15 depicts
the model material using model II and the same parameters as in Figure 3.12 but with s = 0.2.
In this case, the dark region is deﬁned by −1.28 < y(r) < −0.253. As can be seen, by varying a
few parameters one can generate a wide variety of interesting microstructures which, in many
cases, appear very realistic. In addition, transport properties of such model materials can be
computed and compared with the relevant experimental data. This comparison can be used
for tuning the parameters of the model.
3.5 Discrete Models
98

So far, we have discussed models of microstructure of heterogeneous materials that are
considered as a sort of disordered continua. We now describe the discrete models that have been
used extensively in the development of statistical physics of disordered media. These models
have proven to be particularly useful when the heterogeneous system or material contains
several phases, one or more of which are sample-spanning. Then, the behavior of the material
in the vicinity of the percolation threshold of a given phase, i.e., the point at which the phase
becomes sample-spanning, is particularly interesting and is described by percolation theory, the
essential elements of which were described in Chapter 2. What follows is a brief description
of the discrete models. In the subsequent chapters, where we study the transport properties
of heterogeneous materials using such models, more properties of the discrete models will be
described.
3.5.1 Network models
The idea of representing a disordered material by a network is particularly self-evident and
intuitively appealing for at least one class of such materials, namely, microporous materials,
since it is clear to everyone that ﬂuid paths in such materials may branch and, later on, join
one another. This prompted many people to think of a network model of the pore space of a
microporous material in which the network’s bonds represent in some sense the ﬂow paths or
channels that connect the network’s sites where the ﬂow paths meet. To each bond is assigned
an eﬀective radius or, equivalently, an eﬀective ﬂow conductance which can be selected from
a probability density function that can, in principle, be measured. The network may have a
disordered topology, such that the coordination number Z of each node, i.e., the number of
bonds that are connected to the node, is distributed according to a probability density function.
An example is provided by the Voronoi network, which is obtained by joining by straight lines
the centers of the polygons or polyhedra in the Voronoi tessellation model described above.
Alternatively, the network can have an ordered topology, so that the coordination number is
the same everywhere. Examples include the networks that one can contruct by using simple-
cubic lattices. Although the idea of using a network to represent the pore space of a porous
medium is intuitively clear and has been used for a long time (see, for example, Sahimi, 1993b,
1995b for reviews), it was only in the beginning of 1980s that Mohanty (1981) and Lin and
Cohen (1982) provided a rigorous mathematical foundation to such modelling approaches.
99

More generally, one may consider the bonds of a network to be resistors with conductances
that are selected from a probability distribution function. Then, a fraction p1 of the bonds
are designated as phase 1, a fraction p2 as phase 2, and so on. Each phase may have its own
probability desnity function for the its bonds’ conductances. In this way, one obtains a discrete
model of a multiphase material that can be used for studying such transport properties as the
eﬀective conductivity of the material. If vector transport properties, such as the leastic moduli
of the material, are of interest, then each bond represents an elastic element, such as a spring
or beam, to which eﬀective elastic constants are assigned.
Such network models can also be obtained from discretization of the governing equations for
transport processes in heterogeneous media. Depending on whether one uses a ﬁnite-diﬀerence
or a ﬁnite-element approach for discretizing the transport equations, a variety of networks can
be obtained. These matters will be discussed in the subsequent chapters where we study various
transport processes.
3.5.2 Bethe lattice models
Aside from the discrete one-dimensional models described in 3.2, the simplest discrete mod-
els are branching networks which are based on the Bethe lattices of a given coordination number,
an example of which is shown in Figure 2.5. Such models have been used routinely in the statis-
tical mechanics literature for investigating critical phenomena in the mean-ﬁeld approximation.
As far as their applicability to modelling heterogeneous media is concerned, branching networks
suﬀer from two major shortcomings. First, although they contain interconnected bonds that
can mimic the interconnectivity of the microscopic elements of a heterogeneous material, they
lack closed loops of bonds which restricts the interactions between the microscopic elements.
Secondly, for a Bethe lattice of coordination number Z, the ratio R of the number of sites on
the external surface of the network and the total number of sites in the lattice is given by
R = Z −2
Z −1 ,
(209)
which takes on ﬁnite values for any Z ̸= 2, whereas for large 3D networks, and indeed most
real materials, this ratio is essentially zero. Thus, surface eﬀects strongly aﬀect the properties
of a Bethe lattice, leading to anomalous phenomena such as those discussed by Hughes and
Sahimi (1982) who investigated diﬀusion processes on such lattices.
The advantage of the
Bethe lattice models is that it is often possible to derive analytical equations for the properties
100

of interest. Surprisingly, some of the predictions of these equations agree quite well with those
of 3D systems. An example is conduction in disordered Bethe lattices that will be described
and discussed in Chapter 5 and 6, and also Chapter 3 of Volume II.
To our knowledge, Liao and Scheidegger (1969) and Torelli and Scheidegger (1972) were the
ﬁrst to use the Bethe lattices for modelling transport in a disordered system which, in their
case, was a porous medium. They studied the phenomenon of hydrodynamic dispersion, i.e.,
mixing of two miscible ﬂuids ﬂowing in a porous medium, where the medium was modeled by
a Bethe lattice. Others have used Bethe lattices to model transport and chemical reactions in
catalytic and non-catalytic materials (for a review see Sahimi et al., 1990). Stinchcombe (1973,
1974) appears to be the ﬁrst to use this model for calculating the electrical conductivity of
disordered materials (see Chapters 5 and 6, and also Chapter 3 of Volume II).
3.6 Reconstruction of Heterogeneous Materials: Simulated Annealing
The models discussed so far can be accurate representation of a large class of materials.
However, a challenging problem is generating a realization of a heterogeneous material given
speciﬁc but, by necessity, limited microstructural information on the material. In this context,
limited microstructural information implies lower-order statistical correlation functions, such
as those discussed above. One hurdle to this diﬃcult problem is that, often the information
that is available is only from 2D cross sections of the material, whereas the goal is to infer the
3D microstructure from the 2D information. Moreover, the degree with which the structure of
a real material can be mimicked by a model which is constructed based on low-order statistical
information provides us with important insight about the usefulness of the correlation and
distribution functions described above. In particular, the solution of this problem yields insight
into the usefulness of two-point correlation functions that can be measured experimentally by
small-angle scattering (see Section 2.3.2).
A heavily-used method for constructing a model of a heterogeneous material is based on the
Gaussian random ﬁelds (GRF) that were described above (for a review see, for example, Levitz,
1998). However, a fundamental problem may limit, at least in some cases, the usefulness of
model construction methods based on the GRFs. This limitation is the fact that the material’s
microstructure may be correlated (in fact, in practice that is usually the case) with a relatively
large correlation length, and therefore its reconstruction cannot be done with models such as
101

the GRF model. In addition, as discussed above, the GRF approach assumes that in order to
construct a model it suﬃces to specify the volume fractions of the two phases and the standard
two-point correlation functions (such as the power spectra). However, imposing constraints
only on the volume fractions, which represent the ﬁrst moments of the distribution functions,
and the two-point correlation functions, may not be adequate as GRFs have the property that
their higher-order cumulants are all zero. On the other hand, imposing constraints on the
higher-order cumulants of the distribution and correlation functions is not straightforward and,
as a result, it is not clear to what extent the generated model can match the actual material,
even if the material can in fact be modeled by a GRF.
A natural approach to the reconstruction problem, i.e., one in which one tries to develop
a model that can mimic certain amount and type of experimental information, is to formulate
it as an optimization problem. Then, the most appropriate model is one that minimizes the
diﬀerences between the properties of the model and the data measured for these properties. In
this method one starts with a reference system – one for which one has some microstructural
information which has been either measured directly, or has been “guessed” based on intuition
and insight.
Then, an optimization method is used to search for the best model that can
reproduce those aspects of the reference model for which experimental information is available.
One of the most eﬃcient optimization algorithms is simulated annealing (SA) developed by
Kirkpatrick et al. (1983). It is particularly useful for those systems where a global minimum is
hidden among many local extrema. It is based on a well-known physical fact which states that
if a system is heated to a high temperature T and then slowly cooled down to absolute zero, the
system equilibrates to its ground state. At a given T, the probability of ﬁnding the system in
a state with energy H is given by the Boltzmann distribution, P(H) ∼exp(−H/kBT), where
kB is the Boltzmann’s constant. Given an optimization problem, SA can be used if one has,
(1) a set of possible conﬁgurations of the system;
(2) a method for systematically changing the conﬁguration;
(3) an “energy” function, in analogy with the work of Kirkpatrick et al. (1983), to minimize,
and
(4) an annealing schedule of changing a temperature-like variable, so that the system can
reach its minimum at which the model takes on its optimal conﬁguration that honors the
experimental data.
102

The precise procedure according to which this method is implemented is as follows. One
starts with a model of the reference system. Then, SA is used to ﬁnd an appropriate pattern of,
say, the spatial distribution of various phases of the reference system, given the experimental
information about material. From our point of view, the most important issue to be resolved
is to ﬁnd out how the two (or more) phases are distributed, so that the transport properties of
the model can mimic those of the reference system, and hence honor the data.
For the starting model of microstructure of a heterogeneous material the ﬁrst requirement
depends on the type of the material that one is dealing with. For example, if the material is
known to be particulate, then clearly the appropriate starting model is a dispersion of inclusions,
distributed in a background matrix. Suppose {C} denotes the set of all possible conﬁgurations
of such a model that we are to develop. We need one or more criteria according to which we
can select the most approriate model from the set {C}. Requirement (3) does in fact provide
a method according to which a given conﬁguration of the model is changed until the most
appropriate is reached. To make the discussion concrete, imagine that we wish to develop
a model for a two-phase composite material consisting of conducting and insulating phases.
Then {C} is the set of all conﬁgurations of the system in which some portions of the system are
“on,” i.e., they allow conduction, and some are “oﬀ,” i.e., they are insulators. Suppose that one
assigns a probability function for randomly selecting a microscopic portion of the system. Then,
if the selected portion is on, it is turned oﬀand vice-versa. This generates a new conﬁguration
of the system. One now deﬁnes the “neighborhood” NC of C as the set of all conﬁgurations
that are very close to C or, loosely speaking, they are one step away from C. Annealing the
system means picking a conﬁguration from NC and comparing it with C. In order to make the
comparison precise, one needs to deﬁne an “energy” H – the third ingredient of SA. Usually H
is deﬁned by
H =

j
|f(Mj) −f(Sj)|γ ,
(210)
where Mj and Sj are vectors of measured and simulated responses, respectively, γ a constant and
f(x) a real monotonic function. The measured data could supply morphological information or
provide data about the transport or other properties of the system. A probability distribution
of the conﬁgurations is then assumed to be expressable as a Boltzmann distribution,
P(C) = a exp[H(C)/kT] ,
(211)
103

where a is the renormalization constant which is very diﬃcult to estimate, because one must
know the energy of all conﬁgurations, which is impossible, and T is a temperature-like variable
to be deﬁned below.
Because P(C) is a Boltzmann distribution, C, the current conﬁguration, can be modeled
as a Markov random ﬁeld, which means that the transition probability for moving from C
to C′ depends only on C and C′ and not on the previous conﬁgurations from the set {C}.
Thus, the transition probability can change from conﬁguration to conﬁguration, but it does
not depend on the previous conﬁgurations that were examined. Therefore, given C and NC,
the transition probability for moving from C to C′ (given our current conﬁguration C) is equal
to the probability that we select C′, times the probability that the system would make the
transition to a given conﬁguration C′. Therefore,
P{C →C′|C} =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
0
C′ /∈NC
P(C′|C) × 1
C′ ∈NC,
H(C′) −H(C) ≤0 ,
P(C′|C) exp{[H(C) −H(C′)]/T}
C′ ∈NC ,
H(C′) −H(C) > 0 ,
(212)
where for the last equation we must have C ̸= C′. The ﬁnal ingredient of the model is a schedule
for lowering the temperature as annealing proceeds. This means that as annealing continues,
one is less likely to keep those conﬁgurations that increase H. For example, an ad hoc, but
eﬀective, schedule was suggested by Press et al. (1992) who proposed that the temperature
should be changed after a number of conﬁguration iterations which is suﬃcient to produce
a ﬁxed number of acceptable changes. At the end of each iteration i, the temperature Ti is
decreased using a geometric series
Ti+1 = TiRi
i ,
(213)
where 0 < Ri < 1. Thus, one only needs to select the initial temperature. This is selected
such that it is of the same order of magnitude as the energy diﬀerence between the ﬁrst two
conﬁgurations, so that the energy diﬀerence between successive conﬁgurations remains (most of
the time) between zero and 1. This schedule does not, however, guarantee convergence to the
true optimal conﬁguration, but it is usually eﬀective. Alternatively, one may use the Metropolis
algorithm as the acceptance criterion, in which case the logarithmic annealing schedule which
104

deacreases the temperature according to
Ti ∼1
ln i ,
(214)
would evolve the system to its ground state. Of course, such a logarithmic schedule may also
cause very slow convergence.
However, the convergence of the system to the true optimal
conﬁguration is ensured.
What does one do if, for example, quantitative information, such as the range of possible
responses, is available, but there are no actual measurements?
For example, suppose one
wishes to predict the electrical current I at a point in the system far from a point at which a
measurement was done, and has the information that the currents were observed to be between
a and b, I ∈[a, b]. In this case, each time a conﬁguration is changed, the following steps are
also taken:
(1) The new point is added to the conﬁguration and I is calculated at that point;
(2) a new energy function H′ is calculated such that H′ = 0, if the calculated I is in [a, b],
H′ = (I −a)γ, if Q < a, and H′ = (I −b)γ if Q > b;
(3) if H(C′) + H′(C′) < H(C) + H′(C), then C′ is kept. Otherwise, the usual annealing
probability is used to keep or reject C′, and
(4) ﬁnally, the new point is removed and the process continues.
This completes the SA method for selecting a conﬁguration of a two-phase material that
mimics its important features and reproduces its measured properties.
Summary
Several classes of realistic models for the morphology of a wide variety of heterogeneous
materials are now available. Depending on the available computational power, and the extent of
accurate experimental data for the morphological characteristics of a material, one can generate
a model of a material in considerable detail, and employ the techniques that will be described in
the subsequent chapters to estimate its transport properties. Each class of models has its own
strengths and weaknesses. At the same time, there is no “universal” model that can be used for
every type of material. Therefore, depending on the complexity of a material’s microstructure,
the amount of information available for the microstructure, and the computational power that
is available, one may choose the appropriate model to represent a material.
105

Captions
Figure 3.1. Model of copper benzoate that shows the magnetic chains. Black circles rep-
resent the Cu atoms, large circles the O(C6H5COO−) complex, while small circles show the
O(H2O) molecules.
Figure 3.2. The Wigner-Seitz cell, which can be thought of as the ordered version of a
Voronoi cell.
Figure 3.3. Two-dimensional model of overlapping disks (or inﬁnitely-long cylinders). The
radii of the disks are distributed uniformaly.
Figure 3.4. The cherry-pit, or the penetrable-concentric shell, model. The diameter of the
hard particles (the black circles) is 2R, while the diameter of their impenetrable hard core
(black circles plus the core around them) is 2λR.
Figure 3.5. Chord-length distribution function Lc vs dimensionless distance z/2⟨R⟩for a
3D fully-impenetrable polydispersed system. The particles’ sizes follow a Schulz distribution,
f(R) ∼Rm exp[−(m + 1)R/⟨R⟩] (m > −1). The volume fraction of the spheres is φ2 = 0.4
(after Torquato and Lu, 1993).
Figure 3.6. The exclusion zone ΩE, showing the expansion of a spherical cavity of radius
R (top) into an intermediate spherocylinder (middle), and the ﬁnal spherocylinder of length z
and hemispherical caps of the same radius R (after Lu and Torquato, 1992a).
Figure 3.7. The two-point probability function S2(r) vs the distance r between the two
points, at a sphere volume fraction of φ2 = 0.6.
The solid and dashed curves represent,
respectively, models of hard and overlapping spheres. The diameter of the spheres is 1 (after
Torquato and Stell, 1985).
Figure 3.8. A 2D model of anisotropic materials that consists of elliptical particles, dis-
tributed in a uniform matrix.
Figure 3.9.
Examples of cellular solids: A 2D aluminium honeycomb (top), and a 3D
polymeric foam with both open and closed cells (bottom) (after Gibson and Ashby, 1997).
Figure 3.10. (a) Kelvin’s tetrakaidecahedron unit cell, and (b) the Weaire-Phelan unit call
that consists of 6 fourteen-sided polyhedra and 2 twelve-sided polyhedra.
Figure 3.11. A 2D Voronoi tessellation of space. The dots represent the initial Poisson
points.
Figure 3.12. Morphology of polystyrene foam (after Roberts and Knackstedt, 1996).
106

Figure 3.13. Interface of a material generated by model II with s = 0.5 and µ = 1.5, at a
pore volume fraction φ1 = 0.2. The dark region is represented by the cut −0.253 < y(r) < 0.253
(after Roberts and Knackstedt, 1996).
Figure 3.14. Interface of a material generated by model I with s = 0.5, ν = 0.0 and a
volume fraction φ1 = 0.2. The light region is represented by the cut −0.253 < y(r) < 0.253
(after Roberts and Knackstedt, 1996).
Figure 3.15. Interface of a material generated by model II with s = 0.2 at a volume fraction
φ1 = 0.2. The dark region is represented by the cut −1.28 < y(r) < 1.28 (after Roberts and
Knackstedt, 1996).
107

PART II:
LINEAR TRANSPORT AND OPTICAL PROPERTIES
108

4
Eﬀective Conductivity, Dielectric Constant and Optical Properties:
The Continuum Approach
4.0 Introduction
In Chapters 2 and 3 we described and discussed the main concepts and methods for charac-
terization and modelling of morphology of heterogeneous materials. Beginning with the present
chapter, we describe and discuss the relation between the eﬀective (macroscopic) transport and
optical properties of a disordered material and its morphology. If by morphology one implies
the arrangement and motion of atoms and/or molecules, then, depending on the speciﬁc phe-
nomenon under study, the problem of estimating the eﬀective transport properties has been
called, over the last several decades, kinetic theory, liquid state theory, solid state physics,
condensed matter physics, metal physics, or crystallography. However, in the present chap-
ter we are not interested in these phenomena at the atomic or molecular length scales; these
phenomena will be taken up in Chapters 9 and 10 of Volume II. In many applications, the
term microscopic refers to a length scale large compared with molecular dimensions but small
compared with the overall dimensions of a given heterogeneous material. Under such circum-
stances the material can still be considered as a continuum when viewed on the microscopic
length scale, but the problem of estimating its eﬀective properties is no longer studied as a
molecular-level phenomenon treated by statistical mechanics and theoretical physics, but one
at larger length scales which is usually studied by applied physicists and engineers. It is this
domain that is of interest to us in this chapter.
How can one estimate the eﬀective transport properties of a heterogeneous material? Be-
cause of disorder in a material’s microstructure, statistical description of its morphology is
appropriate and indeed unavoidable. In Chapters 2 and 3 we described various statistical meth-
ods and models for analyzing and representing heterogeneous materials’ morphology. In the
same spirit, statistical methods play an indispensable role in estimating the eﬀective transport
properties of heterogeneous materials. However, although characterization of the morphology of
ordered materials - those that do not contain disorder of any sort - is a straightforward task, the
same is not true about estimating their eﬀective transport properties. For example, the problem
of estimating the eﬀective (electrical or thermal) conductivity of a regular d−dimensional array
109

of conducting (or insulating) spheres inserted in a uniform matrix of a diﬀerent conductivity
was studied for almost a century before its solution was derived, even though the formulation
of the problem and deriving its solution seemed straightforward. At the same time, transport
properties of ordered multiphase materials often provide key insights into those of disordered
materials. For this reason, throughout this book, and whenever appropriate, we describe and
discuss methods for estimatind eﬀective transport properties of ordered materials and use the
results as a guide for understanding those of heterogeneous materials.
Experience with homogeneous materials, and also general theory of transport processes,
shows that any small departure from (thermal, mechanical, or electrical) equilibrium, which
is represented by the existence of a gradient of intensity ∇G in a material, gives rise to an
associated ﬂux J given by a linear relation
J = −T · ∇G ,
(215)
where the proportionality factor T is a local transport coeﬃcient that characterizes the material
at the local level. T is in general a second-rank tensor when a scalar quantity is transported in
the medium, such as heat or mass, and a fourth-rank tensor when ∇G represents the gradient of
a vector quantity, e.g., stress. If the material’s morphology is isotropic, the resulting symmetry
conditions on T simplify its form greatly, in which case a single transport coeﬃcient may suﬃce
for the description of, say, thermal conductivity. If the material is statistically homogeneous
(but microscopically heterogeneous), we expect a linear relation such as (1) to also exist between
an imposed small average gradient of intensity ⟨∇G⟩and the resulting average ﬂux ⟨J⟩:
⟨J⟩= −Te⟨∇G⟩,
(216)
where Te is now the eﬀective transport coeﬃcient that characterizes the material macroscop-
ically, and the averages are over the ensemble of all possible conﬁgurations of the disordered
material. In general, Te diﬀers from a simple average of the statistical distribution of the local
transport coeﬃcient T . However, in many cases such simple and linear equations as (1) and (2)
do not exist for a material, in which case the material is said to behave non-linearly. We will
consider such materials in Volume II. In this and the next few chapters we focus on estimating
the eﬀective linear transport properties of heterogeneous materials. Clearly, the microstructure
of a material controls its eﬀective transport properties. If detailed information is available on
110

the materials’ morphology, then it should be exploited to the full for estimating their transport
properties, which is what we try to accomplish throughout this book. If, on the other hand,
little is known about the morphology, then one is forced to fall back on observations, experience
or hypothesis, or purely phenomenological theories which in essense are speculations.
If we restrict ourselves to linear transport properties of heterogeneous materials, then we
discover an important fact: A remarkably large number of apparently diﬀerent transport prob-
lems can be treated by a common theoretical framework. For example, (1) thermal conductors;
(2) electrical conductors; (3) electrical insulators, and (4) dia- or para-magnetic materials are
all described by Eq. (2), where the transport coeﬃcient is called, respectively, (1) thermal
conductivity; (2) electrical conductivity; (3) dielectric constant, and (4) magnetic permeability.
At steady state, the ﬂux J in all the four phenomena satisﬁes a conservation equation:
∇· J = 0 .
(217)
Table 4.1 lists several transport problems that are mathematically equivalent. It is precisely
their mathematical equivalency that makes it possible to treat these problems within a common
theoretical framework. However, perhaps even more remarkable is the fact that considerable
common ground exists, both in the methods of analysis and in the nature of the results, between
transport problems with mathematical formulations that are not identical. For example, if we
consider a two-phase heterogeneous material, the diﬀerences between the formulations of two
transport problems in the material may arise from diﬀerent boundary conditions that must be
satisﬁed at the interface between the two phases, or from diﬀerent constitutive equations that
describe transport in diﬀerent phases. However, such diﬀerences are, in many cases, matters of
analytical details. Although such similarities may seem obvious to us now, they were not noted
for many decades, as a result of which research on various transport processes in heterogeneous
materials proceeded independently which we now recognize, with the beneﬁt of hindsight, as
unnecessary.
As we discuss in this and the next few chapters, the results for one type of
transport process often have their analogues for several other transport problems.
Table 4.1
Mathematically equivalent transport problems with the ﬂux J and transport coeﬃcient T .
111

Phenomenon
Potential
Driving force
J
T
Heat conduction
Temperature
Temperature gradient
Heat ﬂux
k
Electrical conduction
Electric potential
Electric ﬁeld
Current density
g
Diﬀusion
Density
Density gradient
Diﬀusant current density
D
Electrostatics
Electric potential
Electric ﬁeld
Electric displacement
ϵ
Magnetostatics
Magnetic potential
magnetic ﬁeld
Magnetic induction
P
In this chapter we describe and discuss the continuum methods for estimating the eﬀec-
tive transport and optical properties of disordered materials. By continuum methods we mean
those that rely on the continuum models of the morphology of disordered materials that were
described in Chapter 3. In particular, we describe and discuss various theoretical and computer
simulation methods for estimating the eﬀective conductivity, diﬀusivity and dielectric constant.
Estimating vector transport properties, such as the eﬀective elastic moduli of disodered mate-
rials based on the continuum models, will be considered in Chapter 7. After describing some
symmetry properties of the conductivity tensor, our discussions will focus on describing some
general results that are applicable to all the transport processes that are discussed in this book.
These results are general in the sense that they are applicable to continuum models of transport
processes regardless of the volume fraction of the inclusion phase. We then describe methods
of estimating the (thermal or electrical) conductivity and dielectric constant of heterogeneous
materials with a microstructure that can be described by a dispersion of inclusions inserted in
a uniform matrix. Both isotropic and anisotropic materials will be considered. We are always
interested in ergodic materials (that is, those for which the ensemble-averaged properties are
equal to the volume-averaged properties, when the volume of the system tends to inﬁnity), for
which the eﬀective conductivity tensor ge exists and is independent of the boundary conditions
imposed on the surface of the materials.
4.1 Symmetry Properties of the Conductivity Tensor
It is not diﬃcult to show that, in general, the conductivity tensor g must be symmetric,
i.e., gij = gji, from which it follows that the corresponding resistivity tensor must also be
symmetric. This symmetry implies that the number of independent components of g reduces
from d2 (for a d−dimensional system) to 1
2d(d + 1). Thus, in 3D, the conductivity tensor has
112

only six independent components:
g =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
g11
g12
g13
g12
g22
g23
g13
g23
g33
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
(218)
For symmetry with respect to a plane, say the x1 −x2 plane, g has four independent
components as g13 = g23 = 0. This is called monoclinic symmetry. If g is symmetric with
respect to three orthogonal planes, then it has three independent components which are the
gii for i = 1, 2 and 3. The other three components vanish. This is referred to as orthotropic
symmetry. If g is symmetric with respect to a 90◦rotation about, say the x3 axis, then g has
only two non-zero and independent components which are g11 = g22 and g33. The rest of the
components are zero. This is referred to as transversely isotropic symmetry. In general, a crystal
has n−fold rotational symmetry (n > 0) if it appears unchanged when it is rotated about an
axis through 2π/n radians. Thus, for example, crystals with 6-fold rotational symmetry axis
(i.e., hexagonal), a 4-fold rotational symmetry axis (i.e., tetragonal), or a 3-fold rotational
sysmmetry axis (i.e., trigonal) are all transversely isotropic with respect to the conductivity,
although neither a tetragonal nor a trigonal crystal has elastic transverse isotropy; see Chapter
7. Finally, when the conductivity is independent of the orientation of the coordinate system,
then g has only a single independent component, gii = g, for i = 1, 2 and 3. The rest of the
components are zero. This is the standard isotropic symmetry.
4.2 General Results
For two-phase materials, general results that are applicable over the entire range of the
volume fraction φ2 of the inclusion phase are rare, and it is precisely for this reason that they
are also important. In what follows we describe a few of such results.
(1) For any statistically homogeneous (but microscopically disordered) material the mean
ﬂux is a maximum when the local transport properties of the material are uniform (Batchelor,
1974). The proof is straightforward.
(2) One can calculate the eﬀective transport properties exactly if the local transport prop-
erties of the material vary in one direction only. For example, this corresponds, in the case of
dispersion of inclusions, to particles in the form of inﬁnite plane slabs parallel to each other.
This reduces the problem to an essentially 1D problem. As an example, consider thermal or
113

electrical conduction in a composite material in which the conductivity of the matrix is gm
with volume fraction φ1, and that of the inclusions is αgm with a volume fraction φ2. If the
inclusions are arranged such that x is the direction along which the conductivities vary (so
that x is an axis of symmetry), then the principal axes of the eﬀective conductivity tensor ge
are parallel and perpendicular to x, with its diagonal elements given by ⟨1/g⟩, ⟨g⟩and ⟨g⟩,
i.e., thermal resistances in series and parallel, respectively, where ⟨g⟩= gm(1 −φ2 + αφ2), and
⟨1/g⟩= αgm/(α+φ2−αφ2). In addition, for regular arrays of d−dimensional spheres embedded
in a uniform matrix, one can derive exact solutions for the eﬀective transport properties of the
composites. These solutions will be presented and discussed below.
(3) The eﬀective conductivity tensor ge is positive deﬁnite and symmetric if the local con-
ductivity tensor g is also positive deﬁnite and symmetric.
(4) Heterogeneous materials, that consist of isotropic phases, possess the following proper-
ties. (i) Statistically isotropic composite materials are always macroscopically isotropic. (ii)
Statistical anisotropy, as measured by the correlation functions described in Chapter 3, does
not necessarily imply a macroscopically anisotropic material. For example, composite materi-
als with cubic symmetry are statistically (microscopically) anisotropic but are macroscopically
isotropic. Cubic lattices of spheres that are studied later in this chapter are examples of such
composite materials. (iii) Macroscopically anisotropic composite materials are necessarily mi-
croscopically anisotropic.
(5) The eﬀective conductivity tensor ge of a macroscopically anisotropic composite material
with n isotropic phases is a homogeneous function of degree one in its n scalar phase conduc-
tivities g1, · · · , gn. This means, for n = 2, that, ge(αg1, αg2) = αge(g1, g2), for all values of α.
Thus, if we set α = 1/g1, we immediately obtain
ge = g1ge(1, g2/g1) ,
(219)
implying that the homogeneity relation reduces, without loss of generality, the number of
independent variables from two to one.
(6) If the volume fraction of the inclusions is small, or if the ﬂuctuations in the relevant
transport property of the material are small compared with their mean value, then, many
rigorous results can be derived. Consider, for example, thermal conduction again. If θ represents
small perturbations in the temperature ﬁeld, then Eq. (3) implies that, ∇2θ ≈−⟨G⟩· ∇(g −
114

⟨g⟩)/⟨g⟩, if we assume that |g −⟨g⟩|/⟨g⟩is small everywhere (which implies that |∇θ|/⟨G⟩is
also small everywhere). If S(ω) is the power spectrum of g −⟨g⟩, then
⟨(g −⟨g⟩)⟩∇θ = −

ω
⟨G⟩· ω
ω2
 S(ω)
⟨g⟩

dω .
(220)
It then follows that
⟨J⟩= ⟨g(⟨G⟩+ ∇θ)⟩≈⟨g⟩⟨G⟩−⟨(g −⟨g⟩)∇θ⟩,
(221)
and therefore the eﬀective conductivity tensor is given by
ge = ⟨g⟩U −
 ωω
ω2
 S(ω)
⟨g⟩

dω ,
(222)
where U is the unit tensor. For example, for isotropic materials S(ω) is independent of direction
of ω, and therefore
ge = ⟨g⟩−⟨(g −⟨g⟩)2⟩
3⟨g⟩
.
(223)
Equation (9) was ﬁrst given by Beran (1968); the derivation presented here was given by
Batchelor (1974). For a two-phase isotropic and dispersed material of the type discussed above,
Eq. (9) simpliﬁes further to
ge ≈⟨g⟩−1
3gmφ2(1 −φ2)(α −1)2 .
(224)
We should emphasize that these results are valid for the case in which the ﬂuctuations in the
local conductivity are weak. For a 2D system (i.e., a system of long cylinders distributed in the
matrix) the fractor 1/3 should be replaced by 1/2. In this case, if the temperature gradient is
parallel to the axes of the cylinders, then the eﬀective conductivity is simply ⟨g⟩.
(7) One can derive rigorous upper and lower bounds to the eﬀective transport properties
of a heterogeneous material. The usefulness of the bounds depends on the complexity of the
material’s microstructure and the amount of microstructural information that is included in
the bounds. In some cases the bounds provide very accurate estimates of the eﬀective transport
properties, while in other cases they are practically useless. We will describe and discuss the
derivation of such bounds and provide the expressions for the most accurate bounds currently
available.
Having stated the above general results, we now begin describing the estimation of scalar
transport properties of heterogeneous materials. We begin by describing the results for disper-
sion of spheres.
115

4.3 Eﬀective Conductivity of Dispersion of Spheres: Exact Results
We ﬁrst consider the cases for which an exact solution can be derived. The best-known of
such solutions are for regular arrays of d−dimensional identical spheres of radius R inserted in a
uniform matrix. The conductivities of the spheres and the matrix are diﬀerent, and the goal is
to obtain the eﬀective conductivity of the composite material. This problem, as described here,
was ﬁrst studied by Lord Rayleigh (1872). Since then it has been studied by many authors,
including Runge (1925) who noticed an error in Lord Rayleigh’s results, and Kharadly and
Jackson (1952) who, despite the error, found good agreement between Rayleigh’s results and
their own experimental data (see below). The problem has been studied in both 2D and 3D,
but we ﬁrst consider the 3D microstructures which are more general, and then summarize the
results for the 2D cases.
4.3.1 Three-dimensional regular arrays of spheres
In addition to the early investigators of this problem mentioned above, Meredith and Tobias
(1960) also analyzed this problem, but their solution suﬀers from a fundamental error resulting
from use of an axially symmetric potential (with axis in the direction of the macroscopic
potential gradient), rather than a potential possessing the four-fold symmetry of the cubic
array. Other papers reporting a study of this problem include those of Keller (1963), Zuzovsky
and Brenner (1977), Doyle (1978), McPhedran and McKenzie (1978), McKenzie et al. (1978),
and Sangani and Acrivos (1983), using a variety of techniques. Here we describe the method
due to McPhedran and McKenzie (1978) and McKenzie et al. (1978), as their work presents
a uniﬁed approach to both the 2D and 3D problems. We ﬁrst consider a simple-cubic array
of spheres, after which face-centered cubic (FCC) and body-centered cubic (BCC) lattices are
discussed.
4.3.1.1 Simple-cubic arrays
Consider a simple-cubic lattice of identical spheres inserted in a uniform matrix. The ratio
of the conductivities of the spheres and the matrix is σ, and we wish to determine the eﬀective
conductivity ge of the composite normalized by that of the matrix. The sphere radius is R,
measured in units of the lattice spacing, and thus the sphere volume fraction is φ2 = 4πR3/3.
Due to the symmetry of the lattice, the eﬀective conductivity of the composite is independent
of the direction along which an external ﬁeld E0 is applied, and therefore we assume that E0 is
116

applied in, say, the x−direction. The most convenient coordinate system, relative to the center
O of a sphere, is the spherical coordinates (r, θ, ϕ), where θ is measured from the x−axis and ϕ
is an azimuthal angle measured from the xy plane. The voltage distribution in the composite
satisﬁes the Laplace equation, ∇2V = 0. To compute ge one must ﬁnd the voltage distribution
both inside and outside the spheres. A general expansion about the point O, appropriate inside
the spheres, i.e., for r < R, is given by
Vs(r, θ, ϕ) = C0 +
∞

l=1
l

m=−l
Clm rlYlm(θ, ϕ) ,
(225)
while the corresponding expansion for the matrix region is
Vm(r, θ, ϕ) = A0 +
∞

l=1
l

m=−l
(Almrl + Blmr−l−1)Ylm(θ, ϕ) .
(226)
Here Ylm is the spherical harmonic of order (l, m), i.e., the solution of the Laplace equation in
spherical coordinates, which can be represented in terms of the Legendre functions, Ylm(θ, ϕ) =
[(l −|m|)!/(l + |m|)!]1/2P |m|
l
(cos θ) exp(imϕ).
The boundary conditions at the interface between the spheres and the matrix, i.e., at r = R,
are
Vm = Vs ,
σ∂Vs
∂n = ∂Vm
∂n ,
(227)
where n is normal to the surface of the spheres. One ﬁnds on applying these boundary conditions
that
Alm = Blm[σ + (l + 1)/l]
R2l+1(1 −σ)
.
(228)
Due to the symmetry of the lattice the voltage V must be an anti-symmetric function of θ
about θ = π/2, which implies that only odd values of l in Eqs. (11) and (12) must be allowed.
Moreover, V must also be a symmetric function of ϕ about ϕ = π/4, so that only those values
of m that are multiples of 4 must be allowed in the expansions.
The expansion for Vm contains the term rl which increases with r, and thus represents the
contributions to the solution from sources other than those on the central sphere centered at O
(for sources on this sphere the contributions decrease with r). These sources are at inﬁnity and
on all the spheres other than the central one. The term r−l−1, which decreases with increasing
r and is singular at r = 0, represents the contributions of the sources on the central sphere.
Thus, the voltage expansion not singular at O is due to terms originating at inﬁnity and at the
117

other lattice sites, which means that
A0 +
∞

l=1
2l−1

m=−2l+1
A2l−1,mr2l−1Y2l−1,m(θ, ϕ) ≡
∞

l=1
2l−1

m=−2l+1
∞

i=1
B2l−1,mρ−2l
i
Y2l−1,m(θi, ϕi) + E0x .
(229)
The sum over i is over all spheres other than the central one, while the coordinates (ρi, θi, ϕi)
are measured relative to the center of the ith sphere. We group together terms of Eq. (15)
having positive and negative values of m, rescale the coeﬃcients, and express the spherical
harmonics in terms of the Legendre functions P m
l (cos θ). This yields
A0 +
∞

l=1
2l−1

m=0
A2l−1,mr2l−1P m
2l−1(cos θ) cos(mϕ) −E0x
≡
∞

l=1
2l−1

m=0
∞

i=0
B2l−1,mρ−2l
i
P m
2l−1(cos θi) cos(mϕi) .
(230)
In his treatment of this problem, Lord Rayleigh truncated terms higher than those involving
r3 from the Legendre polynomials.
It remains to determine the unknown coeﬃcients B2l−1,m. They are obtained by equating
the partial derivatives of all orders with respect to x of the two sides of identity (16) and
evaluating them at a point Q(r0, θ0, ϕ0) within a unit cell that contains O. Hence, if we equate
the (2n + 1)th partial derivatives of both sides of (16) at the point Q, we obtain
∞

l=n+1
2l−2n−2

m=0
⎛
⎜
⎝
m + 2l −1
2n + 1
⎞
⎟
⎠P m
2l−2n−2(cos θ0) cos(mϕ0)A2l−1,m
+
∞

l=1
2l−1

m=0
∞

i=1
⎛
⎜
⎝
2l + 2n −m
2n + 1
⎞
⎟
⎠ρ−2l−2n−1
i
P m
2l+2n(cos θi) cos(mϕi)B2l−1,m = E0δn,0 ,
(231)
where
⎛
⎜
⎝
n
r
⎞
⎟
⎠= n(n −1) · · · (n −r + 1)
r!
.
In the sum over i we run over all positive or negative values of the lattice points (u, v, w)
excluding (0, 0, 0). Thus, if
U m
l (Q) =
∞

i=1
ρ−l−1
i
P m
l (cos θi) cos(mϕi) ,
(232)
118

where ρi is the distance between the points (x0, y0, z0) and (u, v, w), cos θi = (x0 −u)/ρi, and
cos ϕi = (y0 −v)/(z0 −w), then Eq. (17) becomes
∞

l=n+1
2l−2n−2

m=0
⎛
⎜
⎝
m + 2l −1
2n + 1
⎞
⎟
⎠P m
2l−2n−2(cos θ0)r2l−2n−2
0
cos(mϕ0)B2l−1,m[σ + 2l/(2l −1)]
R4l−1(1 −σ)
+
∞

l=1
2l−1

m=0
⎛
⎜
⎝
2l + 2n −m
2n + 1
⎞
⎟
⎠U m
2l+2n(Q)B2l−1,m = E0δn,0 .
(233)
In general, one must determine Mθ coeﬃcients of the form B2l−1,0 and Mϕ coeﬃcients of
the form B2l−1,m, representing the eﬀect of the azimuthal terms, where m is a multiple of 4 and
does not take on a zero value. For the Mθ coeﬃcients the point Q is taken to coincide with O,
hence yielding
B2n+1,0[σ + (2n + 2)/(2n + 1)]
R4n+3(1 −σ)
+
∞

l=1
2l−1

m=0
⎛
⎜
⎝
2l + 2n −m
2n + 1
⎞
⎟
⎠U m
2l+2n(O)B2l−1,m = E0δn,0 , (234)
which yields Mθ coeﬃcients. For the Mϕ coeﬃcients one takes the point Q to be away from
O and on the line x0 = y0 = z0, where x0 = (4
√
3)−1. However, the sums in Eq. (19), and
in particular the term U m
2l (Q), depend on the assumed form of the surface at inﬁnity which
encloses the lattice. This dependence had prompted some researchers (for example, Jeﬀrey,
1973) to cast doubt on the validity of Lord Rayleigh’s approach. However, an elegant argument
by McPhedran and McKenzie (1978) established that the shape dependence of these sums can
be removed if one replaces the ﬁeld E0 in Eq. (19) with the total ﬁeld E = E0 + Ep, where Ep
the polarization ﬁeld that represents the eﬀect of polarization charges on the exterior boundary
of the cubic array, and if one sets U 0
2(O) = U 0
2(Q) = 2π/3. Then, the resulting modiﬁed Eq.
(19) can be used for determining the coeﬃcients B2l−1,m.
To make further progress, one needs to evaluate the terms U m
2l (O) and U m
2l (Q). McPhedran
and McKenzie (1978) showed that
U 0
2l(O) = 2 + 4P2l(O) , l > 10 ,
(235)
U m
2l (O) = 4P m
2l (O) , l ≥13 ,
(236)
provide very accurate estimates of U m
2l (O). The numerical values for the ﬁrst few terms of
U m
2l (O) are, U 0
4(O) ≃3.108, U 0
6(O) ≃0.57333, and U 0
8(O) ≃3.2593. McPhedran and McKenzie
119

(1978) list the values of U m
2l (O) for m > 0 (with m being multiples of 4). In addition, if r0 = 1/4,
r1 =
$
1 + r2
0 −2x0, r2 =
$
1 + r2
0 + 2x0, tan ϕ1 = (x0 −1)/x0, and tan ϕ2 = (x0 + 1)/x0, then
U 0
2l(Q) = {2P2l(x0/r1) + P2l[(x0 −1)/r1]}r−2l−1
1
, l > 25 ,
(237)
and
U m
2l (Q) = {2P m
2l (x0/r1) cos(mϕ1) + P m
2l [(x0 −1)/r1] cos(mπ/4)}r−2l−1
1
+{2P m
2l (x0/r2) cos(mϕ2) + P m
2l [(x0 + 1)/r2] cos(mπ/4)}r−2l−1
2
, l ≥13 .
(238)
Values of the ﬁrst few U m
2l (Q), where Q = (x0, y0, z0) and x0 = (4
√
3)−1, are U 0
4(Q) ≃2.752,
U 0
6(Q) ≃0.41415, and U 0
8(Q) ≃1.3989. The corresponding values for m > 0 (and multiples of 4)
are listed by McPhedran and McKenzie (1978). However, numerical calculations of McPhedran
and McKenzie (1978) showed that the eﬀect of the azimuthal terms is in fact negligible. Having
determined values of U m
2l (O) and U m
2l (Q), one can now determine the coeﬃcients B2l−1,m to any
desired accuracy by truncating Eqs. (19) and (20) and solving them (in which E0 is replaced
by E).
Application of the Green theorem shows that the eﬀective conductivity of the cubic array
is given by
ge = 1 −4πB1,0
E
,
(239)
which is an important result since it indicates that one only needs to compute B1,0. Figure 4.1
presents the predicted eﬀective conductivity of the composite versus the volume fraction φ2 of
the spheres. The spheres are perfectly conducting (i.e., the conductivity ratio σ = ∞), and the
conductivity of the composite has been normalized by that of the matrix. Note that this is a
mixture of conducting and superconducting materials, as problem that was described in Chapter
2 (see Section 2.6.2) in the context of a percolation model of conducting and superconducting
resistors. The results shown are for various values of M = Mθ, as the azimuthal contributions
have been neglected (i.e., Mϕ = 0). The lowest value, M = 1, corresponds to a sort of a
mean-ﬁeld approximation ﬁrst derived by Maxwell (1873):
ge = 1 −3φ2
2 + σ
1 −σ + φ2
−1
,
(240)
so that in the limit σ →∞one has ge = (1 + 2φ2)/(1 −φ2). Although this approximation
is accurate for low values of φ2, it becomes increasingly inaccurate for larger values of φ2 and
120

breaks down completely for φ2 > 0.6. In particular, it predicts that the conductivity of the
composite diverges only when φ2 →1, which, as percolation theory predicts, is wrong. In
reality, the conductivity diverges when φ2 = φc = π/6 ≃0.523, which happens when the
spheres begin to touch. This is actually predicted very accurately by the theory of McPhedran
and McKenzie (1978) when M becomes very large; see Figure 4.1. However, compared to the
M = 1 case, the solution for M = 2, i.e., when octupoles are taken into account, indicates
a dramatic improvement, and mutipoles of order 27, which correspond to M = 4, provide
very substantial improvements. For the M = 4 case and neglecting the contributions of the
azimuthal terms, the approximate solution is given by (McPhedran and McKenzie, 1978)
ge = 1 −3φ2
D ,
(241)
where
D = ℜ−1
1
+ φ2 −b1ℜ5φ14/3
2
−c1ℜ7φ6
2 −a1φ10/3
2
1 −c2ℜ5φ11/3
2
+ c3ℜ2
5φ22/3
2
1/ℜ3 + b2φ7/3
2
−c4ℜ5φ6
2
(242)
with
ℜn =
1 −σ
σ + 1 + n−1 ,
(243)
and a1 = 1.305, b1 = 0.01479, b2 = 0.4054, c1 = 0.1259, c2 = 0.5289, c3 = 0.06993, and
c4 = 6.1673. If the coeﬃcients c1 −c4 are set to zero, then one obtains the formula suggested
by Meredith and Tobias (1960).
Figure 4.2 compares the theoretical predictions with the
experimental data of Meredith and Tobias (1960), and the agreement is excellent.
Let us mention some of the important results that have been obtained by various groups
and compare them with those of McPhedran and McKenzie (1978) discussed above. Zuzovsky
and Brenner (1977) presented the following expression for the eﬀective conductivity of the
simple-cubic array of spheres:
ge = 1 −3φ2
⎡
⎣2 + σ
1 −σ + φ2 −
16d2
1φ10/3
2
1/ℜ3 + 20d2φ7/3
2
−53.5d2
2ℜ5φ14/3
2
+ O(φ6
2)
⎤
⎦
−1
,
(244)
where d1 = 0.2857 and d2 = 0.02036. The predictions of this equation agree closely with those
of McPhedran and McKenzie (1978).
Note that, unlike McPhedran and McKenzie (1978),
Zuzovsky and Brenner did not neglect the contributions of the azimuthal terms. In the limit
σ →0, i.e., when the the spheres become insulating, Eq. (30) reduces to
ge = 1 −3φ2
⎡
⎣2 + φ2 −
1.306φ10/3
2
4/3 + 0.407φ7/3
2
−0.018φ14/3
2
+ O(φ6
2)
⎤
⎦
−1
,
(245)
121

the predictions of which also agree with the experimental data of Meredith and Tobias (1960).
In the opposite limit of σ →∞, i.e., when the spheres become perfectly conducting, Eq. (30)
reduces to
ge = 1 + 3φ2
⎡
⎣1 −φ2 −
1.306φ10/3
2
1 −0.407φ7/3
2
−0.022φ14/3
2
+ O(φ6
2)
⎤
⎦
−1
,
(246)
the predictions of which also agree with the experimental data of Meredith and Tobias (1960)
for φ2 as large as 0.45. Sangani and Acrivos (1983) presented expressions similar to those of
Zuzovsky and Brenner (1977), except that theirs were accurate to order O(φ25/3
2
). Batchelor and
O’Brien (1977) considered the problem of calculating the conductivity of a lattice of touching,
ﬁnitely conducting spheres, and derived the following expression for the conductivity of a simple-
cubic array of touching spheres,
ge ≈π ln σ ,
σ ≫1 .
(247)
The predictions of McPhedran and McKenzie (1978) agree with those of Eq. (33) for large
values of σ. Furthermore, Keller (1963) suggested that for the case of perfectly conducting
spheres and for φ2 close to φc one has
ge ≈−π
2 ln(φc −φ2) ,
(248)
with φc = π/6, as mentioned above. The predictions of Keller’s equation also agree with the
results of McPhedran and McKenzie (1978). Since φc represents a sort of percolation threshold,
Eq. (34) represents a mean-ﬁeld approximation to the problem of conductivity of a percolation
system of conducting-superconducting mixture discussed in Chapter 2, because Equation (34)
predicts that the conductivity of the mixture diverges logarithmically as φc is approached,
which is precisely what the mean-ﬁeld theory predicts. Moreover, the logarithmic divergence
of the conductivity implies that the critical exponent s deﬁned by Eq. (2.37) is zero (see Table
2.3).
4.3.1.2 Body-centered and face-centered cubic arrays
For these cases we follow the treatment of McKenzie et al. (1978). The potential expansions
are still given by Eqs. (11) and (12), where the coeﬃcients Alm are related to Blm through Eq.
(14), and
Clm = Blm(1/ℜl + 1)
R2l+1
,
(249)
122

where ℜl is given by Eq. (29). For the FCC and BCC lattices the axes can be selected in
such a way that l is restricted to odd values, and that the potential is an even function of ϕ.
Equations (16) and (19) still hold for both lattices. Actually, these equations, with a most
minor modiﬁcation, hold for many other Bravais lattices.
For the BCC lattice, the volume fraction of the spheres is φ2 = 8πR3/3, with its critical
value, i.e., when the spheres touch (i.e., at R =
√
3/4), being φc =
√
3π/8. The x−direction,
along which the external ﬁeld is applied, is taken to lie along the (111) direction. The reason for
this choice is that, for the case of perfectly conducting spheres, as φ2 approaches φc a divergent
current occurs along the line θ = 0, which can cause convergence problems for the series in
Eqs. (11) and (12). Since V (r, θ, ϕ) = V (r, θ, ϕ + 2
3πk), where k is an integrer, we must restrict
m in the series to multiples of 3. To apply the Green theorem and relate the conductivity to
the coeﬃcients B2l−1,m, a unit cell must be selected. McKenzie et al. (1978) chose a hexagonal
prism with its end faces on the planes perpendicular to the x−axis at x = ±
√
3/4, and its cross
section being of external radius
$
2/3. A sphere lies at the center of the unit cell and each side
edge of the prism passes through a sphere center. There are 3 spheres contained within this
cell which has volume 3/2.
Unlike the case of the simple-cubic lattice, the contributions of the azimuthal terms for the
BCC lattice cannot be neglected. Thus, Mθ equations are obtained from (19) by taking Q to
be at the origin O, while Mϕ equations are obtained by taking Q to be at (x0, x0, x0) with
x0 =
√
3/12. Thus, a total of M = Mθ + Mϕ terms are used. Computations of McKenzie
et al. (1978) showed that a very accurate solution is obtained even with Mθ = Mϕ = 4. To
calculate the coeﬃcients B2l−1,m one must compute U m
2l (O) and U m
2l (Q). To remove the shape-
dependence of the solution, one must have, U 0
2(O) = U 0
2(Q) = 4π/3. Values of the ﬁrst few
terms are, U 0
4(O) ≃2.071, U 0
6(O) ≃9.68277, and U 0
8(O) ≃2.26619. With Q at (x0, y0, z0) and
x0 =
√
3/12, values of the ﬁrst few terms of U m
2l (Q) are, U 0
4(Q) ≃2.5322, U 0
6(Q) ≃5.50568,
and U 0
8(Q) ≃−4.97972. Other relevant values of U m
2l (with m being multiples of 3) both at
O and at Q are listed by McKenzie et al. (1978). We should also keep in mind that, due to
the invariance of the lattice under the cubic point group, and the transformation properties of
the spherical harmonics under rotations, U m
2l are not all independent. For example, one can
show that, U 3
4(O) + 60
√
2U 0
4(O) = 0. Knowledge of U m
2l enables one to compute the coeﬃcients
B2l−1,m to any desired accuracy by truncating and solving Eqs. (19) and (20).
123

Application of the Green theorem to the unit cell shows that the eﬀective conductivity of
the BCC composite is given by
ge = 1 −8πB1,0
E
,
(250)
where E is the total ﬁeld deﬁned above. Figure 4.3 compares the predictions of the theory with
the experimental data of McKenzie et al. (1978) for the case of perfectly conducting spheres;
the agreement between the theory and the experimental data is excellent. In particular, both
the theory and the data correctly indicate that the conductivity of the mixture diverges at
a volume fraction φc ≃0.68.
An equation similar to (28) also gives accurate estimates of
the conductivity, where for the BCC lattice a1 = 0.057467, b1 = 0.166117, b2 = 1.35858,
c1 = 0.000950738, c2 = 0.733934, c3 = 0.134665, and c4 = 0.0465862. In this case φ2 must be
relatively small, as the analogue of Eq. (28) for the BCC lattice was obtained with Mθ = 4 and
Mϕ = 0, i.e., the contributions of the azimuthal terms were neglected, whereas, as discussed
above, for the BCC lattice such contributions are not negligible if the sphere volume fraction φ2
is relatively large. The Zuzovsky-Brenner expression, Eq. (30), also provides accurate estimates
of the eﬀective conductivity with d1 = −0.0897 and d2 = 0.03811
In a similar manner, the conductivity of a dispersion of equal-sized spheres inserted at the
nodes of a FCC lattice in a uniform matrix are computed. In this case the volume fraction of the
spheres is φ2 = 16πR3/3, so that the critical volume fraction at which the spheres begin to touch
[i.e., at R = 1/(2
√
2)] is φc =
√
2π/6 ≃0.740. The x−axis, along which the external potential
is applied, is taken to lie along the (110) lattice direction. The cell selected for applying the
Green theorem is a rectangular prism with its end faces being the planes perpendicular to the
x−axis at x = ±
√
2/8. The cross section of the prism in the yz plane is deﬁned by the four
points (y, z) = (±
√
2/4, ±1/2). The side faces of the prism lie in mirror planes of symmetry
in the lattice. Moreover, with this choice of the axes, the potential distribution satisﬁes the
condition that, V (r, θ, ϕ) = V (r, θ, ϕ+kπ), where k is an integer, implying that we must restrict
m in the series to even integer values. As before, l is restricted to odd values to ensure that V
is an even function of ϕ.
For the FCC lattice, U 0
2(O) = 8π/3. Values of the ﬁrst few terms are, U 0
4(O) ≃1.8815,
U 0
6(O) ≃43.2817, and U 0
8(O) ≃45.6674. Other values of U m
2l for even values of m are given by
McKenzie et al. (1978). Similar to the BCC lattice case, the contributions of the azimuthal
terms cannot be neglected, and therefore a total of M = Mθ + Mϕ terms of the series are used
124

for evaluating the eﬀective conductivity. It turns out that even with Mθ = 4 and Mϕ = 6
one obtains a very accurate estimate of the eﬀective conductivity over the entire range of the
volume fraction of the spheres.
Application of the Green theorem to the unit cell of the composite yields the result
ge = 1 −16πB1,0
E
,
(251)
where, as before, E is the total ﬁeld. Equation (28) provides accurate estimates of the con-
ductivity for low values of the sphere volume fraction φ2 with a1 = 0.0047058, b1 = 0.130683,
b2 = 1.20500, c1 = 0.00603255, c2 = 5.73021, c3 = 8.20884, and c4 = 0.295595. These co-
eﬃcients were estimated with Mθ = 4 and Mϕ = 0. The Zuzovsky-Brenner expression, Eq.
(30), also provides accurate estimates of the eﬀective conductivity with d1 = −0.0685 and
d2 = −0.03767.
4.3.2 Two-dimensional arrays of cylinders
In 2D, the problem is deriving the eﬀective conductivity of a regular array of inﬁnitely long
cylinders with circular cross sections, inserted in a uniform matrrix. As in the 3D case, the
conductivities of the cylinders (circles) and the matrix are diﬀerent. The radius of the cylinders
is R. Such 2D regular arrays of cylinders inserted in a uniform matrix of a diﬀerent conductivity
are of practical interest. For example, thin ﬁlms made by sputtering by ion bombardment often
have a columnar structure, similar to what we consider here. One may also wish to model
thin ﬁbrous materials in which the role of the ﬁbers is played by the long cylinders. Certain
cermets - composites of metals and ceramic materials - also have such a structure. According to
the International Tables for X-Ray Crystallography, there are ﬁve ways of packing cylinders in
regular 2D arrays. Here we consider two of such arrays, namely, square and hexagonal arrays.
4.3.2.1 Hexagonal arrays
This problem has been studied by Lord Rayleigh (1892), Runge (1925), Keller (1963), Keller
and Sachs (1964), Ninham and Sammut (1976), Doyle (1978), and Perrins et al.
(1979b).
Keller and Sachs (1964) considered the case in which the cylinders were perfectly conducting.
We discuss the more general problem in which both the cylinders and the matrix have ﬁnite
conductivities, and summarize the solution obtained by Perrins et al. (1979b) whose method
125

is similar to that of McPhedran and McKenzie (1978) and McKenzie et al. (1978) that we
described in the last section.
Consider a hexagonal array of cylinders of radius R, as shown in Figure 4.4. Without loss
of generality, one may assume a unit separation between the cylinders’ centers. The volume
fraction φ2 of the cylinders is given by φ2 = 2πR2/
√
3. The cylinders touch when R = 1/2, and
therefore the critical volume fraction is φc = π/(2
√
3). The ratio of the conductivities of the
cylinders and the matrix is σ, and the goal is to determine the eﬀective conductivity ge of the
composite normalized by the conductivity of the matrix. We use polar coordinates (r, θ) with
r being measured from a cylinder center P and θ from PD; see Figure 4.4. An electric ﬁeld E0
is applied to the system parallel to the line PD. Similar to the 3D case, one must consider the
voltage distributions both outside and inside the cylinders. For outside the cylinders, i.e., for
r > R, Perrins et al. (1979b) expanded the voltage about P as
Vm(r, θ) = A0 +
∞

l=1
(Alrl + Blr−l) cos lθ ,
(252)
whereas for r < R, i.e., inside the cylinders, one has
Vc(r, θ) = C0 +
∞

l=1
Clrl cos lθ .
(253)
The boundary conditions at the interface between the cylinders and the matrix are again
given by Eq.
(13).
If we set Vc(0, θ) = 0 and use the boundary conditions (13), we ﬁnd
that A0 = C0 = 0. This implies immediately that only odd values of l must be allowed in
the expansions for Vm and Vc.
Moreover, suppose that, in addition to E0, we apply ﬁelds
E0(−1/2, −
√
3/2) and E0(−1/2,
√
3/2), so that the total applied ﬁeld is zero. If Vm(r, θ) is the
potential distribution due to E0, then the symmetry of the system yields Vm(r, θ + 2
3π) and
Vm(r, θ + 4
3π) for the potentials at (r, θ) due to the other two external ﬁelds. This implies that,
Vm(r, θ) + Vm(r, θ + 2
3π) + Vm(r, θ + 4
3π) = 0. Substituting Eq. (39) into this expression, we
can see immediately that l cannot be a multiple of 3, and therefore Al = Bl = 0, when l is a
multiple of 3.
The analogue of Eq. (19) for the hexagonal array is
E0δn,1 −(2n −1)!B2n−1(1 + σ)
R4n−2(1 −σ) =

m=1,2,···
(2n + 2m −3)!
(2m −2)!
U2n+2m−3B2m−1 .
(254)
126

Here, the quantity Ul is given by
Ul =
∞

j=1
(xj + iyj)−l =

(r,θ)
r−l exp(−ilθ) ,
(255)
where i = √−1, and (xj, yj) represents the cylinders’ centers, excluding P. Despite seemingly
being a complex number, all the non-zero Ul are real. Note that, if we assume that the array
remains unchanged by an angular rotation through an angle ϕ, then we must have Ul =
Ul exp(−ilϕ), for all integer values l > 2. Since Ul is non-zero, we must have l = 2mπ/ϕ.
For a hexagonal array, ϕ = π/3, and thus, for l > 2, the only non-zero sums have an order l
which is a multiple of 6. However, similar to the 3D systems, U2 is conditionally convergent as
its value depends upon the shape of the exterior boundary of the array at inﬁnity. But, as in
the 3D case, this shape dependence is removed by replacing E0 in Eq. (40) by E = E0 + Ep,
where Ep represents the eﬀect of polarization charges on the exterior boundary of the array, in
which case, U2 = 2π/
√
3. In general, to a high degree of accuracy,
U6l = 4

(−1)l + 1
33l + (−1)l
36l
+ 2 cos(6lΨ1)
73l
+ 2 cos(6lΨ2)
133l

+2

(−1)l + 1
33l
 
ζ(6l) + 2
43l

+ 2 cos(6lΨ3)
73l

, l = 1, 2 · · ·
(256)
where ζ(x) is the Riemann zeta function, viz.
ζ(x) =
∞

n=1
1
nx , x > 1 ,
and Ψ1 = arccos(3
$
3/7/2), Ψ2 = arccos(3
$
3/13/2), and Ψ3 = arccos(
$
3/7). The ﬁrst few
values of Ul for l > 2 (with l being a multiple of 6) are U6 = −5.86303, U12 = 6.00964,
U18 = −5.99972, and U24 = 6.00001.
Application of the Green theorem then yields
ge = 1 −4π
√
3
B1
E ,
(257)
so that the eﬀective conductivity is obtained by estimating B1 which itself is determined by
truncating and solving Eq. (40) (in which E0 is replaced by E). The degree of truncation
depends upon the desired accuracy of ge. Figure 4.5 compares the theoretical predictions with
the experimental data; the agreement is excellent. If the conductivity ratio σ is small, or if
127

the cylinders are not too close to each other, then the following approximate solution, obtained
with the ﬁrst 4 terms of the inﬁnite series (40), provides accurate predictions:
ge = 1 −2φ2

ℜ+ φ2 −
0.075422ℜφ6
2
ℜ2 −1.060283φ12
2
−0.000076φ12
2
ℜ
−1
,
(258)
where ℜ= (1 + σ)/(1 −σ).
4.3.2.2 Square arrays
The problem in this case is completely analogous to the hexagonal array (Perrins et al.,
1979a). The critical volume fraction at which the cylinders start to touch is φc = π/4. Equations
(38) and (39) still express the voltage distributions outside and inside the cylinders, respectively,
in which l is restricted to odd values. The analogue of Eq. (40) for a square array of cylinders
is given by
E0δn,1 −n!1 + σ
1 −σ
Bn
R2n =

m=1,3,···
(n + m −1)!
(m −1)!
Un+mBm , n = 1, 3, · · ·
(259)
The notation is the same as before. The coeﬃcients Bm can be determined to any desired
accuracy by truncating and solving Eq. (45) (in which E0 has been replaced by E). In this
case U2 = π and for m > 2 Um is non-zero only when m is a multiple of 4. In general, to a high
degree of accuracy,
U4l ≃4

ζ(4l)

1 + (−1)l
22l

+ 2 cos(4lΨ)
52l

, l = 1, 2, · · · ,
(260)
where Ψ = arccos(2/
√
5).
The ﬁrst few values of Um are, U4 = 3.15121, U8 = 4.25577,
U12 = 3.93885, and U16 = 4.015695.
The eﬀective conductivity of the array is given by
ge = 1 −2πB1 ,
(261)
so that ge can be estimated by computing B1. Figure 4.5 also compares the theoretical pre-
dictions with the experimental data of Kharadly and Jackson (1952). As can be seen, the
agreement is excellent. To order 3, the eﬀective conductivity can be approximated by
ge = 1 −2φ2

ℜ+ φ2 −
0.305827ℜφ4
2
ℜ2 −1.402948φ8
2
−0.013362φ8
2
ℜ
−1
,
(262)
where, as before, ℜ= (1 + σ)/(1 −σ).
128

The limit in which the cylinders are in contact is of interest. Asymptotic analysis of O’Brien
(1979) indicates that, for a pair of cylinders of conductivity σ which are separated by a small
gap h, the current I(σ, h) ﬂowing in response to a unit applied ﬁeld is given by
I(σ, h) ≃
⎛
⎝2
π
ln σ
σ
+ 1
π
!
h
R
⎞
⎠
−1
,
σ ≫1 .
(263)
For a square array of cylinders, I is also the total current ﬂowing in the unit cell, if the
contribution to ge from the region around the touching line is much larger than that from other
regions. For a hexagonal array of cylinders, I as given above must be multiplied by
√
3 in order
to obtain ge. In the limit of touching cylinders (h = 0) we obtain
ge ≃
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
π
2
σ
ln σ ,
square array,
√
3π
2
σ
ln σ ,
hexagonal array,
(264)
which agree with the calculations of Perrins et al. (1979a,b) if σ > 80. See also Milton et al.
(1981) for arrays of intersecting square prisms and comparison with experimental data.
Keller (1963) derived asymptotic expressions for the eﬀective conductivity of a square array
of identical and perfectly conducting circular cylinders in a matrix of conductivity g1 near
the inclusion-phase threshold φc = φ2c = π/4, and for a square array of perfectly insulating
inclusions near φc. His results are given by
ge
g1
=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
π3/2
2 (φc −φ2)−1/2 ,
perfectly conducting,
2
π3/2(φc −φ2)1/2 ,
perfectly insulating .
(265)
Observe that the right sides of the two equations are the reciprocal of each other, which is a
general property of 2D systems. We will come back to this point later in this chapter.
4.4 Exact Results for Coated Spheres and Laminates
In addition to the exact results derived in Section 4.3, one can also obtain an exact expression
for the eﬀective conductivity of a particular model of two-phase materials, ﬁrst suggested by
Hashin and Shtrikman (1962). The material in this model consists of composite spheres that
are composed of a spherical core of conductivity g2 and radius a, surrounded by a concentric
shell of conductivity g1 with an outer radius b > a. The ratio a/b is ﬁxed and in d−dimensions,
φ2 = (a/b)d. The compsite spheres ﬁll the space, implying that there is a sphere size distribution
129

that extends to inﬁnitesimally-small particles. This model is referred to as the coated-spheres
model.
To derive an expression for ge, it is suﬃcient to obtain the local ﬁelds for a single d−dimensional
composite sphere. Hence, we consider a uniform material with (as yet) unknown conductivity
ge on which a uniform ﬁeld E0 is imposed. We then replace a d−dimensional sphere of radius
b of the material with a composite sphere, and attempt to determine ge in such a way that
the ﬁeld outside the composite sphere remains unchanged, which implies that there would be
no change in the material’s conductivity due to the replacement. Repeating the procedure of
replacing spheres with composite spheres ad inﬁnitum will yield the coated-spheres model with
the eﬀective conductivity ge.
Thus, consider a d−dimensional composite sphere in an inﬁnite matrix of conductivity ge,
and let r be the radial vector emanating from the sphere center. The voltage (or temperature)
distribution satisﬁes the Laplace equation, subject to continuity of the voltage and the radial
component of its ﬂux at r = a and r = b. The general solution for the voltage V is then given
by
V =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
c1E0r cos θ ,
r ≤a ,
c2E0r cos θ + c3
E0 cos θ
rd−1
,
a ≤r ≤b ,
−E0r cos θ ,
r ≥b ,
(266)
where E0 = |E0|, θ is the angle between r and E0 (aligned along the z−axis), and c1, c2 and c3
are three constants that are determined from continuity of V at r = a and r = b and that of
its radial ﬂux at r = a. In particular,
c2 =
(1 −d)g1 −g2
g2 + (d −1)g1 −φ2(g2 −g1) ,
(267)
and
c3 =
ad(g2 −g1)
g2 + (d −1)g1 −φ2(g2 −g1) ,
(268)
where φ2 = (a/b)d, as mentioned earlier. Continuity of the radial ﬂux at r = b (the interface
between the composite sphere and the uniform matrix) then yields
ge = c3g1(d −1)
b2
−c2g1 = φ1g1 + φ2g2 −
φ1φ2(g2 −g1)2
φ2g1 + φ1g2 + g1(d −1) ,
(269)
which is an exact result.
130

Note that, except for the trivial limit of φ2 = 1, the particle phase never percolates in
the composite material. Later in this chapter (see Section 4.6) we will discuss the connection
between Eq. (55) and the Hashin-Shtrikman rigorous bounds to the eﬀective conductivity of
composite materials.
Another class of models of heterogeneous materials for which exact results have been derived
consists of hierarchical laminates - layered materials with n diﬀerent structural levels.
For
example, a random ﬁrst-rank laminate is composed of alternating layers of phases 1 and 2,
according to some random process such that, for example, the thicknesses of the layers vary in
space. A random second-rank laminate is constructed in two stages. Assume, for simplicity,
that the ﬁrst stage is a series of parallel slabs of ﬁxed width W1 oriented in a given direction, say
the y−direction, and generated by some 1D process. Let φ(1)
1
and φ(1)
2
be the volume fractions
of the matrix and the inclusion phases, respectively. In the second stage one adds perpendicular
slabs of width W2 in the gaps of the ﬁrst stage. Let φ(2)
1
and φ(2)
2
be the volume fractions of
phases 1 and 2, respectively, for the second-stage process. Clearly, φ(1)
1
+ φ(1)
2
= φ(2)
1
+ φ(2)
2 .
Moreover, a point is in phase 1 of the entire laminate exactly when its x−coordinate is in
phase 1 of the ﬁrst stage and also in phase 1 of the second stage of lamination. However, since
these events are independent, the volume fraction of phase 1 of the entire laminate is given by,
φ1 = 1 −φ2 = φ(1)
1 φ(2)
1 . Clearly, one can generalize this construction to nth-rank laminates. It
should also be clear to the reader that laminates are macroscopically anisotropic.
As an example, consider a laminate of rank 1 that consists of alternating layers of isotropic
phases 1 and 2 of random thicknesses. Phase i has conductivity gi and volume fraction φi. We
assume that the laminate is of an inﬁnite extent. It is not diﬃcult to show that the eﬀective
conductivity tensor of this composite is given by
ge =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
⟨g−1⟩−1
0
0
0
⟨g⟩
0
0
0
⟨g⟩
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
,
(270)
where ⟨g⟩= φ1g1 + φ2g2, and ⟨g−1⟩−1 = (φ1/g1 + φ2/g2)−1, and therefore the components of ge
are simply the arithmetic and harmonic averages of the phase conductivities. If the laminate
is of rank 1, but consists of n phases, then one must use ⟨g⟩=
n
i=1 φigi, and ⟨g−1⟩−1 =
(
n
i=1 φi/gi)−1.
131

Although laminates may seem to have a morphology which is too simple for modelling any
real disorderd material, they have proven to be very useful models. In fact, Schulgasser (1976)
showed that the eﬀective conductivity of a large class of composites can be evaluated exactly by
a lamination construction of high orders. The eﬀective conductivity of such laminates can still
be computed analytically, because, similar to laminates of rank 1, the local ﬁelds are piecewise
constant under the assumption that the length scales between the diﬀerent structural levels
are inﬁnitely separated. If so, one can repeatedly use the eﬀective conductivity tensor of a
ﬁrst-rank laminate successively at each level of the hierarchy to obtain the eﬀective conduc-
tivity of the entire laminate. Moreover, Schulgasser (1976), who was interested in ﬁnding the
maximum range of the eﬀective conductivity that an isotropic polycrystal, composed of grains
with principal conductivities ga, gb, and gc, can take on for all possible orientations, shapes,
and conﬁgurations of the grains, showed that the well-known upper bound,
1
3
 1
ga
+ 1
gb
+ 1
gc
−1
≤ge ≤1
3(ga + gb + gc) ,
(271)
derived by Molyneux (1970) for the eﬀective conductivity of macroscopically isotropic poly-
crystals, is attained by a laminate of rank 3. Milton (1981d) showed that many bounds on the
complex dielectric constant of two-phase composites, to be described later in this chapter and
Chapters 5 and 6, can be realized by laminates. It can also be shown that laminates of rank d
achieve the d−dimensional Hashin-Shtrikman bounds, to be derived later in this chapter. For
example, it can be shown that Eq. (55) for coated-spheres model with d = 2, which is equal to
the Hashin-Shtrikman lower bound for g2 ≥g1, is attained by a laminate of rank 2.
4.5 Perturbation Expansion for the Eﬀective Conductivity
Regular arrays of conducting spheres embedded in a uniform matrix of a diﬀerent conductiv-
ity belong to a small class of systems for which exact computations can be carried out. Another
approach for deriving exact, albeit implicit, solution of the conduction problem in heterogeneous
materials is based on perturbation expansions. There are several versions of such expansions
which are not necessarily equivalent. In this section we discuss one such expansion for which
the original idea belongs to Brown (1955). The formulation of the problem as discussed below
is due to Torquato (1985a). One advantage of this perturbation expansion is that it enables
one to establish links with rigorous upper and lower bounds to the eﬀective conductivity and
132

dielectric constant of heterogeneous materials which will be derived later in this chapter. Both
isotropic and anisotropic materials can be treated, and thus we discuss them separately.
4.5.1 Isotropic materials: Strong-contrast expansion
We assume that the material is a domain D of space of volume Ω(or surface S in 2D) which
consists of two phases; one with volume (area) fraction φ1 and conductivity g1 and another
(inclusion) phase characterized by a volume (area) fraction φ2 and conductivity g2. The local
conductivity g(r) at position r ∈D is given by
g(r) = gj + (gi −gj)mi(r) , i ̸= j ,
(272)
with
mi(r) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1,
r ∈Di
0,
otherwise
(273)
where Di represents the domain of phase i. The two-phase material is now subjected to the
electric ﬁeld E0(r) which generates a Lorentz electric ﬁeld EL(r) given by (Jackson, 1998)
EL(r) = E0(r) +

Di
T(r −r′) · P(r′)dr′ ,
(274)
where Di denotes the domain of the integration (Ωor S) with the exclusion of an inﬁnitesimally
small sphere or circular disk centered at r. EL(r) is related to the electric ﬁeld E(r) in the
material through
EL(r) =

1 + g(r) −gj
gjd

E(r) ,
(275)
where d is the dimensionality of the system, and P(r) is the induced polarization ﬁeld, relative
to the medium in the absence of phase i which is related to E(r) by
P(r) = g(r) −gj
2(d −1)πE(r) .
(276)
The quantity T(r) is a dipole-dipole interaction tensor given by
T(r) = drr −r2U
gjrd+2
,
(277)
where r ≡|r| and U is the unit dyadic. If we combine Eqs. (61) and (62), we obtain
P(r) =
gjd
2(d −1)π

g(r) −gj
g(r) + (d −1)gj

EL(r) =
gjd
2(d −1)πgijmi(r)EL(r) , i ̸= j ,
(278)
133

where gij, given by
gij =
gi −gj
gi + (d −1)gj
(279)
is proportional to the dipole polarizability of a sphere or a circular disk of conductivity gi,
embedded in a matrix of conductivity gj. The eﬀective conductivity ge of the material is then
deﬁned through the following relation:
⟨P(r)⟩=
gjd
2(d −1)π

ge −gj
ge + (d −1)gj

⟨EL(r)⟩,
(280)
where ⟨·⟩denotes an ensemble average.
The procedure developed by Brown (1955) (and extended by Torquato, 1985a) for calcu-
lating ge is actually quite involved. If we combine Eqs. (60) and (64) for the Lorentz and
polarization ﬁelds, we obtain an integral equation that governs P(r). This equation is solved
by successive substitution which yields an expansion in powers of gij, which is then formally
re-expressed in terms of an operator acting on E0(r). One then averages the relation between
P(r) and E0(r). As discussed for regular arrays of spheres, the relation between the average
ﬁeld and E0(r) is shape-dependent. To remove the shape dependence, one inverts the series for
⟨P(r)⟩in terms of E0(r) and eliminates E0(r) by averaging Eq. (60) for EL(r). This procedure
also eliminates the need for excluding, from the domain of integration Di in Eq. (60), the
inﬁnitesimally small sphere or circular disk centered at r. In the limit Ω→∞(or S →∞) we
obtain a perturbation expansion for ge which is given by
(gijφi)2
ge + (d −1)gj
ge −gj

= φigij −
∞

n=3
A(i)
n gn
ij , i ̸= j ,
(281)
where A(i)
n are integrals over a set of n−point probability functions. For n ≥3 one has
A(i)
n = (−1)nφ2−n
i
d

dgj
2π(d −1)
n−1 
· · ·

T(1, 2) · · · T(n −1, n) : UC(i)
n (1, 2, · · · , n)dr2 · · · drn ,
(282)
while for n = 2,
A(i)
2 = dΓ(d/2)
2πd/2

T(1, 2)

S(i)
2 (r1, r2) −φ2
2

dr2 ,
(283)
134

with T(i, j) = T(ri −rj), and C(i)
n
is the determinant of the following matrix:
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
S(i)
2 (1, 2)
S(i)
1 (2)
0
· · ·
0
0
S(i)
3 (1, 2, 3)
S(i)
2 (2, 3)
S(i)
1 (3)
· · ·
0
0
·
·
·
· · ·
·
·
·
·
·
· · ·
·
·
S(i)
n−1(1, · · · , n −1)
S(i)
n−2(2, · · · , n −1)
· · ·
· · ·
S(i)
2 (n −2, n −1)
S(i)
1 (n −1)
S(i)
n (1, 2, · · · , n)
S(i)
n−1(2, 3, · · · , n)
· · ·
· · ·
S(i)
3 (n −2, n −1, n)
S(i)
2 (n −1, n)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(284)
Here S(i)
n (1, 2, · · · , n) = S(i)
n (r12, · · · , r1n) = ⟨mi(r1)mi · · · mi(rn)⟩, is the probability of ﬁnding
n points with positions r1, r2,· · · , rn, all in phase i, deﬁned in Chapter 3, and rij = ri −rj.
Several points are worth mentioning here:
(1) Equation (67) actually represents two series expansions, one for i = 1 and j = 2,
and another one for i = 2 and j = 1.
Because of their dependence on S(i)
1 , S(i)
2 , · · · , S(i)
n ,
the parameters A(i)
n are usually referred to as the n−point microstructural parameters. Since
determination of S(i)
n for an arbitrary microstructure is not practical, ge cannot be determined
exactly, although Eq. (67) is an exact (but implicit) equation for ge.
(2) The n−point parameters A(i)
n are independent of the phase properties, and hence repre-
sent purely microstructural properties that depend only on the correlation functions S(i)
n , and
not their derivatives, as in other theories (see, for example, Beran, 1968).
(3) The presence of the tensor T(r), which decays as r−d for large r, does not make the
integrals in Eqs. (68) and (69) conditionally convergent since, due to the asymptotic properties
of S(i)
n described in Chapter 3, the determinant C(i)
n in Eq. (68) and the quantity in the brackets
in Eq. (69) both identically vanish at the boundary of the sample, and therefore the integrals
in Eqs. (68) and (69) are both absolutely convergent. In addition, for n ≥3, the limiting
process of excluding an inﬁnitesimally small cavity about rij = 0 in the integral (68) is no
longer necessary, since C(i)
n
is again identically zero for such values of n.
(4) Classical perturbation expansions involve small parameters that are simple diﬀerences
in the phase conductivities (see, for example, Beran, 1968). In contrast, the series expansions
(67) are non-classical because they involve the polarizability gij given by Eq. (65), a ratio-
nal function, and therefore their convergence properties are superior to those of the classical
expansions.
135

(5) The expansion parameter gij arises because of our choice of excluding a spherical cavity
at r′ = r in the integral (60) and integrating by parts. Had we chosen a non-spherical cavity,
we would have obtained a diﬀerent series expansion. However, the implication of using a non-
spherical cavity has not been fully understood yet. Moreover, a free paramter of this formulation
is the reference material, which does not have to be phase 1 or 2. In fact, as shown by Eyre and
Milton (1999), the convergence of the series expansions (67) can be accelerated by judicious
choice of the exclusion-cavity shape and the reference material.
The fact that ge remains invariant under interchange of the phases in Eq. (67) implies that
A(1)
n
and A(2)
n
are dependent upon each other. For isotropic materials A(i)
2 = 0. For n = 3 and
n = 4 one has
ζ1 + ζ2 = 1 ,
(285)
where
ζi =
A(i)
3
φiφj(d −1) , i ̸= j ,
(286)
and
γ1 −γ2 = (d −2)(ζ2 −ζ1) ,
(287)
with
γi =
A(i)
4
φiφj(d −1) .
(288)
It can be shown that 0 ≤ζi ≤1. Moreover,
ζi =
4
πφ1φ2
 ∞
0
dr
r
 ∞
0
ds
s
 π
0 dθ cos(2θ)
⎡
⎣S(i)
3 (r, s, θ) −S(i)
2 (r)S(i)
2 (s)
φ2
⎤
⎦, d = 2 ,
(289)
ζi =
9
2φ1φ2
 ∞
0
dr
r
 ∞
0
ds
s
 1
−1 d(cos θ)P2(cos θ)
⎡
⎣S(i)
3 (r, s, θ) −S(i)
2 (r)S(i)
2 (s)
φ2
⎤
⎦, d = 3 , (290)
where P2 is the Legendre polynomial of order 2, and θ is the angle opposite the side of the
triangle of length |r −s|. Note that, due to its relation with A(i)
3 , ζi represents a three-point
parameter, whereas γi is a four-point parameter.
It is useful to consider microstructures for which the parameters A(i)
n vanish to all orders
for all values of the phase conductivities. Hence, setting A(i)
n = 0 in Eq. (67) yields
ge −gj
ge + (d −1)gj
=
gi −gj
gi + (d −1)gj
φi .
(291)
136

For 2D and 3D systems, Eq. (77) is identical with the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds, to be de-
scribed below, on the eﬀective conductivity of two-phase isotropic materials, and therefore, as
discussed in Section 4.4, is exact for the assemblages of coated spheres and ﬁnite-rank laminates.
Thus, one may view Eq. (67) as an expansion that perturbs around the Hashin-Shtrikman mi-
crostructures, i.e., the coated-spheres model. Since, as discussed in Section 4.4, the inclusion
phase in the coated-spheres model is non-percolating, we may expect the ﬁrst few terms of the
series (67) to provide excellent approximation for ge for any values of the phase conductivi-
ties for materials in which the inclusions, taken to be the polarized phase, are prevented from
forming large clusters.
Another interesting feature of the series (67) is as follows. If we write the expansion for
i = 1 and j = 2 and add it to the expansion for i = 2 and j = 1, we obtain
ge + (d −1)g2
ge −g2
φ1 + ge + (d −1)g1
ge −g1
φ2 = 2 −d −
∞

n=3
A(2)
n
φ2
gn−2
21
+ A(1)
n
φ1
gn−2
12

.
(292)
If the sum on the right-hand side of Eq. (78) is zero, then Eq. (78) reduces to the eﬀective-
medium approximation, to be derived later in this chapter, for two-phase materials with spher-
ical grains. This fact, together with the realization that, g12/g21 = −[1 + (d −2)g21]−1, enable
us to conclude that Eq. (78) is a series expansion of ge in powers of g21 that perturbs about
microstructures that realize the two-phase eﬀective-medium approximation.
4.5.2 Approximations
Because determining S(i)
n for large values of n is not currently practical, the series (67) cannot
be summed exactly, and one must resort to approximate techniques.
A particularly useful
method for doing so is using Pad´e approximation (Baker, 1975) which provides an accurate
means of approximately summing a series while using only a limited number of its terms. In
general, a Pad´e approximant of a function f(x) is written as a ratio of two truncated power
series in x and denoted by [n1/n2], where n1 and n2 indicate the order of the series in the
numerator and denominator, respectively. The Taylor series of f(x) and the Pad´e approximant
agree up to order n1+n2. For example, the [1/1] and [2/2] approximants are given, respectively,
by
ge
gj
= 1 −(d −1)φigij
1 −φigij
, i ̸= j
(293)
ge
gj
= 1 + [(d −1)φi −γi/ζi]gij + (1 −d)[φjζi + φiγi/ζi]g2
ij
1 −[φi + γi/ζi]gij + [φj(1 −d)ζi + φiγi/ζi]g2
ij
, i ̸= j .
(294)
137

As was discussed by Torquato (1985a), such Pad´e approximants can produce rigorous upper
and lower bounds to the eﬀective conductivity of the material. We will discuss this link between
the Pad´e approximants and the bounds to ge in the next sections. Moreover, employing the
expressions for the eﬀective conductivity of various regular arrays of spheres, e.g., Eqs. (28)
and (30), one can show that the ﬁrst two terms of series (67) for j = 1 (i.e., terms through
order g2
ij) provide a very good approximation to its left-hand side for the simple-cubic, BCC
and FCC lattices for broad ranges of the spheres’ volume fraction φ2 and the conductivity ratio
σ. Thus, for such microstructures,
∞
n=4 A(2)
n gn
21 ≃0, which implies that if this remainder is
indeed assumed to be zero, and the remaining equation is solved for ge, one obtains (Torquato,
1985a)
ge
g1
= 1 + 2φ2g21 −2φ1ζ2g2
21
1 −φ2g21 −2φ1ζ2g2
21
.
(295)
Torquato (1985a) showed that Eq. (81) yields accurate estimates for the eﬀective conductivity
of 3D dispersions, provided that the mean cluster size of the dispersed phase (the spheres) is
much smaller than the macroscopic length scale, i.e., the volume fraction of the dispersed phase
is not close to its percolation threshold (see below).
To utilize the series expansion (67), the Pad´e approximants, Eq. (81), or various bounds
that will be described in Section 4.6, one needs to determine the three-point microstructural
parameter ζ2. Therefore, let us summarize and describe the most important results that have
been obtained for this parameter.
4.5.3 The microstructural parameter ζ2
Let us write a low-density expansion for ζ2 given by
ζ2 = ζ(0)
2
+ ζ(1)
2 φ2 + · · ·
(296)
Given Eq. (82), the following results have been obtained for the ﬁrst term of the above expan-
sion. For a d−dimensional dilute array of randomly oriented ellipsoids one has
ζ(0)
2
=
1
d −1

d
d

i=1
A2
i −1

,
(297)
where Ai are the depolarization factors. In particular, for 3D systems,
ζ(0)
2
=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
0
spheres,
1
4
needles,
1
disks ,
(298)
138

while for 2D systems,
ζ(0)
2
=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
0
disks,
1
needles.
(299)
In addition, from the work of Helsing (1994) and Hetherington and Thorpe (1992) one can
deduce the following results,
ζ(0)
2
=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
0.11882
cubes,
0.20428
triangles,
0.08079
squares,
0.02301
hexagons,
(300)
where the ﬁrst equation is for random stacks of cubes, while the last three are for regular
polygonal inclusions in the plane.
One of the simplest models for which the parameter ζ2 has been estimated is the so-called
symmetric cell model (see, for example, Miller, 1969, for one of the earliest work on such
models; see also Section 3.4.2). In such models, one partitions the space into cells of arbitrary
shapes and sizes. The cells are designated randomly and independently as phase 1 or 2, with
probabilities φ1 and φ2, their corresponding volume fractions. Such models possess, in contrast
to dispersions of inclusions, topological equivalence in the sense that their morphology with
volume fractions φi is identical with another morphology with volume fractions 1 −φi (i.e.,
they possess phase-inversion symmetry). They are useful models because one can compute
the ﬁrst few terms of series expansion (67) without any need for computing the associated
correlation functions S(i)
n . Milton (1982a,b) showed that for a d−dimensional symmetric-cell
model
ζ2 = φ2 + (φ1 −φ2)(Sd2 −1)
d −1
,
(301)
where S is a factor that depends only on the shape of the cells. For spherical or circular cells,
ζ2 = φ2, while for plate-like or ribbon-like cells, ζ2 = φ1. These are useful results because,
for example, it can be shown that for cylinders (disks for d = 2), be they overlapping, non-
overlapping, possessing polydispersivity in size, etc., ζ2 is always bounded from above by the
symmetric-cell result, ζ2 = φ2, and this appears to be also true for d = 3. Moreover, we observe
that for any symmetric-cell material at φ1 = φ2 = 1/2, one must have ζ2 = 1/2.
Consider now an isotropic symmetric-cell material that consists of d−dimensional ellipsoidal
cells. These space-ﬁlling cells must be randomly oriented and possess a size distribution down
139

to inﬁnitesimally small sizes. It can be shown that for 3D needle-like cells, ζ2 = 1
4φ1 + 3
4φ2, and
for 3D disk-like cells or 2D needle-like cells, ζ2 = φ1. For symmetric-cell materials one has
ζ2 =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
0.11882φ1 + 0.88118φ2
cubical cells,
0.20428φ1 + 0.79572φ2
triangular cells,
0.08079φ1 + 0.91921φ2
square cells,
0.02301φ1 + 0.97699φ2
hexagonal cells.
(302)
The microstructural parameter ζ2 has also been computed for several other models of het-
erogeneous materials. Stell and Rikvold (1987) showed, for a distribution of overlapping spheres
embedded in a uniform matrix (the Swiss-cheese model; see Section 2.11), or its 2D versions
(overlapping cylinders), that the parameter ζ2 is insensitive to polydispersivity eﬀect. More-
over, Berryman (1985) and Torquato (1986a) showed that the ﬁrst term in an expansion of ζ2
in terms of φ2, such as Eq. (82), is a good approximation to ζ2 over almost the entire range of
φ2 with ζ2 ≃0.5615φ2.
However, estimation of ζ2 for microstructures in which the inclusions do not overlap is
quite diﬃcult, since the integrals in Eqs. (75) and (76) involve the probability distribution
function S(i)
n , the evaluation of which is by itself a formidable task. For an isotropic, equilibrium
distribution of hard (impenetrable) spheres, Beasley and Torquato (1986) calculated ζ2 exactly
through third order in φ2 with the result being
ζ2 = 0.21068φ2 −0.04693φ2
2 + 0.00247φ3
2 ,
(303)
which appears to be very accurate. Even if we truncate Eq. (79) after the quadratic term,
it would still be very accurate for a wide range of φ2, which is not really surprising since ζ2
incorporates primarily up to three-body eﬀects to lowest order, even when φ2 is large. For a
random distribution of inﬁnitely long, parallel, identical, circular and non-overlapping cylinders,
Torquato and Lado (1988) calculated ζ2 exactly through second order in φ2:
ζ2 = 1
3φ2 −0.05707φ2
2 ,
(304)
which is highly accurate in the range 0 ≤φ2 ≤0.7, where φ2 = 0.7 is relatively close to φc ≃0.81
for random close packing. Thovert et al. (1990) computed exactly through ﬁrst order in φ2 for
impenetrable spheres with a polydispersivity in size. For a bidispersed suspension with widely
140

separated particles’ sizes, they found
ζ2 = 0.35534φ2 ,
(305)
while for a polydispersed suspension containing n diﬀerent and widely separated particle sizes
(as n →∞), they obtained
ζ2 = 0.5φ2 .
(306)
In addition, numerical values of ζ2 for the three regular arrays of spheres described in
Section 4.2 have also been computed. They are listed in Table 4.2 along with those for random
impenetrable spheres, fully penetrable spheres model (the Swiss-cheese model), described in
Chapters 2 and 3, and polydispersed impenetrable spheres. Using values of ζ2 listed in Table 4.2,
it can be easily shown that Eq. (81) provides excellent estimates of the eﬀective conductivity of
three 3D regular arrays of spheres embedded in a uniform matrix that were discussed in Section
4.2. Finally, Torquato et al. (1999) computed ζ2 for 2D checkerboard geometry - tessellation of
2D space into square cells - with the result being, ζ2 = 0.08079 + 0.83842φ2, which is identical
with what is given in Eq. (88), as it should be.
Table 4.2
Values of the microstructural parameter ζ2 for simple-cubic (SC), body-centered cubic (BCC),
and face-centered cubic (FCC) lattices (all computed by McPhedran and Milton, 1981), as
well as fully-impenetrable spheres (FIS), fully-penetrable spheres (FPS), and polydispersed
impenetrable spheres (PIS) (all tabulated by Torquato, 2002). φ2 is the volume fraction of the
spheres.
φ2
SC
BCC
FCC
FIS
FPS
PIS
0.10
0.0003
0.0000
0.0000
0.0200
0.0564
0.0500
0.20
0.0050
0.0007
0.0004
0.0410
0.1140
0.1000
0.30
0.0220
0.0031
0.0021
0.0600
0.1712
0.1500
0.40
0.0678
0.0107
0.0078
0.0770
0.2300
0.2000
0.50
0.1738
0.0307
0.0232
0.0940
0.2900
0.2500
0.60
–
0.0796
0.0619
0.1340
0.3510
0.3000
141

4.5.4 Anisotropic materials
The perturbation expansion derived above is now extended to anisotropic materials. Equa-
tions (60)-(65) are still applicable, but, due to the system’s anisotropy, Eq. (66) is modiﬁed to
(Sen and Torquato, 1989)
⟨P(r)⟩=
gjd
2(d −1)π [ge + (d −1)gjU]−1 (ge −gjU)⟨EL(r)⟩,
(307)
where ge is now the eﬀective conductivity tensor of the anisotropic material. Then, the analogue
of Eq. (67) for anisotropic materials is
(gijφi)2(ge −gjU)−1[ge + (d −1)gjU] = φigijU −
∞

n=2
A(i)
n gn
ij , i ̸= j ,
(308)
where A(i)
n are now tensors, the expressions for which will be given shortly. As before, we refer
to A(i)
n as the n−point microstructural parameter.
As in the case of isotropic materials, Eq. (94) for anisotropic materials actually represents
two series expansions, one for i = 1 and j = 2, and a second one for i = 2 and j = 1. This
means that in one case phase 1 is the matrix and phase 2 in inserted in it, while the reverse is
true in the second case.
A few properties of A(i)
n are worth mentioning here.
(1) A(i)
n
is a symmetric tensor and for n = 2, 3, · · · will not, in general, have common
principal axes, implying that, in general, the principal axes of the conductivity tensor ge will
rotate as the phase conductivity ratio σ changes. An example is a heterogeneous material with
chirality, i.e., one with some degree of left- or right-handed asymmetry. Nonetheless, for at
least a certain class of model materials, which includes random distributions of oriented and
identical ellipsoids or cylinders in a matrix, there are enough symmetries for all the A(i)
n
to
possess common principal axes, in which case n−point tensor multiplication is commutative.
(2) For macroscopically-anisotropic materials, the series expansions (94) can be considered
as expansions that perturb about the optimal structures that realize the generalized Hashin-
Shtrikman bounds, ﬁrst derived by Willis (1977) and again by Sen and Torquato (1989).
(3) Consider microstructures for which A(i)
n = 0 for n ≥3. Equation (94) reduces to
(gijφi)2[ge −gjU]−1 · [ge + (d −1)gjU] = φigijU ,
i ̸= j .
(309)
The series (95) are equivalent to the generalized Hashin-Shtrikman bounds, to be derived
below, for d−dimensional anisotropic materials, derived by Sen and Torquato (1989) using
142

the method of Pad´e approximants. Willis (1977) was the ﬁrst to derive (95) for d = 3. The
bounds that are embodied in (95) are optimal, since they are achieved by certain oriented
singly-coated ellipsoidal assemblages (see, for example, Milton, 1981d), as well as ﬁnite-rank
laminates (Tartar, 1985). Note that, as pointed out earlier, in such models one of the phases is
always disconnected.
(4) The lowest-order parameters A(i)
2 does not generally vanish for microscopically-anisotropic
materials, since S(i)
2 (r) depends on r = |r| as well as the orientation vector r. For macroscopically-
isotropic materials, A(i)
2
= 0, since it is traceless. However, as pointed out earlier, we should
keep in mind that microscopic anisotropy does not necessarily imply macroscopic anisotropy.
An example is cubic lattices of spheres which are microscopically anisotropic, but are macro-
scopically isotropic with respect to their eﬀective conductivity (but not their elastic moduli;
see Chapter 7).
If δij = (gi −gj)/gj, then Eq. (94) through fourth-order term becomes
ge
gj
= U + a(i)
1 δij + a(i)
2 δ2
ij + a(i)
3 δ3
ij + a(i)
4 δ4
ij + O(δ5
ij) , i ̸= j ,
(310)
with
a(i)
1 = φiU ,
(311)
a(i)
2 = 1
d[A(i)
2 −φiφjU] ,
(312)
a(i)
3 = 1
d2
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩φ2
jφi
⎡
⎣U −A(i)
2
φiφj
⎤
⎦
2
+ A(i)
3
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭,
(313)
a(i)
4 = 1
d3

−φiφ3
jB3 −φjB · A(i)
3 −φjA(i)
3 · B −A(i)
3 + A(i)
4

,
(314)
where B = U −A(i)
2 /(φiφj). The ﬁrst few n−point microstructural parameters are as follows,
A(i)
2 =
d
2π(d −1)

Di
T(x)[S(i)
2 (x) −φ2
i ]dx ,
(315)
A(i)
3 =

d
2π(d −1)
2 
T(x12) · T(x23)
⎡
⎣S(i)
3 (x12, x13) −S(i)
2 (x12)S(i)
2 (x23)
φi
⎤
⎦dx2dx3 ,
(316)
A(i)
4 =

d
2π(d −1)
3 
T(x12) · T(x23) · T(x34)

S(i)
4 (x12, x13, x14)
−S(i)
3 (x12, x13)S(i)
2 (x34)
φi
−S(i)
3 (x23, x24)S(i)
2 (x12)
φi
+ S(i)
2 (x12)S(i)
2 (x23)S(i)
2 (x34)
φ2
i
⎤
⎦dx2dx3dx4 ,
(317)
143

where xij = xi −xj, and the rest of the notation is the same as before. Note that, as mentioned
earlier (see also Chapter 3), for both isotropic and anisotropic materials one has
S(i)
n (xn) ≡
) n

j=1
mi(xi)
*
.
(318)
where mi(xi) is deﬁned by Eq. (51), and xn = {x1, x2 · · · , xn}.
Using the perturbation expansions for the eﬀective conductivity of isotropic as well as
anisotropic materials, one can also develop rigorous upper and lower bounds to ge. We de-
scribe and discuss this in the next section.
4.6 Bounds to the Eﬀective Conductivity
Derivation of rigorous bounds to the eﬀective transport properties of heterogeneous materials
has a long history which goes back to at least Wiener (1912), who showed that the eﬀective
conductivity ge of a composite material is bounded by
) 1
g(r)
*
< ge < ⟨g(r)⟩,
(319)
where the indicated averages are taken with respect to the spatial distribution of the local
conductivity g(r) at point r. The bounds (105) state that ge is bounded from below and above
by the conductivity of hypothetical systems in which the local conductivities g(r) are in series
or in parallel, respectively. As such, these bounds are not very sharp and hence are of very
limited utility. We refer to (105) as the one-point bounds.
Although there are several methods for bounding the eﬀective transport properties of a
composite material, we discuss in detail one such method, namely, the variational principles,
which have been used very heavily for nearly four decades. The use of this method was pioneered
by Hashin and Shtrikman (1962a,b,1963), Prager (1963) and Beran (1965). Their work was
based on a variational principle which is based on the followeing key theorem.
Theorem: The functional integral deﬁned by
H = 1
8π
 
ϵ0E2
0 −
P2
ϵ −ϵ0
+ P · (2E0 + E′)

dr ,
(320)
is stationary for arbitrary variations of the polarization P when
P = (ϵ −ϵ0)E = D −ϵ0E ,
(321)
144

with E = E0 + E′, subject to the conditions that, E′ = −∇ψ, and ϵ0∇· E′ = −∇· P. The
boundary condition is that on all the surfaces one must have, ψ = 0. Here E(r) and D(r) are
the local electric and displacement ﬁelds, respectively, ϵ(r) is the spatially-varying permittivity
of the material, ϵ0 is an arbitrary constant, and E0(r) is the electric ﬁeld if the material were
homogeneous. It is straightforward to show that the stationary value of (106) is exactly the
electrostatic energy stored in the system, i.e.,
Hs = 1
8π

E · D dr .
(322)
4.6.1 Isotropic materials
We ﬁrst derive the upper and lower bounds for the eﬀective conductivity of isotropic mate-
rials, after which anisotropic materials will be considered.
4.6.1.1 Two-point bounds
Although the Hashin-Shtrikman (1962a,b) method involved polarization ﬁelds, and as such is
somewhat diﬀerent from those of others (see below), we describe their method here both because
of its historical signiﬁcance and the role that it has played in the research ﬁeld of bounding
the eﬀective transport properties of a composite, and also the fact that their work illustrates
the essense of the bounding principles. Hashin and Shtrikman studied the permittivity of a
heterogeneous material, and considered suitable trial choices for P to be inserted in (106). They
used the ansatz
P ≡PiE0 ,
(323)
for an m−component composite, where Pi is the polarization for phase i of the material. Then,
Eq. (106) yields
8πH
Ω
= ϵ0E2
0 −
) P 2
i
ϵ −ϵ0
*
+ 2⟨Pi⟩E0 + 1
Ω

P · E′dr ,
(324)
where, ⟨Pi⟩=
m
i φiPi, ⟨P 2
i ⟩=
m
i φiP 2
i , and Ωis the volume of the system. Thus, one needs
only to determine the integral on the right-hand side of Eq. (110). After considerable and
tedious algebra (see, for example, Hashin and Shtrikman, 1962a,b; Bergman, 1978) one obtains
8πH
Ω
= ϵ0E2
0 −
) P 2
i
ϵ −ϵ0
*
+ 2⟨Pi⟩E0 −1
3ϵ0
+
⟨P 2
i ⟩−⟨Pi⟩2,
.
(325)
Equation (111) is now extremised with respect to Pi, choosing a suitable value for ϵ0. If, for
a two-component system (m = 2), we choose ϵ0 to be the minimum or maximum value of ϵ,
145

i.e., ϵ1 or ϵ2 (if ϵ1 < ϵ2), respectively, then we ﬁnd the upper and lower bounds to the eﬀective
permittivity, e.g., the dielectric constant ϵe, of the material, namely,
ϵ1 +
φ2ϵ1
ϵ1/∆ϵ + φ1/3 < ϵe < ϵ2 +
φ1ϵ2
ϵ2/∆ϵ + φ2/3 ,
(326)
which are the celebrated Hashin-Shtrikman bounds, with ∆ϵ = ϵ2 −ϵ1. For a d−dimensional
systems, the factor 3 in (112) must be replaced by d.
Are these bounds an inherent property of the model, or are they due to the limitations
of the ansatz (109)? To answer this question, Hashin and Shtrikman (1963) considered the
so-called concentric-shell model (see Chapter 3), which is equivalent to singly-coated spheres
model described in Section 4.4. Consider a homogeneous material with permittivity ϵ0 where
the surface potential is prescribed to be ψ0 so as to create a uniform electric ﬁeld E0 within the
uniform system. The energy stored in this original system is ϵ0E2
0/(8π). Suppose now that a
sphere of radius b in this material is replaced by a composite sphere with an inner radius a and
permittivity ϵa while the outer concentric shell is of radius b and ϵb. The question is: Under
what conditions is there no change in the stored energy, i.e., the composite material behaves
the same as the original system? The energy will remain unchanged if E0 outside the composite
sphere remains the same by the replacement. We know from elementary electrostatics (see, for
example, Jackson, 1998) that for 0 < r < a, i.e., in the inner sphere, we have
Ea = −c1 cos θ er + c1 sin θ eθ ,
(327)
where er and eθ are the unit vectors, and c1 is a constant to be determined. For the shell area,
a < r < b, we must have
Eb =

−c2 + c3
r3

cos θ er +

c2 + c3
r3

sin θ eθ ,
(328)
where c2 and c3 are also constants to be determined. Finally, outside the sphere and its shell,
b < r < ∞, we must have no change in the energy, and therefore
E = E0 cos θ er −E0 sin θ eθ .
(329)
To determine the constants c1, c2 and c3 we must use the boundary conditions which are the
continuity of displacement D⊥and the electric ﬁeld E∥across the interfaces at r = a and r = b.
146

These four boundary conditions lead us to
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
E0b −c2b −c3/b2
=
0
ϵ0E0 −ϵbc2 + 2ϵbc3/b3
=
0 ,
c2a + c3/a2 −c1a
=
0 ,
ϵbc2 −2ϵbc2/a3 −ϵac1
=
0 .
(330)
Since there are four equations and only three unknowns, the determinant of Eqs. (116) must
vanish. This leads us to
ϵ0 = ϵb +
(a/b)3
1/(ϵa −ϵb) + [1 −(a/b)3]/(3ϵb) .
(331)
If we carry out the replacement process for every inﬁnitesimal particle in the system, keeping
(a/b)3 (i.e., the ratio of the volumes) constant, then we have φa = (a/b)3 and φb = 1 −(a/b)3.
Then, by choosing ϵ1 = ϵa, φ1 = φa, ϵ2 = ϵb, and φ2 = φb we recover the Hashin-Shtrikman
lower bound, while selecting ϵ1 = ϵb, φ1 = φb, ϵ2 = ϵa and φ2 = φa yields the Hashin-Shtrikman
upper bound. This implies that, given only the volume fractions of the two phases and ϵ1 and
ϵ2, the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds are the best possible bounds that one can obtain.
The corresponding Hashin-Shtrikman bounds for the eﬀective conductivity of a two-phase
material, consisting of phases 1 and 2 with g2 ≥g1, are give by
φ1g1 + φ2g2 −
φ1φ2(g1 −g2)2
φ2g1 + φ1g2 + g1(d −1) ≤ge ≤φ1g1 + φ2g2 −
φ1φ2(g2 −g1)2
φ2g1 + φ1g2 + (d −1)g2
. (332)
The Hashin-Shtrikman bounds are exact through second-order in the diﬀerence (gi −g2). Ob-
serve that the lower bound is identical with Eq. (55). These bounds are realized by the singly-
coated d−dimensional sphere assemblages and the second-rank laminates described in Section
4.4, which is why they represent the best possible bounds when the only information available
is the volume fractions of the phases and g1 and g2. If one wishes to obtain sharper bounds
to the eﬀective transport properties, then the perturbation expansions derived above must be
used which, as discussed above, depend on an inﬁnite number of the n−point microstructural
parameters A(i)
n . This will be discussed below.
The corresponding bounds for the eﬀective conductivity ge of d−dimensional, macroscopically-
isotropic materials that consist of n isotropic phases are also known. Suppose that gM and gm
are, respectively, the maximum and minimum phase conductivities. Then, with g∗
m = (d−1)gm
147

and g∗
M = (d −1)gM, one has
 n

i=1
φi(g∗
m + gi)−1
−1
−g∗
m ≤ge ≤
 n

i=1
φ1(g∗
M + gi)−1
−1
−g∗
M .
(333)
Milton (1981b) showed that these bounds for multiphase materials are realized by certain
multicoated spheres for a wide range of cases. The bounds for any dimension d ≥2 are realized
by the corresponding d−dimensional multicoated spheres.
4.6.1.2 Cluster bounds
If use of polarization ﬁelds is to be avoided, then the classical variational principles for the
eﬀective conductivity tensor ge are as follows (Beran, 1968; McPhedran and Milton, 1981):
Minimum potential energy criterion for the upper bound:
⟨∇T⟩· ge · ⟨∇T⟩≤⟨E · gE⟩, ∀E ∈SU ,
(334)
SU = {stationary φ(r); ∇× E = 0 , ⟨E⟩= ⟨∇T⟩} .
(335)
Constraints (121) imply that the trial ﬁeld E is irrotational and its ensemble average must
equal the ensemble average of the true temperature gradient ∇T or voltage gradient ∇V . Any
trial ﬁeld E that satisﬁes these conditions will yield an upper bound on ge given by
ge ≤⟨gE · E⟩
⟨E⟩· ⟨E⟩.
(336)
Minimum complementary energy criterion for the lower bound:
⟨q⟩· g−1
e
· ⟨q⟩≥⟨J · g−1J⟩,
∀J ∈SL ,
(337)
SL = {stationary J(r); ∇· J = 0 , ⟨J⟩= ⟨q⟩} .
(338)
As in the case of the upper bound, as long as the trial ﬂux J satisﬁes constraints (124), and in
particular its ensemble average is equal to the ensemble average of the true ﬂux q, it yields a
lower bound to the eﬀective conductivity ge given by
ge ≥⟨J⟩· ⟨J⟩
⟨g−1J · J⟩.
(339)
As an example, if we take the admissible temperature gradient and heat ﬂux to be con-
stant vectors and correspond exactly to the eigenvalues of anisotropic composites composed of
148

alternating slabs parallel or perpendicular to the applied ﬁeld, we obtain the one-point bounds
(105), ﬁrst derived by Wiener (1912). Having set up the general concepts and ideas of bounding
the eﬀective conductivity, we now discuss more speciﬁc cases for well-deﬁned geometries.
The perturbation expansions derived in Section 4.5 and the bounding principles discussed
above can both be used for deriving upper and lower bounds to the eﬀective conductivity (and
also the dielectric constant) of heterogeneous materials.
Before proceeding with describing
how this is done, let us demonstrate how the variational principles are used for deriving the
bounds for a relatively simple model of heterogeneous materials, namely, the fully-penetrable
(the Swiss-cheese) model of N equisized spheres of radius R and conductivity g2 inserted in a
uniform matrix of conductivity g1. The electric ﬁeld at point r can be expanded in a cluster
expansion form (Torquato, 1986a):
E(r) = ⟨E(r)⟩+
n

k=1
ckE(k)(r) ,
(340)
where the kth-order term, E(k), is the contribution to E by the intrinsic k−body interactions,
with the property that for all k ≥1, ⟨E(k)⟩= 0. The constants ck are selected so as to minimize
the upper bound to ge. Thus, if we substitute (126) into (122) and set ∂ge/∂c = 0, where c is
the vector with components ck, we obtain
ge ≤⟨g⟩−VTW−1V
⟨E⟩· ⟨E⟩,
(341)
where T denotes the transpose operation, V is a vector with components
Vk = ⟨E⟩· ⟨gE(k)⟩,
(342)
and the entries of the matrix W are given by
Wkl =
-
gE(k) · E(l).
.
(343)
Similarly, if the trial ﬂux J is taken to be
J(r) = ⟨J⟩+
n

k=1
ωkJ(k)(r) ,
(344)
and if we proceed as in the case of the upper bound, the following lower bound is obtained
ge ≥

⟨1/g⟩−XTY−1X
⟨J⟩· ⟨J⟩
−1
,
(345)
149

with
Xk = ⟨J⟩· ⟨J(k)/g⟩,
(346)
Ykl = ⟨J(k) · J(l)/g⟩,
(347)
As pointed out by Torquato (1986a), bounds (127) and (131) are exact through nth order in
the sphere volume fraction φ2, because they are based on the exact solution of the electrostatic
ﬁeld equations for n interacting spheres (see below). We refer to them as the nth-order cluster
bounds.
It is now possible to derive explicit expressions for the cluster bounds. If the trial ﬁelds are
taken to be constant vectors added to the sum of the contributions from individual isolated
spheres, then for the simplest case, i.e., n = 1, one obtains
ge ≤⟨g⟩−⟨gE(1)⟩· ⟨gE(1)⟩
⟨gE(1) · E(1)⟩
,
(348)
ge ≥

⟨1/g⟩−⟨J(1)/g⟩· ⟨J(1)/g⟩
⟨J(1) · J(1)/g⟩
−1
,
(349)
where E(1) is the trial ﬁeld electric ﬁeld ﬂuctuation, J(1) is the trial current ﬁeld ﬂuctuation, and
⟨·⟩denotes an ensemble average. The trial ﬁelds E(1) and J(1) are obtained from the one-sphere
electrostatic boundary value problem (Jackson, 1998):
E(1)(r; rN) =
N

i=1
¯K(xi) · ⟨E⟩−

ρ1(r1) ¯K(x1) · ⟨E⟩dr1 ,
(350)
J(1)(r; rN) =
N

i=1
¯M(xi) · ⟨E⟩−

ρ1(r1) ¯M(x1) · ⟨E⟩dr1 ,
(351)
where xi = r −ri, rN = {r1, · · · , rn}, and
¯K(r) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
g21R3(3ˆrˆr −U)/r3 ,
r > R ,
−g21U ,
r < R ,
(352)
¯M(r) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
g1g21R3(3ˆrˆr −U)/r3 ,
r > R ,
2g1g21U ,
r < R .
(353)
Here, r = |r|, ˆr = r/r, U is the unit dyadic, and gij = (gi −gj)/(gj + 2gi). ρ1(r)dr is the one-
particle limit of ρn(rn)drn, introduced and discussed in detail in Chapter 3 (see Section 3.4.1.3),
which gives the probability that the center of exactly one unspeciﬁed particle is in volume dr1
150

about r1, the center of exactly one other unspeciﬁed particle is in volume dr2 about r2, etc. It
is now possible to calculate the various needed averages. These are given by (Torquato, 1986a)
⟨g⟩= g1 + φ2(g2 −g1) ,
(354)
⟨1/g⟩= 1/g1 + φ2(g1 −g2)/(g1g2) ,
(355)
⟨gE(1)⟩= −4πg21(g2 −g1)⟨E⟩
 1
0 z2H(2)
1 (z)dz ,
(356)
⟨J(1)/g⟩= 8πg21
g1 −g2
g2

⟨E⟩
 1
0 z2H(2)
1 (z)dz ,
(357)
⟨gE(1) · E(1)⟩
g2
21⟨E⟩· ⟨E⟩= g1A + (g2 −g1)B ,
(358)
⟨J(1) · J(1)/g⟩
g2
21⟨E⟩· ⟨E⟩= C
g1
+ g1 −g2
g1g2
D ,
(359)
with A =
3
i=1 Ai, B =
4
i=1 Bi, C = 2A1 + 4A2 + A3, D = 4B1 + B2 + 4B3 + B4, where
A1 = 3η ,
(360)
A2 = 9
2η2
 1
0 dz z2
 1
0 dy y2
 1
−1 du h(x) ,
(361)
A3 = 9η2
 ∞
1
dz
z
 ∞
1
dy
y
 1
−1 du h(x)P2(u) ,
(362)
B1 = 3η
 1
0 dz z2G(2)
1 (z)/ρ ,
(363)
B2 = 6η
 ∞
1
dz
z4 G(2)
1 (z)/ρ ,
(364)
B3 = 9
2η2
 1
0 dz z2
 1
0 dy y2
 1
−1 du Q(y, z)/ρ2 ,
(365)
B4 = 9η2
 ∞
1
dz
z
 ∞
1
dy
y
 1
−1 du Q(y, z)P2(u)/ρ2 ,
(366)
and
Q(y, z) = G(2)
2 (y, z) −ρG(2)
1 (y) −ρG(2)
1 (z) + ρ2φ2 .
(367)
Here the sphere radius R is taken to be unity, ρ = N/Ωis the number density, η = ρv1 is a
reduced density, v1 is the volume of one sphere, P2(u) is the second-order Legendre polynomial,
u = (y2 + z2 −x2)/(2yz), and x = |y −z|.
The quantity G(i)
n (rn+1)dr2dr3 · · · drn, the point/n−particle distribution function which was
introduced and discussed in Chapter 3 (see Section 3.4.1.3), yields the probability of ﬁnding
151

phase i at r1, the center of one unspeciﬁed particle in volume dr2 about r2, the center of another
unspeciﬁed particle in volume dr3 about r3, etc. As discussed in Chapter 3, for statistically-
homogeneous materials, G(i)
1 (r1, r2) = G(i)
1 (r12), G(i)
2 (r1, r2, r3) = G(i)
2 (r12, r13, ˆr12 · ˆr13), etc.,
where rij = ri −rj and ˆrij = rij/rij. An important property of this function for a two-phase
material is that (Torquato, 1986a)
G(1)
n (r; rn) + G(2)
n (r; rn) = ρn(rn) .
(368)
It is also not diﬃcult to show that for x < 1 we have G(2)
1 (x) = ρ. The function H(i)
1
that
appears in Eqs. (142) and (143) is given by
H(i)
n (r; rn) ≡G(i)
n (r; rn) −G(i)
0 (r)ρn(rn) .
(369)
Thus, it is straightforward to show that H(2)
1 (x) = ρφ1, provided that x < 1. Many other
properties of G(i)
n and H(i)
n were given by Torquato (1986a). The function h(x) appearing in Eqs.
(147) and (148) is the total correlation function discussed in Chapter 3 (see Section 3.4.1.4)
and is given by, h(x) = ρ2(x)/ρ. Thus, the following bounds on the eﬀective conductivity
of an isotropic composite consisting of equisized spheres of variable penetrability dispersed
throughout a matrix are obtained,
ge ≤⟨g⟩−
η2φ2
1(g2 −g1)2
g1A + (g2 −g1)B ,
(370)
ge ≥

⟨1/g⟩−4η2φ2
1(g2 −g1)2/(g1g2)
g2C + (g1 −g2)D
−1
.
(371)
In both cases an averaged quantity ⟨X⟩is deﬁned as ⟨X⟩= φ1X1 + φ2X2. As discussed in
Chapter 3, for partially-penetrable spheres the inclusion volume fraction φ2 can be related
to the reduced density η. For example, for fully-penetrable spheres and totally-impenetrable
spheres one has, φ2 = 1 −e−η and φ2 = η, respectively. Note also that the diﬀerence between
the upper and lower bounds diverges when g1/g2 →0 or g2/g1 →∞, and in particular the
upper bound usually diverges, so that in these limits the upper bound is not useful.
We can make further progress if we specify the microstructure of the model. Consider,
as an example, the penetrable-concentric shell (PCS) model (see Chapter 3) in which each
d−dimensional sphere of diameter 2R is composed of a hard impenetrable core of diameter
2λR, encompassed by a perfectly penetrable shell of thickness (1 −λ)R (see Figure 3.4). The
152

limits λ = 0 and λ = 1 correspond, respectively, to the cases of fully-penetrable sphere (the
Swiss-cheese) model, and the totally-impenetrable sphere model.
For this model, one can
develop low-density expansions of the various properties of interest through second order in the
density ρ. The result for the total correlation function h(x) is given by (Torquato, 1986b)
h(x; λ) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
−1 ,
x < 2λR ,
0 ,
x > 2λR ,
(372)
and
G(2)
1 (x) = m(x)ρ + [1 −m(x)][v1 −vi(x; a, b)]ρ2
(373)
where m(x) = 1 if x < R and m(x) = 0 otherwise, v1 is the volume of one sphere, a =
min(R, 2λR), b = max(R, 2λR), and vi(x; a, b) is the volume common to two spheres, one of
radius a < b and the other of radius b, the centers of which are separated by a distance x (see
also Section 3.4.1.4). For 0 ≤x ≤R2 −R1, vi is simply the volume of the smaller sphere,
vi = 4πR3
1/3, while for x ≥R1 + R2 the common volume is zero, vi = 0. In between, for
R2 −R1 ≤x ≤R2 + R1 one has
vi(x; R1, R2) = 4π
3

−3
16x(R2
2 −R2
1)2 + 1
2(R3
1 + R3
2) −3x
8 (R2
1 + R2
2) + x3
16

.
(374)
We also need Q(r12, r13) which is given by
Q(r12, r13) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
0 ,
r12 > R and r13 > R ,
h(r23)ρ2 ,
r12 < R and r13 > R ,
h(r23)ρ2 ,
r12 > R and r13 < R ,
(h(r23) −1)ρ2 ,
r12 < R and r13 < R .
(375)
Given Eqs. (158)-(161), the quantities A, B, C, and D are computed using Eqs. (146)-(152).
The results through order η2 are given by
A = 3η −3η2(8λ3 −9λ4 + 2λ6) ,
(376)
B = η + η2

1 −2λ6 + 27λ4
2
−16λ3 + 9λ2
4
+
3λ
4(1 + 2λ)2 −3
8 ln(1 + 2λ)

,
(377)
D = 4η −η2

2 + 8λ6 −81λ4
2
+ 40λ3 −9λ2
4
−
3λ
4(1 + 2λ)2 + 3
8 ln(1 + 2λ)

,
(378)
and C = 2A. We may also eliminate η in favor of φ2 using the relation
η = φ2 + φ2
2

4(1 −λ3) −9
2(1 −λ4) + 1 −λ6

,
(379)
153

which is exact through order φ2
2. The resulting bounds are always sharper than the Hashin-
Shtrikman bounds because they contain more microstructural information.
4.6.1.3 Three- and four-point bounds
The above bounds are for a speciﬁc model of microstructure of heterogeneous materials.
Beran (1965) derived upper and lower bounds on the eﬀective conductivity of any statistically
isotropic two-phase material which are, through φ2
2, exact. To do this, he utilized trial ﬁelds
based upon the ﬁrst two terms of a perturbation expansions for the ﬁelds. His bounds are given
by
ge
g1
≤1 + g2 −g1
g1

1 −
g12
1 + 2g12(1 −f0)

φ2 + g12(g2 −g1)
g1

1
1 + 2g12(1 −f0) −g12(1 + 2f1)

φ2
2 ,
(380)
ge
g1
≥1 + g2 −g1
g2

1 +
2g12
1 + g12(f0 −1)

φ2 +
⎧
⎨
⎩
(g2 −g1)2
g2
2

1 +
2g12
1 + g12(f0 −1)
2
+2g12(g1 −g2)
g2

1
1 + g12(f0 −1) + g12(2 + f1)

φ2
2 .
(381)
Here g21 = (g2 −g1)/(g2 + 2g1). The factors f0 and f1 depend on the microstructure of the
system. If
J =
9
2φ1φ2
lim
L→∞lim
∆→0
 L
∆
dr
r
 L
∆
ds
s
 1
−1 dµS3(r, s, µ)P2(µ) ,
(382)
where S3(r, s, µ) is the three-point probability function which gives the probability of ﬁnding
the vertices of a triangle with sides of length r and s and angle cos−1(µ) in phase 1 (the matrix),
and P2(x) is the second-order Legendre polynomial, and assuming that J can be expanded in
powers of φ2, then f0 and f1 are deﬁned through the relation
J = f0 + f1φ2 + O(φ2
2) .
(383)
In general f0 depends on one-body information, whereas f1 depends on one-body and two-body
information. It can be shown that for spherical particles f0 = 1. The Beran bounds are third-
order bounds in the sense that they are exact through third order in (g2 −g1). These bounds,
as given by (166)-(169), are diﬃcult to compute. They were simpliﬁed by Milton (1981b) and
are given by
ge ≥

⟨1/g⟩−
4φ1φ2(1/g2 −1/g1)2
6/g1 + (4φ1 + 2ζ2)(1/g2 −1/g1)
−1
,
(384)
ge ≤⟨g⟩−
φ1φ2(g2 −g1)2
3g1 + (φ1 + 2ζ2)(g2 −g1) ,
(385)
154

where the ensemble average of any quantity X is deﬁned as, ⟨X⟩= φ1X1 + φ2X2.
The accuracy of the Beran bounds is essentially comparable with that of (156) and (157).
They are in fact identical with (156) and (157) for dispersions of identical hard spheres. This fact
can be used for developing a numerical procedure for estimating the microstructural parameter
ζ2. A comparison of (156) and (157) with (170) and (171) shows that A = 3φ1φ2, and B =
φ2
1φ2 + 2ζ2φ1φ2. In light of Eq. (144) one can then show that
ζ2 =
⟨m2E(1) · E(1)⟩
2φ1φ2g2
12⟨E⟩· ⟨E⟩−1
2φ1 ,
(386)
where m2 is deﬁned by Eq. (59). Equation (172) provides a means of computing the microstruc-
tural parameter ζ2. This was exploited by Miller and Torquato (1990) who obtained, through
computer simulation, accurate estimates of ζ2.
In general, d−dimensional three-point bounds on the eﬀective conductivity of two-phase
isotropic materials of any microstructure are given by
φ1g1 + φ2g2 −
φ1φ2(g2 −g1)2
φ2g1 + φ1g2 + (d −1)⟨g−1⟩ζ
≤ge ≤φ1g1 + φ2g2 −
φ1φ2(g2 −g1)2
φ2g1 + φ1g2 + ⟨g⟩ζ
,
(387)
where for any property p one has, ⟨p⟩ζ = p1ζ1 + p2ζ2 with ζ1 + ζ2 = 1. Since ζi ∈[0, 1], the
bounds (173) are always more accurate than the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds. When ζ2 = 0, the
bounds (173) coincide with the Hashin-Shtrikman lower bound (for g2 ≥g1), whereas when
ζ1 = 1, they coincide with the Hashin-Shtrikman upper bounds (for g2 ≥g1). The bounds
(173) are exact through third order in the diﬀerence in the phase conductivities.
Milton (1982a,b) derived a three-point lower bound on ge for d = 3 and g2 > g1, which
improves upon the Beran lower bound, but only slightly:
ge
g1
≥1 + (1 + 2φ2)g21 −2(φ1ζ2 −φ2)g2
21
1 + φ1g21 −(2φ1ζ2 + φ2)g2
21
,
(388)
where g21 is the same as before, and ζ2 is given by Eq. (76), or any of its approximations
discussed in Section 4.5.3. Milton (1981a) also derived n−point bounds on ge for d = 2 and
d = 3 which are exact through the nth order in (gi −gj). For even values of n, his n−point
bounds are exactly realized for space-ﬁlling multicoated cylinders (disks in 2D) where each
multicoated cylinder or disk has n/2 coatings and is similar, to within a scale factor, to any
other multicoated cylinder in the composite; see Figure 4.6. In the case of n = 4 and for
g2 ≥g1, his lower bound is given by Eq. (80) with i = 2 and j = 1, while his upper bound is
155

obtained from Eq. (80) with i = 1 and j = 2. Thus, the Pad´e approximation that was used to
derive Eq. (80) actually yields rigorous upper and lower bounds to the eﬀective conductivity.
Figure 4.7 compares the three-point bounds of Milton and Beran with the simulation results
of Kim and Torquato (1992) for an equilibrium distribution of overlapping spheres in a matrix.
The ratio of the conductivities of the spheres and the matrix is σ = 10. As can be seen, for this
value of σ, the two bounds provide very sharp estimates of the conductivity. Figure 4.8 makes
the same comparison but for σ = 50, and it is clear that as the conductivity of the spheres
becomes much larger than that of the matrix, the bounds begin to become relatively poor.
Figure 4.9 compares the results for the case of superconducting spheres (σ = ∞) with the lower
bound of Milton and Beran which, up to about a sphere volume fraction of φ2 ≃0.2, provides
reasonable estimates of the eﬀective conductivity. Also shown in this ﬁgure are the predictions
of Eq. (81) which in fact performs better than the lower bound. One can see that, as long as
the superconducting spheres are not close to forming a sample-spanning cluster, the three-point
bound and Eq. (81) both perform well, but as the sphere volume fraction φ2 approaches the
percolation threshold, the lower bound and Eq. (81) both fail.
Four-point bounds on the eﬀective conductivity of two-phase isotropic materials were ﬁrst
derived by Milton (1981b). They are given by
g(4)
L
g1
= 1 + [(d −1)φ2 −γ2/ζ2]g21 + (1 −d)[φ1ζ2 + φ2γ2/ζ2]g2
21
1 −(φ2 + γ2/ζ2)g21 + [φ1(1 −d)ζ2 + φ2γ2/ζ2]g2
21
,
(389)
g(4)
U
g1
= 1 + [(d −1)φ1 −γ1/ζ1]g12 + (1 −d)[φ2ζ1 + φ1γ1/ζ1]g2
12
1 −(φ1 + γ1/ζ1)g12 + [φ2(1 −d)ζ1 + φ1γ1/ζ1]g2
12
,
(390)
where all the parameters were already deﬁned above. Note that for d = 2 the four-point bounds
are exactly zero [since γ1 = γ2; see Eq. (73)], and hence in this case the four-point bounds
depend only on the phase conductivities and volume fractions, and the parameter ζ1 = 1 −ζ2.
4.6.1.4 Cluster expansions for the eﬀective conductivity
The cluster expansion derived in Section 4.6.1.2 can also be used for obtaining simple
expressions for the efective conductivity of composite materials, since the bounds (127) and
(131) are exact through nth order in the sphere volume fraction φ2. We do not give further
details of these expansions, and only summarize the results.
Through ﬁrst order in φ2, the eﬀective conductivity of a dilute dispersion of d−dimensional
156

spheres is given by
ge = g1 + dg1g21φ2 + O(φ2
2) .
(391)
The result for d = 3 is usually attributed to Maxwell (1873).
It can be shown that the
polarization coeﬃcient dg1g21 is not changed if the spheres’ sizes are distributed according
to a statistical distribution. In fact, the size-independence of the polarization coeﬃcient is
independent of the particles’ shape. Moreover, if the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds are expanded
through ﬁrst order in φ2, the result would agree with Eq. (177). For the two limiting cases of
interest to us, Eq. (177) reduces to
ge
g1
=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 −
d
d−1φ2 + O(φ2
2),
insulating spheres,
1 + dφ2 + O(φ2
2),
superconducting spheres.
(392)
Consider now the non-dilute dispersion of spheres. For the most random distribution of
insulating spheres, subject to impenetrability constraint, Jeﬀrey (1973) derived the following
expression:
ge
g1
= 1 −3
2φ2 + 0.588φ2
2 + O(φ3
2) ,
(393)
whereas for superconducting d−dimensional spheres one has
ge
g1
=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 + 3φ2 + 4.51φ2
2 + O(φ3
2),
d = 3,
1 + 2φ2 + 2.74φ2
2 + O(φ3
2),
d = 2.
(394)
The 2D result was derived by Peterson and Hermans (1969).
Finally, for the fully-penetrable spheres model, the following results have been derived
(Torquato, 1985b)
ge
g1
≃
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 −3
2φ2 + 0.345φ2
2 + O(φ3
2),
insulating spheres,
1 + 3φ2 + 7.56φ2
2 + O(φ3
2),
superconducting spheres.
(395)
4.6.2 Anisotropic materials
Derivation of upper and lower bounds on the eﬀective conductivity of anisotropic materials
is similar to that for the isotropic case, except that for anisotropic materials one must take into
account the tensorial nature of the eﬀective conductivity. As usual, we consider a two-phase
material. Recall that Eq. (94) actually represents two series expansions, one for i = 1 and
j = 2, and a second one for i = 2 and j = 1, implying that ge remains invariant to interchange
157

of the phases, and thus the A(1)
n
are related to the A(2)
n . Sen and Torquato (1989) showed, in
fact, that
A(1)
2
= A(2)
2
,
(396)
A(1)
3
+ A(2)
3
= (d −1)φ1φ2U −(d −2)A(1)
2
−
1
φ1φ2
A(1)
2
· A(1)
2
,
(397)
and
A(1)
4
−A(2)
4
= (d −2)

A(2)
3
−A(1)
3

+
1
φ1φ2

A(1)
2
· A(2)
3
−A(1)
3
· A(1)
2

.
(398)
Moreover, in 2D all the A(i)
2n+1 are scalar multiplier of the unit tensor, and all the A(i)
2n are
traceless. For macroscopically-isotropic materials, A2 = A(1)
2
= A(2)
2
= 0.
To derive the bounds for anisotropic materials one follows the prescription for the isotropic
case, namely use of Pad´e approximation (Sen and Torquato, 1989; Torquato and Sen, 1990),
variational principles, or any method that is used for deriving the bounds for isotropic materials,
suitably modiﬁed for anisotropic materials. The nth-order bounds are exact through order
δij = (gi −gj)/gj. We summarize the results here.
4.6.2.1 Two-point bounds
The two-point anisotropic generalizations of the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds on ge (with
g2 ≥g1) are given by
g(2)
L = ⟨g⟩+ (g1 −g2)2a2 ·

g1U + (g1 −g2)2
φ2
a2
−1
,
(399)
g(2)
U = ⟨g⟩+ (g1 −g2)2a2 ·

g2U + (g2 −g1)2
φ1
a2
−1
,
(400)
where [see Eq. (98)] a2 ≡a(1)
2
= a(2)
2 −(φ1φ2/d)U, and thus the trace of a2 is just −φ1φ2. This
property can be exploited for obtaining simpler bounds on the eigenvalues of ge. Therefore,
these bounds incorporate only volume-fraction information. These bounds were derived by
Willis (1977) using the generalization of the Hashin-Shtrikman method described earlier, and
by Torquato and Sen (1990) using the method of Pad´e approximants. The two bounds may be
written in terms of a single expression:
g(2)
g1
=

U +

φiU −1
φi
a(i)
2

δij
 
U −1
φi
a(i)
2 δij
−1
,
(401)
158

where δij = (gi −gj)/gj. For g1 ≤g2 the lower bound is obtained by setting i = 2 and j = 1,
while the upper bound is obtained with i = 1 and j = 2. If the material is isotropic, then these
bounds reduce to the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds.
Willis (1977) also derived two-point bounds for 3D multiphase anisotropic materials with
n anisotropic phases of conductivities g1, · · · , gn and a comparison phase 0 of conductivity g0.
They are given by
ge
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
≥¯g,
gi ≥g0,
≤¯g,
gi ≥g0,
(402)
for i = 1, 2, · · · , n, where
¯g =
 n

i=1
φigiR(0)
i

·
 n

i=1
φiR(0)
i
−1
,
(403)
R(0)
i
= [U + P0 · (gi −g0)]−1 ,
(404)
P0

S(ij)
2
−φiφj

= −

G0(x −x′)

S(ij)
2
(x −x′) −φiφj

dx′ .
(405)
Here S(ij)
2
(x) is the probability of ﬁnding one point in phase i and another in phase j with a
relative separation of x, which, in the absence of long-range order, has the asymptotic properties
that, S(ij)
2
(∞) = φiφj, and
S(ij)
2
=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
φi,
i = j,
0,
i ̸= j.
(406)
The second-rank tensor G0(r) is the double gradient of the Green function for a system with
conductivity tensor g0 [see, for example, Eq.
(247) given below].
For two-phase materials
(n = 2), P0 = −a2/(φ1φ2g0), and the bounds (188) reduce to (187).
4.6.2.2 Three- and four-point bounds
These bounds are given by (Torquato and Sen, 1990)
gL
e
g1
−1
= (1 + φ1δ21)U + δ2
21c2 · [(1 −φ1δ21)c2 + (b3 + φ1b2)δ21]−1 · c2 ,
(407)
gU
e
g1
= (1 + φ2δ21)U + δ2
21a(2)
2
· (a(2)
2
−a(2)
3 δ21)−1 · a(2)
2
,
(408)
with b2 = φ1U+a(1)
2 , c2 = φ2
1U−b2, and b3 = −[φ1U+2a(1)
2 +a(1)
3 ], where a(1)
3
is given by Eq.
(99). For isotropic materials, these bounds reduce to those of Beran described above. Milton
(1987), using an elegant continued-fraction formulation of the problem, derived n−point bounds
for anisotropic materials which, however, are formal in the sense that the microstructural
159

parameters are not given explicitly in terms of the n−point probability functions that were
described in Chapter 3.
The fourth-order bounds are given by
ge
gj
= 1
2

AB−1 + (AB−1)T 
,
(409)
where
A = U + p(i)
1 δij + p(i)
2 δ2
ij ,
(410)
B = [U + q(i)
1 δij + q(i)
2 δ2
ij]−1 ,
(411)
with
q(i)
1 = [a(i)
2 · a(i)
2 −φia(i)
3 ]−1 · [a(i)
1 · a(i)
4 −a(i)
2 · a(i)
3 ] ,
(412)
q(i)
2 = −φ−1
i [a(i)
3 + a(i)
2 · q(i)
1 ] ,
(413)
where p(i)
1 = a(i)
1 + q(i)
1 , and p(i)
2 = a(i)
2 −φ−1
i a(i)
3 + [a(i)
1 −φ−1
i a(i)
2 ] · q(i)
1 , with a(i)
4 being given by
Eq. (100). Equation (195), for g1 ≤g2, i = 1 and j = 2, yields an upper bound for ge, while
for i = 2 and j = 1 one obtains a lower bound.
4.6.2.3 Simpliﬁcation of the bounds
As Eqs. (101)-(103) indicate, one needs the n−point probability function S(i)
n (xn), and in
particular S(1)
n (xn), in order to estimate the above bounds. In this case
S(1)
n (xn) = 1 +
N

k=1
(−1)k
k!

ρk(rk)
k

j=1
⎡
⎣1 −
n

j=1
[1 −m(xi −rj)]
⎤
⎦drj ,
(414)
where, as usual, the inclusion indicator function m(x) depends on the shape of the inclusions.
Equation (200) is valid for general heterogeneous arrays of identical, oriented inclusions of
arbitrary shapes distributed throughout a matrix. Although S(1)
n (xn), as given by Eq. (200),
appears to be formidable to compute, it can, for certain limits, be simpliﬁed, two of which are
as follows (Torquato and Sen, 1990).
Dilute distributions of oriented inclusions
In this limit, even if the inclusions interact with each other with an arbitrary interparticle
potential, Eq. (200) can be explicitly evaluated. Through order ρ one has
S(1)
n (x12, · · · , x1n) = 1 −ρ
 
1 −
n

i=1
[1 −m(xi −r1)]

dr1 = 1 −ρvi(x12, · · · , x1n) ,
(415)
160

where vi the union or intersection volume of n regions, all with the same size, shape and
orientation of an inclusion, with centroids that are separated by the vectors x12, · · · , x1n. For
n = 1, vi is simply the volume of an inclusion. For n = 2, for example, the union volume of
two rectangular or two cylindrical inclusions are given, respectively, by Eqs. (3.86) and (3.88).
Overlapping oriented inclusions
As discussed in Chapter 3, for overlapping inclusions ρn(xn) = ρn, and therefore Eq. (200)
becomes
S(1)
n (x12, · · · , x1n) = exp[−ρvi(x12, · · · , x1n)] .
(416)
As usual, the problem is more diﬃcult when the overlapping inclusions form a sample-spanning
cluster, in which case the bounds are not usually very useful.
Another limiting case of interest, non-overlapping oriented inclusions, is, as discussed in
Chapter 3, a very diﬃcult problem. Computation of even low-order statistics, such as S(1)
2
is quite involved. Lado and Torquato (1990) considered the case in which the inclusion was
an axially symmetric spheroid aligned with its symmetry axis in the x3−direction, so that its
inclusion indicator function is given by
m(r) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 ,
(x2
1 + x2
2)/a2 + x2
3/b2 < 1 ,
0 ,
otherwise
(417)
The eccentricity of the spheroid is thus, ϵ = b/a, and therefore the model includes oriented
disks (ϵ = 0), spheres (ϵ = 1), and oriented needles (ϵ = ∞). Figure 4.10 presents S2(r, θ) =
S(1)
2 (x12)−φ2
1 versus r/b for φ2 = 0.6 and ϵ = 2.0. Here θ is the polar angle between the x3−axis
and r = (x1, x2, x3). The results are for three values of θ, and as can be seen, the behavior of
S2(r, θ) is quite complex.
Further progress in evaluating these bounds can be made if the structure of the inclusions
is speciﬁed.
For example, for any 3D distribution of inclusions aligned in the x3 direction
which possesses transverse isotropy and azimuthal symmetry (for example, circular cylinders
or spheroids), the quantity a2 = a(i)
2
that appears in the bounds is given by
a2 = −φ1φ2
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
Q
0
0
0
Q
0
0
0
1 −2Q
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(418)
161

where
Q = 1
3 −lim
δ→0
1
4φ1φ2
 ∞
δ
dx
x
 π
0 dθ sin θ(1 −3 cos2 θ)

S(1)
2 (x) −φ2
1

.
(419)
Here, x = |x|, and θ is the polar angle measured with respect to the x3−axis. Note that, due
to the symmetry in the x1x2 plane, the diagonal elements (a2)11 and (a2)22 are equal. It can be
shown that for possibly overlapping spheroidal inclusions aligned parallel to the x3−axis with
length 2b and maximum diameter 2a [see Eq. (204)], one has (Willis, 1977)
Q = 1
2

1 +
1
(b/a)2 −1

1 −
1
2χ1
ln
1 + χ1
1 −χ1

, b/a > 1 ,
(420)
Q = 1
2

1 +
1
(b/a)2 −1

1 −1
χ2
tan−1(χ2)

, b/a < 1 ,
(421)
where χ2
1 = −χ2
2 = 1 −a2/b2. Numerical values of Q for overlapping cylinders and various
values of b/a and φ2 are listed in Table 4.3. Given Eq. (204), the second-order bounds (187)
simplify to
(ge)11
gj
= (ge)22
gj
= 1 + (φi + φjQ)δij
1 + φjQδij
,
(422)
(ge)33
gj
= 1 + [φi + φj(1 −2Q)]δij
1 + φj(1 −2Q)δij
,
(423)
where, as mentioned earlier, for g2 > g1 the upper bound is obtained with i = 1 and j = 2,
while i = 2 and j = 1 yield the lower bound.
Table 4.3
Dependence of the microstructural parameter Q on the aspect ratio b/a for aligned, overlapping
cylinders (Torquato and Sen, 1990) and aligned, non-overlapping spheroids (Willis, 1977). φ2
is the volume fraction of the cylinders. The results for the spheroids are valid for any volume
fraction.
162

b/a
φ2 = 0.1
φ2 = 0.5
φ2 = 0.9
Spheroids
0.01
0.0171
0.0179
0.0199
0.009
0.05
0.0617
0.0640
0.0693
0.037
0.10
0.102
0.105
0.111
0.070
0.20
0.160
0.163
0.169
0.125
0.50
0.263
0.264
0.266
0.236
1.00
0.344
0.343
0.340
0.333
2.00
0.409
0.407
0.402
0.413
5.00
0.460
0.458
0.454
0.472
10.0
0.480
0.478
0.475
0.490
20.0
0.490
0.489
0.487
0.497
∞
0.500
0.500
0.500
0.500
Finally, the important case of a model of aligned, inﬁnitely long, equisized, rigid, circular
cylinders (or disks in 2D) distributed randomly throughout a matrix, a very useful model of
ﬁber-reinforced matrials, should be mentioned. Silnutzer (1972) derived three-point bounds for
the eﬀective conductivity of such a material which, in their original forms, were quite complex.
Milton (1982a,b) simpliﬁed these bounds to
ge ≥

⟨1/g⟩−φ1φ2(1/g2 −1/g1)2
⟨1/ˆg⟩+ ⟨1/˜g⟩
−1
,
(424)
ge ≤⟨g⟩−φ1φ2(g2 −g1)2
⟨ˆg⟩+ ⟨˜g⟩
,
(425)
where ⟨X⟩= φ1X1 + φ2X2, ⟨ˆX⟩= φ2X1 + φ1X2, and ⟨˜X⟩= ζ1X1 + ζ2X2. The microstructural
parameters ζ1 and ζ2 are given by Eqs. (75) and (77). Milton (1982a,b) also derived fourth-order
bounds for the conductivity of such materials which are given by
ge ≥g1
(g1 + g2)(g2 + ⟨g⟩) −φ1ζ2(g2 −g1)2
(g1 + g2)(g1 + ⟨ˆg⟩) −φ1ζ2(g2 −g1)2

,
(426)
ge ≤g2
(g1 + g2)(g1 + ⟨g⟩) −φ2ζ1(g2 −g1)2
(g1 + g2)(g2 + ⟨ˆg⟩) −φ2ζ1(g2 −g1)2

.
(427)
The microstructural parameters ζ1 and ζ2 = 1−ζ1 were estimated very accurately by Torquato
and Lado (1988); their results are represented by Eq. (90).
163

Figure 4.11 compares the predictions of the second-order bounds with the computer sim-
ulations of Kim and Torquato (1993). Shown in this ﬁgure are the diagonal elements of the
conductivity tensor ge/g1 for a composite that consists of spheroidal inclusions inserted in a
uniform matrix, with b/a = 1/2 [see Eq. (203)], and a conductivity ratio σ = g2/g1 = 10. It
is clear that the bounds provide very reasonable estimates of the conductivities. Figure 4.12
makes the same comparison but for σ = ∞and b/a = 0.1. As in the case of the isotropic
case, when the conductivity ratio is large and the inclusions start to form large clusters, the
bounds lose their accuracy. In fact, the upper bound diverges, rendering it useless, but, at least
over a limited range of the inclusions’ volume fraction, the lower bound still provides a useful
estimates of the conductivities. The computer simulation results shown in Figures 4.11 and
4.12 were obtained by the random walk method that will be described later in this chapter.
4.6.2.4 Cluster expansions for the eﬀective conductivity
Similar to isotropic materials discussed in Section 4.6.1.4, one may also develop cluster ex-
pansions for the eﬀective conductivity of anisotropic materials. Consider, as an example, a
dilute suspension of d−dimensional ellipsoidal inclusions with semi-axes a1, · · · , ad and speci-
ﬁed orientations. The conductivities of the matrix and inclusions are g1 and g2, respectively.
Suppose that the ellipsoids are aligned along the xd−axis. Then,
ge = g1 + Mφ2 + O(φ2
2) ,
(428)
where
M = (g2 −g1)

U + g2 −g1
g1
A
−1
.
(429)
Here M and A are, respectively, the polarization concentration and depolarization tensors for
a d−dimensional ellipsoidal inclusion. In particular, the symmetric tensor A, in the principal
axes frame, has diagonal components Ai, i = 1, · · · , d, given by
Ai =

Πd
j=1
1
2ai
  ∞
0
1
(x + a2
i )
$
Πd
j=1(x + aj)2 dx ,
i = 1, · · · , d.
(430)
The eigenvalues of A, usually referred to as the depolarization factors, are all positive. The
trace of A is unity, and therefore, 0 ≤Ai ≤1.
For a d−dimensional sphere, Ai = 1/d;
for needle-shaped inclusions, A1 = A2 = 1/2 and A3 = 0, while for disk-shaped inclusions,
A1 = A2 = 0 and A3 = 1.
164

If the inclusions are aligned 3D spheroids in which a1 = a2 = a and a3 = b, then the eﬀective
conductivity tensor for this composite, which is transversely isotropic, is given by
ge =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
(ge)11
0
0
0
(ge)22
0
0
0
(ge)33
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
,
(431)
with
(ge)11 = (ge)22 = g1 +
φ2g1(g2 −g1)
g1 + Q(g2 −g1) + O(φ2
2) ,
(432)
(ge)33 = g1 +
φ2g1(g2 −g1)
g1 + (1 −2Q)(g2 −g1) + O(φ2
2) ,
(433)
where Q is given by Eqs. (206) and (207).
Finally, the scalar eﬀective conductivity of a dilute isotropic suspension of randomly oriented
ellipsoidal inclusions is given by
ge = g1 + Mφ2 + O(φ2
2) ,
(434)
which is simply the scalar product of Eq. (214) and the identity tensor. Here, M is the scalar
polarization coeﬃcient given by
M = g2 −g1
d
d

i=1
g1
g1 + Ai(g2 −g1) ,
(435)
and the Ai are the depolarization factors given above. The 3D version of this result was ﬁrst
given by Polder and Van Santen (1946). With the depolarization factors for needles and disks
that we mentioned above, Eqs. (220) and (221) immediately yield
ge
g1
=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
1 + (5g1 + g2)(g2 −g1)
3g1(g1 + g2)
φ2 + O(φ2
2) ,
needles,
1 + (g1 + 2g2)(g2 −g1)
3g1g2
φ2 + O(φ2
2) ,
disks .
(436)
4.7 The Eﬀect of the Interface on the Eﬀective Conductivity
So far we have discussed the eﬀective conductivity of composite materials in which the in-
terface between the two phases is “perfect,” i.e., it does not oﬀer any resistance to the transport
process. However, this may not be the case in many practical applications. For example, ther-
mal or electrical resistance at the interface caused by, e.g., rough surfaces of the two phases in
contact, can decrease signiﬁcantly the eﬀective conductivity of the composite material.
165

This problem, at least for dispersions of spheres inserted in a uniform matrix, can be solved
by the methods that we have described so far in this chapter. Consider, for example, the case
in which one has a regular array of d−dimensional spheres inserted in a uniform matrix. The
methods that we described in Section 4.3 can be extended to the case in which the interface
between the two phases (the inclusions and the matrix) oﬀers resistance to the transport process.
One must treat the composite material as a three-phase system of similar dispersion in which the
spherical inclusions possess a concentric coating of thickness δ and conductivity gi. The strength
of the interface resistance to the transport process may be characterized by a dimensionless
parameter Rh = ˆRg2/R, where, as usual, R is the radius of the spheres and g2 their conductivity.
Here, ˆR = δ/gi, and of particular interest is the limit in which δ and gi both approach zero. This
would then be equivalent to introducing a temperature or voltage jump across the interface.
As an example, consider the electrical conduction case. Then, boundary conditions (13) at
the interface should be replaced by, g2(V + −V −)/(RhR) = g2∂V −/∂n = g1∂V +/∂n, where n
is the unit outward normal vector, and V + and V −are the voltages on the two sides of the
interface. The solution of this problem can be obtained by exactly the same methods that we
described in Section 4.3, since the only diﬀerence between the perfect and imperfect interfaces
is in the boundary conditions at the interface. Cheng and Torquato (1997) actually applied
the methods of Section 4.3 to the case of imperfect interfaces. As discussed in Section 4.3, the
conductivity of the regular dispersions depends only on the coeﬃcient B1,0 [see, for example,
Eq. (25) for a simple-cubic array], and thus the diﬀerence between the conductivities of such
regular composites with perfect or imperfect interfaces appears in the value of the coeﬃcient
B0,1.
Similarly, one may also derive rigorous upper and lower bounds for the eﬀective conductivity
of composite materials with imperfect interfaces (Torquato and Rintoul, 1995). An interesting
result that emerges from these works is that there is a critical value of Rh at which the conduc-
tivity of the material equals the matrix conductivity g1, implying that the interface can act in a
way that the second (inclusion) phase is hidden. This phenomenon has actually been observed
in measuring the thermal conductivity of ZnS/diamond composites (Every et al., 1992), and
thus it is of practical importance.
4.8 Exact Duality Relations
166

A reciprocity theorem proved by Keller (1964) and Dykhne (1971) provides an important
exact relation for the eﬀective transport properties of 2D materials. Keller (1964) considered a
two-phase heterogeneous material consisting of a rectangular lattice of parallel cylinders, each
of which is symmetric in the x−and y−axes, with generators parallel to the z−axis, a 2D
problem. He proved that the eﬀective conductivity gx
e in the x−direction is related to the
eﬀective conductivity gy
e of the phase-interchanged composite (i.e., one in which the roles of
phases 1 and 2 have been interchanged) in the y−direction by
gx
e(g1, g2)gy
e(g2, g1) = g1g2 ,
(437)
where g1 and g2 are, respectively, the conductivities of the matrix and the inclusions. Hence,
if the material is macroscopically isotropic (that is, if the eﬀective conductivity tensor ge is
rotationally invariant), then Eq. (223) reduces to
ge(g1, g2)ge(g2, g1) = g1g2 .
(438)
In an apparently independent work, Dykhne (1971) proved that the eﬀective conductivity of 2D
two-phase composite materials that possess phase distributions that are statistically equivalent
is given by
ge = √g1g2 .
(439)
Subsequently, Mendelson (1975b) generalized the Keller-Dykhne theorem to any 2D two-phase
composite, disordered or not, so long as x and y are the principal axes of the eﬀective conduc-
tivity tensor, implying that no geometrical symmetries are required. More precisely, composite
materials that satisfy Eq. (225) possess phase-inversion symmetry at φ1 = φ2 = 1/2. Equation
(225) has another interesting implication: The percolation threshold of a continuous system for
which Eq. (225) is valid is exactly 1/2.
The proof of the Keller-Dykhne-Mendelson result is based on a theorem that states that a 90◦
rotation of the eﬀective conductivity tensor of a 2D composite material with local conductivity
tensor g determines the eﬀective conductivity of the same material, but one in which the local
conductivity is the reciprocal tensor g−1 rotated by 90◦.
Note that the Keller-Dykhne-Mendelson theorem is independent of the details of morphology
of the material, a rare result. Due to this independence, this result provides a very useful test of
theoretical and computer simulation estimates of the eﬀective conductivity of 2D composites.
167

For example, Perrins et al. (1979b) showed that Eq. (224) is valid for an arbitrary order of
their exact solutions of the conduction problem for the square and hexagonal arrays, which
were derived in Section 4.3.2.
Similar equations hold for the dielectric constant of the material. For example, for the
dielectric constant of a 2D anisotropic material in one direction, say x, one has
ϵ(xx)
e
(ϵ1, ϵ2)ϵ(yy)
e
(ϵ2, ϵ1) = ϵ1ϵ2 ,
(440)
with a similar relation holding for the other direction.
No such reciprocal relation is known for the eﬀective transport properties of 3D materials.
4.9 Eﬀective-Medium Approximation
One of the most successful analytical treatments of the scalar and vector transport properties
of composite materials, such as their eﬀective conductivity and elastic moduli, as well as their
eﬀective dielectric constant is the eﬀective-medium approximation (EMA). This approximation
has a long history, going back to at least Bruggeman (1935), which was beautifully reviewed by
Landauer (1978). The essence of EMA is the replacement of the actual heterogeneous material
by an eﬀective homogeneous medium with a conductivity that somehow mimics the behavior
of the true eﬀective conductivity ge of the material. The approximation is very versatile: It can
be developed for both isotropic and anisotropic materials, as well as discrete and continuum
models of disordered materials. It is not restricted to linear transport processes; Chapters 2 and
3 of Volume II will present the derivation of EMAs for several types of non-linear transport and
optical properties. It can also be extended to vector transport properties, such as the eﬀective
elestic moduli; see Chapters 7-9. As shown in Chapter 6, an EMA can also be developed for
time- and frequency-dependent properties of composite materials. The discrete versions of the
EMA for scalar and linear transport properties will be derived and discussed in Chapter 5, and
6. In what follows we describe the derivation of an EMA for disordered continua.
4.9.1 Isotropic materials
As mentioned above, in the EMA approach one replaces the actual inhomogeneous material
with one that is homogeneous with an eﬀective conductivity ge, which is an approximation
to the true eﬀective conductivity. The procedure to compute ge is as follows. For isotropic
materials we insert in the eﬀective medium a spherical inclusion of radius R and conductivity
168

g, surrounded by the eﬀective medium with conductivity ge. For steady-state transport, the
governing equations are given by
∇2Vi = 0 ,
0 < r < R ,
(441)
∇2Ve = 0 ,
r > R ,
(442)
where Vi and Ve are, respectively, the voltage inside the inclusion and in the eﬀective medium.
At the interface between the inclusion and the eﬀective medium, we must have the continuity
of the currents:
g∂Vi
∂r = ge
∂Ve
∂r ,
r = R .
(443)
Moreover, the voltage is a static quantity, and therefore,
/
∇V · dr = 0 ,
(444)
which implies that
∂Vi
∂θ = ∂Ve
∂θ ,
r = R .
(445)
Finally, one must impose the physical requirement that, Vi(r = 0) ̸= ∞.
The general solutions of the Eqs. (227) and (228) are given by
Vi = Ai + Bi
r + Cir cos θ + Di
cos θ
r2
,
(446)
Ve = Ae + Be
r + Cer cos θ + De
cos θ
r2
.
(447)
Clearly, one must have Bi = 0. The application of the other two boundary conditions, Eqs.
(229) and (231), leads us to
Vi = Ai + Ce
3ge
g + 2ge
r cos θ ,
(448)
Ve = Cer cos θ −CeR3 g −ge
g + 2ge
cos θ
r2
.
(449)
Suppose now that a constant ﬁeld ∇V0 = b is applied along the z−axis (where z = r cos θ).
Then, far from the sphere one must have ∇Ve = ∇V0, implying that
∇Ve = br cos θ −bR3 g −ge
g + 2ge
cos θ
r2
.
(450)
169

The second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (236) represents the local ﬂuctuations in the
ﬁeld due to the inhomogeneity that insertion of the inclusion causes in the eﬀective medium.
The eﬀective-medium conductivity ge is then computed by requiring that

f(g)∇Ve dg = ∇V0 ,
(451)
which is equivalent to

g −ge
g + 2ge
f(g)dg = 0 ,
(452)
where f(g) is the distribution of the local conductances of the composite material.
More
generally, for a d−dimensional isotropic continuum system, Eq. (238) generalizes to

g −ge
g + (d −1)ge
f(g)dg = 0 ,
(453)
which is the equation that was derived by Bruggeman (1935), and independently by Landauer
(1952).
It is straightforward to show, upon inserting a conductance distribution f(g) = (1 −
φ)δ+(g)+φh(g) into Eq. (239) [where h(g) is any normalized probability density function], that
the EMA predicts a percolation threshold φc = 1/d for a d−dimensional continuum, isotropic
material.
If the composite consists of n phases, each with constant conductivity gi and volume fraction
φi, Eq. (239) becomes
n

i=1
φi
gi −ge
gi + (d −1)ge
= 0 .
(454)
4.9.2 Anisotropic materials
The above EMA was generalized by Stroud (1975) to materials that consist of crystallites
of arbitrary shape and conductivity tensors of arbitrary symmetry. Suppose that a material
is characterized by a conductivity tensor g(r). If this conductivity ﬁeld is expanded around
a constant reference conductivity g0 by writing, g(r) = g0 + δg(r), then the average current
density ⟨I⟩in the material is given by
⟨I⟩= g0⟨E⟩+ ⟨δgE⟩,
(455)
where E is the electric ﬁeld in the material. If we deﬁne the scalar potential Φ(r) = −E · r,
then, using the usual equations of continuity and electrostatics, we obtain, ∇·[g(r)∇Φ(r)] = 0,
170

which, using the perturbation for the conductivity ﬁeld, is written as
∇· (g∇Φ) = −∇· (δg∇Φ)
in Ω,
(456)
Φ(r) = Φ0(r) = −E0 · r
on ∂Ω.
(457)
Here, E0 is the constant far-ﬁeld electric ﬁeld imposed on the material, and Ωand ∂Ωare,
respectively, the volume and external surface of the material. If we now introduce a Green
function G(r, r′) such that G(r, r′) = 0 on ∂Ωand
∇· [g0∇G(r, r′)] = −δ(r −r′)
in Ω,
(458)
we can write Φ(r) in terms of this Green function as
Φ(r) = Φ0(r) +

ΩG(r, r′)∇′ · [δg(r′)∇′Φ(r′)]dr′ .
(459)
Using integration by parts, taking the gradient of both sides of Eq. (245), writing δI = δgE,
and using the fact that G(r, r′) = G(r′, r), we obtain
E(r) = E0 +

G(r, r′)δg(r′)E(r′)dr′
(460)
where the tensor G(r, r′) is deﬁned by
Gij(r, r′) = ∂
∂r′
i
∂
∂rj
G(r, r′) .
(461)
One can now obtain an exact, but implicit, expression for the eﬀective medium conductivity
tensor ge. From Eq. (246), we can write
δg(r)E(r) = δg

E0 +

G(r, r′)δg(r′)E(r′)dr′

,
(462)
so that if we deﬁne a tensor χ(r) by
χ(r)E0 = δg(r)E(r) ,
(463)
we obtain
χ(r) = δg(r)

1 +

G(r, r′)χ(r′)dr′

,
(464)
and therefore
ge = g0 + ⟨χ⟩.
(465)
171

Therefore, the main task is to develop a suitable expression for ⟨χ⟩which, for a general
microstructure, cannot be evaluated exactly, and therefore one must resort to approximate
schemes.
Suppose that the material consists of a random assembly of cells or crystallites, each of
which is pure, i.e., has a constant conductivity, and that point r lies in the ith cell which has
a volume Ωi. From Eq. (250) one obtains
χ(r) = δgi

1 +

Ωi
G(r, r′)χ(r′)dr′ +

Ω−Ωi
G(r, r′)χ(r′)dr′

,
(466)
where δgi = gi −g0, with gi being the conductivity tensor of the ith phase. One approximation
consists of

Ω−Ωi
G(r, r′)χ(r′)dr′ ≃

Ω−Ωi
G(r, r′)⟨χ⟩dr′ .
(467)
However, this approximation is not unique, since it depends on the choice of the reference
conductivity g0. The analog of the EMA described above, also referred to as the self-consistent
approximation (SCA), is obtained by insisting that
⟨χ⟩= 0 ,
(468)
which would imply that ge = g0.
Consider, as an example, a composite material that consists of spherical crystallites of
identical composition but anisotropic conductivity tensor. We assume that the principal axes
of the crystallites are randomly oriented. It is then easy to see that Eq. (254), the SCA or
EMA, becomes
-
[1 + (1/3ge)(g −geU)]−1 (g −geU)
.
= 0 ,
(469)
where U is now the identity tensor. If the crystallites are uniaxial, and the coordinate axes are
parallel to their principal axes, then
g = g0
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
α
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
(470)
where α is a constant. Then, the EMA or SCA yields (in 3D)
ge
g0
= 1 + 1
4

−3 + [9 + 8(α −1)]1/2
.
(471)
172

As another example, consider the eﬀective conductivity of a polycrystalline metal in a
magnetic ﬁeld H applied in the z direction. In this case,
ge =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
gxx
e
gxy
e
0
−gxy
e
gxx
e
0
0
0
gzz
e
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(472)
so that the three components of the conductivity tensor, as well as the Green function must be
evaluated. With r = (x, y, z) and r′ = (x′, y′, z′), one has
G(r, r′) =
1
4πgxx
e (gzz
e )1/2
(x −x′)2
gxx
e
+ (y −y′)2
gxx
e
+ (z −z′)2
gzz
e
−1/2
.
(473)
Given Eq. (259), the SCA or EMA yields three equations for the three non-zero components
of the eﬀective conductivity tensor ge.
Let us mention that Granqvist and Hunderi (1978) generalized the above EMA to the case
where there are dipole-dipole interactions in the material. In this case, the resulting EMA is
somewhat similar to Eq. (240) [or (239)] and is given by
n

i=1
3

j=1
φi
gi −ge
Ajgi + (1 −Aj)ge
= 0 ,
(474)
where A1, A2 and A3 are the triplet of depolarization factors which depend on the shape of the
inclusions, and were already given in Section 4.6.2.4.
4.9.3 Critique of the eﬀective-medium approximation
Due to its simplicity, and the fact that, under a variety of conditions, it provides reasonable
estimates of the eﬀective transport properties, the EMA or SCA has been a popular method.
However, there are also many systems for which the EMA provides rather inaccurate estimates
of the transport properties. We now discuss the reason for the inaccuracy of the EMA.
Since the continuum EMA derived above does not contain any information about a mate-
rial’s morphology, and because it neglects all the spatial correlations that typically exist in real
materials’ morphology, its application to estimating the efective transport properties of many
materials is questionable. Moreover, as its derivation makes it clear, the EMA assumes that the
eﬀective medium exists just outside the test inclusion inserted in the material - a completely
wrong assumption for many systems, such as packings of identical spheres which contain gaps
between the particles. Acrivos and Chang (1986) addressed this problem by ﬁrst surrounding
173

the test sphere with a shell of matrix materials, and then inserting it in the eﬀective medium.
In addition, the EMA generally violates bounds that improve upon the Hashin-Shtrikman
bounds. Finally, although the EMA provides non-trivial predictions for the percolation thresh-
old of various materials, its predictions, except for 2D systems, are generally not accurate. This
particular shortcoming of the EMA, and a few others, will be demonstrated in Chapter 5, where
we describe and discuss the discrete version of Eq. (239) or (240).
Milton (1985) showed that there is a particular class of morphologies that correspond exactly
to Eq. (240). For a two-phase system, this class consists of granular aggregates such that
spherical grains of the two phases of comparable sizes are well-separated, and the system is
self-similar on many length scales. At a particular length scale, large well-separated spheres
of the two phases, which correspond to dilute proportions, are surrounded by a matrix that
consists of much smaller well-separated spheres of the two phases. They, in turn, are surrounded
by a matrix that consists of even much smaller well-separated spheres of the two phases, with
the construction continuing as inﬁnitum. Thus, the diﬀerent-sized spheres of the two phases
ﬁll up the space in accordance with the overall phase volume fractions. Milton (1985) proved
that such a fractal-like model leads to the EMA, Eq. (240).
More recently, Torquato and Hyun (2001) discovered single-scale periodic dispersions that
realize the two-phase version of the 2D EMA for all volume fractions at a given phase conduc-
tivity contrast. Moreover, to a very high degree of accuracy (but not exactly) the same models
realize the EMA for almost the entire range of phase conductivities and volume fractions. The
Torquato-Hyun model involves a simple inclusion shape at a single length scale, namely, the
generalized hypcylcoid, deﬁne by the equation
x2/b + y2/b = a2/b ,
(475)
where a and b are volume fraction-dependent parameters, and all distances are measured in
units of the cell length. Except for b = 1, the interface between the inclusion and the matrix
is not smooth. For example, for φ2 ≪1 (a →0 and b →1), the model consists of identical
circular inclusions of phase 2 on the sites of a square lattice in a matrix of phase 1, while for
φ2 = 1/2 (a = 1 and b = 2), the model is the periodic checkerboard. Note that both the Milton
and Torquato-Hyun models possess phase-inversion symmetry. Note also that, for φ2 = 1/2,
the 2D EMA predicts that ge = √g1g2, and therefore satisﬁes the exact duality relation (225).
174

The foregoing discussions lead to the following conclusion. The reason for failure of the
EMA in predicting the eﬀective transport properties of many model composites is that, all
the phases are treated symmetrically [note that Eq. (240) is symmetric under the interchange
g1 ←→g2 and φ1 ←→φ2].
4.9.4 The Maxwell-Garnett approximation
Another very famous approximation to the eﬀective conductivity or dielectric constant of dis-
ordered materials is due to Maxwell-Garnett (1904), which is also called the Clausius-Mossotti
approximation, so named after the closely related works of Mossotti (1850) and Clausius (1879).
For a composite material that consists of a matrix of conductivity g1 and spherical inclusions
of conductivity g2 and volume fraction φ2, the MG approximation is given by
ge −g1
ge + (d −1)g1
= φ2
g2 −g1
g2 + (d −1)g1
.
(476)
Note that, unlike the EMA, this approximation is not symmetric with respect to interchanging
the roles of the matrix and the inclusions. As a result, the slope dge/dφ1 takes on diﬀerent
values in the limits φ = 0 and 1, implying that the MG approximation cannot provide a non-
trivial (not equal to 0 or 1) estimate for the conductivity or percolation threshold, since this
approximation is accurate only when the minority component appears as a skin completely
surrounding and separating the second phase. Thus, according to the MG approximation, a
material remains conducting until every portion of it is replaced by an insulator. Moreover,
derivation of Eq. (262) is independent of the spheres’ sizes, i.e., polydispersivity does not make
any diﬀerence to the MG approximation, whereas the eﬀective conductivity does, in general,
depend on the degree of polydispersivity.
Another shortcoming of the MG approximation is that it cannot be generalized to a material
with more than two components. To see this, suppose that a material consists of a matrix of
conductivity g0 and two other phases with conductivities g1 and g2 dispersed in the matrix.
Then, the generalization of Eq. (262) to this three-component composite is given by
ge −g0
ge + (d −1)g0
=
2

i=1
φi
gi −g0
gi + (d −1)g0
.
(477)
However, Eq.
(263) predicts that ge depends on g0 even when the matrix has completely
disappeared, i.e., when φ1 + φ2 = 1!
175

Extensions of the MG approximation which are capable of predicting a non-trivial perco-
lation threshold have been proposed (Choy et al., 1998). However, these extensions are still
inaccurate (albeit more accurate than the original MG approximation), and their predictions
are in some cases not completely physical. For example, for a conductor-insulator mixture,
the extended MG approximation predicts a percolation threshold, φc = 0.9103, while for a
conductor-superconductor composite it predicts φc = 0.7313, whereas we know that the two
percolation thresholds must in fact be identical. Hence, the problem of a correct extension of
the MG approximation that can predict non-trivial percolation thresholds, and satisﬁes all the
required symmetries, remains unsolved.
The MG approximation is not completely useless. It yields accurate estimates of ge at non-
dilute conditions, if the spheres are well separated from each other, as it is identical with the
result for coated-sphere model described in Section 4.4. This would be the case if the volume
fraction of the inclusions is small. Moreover, Eq. (262) coincides with the optimal Hashin-
Shtrikman bounds, i.e., it equals the lower bound in (118) when g2 ≥g1 and the corresponding
upper bound when g2 ≤g1. When all the inclusions are more (less) conducting than the matrix
phase, Eq. (263) coincides with the lower (upper) bound (119), the Hashin-Shtrikman bound
lower (upper) bound for a multiphase material.
The MG approximation can be extended to macroscopically-anisotropic materials that con-
sist of n−1 diﬀerent types of unidirectionally aligned isotropic ellipsoidal inclusions of the same
shape. The result is given by
n−1

i=1
φi(ge −gi) · M(1)
i
= 0 ,
(478)
where gi = giU, and
M(1)
i
=

U + gi −g1
g1
A
−1
,
(479)
with A being the depolarization tensor deﬁned in Section 4.6.2.4. If the ellipsoids are randomly
distributed, then one has M (1)
i
= Tr[M(1)
i ]/d, and Tr denotes the trace of the tensor. In this
case, Eq. (264) reduces to a scalar equation.
4.10 The Random Walk Method
It has been known for decades (see, for example, Chandrasekhar, 1943) that from the time
dependence of the mean square displacement ⟨R2(t)⟩of a random walker that diﬀuses in a
heterogeneous medium one can compute the eﬀective diﬀusivity De and conductivity ge. In
176

particular, the eﬀective conductivity of a d−dimensional medium is given by
ge = lim
t→∞
⟨R2(t)⟩
2dt
,
(480)
where t is the time and ⟨·⟩denotes an ensemble average. The ﬁrst application of this idea to
determining the eﬀective conductivity of composite materials appeared in a paper of Haji-Sheikh
and Sparrow (1967), who studied heat conduction in a composite solid. Over the past 25 years,
random walk methods have been used extensively for studying transport in disordered media.
Hughes (1995) provides an extensive review of fundamental properties of random walks. In this
section, we describe the application of this technique to determining the eﬀective conductivity
of composite solids based on the continuum models described in Chapter 3, while in Chapter 5
the implemention of this method in discrete models of disordered materials will be described.
The essential idea is simple: One computes the mean square displacement of some random
walkers in the composite material and utilizes Eq.
(266) to estimate ge.
The simulations
can be sped up by using the concept of ﬁrst-passage time (FPT), which is the statement of
the fact that if a random walker moves in a homogeneous region of a material (for example,
within one phase of a two-phase material where the local conductivity is essentially the same
everywhere within that phase), there is no need to spend unnecessary time to simulate its
motion in detail. Instead, the walker should be allowed to take long steps to quickly pass
through the homogeneous regions and arrive at the interface between the two phases. The
necessary time for taking the long steps can often be calculated analytically, hence resulting
in further improvement in the eﬃciency of the method. The only requirement for using the
FPT method is that the walker should not take such long steps that would take it outside of a
homogeneous region. After taking each of such long steps, the time is increased by an amount
appropriate to that step. To our knowledge, the FPT technique was ﬁrst used by Sahimi et
al. (1982; see Sahimi et al., 1986 for details) for simulating hydrodynamic dispersion (that
is, unsteady state mixing of two miscible ﬂuids by diﬀusion and convection) in ﬂow through
a porous medium. In the context of calculating the eﬀective conductivity and diﬀusivity of
a disordered material, Siegel and Langer (1986) and Kim and Torquato (1990) appear to be
the ﬁrst to have used this method. Let us now describe the details of the FPT method for
calculating the eﬀective conductivity (and hence diﬀusivity) of disordered materials.
We ﬁrst consider a homogeneous medium and follow Torquato et al. (1999) to describe the
177

essentials of the FPT method. Suppose that a random walker is diﬀusing in a d−dimensional
homogeneous material of conductivity g. We surround the particle with a ﬁrst-passage region
Ωwhich has a bounding surface ∂Ω, and denote by r and rB the position of the walker inside Ω
and on its boundary, respectively. Let P(r, rB, t) be the probability associated with the walker
hitting ∂Ωin the vicinity of rB for the ﬁrst time at time t, if it starts its motion at r. P(r, rB, t)
is a probability density function in the variable rB and a cumulative probability distribution
function in the time variable t which satisﬁes the diﬀusion equation:
g∇2P(r, rB, t) = ∂P(r, rB, t)
∂t
,
(481)
subject to the boundary and initial conditions that
P(r, rB, t = 0) = 0 ,
r ∈Ω
(482)
P(r, rB, t) = δ(r −rB) ,
r on ∂Ω, t > 0 .
(483)
Now, suppose that C(r, t) is the cumulative probability distribution function associated with
the walker, starting at r, to ﬁrst hit any point on the surface ∂Ωat time t. Clearly, C(r, t) is
the integral of P(r, rB, t)drB, integrated over ∂Ω. Hence, it is not diﬃcult to show that C(r, t)
also satisﬁes the same unsteady-state diﬀusion equation as P(r, rB, t) with the same initial
condition, but with the boundary condition that, C(r, t) = 1 for r in ∂Ω
An important physical quantity is the average hitting time, of the average FPT, th(r), the
average time that a random walker takes, starting from r, to hit the surface ∂Ωfor the ﬁrst
time. It is not diﬃcult to see that
th(r) =
 ∞
0
∂C
∂t dt .
(484)
In particular, we are interested in the average hitting time t0 when the walker begins its walk
from the origin, t0 = th(0). For example, for a d−dimensional sphere of radius R centered at
the origin, one has t0 = R2/(2dg), where g is the sphere’s conductivity. In principle, one can
solve the unsteady-state diﬀusion equation for C(r, t) from the solution of which the average
hitting time can be computed. However, Torquato et al. (1999) showed that th satisﬁes the
following steady-state diﬀusion equation
g∇2th(r) = −1 , r ∈Ω,
(485)
178

th(r) = 0 , r on ∂Ω.
(486)
Another important property is the probability density w(r, rB) associated with hitting the
vicinity of a particular position rB on the surface ∂Ωfor the ﬁrst time, if the walker starts at r.
It is not diﬃcult to see that, w(r, rB) =
 ∞
0 ∂P/∂t dt = P(r, rB, t = ∞), implying that w(r, rB)
satisﬁes the following boundary-value problem,
∇2w(r, rB) = 0 , r ∈Ω,
(487)
w(r, rB) = δ(r −rB) .
(488)
Of particular interest is the probability density w(r, rB) when the walker begins its walk at the
origin, w(rB) = w(r = 0, rB).
A ﬁnal quantity of interest is the jumping probability p(r), the probability that the random
walker, starting at r, arrives on a certain portion of the ﬁrst-passage surface ∂Ω0 for the ﬁrst
time. Clearly,
p(r) =

∂Ω0
w(r, rB)drB ,
(489)
which implies that p(r) satisﬁes a steady-state diﬀusion equation with the boundary condition
that
p(r) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 ,
r on ∂Ω0 ,
0 ,
otherwise.
(490)
We now consider a two-phase, d−dimensional heterogeneous material of conductivities g1
and g2. Suppose that the random walker is in the vicinity of the interface between the two
phases. We surround the walker with a ﬁrst-passage region Ωhaving a bounding surface ∂Ωthat
encompasses both phases. Let Ωi be that portion of Ωthat contains phase i (with i = 1, 2) with
a corresponding surface ∂Ωi, and Γ be the interface surface. Equation (271) is then modiﬁed
to
gi∇2th(r) = −1 , r ∈Ωi ,
(491)
subject to the boundary condition (272) and the interface conditions
th|1 = th|2 , r on Γ ,
(492)
∂th
∂n1
000001 = g2
g1
∂th
∂n1
00000
2
, r on Γ ,
(493)
179

where n1 is the unit outward normal from Ωi.
The jump probability w(r, rB) satisﬁes the
same equation and boundary condition as before, but with the additional interface conditions
similar to (278) and (279). The probability pi(r) that the random walker, initially at r, hits
the ﬁrst-passage surface ∂Ωi for the ﬁrst time is governed by an equation similar to (275) but
integrated over ∂Ωi. The boundary conditions for, e.g., p1(r), are given by
p1(r) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1 ,
r on ∂Ω1 ,
0 ,
r on ∂Ω2 .
(494)
Moreover, the interface conditions,
p|1 = p|2 , r on Γ ,
(495)
∂p
∂n1
000001 = g2
g1
∂p
∂n1
00000
2
, r on Γ ,
(496)
must be satisﬁed. From the obvious relation,

i pi(r) = 1, one can determine p2(r) given p1(r).
Let us demonstrate the FPT method with two examples (Torquato et al., 1999). Consider
a ﬁrst-passage square with a side length of 2L in a homogeneous medium of conductivity g,
with the origin of the coordinate system being at the square’s center. The average hitting time,
the solution of Eqs. (271) and (272), can be derived easily by the method of separation of
variables (see, for example, Carslaw and Jaeger, 1959). Then, the average hitting time for a
walk starting at the origin is found by setting r = 0 in the solution, yielding
t0 = L2
2g −16L2
gπ3
∞

n=0
(−1)n
(2n + 1)3 cosh[(2n + 1)π/2] .
(497)
Moreover, the series in Eq.
(283) can be summed numerically yielding, t0 ≃(0.295L2)/g.
The probability density w(r, rB) can also be obtained by solving Eq. (273) by the method
of separation of variables, subject to the boundary conditions that, w(x, −L) = w(x, L) =
w(−L, y) = 0, and w(L, y) = δ(y −yB). The solution is given by
w(x, y, yB) = 1
L
∞

n=1
sinh[nπ(x + L)/(2L)] sin[nπ(y + L)/(2L)] sin[nπ(yB + L)/(2L)]
sinh(nπ)
,
(498)
from which the probability that the random walker lands for the ﬁrst time at any point along
the side x = L is obtained, using Eq. (275), to be p = 1/4.
If the ﬁrst-passage square contains two phases, then, depending on how the two phases are
distributed in the square, the above results must be somewhat modiﬁed. For example, suppose
180

that the upper and lower halfs of the square are occupied by phases 1 and 2, respectively.
Then, Eqs. (278) and (279) must be solved by the method of separation of variables, which is
straightforward. Setting r=0 then yields the following exact result
t0 =
2
g1 + g2
th0 ,
(499)
where th0 is the solution for the homogeneous square given by Eq. (283) for g = 1. It is
easy to show that Eq. (285) is also applicable to the case in which each phase occupies two
diagonal quadrants of the square. The jumping probability density function w(x, y) is obtained
by solving Eq. (273) with the method of separation of variables, subject to the interface and
boundary conditions (274) and the analogues of (278) and (279) for w(x, y). If we set x = y = 0
in the resulting solution and consider the boundary points yB to be on the x = L side, we obtain
w(yB) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
(2g2)(g1 + g2)−1wh(yB) ,
−L ≤yB < 0 ,
(2g1)(g1 + g2)−1wh(yB) ,
0 < y ≤L ,
(500)
where wh(yB) is the solution for the case of homogeneous square, Eq. (284). Observe that in
this case w(yB) is discontinuous at yB = 0. The same solution, Eq. (286), is obtained if we
consider the boundary points yB to be on the side x = −L. The probability p that the random
walker lands for the ﬁrst time along the side x = L is p = 1/4. If we consider the boundary
point xB on the y = L side, we obtain
w(xB) =
2g1
g1 + g2
wh(xB) , −L ≤y ≤L .
(501)
The probability p that the random walker lands for the ﬁrst time at any point along the side
y = L is given by
p =
 L
−L w(xB)dxB =
g1
2(g1 + g2) .
(502)
A similar approach can be used if the two phases are distributed diﬀerently than what we just
considered. If, for example, phase 1 occupies three quadrants of the square and phase 2 one
quadrant, we obtain
t0 =
4
3g1 + g2
th0 ,
(503)
and the corresponding expressions for w(xB), w(yB), and p can also be obtained.
More generally, suppose that Ω= Ω1
1 Ω2 is a small spherical ﬁrst-passage region of radius
R centered at the interface at position x0, and ∂Ωi is the surface of Ωi excluding the two-phase
181

interface. One can show (Kim and Torquato, 1992) that, for a curved but smooth interface,
the probability p1 (p2) that the random walker, initially at x near x0, eventually arrives at the
surface ∂Ω1 (∂Ω2) is given by
p1 =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
S1(S1 + σS2)−1 (1 + σ
∞
n=0 B2n+1r2n+1) ,
x ⊂Ω1
S1(S1 + σS2)−1 (1 −
∞
n=0 B2n+1r2n+1) ,
x ⊂Ω2 ,
(504)
where
B2n+1 = (−1)n(2n)!
22n+1(n!)2
4n + 3
n + 1 .
(505)
Here Si is the area of the surface ∂Ωi in phase i, r = |x −x0|/R, and σ = g2/g1. The average
hitting time th for the random walker, initially at x, to hit ∂Ω= ∂Ω1
1 ∂Ω2 for the ﬁrst time
is given by
th =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
t01(V1 + V2)(V1 + σV2)−1 [1 −r2(3σ −1)/2 + (σ −1)
∞
n=0 C2n+1r2n+1] ,
x ⊂Ω1 ,
t01(V1 + V2)(V1 + σV2)−1 [1 + r2(1 −3σ−1)/2 −(1 −σ−1)
∞
n=0 C2n+1r2n+1] ,
x ⊂Ω2 ,
(506)
where Vi is the volume of region Ωi, t01 = R2/(6g1), and
C2n+1 = (−1)n+1(2n)!
22n+2(n!)2
3(4n + 3)
(n + 1)(n + 2)(2n −1) .
(507)
Even if the interface is not smooth, Eqs. (290) and (292) can still be used by making the sphere
radius R smaller.
In practice, in a FPT simulation one constructs the largest (imaginary) concentric sphere of
radius R around a randomly chosen point in phase i, that just touches the multiphase interface.
Suppose that the random walker is initially at the center of the imaginary sphere. The average
time t0i = R2/(2dgi) for the particle to reach a randomly-selected point on the surface of
the sphere is recorded, and the process of constructing the sphere and calculating the time a
point on its surface is reached is repeated, until the random walker comes within a very small
distance of the interface between the two phases. One then computes the average hitting time
th associated with imaginary concentric sphere of radius R in the small neighborhood of the
interface, and the probability of crossing the interface, both of which were given above. If the
random walker crosses the interface and enters a new phase, it ﬁnds itself in a new homogeneous
phase, and therefore the process of constructing imaginary spheres is repeated. The eﬀective
conductivity of the heterogeneous material, in the limit t →∞, is then given by
ge
g1
= ⟨

i t01(Ri) +

j t01(Rj) +

k t01(Rk)⟩
⟨

i t01(Ri) +

j t01(Rj)/σ +

k th(Rk)⟩,
(508)
182

where the summations over i and j are for the random walker’s paths in phase 1 and 2,
respectively, the summation over k is for the paths that cross the interface boundary, and ⟨·⟩
denotes an average over all realizations of the disordered medium.
The same principles can be used for estimating the eﬀective conductivity tensor ge of an
anisotropic material. In this case, the generalization of Eq. (266) for the ij component of the
eﬀective conductivity tensor, in the limit of long times (or, equivalently, large random walker
displacements), is given by
(ge)ij = xixj
2t
,
(509)
where xi is the displacement of the random walker in the ith direction, and t is the total time that
the random walker spends in order to make a total mean square displacement ⟨R2(t)⟩=

i x2
i .
The FPT technique can of course be used for anisotropic materials as well, and the analogue
of Eq. (294) for (ge)ij is given by
(ge)ij =
⟨xixj⟩
2⟨

i t01(Ri) +

j t01(Rj) +

k th(Rk)⟩,
(510)
where the notations are exactly the same as in Eq. (294). As already mentioned, Figures 4.11
and 4.12 compare the eﬀective conductivities of an anisotropic material, obtained by the FPT
simulations, with the upper and lower bounds derived in Section 4.6.2.3.
Another limiting case that is of interest is one in which one phase of a two-phase hetero-
geneous material is superconducting. In this limit the equations that were derived above, and
in particular Eqs. (290) and (292), are not useful. In this case, Kim and Torquato (1990)
proposed the following recipe.
(1) If the random walker is moving in the non-superconducting region, then the procedure
is still the same as what was described above.
(2) When the random walker is within a prescribed small distance from the interface between
the two phases, it is absorbed into the superconducting phase and leaves it after spending a
time ts in this phase.
(3) If the random walker is already in the superconducting phase (for example, if its motion
is commenced within this phase), then step (2) is repeated.
As pointed out by Kim and Torquato (1993), calculation of ts is not straightforward. Con-
sider, for example, the case of a dispersion of overlapping, equisized superconducting spheres of
radius R dispersed in a uniform matrix of conductivity g1. If the overlapping spheres can form
183

large clusters, then one needs to compute ts for each cluster size separately. This requires that
one ﬁrst identify the cluster of the overlapping spheres, a task which can be accomplished using
the Hoshen-Kopelman algorithm discussed in Chapter 2 (see Section 2.5.4). As an example,
consider a superconducting dimer of two overlapping spheres, and suppose that the random
walker is within a small prescribed distance δ1R (typically δ1 is about 10−4) from the interface.
Then, instead of computing V1 and V2 to be used in Eqs. (290) and (292), one must compute
two other volumes, Vi and Vo. Here Vi is the union volume of the two overlapping spheres plus
the imaginary concentric inner shell of thinckness δ1R. If we calculate another quantity Vs,
the volume of another imaginary concentric outer shell of thinckness δ2R (typically δ2 is about
10−2), then Vo = Vi + Vs. The time ts is then given by
ts = th

1 −
 Vi
Vo
2/3
,
(511)
where th is the average hitting time for the random walker, initially at the center of mass of the
homogeneous region of volume Vo and conductivity g1, to ﬁrst hit the surface of this volume.
The numerical results shown in Figure 4.12 were obtained by this method.
A random walk method is particularly useful for estimating the electrical conductivity of
composite materials made of an insulating matrix and a sample-spanning conducting phase.
Well-known examples of such systems are porous media made of an insulating matrix and a pore
space saturated with a conducting ﬂuid (see, for example, Sahimi, 1995b for a detailed review).
A traditional method, such as the ﬁnite-element technique, is notoriously time consuming for
such materials as a very ﬁne ﬁnite-element mesh with roughly about 1 billion nodes would be
required to accurately solve the Laplace equation, a prospect which is currently impractical. For
this reason alone, a random walk method is the preferred technique for estimating diﬀusivity
and conductivity of heterogeneous materials.
4.11 The Eﬀective Dielectric Constant
Most of the results and techniques for estimating the eﬀective conductivity of heterogeneous
materials that have been described so far have their exact analogues for the eﬀective dielec-
tric constant ϵe. Therefore, we summarize such results for ϵe and discuss their implications.
However, before doing so, we describe and discuss an elegant formulation of the problem of
determining ϵe that was developed by Bergman (1978). He showed that one can separate out
184

the dependence of ϵe on the material’s morphology by deﬁning a set of geometrical character-
istic functions that have very general analytical properties. In addition, the poles and residues
of these functions contain experimentally-measurable information on low-frequency excitations
in the material. We discuss Bergman’s formulation for a two-phase material with dielectric
constants ϵ1 and ϵ2, although his results are valid for a general multiphase system.
4.11.1 Spectral representation
To begin with, let us deﬁne two variables s ≡ϵ2/(ϵ2 −ϵ1) and t = 1 −s ≡ϵ1/(ϵ1 −ϵ2).
Bergman (1978) showed that one can have four spectral representations of ϵe given by
F1(t) ≡1 −ϵe
ϵ1
=

i
ai
t −ti
,
(512)
F2(s) ≡1 −ϵe
ϵ2
=

i
bi
s −si
,
(513)
F3(s) ≡1 −ϵ1
ϵe
=

i
ci
s −ˆsi
,
(514)
F4(t) ≡1 −ϵ2
ϵe
=

i
di
t −ˆti
.
(515)
The poles si, ti, ˆsi, and ˆti, and the residues ai, bi, ci, and di are all real and in the interval [0, 1],
are determined by the statistical properties of the material’s microstructure, and are completely
independent of ϵ1 and ϵ2. In addition, the residues also satisfy the following rules that relate
them to the volume fractions of the phases:

i
bi =

i
di = φ1 ,
(516)

i
ai =

i
ci = φ2 .
(517)
Moreover, any additional information about the material will result in some relations between
the residues and the poles.
For example, for a d−dimensional material that has cubic or
isotropic rotational symmetry, one has

i
bisi = φ1φ2
d
.
(518)
The absorption spectrum of a composite material is directly related to the spectral representa-
tion of its eﬀective dielectric constant.
185

To make further progress, we assume, for the sake of convenience, that our system forms the
dielectric of a parallel plate capacitor. The electric ﬁeld E(r) in the system, which is curl-free
(i.e., ∇× E = 0), must satisfy
∇· [ϵ(r)E] = 0 .
(519)
We take the applied potential to be zero on one plate and L on the other. The eﬀective dielectric
constant (permittivity) is deﬁned by (see also Chapter 1)
ϵe⟨E2⟩≡1
Ω

ϵ(r)E2(r)dr ,
(520)
where Ωis the volume of the system. By deﬁnition, E(r) is a homogeneous function of order
zero, while ϵe, similar to the conductivity of a two-component system described in Chapter 2
[see Eqs. (2.42) and (2.43)], is a homogeneous function of order one in ϵi (i = 1, 2). Bergman
(1978) used this fact to substitute for ϵi and ϵe the following variables:
h = ϵ1
ϵ2
, m(h) ≡ϵe
ϵ2
= 1
Ω

θh(∇ψ)2dr ,
(521)
with
θh ≡ϵ(r)
ϵ2
= m1h + m2 ,
E = −|⟨E⟩| ,
(522)
where mi is deﬁned by Eq. (59). Here ψ is the solution of the following boundary value problem:
∇· (θh∇ψ) = 0 ,
(523)
ψ(0) = 0 ,
(524)
ψ(L) = L ,
(525)
∂ψ
∂n = 0
on the walls ,
(526)
where n is normal to the walls. One can also deﬁne the inverse variable, ˆh = h−1, and refor-
mulate the problem through the displacement ﬁeld D(r) and its average.
A few examples may help the reader to better understand the spectral representation of
ϵe. For random platelets perpendicular to two capacitor plates, which is equivalent to a set of
parallel capacitors, we have
ϵe = φ1ϵ1 + φ2ϵ2 ,
(527)
which implies that
F2(s) = φ1
s ,
(528)
186

so that there is a pole at zero with the residue being φ1. The other spectral functions, F1(t),
F3(s), and F4(t), are also easily determined. For the complementary case of a set of capacitors
in series,
1
ϵe
= φ1
ϵ1
+ φ2
ϵ2
,
(529)
so that
F2(s) =
φ1
s −φ2
.
(530)
As the third example, we consider the low-volume fraction distribution of d−dimensional spher-
ical inclusions of dielectric constant ϵ2, distributed in a matrix of dielectric constant ϵ1. In this
limit the Maxwell-Garnett formula (see Section 4.9.4) provides reasonably accurate predictions
for ϵe:
 1
dϵ1
+
1
ϵe −ϵ1
−1
= φ2
 1
dϵ1
+
1
ϵ2 −ϵ1
−1
,
(531)
which implies that the approximate spectral representation of ϵe is given by
F2(s) =
φ2
s −φ1/d .
(532)
Equation (318) is an approximate representation of F2(s), since the MG formula provides only
approximate predictions for ϵe. The ﬁnal example is a simple-cubic array of spheres inserted
in a uniform matrix, described in 4.3.1.1, for which the MG formula, Eq. (317), is in fact an
approximate solution. One can now show that [see Eq. (30)]
F2(s) =
φ2 −b1φ13/3
2
s −(1 −φ2)/3 + b2φ10/3
2
+
b1φ13/3
2
s −3/7 + b3φ7/3
2
−b2φ10/3
2
+ · · · ,
(533)
where b1, b2 and b3 are constants.
On examining Eqs.
(318) and (319), one can see that
there is a drastic diﬀerence between the exact and approximate spectral representations of ϵe,
and in fact, as Eqs. (298)-(301) imply, the exact spectral representation of ϵe for a material
with an arbitrary microstructure is an inﬁnite series. Hinsen and Felderhof (1992) computed
by computer simulations the spectral functions of a system of uniform polarizable spheres
distributed randomly in a uniform background.
4.11.2 Perturbation expansion
A perturbation expansion, similar to that developed for the eﬀective conductivity ge, can
also be developed for the dielectric constant ϵe. Our discussion here follows that of Felderhof
187

(1982) whose formulation of this problem follows closely those of Dederichs and Zeller (1973)
and Kr¨oner (1977), who developed similar perturbation expansions for the elastic moduli of
heterogeneous materials (see Chapter 7). According to this formulation, the eﬀective dielectric
constant tensor of a heterogeneous material is given by
ϵe = ⟨ϵ(I −LG0δϵ)−1⟩,
(534)
where I is the identity operator, G0 is the Green function for a reference material with uniform
dielectric constant ϵ0, δϵ = ϵ(r) −ϵ0, and L is an operator deﬁned by, Lf = f −⟨f⟩. Note
that, ⟨Lf⟩= 0, a property which will be used later in our analysis. Because of its homogeneity
and isotropy, ϵe is proportional to U, the unit tensor. We now expand Eq. (320) in powers of
(ϵ1 −ϵ2)/ϵ1 by taking the reference medium to be one with dielectric constant ϵ1, in which case,
δϵ = (ϵ2 −ϵ1)m2(r), where m2(r) is deﬁned by Eq. (59). The Green function is then given by
G0(r −r′) = −1
3ϵ1
Uδ(r −r′) +
1
4πϵ1
∇∇
1
|r −r′| .
(535)
The ﬁrst three terms of the expansion are then given by
ϵe = ⟨ϵ⟩U + ⟨δϵLG0δϵ⟩+ ⟨δϵLG0δϵLG0δϵ⟩+ · · · ,
(536)
where ⟨Lf⟩= 0 has been used. Equation (322) represents a formal perturbation expansion
for ϵe. Further progress can be made if the microstructure of the material is speciﬁed (see, for
example, Torquato, 1984), and a procedure similar to the one for the eﬀective conductivity is
followed. However, we now turn our attention to deriving rigorous upper and lower bounds
for the eﬀective dielectric constant, since these bounds are usually close to each other and
thus provide accurate estimates of ϵe, unless percolation eﬀects are important, in which case
Chapters 5 and 6 provide detailed formulation and discussion of the problem of determining ϵe.
4.11.3 Rigorous bounds
The spectral representation of the dielectric constant can be used for developing rigorous
bounds for ϵe. The formulation and treatment of the problem that we discuss here are due to
Felderhof (1982). The series expansion of, e.g., F1(t), in the inverse powers of t yields
F1(t) =
∞

j=1
fjt−j ,
(537)
188

which, when compared with Eq. (298), implies that

i
aitj−1
i
= fj ,
j = 1, 2, · · ·
(538)
The upper bound on ϵe, for 0 < ϵ2 < ϵ1, is obtained by minimizing F1(t) for t > 1. To do this,
one varies the {ai} and the {ti} subject to any known constraints imposed on the system. If
we ignore the constraints (324), then the linear variations of (298) is given by
δF1 =

i
 δai
t −ti
+
aiδti
(t −ti)2

.
(539)
We now suppose that f1 is known. Then, for j = 1 Eq. (324) yields,

i ai = f1, which in
diﬀerential form means that,

i δai = 0. We choose t0 to be the smallest pole and eliminate
δa0 from Eq. (325) by use of constraints (324) (for j = 1). The result is
δF1 =

i>0

δai
ti −t0
(t −ti)(t −t0) +
aiδai
(t −ti)2

.
(540)
The analysis is continued further by treating δai and δti as independent. Since t > 1 and t0 is
the smallest pole, the implication is that (ti −t0)/[(t −ti)(t −t0)] > 0, so that F1 decreases by
lowering ai (for i > 0) to their minimum value, ai = 0. The term a0δt0/(t −t0)2 also decreases
by decreasing t0 to zero. Therefore, when f1 is known, the constraints (324) (for j = 1) yield
a0 = f1, and the minimum value of F1, denoted by F (1)
1 , is given by
F (1)
1 (t) = f1
t .
(541)
If f2 is also known, then the second constraint, Eq.
(324) with j = 2, yields, in the
diﬀerential form,

i
(aiδti + tiδai) = 0 ,
(542)
which is used to eliminate δt0 from (326). The result is
δF1 =

i>0

δai
(ti −t0)2
(t −t0)2(t −ti) + aiδai
(t0 −ti)(t0 + ti −2t)
(t −ti)2(t −t0)2

.
(543)
Using arguments similar to those utilized for deriving Eq. (327), we ﬁnd that values of a0 and
t0 are determined by the two constraints a0 = f1 and a0t0 = f2, so that the minimum value of
F2 is given by
F (2)
1 (t) =
f1
t −f2/f1
.
(544)
189

Finally, if f3 is also known, the third constraint, Eq. (324) with j = 3, yields, in diﬀerential
form,

i(2tiaiδti + t2
i δai) = 0. Proceeding along the same lines, we can show that in this case
the minimum value of F2 is given by
F (3)
1 (t) = f1
t +
f2
t(t −f3/f2) .
(545)
The coeﬃcients f1, f2 and f3 are now obtained by comparing the perturbation expansion
of ϵe with its spectral representation. We derive the second-order bounds which, as expected,
will be identical with the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds derived in Section 4.6.1.1. Comparison of
Eq. (2322) with (298) and (2323) yields the following results
f1 = φ2 ,
(546)
f2U = −ϵ1⟨m′
2G0m′
2⟩= 1
3φ1φ2 ,
(547)
f3U = ϵ2
1⟨m′
2G0m2G0m′
2⟩,
(548)
where ⟨Lf⟩= 0 has been used again. Equation (333) indicates that f2 = −a(i)
2 (in the isotropic
limit), where a(i)
2
is deﬁned by Eq. (98). Using Eq. (333) in (330), we ﬁnd the second-order
upper bound
ϵU
e = ϵ1

1 + 3φ2
ϵ2 −ϵ1
φ1ϵ2 + (2 + φ2)ϵ1

,
(549)
which is valid for ϵ1 > ϵ2 > 0. Equation (335) is identical with the Hashin-Shtrikman upper
bound, if we take note of the fact that bounds (112) were derived assuming that ϵ2 > ϵ1, and thus
the bound (335) corresponds to the lower bound of (112). Thus, the spectral representation
of the dielectric constant provides us with another method of deriving rigorous upper and
lower bounds to the eﬀective transport properties of heterogeneous materials. Felderhof (1982)
showed that, under certain conditions, the above second-order bounds coincide with the third-
order bounds for the eﬀective dielectric constant, and therefore the second-order bounds can in
fact be highly accurate.
4.12 Optical Properties
We now consider electromagnetic properties of composite materials at ﬁnite frequencies.
To be concrete, we consider a two-phase material that consists of phases 1 and 2 with volume
fractions φ1 = φ and φ2 = 1 −φ, respectively. The real dielectric function of the composite
material is then ϵi(r, ω) = ϵ1(ω) or ϵ2(ω), while the real conductivity is gi(r, ω) = g1(ω) or
190

g2(ω)., where ω is the frequency. For simplicity, we assume that the magnetic permeabilities
are equal to unity.
The transport of electromagnetic waves through the two-phase composite is described by
the macroscopic Maxwell equations. Assuming monochromatic ﬁelds of the form E(r, t) =
E(r) exp(−iωt), and adopting the usual convention that the physical ﬁelds are the real parts
of complex quantities, these equations take the following forms (in Gaussian units)
∇· (ϵiE) = 4πρ ,
(550)
∇· B = 0 ,
(551)
∇× E = iω
c B ,
(552)
∇× B = 4π
c giE −iω
c ϵiE ,
(553)
which are supplemented by the continuity equation,
∇· (giE) −iωρ = 0 .
(554)
Substituting Eq. (340) into (336) yields
∇· D = 0 ,
(555)
where the free current density and polarization current have been combined into a single eﬀective
displacement ﬁeld,
D =

ϵi + 4iπgi
ω

E .
(556)
Thus, if we introduce a complex dielectric function
ϵ(r, ω) = ϵi(r, ω) + 4iπ
ω gi(r, ω) ,
(557)
Maxwell’s equations take the form
∇· (ϵE) = 0 ,
(558)
which has the same form as Eq. (305), and
∇· B
=
0 ,
(559)
∇× E
=
iω
c B ,
(560)
∇× B
=
−iωϵ
c E .
(561)
191

If the frequency is suﬃciently low, the inductive term (iω/c)B in Faraday’s law can be
neglected, in which case the electric and displacement ﬁelds satisfy the equations, ∇· D = 0,
and ∇× E = 0, with D(r, ω) = ϵ(r, ω)E(r, ω), which are formally identical to the static limit
discussed earlier in this chapter, and is known as the quasi-static approximation (QSA). In
general, this approximation is reasonable if the typical linear dimension of the inclusions is
small compared to the wavelength or the penetration depth of the radiation in either phase of
the material. For inclusions with sizes that are of the order of a few hundred angstroms, the
QSA is reasonably accurate even at visible or near-ultraviolet frequencies. Given the validity
of the QSA, we can use all the static-limit results to study electromagnetic wave propagation
in composite materials, in the long-wavelength limit. The propagation of waves is properly
described in terms of an eﬀective dielectric constant ϵe, which is a complex function of the
two complex variables ϵ1 and ϵ2, as well as the volume fraction φ and the material’s morphol-
ogy. Similarly, the MG approximation and the EMA can be extended to treat isotropic 3D
composites, provided that conductivities are replaced by dielectric functions.
4.12.1 Conductor-insulator composites
As the ﬁrst example, consider a composite material with a volume fraction φ of metal with
a Drude dielectric function
ϵ1(ω) = 1 −(ωp/ω)2
1 + iωτ/ω
(562)
and a fraction (1−φ) of the insulator with dielectric constant ϵ2(ω) = 1, where ωp is the plasma
frequency and τ = 1/ωτ a characteristic relaxation time. In a bulk free-electron metal, such
as Al, ωp ∼1015sec−1 and ωpτ ∼100. In a small particle of such bulk metal, ωpτ may be
reduced from this value by surface scattering. When φ ≪1, ϵe is accurately predicted by the
MG approximation, provided the metal particles can be assumed to be spherical. In this limit,
ϵe = 1 + 3φϵ1 −1
ϵ1 + 2 + O(φ2) .
(563)
Equation (349) has two interesting frequency regimes. Frequencies such that ϵ1 + 2 ≃0 corre-
spond to the so-called surface plasmon resonance. In this limit the denominator in Eq. (349)
approaches zero, as the result of which the real part of ϵe becomes very large. For a metal-
insulator composite, this occurs near ω = ωp/
√
3. For non-spherical inclusions, this resonance
splits into several peaks that occur at other frequencies. The surface plasmon resonance charac-
teristically appears as a strong absorption line. This absorption is responsible for the beautiful
192

ruby colors seen in dilute suspensions of small gold particles in a transparent host, such as glass.
The absorption coeﬃcient α is the fraction of energy absorbed per unit length of material, and
is given by
α = 2ω
c Im√ϵe ,
(564)
or, when φ ≪1,
α ≃3φ ω
c Im
ϵ1 −1
ϵ1 + 2

,
(565)
on using Eq. (349). Note that in the QSA, the radius of the spherical inclusion cancells out
(although the particle’s shape is still important).
A dilute suspension of spheres also exhibits interesting behavior at ωτ ≪1.
For most
metals, this corresponds to the far infrared. By substituting Eq. (348) into (351), one ﬁnds
α = 9ω2φ
4πgec ≡Ceω2φ,
(566)
where ge = ω2
pτ/(4π) is the static conductivity. Experimental data do indicate an absorption
coeﬃcient that varies roughly linearly with the volume fraction φ, as predicted by Eq. (352),
but the measured magnitude of α is much larger than that predicted by the QSA, with the
discrepancy being typically a factor of 105 or larger.
At higher metal’s volume fraction, the qualitative optical behavior of the composite mate-
rial indicates a number of striking features as a function of φ. These features are illustrated
by approximated calculations using the EMA which serves as a useful interpolation scheme.
The phenomena predicted are not, however, artifacts of the EMA, but are quite general and
connected with the material’s percolation properties.
Figure 4.13 presents Re[ge(ω)] = (ω/4π)Im[ϵe(ω)] versus frequency for several values of φ,
as predicted by the EMA. For φ < φc (φc = 1/3 in the EMA; see Section 4.9.1), Re(ge) exhibits
a single broad peak, conﬁned within the frequency range 0 < ω < ωp.
This is a band of
surface plasmon resonances, broadened from the low-volume fraction limit by electromagnetic
interactions among individual grains. For φ > φc, a Drude peak, centered at ω = 0, develops
in addition to the surface plasmon band, signaling the fact that the composite is conducting at
zero frequency. The peak appears at the percolation threshold of a metal-insulator composite
above which the material has non-zero DC conductivity. As φ increases further, the integrated
strength of the Drude peak grows, which is consistent with an increasing DC conductivity.
193

The surface plasmon peak eventually shrinks and narrows to a band centered at ω = ωp
$
2
3,
corresponding to a void resonance, representing oscillating charge in the vicinity of a spherical
void in an otherwise homogeneous metal.
Similar behavior is exhibited by the energy loss function, –Im[1/ϵe(ω)], which shows charac-
teristic structure related to the connectedness of various phases of the composite in a homoge-
neous metal, and has peaks at the plasmon resonances where Re(ϵe) ≃0. For a metal described
by the Drude dielectric function, this peak occurs at ω = ωp, which persists in the composite
for φ > φ∗
c, where φ∗
c is the volume fraction of metal above which the insulator no longer forms
a sample-spanning cluster (for example, φ∗
c = 2/3 according to the EMA). Besides the sharp
plasmon peak, there is also a broad band in –Im(1/ϵe) from localized surface plasmons.
The disappearance of the bulk peak for φ < φ∗
c may be understood by using the concepts
of percolation theory described in Chapter 2. Near the plasma frequency one has, Re(ϵ1) ≃0,
while ϵ2 = 1. Thus, the metallic component acts as an insulator, with zero conductivity or
displacement current, while the insulator behaves like a metal: The roles of the two phases are
thus reversed. The zero in ϵe at ω = ωp persists so long as the insulator phase is present only
in the form of ﬁnite clusters; that is, for φ > φ∗
c.
Experimental data that are qualitatively similar to Figure 4.13 have been reported for a
number of materials including 3D Ag/KCI composites which have a bicontinuous regime and
a percolation threshold (Cummings et al., 1984). Because Ag is not a Drude metal, there is, in
addition to the surface plasmon peak, a region of large oscillator strength at high frequencies
that corresponds to interband transitions in Ag, which persist in the composite.
4.12.2 Conductor-superconductor composites
Optical absorption by a composite material of normal metal and a superconducting phase is
of interest because of the possibility that the presence of the normal metal can produce absorp-
tion below the superconducting energy gap, thereby causing that gap to appear smaller than
what it really is. In the classical Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieﬀer (BCS) theory of superconductivity,
Re[gs(ω)] is characterized by two parts: (1) A delta function at ω = 0, corresponding to the
pure inductive response typical of inﬁnite conductivity, and (2) a gap of width 2∆/¯h, where
∆is the BCS energy gap below which Re[gs(ω)] = 0 and there is no absorption. Mattis and
Bardeen (1958) showed that g1(ω) ≡Re[g(ω)] takes the following form in the superconducting
194

state at temperature T = 0:
g1s
gn

T=0
=

1 + 2∆
¯hω

E(k) −4∆
¯hω K(k) ,
¯hω ≥2∆,
(567)
where
k =
00000
¯hω −2∆
¯hω + 2∆
00000 ,
(568)
and E and K are the standard elliptic integrals, with gn being the conductivitivity of the
superconductor in its normal state. For ¯hω < 2∆, g1s vanishes. If we include the inductive
delta function, the total conductivity in the superconductive state would be
gt(ω) = i
ωG0 + gs(ω) ,
(569)
where gs = g1s + ig2s, and g2s is related to g1s by the Kramers-Kronig relation.
In a composite that consists of superconducting and insulating materials, a novel type of
surface plasmon resonance is possible that has so far been reported only in some of the high-
temperature superconductors (see, for example, Noh et al., 1989). To understand the origin
of this eﬀect, we write G0 = π∆gn/¯h, the correct BCS form for the inductive part at low
temperature. Then, the dielectric function of the superconductor is
ϵs(ω) = ϵph(ω) + 4iπ
ω gt(ω) ,
(570)
where ϵph is that part of the dielectric function which is due to non-superconducting processes,
such as phonon excitations. If we use Eq. (355), neglect the absorptive part, and approximate
ϵph by unity, we obtain
ϵs(ω) ≃1 −4π2gn∆
ω2¯h
,
(571)
which is identical in form to a Drude dielectric function with an inﬁnite relaxation time. Thus,
if a spherical grain of such a superconductor is inserted in an insulator with dielectric constant
ϵi, we expect a surface plasmon resonance in the form of a sharp absorption line at ϵs +2ϵi ≃0,
or
ωsp =
4π2gn∆
3¯hϵi
1/2
.
(572)
This line can be detected only if it occurs below the superconducting gap; that is, for ωsp <
2∆/¯h, or
∆
¯h > π2gn
3ϵi
,
(573)
195

implying a large ∆or a small gn. In conventional low-temperature superconductors in which
this inequality is not satisﬁed, the resonance is lost in the single-particle excitations above the
gap. However, such an absorption spike has indeed been reported by Noh et al. (1989) in small
spherical particles of YBa2Cu3O7−δ.
4.12.3 Anisotropic materials
Several optical materials are composed of optically anisotropic constituents. Examples in-
clude intercalated graphites, many high-temperature superconductors, and quasi-linear organic
conductors. In these materials, the dielectric function is a second-rank tensor with three dis-
tinct non-zero principal values. A polycrystal of such an anisotropic dielectric is essentially a
composite material which, as discussed above, can be treated by the anisotropic EMA (with all
the conductivities replaced by dielectric functions).
Calculations based on this approach and various generalizations to non-spherical grains
have been used for interpreting the optical properties of the quasi-planar high-temperature
superconductor YBa2Cu3O7−δ, which is a planar material with a highly anisotropic conductivity
in both its normal and superconducting states. These calculation postulate ellipsoidal grains
oriented so that the principal axes of the conductivity tensor are parallel to the principal axes of
the ellipsoid within each grain. An important feature is the ﬁnite absorption found below 2∆/¯h,
manifested in a ﬁnite g1(ω) below the gap (see, for example, Walker and Scharnberg, 1990).
An analysis that involves oriented anisotropic grains of high-temperature superconductors was
developed by Diaz-Guilera and Tremblay (1991).
Optical anisotropy can also be produced by the application of a magnetic ﬁeld. One such
change is the Faraday eﬀect, which is the rotation of light (either on transmission or reﬂection)
on passing through a medium in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. Such a ﬁeld is treated formally
by adding to the zero-ﬁeld dielectric tensor an additional antisymmetric contribution. If the
material is isotropic in the absence of the ﬁeld, the problem is essentially an AC generalization of
the Hall eﬀect that will be described and discussed in Chapter 5. In a non-absorbing material,
the components of the antisymmetric tensor are usually purely imaginary, so that left and
right circularly polarized waves travel with diﬀerent velocities. Faraday rotation in composite
materials has been studied theoretically in the dilute limit using the MG approximation (Hui
and Stroud, 1987), and for both magnetic and non-magnetic particles at higher volume fractions
196

using the EMA (Xia et al., 1990). Experimental studies are of practical interest because of the
possibility of obtaining optical materials with large Faraday rotation per unit thickness and
low absorption.
4.12.4 The Cole-Cole representation
Cole and Cole (1941) suggested a method for analyzing complex dielectric constant of com-
posite materials which appears to be extremely accurate. Their method is based on plotting
the imaginary part of the eﬀective dielectric constant versus its real part as the frequency ω
is varied. Often, if one plots separately the real or imaginary part versus frequency, one may
obtain excellent agreement with experimental data or an exact result. However, the true de-
partures from the data or the exact theory are picked up only when one utilizes the Cole-Cole
plot.
As an example, consider the MG approximation to the eﬀective dielectric constant. Writing
ϵe = ϵ′ + iϵ′′, it is straightforward to show that the MG formula for ϵe, Eq. (262), can be
expressed in the following form:
ϵ′ + iϵ′′ = 1 −
φ2
t −u0
,
(574)
where u0 = (1 −φ2)/3 is the MG pole in the spectral representation of ϵe (see Section 4.11.1),
and t = ϵ1/(ϵ1 −ϵ2). Writing t(ω) = t′(ω) + it′′(ω), it follows that the MG trajectory is a circle
given by
ϵ′(ω)
ϵ1
−1
2
+
ϵ′′(ω)
ϵ1
−φ2
2t′′
2
=
 φ2
2t′′
2
.
(575)
The Cole-Cole plot of the MG approximation also aﬀords us an opportunity for comparing
it with an exact result due to Felderhof and Jones (1989), so as to study its deviations from
the exact values. Felderhof and Jones derived their exact result for low values of φ2 by taking
into account the eﬀect of two-body interactions (which are of course absent in both the MG
apprpoximation and the EMA), which can be thought of as the coupling of the surface plasmon
modes of two spheres. Their result can be written as
ϵ′ + iϵ′′ = 1 −
φ2
t −u0 −1
3C(t) ,
(576)
where C(t) contains the eﬀect of two-body interactions and is frequency dependent. If we now
compare Eq. (362) to (360), we see that the shift of the pole from u0 to u0 −1
3C(t) shrinks the
197

radius of the circle in the Cole-Cole plot, if the frequency-dependence of C(t) is not too strong.
Of course, as φ2 increases, deviations from a circular Cole-Cole plot emerge, and in fact for
large φ2 the plot will not be a circle.
4.13 Beyond the Quasi-Static Approximation: Mie Scattering
One may examine the validity of the QSA by analyzing a dilute suspension of inclusions
in an otherwise homogeneous material, which is subjected to an incoming linearly polarized
monochromatic plane electromagnetic wave with electric ﬁeld E = E0 exp(ikz −iωt).
We
consider spherical inclusions with complex dielectric function ϵ2(ω) and a host of dielectric
function ϵ1. This is one rare case for which an exact analytical solution was obtained by G.
Mie in 1908. Because of the symmetry of the system, we can write the electromagnetic ﬁelds
in terms of two scalar functions that deﬁne the electric and magnetic Hertz vectors:
Πelec = Π1ˆr ,
(577)
Πmag = Π2ˆr ,
(578)
where all the transverse electric and magnetic modes are given in terms of the scalar functions
Π1 and Π2, respectively. These functions are the solution of the Helmholtz equation:
(∇2 + k2)Π = 0 ,
(579)
outside the sphere, and
(∇2 + η2k2)Π = 0 ,
(580)
inside the sphere, where η is the refractive index of the sphere. The incident ﬁeld E0 is readily
decomposed into incident Hertz ﬁelds, as [r and ϕ are the polar coordinates in the (x, y) plane]
rΠ0
1 = 1
k2
∞

n=1
in−1(2n + 1)
n(n + 1)
ψn(kr)P (1)
n (cos θ) cos ϕ ,
(581)
rΠ0
2 =
1
Z1k2
∞

n=1
in−1(2n + 1)
n(n + 1)
ψn(kr)P (1)
n (cos θ) sin ϕ .
(582)
Here, ψn(x) = xjn(x) =
$
πx/2Jn+1/2(x) are the Riccati-Bessel functions, Z1 =
$
µ1/ϵ1 is the
impedance of the matrix (outside the sphere), with ϵ1 and µ1 being its permittivity and magnetic
permeability, respectively, and P (j)
i
are the Legendre functions. Similarly, the scattered ﬁeld
198

outside the sphere is given by the same form but with Mie scattering coeﬃcients an and bn that
contain information on the scattering:
rΠscatt
1
= −1
k2
∞

n=1
in−1(2n + 1)
n(n + 1)
anζn(kr)P (1)
n (cos θ) cos ϕ ,
(583)
rΠscatt
2
= −
1
Z1k2
∞

n=1
in−1(2n + 1)
n(n + 1)
bnζn(kr)P (1)
n (cos θ) sin ϕ ,
(584)
where ζn = xh(1)
n (x) =
$
πx/2H(1)
n+1/2(x), with H(j)
i (x) being the Hankel functions. Inside the
sphere we have the following ﬁelds,
rΠinside
1
=
1
k2η2
∞

n=1
in−1(2n + 1)
n(n + 1)
cnψn(kr)P (1)
n (cos θ) cos ϕ ,
(585)
rΠinside
2
=
1
Z1k2η2
∞

n=1
in−1(2n + 1)
n(n + 1)
dnψn(kr)P (1)
n (cos θ) sin ϕ ,
(586)
with the Mie coeﬃcients cn and dn containing all the information on the wave propagation
inside the sphere. These coeﬃcients, together with an and bn, are determined by the boundary
conditions that E and H must be continuous at the interface between the sphere and the matrix
(i.e., at r = R). Of main interest to us are an and bn which are given by
an = ψ′
n(y)ψn(x) −ηψn(y)ψ′
n(x)
ψ′
n(y)ζn(x) −ηψn(y)ζ′
n(x) ,
(587)
bn = ηψ′
n(y)ψn(x) −ψn(y)ψ′
n(x)
µψ′
n(y)ζn(x) −ψn(y)ζ′
n(x) ,
(588)
where x = kR, y = kηR, and R is the sphere’s radius. The coeﬃcients an and bn are pro-
portional to the n−pole electric and magnetic portions of the wave scattered from the sphere.
Having determined these coeﬃcients, the ﬁelds E and H are then given by
E = ∇× ∇× (rΠelec) + iωµ∇× (rΠmag) ,
(589)
H = ∇× ∇× (rΠmag) −iωµ∇× (rΠelec) ,
(590)
where (ϵ, µ) = (ϵ1, µ1) inside the matrix, and (ϵ, µ) = (ϵ2, µ2) inside the sphere.
The extinction coeﬃcient αtot, deﬁned as the ratio of power lost out of the incident beam
per unit volume and the incident power per unit area, is given by the standard expression
αtot = 4πn0
k2 Re[A(0)] ,
(591)
199

A(0) = 1
2
∞

n=1
(2n + 1)(an + bn) ,
(592)
where A(0) is the forward scattering amplitude, an and bn are the electric and magnetic mul-
tipole coeﬃcients given by Eqs. (373) and (374), and n0 is the number density of spheres.
Although αtot represents the sum of losses due to scattering and absorption, scattering losses
are negligible at long wavelengths (i.e., when kR ≪1). The two dominant contributions to the
absorption are made by the electric and magnetic dipole terms, a1 and b1. When x ≪1 and
y ≪1, an expansion of the spherical Bessel and Hankel functions yields
a1 ≃−2i
3 x3ϵ1 −1
ϵ1 + 2 ,
(593)
b1 ≃−i
45x5(ϵ1 −1) .
(594)
All other coeﬃcients (for example, the electric quadrupole coeﬃcient a2) vary as x5 or a higher
power of x. Thus, the dominant coeﬃcient at low frequency is a1, the electric dipole term
(except in one special case discussed below). We then obtain
αtot = 3φω
c Im
ϵ1 −1
ϵ1 + 2

,
(595)
which is identical to the absorption coeﬃcient (351) predicted by the quasi-static MG approx-
imation. Thus, the QSA is generally valid in the limit kR ≪1, the limit in which αtot is
independent of R. This scale independence is expected because in the quasi-static limit a com-
posite material can be described by an eﬀective dielectric function that is unchanged if all the
dimensions of the composite are uniformly multiplied by a scale factor.
On the other hand, in a metal-insulator composite at low frequencies, the contribution αm
to the extinction coeﬃcient made by b1 can be comparable to the electric dipole contribution,
which is the same as the QSA or even much larger. If we substitute Eqs. (379) and (380) into
(377), we obtain, αe = Ceω2φ, and αm = Cmω2φ, where Ce is deﬁned by Eq. (352) and
Cm = 2πgeR2
5c3
.
(596)
The magnetic dipole contribution also varies as ω2φ, but, unlike αe, it increases with particle
radius because the induced eddy currents dissipate more energy in larger particles. For particles
of conductivity comparable to that of Al at room temperature, Cm may exceed Ce at a particle
radius as small as 30˚A. For 100 ˚A particles, inclusion of the magnetic dipole absorption can give
200

an enhancement of far-infrared absorption of the order of 102 over the QSA. This extra magnetic
dipole (or eddy current) absorption undoubtedly contributes to the well-known discrepancy
between the observed and the quasi-static far-infrared absorption in small metal particles.
However, it is still inadequate to explain a factor of 104 −106 seen in many experiments.
4.14 Dynamical Eﬀective-Medium Approximation
Several attempts have been made to extend the EMA in order to obtain more accurate
predictions for ϵe(ϵ1, ϵ2, q, ω), where q represents all the modes. To be more precise, suppose
that a plane wave of frequency ω propagates through a composite material.
This wave is
then attenuated and retarded due to multiple scattering and absorption in the material. The
scattered ﬁelds can propagate over a wide range of wave vectors, and therefore the important
question to ask is: How does one deﬁne an average that can take into account all the scattered
ﬁelds in order to obtain the correct eﬀective dielectric constant? For example, one can deﬁne
the average on a mode-by-mode basis:
⟨D(ϵi, q, ω)⟩= ϵe(ϵ1, q, ω)⟨E(ϵi, q, ω)⟩,
(597)
and then average over all the modes q. However, the distribution of the modes is non-trivial,
and its knowledge does in fact require the complete solution of the multiple scattering problem
in the composite material, a prospect which is currently out of reach. Another important issue
to address is the following. Since the wave experiences both absorption and scattering, the
modes q are complex, and therefore the question is: Does one average over the real part or the
imaginary part?
To address such issues, Stroud and Pan (1978) proposed selecting the eﬀective medium to
have a dielectric function ϵe such that the forward scattering from the spheres, i.e., A(0) [see
Eq. (378)], vanishes on the average. They obtained their approximate solution by imposing the
consistency condition through the Fourier components D(q, ω) and relating it to the electric
ﬁeld E(q, ω) via ϵe(ω) at one magnitude of q - that of the propagating mode itself - i.e.,
ke = ω√ϵe/c. Therefore,

D(r, ω) exp(−ikez)dr = ϵe

E(r, ω) exp(−ikez)dr ,
(598)
which implies that the average is automatically taken through the Fourier transform. Note
that, in general, when the magnetic properties are also important, the eﬀective wave vector is
201

deﬁned by
ke = ω
c
√ϵeµe ,
(599)
which indicates that one must also have a similar hypothesis for the ﬁeld B:

B(r, ω) exp(−ikez)dr = µe

H(r, ω) exp(−ikez)dr .
(600)
However, Eq. (386) also implies that, instead of attemping to directly compute ϵe and µe, one
should calculate an eﬀective value ke for the wave vector. But, how does one do so?
To address this question, Mahan (1988) avoided including the magnetic-dipole scattering
in an eﬀective dielectric function, and instead proposed the introduction of separate eﬀective
dielectric function and magnetic permeability, each of which is determined by independent,
EMA-like equations. In other words, he assumed that both of the averages given by Eqs. (384)
and (386) are independent.
Even Eq. (336) cannot be used directly, because, in principle, the ﬁelds D and E must be
known. These ﬁelds can, however, be computed only if we can completely solve the multiple
scattering problem. In this case, a technique similar to that used for deriving the EMA in
the static limit (see 4.9.1) can be used, namely, a spherical grain is embedded in the eﬀective
medium that has an eﬀective dielectric constant ϵe(ω), which is yet to be determined. This
assumption, together with the superposition principle for each of the spherical grains (assumed
not to be interacting with each other, so that it suﬃces to consider a single sphere), enable us
to carry out the integrations in Eq. (384). One breaks up the integral of the ﬁeld E into a sum
over the individual grains:
Ii =

Ωi
Ei(r, ω) exp(−ikez)dr ,
(601)
where Ωi is the volume of the region over which the integration is carried out, which must be
at least of the order of several wavelengths. The eﬀective dielectric constant is then given by
ϵe(ϵ1, ω) =

i ϵiIi

i Ii
.
(602)
Equation (388) can be thought of as the dynamical version of the MG approximation.
It
is, however, ﬂawed, because it violates the important condition that the propagating mode,
deﬁned by k1(ϵ1) through an analogue of Eq. (385), is inconsistent with ϵe. In a similar way,
the dynamical version of the EMA can be obtained:

i
(ϵi −ϵ1)Ii = 0 .
(603)
202

The only remaining issue is then evaluating the integral (387) which is possible once the electric
ﬁeld E is speciﬁed.
Numerically, the approximations developed by Stroud and Pan (1978) and by Mahan (1988)
yield rather similar results. The conditions under which one can treat the eﬀective medium by
separate eﬀective dielectric functions and permabilities were discussed by Lamb et al. (1980).
Let us mention that we will derive in Chapter 6 a diﬀerent eﬀective-medium approximation for
predicting frequency-dependent transport properties of disordered materials.
4.15 The Eﬀect of Large-Scale Morphology
There can be large-scale structures in a composite material that are of the same order as
the wavelength λ of electromagnetic radiation in the composite, even if the individual grains
are small, so that the QSA breaks down again. Examples of such materials include large (for
example, fractal) clusters of particles with a cluster linear dimension that is roughly about λ. As
we should know by now, in a randomly disordered composite, the percolation correlation length
ξp diverges as the percolation threshold φc is approached from either side, so that suﬃciently
near the threshold, ξp > λ.
The optical properties of a composite material in this regime were analyzed by Yagil et al.
(1991). In their analysis, the incident radiation near φc samples the dielectric constant, not of
the composite as a whole, but rather of only a small piece of volume ∼Ld
ξ , where Lξ is the
smallest of the three lengths, λ (the electromagnetic wavelength in the composite), ξp (the per-
colation correlation length), and L(ω). In turn, L(ω) is the anomalous diﬀusion length, deﬁned
as the distance a charge carrier travels within the metallic portion of the composite in one AC
cycle (see Chapter 6, Section 6.1.9, for a detailed discussion of anomalous diﬀusion). Such a
small piece of the material deviates from the bulk in two ways: Its dielectric function diﬀers
from that of an inﬁnite sample, and it has a distribution of possible values for ϵe described by
a probability density function. Both eﬀects arise from large ﬂuctuations exhibited by diﬀerent
ﬁnite-size samples of the composite near φc. The dielectric constant ϵe for a piece of size Lξ
was then assumed to be characterized by a ﬁnite-size scaling function near φc, of the form
ϵe(ϵ1, ϵ2, φ, Lξ) =
ϵ1
ϵ2
−a
F±
ϵ1/ϵ2
ξ−a
p
, ξp
Lξ

,
(604)
where F+ and F−are two scaling functions that describe the dielectric constant above and
below φc, respectively. Equation (390) was tested numerically in 2D and was found to be valid.
203

4.16 Multiple-Scattering Approach
Over the past 35 years, numerous other apoproximate schemes have been proposed for
estimating various properties of composite materials. Some of these methods are either simple
extensions of the MG approximation or the EMA, while others are considerably more elaborate.
In this section, we brieﬂy describe one of these approaches, namely, the multiple-scattering
approach which has been used widely in the condensed matter theory.
An example of such methods is one for materials that consist of a random distribution of
particles of dielectric function ϵ2 and ﬁxed shapes (for example, spherical particles), embedded
in a matrix of a diﬀerent dielectric function ϵ1. Such a composite material can be thought of
as a macroscopic version of a morphologically-disordered atomic system, such as a liquid metal
or an amorphous solid. In this analogy, the particles play the role of the atoms, while the
diﬀerence ϵ2 −ϵ1 corresponds to the scattering potential. This analogy can be exploited for
estimating the eﬀective dielectric constant of the material by writing down an integral equation
for the electric ﬁeld E, which is obtained by combining the Maxwell equations, Eq. (346) and
(347):
∇× ∇× E −k2E = k2δϵE ,
(605)
where k2 = k2
0ϵ0, k2
0 = ω2/c2, δϵ = [ϵ(r) −ϵ0]/ϵ0, ϵ(r) is the position-dependent dielectric
constant, and ϵ0 is a reference dielectric constant to be selected in some convenient way. If we
introduce a 3 × 3 tensor Green function G deﬁned by
∇× ∇× G −k2G = −k2δ3(r −r′)U ,
(606)
where U is the 3 × 3 unit tensor, Eq. (391) is converted into an integral equation for E:
E(r) = E(r) +

G(k; r −r′) · δϵ(r′)E(r′)d3r′ ,
(607)
where E0 is the electric ﬁeld in the homogeneous material. Equation (393) is a vector analogue
of the integral Schr¨odinger equation, with E playing the role of the quantum-mechanical wave
function ψ. The Green function G has been calculated for many choices of boundary and initial
conditions. For example, the outgoing-wave Green function is readily shown to be given by
Gij(k; R) = −(k2δij + ∇i∇j)exp(ikR)
4πR
,
(608)
where R ≡r −r′, R = |R|, and i and j denote Cartesian coordinates.
204

Given the solution of Eq.
(393), one may, in the following manner, deﬁne an eﬀective
frequency- and wave number-dependent dielectric tensor ϵe(q, ω). Suppose that the homoge-
neous solution is a monochromatic ﬁeld, E0(r, t) = E0 exp(iq·r−iωt). Then, ϵe(q, ω) is deﬁned
by an equation similar to (383) in which ⟨·⟩indicates an ensemble average. Given this deﬁ-
nition, the longitudinal and transverse responses may diﬀer. In the limit of small q, however,
one may expect the q−dependence to disappear and the longitudinal and transverse dielectric
functions to become equal. If we introduce a 3 × 3 scattering matrix T, deﬁned by
δϵ(r)E(r) =

T(r, r′)E0(r′)dr′ ,
(609)
then, ϵe(q, ω) is expressed in terms of T through the following equation
ϵe(q, ω) = ϵ0U + ⟨T(q, ω)⟩[U + G(q, ω)⟨T(q, ω)⟩]−1 ,
(610)
where G(q, ω) is the Fourier-transformed solution of Eq. (391).
Given Eq. (396), we may convert the problem of determining the eﬀective dielectric constant
to one of searching for an eﬀective wave vector ke. The natural way to deﬁne ke is to look for a
k such that the average scattering matrix ⟨T⟩vanishes. The corresponding Green function G
then describes the average propagation characteristics of a wave in the disordered material and
the corresponding k0 = ke. Likewise, the eﬀective dielectric function ϵe, is just ϵ0, the reference
dielectric constant that causes the average scattering matrix to vanish. For suﬃciently long
wavelengths, the resulting dieletric constant will presumably be the same for both longitudinal
and transverse waves.
For a suspension of identical spheres, the scattering matrix T can be expanded in a multiple-
scattering series involving the scattering matrices ti of the individual spheres. Because this
series has the same form as in liquid metals, one can adapt liquid-metal approximations to
compute and analyze dielectric suspensions. Davis and Schwartz (1986) used this approach to
calculate ϵe in the long-wavelength regime, kR ≪1 (where R is the sphere’s radius), using Eq.
(396). They used several approximate schemes for ⟨T⟩developed in the theory of liquid metals,
including those known as the quasi-crystalline approximation and the EMA of Roth (1974)
which, however, is an approximation entirely distinct from the usual EMA described above.
Another multiple-scattering approach was developed by Lamb et al. (1980) who studied both
ordered and disordered suspensions of spheres in the long-wave length limit, including both two-
205

and three-body correlation functions. Their method yields predictions that diﬀer signiﬁcantly
from those provided by the simpler MG approximations, and agree better with experimental
data.
Summary
Many theoretical approaches for estimating transport and optical properties of disordered
materials have been developed over the past several decades. Some of these methods, that uti-
lize the continuum models of heterogeneous materials that were described in Chapter 3, were
developed, analyzed and discussed in this chapter. They range from exact results for certain
types of morphologies, to rigorous upper and lower bounds to the eﬀective properties, and
several mean-ﬁeld and eﬀective-medium approximations. The exact results are useful when a
material’s morphology resembles the models for which the exact solutions have been derived.
The bounds provide in many cases useful estimates for the eﬀective transport properties, and
are also useful for checking the merit of a new theory. The mean-ﬁeld and eﬀective medium
approximations are easy to use, can be used as interpolation formulae and, under certain condi-
tions, provide relatively accurate estimates of the eﬀective transport properties. These methods
have provided us with a wealth of information on the eﬀective transport and optical properties
of disordered materials, as a result of which we now have a much deeper understanding of how
a material responds to a given external excitation. Chapter 5 will describe the complementary
approaches that are based on discrete models of disordered materials.
206

Captions
Figure 4.1. Eﬀective conductivity ge of a simple cubic array of perfectly conducting spheres
as a function of their volume fraction φ2. M is the order of the theory, with M = 1, 2, and
3 corresponding to the theories of Maxwell (1973), Rayleigh (1892), and Meredith and Tobias
(1960). M = ∞(the ﬁrst curve from the left) is the exact solution (after McPhedran and
McKenzie, 1978).
Figure 4.2. Comparison of the experimental data of Kharadly and Jackson (+) and Meredith
and Tobias (×) for the eﬀective conductivity of a simple cubic array of perfectly conducting
spheres with the exact solution (M = ∞). The vertical dashed lines corresponds to φ2 = 1
6π
(after McPhedran and McKenzie, 1978).
Figure 4.3. Comparison of the experimental data for the eﬀective conductivity ge of a BCC
array of perfectly conducting spheres (symbols) with the theoretical predictions (after McKenzie
et al., 1978).
Figure 4.4. A portion of the hexagonal array of disks (or cylinders) used in the computations.
The basic hexagonal cell, as well as a subunit (dashed outlines), are shown (after Perrins et al.,
1979a).
Figure 4.5. Comparison of the experimental data (symbols) for the eﬀective conductivity
ge of 2D arrays of perfectly conducting spheres with the theoretical predictions. The curves on
the left and right correspond, respectively, to the square and hexagonal arrays (after Perrins et
al., 1979a).
Figure 4.6. The double-coated spheres model in two dimensions.
Figure 4.7. Comparison of the rigorous three-point bounds for eﬀective conductivity of an
equilibrium distribution of overlapping spheres (curves), in a matrix of conductivity g1, with
the simulation results (circles). The ratio of the conductivities of the spheres and the matrix
is 10 (after Kim and Torquato, 1992).
Figure 4.8. The same as in Figure 4.7, but with a conductivity ratio of 50 (after Kim and
Torquato, 1992).
Figure 4.9. Eﬀective conductivity of an equilibrium distribution of superconducting over-
lapping spheres in a matrix of conductivity g1. The solid curve is the rigorous three-point
lower bound, the dotted curve is the approximation given by Eq. (81), while the circles are the
numerical simulation results (after Kim and Torquato, 1992).
207

Figure 4.10. Cross sections through the two-point probability function S2(r, θ) for hard,
oriented prolate spheroids at a volume fraction φ2 = 0.6 of the particles and eccentricity b/a = 2.
The curves, from right to left on the main peak, are for θ = 0◦, 45◦and 90◦(after Lado and
Torquato, 1990).
Figure 4.11. The diagonal components [ge = (ge)ii] of the eﬀective conductivity of a com-
posite material that consists of aligned spheroids of volume fraction φ2, aspect ratio b/a = 1/2,
and phase conductivity ratio g2/g1 = 10, in a matrix of conductivity g1. The dashed curves are
the two-point bounds for (ge)11/g1 = (ge)22/g1, the triangles are the corresponding simulation
results, while the solid curves and the circles represent the same for (ge)33/g1 (after Kim and
Torquato, 1993).
Figure 4.12. The diagonal components [ge = (ge)ii] of the eﬀective conductivity of a compos-
ite that consists of superconducting aligned spheroids of volume fraction φ2, and aspect ratio
b/a = 0.5. The dashed curve and the triangles are, respectively, the two-point lower bound
and the numerical simulation results for (ge)11 = (ge)22, while the solid curve and the circles
represent the same for (ge)33. Note that, in this case, the upper bounds diverge (after Kim and
Torquato, 1993).
Figure 4.13. The real part of the conductivity ge(ω) of a composite material that consists
of a Drude metal of volume fraction φ and insulators of volume fraction 1 −φ, as predicted by
the eﬀective-medium approximation. The Drude peaks are on the vertical axis at ω = 0 which
are, however, too narrow to be shown on the scale of the ﬁgure. The dashed line denotes the
plasma frequency ωp. The individual curves have been displaced vertically by constant amounts
relative to one another (after Stroud, 1979).
208

5
Eﬀective Conductivity and Dielectric Constant:
The Discrete Approach
5.0 Introduction
In Chapter 4 we described and discussed various methods of estimating the eﬀective con-
ductivity, dielectric constant, and optical properties of heterogeneous materials, based on the
continuum models of such materials that were described in Chapter 3. The purpose of the
present chapter is to essentially carry out the same program of analyses as in Chapter 4, except
that we describe and discuss the solution of these problems using the discrete or lattice models
of disordered materials. One main advantage of the discrete approach is that it allows one to
make direct contact with the eﬀect of percolation and clustering on the eﬀective properties of
disordered materials. Recall from Chapter 2 that percolation and clustering eﬀects are relevant
and important when there is a large diﬀerence between the properties of the phases of a disor-
dered multiphase material. Under this condition, many of the methods that were described in
Chapter 4 cannot provide accurate estimates of the eﬀective transport and optical properties.
Another advantage of the discrete models is their relative simplicity and the ease with which
they can be utilized, which also explains their popularity over the past three decades. Since we
will describe and discuss estimation and computation of the eﬀective linear vector transport
properties, such as the elastic moduli, in Chapters 7-9, we restrict our attention in this chapter
to scalar steady-state transport, and in particular conduction, and describe and discuss vari-
ous methods of estimating the eﬀective conductivity and dielectric constant of heterogeneous
materials. Since methods of estimating the eﬀective conductivity and dielectric constant of
disordered solids are completely similar, we only describe the methods for the eﬀective con-
ductivity. In addition, we consider not only the electrical and thermal conductivities, but also
the Hall conductivity, as well as the classical (non-quantum mechanical) aspects of supercon-
ductivity. Chapter 6 will describe and discuss the analysis of the eﬀective transport, optical,
and other dynamical properties of heterogeneous material under the condition that they are
frequency- and/or time-dependent.
5.1 Experimental Data for Conduction in Heterogeneous Materials
Before we begin our theoretical discussions, let us review some of the experimental studies
209

of conduction in composite solids in order to better demonstrate the relevance of percolation
and clustering eﬀects. Our review of this problem is by no means exhaustive, as there is a
very extensive literature on the subject. Therefore, we conﬁne our attention to reviewing only
some of the key results that have been reported over the past 30 years. Toward this end, we
consider three types of heterogeneous materials, namely, powders, polymeric materials, and
metal-insulator composites, and restrict most of our discussions to the power-law behavior
of their eﬀective conductivity in the critical region near the percolation threshold pc, where
percolation eﬀects are dominant and universal properties, independent of the morphology of the
materials, are observed. Non-universal features, such as the location of the percolation threshold
and the numerical value of the eﬀective transport properties away from pc are predicted well
by the eﬀective-medium approximation and many of the methods described in Chapter 4, the
discrete versions of which are described in detail later in this chapter.
Over 30 years ago, Ziman (1968) proposed that the mobility of an electron in a disordered
semiconductor can be predicted by percolation theory. Eggarter and Cohen (1970) then sug-
gested that the mobility, and hence the conductivity, should be proportional to the percolation
probability P(p), introduced in Section 2.6.1. However, in a classical paper, Last and Thouless
(1971) reported measurements of the eﬀective conductivity of a conducting colloidal graphite
paper in which holes had been punched randomly, and showed that the conductivity decreases,
as the percolation threshold is approached, much slower than P(p), due to the fact that near
pc the conducting paths are very tortuous. Their simple and beautiful experiment helped the
beginning of an era in which percolation gradually became an indispensable tool for explaining
and modelling of transport properties of two-phase composite materials in which there is a large
contrast between the properties of the two phases.
5.1.1 Powders
Malliaris and Turner (1971) were probably the ﬁrst to link percolation concepts with ex-
perimental data for electrical conductivity of a compacted powder of spherical particles. They
prepared powders of high-density polyethylene particles with radius Rp and nickel particles
with radius Rn, and reported that the electrical conductivity of the powder was essentially zero
unless, “the composition of the metal reached a critical value.” This critical value, which is
clearly the percolation threshold of the metallic phase, was found to depend on Rp/Rn. The
210

electrical resistivity of the powder dropped 20 orders of magnitude at the percolation thresh-
old of the samples with nickel segregated on the outside of the polyethylene spheres, and at a
diﬀerent percolation threshold for samples prepared in such a way that the nickel penetrated
the spheres. Another early study of the conductivity of a percolation composite was reported
by Fitzpatrick et al. (1974), who utilized a random close packing of equal-size spheres, as part
of a freshman physics course at Harvard University. The conducting spheres were made of
aluminum, the insulating ones of acrylic plastic. The eﬀective conductivity of the packing was
measured as a function of the volume fraction φ of the conducting spheres, and was found to
vanish at a ﬁnite φ, indicating a percolation transition at that point.
The ﬁrst systematic and extensive study of percolation and conduction properties of random
packings of particles appears to have been carried out by Ottavi et al. (1978), who used equal-
size molded plastic spheres with a fraction of them electroplated with a copper coating to make
them conducting. Their data indicated that the eﬀective conductivity ge of the sample vanishes
at pc ≃0.29 ± 0.02. Since the ﬁlling factor fl (see Section 2.10) of such packings is about 0.6,
one obtains a critical volume fraction φc = flpc ≃0.17, in agreement with the prediction of
Scher and Zallen (1970) for the percolation threshold of random 3D percolating continua.
Another set of experiments was carried out by Deptuck et al. (1985). Sintered, submicron
silver powder with a volume fraction φ ∼0.4 is commonly used for millikelvin and submillikelvin
cryostats. The sinter remains percolating for φ as low as 0.1. Submicron copper-oxide-silver
powder is routinely used in heat exchangers for optimizing heat transfer to dilute liquid 3He-
4He mixtures. In these composites, the silver component remained sample-spanning with a
critical volume fraction φc < 0.1. Deptuck et al. carried out a systematic study of the electrical
conductivity (and the Young’s modulus; see Chapter 9) of such powders, and reported that near
φc the conductivity followed the power law (2.36) with µ ≃2.15 ± 0.25, completely consistent
with µ ≃2.0 for 3D percolation (see Table 2.3). Similar data were reported by Lee et al.
(1986) who used silver-coated-glass Teﬂon composites. The Teﬂon powder used was composed
of particles with diameters of about 1µm. The powder was then mixed with glass spheres coated
with a 600˚A silver layer which provided high conductivity. The conductivity of the mixture
was then measured as a function of the volume fraction of the conducting particles. Lee et al.
reported a percolation threshold φc ≃0.17, in good agreement with the percolation threshold
of 3D continuum percolation predicted by Scher and Zallen (1970). Moreover, from their data
211

they estimated that, µ ≃2.0 ± 0.2, in excellent agreement with the critical exponent of the
conductivity of 3D percolation (see Table 2.3). Lee et al., as well as Deprez et al. (1989), who
measured the electrical conductivity of sintered nickel samples, also reported that the power
law (2.36) was satisﬁed over the entire range of the volume fraction, thus demonstrating the
practical usefulness of such universal power laws.
5.1.2 Polymer composites
Hsu and Berzins (1985) studied percolation eﬀects in a polymer composite, namely, perﬂu-
orinated ionomers with the general formula [(CF2)nCF]m-O-R-SO3X, where n is typically 6-13,
R is a perﬂuoro alkylene group which may contain ether oxygene, and X is any monovalent
cation. These composites are comprised of carbon-ﬂuorine backbone chains with perﬂuoro side
chains containing sulfonate, carboxylate, or sulfonamide groups, possess exceptional transport,
chemical, and mechanical properties, and have been used as membrane separators, acid cata-
lysts, and polymer electrodes. Percolation eﬀects are important in these composites because
of a spontaneous phase separation occuring in the wet polymer, which is the conductive aque-
ous phase that is distributed randomly in the insulative ﬂuorocarbon phase. Hsu and Berzins
(1985) measured the electrical conductivity (and elastic moduli) of these polymer composites
and found their measurements to be consistent with the predictions of percolation theory. For
example, they found that for 10−2 ≤φ −φc ≤0.8, a very broad region, the conductivity of the
polymers followed the power law (2.36), indicating again the broad applicability and usefulness
of such universal power laws.
Michels et al.
(1989) reported extensive data for the electrical conductivity of a well-
known composite, namely, carbon-black/polymer composites. From a master batch of well-
dispersed carbon black (CB), casting of crosslinked samples were prepared, and for each CB
concentration the eﬀective conductivity was measured. At a critical volume fraction well below
2% (in weight) CB, the composite’s conductivity exhibited a sharp rise to values 11 to 14
orders of magnitude larger than that of the matrix which was a thermosetting polymer, hence
indicating the formation of a sample-spanning cluster of CB. Near the critical volume fraction of
CB, the eﬀective conductivity of the sample was found to follow Eq. (2.36) with, µ ≃2.1±0.2,
in excellent agreement with the numerical estimate of µ for 3D percolation (see Table 2.3).
5.1.3 Conductor-insulator composites
212

Thin metal ﬁlms are two-phase mixtures of metal and non-metal components which have
interesting structural and transport properties. Their electrical conductivity changes contin-
uously as the volume fraction of the metallic phase is varied. If the volume fraction of the
metallic phase is large enough, the metal phase forms a sample-spanning cluster in which the
non-metallic phase is dispersed in the form of isolated islands. In this regime, the electrical
conductivity of the system is large and its temperature coeﬃcient of resistance is positive. If
the volume fraction of the metallic phase is close to its percolation threshold, one has a com-
plex system of isolated metallic islands, a tortuous and sample-spanning cluster of the metallic
component, and islands of the non-metallic component.
If the non-metallic phase forms a
sample-spanning cluster, the system is in the dielectric regime, and its electrical conductivity
is very small, if not zero. Transmission electron microscopy shows that thin metal ﬁlms have
a discontinuous structure in which the metallic phase constitutes only a fraction of the total
volume of the system. Such ﬁlms have a nearly two-dimensional (2D) structure and are formed
in the early stages of ﬁlm growth by a variety of techniques, such as evaporation or sputtering.
The metallic phase ﬁrst forms isolated islands that at later stages of the process join together
and form a continuous ﬁlm. Generally speaking, a metal ﬁlm is considered thin if its thickness
is less than the percolation correlation length ξp of the 3D ﬁlm.
Thick ﬁlms of metallic and non-metallic components, i.e., those with a thickness greater
than ξp, also have interesting properties and have been studied for a long time. They can also
be produced by co-sputtering or co-evaporation of two components that are insoluble in each
other, one being the non-metallic component and the other one the metallic phase. They have
been studied for their novel superconducting and magnetic properties. However, the discovery
by Abeles et al. (1975) that the electrical conductivity of such ﬁlms near pc follows the power
law (2.36) made them the subject of many studies. Such thick ﬁlms are mainly composed of
a metal with a bulk lattice structure. The non-metallic phase is amorphous and often in the
form of isolated islands. They are often called granular metal ﬁlms because inspection of their
structure shows that the metal grains are often surrounded by very thin amorphous layers of the
non-metallic component, so that metallic grains remain separated. Granular composites always
have high percolation thresholds, which can be close to the random close packing fractions, if
the grain size is constant and the insulator is relatively thick. Examples of such composites are
Ni-SiO2, Al-Si, and Al-Ge. Unlike thin metal ﬁlms, one cannot easily ﬁnd clusters of metallic
213

grains in granular metals, and therefore it is more diﬃcult to interpret their morphology in
terms of the concepts of percolation theory. Let us now discuss several properties of metal ﬁlms
and relate them to percolation quantities.
The ﬁrst application of percolation to the interpretation of various properties of very thin
(2D) metal ﬁlms appears to have been made by Liang et al. (1976). They prepared ultrathin
ﬁlms which were 1.5 mm wide with pre-evaporated indium electrodes spaced 25 mm apart. The
substrate used was SiO ﬁlms deposited on a microscope slide glass. Several types of metallic
compounds were evaporated and studied. They found that the sudden drop of the resistivity
of semi-metal bismuth ultrathin ﬁlms was very steep, signaling a percolation transition. When
they plotted the conductivity of the composite versus the area fraction φ of the conducting
phase, they found that near the percolation threshold the conductivity follows the power law
(2.36) with µ ≃1.15, reasonably close to the corresponding exponent for 2D percolation (see
Table 2.3).
Papandreou and N´edellec (1992) prepared Pd ﬁlms with a typical thickness of about 100˚A
by depositing them by electron gun evaporation on quartz substrate for measuring their con-
ductivity, and on NaCl substrate for TEM observations. The substrates were coated with a
SiO layer of 150˚A, which ensured similar growth conditions, regardless of the substrate below
SiO. The samples were then irradiated under normal incidence with 100keV Xe ion beam, after
which their conductivities were measured. It was found that as the percolation threshold was
approached, the conductivity of the samples vanished according to the power law (2.36) with
µ ≃1.3, in complete agreement with the prediction of 2D percolation (see Table 2.3).
As already mentioned above, in a seminal paper, Abeles et al. (1975) studied the growth
of the grains of the metals W or Mo in the insulators Al2O3 or SiO2 using co-sputtering. They
varied the volume fraction φ of the metal in the mixture in the range 0.1 < φ ≤1 and obtained
very ﬁnely dispersed grain structures. With annealing, one can change the size of the metal
grains over a wide range. The advantage of using the W or Mo is that annealing does not cause
the metal to precipitate - it remains uniformly dispersed within the insulator. The conductivity
of the ﬁlms was measured for several volume fractions of the metallic phase. It was found that
the eﬀective conductivity of the composite follows the power law (2.36) with µ ≃1.9 ± 0.1, in
good agreement with the critical exponent of 3D percolation (see Table 2.3).
Results and data similar to those of Abeles et al. were also reported by Kapitulnik and
214

Deutscher (1983), Tessler and Deutscher (1989), and Kapitulnik et al. (1990). Kapitulnik and
Deutscher (1983) prepared Al-Ge ﬁlms by co-evaporating them onto glass substrates from two
electron beam guns through a mask with slits, and measured their electrical conductivity. The
conductivity of the thick samples near the metal-insulator transition followed the power law
(2.36) with µ ≃2.1±0.5, completely consistent with the prediction of 3D percolation (see Table
2.3). The crossover between 2D and 3D ﬁlms was also studied by Kapitulnik and Deutscher
(1983).
More recent experiments and their comparison with the predictions of percolation
theory and lattice models will be described and discussed throughout this chapter. Metal-
insulator composites will also be further analyzed in the next chapter, and also Chapter 3 of
Volume II.
Hence, there should be little, if any, doubt that percolation theory and the discrete models
provide a satisfactory explanation of the behavior of the eﬀective conductivity of a wide variety
of two-phase materials with large contrast between the conductivities of the phases. We now
describe theoretical methods and computer simulation techniques for predicting the eﬀective
conductivity (and hence the eﬀective dielectric constant) of disordered materials.
5.2 Conductivity of a Random Resistor Network
For simplicity, we consider a d−dimensional cubic lattice of (L + 1)d sites, in which the
sites s = (s1, s2, · · · , sd) have integer coordinates deﬁned by by 0 ≤sj ≤L. We impose a
potential drop ∆V between the faces s1 = 0 and s1 = L, so that a potential gradient ∆V/L
is imposed on the lattice. If L is large enough, the boundary conditions in the other direction
will not matter, but in practice one uses ﬁnite-size lattices, and therefore periodic boundary
conditions, by which the faces sj = 0 and sj = L are connected for j = 2, · · · , d, are used
in order to eliminate sample-size eﬀects. Suppose that, in response to the applied potential
gradient ∆V/L, a total current I ﬂows in the network. Then, the current per unit area (that
is, per site) of the face s1 = 0 is I/(L + 1)d−1. The conductivity g of the lattice is then deﬁned
by
lim
L→∞
I/(L + 1)d−1
∆V/L
= lim
L→∞
L2−dI
∆V
.
(611)
If the lattice is disordered (i.e., if the conductance of its bounds are distributed according to
some probability density function), then we are interested in the mean value of the above limit
215

which is the eﬀective conductivity ge of the lattice:
ge = lim
L→∞
)Ld−2I
∆V
*
,
(612)
where the average is taken with respect to the distribution f(g) of the bond conductances.
Note that G = I/∆V is the conductance of the lattice.
It can be shown that if g is the conductance of the individual bonds of the lattice, then
the mean conductance ⟨G⟩and the eﬀective conductivity ge of the lattice satisfy the following
inequalities, which are known as the series and parallel bounds:
L−1(L + 1)d−1⟨g−1⟩−1 ≤⟨G⟩≤L−1(L + 1)d−1⟨g⟩,
(613)
⟨g−1⟩−1 ≤ge ≤⟨g⟩,
(614)
where ⟨·⟩denotes an average over the distribution of the conductances g of the bonds. As
discussed in Section 4.6, the bounds in (4) are in fact the one-point bounds ﬁrst derived by
Wiener (1912).
5.3 Exact Solution for Bethe Lattices
Stinchcome (1973, 1974) derived an exact solution for the conductance and eﬀective conduc-
tivity of a Bethe lattice of coordination number Z, an endlessly branching network without any
closed loops; see Figure 2.5. His treatment of the problem is somewhat involved, and therefore
we describe a simpler analysis due to Heinrichs and Kumar (1975), which will also be used in
the next chapter, and also in Chapter 3 of Volume II for analyzing more complex non-linear
transport processes on Bethe lattices.
Consider a branch of a Bethe lattice of coordination number Z which starts at the origin O.
The conductance of the branch can be computed by simply realizing that, it is the equivalent
conductance of one bond, say OA, of the branch that starts at O with conductance gi in series
with the branch that starts at A, the conductance of which is Gi. Suppose now that the lattice
is grounded at inﬁnity and that the voltage at O is unity. Then, the total conduatance G of
the network between O and inﬁnity is that of (Z −1) branches which are in parallel. Hence,
G =
Z−1

i=1
 1
gi
+ 1
Gi
−1
.
(615)
216

For an inﬁnitly large Bethe lattice, G and Gi are statistically equivalent.
Thus, if H(G)
represents the statistical distribution of G, we must have
H(G) =

· · ·

δ
⎧
⎨
⎩G −
Z−1

i=1
 1
gi
+ 1
Gi
−1⎫
⎬
⎭
Z−1

i=1
f(gi)H(Gi)dgidGi ,
(616)
where f(g) is the probability density function for the bond conductances. If we now take the
Laplace transform of both sides of Eq. (6), we obtain
˜H(s) =
 ∞
0
exp(−sG)H(G)dG =
 
exp

−sgG
g + G

f(g)H(G)dgdG
Z−1
,
(617)
where s is the Laplace transform variable conjugate to G. Most of the properties of interest
can be obtained from the solution of the integral equation (7), which is an exact equation valid
for any f(g). In particular, if we consider a percolation-type distribution, i.e., a conductance
distribution for a conductor-insulator material,
f(g) = (1 −p)δ+(0) + ph(g) ,
(618)
where h(g) is any normalized distribution, then, Eq. (7) becomes
˜H(s) =

1 −p + p
 
exp

−sgG
g + G

h(g)H(G)dgdG
Z−1
,
(619)
which can be further simpliﬁed if h(g) = δ(g −g0),
˜H(s) =

1 −p + p
 ∞
0
exp

−sg0G
g0 + G

H(G)dG
Z−1
.
(620)
5.3.1 The microscopic conductivity
In general, one can deﬁne and calculate two diﬀerent conductivities for a Bethe lattice. One
is gm, the microscopic conductivity of the lattice, which is obtained by grounding the lattice at
inﬁnity and imposing a unit voltage at site O of the lattice. gm is then deﬁned as the current
that ﬂows out along one of the outgoing bonds connected to O. It is not diﬃcult to see that
gm = Z⟨G⟩/(Z −1). Therefore,
gm = −
Z
Z −1
d ˜H(s)
ds

s=0
= Z
   gG
g + G

f(g)H(G)dgdG
Z−2
.
(621)
217

If f(g) is a percolation type distribution, Eq. (8), then, it can be shown that, near the perco-
lation threshold pc = (Z −1)−1 of the lattice,
gm = 2c(Z −1)2
h−1(Z −2)(p −pc)2 ,
(622)
where c ≃−0.761 and
h−1 =
 ∞
0
h(g)
g
dg .
(623)
Equations (12) and (13) imply that, if h−1 is ﬁnite, then the microscopic conductivity gm
follows a power law near pc with a critical exponent of 2. Observe that this critical exponent is
the same as with the exponent µ ≃2 for the eﬀective conductivity ge of three-dimensional (3D)
systems (see Table 2.3), and therefore the eﬀective macroscopic conductivity of 3D networks
and the microscopic conductivity of the Bethe lattices follow the same power law near the
percolation threshold. On the other hand, as discussed in Chapter 2, the bond-percolation
threshold of a 3D lattice is approximated well [see Eq. (2.22)] by pc ≃3/(2Z3), where Z3 is
the coordination number of the 3D lattice. Since for a Bethe lattice pc = (Zb −1)−1, where
Zb is the coordination number of the Bethe lattice, one can select the coordination number Zb
of the Bethe lattice in such a way that its percolation threshold would match closely that of a
corresponding 3D network. The appropriate choice of Zb is then given by
Zb = 2
3Z3 + 1 .
(624)
For example, a ﬁve-coordinated (Zb = 5) Bethe lattice (pc = 0.25) and the simple-cubic lattice
(Z3 = 6, pc ≃0.249) have essentially the same bond percolation threshold. The conclusion is
that, the microscopic conductivity of a Bethe lattice, the coordination number of which has
been selected in such a way that its percolation threshold approximates well that of a 3D lattice,
provides an excellent approximation to the eﬀective conductivity of the 3D lattice. This has
indeed found to be the case (Heiba et al., 1982, 1992).
Equation (10) can further be analyzed by the following method (Heinrichs and Kumar,
1975). We view a Bethe lattice of coordination number Z as a collection of Z subnetworks,
and consider its behavior near pc. Then, the percolation probability P(p) (see Section 2.6.1),
i.e., the probability that, when the fraction of the conducting bonds is p, a site belongs to the
sample-spanning (inﬁnite) conducting cluster, can be written as
P(p) = 1 −R(p)Z ,
(625)
218

where R(p) is the probability that a site does not belong to a conducting cluster on one of
the Z subnetworks. With this deﬁnition, it is not diﬃcult to see that R(p) is the root of the
following equation:
R(p) = 1 −p + pRZ−1 .
(626)
Heinrichs and Kumar (1975) assumed that
˜H(s) = [R(p) + φ(s)]Z−1 ,
φ(s) ≪1 .
(627)
With the help of Eqs. (15)-(17), Eq. (10) is converted into a diﬀerential equation for φ(s):
spRZ−2
g0pc
d2φ
ds2 +
 p
pc
RZ−2 −1

φ(s) + p(1 −pc)RZ−3
2p2
c
φ2(s) + O(φ3) = 0 ,
(628)
where pc = (Z −1)−1, and a term which is proportional to φdφ/ds which, compared to φ2(s), is
small near pc has been neglected, as in the critical region near the percolation threshold ˜H(s)
is a slowly-varying function. The boundary conditions are, φ(0) = 1 −R(p) which follows from
the normalization condition, ˜H(0) = 1, and φ(∞) = 0. Equation (18) can be solved for any
p > pc and g0. A similar, but more tedious, method can be developed for the more general
percolation distribution (8) (Heiba et al., 1982, 1992) and for any p (see also Essam et al.,
1974).
5.3.2 Eﬀective-medium approximation
As discussed in Chapter 4 for continuum models of disordered materials, and as we show
later in this chapter, a simple and useful approximation for the conductivity of a disordered
network can be obtained by an eﬀective-medium approximation (EMA). A systematic derivation
of the EMA for 2D and 3D lattices will be given shortly. For now, we utilize Eq. (7) in order
to derive an EMA for the Bethe lattices. In an EMA approach, the probability density H(G) is
expected to be sharply peaked around a mean value G∗, and thus we may approximate H(G)
by H(G) ≃δ(G −G∗), so that ˜H(s) = exp(−sG∗), in which case Eq. (7) becomes
exp(−sG∗) =
 
exp

−sgG∗
g + G∗

f(g)dg
Z−1
.
(629)
We must ﬁrst determine G∗. To do so, we take the derivative of Eq. (19) with respect to the
Laplace transform variable s and evaluate the result at s = 0 [see Eq. (11)] to obtain
 ∞
0
 gG∗
g + G∗−
G∗
Z −1

f(g)dg = 0 .
(630)
219

The eﬀective conductivity ge of the network is obtained if we set in Eq. (20), f(g) = δ(g −ge)
(since, as discussed below, in the EMA approach all bonds of the network have the same
conductance ge), which then yields, G∗= ge(Z −2). Substituting this result into Eq. (20)
then yields the EMA for the eﬀective conductivity of a Bethe lattice of coordination number Z
(Stinchcombe, 1973,1974; Heinrichs and Kumar, 1975):
 ∞
0
g −ge
g + (Z −2)ge
f(g)dg = 0 ,
(631)
which, as shown below, is completely similar to the EMA for regular (2D or 3D) networks.
If the percolation distribution (8) is substituted into Eq. (21), we ﬁnd that it predicts the
percolation threshold of a Bethe lattice of coordination number Z is, pc = (Z −1)−1, an exact
result [see Eq. (2.22)]. However, Eq. (21) also predicts that near pc the eﬀective conductivity
ge varies linearly with (p −pc), which is incorrect.
5.3.3 Conductor-insulator composites
In addition to the microscopic conductivity deﬁned and analyzed above, one may also de-
ﬁne and compute the usual macroscopic or eﬀective conductivity ge, which is also the usual
conductivity of 3D (bulk) materials. For a Bethe lattice, ge is the average current density per
unit applied ﬁeld. However, unlike gm which, as discussed above, provides an excellent approx-
imation for the eﬀective macroscopic conductivity of 3D systems, the eﬀective conductivity of
a Bethe lattice is only of theoretical interest. In particular, it can be shown (de Gennes, 1976a;
Straley, 1977a) that near pc
ge ∼(p −pc)3 ,
(632)
so that the critical exponent µ for the power-law behavior of the eﬀective conductivity near
pc, deﬁned by Eq. (2.36), is µ = 3. Equation (22) represents the power-law behavior of the
eﬀective conductivity near pc in the mean-ﬁeld approximation. Other properties of ge for Bethe
lattices have been discussed by Straley (1977a).
5.3.4 Conductor-superconductor composites
Before moving on to the next topic, let us point out that one may also consider the problem
of computing the eﬀective conductivity of a Bethe lattice in which the bonds are either normal
conductors with a fraction (1 −p) or are superconducting with a fraction p. Similar to the
conductor-insulator problem described above, one may compute two eﬀective conductivities
220

for the conductor-superconductor problem. One is the microscopic conductivity gm, while the
second one is the usual eﬀective macroscopic conductivity ge. All the fomulations developed
above are equally applicable to conductor-superconductor problem. The only change that one
must make is using the conductance distribution f(g) = pδ(g −∞) + (1 −p)δ(g −g0). In
particular, one ﬁnds that near pc
gm ∼|p −pc|−1 ,
(633)
so that the microscopic conductivity diverges at pc with a critical exponent of 1. On the other
hand, the eﬀective macroscopic conductivity follows the following power law near pc (Straley,
1977a):
ge ∼ln |p −pc| ,
(634)
and therefore the critical exponent s, deﬁned by Eq.
(2.37) for conductor-superconductor
mixtures near pc, is given by s = 0, since as p →pc, ln |p −pc| diverges slower than any
power law. This value of s should be compared with s ≃0.73 for 3D conductor-superconductor
percolation composites (see Table 2.3). The conclusion is that, unlike the case of conductor-
insulator mixtures described above, neither gm nor ge provides a reasonable approximation to
the eﬀective conductivity of a 3D conductor-superconductor mixture.
5.4 Exact Results for Two-Dimensional Composites
In addition to the exact solution of the conduction problem on a Bethe lattice, there are a
few other exact results that hold for 2D systems. What follows is a brief description of these
two results and their implications.
5.4.1 Exact duality relations
Composite materials with a 2D microgeometry possess a special symmetry called duality.
We already discussed in Section 4.8 the implications of this special property for continuum
models of heterogeneous materials. One example of such a system is a 3D composite with
cylindrical symmetry in which all interfaces are parallel to a ﬁxed direction. Another example
is a thin conducting ﬁlm with a thickness which is negligible compared to other microgeometric
scales, such as channel widths and grain sizes. Even though the ﬁlm is part of a 3D system, the
only important electric current ﬁelds lie in the plane of the ﬁlm. As discussed in Section 4.8, this
symmetry was ﬁrst discovered by Keller (1964), and independently by Dykhne (1971), for the
221

case in which all components of the composite have scalar conductivity tensors. This result was
later generalized by Mendelson (1975a,b) to the case of general anisotropic conductivity tensors,
including non-symmetric tensors. A further generalization was made by Milton (1988), who
also provided additional historical references. These results were already described in Section
4.8, where we also described how they lead to some exact results for the eﬀective conductivity
of 2D composites.
A duality transformation is also possible for the lattice or discrete models. However, because
the discretized versions of the local electric ﬁeld E(r) and the current I(r) are the voltage Vi
and current Ii in a bond i, one must also rotate each bond by 90◦(see the discussion in Section
4.8) when performing the duality transformation. This alters in most cases the structure of
the network, whereas in the continuum case discussed in Section 4.6 the morphology is left
unchanged. For example, even in the case of a square network (for which the dual network
is also a square network), if the original network is random, the dual network will usually
be a diﬀerent random square network. Thus, one of the implicit assumptions used to derive
the duality relations presented in Section 4.8 is not satisﬁed. Although this turns out to be
unimportant for random resistor networks in which the external ﬁeld is H = 0, it is an important
consideration for the choice of an appropriate random resistor network model for H ̸= 0. In
particular, some random resistor network models for the Hall eﬀect that are not self-dual have
turned out to belong to a universality class that diﬀers from that of continuum composites, as
far as the critical behavior of the Hall conductivity near pc is concerned. We will discuss this
issue in Section 5.17.
Consider a 2D network in which the probability density function f(g) for the bond conduc-
tances is given by
f(g) = (1 −p)δ(g −g1) + pδ(g −g2) .
(635)
The eﬀective conductivity ge of a square network with bond conductance distribution (25)
satisﬁes the following equation,
ge(p)ge(1 −p) = g1g2 .
(636)
In particular, setting p = 1/2, we obtain
ge(p = 1/2) = √g1g2 .
(637)
These results can be directly deduced from the duality relation, Eq. (4.224). Equation (26) is
222

in fact more general: Since the triangular and hexagonal lattices are also dual of each other,
one can also write (Bernasconi et al., 1977)
ghexag
e
(p)gtriang
e
(1 −p) = g1g2 .
(638)
An immediate consequence of these results is that, for the square lattice, and hence (due to
the universality) for all 2D systems, the critical exponents µ and s for the power-law behavior
of the eﬀective conductivity of conductor-insulator, and conductor-superconductor composites
near pc must be equal (Straley, 1977b):
µ = s ,
two-dimensional composites ,
(639)
and that if, for the region near pc, we write, ge = a0(p −pc)µ for conductor-insulator mixtures,
and ge = a∞(pc −p)−s for conductor-superconductor composites, then a0a∞= 1.
All the
numerical simulations conﬁrm these important results.
5.4.2 Log-normal conductance distribution
Although the duality relations are interesting and useful, they cannot predict, except at
p = 1/2, the eﬀective conductivity of any 2D lattice. There is, however, an important case
for which there exists an exact relation that can predict the conductivity of a square network.
Suppose that the bond conductance distribution in a square network is given by
f(g) =
1
√
2πgσ exp

−(log g −log g0)2
2σ2

,
(640)
then
ge = g0 .
(641)
5.5 Green Function Formulation and Perturbation Expansion
The idea that in order to calculate eﬀective transport properties of a disordered material, one
may replace it with a hypothetical homogeneous material which somehow mimics the behavior
of the original disordered material, and then calculate the homogeneous material’s properties,
has a long history, some of which was already mentioned in Chapter 4. As discussed there, there
are two approaches for implementing this idea. In the approach developed by Maxwell-Garnett
(1904), one considers isolated inclusions that are embedded in a continuous matrix consisting of
a single phase; the eﬀective properties of the disordered material are derived by placing a sphere
223

(or an ellipse) of the homogeneous or the eﬀective medium in this matrix. Such an approach has
also been called the average t-matrix approximation, or the non-self-consistent approximation,
and was described and discussed in Section 4.9.4. In the second approach, originally developed
by Bruggeman (1935), each inhomogeneity is embedded in the eﬀective medium itself, the
unknown properties of which are determined in such a way that the volume-averaged ﬁeld,
when the averaging is done with respect to the inhomogeneities, is equal to uniform ﬁeld in the
eﬀective medium. This technique is usually called the eﬀective-medium approximation (EMA).
In eﬀect, the EMA is an ingenious way of transforming a many-body problem into a one-
body problem. Bruggeman’s EMA, which in Section 4.9 was derived for continuum models of
disordered materials, was independently rederived by Landauer (1952) [see Landauer (1978)
for a history of EMAs]. In this section we derive a perturbation expansion, the lowest order of
which yields the EMA for discrete models of disordered materials.
The continuity equation requires that at every site of a resistor network one must have

j
gij (Pj −Pi) = 0 ,
(642)
where Pi is the ﬁeld (voltage, temperature, etc.) at site i, and the sum is over all the nearest-
neighbor sites of i. Here gij represents the local conductance between sites i and j which varies
in space according to a probability density function. The exact and explicit solution of Eq.
(32) for an arbitrary distribution of gij is not available in any dimension d ≥2. However,
one can develop an exact but implicit solution of this equation which can then be used as the
starting point for construction of a hierarchy of analytical approximations. We ﬁrst develop
this solution for an isotropic material, following the work of Blackman (1976), and then analyze
the same problem for anisotropic materials.
To facilitate the solution of Eq. (32) we introduce a uniform or an eﬀective medium in
which all the bond conductances are equal to an eﬀective conductance ge which is yet to
be determined. The eﬀective conductivity of the material will in fact be proportional to, or
identical with (depending on the topology of the lattice), ge. Therefore,

j
ge(P 0
j −P 0
i ) = 0 ,
(643)
where P 0
i is the ﬁeld at site i of the eﬀective (uniform) network. Subtracting Eq. (32) from
224

(33) yields

j
[∆ij(Pj −Pi) −(Pi −P 0
i ) + (Pj −Pj)] = 0 ,
(644)
where ∆ij = (gij −ge)/ge. Equation (34) is now rewritten as
Zi(Pi −P 0
i ) −

j
(Pj −P 0
j ) = −

j
∆ij(Pi −Pj) ,
(645)
where Zi is the coordination number of site i. We now introduce a site-site Green function Gij
deﬁned by
ZiGik −

j
Gjk = −δik ,
(646)
where, physically, Gij is the ﬁeld at j as a result of injecting a unit ﬂux at i. With the aid of
the Green function, Eq. (35) becomes
Pi = P 0
i +

j

k
Gij∆jk (Pj −Pk) .
(647)
The analysis so far is exact and applies to any network, since we have not speciﬁed Zi or Gij.
Thus, Eq. (37) represents an exact, albeit implicit, solution of Eq. (32).
We can rewrite Eq. (37) in terms of Qij = Pi −Pj, where Qij is proportional to the ﬂux
between i and j, by noting that Qij = −Qji. Hence,
Qij = Q0
ij +

[lk]
Qlk(Gil + Gjk −Gjl −Gik) ,
(648)
where [lk] indicates that the bond connecting nearest-neighbor sites l and k is counted only
once in the sum. We denote bonds with Greek letters and assign direction to them and let
γαβ = (Gil + Gjk) −(Gjl + Gik) ,
(649)
be a bond-bond Green function, where i and l (j and k) are network sites with tails (heads) of
arrow on bonds α and β, respectively. Equation (38) is ﬁnally rewritten as
Qα = Q0
α +

β
∆βγαβQβ .
(650)
According to Eq. (40), the “ﬂux” Qα in bond α is the sum of the ﬂux in the same bond but in
the eﬀective (uniform) network, plus the perturbations that are caused by the distribution of
the conductances.
225

5.5.1 Properties of the Green Functions
The derivation of the lattice Green functions Gik will be described in detail in Section 6.1.4,
where we derive them for the more general problem of unsteady-state diﬀusion and conduction
in disordered lattices. In the limit of long times, t →∞, the resulting Green functions reduce
to those that are needed here. More speciﬁcally, the Green functions Gik that are needed here
are the limit ϵ = 0 of those for the unsteady-state problem that will be derived for a variety
of 2D and 3D regular lattices in 6.1.4. Here we discuss some speciﬁc properties of the Green
functions that are needed for evaluating the accuracy of the above perturbation expansion for
the eﬀective conductivity. In our discussion we closely follow Blackman (1976).
Figure 5.1 shows a reference bond labelled 0 and a set of neighboring bonds labelled 1, 2, · · ·
on a square lattice. Neighboring bonds in the other three quadrants are symmetrically equiv-
alent to those in Figure 5.1, and hence are not shown. This ﬁgure can be reﬂected about a
vertical axis through bond 0, and also about a horizontal axis through bond 0, but keeping
the direction of the bonds intact. Using the Green functions given in Chapter 6 (in the limit
ϵ = 0), it is straightforward to show that
γ00 = γ04 = 0 ,
γ01 = −γ02 = 1
2 −2
π ,
γ03 = −γ05 = 5
2 −8
π ,
(651)
γ06 = −γ09 = 25
2 −118
3π ,
γ07 = −γ08 = 14
3π −3
2 .
More generally, if the integers (m, n) label the tail of bond α with respect to the tail of bond
0, then, as shown in Section 6.1.6,
γ0α(m, n) = 1
2
 ∞
0 (ImIn+1 + ImIn−1 −2ImIn) exp(−2t)dt .
(652)
Moreover, it is not diﬃcult to show that
γ(m, n) = −γ(n, m) ,
γ(m, n) = γ(−m, −n) ,
γ(m, m) = 0 .
(653)
Consider now the cluster of bonds shown in Figure 5.2, which includes a reference bond
labelled 0 and the ﬁrst two shells of perpendicular bonds. It is not diﬃcult to show that
γ01 = γ03 = −γ02 = −γ04 = 1
2 −1
π
226

γ05 = γ07 = γ09 = γ0,11 = 1 −3
π
= −γ06 = −γ08 = −γ0,10 = −γ0,12 .
(654)
More generally,
γ0α(m, n) = 1
2
 ∞
0 (Im+1In + ImIn−1 −ImIn −Im+1In−1) exp(−2t)dt ,
(655)
based on which it is not diﬃcult to show that
γm,n = γ−(m+1),(1−n) = γ−n,−m = γ(n−1),(m+1)
= −γm,(1−n) = −γ−(m+1),n = −γn,(m+1) = −γ(n−1),−m .
(656)
As Eq. (40) indicates, in assessing the accuracy of the perturbation expansion, one must
also deal with summation over bonds. It can be shown that, for the square and simple-cubic
lattices,

β
γαβ = 0 ,
(657)
which is true for β summed over all bonds of the lattice, over bonds parallel or perpendicular
to α, over a continuous chain of bonds joining the two boundaries, and if the sum is over α
instead of β. One can also show that

β,δ,···,ϵ
γαβγβδ · · · γϵα = (γn)αα = (−1)n1
2 ,
(658)
where n is the number of terms in the product so that, for example,

β
γαβγβα = 1
2 ,
(659)
and

β
(γαβ)n = (−1
2)n .
(660)
Equation (48) also holds for the simple-cubic lattice, if we replace 1/2 with 1/3.
5.6 Eﬀective-Medium Approximation
An EMA is now constructed by the following algorithm. Figure 5.3 shows the schematics
of the method. One solves Eq. (40) for an arbitrary cluster of bonds, i.e., for arbitrary ∆α,
selects any bond α, and requires that
⟨Qα⟩= Q0
α ,
(661)
227

where ⟨·⟩denotes an average over all possible values of the bond conductance gα in the set.
Equation (51) requires that the average of the ﬂuctuations in the “ﬂux” Qα across bond α
from its value in the eﬀective network vanish, as a result which one is led to a self-consistent
determination of ge. Therefore, one obtains a hierarchy of approximations built on cluster of
bonds, such that the larger the set of bonds that one uses in Eq. (51), the more accurate the
approximate estimate of ge would be. In fact, if we could use every bond of the network in such
an averaging, the resulting ge would be exact. In practice, this is neither possible nor necessary,
because doing so would make it impossible to derive an analytical approximation, and therefore
one assigns to all but a ﬁnite set of bonds in the network the eﬀective conductance ge (so that
∆α ̸= 0 only for a ﬁnite cluster of bonds), and proceeds as above, now averaging over the ﬁnite
cluster of the bonds in order to determine ge. The ge so computed represents an approximation
to the true value of the eﬀective conductivity of the network. To obtain rapid convergence
toward the true value of ge with increasing size of the cluster of bonds, one must choose the
cluster carefully to ensure that it preserves all symmetry properties of the network (see Section
5.6.7).
In the simplest approximation, only a single bond α has a conductance g diﬀering from ge,
in which case equations (40) and (51) yield
)
1
1 −γαα∆α
*
= 1 ,
(662)
or
)
∆α
1 −γαα∆α
*
= 0 .
(663)
Since ∆α = (gα −ge)/ge, Eq. (53) is equivalent to
)
gα −ge
(1 + γαα)ge −γααgα
*
= 0 .
(664)
From Eq. (39) we obtain
γαα = 2[G(0, 0) −G(1, 0)] .
(665)
Equation (36) implies that, for periodic networks of coordination number Z, Z[G(0, 0) −
G(1, 0)] = −1, so that
γαα = −2
Z .
(666)
228

If f(g) represents the probability density function of the bond conductances, then Eq. (54)
becomes
 ∞
0
g −ge
g + (Z/2 −1)ge
f(g)dg = 0 ,
(667)
an equation that was ﬁrst derived by Kirkpatrick (1971,1973) for random resistor networks
using a diﬀerent derivation. To distinguish between this EMA and those that will be described
below, in which a cluster of bonds is utilized in the calculations, we sometimes refer to Eq. (57)
as the single-bond EMA.
We may also derive Eq. (57) by a method due to Kirkpatrick (1973). We described here
his method of deriving Eq. (57), and will utilize it shortly in order to derive an EMA for
regular networks with two diﬀerent coordination numbers, such as the kagom´e lattice which is
characterized by coordination numbers Z1 = 6 and Z2 = 3, and for topologically-disordered
networks, such as the Voronoi network described in Chapters 2 and 3. Consider a regular net-
work of coordination number Z, e.g., a simple-cubic network, in which the bond conductances
are distributed according to a probability density function. Now construct the eﬀective-medium
equivalent of the network by replacing the conductances of all the bonds with ge. Applying an
external potential gradient to this network induces a uniform potential Ve along those bonds
that are oriented along the external ﬁeld. Take one such bond and replace its conductance ge
by its true value g in the original heterogeneous network (see Figure 5.4). This replacement
induces an extra current I0 = Ve(ge −g) in the bond, which in turn induces an extra or excess
potential V0 along the bond. As discussed above, in the EMA approach one calculates the
excess potential V0 and insists that its average must vanish, so that
 ∞
0
V0f(g)dg = 0
(668)
from which ge is determined. To calculate V0 one only needs to calculate g′
AB, the conductance
of the network between A and B since V0 = I0/(g + g′
AB). But because gAB = g′
AB + ge, all
one needs to do is calculating gAB, the conductance between A and B in the eﬀective network,
which can be determined by a symmetry argument: Express the current distribution in the
network with g = ge as the sum of two contributions, a current I0 injected at A and extracted
at inﬁnity, and an equal current injected at inﬁnity and extracted at B. In both cases, the
current ﬂowing through each of the Z equivalent bonds at the point of current entrance is I0/Z,
so that a total current of 2I0/Z ﬂows through AB. Thus, gAB = Zge/2, g′
AB = (Z/2 −1)ge,
229

and therefore
V0 = Ve
ge −g
g + (Z/2 −1)ge
.
(669)
Substituting Eq. (59) into (58) yields (57).
5.6.1 Conductor-insulator composites
An important test for any theory of transport in a disordered medium is its ability for
predicting the percolation threshold pc of the medium.
Despite its simplicity and lack of
detailed information about the microstructure of the material, or the network that represents
it (other than its coordination number Z), the EMA predicts the existence of a non-trivial pc.
Suppose that the bond conductance distribution is given by Eq. (8). Then, Eq. (57) becomes
1 −p
1 −Z/2 + p
 ∞
0
g −ge
g + (Z/2 −1)ge
h(g)dg = 0 .
(670)
Equation (60) represents the EMA equation for the eﬀective conductivity ge of a random resistor
network of conducting and insulating bonds in bond percolation, as the bond conductances have
been assumed to be randomly distributed according to a probability density function h(g). The
EMA prediction for pc, the bond-percolation threshold of the network, is obtained if in Eq. (60)
we set ge = 0 and p = pc, since at p = pc the eﬀective conductivity must vanish. Using the fact
that,
 ∞
0 h(g)dg = 1, we obtain
pc = 2
Z ,
(671)
as the EMA prediction for the bond percolation threshold of a regular network of coordination
number Z.
Equation (61) has a simple interpretation. Since ⟨Z⟩= pcZ represents the average coordi-
nation number ⟨Z⟩of the network at the percolation threshold, Eq. (61) implies that, for a
network to be conducting, one must have ⟨Z⟩≥2. Recall from Chapter 2 [see Eq. (2.23)] that
for d−dimensional networks ⟨Z⟩= pcZ ≃d/(d −1) represents a very accurate approximation
for the average coordination number at the bond-percolation threshold. Therefore, the EMA
prediction, Eq. (61), is accurate for 2D networks, since its predictions become idential with
Eq. (2.23), but not so for 3D networks, where the EMA overestimates the bond percolation
thresholds [compare the predictions of Eq. (61) with those listed in Table 2.2].
Another important test of the accuracy of the EMA is its ability for predicting the power-
law behavior of the eﬀective conductivity ge near pc. Recall from Chapter 2 that near pc the
230

eﬀective conductivity follows power-law (2.36) with µ(d = 2) ≃1.3 and µ(d = 3) ≃2.0. If in
Eq. (60) we set h(g) = δ(g −g0), we obtain
ge
g0
= p −2/Z
1 −2/Z = p −pc
1 −pc
,
(672)
and thus, according to the EMA, in any dimension d the eﬀective conductivity ge varies linearly
with p−pc, implying that the EMA predicts that the critical exponent µ that characterizes the
power-law behavior of ge near the percolation threshold is µ = 1, regardless of the dimensionality
d.
Even if we replace h(g) = δ(g −g0) with a more general distribution, as long as this
distribution satisﬁes the constraint (2.44), we would still obtain µ = 1. The main exception
is when h(g) = (1 −α)g−α, where 0 ≤α < 1 is a parameter of the distribution. Such a
distribution violates constraint (2.44), and in this case the EMA predicts (Kogut and Straley,
1979) that
ge ∼(p −pc)1+α/(1−α) ,
(673)
so that, µ = 1 + α/(1 −α), and thus the exponent µ is no longer universal and depends on the
details of the conductance distribution [the factor α/(1 −α) represents the EMA prediction for
departure from the universal value of µ]. While the EMA prediction of a non-universal behavoir
for µ, when one uses such power-law conductance distributions, is qualitatively correct, the
predicted exponent, µ = 1/(1 −α), is not correct; see the discussion in Section 2.11, and in
particular the inequalities (2.77). In general, as Koplik (1981) demonstrated, the EMA is very
accurate if the system is not close to its percolation threshold, regardless of the structure of
h(g). Its predictions are also more accurate for 2D networks than for 3D ones. Later in this
chapter, we will describe several methods for improving the accuracy of the EMA’s predictions.
We point out that the EMA satisﬁes the exact duality relations, Eqs.
(26)-(28).
For
example, if we substitute probability density function (25) into Eq. (57), we ﬁnd that, for
p = 1/2, the EMA prediction for ge is exactly the same as in Eq. (27). Moreover, it is not
diﬃcult to show that Eq. (57) also satisﬁes the duality relation for the eﬀective conductivities
of the hexagonal and triangular networks, Eq. (28). Thus, the 2D EMA with Z = 4 is the
simplest approximation that satisﬁes all the known exact results.
5.6.2 Conductor-superconductor composites
Equation (57) can also be used for predicting the eﬀective conductivity of a network of
normal conductors and superconductors. If p is the fraction of the superconducting bonds,
231

then with f(g) = (1 −p)h(g) + pδ(g −∞) Eq. (57) becomes
p + (1 −p)
 ∞
0
g −ge
g + (Z/2 −1)ge
h(g)dg = 0 ,
(674)
which can be used for predicting the conductivity of the network for any h(g). It is straight-
forward to show that Eq. (64) predicts that ge diverges at p = pc = 2/Z, the EMA prediction
for the bond-percolation threshold of the network. Moreover, if h(g) = δ(g −g0), then
ge =
g0
1 −p −p(Z/2 −1) =
pcg0
pc −p .
(675)
According to Eq. (65), regardless of its dimensionality, the conductivity of a network of con-
ducting and superconducting bonds diverges as p →pc with an exponent s = 1. This value of
s should be compared with those of 2D and 3D systems listed in Table 2.3, and will not change
if any other distribution h(g) is used, so long as it satisﬁes the constraint (2.44). If, however,
h(g) = (1 −α)g−α (with 0 ≤α < 1), which does violate the constraint (2.44), then (Kogut and
Straley, 1979)
ge ∼|p −pc|−[1+(2−α)/(α−1)] ,
(676)
so that in this case, s = 1 + (2 −α)/(α −1), and therefore (2 −α)/(α −1) represents the EMa
prediction for the departure from the universal value of the exponent s. This EMA-predicted
non-universality is qualitatively correct, although the predicted non-universal value of s is not.
Therefore, once again, the EMA predicts the correct qualitative behavior, but fails to provide
accurate estimate for the associated critical exponent.
5.6.3 Resistor networks with multiple coordination numbers
Over the past three decades the EMA has been used heavily for predicting the eﬀective
conductivity and other transport properties of regular networks that are characterized by a
single coordination number Z. However, despite their signiﬁcance, little work has been done
on regular networks that are characterized by at least two coordination numbers Z1 and Z2, or
on topologically-disordered networks. An example of the former is the kagom´e lattice, while the
Voronoi network (see Figure 2.14) is an example of the latter type of networks. We now extend
the basic EMA, Eq. (57), to these types of network.
To accomplish this task, we utilize the method that was used by Kirkpatrick (1973) for
deriving Eq. (57), and was described in the paragraph after this equation. Consider a resistor
232

network which is either topologically disordered, or has an ordered structure which is char-
acterized by two coordination numbers Z1 and Z2. We replace all the conductances by their
eﬀective-medium value ge, and consider one bond of the network such that the coordination
numbers of its two ends are Z1 and Z2, which are either ﬁxed everywhere, as in the kagom´e lat-
tice, or are distributed according to a joint probability density function P(Z1, Z2). In networks
in which Z1 and Z2 are ﬁxed, the angle between the bonds are also ﬁxed. If the distribution
of the angles between the bonds is essentially uniform, as in the case of the Voronoi network,
then injecting a current I0 at one end of a bond with a coordination number Z1 distributes
it essentially as I0/Z1 in each bond connected to that site. Therefore, following Kirkpatrick’s
argument (see above), the total current through bond AB (see Figure 5.4) is now I0/Z1 +I0/Z2
and hence the analogue of Eq. (59) is given by
V0 = Ve
ge −g
g + [Z1Z2/(Z1 + Z2) −1]ge
.
(677)
Therefore the single-bond EMA for a topologically-random network, obtained by substituting
Eq. (67) into (58), is given by
  
g −ge
g + [xy/(x + y) −1]ge
f(g)P(x, y)dgdxdy = 0 .
(678)
Note that one must take the average of V0 with respect to both f(g) and P(Z1, Z2). For a
lattice, such as the kagom´e lattice, in which both Z1 and Z2 are ﬁxed everywhere, P(x, y) =
δ(x −Z1)δ(y −Z2), and Eq. (68) simpliﬁes to
 ∞
0
g −ge
g + [Z1Z2/(Z1 + Z2)]ge
f(g)dg = 0 .
(679)
If we compare Eq.
(68) with Eq.
(53), we see that, since for topologically-disordered
networks the coordination numbers Z1 and Z2 are distributed variables, the bond-bond Green
function γαα is a stochastic function given by
γαα = −Z1 + Z2
Z1Z2
,
(680)
which reduces to γαα = −2/Z given above when Z1 = Z2 = Z. Thus, one may also deﬁne
quantities such as ⟨γαβ⟩and ⟨γαα⟩, where ⟨·⟩denotes an average over the distribution of the
coordination numbers. More generally, the bond-bond green function γαβ (and hence the site-
site green function Gij) must be averaged over the distribution of the coordination numbers
and the angles between the bonds of the network.
233

Equations (68)-(70) were tested by Sahimi and Tsotsis (1997) using numerical simulations
and 2D L × L Voronoi networks, where L refers to the square root of the number of Poisson
points (or polygons) in the network. The bond-bond Green function γαα was calculated by
solving Eq. (36) for the site-site Green function Gik, from which γαα was computed via Eq.
(55). Since the local environment and topology around each bond of the network are diﬀerent,
one obtains a statistical distribution of values of γαα. The resulting frequency distribution of
γαα is shown in Figure 5.5. It is seen that γαα can take on values anywhere from −0.26 to
−0.43, depending on where the reference bond α is located, although most of the values are
concentrated in the relatively narrow range between −0.3 and −0.37. If ⟨γαα⟩is calculated
from the frequency distribution shown in Figure 5.5, one obtains ⟨γαα⟩≃−0.322. On the other
hand, if one uses Eq. (70) and averages γαα over the distributions of Z1 and Z2, one obtains
γαα ≃−0.33, a diﬀerence of about 2% from its value obtained from the frequency distribution
of Figure 5.6, which is presumably due to the ﬁnite size of the networks used in the simulations.
One may also be tempted to use the naive approximation, ⟨γαα⟩≃−2/⟨Z⟩, where ⟨Z⟩is the
average coordination number of the Voronoi network. Since ⟨Z⟩≃6.29 (Jerauld et al., 1984a),
one obtains ⟨γαα⟩≃−0.317, surprisingly close to the numerical estimates. Note that, although
in general the coordination numbers Z1 and Z2 of the two end sites of any bond in the Voronoi
network are correlated with each other, as Jerauld et al. (1984a) demonstrated, the correlations
are weak.
The numerical accuracy of Eq. (68) was also tested by considering conduction in a 2D
Voronoi network. A simple conductance distribution, f(g) = pδ(g −1)+(1−p)δ+(0), was used,
p was varied and the eﬀective conductivity ge was calculated by imposing on the network a unit
potential gradient in one direction and periodic boundary condition in the other direction, and
by performing two distinct averagings. One was over the spatial distribution of the conducting
bonds in a given Voronoi network, while the second averaging was over diﬀerent realizations of
the Voronoi networks of a given linear size L used in the computations. The second averaging
is necessitated by the fact that, since the initial Poisson points, that are used to construct the
network, are randomly distributed, the topology of a Voronoi network varies from realization
to realization.
Figure 5.6 presents the results. Equation (68) was also used to calculate ge using three dif-
ferent approaches. In one approach the correlations between Z1 and Z2 were taken into account,
234

by numerically constructing the joint distribution function P(Z1, Z2) of the two coordination
numbers of any bond. In the second approach Z1 and Z2 were assumed to be independent
of each other, so that P(Z1, Z2) = ζ(Z1)ζ(Z2) = ζ(Z)2, where ζ(Z) is the distribution of the
local coordination numbers of the network. In the third approach Eq. (57) was used with
Z = ⟨Z⟩≃6.29, the average coordination number of the Voronoi network. As Figure 5.6 indi-
cates, there are some diﬀerences between the three sets of predictions and also with the Monte
Carlo results, although the diﬀerences are certainly not too large. Therefore, use of an average
coordination number in Eq. (57) provides accurate estimates of the eﬀective conductivity of
topologically-disordered networks.
5.6.4 Materials with zero percolation threshold
The percolation threshold of some composite materials, especially porous ones, is zero, or
nearly zero, i.e., the materials remain conducting so long as an inﬁnitesimal volume fraction
of it is conducting. For example, for many porous materials, especially rock samples, a useful
empiricism is the Archie’s law:
ge = gfφm ,
(681)
where gf is the electrical conductivity of the ﬂuid saturating the porous media, and φ is the
porosity of the material. The exponent m has been found to vary anywhere between 1.3 and
4, depending upon a variety of factors. Archie’s law has been found to hold even for a wide
variety of porous media. It is clear that Eq. (71) implies that the ﬂuid phase in the porous
medium remains connected, i.e., the percolation threshold of the material is zero.
It has been established (see, for example, Sen et al., 1981; Mendelson and Cohen, 1982;
Yonezawa and Cohen, 1983) that a modiﬁcation of the EMA can be used for deriving an
expression for the eﬀective conductivity of materials that have zero percolation threshold. This
version of EMA is called the self-similar EMA because of the assumption that a material’s grain
is coated with the ﬂuid which includes coated grains, with the coating at each level consisting
of other coated grains.
Consider ﬁrst the standard EMA, Eq.
(57), which, with a binary
conductance distribution, f(g) = pδ(g −gf) + (1 −p)δ(g −gs), predicts that
ge =
−A ±
$
A2 + 4(γ−1 −1)gfgs
2(γ−1 −1)
,
(682)
where γ−1 = −γ−1
αα = Z/2, and A = [gf −(γ−1 −1)gs −γ−1(gf −gs)p], with gs being the
235

conductivity of the material’s solid matrix. Equation (72) has two solutions, but only one of
them is physically meaningful. In the limits p →0 and p →1, we obtain
g(1)
=
gf

1 + (1 −p)γ−1
gs −gf
gs + (γ−1 −1)gf

,
(683)
g(2)
=
gs

1 + pγ−1
gf −gs
gf + (γ−1 −1)gs

.
(684)
The basic idea behind the self-similar EMA is as follows. One starts with a pure ﬂuid
system, replaces, step by step, small portions of it by pieces of solid matrix of the material, and
applies the EMA at each step. Suppose that g(i) is the conductivity of the mixture at a step i,
and replace a small volume ∆qi of the system by the material’s grains. Equation (57) yields
g(i) −g(i+1)
g(i) + (γ−1 −1)g(i+1)(1 −∆qi) +
gs −g(i+1)
gs + (γ−1 −1)g(i+1)∆qi = 0 .
(685)
If ∆qi is small enough, we obtain from Eq. (75)
g(i+1) = g(i)

1 + γ−1
gs −g(i)
gs + (γ−1 −1)g(i)∆qi

.
(686)
Note that, if the volume fraction of the ﬂuid at the ith stage is pi, we have, ∆piqi = pi −pi+1.
If we now use Eq. (76) repeatedly, we obtain, for the case of gs = 0,
g(n+1) =
n

i=1

1 +
γ−1
γ−1 −1
pi+1 −pi
pi

g(0) ,
(687)
where g(0) = gf and p0 = 1 (p0 = 1 corresponds to pure ﬂuid, the system we started with). If
we take the limit ∆qi →0, then, Eq. (75) becomes a diﬀerential equation,
dg(i)
g(i) = −dpi
pi
gf −g(i)
gf + (γ−1 −1)g(i)γ−1 ,
(688)
which, after integrating and using the boundary condition that, g(i) = gf for pi = 1, yields an
equation similar to (71) with φ →p, so that if we interpret p as the porosity φ of the material,
then the EMA produces the Archie’s law with
m =
γ−1
γ−1 −1 .
(689)
Equation (79) indicates that, consistent with the experimental data, m is not universal but
depends on the connectivity of the system.
What is the geometrical interpretation of this result? For a network model of a porous
material, Yonezawa and Cohen (1983) presented an interesting interpretation which can be
236

summarized as follows. At the ith stage, where every bond has a conductance g(i), a small
fraction ∆qi of the bonds is replaced by a resistor with conductance gs and the EMA is used
for estimating the conductivity of the new system. This is equivalent to putting on each bond
a resistor parallel to the original one. The conductance g(ia) of an added resistor should be
g(ia) = γ−1g(i)
g2 −g(i)
g2 + (γ−1 −1)g(i)∆qi ,
(690)
if the original resistor belongs to the host medium; otherwise, it is given by Eq. (76). The
implication is that even when gs = 0, the application of the EMA at each stage makes the link
between the nodes conducting, due to the addition of a parallel conducting resistor, and thus
there is always a sample-spanning cluster of conducting bonds. Translating this for a porous
material-ﬂuid system, it implies that this procedure guarantees the continuity of the ﬂuid phase
and the granularity of the rock grains. For a more detailed discussion of this problem and the
application of Eq. (71), see Sahimi (1995b).
5.6.5 Comparison with the experimental data
The EMA has been used for estimating the eﬀective conductivity of a wide variety of
composites. The list of all the papers that have reoprted such calculations and have compared
the predictions to the experimental data is too long to be given here. The EMA has also been
used for estimating the eﬀective diﬀusivity of molecules diﬀusing in a porous material, as well as
the eﬀective permeability of such materials (see, for example, Koplik et al., 1984, Doyen, 1988).
In all cases, the EMA has been found to provide accurate predictions for the eﬀective transport
properties away from the percolation threshold. If the material does not behave as a percolation
system (i.e., if its constituents, components, or phases, are all well-connected and conducting),
then the EMA always provides accurate predictions for its transport properties, unless there
are strong correlations in the material’s morphology which the EMA cannot account for.
However, as discussed above, the EMA does have two main weaknesses, namely, its over-
estimation of the percolation threshold pc of 3D materials, even when their morphology is
nearly random, and its inability for predicting the correct value of the critical exponent µ
that characterizes the power-law behavior of the eﬀective conductivity near pc. In a series of
papers, McLachlan and co-workers (see McLachlan, 1988; Wu and McLachlan, 1997, and refer-
ences therein) modiﬁed the basic EMA, Eq. (57), in order to eliminate these two weaknesses.
Although the modiﬁcations that McLachlan and co-workers proposed were intended for the
237

EMA for a continuum (see Section 4.9), they are equally applicable to resistor network models
and, moreover, since the modiﬁed EMA does take into account the power-law behavior of the
eﬀective conductivity of a material near pc, we describe it in the present chapter.
Consider a two-component material that consists of a low- and a high-conductivity compo-
nent, with volume (area) fractions p and (1 −p), respectively. McLachlan’s modiﬁed EMA is
given by
p
gl −σe
gl + [pc/(1 −pc)]σe
+ (1 −p)
gh −σe
gh + [pc/(1 −pc)]σe
= 0 ,
(691)
which is directly obtained from Eq. (57) if we take the conductance distribution f(g) to be,
f(g) = pδ(g −gl) + (1 −p)δ(g −gh), and replace the factor (Z/2 −1) by pc/(1 −pc). This
replacement is plausible if we recall that within the EMA, Z/2 −1 = 1/pc −1 = (1 −pc)/pc.
Here, gl = σ1/µ
l
, gh = σ1/µ
h
, and σe = g1/µ
e
, where σl, σh, and ge are the conductivities of
the low-conductivity, high-conductivity, and the eﬀective conductivity of the material itself,
respectively, and pc = 1 −p′
c, with p′
c being the percolation threshold or the critical volume
fraction at which the high-conductivity component forms a sample-spanning cluster across the
material. Note that, pc/(1−pc) = p′
c/(1−p′
c), and that if we set µ = 1, we recover the standard
EMA derived above. Note also that, if σl = 0 and σh is ﬁnite, Eq. (81) becomes
ge = σh(1 −p/pc)µ = (σh/pµ
c )|pc −p|µ ,
(692)
which is the correct equation and is in agreement with Eq. (2.36). Many other properties of
the modiﬁed EMA are discussed by Michels (1992) and Wu and McLachlan (1997).
Figure 5.7 compares the predictions of Eq. (81) with the experimental data, in which the
parameters pc and µ were treated as adjustable parameters. The sharp decrease in the eﬀective
conductivity signals the percolation threshold at which a sample-spanning cluster of the low-
conductivity material was formed. The data were measured on a 2D circuit board, arranged
as a square tessellation, in which a randomly-selected fraction p of the squares represented
the low-conductivity material. The two components were graphite (low-conductivity material)
and copper (high-conductivity material). As Figure 5.7 indicates, the agreement between the
predictions and the data is excellent over the entire range of the graphite volume fraction.
Moreover, when µ was treated as an adjustable parameter, all the samples (the conductivity
of one of which is shown in Figure 5.7) yielded, 1.19 ≤µ ≤1.3, which are in agreement with
what is expected for 2D percolation, µ ≃1.3 (see Table 2.3). Many other sets of experimental
238

data, for both 2D and 3D materials, have been shown to be predicted rather accurately by Eq.
(81); see McLachlan (1988), Michels (1992), and Wu and McLachlan (1997) for more details.
5.6.6 Accuracy of the eﬀective-medium approximation
Due to its simplicity, it is of great interest to understand the conditions under which the
EMA can provide accurate predictions for the eﬀective conductivity of a disordered material,
modelled either by a random resistor network, or by an appropriate continuum model of the
types that were described in Chapter 3. Although many authors have studied this issue, in
this section we brieﬂy discuss the work of Luck (1991) who carried out what we consider a
systematic investigation of this problem, and was able to quantify the conditions under which
the EMA can be expected to be a very accurate approximation. What follows is a summary of
his analysis.
The bond conductances are assumed to take the following form
gi(x) = g0[1 + ϵ(x)] ,
(693)
where the (dimensionless) ﬂuctuations are assumed to be small and have zero average, so that
g0 is by deﬁnition the average of gi(x) over the distribution f(g)dg of the bond conductances.
The moments of the conductance ﬂuctuations are now deﬁned by
Mk = ⟨[ϵi(x)]k⟩,
k ≥1 ,
(694)
where the average is taken over the distribution f(g)dg; by deﬁnition, M1 = 0. The goal is to
evaluate the eﬀective conductivity as a systematic series expansion in the moments Mk. To do
this, we consider a d−dimensional cubic lattice, so that the Kirchhoﬀ’s law for any site of the
lattice is written as
d

i=1
{gi(x)[V (x + ei) −V (x)] + gi(x −ei)[V (x −ei) −V (x)]} = 0 ,
(695)
where V (x) is the voltage at x, and ei (1 ≤i ≤d) represents a basis of unit vectors. An
arbitrary (but small enough) electric ﬁeld E is imposed on the network, and a solution is
sought which has the following form,
V (x) = E · x + W(x) ,
E · x =
d

i=1
Eixi ,
(696)
239

where the voltage ﬂuctuation W(x) has the same periodicity L (L is the linear size of the
sample) in each direction, and its average is zero, i.e.,

x W(x) = 0.
With the help of deﬁnitions (83) and (84), Eq. (85) is rewritten as
−∆W(x) =
d

i=1
Ei[ϵi(x) −ϵi(x −ei)] +
d

i=1
{ϵi(x)[W(x + ei) −W(x)]
+ϵi(x −ei)[W(x −ei) −W(x)} ,
(697)
where ∆W(x) =
d
i=1[W(x + ei) + W(x −ei) −2W(x)] is essentially the discrete Laplace
operator on a lattice. Equation (87) is now Fourier transformed over the Ld sites of the lattice.
Thus, deﬁning
ˆW(ω) =

x
e−iω·xW(x) ,
(698)
and noting that in the limit L →∞
1
L

ω
→

dˆω =
1
(2π)d

dω1 · · · dωd ,
the Fourier transform of Eq. (87) is then given by
K(ω) ˆW(ω) =
d

i=1
(1 −e−iωi)
2
Eiˆϵi(ω) +

ˆϵi(p)

ei(ω−p)i −1
 ˆW(ω −p)dˆp
3
,
(699)
where
K(ω) = 2
d

i=1
(1 −cos ωi) .
(700)
In general, the conductivity tensor gij of a ﬁnite sample is deﬁned by
Ii = 1
Ld

x
Ii(x) =
d

j=1
gijEj ,
(701)
where Ii(x) is the current ﬂowing out of x in the positive ith direction. In terms of the Fourier-
transformed quantities, Ii is given by
Ii = g0

Ei + 1
Ld

ˆϵi(−ω)(eiωi −1) ˆW(ω)dˆω

.
(702)
To develop the series expansion for the eﬀective conductivity, one writes, ˆW = ˆϵ + ˆϵ ∗ˆW,
where all the integrals and prefactors are hidden in a convolution-like operator ∗. This implicit
equation, when solved iteratively, yields, ˆW = ˆϵ+ˆϵ∗ˆϵ+ˆϵ∗ˆϵ∗ˆϵ+· · · Thus, one obtains ˆW(ω) as
an inﬁnite power series in the function ˆϵ(ω), which involves an increasing number of complex
240

multiple integrals. Having determined this power series, one computes the corresponding series
for the eﬀective conductivity via Eq. (92). After some tedious computations, one ﬁnally obtains
the following sixth-order series expansion (higher-order terms can of course be computed, if need
be)
ge = g0

1 +
6

i=2
Mi + · · ·

,
M2 = −M2
d , M3 = M3
d2 ,
(703)
with
M4 = −1
d3

M4 + (d −3 + J1)M 2
2

,
M5 = 1
d4 [M5 + (3d −10 + 4J1 + J3)M2M3] ,
M6 = −1
d5{M6 + (4d −15 + 6J1 + 3J3)M2M4 + (2d −10 + 4J1 + J2 + 2J3)M 2
3
(704)
+[2d2 −12d + 30 + 3(d −6)J1 + (d −9)J3 + 4J4]M 3
2} .
Here,
J1 = d3 
x
[Gii(x)]3 ,
J2 = d5 
x
[Gii(x)]5 ,
J3 = d4 
x
d

j=1
[Gij(x)]4 ,
(705)
J4 = d5 
x,y
d

j=1
Gii(x −y)[Gij(x)]2[Gij(y)]2 ,
where
Gij(x) =

eip·ω Kij(p)
K(p) dˆp ,
(706)
Kij(ω) = 4ei(ωi−ωj)/2 sin(ωi/2) sin(ωj/2) ,
(707)
The quantity Gij(x) is closely related to G(x), the continuum analogue of the lattice Green
function Gij deﬁned earlier, i.e., G(x) is the solution of, ∇2G(x) = −δ(x), with G(x) ∝1/x in
3D and G(x) ∝ln(1/x) in 2D (see also Section 5.8). In fact,
Gij(x) = G(x) −G(x + ei) −G(x −ej) + G(x + ei −ej) .
(708)
The same type of analysis can be carried out for deriving a series expension for the eﬀective
conductivity within the EMA. To do this, we write down an equation for the bond conductances
gi(x)
gi(x) = gEMA
e
[1 + ηi(x)] ,
(709)
241

which is similar to Eq. (83), with ηi(x) representing the bond conductance ﬂuctuations, but, of
course, without the assumption that ⟨gi⟩= gEMA
e
, since, as discussed above, the EMA prediction
for the eﬀective conductivity is not equal to the average of the conductance distribution. The
ﬁnal expansion foe gEMA
e
is given by
gEMA
e
= g0

1 +
6

i=2
MEMA
i
+ · · ·

, MEMA
2
= −M2
d , MEMA
3
= M3
d2 ,
(710)
MEMA
4
= −1
d3

M4 + (d −2)M 2
2

,
MEMA
5
= 1
d4 [M5 + (3d −5)M2M3] ,
(711)
MEMA
6
= −1
d5

M6 + 2(2d −3)M2M4 + (2d −3)M 2
3 + (2d2 −8d + 7)M 3
2

.
If we now compare Eqs. (100) and (101), the EMA series expansion, with the exact series
expansion, Eqs. (93) and (94), we see that the two series are identical up to and including the
third term of the expansion. The diﬀerence between the two series begins at the fourth term
which, however, depends on the dimensionality d of the system. Indeed, it is easy to see, by
comparing the two series expansions, that, within the EMA,
J1 = J2 = J3 = J4 = 1 ,
EMA .
(712)
For 1D systems, Ji (i = 1, · · · , 4) are exactly equal to 1, which explains why the EMA is exact for
d = 1. For the square lattice, it is not diﬃcult to show that, J1 = J2 = 1 and J3 = J4 ≃1.092,
which explain the excellence of the EMA for predicting the eﬀective conductivity of a square
lattice (or a 2D isotropic continuum).
For the simple-cubic lattice, J1 ≃0.9237825, J2 ≃
0.9869128, J3 ≃1.2635747, and J4 ≃1.0561133, which explain the relatively large deviations
of the EMA predictions from the actual numerical results.
5.6.7 Cluster eﬀective-medium approximation
As discussed earlier, the predictions of the single-bond EMA are not very accurate near
the percolation threshold pc. This is particularly true for 3D systems. The reason for the
failure of the EMA near pc is that, near the percolation threshold the currents and potentials
in the conducting bonds are highly correlated, so that the state of any bond aﬀects that of
many others in its vicinity. However, such correlations are completely absent in the single-bond
EMA, as one embeds only one bond with a random conductance in a uniform (eﬀective-medium)
242

network and estimates the eﬀective conductivity of the system based on the requirement that
the average of the potential or ﬂux ﬂuctuations along only one bond must vanish. Over the past
two decades considerable eﬀort has been devoted to improving the predictions of the EMA near
pc. A possible way of achieving this goal is to use higher order EMAs based on the perturbation
expansion developed above. According to Eq. (40), the current Qα is written in terms of the
ﬂuctuations in the conductance of the bond α itself and those of the other bonds β that surround
α. Thus, instead of embedding in the eﬀective-medium only a single bond α with a random
conductance, one should embed a cluster of such bonds in the eﬀective network, calculate Qα for
a reference bond α within the cluster, and insist that, ⟨Qα⟩= Q0
α, where the averaging is taken
with respect to the distribution of the conductances of all the bonds in the cluster. In practice,
one must apply Eq. (40) to every bond of the cluster and calculate Qα numerically. Since
near pc the currents and potentials in the conducting bonds are correlated, a cluster of bonds
includes to some extent the eﬀect of such correlations, and thus with an appropriately-selected
cluster one may obtain more accurate predictions for the eﬀective conductivity of the network.
This approach has been used by several authors (Blackman, 1976; Turban, 1978; Ahmed and
Blackman, 1979; Sheng, 1980; Nagatani, 1981; Sahimi, 1984b). In general, such a cluster of
bonds must meet two important criteria:
(1) The symmetry of the cluster, with respect to the current, must be such that the average
of the voltage drop on each bond of the cluster is equal to zero, with the same value of the
conductance ge of the eﬀective medium for all the bonds of the cluster.
(2) The cluster must preserve the symmetry of the lattice itself. For the triangular network,
the smallest of such clusters is a triangles of three bonds (Turban, 1978), with which the cluster
EMA predicts the bond-percolation threshold of the lattice to be, pc = 2 sin(π/18) ≃0.3473, the
exact value (see Table 2.1), which should also be compared with the prediction of the single-
bond EMA, pc = 2/6 = 0.3333. The smallest of such symmetric clusters for the hexagonal
lattice is a three-bond cluster in which the bonds are all connected to the same site. Such a
cluster EMA predicts (Turban, 1978) pc = 1 −2 sin(π/18) ≃0.6527 for the bond-percolation
threshold of the hexagonal lattice, which is also the exact value (see Table 2.1), and should be
compared with pc = 2/3 = 0.6666, the prediction of the single-bond EMA.
These clusters are small enough to allow one to obtain an analytical equation for the eﬀective
conductivity of the networks. However, for the square and simple-cubic lattices the problem
243

is more diﬃcult. Examples of such clusters are shown in Figure 5.8. The 2D cluster preserves
(Blackman, 1976) the exact bond-percolation threshold of the network, pc = 1/2, which is also
predicted by the single-bond EMA, while the 3D cluster predicts (Ahmed and Blackman, 1979)
pc ≃0.317 for the bond-percolation threshold of the lattice, which should be compared with
the prediction of the single-bond EMA, pc = 1/3 ≃0.333, and with the accurently-accepted
numerical estimate (see Table 2.2), pc ≃0.2488. Note that the 3D cluster contains 15 bonds, and
hence the averaging of Qα must be carried out over 215 = 32, 768 possible conﬁgurations, and
therefore the computations quickly become very complex. At the same time, the convergence
of the predictions of the cluster EMA to the numerical simulation results is slow. This slow
convergence can be understood by examining the bond-bond Green functions γαβ, given by
Eqs. (41)-(50). It is not diﬃcult to see that, even for a pair of bonds α and β that are at a
relatively large distance from each other, γαβ is still signiﬁcant, so that a very large number
of terms in the perturbation expansion (40) must be included, if the predictions of the cluster
EMA are to be close to the numerical simulation results and, in particular, if the percolation
threshold is to be predicted reasonably accurately. Moreover, even a cluster EMA still predicts
an asymptotic value of 1 for the critical exponent µ that characterizes the power-law behavior
of the eﬀective conductivity near pc. In this regard, the diﬀerence between the single-bond
EMA and the cluster EMA is that, in the latter case the range of (p −pc) over which µ = 1 is
smaller than in the former case.
We may conclude that, although a cluster EMA is a systematic method for improving the
predictions of the single-bond EMA, it is not the most eﬃcient way of doing so, if accurate
predictions of pc and µ are of prime interest. There are a few other approximate methods that
provide more accurate predictions for the eﬀective conductivity of random resistor networks
which will be discussed later in this chapter.
5.6.8 Coherent-potential approximation
Let us point out that the EMA is equivalent to the coherent-potential approximation (CPA),
well-known in the studies of alloys (for reviews see, for example, Elliot et al., 1974; Yonezawa,
1982). The CPA, ﬁrst developed by Soven (1967) and Taylor (1967), was originally intended
for calculating one-particle properties of elementary excitations, such as phonons and excitons,
for substitutionally disordered alloys. It has been used for calculating, for example, optical
244

absorption spectra of mixed ionic crystals, such as KCl-KI, magnetic properties of NiFe alloys,
and the shape memory of CuAlNi alloys.
However, while for alloys diﬃculties are frequently encountered in attempts to improve upon
the CPA, the perturbation expansion described here, and in particular EMA and its cluster
extension, do not suﬀer from the same diﬃculties. The common method for improving the
CPA predictions is a cluster calculation in order to improve the predictions near a band edge,
to produce structure in a density of states, or to describe some properties where correlations,
which are absent from both the basic (single-bond) EMA and CPA, are important. However,
while the cluster CPA suﬀers from spurious non-analytic behavior in the associated Green
functions for energies that are oﬀthe real axis (see, for example, Nickel and Butler, 1973
for a discussion of this point), the above perturbation expansion does not suﬀer from such
diﬃculties, and therefore it is, in principle, straightforward (though tedious) to improve upon
the predictions of the EMA by a cluster expansion. In Chapter 6, where frequency- and time-
dependent properties will be computed by the generalizations of the perturbation expansion
and the EMA described in this chapter, the similarities and diﬀerences with the CPA will
become more transparent.
5.7 Eﬀective-Medium Approximation for Site Percolation
Although random resistor networks with bond-percolation disorder have been studied ex-
tensively, and have been able to provide accurate description of transport processes in heteroge-
neous materials, study of such networks with site-percolation disorder is also of great interest,
as they are in fact the exact lattice analogue of the continuum models described in Chapters
3 and 4. In particular, an EMA for random resistor networks with site-percolation disorder is
a useful tool for investigating the eﬀective transport properties of disordered materials. Devel-
opment of such an EMA has been accomplished by several groups (Watson and Leath, 1974;
Butcher, 1975; Bernasconi and Wiesmann, 1976; Yuge, 1977; Joy and Strieder, 1978, 1979;
Sahimi et al., 1984; S¨oderberg et al., 1985).
For concreteness, we consider the simple-cubic network, but our ﬁnal result will be general
and applicable to any network. Development of an EMA for site percolation in this (and any
other) lattice is in fact equivalent to developing a cluster EMA, since for site percolation one
must consider a cluster that consists of a central site and its nearest-neighbors, embedded in the
245

eﬀective-medium network, as shown in Figure 5.9 for the simple-cubic lattice. The following
analysis is based on the unpublished work of Sahimi (1981). We number the bonds of the
cluster (that are connected to the central site) from 1 through 6, and assume that the applied
external ﬁeld is along, for example, the 2-4 direction shown in the ﬁgure. To develop the EMA
for this cluster, we must utilize Eq. (40) to solve for Qα. Given the conﬁguration of the cluster
shown in Figure 5.9, it is clear that Q1 = −Q3, Q5 = −Q6, and Q1 = Q5, and therefore we
only need to solve for Q1, Q2 and Q4. Thus, writing Eq. (40) for bond 1 yields
Q1 = Q0
1 + ∆(γ11Q1 + γ12Q2 + γ13Q3 + γ14Q4 + γ15Q5 + γ16Q6) .
(713)
Given the direction of the applied ﬁeld shown in Figure 5.9, Q0
1 = 0. We now take advantage of
the properties of the bond-bond Green function discussed in 5.3.1 by noting that, γ14 = γ15 =
−γ16 = −γ12. Denoting γ11 = γ1, γ12 = γ2 and γ13 = γ3, Eq. (103) is simpliﬁed to
[1 + ∆(2γ2 + γ3 −γ1)]Q1 −∆γ2Q2 + ∆γ2Q4 = 0 .
(714)
Similarly, taking into account the fact that, γ23 = γ26 = −γ25 = −γ12 = −γ2, and γ24 = γ13 =
γ3, the equation for Q2 is given by
−4∆γ2Q1 + (1 −γ1∆)Q2 −∆γ3Q4 = Q0 .
(715)
Finally, since, γ41 = γ45 = −γ43 = −γ46 = −γ12 = −γ2, and γ42 = γ13 = γ3, the equation for
Q4 is simpliﬁed to
4∆γ2Q1 −∆γ3Q2 + (1 −γ1∆)Q4 = Q0
(716)
Solving Eqs. (104)-(106), we obtain an expression for ∆Q = (Q2 + Q4) −2Q0. The eﬀective
conductivity ge is then estimated by requiring that, ⟨∆Q⟩= 0, where the averaging is taken
over the conductance distribution. This procedure then yields

g −ge
g + (Γ −1)ge
f(g)dg = 0 ,
(717)
which is identical with Eq. (57), except that Z/2 of Eq. (57) has been replaced by Γ, a quantity
which is given by
Γ = −
1
γ1 + γ3
= −
1
γ3 −2/Z ,
(718)
246

where we used γ1 = γ11 = −2/Z, as derived earlier. Moreover, it is straightforward to show
(see Sections 5.3.1 and 6.1.4) that for a d−dimensional simple-cubic lattice,
γ3 = 1
2
2 ∞
0

Id
0(t) −2Id−1
0
(t)I1(t) + Id−2
0
(t)I2
2(t)

exp(−dt)dt
3
,
(719)
where Im is the modiﬁed bessel function of order m.
It remains to only specify the conductance distribution in order to investigate the accuracy
of the EMA for site percolation. In a site-disordered network, a bond is conducting if and only
if its two end sites are present or active. Since a site is active with probability p, a bond would
be conducting with probability p2, and therefore
f(g) = (1 −p2)δ+(g) + p2h(g) ,
(720)
so that Eq. (107) becomes
1 −p2
1 −Γ + p2
 ∞
0
g −ge
g + (Γ −1)ge
h(g)dg = 0 ,
(721)
where h(g) is any normalized probability density function. Equation (111) is the analogue of
Eq. (60) for bond percolation. In particular, if h(g) = δ(g −g0), Eq. (111) becomes
ge
g0
=
Γ
Γ −1(p2 −Γ−1) ,
(722)
which should be compared with Eq. (62) for bond percolation. According to Eq. (112), the
EMA prediction for the site-percolation threshold is given by
pc = Γ−1/2 ,
(723)
which should be compared with Eq. (61), the EMA prediction for bond percolation. In par-
ticular, one obtains pc = 1/
√
2 ≃0.707 for the hexagonal lattice, pc = 1 −2/π ≃0.602 for the
square lattice, pc = [(5π + 6
√
3)/(6π)]1/2 ≃0.531 for the triangular lattice, and pc ≃0.459 for
the simple-cubic lattice. The 2D results are all within a few percent of the known exact results
or numerical estimates listed in Table 2.1, while the estimate for the simple-cubic lattice is too
high, if we compare it with the numerical estimate, pc ≃0.3116. Therefore, similar to the EMA
for bond percolation, the EMA for site percolation is very accurate in 2D, but not as accurate
in 3D.
Note, however, that, unlike Eqs. (60) and (62) for bond percolation, Eqs. (111) and (112) do
produce most of the curvature of the conductivity curve in the critical region near pc. However,
247

they still predict a value of 1 for the critical exponent µ, since the predicted slope dge/dp at
p = pc is 2Γ1/2/(Γ−1), instead of zero. However, the initial slope at p = 1 is predicted exactly;
Eq. (112) predicts that dge/dp = 2Γ/(Γ −1) at p = 1, which is the exact value (Harris and
Kirkpatrick, 1977). Figure 5.10 presents the comparison between the EMA predictions and the
results of computer simulations for the eﬀective conductivity of site-disordered simple-cubic
lattices.
Let us point out that Eq. (107) can also be used for estimating the eﬀective conductivity
of conductor-superconductor composites. Instead of the conductance distribution (110), the
appropriate bond conductance distribution in this case is, f(g) = p2δ(g −∞) + (1 −p2)h(g),
so that Eq. (107) becomes
p2 + (1 −p2)
 ∞
0
g −ge
g + (Γ −1)ge
h(g)dg = 0 ,
(724)
which should be compared with Eq. (111). It is straightforward to show that Eq. (114) predicts
that ge diverges at a percolation threshold pc given by Eq. (113).
5.8 Eﬀective-Medium Approximation for Correlated Composites
Resistor networks with bond-percolation disorder do not contain any correlations, since
the conductance of any bond is selected completely at random. Resistor networks with site-
percolation disorder contain short-range correlations, because a bond is conducting only if its
two end sites are active. However, both models predict percolation thresholds that are typically
large compared with what is actually seen in experiments on many composite solids. These
experiments indicate that many conducting composites have very low percolation thresholds
that cannot be modelled by random site- or bond-percolation. On the other hand, as discussed
in Chapter 2, correlations do change the location of the percolation threshold, and usually lower
it. Therefore, a more realistic model, which may be more relevant to real materials, is one in
which there are correlations between various portions of the material. One such model, which
is directly relevant to hopping conductivity of disordered materials described in Chapter 6 (see
Section 6.2), was proposed by Kirkpatrick (1973), which was already described in 2.12.1. Recall
that in his model, each site of a network is assigned a random number si uniformly distributed
in (−1, +1). Random numbers bij for the bonds connecting sites i and j are then calculated
248

from the numbers si and sj via
bij = 1
2(|si| + |sj| + |si −sj|) .
(725)
All bonds with bij > ∆are then removed, where ∆is a selected limit. It is not diﬃcult to
see that the fraction p(∆) of bonds is given by (Kirkpatrick, 1973; Bernasconi and Wiesmann,
1976)
p(∆) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
3
4∆2 ,
0 ≤∆≤1 ,
∆−1
4∆2 ,
1 ≤∆≤2 .
(726)
The single-bond EMA, Eqs. (57), (61), or (62), can then be used for predicting the eﬀective
conductivity of this model. In particular, Eq. (62) would predict that, ge/g0 = 1
2[3p(∆) −1]
for the simple-cubic lattice which, for p(∆) ≥3/4 (∆≥1), provides a more than satisfactory
approximation to ge(p) (see Figure 5.11). However, for p(∆) < 3/4 (∆< 1), this EMA breaks
down completely, as there are many isolated sites with |si| < ∆, and therefore the fraction of
the conducting bonds is overestimated. Bernasconi and Wiesmann (1976) noticed that, in this
case, a bond that connects sites i and j would be conducting if and only if si < ∆and sj < ∆.
Thus, they proposed that for p(∆) < 3/4 the system should be treated as a site-disordered
network (whereas for p(∆) ≥3/4 the system is similar to a bond-disordered network) with p2
in Eq. (110) replaced by 4
3p(∆), since p(∆) = 3
4∆2 and ∆< 1 plays the role of p. Thus, the
conductance distribution should read
f(g) = [1 −4
3p(∆)]δ+(g) + 4
3p(∆)h(g) .
(727)
This model would then predict that the percolation threshold of the correlated network is
pc ≃0.158 which, although a considerable improvement on the prediction of the single-bond
EMA, pc = 1/3, it is still too high since numerical simulations (Kirkpatrick, 1973) indicate
that, pc ≃0.103. Naturally, we do not expect the conductivity critical exponent µ for this
problem to be diﬀerent from that of random-bond or site percolation, since the correlations
introduced into this model are still short-ranged. Figure 5.11 compares the predictions of the
EMA and the modiﬁed EMA suggested by Bernasconi and Wiesmann (1976) with the results of
numerical simulations on the simple-cubic lattice. We will come back to this problem shortly.
5.9 Eﬀective-Medium Approximation for Anisotropic Materials
249

All the theories of conducation described so far are appropriate for isotropic materials.
Many composite materials are anisotropic, and the eﬀect of their anisotropy on their transport
properties is signiﬁcant and must be modelled appropriately. Examples are abundant. In many
catalytic materials, transport of molecules can be conﬁned to a certain direction of plane, so
that the material is eﬀectively anisotropic. Many solid-state materials, such as (Sn)x and TCNQ
salts, can be obtained only as small crystals, and their eﬀective transport properties must be
measured in compact powders which are highly anisotropic. Carbon-black polyvinylchloride
and other polymer composites are highly anisotropic. Therefore, an EMA for predicting the
conductivity tensor of such materials can be very useful. Although one may consider at least ﬁve
types of anisotropies (Straley, 1980b), we consider here one particular type which is important
to real materials - one in which a material is characterized by direction-dependent conductance
distributions.
We extend the perturbation expansion developed in Section 5.3 for isotropic materials to
anisotropic systems (Mukhopadhyay and Sahimi, 2000). To match the disordered network to
an eﬀective anisotropic one, we introduce d eﬀective conductivities ge1, · · · , ged, so that Eq. (33)
is rewritten as
d

ℓ=1

j
geℓ(P 0
j −P 0
i )ℓ= 0 ,
(728)
where (P 0
j −P 0
i )ℓindicates that the quantity must be evaluated for those nearest neighbor sites
j of i that are in the ℓth direction. Therefore, the analogue of Eq. (34) for an anisotropic
network is given by
d

ℓ=1

j
[∆ijℓ(Pj −Pi)ℓ+ (Pj −Pi)ℓ−(P 0
j −P 0
i )ℓ] = 0 ,
(729)
where ∆ijℓ= (gij −geℓ)/geℓ. The rest of the analysis is somewhat involved but parallels that of
the isotropic case. After some algebra we obtain
Pi = P 0
i +
d

ℓ=1

j

l
Gij∆jlℓ(Pj −Pi)ℓ,
(730)
where the Green function Gij is now for the conduction problem in an anisotropic material.
The analysis in terms of the “ﬂuxes” (Qij)ℓis more complex, since we now have to introduce
direction dependent ﬂuxes Qijℓ. Since for the construction of an EMA one can directly work
with the ﬁelds P 0
i and Pi, and the results would be identical with those obtained with the
ﬂuxes, we do not pursue the formulation of the anisotropic networks in terms of the ﬂuxes.
250

The same idea that was used for isotropic networks can also be utilized for anisotropic
lattices in order to derive an EMA, which we refer to it as the anisotropic EMA (AEMA).
The only diﬀerence is that, since we must compute d eﬀective conductivities geℓ, one for each
principal direction of the lattice, we need d self-consistent equations. Thus, for each principal
direction, Eq. (120) is written for two adjacent sites, from which the ﬂux between them is
calculated. This is then repeated for all the bonds in the cluster. Equation (51) is then applied
to a reference bond α in each principal direction, i.e.,
⟨Qα⟩ℓ= (Q0
α)ℓ
ℓ= 1, · · · , d .
(731)
It is now straightforward to show that the working equation for a single-bond AEMA is the
analogue of Eq. (54) for anisotropic networks:
)
(γαα)ℓ(gα −geℓ)
(γαα)ℓgα −[1 + (γαα)ℓ]geℓ
*
= 0 ,
ℓ= 1, · · · , d .
(732)
If a material is characterized by direction-dependent conductance distributions fℓ(gα), then,
Eq. (122) becomes
 ∞
0
gα −geℓ
gα + Sℓ(ge1, · · · , ged) fℓ(gα)dgα = 0 ,
ℓ= 1, · · · , d ,
(733)
where
Sℓ= −1 + (γαα)ℓ
(γαα)ℓ
geℓ.
(734)
Since γαα = −2/Z, we see that for isotropic networks
S = (Z
2 −1)ge ,
(735)
so that the main diﬀerence between the EMA and AEMA is in the quantity Sℓ.
5.9.1 The Green functions
We conﬁne our attention to a d−dimensional simple-cubic network, although our analysis is
general and applicable to any regular lattice. The governing equation for the Green functions
is the anisotropic version of Eq. (36), written for a d-dimensional simple-cubic network [see
also Eq. (6.14)], i.e.,
(2ge1 + · · · + 2ged)G(m1, · · · , md) −ge1 [G(m1 + 1, · · · , md) + G(m1 −1, · · · , md)]
+ · · · + ged [G(m1, · · · , md + 1) + G(m1, · · · , md −1)] = −δm10 · · · δmd0 .
(736)
251

If we use a discrete Fourier transformation
˜G(θ1, · · · , θd) =
∞

m1=−∞
· · ·
∞

md=−∞
eim·ΘG(m1, · · · , md)
(737)
where m = (m1, · · · , md) and Θ = (θ1, · · · , θd), we obtain
2(ge1 + · · · + ked) ˜G −2(ge1 cos θ1 + · · · + ged cos θd) ˜G = −1
(738)
and hence
G(m1, · · · , md) = −1
2
1
(2π)d
 π
−π · · ·
 π
−π
exp−im·Θ
d
j=1 gej(1 −cos θj)dΘ ,
(739)
which should be compared with Eq. (6.17) for the isotropic lattices.
We ﬁrst calculate the bond-bond Green function (γαα)1 in a principal directions of a square
network. It is easily seen that the analogue of Eq. (55) for an anisotropic network is given by
(γαα)1 = gm1

2G(0, 0) −2G(m1, · · · , md) |m1=1
mi=0

,
(740)
with i ̸= α, so that for a square network
(γαα)1
=
2ge1 [G(0, 0) −G(1, 0)]
=
−ge1
π2
 π
0
 π
0
1 −cos θ1
ge1(1 −cos θ1) + ge2(1 −cos θ2)dθ1dθ2 .
(741)
After some algebra Eq. (131) leads us to
(γαα)1
=
−1
π

π −2 arcsin
!
ge2
ge1 + ge2

=
−1
π

π −2 arctan
!ge2
ge1

,
(742)
which reduces to γαα = −1/2 for the isotropic case (ge1 = ge2), in agreement with γαα =
−2/Z = −1/2 for Z = 4, computed earlier. Similar calculations yield
(γαα)2 = −1
π

π −2 arctan
!ge1
ge2

,
(743)
which can also be obtained from Eq. (132) by cyclic permutation of the indices 1 and 2.
Given these Green functions, we can develop the relevant expressions for Sℓfor the square
and simple-cubic networks. For example, for the square network in the direction ℓ= 1 we have
S1 = ge1
arctan (ge2/ge1)1/2
arctan (ge1/ge2)1/2 ,
(744)
252

and a cyclic permutation of the indices 1 and 2 leads to a formula for S2. Equation (134) was
ﬁrst given by Bernasconi (1974).
In the case of a simple-cubic network, however, the equations are more complex. Using Eqs.
(128) and (129), one ﬁnds that for this network
(γαα)1 = −ge1
π3
 π
0
 π
0
 π
0
1 −cos θ1
ge1(1 −cos θ1) + ge2(1 −cos θ2) + ge3(1 −cos θ3)dθ1dθ2dθ3 .
(745)
Similar expressions can be obtained for the other two directions. The integrals in (135) can be
written in terms of the elliptic integrals (see below). To obtain the corresponding Sℓfor the
simple-cubic network we introduce a parameter Rℓsuch that
1
Rℓ
= Sℓ+ geℓ.
(746)
Using Eqs. (124), (135) and (136) we obtain, after some algebra, for the direction ℓ= 1
R1 =
1
π2(ge2ge3)1/2
 π
0 (1 −cos x)η1/2K(η)dx
(747)
where K(η) is the complete elliptic integral of the ﬁrst kind,
K(η) =
 π/2
0
dτ
(1 −η2 sin2 τ)1/2
(748)
and the parameter η is given by
η =

4ge2ge3
(t −ge1 cos x)2 −(ge3 −ge2)2
1/2
,
t =
3

ℓ=1
geℓ.
(749)
We then obtain
S1 = ge1
arctan [g−1
e1 (ge1ge2 + ge1ge3 + ge2ge3)]1/2
arctan [ge1(ge1ge2 + ge1ge3 + ge2ge3)]−1/2 ,
(750)
and cyclic permutations of the indices lead to the corresponding formulae for R2, R3, S2 and
S3. The formulation presented here provides a general framework for analyzing conduction in
anisotropic networks and materials.
As an example, consider bond conductance distributions, f1(g) = pδ(g −10) + (1 −p)δ+(g),
and f2(g) = pδ(g −1) + (1 −p)δ+(g). Figure 5.12 compares the AEMA predictions with the
results of computer simulations on the square lattice; the agreement between the two is very
good. Note also that, unlike the isotropic case, the conductivity does not vary linearly with p.
Let us point out that the AEMA developed here has been extended by Koelman and de Kui-
jper (1997) to anisotropic materials that contain many components. However, the anisotropy
253

that was considered in their work was due to shapes and orientations of the constitutive mate-
rials, e.g., ellipsoidal grains in a powder or a porous material, which is diﬀerent from what we
discuss here. The anisotropy of such materials persists even at the percolation threshold. We
postpone the discussion of this type of anisotropy until Chapter 6, where we discuss the dielec-
tric constant of composite materials. The EMA for the dielectric constant of such anisotropic
materials is completely analogous to one for the eﬀective conductivity tensor, and therefore
need not be discussed separately.
5.9.2 Conductivity anisotropy near the percolation threshold
The conductivity anisotropy R is deﬁned by
R = geℓ
get
−1 ,
(751)
where geℓand get are the eﬀective conductivities in the longitudinal direction (parallel to the
applied ﬁeld) and transverse directions (perpendicular to the applied ﬁeld), respectively. For
the type of anisotropy considered here, the anisotropy vanishes as the percolation threshold pc
is approached according to the following power law (Shklovskii, 1978)
R ∼(p −pc)ζ ,
(752)
where ζ is presumably a universal exponent, independent of the morphology of the system.
Note that, the AEMA also predicts that the conductivity anisotropy vanishes at pc. If the
material is not thick, then its ﬁnite thickness will give rise to conductivity anisotropy. It is not
diﬃcult to show that
ge1
ge2
∼
ℓ2
ℓ1
(µ3−µ2)/ν3
,
(753)
where ge1 (ge2) is the conductivity of a sample of thickness ℓ1 (ℓ2), µ2 (µ3) is the critical exponent
of the conductivity for 2D (3D) percolation, and ν3 is the critical exponent for the percolation
correlation length in 3D.
Accurate estimates of the anisotropy exponent ζ were obtained by Mukhopadhyay and
Sahimi (1994), who reported that
ζ(d = 2) = ζ2 ≃0.82 ,
ζ(d = 3) = ζ3 ≃0.52 .
(754)
That ζ2 > ζ3 is surprising, since one expects that on a 3D network which contains a much larger
number of current-carrying transport paths than a 2D network, the anisotropy vanish faster,
254

i.e., ζ3 > ζ2. Since vanishing of R is due to the increasing tortuosity of the sample-spanning
conducting cluster, as pc is approached, we must have a measure of the tortuosity of percolation
clusters and their backbone in order to understand why ζ2 > ζ3. One such measure may be
the length Lmin of the minimum path or chemical distance between two points of the cluster,
described in Section 2.8. In general, Lmin is greater than the Pythagorean distance between
the two points. According to Eq. (2.50), near the percolation threshold pc,
Lmin ∼(p −pc)−νDmin ,
(755)
where Dmin is the fractal dimension of the minimum paths. Using the numerical estimates
of ν and Dmin listed in Table 2.3, we obtain, Lmin ∼(p −pc)−1.5 for 2D percolation, and
Lmin ∼(p −pc)−1.18 for 3D percolation.
That is, as pc is approached, Lmin increases less
strongly in 3D than in 2D, which may be interpreted as implying that near pc the tortuosity
of 3D transport paths increases less strongly than that of 2D paths. As a result, at a ﬁxed
distance from pc, the tortuosity of 2D transport paths is larger than that of 3D paths, and
therefore the anisotropy R must vanish faster in 2D than in 3D.
5.9.3 Comparison with the experimental data
Smith and Lobb (1979) measured the eﬀective conductivities of 2D conductor-insulator
networks generated photolithographically from laser speckle patterns. When they measured
the conductivity of isotropic samples, they found that it vanishes at pc ≃0.59, in agreement
with site-percolation threshold of a square network (see Table 2.1), with a critical exponent
µ ≃1.3, in complete agreement with the 2D percolation conductivity (see Table 2.3). When
they measured the conductivities of anisotropic samples, they found that the conductivity
anisotropy, measured in terms of the diﬀerence between the conductivity of the system in
diﬀerent directions, decreased as pc was approached, in agreement with Eq. (142).
Troadec et al. (1981) measured thermal and electrical conductivity of conducting (WTe2)
and semi-conducting (WSe2) powders, characterized both by a geometrical anisotropy (grain
shapes and sizes) and by anisotropy in a transport property. These mixtures belong to the
family of dichalcognides of transition metals, TX2. Their morphology is layered with a hexago-
nal arrangement within each plane, which gives rise to the anisotropy of the system. The main
diﬀerence between the crystallographic structures of WSe2 and WTe2 is in the coordination
number of the W atoms. In WSe2, W is at the center of a trigonal prism of Se atoms, whereas
255

in WTe2 W has an octahedral environment but is not precisely at its center. Moreover, WSe2
has a semi-conductor character, in contrast with the semi-metallic character of WTe2. Troadec
et al. used powder grains that were single crystal platelets having a thickness of about 1 to
2 µm and a horizontal hexagonal shape with a largest dimension of about 20 µm. The mixed
powder was outgassed under secondary vacuum for two hours before being sintered in the same
pressure and temperature conditions. The packing fraction was about 92%. They measured
anisotropy in the electrical conductivity, as deﬁned by Eq. (141), which exhibited a minimum
at the percolation threshold of the WTe2 phase. This is expected, since as pc of a phase is ap-
proached, its conducting paths become so tortuous that the current cannot distinguish between
diﬀerent directions.
Experimental data similar to those of Troadec et al.
were also reported by Balberg et
al. (1983), who measured the resistivity of a composite composed of elongated carbon black
aggregates embedded in an insulating plastic - polyvinylchloride. Because of the elongation
of the aggregates, the system is anisotropic. Measurements of the anisotropy of the system
produced results that indicated that the anisotropy vanishes at pc.
5.10 Cumulant Approximation
In a series of papers, Hori and Yonezawa developed a method – the cumulant approximation
(CA) – which takes into account the eﬀect of clustering of the conducting regions of a compos-
ite, or the conducting bonds in a resistor network model, near the percolation threshold. As
discussed above, such clustering eﬀects, while highly important near pc, are completely absent
in the single-bond EMA. Although the cluster EMA described above does take such eﬀects into
account, the convergence of its predictions toward the actual values is relatively slow, and thus
a faster-converging method would be desirable. A summary of the basic CA ideas is given by
Hori and Yonezawa (1977), where references to their earlier papers can also be found. Although
the CA method was originally developed for continuum models of composite materials, we de-
scribe the theory here for percolation composites, so that a direct comparison with the EMA
and its cluster version can be made. We follow Hori and Yonezawa (1977) closely and describe
the CA method.
Consider a 3D (2D) heterogeneous material with volume (surface area) Ω(S) which will
eventually be assumed to be inﬁnitely large, so that, for example, the ensemble average of the
256

conductivity,
⟨g⟩=

i
φigi
(756)
can be replaced by the spatial average, where gi and φi are the conductivity and volume fraction
of the ith phase, respectively. The eﬀective conductivity ge is then deﬁned through the usual
relation, namely, ⟨Ii⟩= ge⟨Ei⟩, where Ii and Ei are the electric current density and ﬁeld,
respectively. The conductivity g(r) at point r is now split into constant and ﬂuctuating parts,
g(r) = g0 + δg(r). Then, the governing equation for the electrostatic potential Φ(r) is given by
g0
∂2Φ(r)
∂x2
i
+ ∂
∂xi

δg(r)∂Φ(r)
∂xi

= 0 ,
(757)
where summation over the index i is implied. A Green function G(r) is now introduced via
g0
∂2G(r)
∂x2
i
+ δ(r) = 0 ,
(758)
[compare Eq. (148) with Eq. (36), its discrete analogue] in terms of which we can write down
a formal solution for Φ(r):
Φ(r1) = Φ0(r1) +

G(r12) ∂
∂x2,i

δg(r2)∂Φ(r2)
∂x2,i

dr2 ,
(759)
where the integral is over the volume Ω(surface S), and r12 = r2 −r1. The Green function
G(r) is given by the well-known equations,
G(r) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
(2πg0)−1 log(1
r)
2D ,
(4πg0)−11
r ,
3D .
(760)
The corresponding equation for the electric ﬁeld is given by
Ei(r1) = ⟨Ei(r1)⟩+
 ∂G(r12)
∂x1,i
∂
∂x2,j
[δg(r2)Ej(r2)] ,
(761)
which, after some algebra, yields
Ei(r1) = E0
i (r1) +

Gij(r12)δg(r2)Ej(r2)dr2 .
(762)
Here
Gij(r12) = −∂2G(r12)
∂x1,i∂x2,j
= −δijδ(r12)
dg0
+ P

1
2d−1πg0rd
12

dx12,i
r12
x12,j
r12
−δij

,
(763)
257

where d is the dimensionality of the composite, and P denotes the principal value of the
integration around the singular point r12 = 0. In operator notations, we can rewrite Eq. (152)
as
E = E0 + G δg E ,
(764)
where the meaning of the operator is clear when we compare Eq. (154) with (152). Similarly,
I = I0 + Γ δR I ,
(765)
where R is the resistance, R0Γ = −1 −g0G, and R0 = (g0)−1.
5.10.1 The Lorentz ﬁeld
One can now deﬁne a Lorentz ﬁeld L such that
L = δg(r) + dg0
dg0
E = g(r) + (d −1)g0
dg0
E ,
(766)
and
κ(r) =
dδg(r)
δg(r) + dg0
=
d[g(r) −g0]
g(r) + (d −1)g0
.
(767)
The eﬀective constant κ∗satisﬁes, ⟨κL⟩= κ∗⟨L⟩, and therefore
κ∗=
d(g∗−g0)
g∗+ (d −1)g0
.
(768)
In operator notations, Eq. (154) can be rewritten as
L = E0 + ΛκL ,
(769)
where
Λ = 1
d + g0G .
(770)
Equations (154), (155), and (159) are then written in a general form
X = X0 + AδαX ,
(771)
where A is the appropriate Green function.
5.10.2 Perturbation expansion
Successive iteration of Eq. (161) yields
X =
∞

n=0
(Aδα)nX0 ,
(772)
258

whence
⟨X⟩=
∞

n=0
⟨(Aδα)n⟩X0 ,
(773)
δα∗⟨X⟩=
∞

n=0
⟨δα(Aδα)n⟩X0 .
(774)
Therefore, if we eliminate X0 from these equations, we obtain
δα∗≡
∞

n=1
δα(n) ,
(775)
where
δα(1) = ⟨δα⟩,
δα(2) = ⟨δαAδα⟩−⟨δα⟩A⟨δα⟩,
(776)
δα(3) = ⟨δαAδαAδα⟩−⟨δαAδα⟩A⟨δα⟩−⟨δα⟩A⟨δαAδα⟩+ ⟨δα⟩A⟨δα⟩A⟨δα⟩.
We now replace the moments by the corresponding cumulants, or semi-invariants, which are
useful in the sense that they vanish identically for independent groups of random variables.
Hence, Eqs. (166) become
δα(1) = ⟨δα⟩c ,
δα(2) = ⟨δαAδα⟩c ,
(777)
δα(3) = ⟨δαAδαAδα⟩c + ⟨δαA⟨δα⟩cAδα⟩c .
Thus, a cumulant diagram can be constructed by representing the various contributions to δαe,
using the following rules:
(1) Points r1, r2, · · · are represented by means of nodes on the horizontal base line.
(2) The Green function A(ri,i+1) is assigned to a propagator that connects ri and ri+1.
(3) The s−point cumulant ⟨δα(ri)δα(rj) · · ·⟩is assigned to a cross vertex from s interaction
lines start; and then
(4) the operator product of all the Green functions and cumulants described above is taken.
Figure 5.13 shows the diagramatic equation. We now consider a few examples to demon-
strate the application of the cumulant expansion.
5.10.3 Computation of the lowest-order terms
We can now compute the lower-order terms of the cumulant expansion for several models
of disordered materials. One main requirement for being able to do so is that the model should
259

consist of symmetric cells.
Such a model, which is statistically homogeneous, was already
described in Section 3.4.6. Recall that in this model, (1) the space is completely covered by
non-overlapping cells within which the material property is constant, and (2) the properties of
each cell are independent of those of any other cell, and also independent of the geometrical
distribution of the cells. We now describe computation of the lower-order terms of the cumulant
expansion for a few models.
Statistically isotropic materials
In this case
⟨δα(r1)δα(r2)⟩c = ⟨(δα)2⟩cC(r12) ,
(778)
where C(r12) is the normalized two-point correlation function (see Chapter 2). Therefore,
δα(2) = −1
d
⟨(δα)2⟩c
α0
.
(779)
However, third- or higher-order terms cannot be determined analytically, unless more informa-
tion on the morphology of the material is supplied.
Ellipsoidal (Elliptic) cell materials with uniform orientations
Such a material is anisotropic. The second- and third-order terms are given by
δα(2)
ij = −Aij
⟨(δα)2⟩c
α0
,
(780)
where Aij is the depolarization or demagnetization tensor of the cells (see Section 4.6.2.4), and
δα(3,1)
ij
= AikAkj
⟨(δα)3⟩c
α2
0
,
(781)
δα(3,2) = Aij
⟨(δα)2⟩c⟨δα⟩c
α2
0
.
(782)
Ellipsoidal (Elliptic) cell materials with random orientations
Such materials are isotropic, and therefore all one must do is averaging the tensor Aij. For
the second-order term, we have
⟨Aij⟩= δij
d ,
(783)
while for the third-order term,
⟨AikAkj⟩= 1
d
d

k=1
A2
kδij ,
(784)
260

where Ak is the eigenvalue of the tensor Aij.
Spherical cell materials
Since a spherical cell material is statistically isotropic, the second-order term is given by
Eq. (169), while the third-order terms are given by
δα(3,1) = 1
d2
⟨(δα)3⟩c
α2
0
,
(785)
δα(3,2) = 1
d
⟨(δα)2⟩c⟨δα⟩c
α2
0
.
(786)
Given these results, it is straightforward to derive the EMA within the CA. For example,
since it is not possible to sum up all terms in the perturbation series, one simple approximation
is to count only the single-site moment diagrams. The summation is then given by
δg∗= ⟨δg⟩−⟨(δg)2⟩
dg0
+ ⟨(δg)3⟩
(dg0)2 −· · ·
(787)
We now choose δg∗self-consistently, i.e., we take g∗= g0, to immediately obtain
)
g −g∗
g + (d −1)g∗
*
= 0 ,
(788)
which is the continuum version of the EMA (see Section 4.9.1) and identiﬁes g∗as the eﬀective
conductivity. To obtain the lattice version of the EMA, d must be replaced by Z/2. The EMA
can also be derived based on the Lorentz ﬁeld described above. In this case, the requirement
⟨κ⟩= ⟨κ⟩c = 0 immediately reproduces the EMA.
5.10.4 Bond percolation
Having calculated the lower-order terms of the cumulant expansion, one can now obtain an
equation for the eﬀective conductivity of a bond-percolation network. It is not diﬃcult to see
that, with a bond-conductance distribution, f(g) = (1 −p)δ(g) + pδ(g −1), the CA provides
the following equation for the eﬀective conductivity ge,
ge =
 1
0

1 + 1 −p
p
xγ0/ge
−1
dx ,
(789)
where γ0 = −1/d = −2/Z is the same quantity as γαα that appeared in the perturbation
expansion for the eﬀective conductivity of random resistor networks. The emergence of this
quantity in the CA is not really surprising, since the Green function G(r), deﬁned by Eq. (148)
261

and given by Eq. (150), is nothing but the discrete analogue of the Green function Gik deﬁned
by Eq. (36). According to Eq. (179), the eﬀective conductivity ge vanishes at p = pc, where pc
is given by
pc = 1 −exp(−2/Z) .
(790)
Thus, for a simple-cubic network (Z = 6), one obtains, pc ≃0.283, which is much closer to
the numerical estimate (see Table 2.2), pc ≃0.249, than is the EMA prediction, pc = 1/3. On
the other hand, for the square network, Eq. (180) predicts that, pc ≃0.393, whereas the EMA
predicts the exact results, pc = 1/2. Therefore, while for 2D systems the CA is less accurate
than the EMA, the opposite is true in 3D, which is a desirable feature of the CA.
5.11 Position-Space Renormalization Group Methods
Our discussions so far should have made it clear to the reader that the main assumption
behind the EMA is that ﬂuctuations in the potential ﬁeld are small, since in deriving the EMA
we require the average of the ﬂuctuations to be zero. However, if the ﬂuctuations are large,
as in the case of, for example, a composite near its percolation threshold, or a material with a
broad distribution of the conductances, the EMA breaks down and loses its accuracy. In such
cases, a position-space renormalization group (PSRG) method is more appropriate because,
in averaging the properties of the system, this method takes into account the properties of
the pre-averaged material. It also predicts non-analytic power-law behavior for the transport
properties near the percolation threshold, a distinct advantage over the EMA which always
predicts the critical exponents of the conductivity to be unity.
Consider, for example, a square or a cubic network in which each bond is conducting with
probability p. The idea in any PSRG method is that, since the network is so large that we
cannot calculate its properties exactly, we partition it into b × b or b × b × b cells, where b is the
number of bonds in any direction, and calculate their eﬀective properties, which are hopefully
representative of the properties of the original network. However, the eﬀective properties of
the RG cells are calculated in a particular way which we will describe shortly. The shape of
the RG cell can be selected arbitrarily, but it should be chosen in such a way that it preserves,
as much as possible, the symmetry properties of the original network. For example, since the
square network is self-dual, and because self-duality plays an important role in its percolation
and transport properties, we use self-dual cells to represent this network (Bernasconi, 1978).
262

Figure 5.14 shows examples of the RG cells with b = 2 in the square and simple-cubic networks,
where the 2D cell is self-dual.
The next step in a PSRG method is to replace each cell with one bond in each principal
direction; see Figure 5.14. If in the original network each bond conducts with probability p, then
the bonds that replace the cells would be conducting with probability p′ = R(p), where R(p)
is called the renormalization group transformation, and represents the sum of the probabilities
of all the conducting conﬁgurations of the RG cell. To compute R(p), we proceed as follows.
Since we are interested in percolation and conduction in the network, which is supposed to be
represented by the RG cell, we solve for the percolation and conduction problems in each cell
by applying a ﬁxed potential gradient across the cell in a given direction. For example, as far
as percolation and conduction are concerned, the 2 × 2 RG cell of Figure 5.14 is equivalent to
the circuit shown there, which is usually called the Wheatstone bridge. Thus, for the b = 2
cell, we only need to deal with a circuit of 5 bonds, and for the 2 × 2 × 2 cell we construct an
equivalent 12-bonds circuit (see Figure 5.14). To compute R(p), we determine all the conducting
conﬁgurations of such circuits, with some bonds conducting and some insulating. Thus, for the
2 × 2 RG cell we obtain
p′ = R(p) = p5 + 5p4q + 8p3q2 + 2p2q3 ,
(791)
where q = 1−p. It is easy to see how Eq. (181) is derived: There is only one conducting RG cell
conﬁguration with all the ﬁve bonds conducting (probability p5), 5 conducting conﬁgurations
with 4 bonds conducting and one bond insulating (probability 5p4q), and so on.
As discussed in Chapter 2, the sample-spanning cluster at pc is self-similar, implying that
the RG transformation should remain invariant at pc. The invariance of R(p) should also be
true at p = 1 and p = 0, because under any reasonable RG transformation full and empty
networks should be transformed to full and empty networks again. The points p = 0, 1, and
pc are thus called the ﬁxed points of the transformation, and are denoted by p∗. Since the RG
transformation should not change anything at these points, the implication is that at the ﬁxed
points the probability (p) of having a conducting bond in the RG cell and that of a bond in the
renormalized cell [p′ = R(p)] should be the same. Thus, the ﬁxed points should be the solution
of the polynomial equation
p∗= R(p∗) ,
(792)
263

and indeed this equation usually has three roots which are p∗= 0, p∗= 1, and pc = p∗, where p∗
is the RG transformation prediction for pc. For the RG cells of Figure 5.14, we obtain p∗= 1/2
for both 2×2 and 3×3 cells, the exact result. In fact, it can be shown (Bernasconi, 1978) that
the RG transformation for such 2D self-dual cells for any b always predicts pc = 1/2. With the
2 × 2 × 2 RG cell we obtain p∗≃0.208, which should be compared with the numerical estimate
pc ≃0.249.
So far, everything appears nice and simple. In fact, PSRG methods seem so simple that
small-cell calculations can be done on the “back of the envelope,” with the results being rea-
sonably accurate. The reader may guess that one should calculate pc = p∗for several cell sizes
b and then use ﬁnite-size scaling (see Section 2.9) according to which
pc −pc(b) ∼b−1/ν ,
(793)
where pc is the true percolation threshold of the network, and ν is the critical exponent of
percolation correlation length ξp, to extrapolate the results to b →∞and estimate pc. Indeed,
Reynolds et al. (1980) used this method and obtained very accurate estimates of site and bond
percolation thresholds of the square network. However, as always, life is more complex than we
like it to be! Ziﬀ(1992) showed that as b →∞, the probability R(pc) approaches a universal
value of 1/2 for all 2D networks. This implies that, asymptotically, Eq. (182) is wrong, because
pc is not universal and depends on the structure of the network, whereas R(pc) is universal
(as b →∞). Ziﬀ’s discovery does not violate the universality of R(pc); it only ﬁxes its value.
Stauﬀer et al. (1994) showed that R(pc) is also universal in 3D.
How can one use an RG transformation for estimating pc? Although, due to Ziﬀ’s discovery,
the answer to this question during 1992-1994 was not clear, with most of the predictions that
had been obtained [based on Eq. (182)] in the 1970s and early 1980s in doubt, Sahimi and
Rassamdana (1995) showed that, although R(pc) is universal, for any 0 < α < 1 the following
equation
R(pc) = α ,
(794)
always provides an estimate of pc in (0,1). Therefore, one can determine R(pc) for a series of
RG cells of increasing linear sizes b, solve Eq. (184) for the corresponding values of pc, and
use Eq. (183) to extrapolate the results to b →∞. In other words, although Eq. (182) is
wrong theoretically, it can still provide estimates of pc! Moreover, it appears that, among all
264

the possible values, α = pc still provides the fastest convergence to the true value of pc. In
addition, one has a bonus in that, the critical exponent ν of the percolation correlation length
can be estimated from R(pc). Suppose that the percolation correlation length in the original
and renormalized lattices (RG cells) are ξp and ξ′
p, respectively. Since each bond of the RG
cells is replaced by another bond b times its length, we must have,
ξ′
p = 1
bξp .
(795)
On the other hand, ξp ∼(p−pc)−ν and, because of the universality of the percolation exponents,
ξ′
p ∼[R(p) −R(pc)]−ν. If we linearize R(p) and R(pc) around pc = p∗, and use Eq. (185), we
obtain
ν = ln b
ln λ ,
(796)
where λ = dR(p)/dp, evaluated at p = p∗. For example, the 2 × 2 and 3 × 3 self-dual RG cells
yield, ν ≃1.43 and 1.38, respectively, which should be compared with the exact value ν = 4/3
(see Table 2.3). For the 2 × 2 × 2 cell of Figure 5.14, one obtains ν ≃1.03, which should be
compared with the numerical estimate, ν ≃0.88, listed in Table 2.3. In fact, PSRG methods
can also predict the other percolation critical exponents, such as (see Section 2.7.1) β and βB.
We now discuss the PSRG approach for calculating the conductivity of a random resistor
network.
In this approach, one begins with the original probability density function f0(g)
for the bond conductances g of the RG cell and replaces it with a new distribution f1(g),
the probability distribution for the conductance of a bond in the renormalized cell, which is
calculated by determining the equivalent conductance of the RG cell. Thus, for an n−bond
RG cell, one obtains a recursion relation relating f1(g) to f0(g):
f1(g) =

f0(g1)dg1f0(g2)dg2 · · · f0(gn)dgnδ(gp −g′) ,
(797)
where g1, . . . , gn are the conductances of the n bonds of the RG cell, and g′ is the equivalent
conductance of the RG cell. For example, for the 5-bond cell of Figure 5.14 one has
g′ = g1(g2g3 + g2g4 + g3g4) + g5(g1 + g2)(g3 + g4)
(g1 + g4)(g2 + g3) + g5(g1 + g2 + g3 + g4)
.
(798)
and if, f0(g) = (1 −p)δ(g) + pδ(g −g0), then [using Eq. (187)]
f1(g)
=
[1 −R(p)]δ(g) + 2p3q2δ

g −1
3g0

+ 2p2(1 + 2p)q2δ

g −1
2g0

+4p3qδ

g −3
5g0

+ p4δ(g −g0) ,
(799)
265

which is already more complex than f0(g).
One now iterates Eq.
(187) to obtain a new
distribution f2(g) by substituting f1(g) into its right-hand side. The iteration process should
continue until a distribution f∞(g) is reached, the shape of which does not change under further
iterations. This is called the ﬁxed-point distribution and the conductance of the original network
is simply an average of f∞(g). However, it is diﬃcult to analytically iterate Eq. (187) many
times. The common practice is to replace the distribution after the ith iteration by an optimized
distribution f o
i (g) which closely mimics the properties of fi(g). The optimized f o
i (g) is usually
taken to have the following form
f o
i (g) = [1 −R(p)]δ(g) + R(p)δ[g −go(p)] ,
(800)
where go(p) is an optimized conductance. In the past, various schemes have been proposed
for determining go(p), one of the most accurate of which was proposed by Bernasconi (1978),
according to which, if after i iterations of Eq. (187), fi(g) is given by
fi(g) = [1 −R(p)]δ(g) +

i
ai(p)δ(g −gi) ,
(801)
then, go(p) is approximated by
go(p) ≃exp

1
R(p)

i
ai(p) ln gi

.
(802)
Once go(p) is calculated, Eq.
(187) is iterated again, the new distribution fi+1(g) and its
optimized form f o
i+1(g) are determined, and so on. In practice, after a few iterations, even an
initially broad f0(g) converges quickly to a stable and narrow distribution with a shape that
does not change under further rescaling. The conductivity of the resistor network is simply a
suitably-deﬁned average of this distribution.
Renormalization methods are usually very accurate for 2D resistor networks, and are ﬂexible
enough to be used for anisotropic systems. However, they have two drawbackes for 3D systems.
The ﬁrst is that the predictions of the PSRG methods for percolation networks with any type
of b = 2 RG cell are not accurate.
Moreover, even after the ﬁrst iteration of Eq.
(187)
the renormalized conductance distribution f1(g) is very complex; if we begin with a binary
distribution, f1(g) will have seventy-three components of the form δ(g −gi), with i = 1, · · · , 73.
Hence, analytical calculation of f2(g) is very diﬃcult. The second drawback is that, even for
a b = 3 RG cell, analytical determination of the RG transformation becomes very diﬃcult,
266

because the total number of possible conﬁgurations of the RG cell is of the order 1011. Thus,
one must resort to a Monte Carlo renormalization group method (Reynolds et al., 1980), which
is, however, not any simpler than the simple Monte Carlo method itself.
Young and Stinchcombe (1975) were the ﬁrst to use the PSRG methods for computing
critical exponents of 2D percolation networks. Stinchcombe and Watson (1976) were the ﬁrst to
use such methods to compute the conductivity exponent µ. Their work was followed by several
others who proposed various variants of the PSRG methods for calculating both percolation
and conduction properties of random resistor networks and other disordered media (see for
example, Payandeh, 1980; Sahimi et al., 1984; Sahimi, 1988). Stanley et al. (1982) and Family
(1984) reviewed most of the literature on this subject.
5.12 Renormalized Eﬀective-Medium Approximation
To circumvent the diﬃculties that the PSRG methods encounter for 3D resistor networks,
Sahimi et al.
(1983c, 1984) proposed a new method that combined the EMA and PSRG
methods, and is called the renormalized EMA (REMA). Their method took advantages of two
facts.
(1) Each time a resistor network is renormalized, it becomes less critical in the sense that,
its associated percolation correlation length ξ′
p is smaller than the original correlation length ξp
by a factor of b (the linear size of the RG cell); see Eq. (185).
(2) As discussed and demonstrated above, the EMA is usually accurate away from the
percolation threshold, if the morphology of the material does not contain any correlations.
Therefore, if one employs the EMA with the ﬁrst iteration f1(g) of the original bond con-
ductance distribution f0(g), instead of f0(g) itself, the performance of the EMA must improve.
That is, in the REMA the conductance distribution that one uses in Eq. (57) is f1(g), in-
stead of f0(g). Because the bonds of the renormalized resistor network are b times longer than
the original ones, this necessitates a rescaling of conductivities of the renormalized network to
replicate the old one: The REMA conductivity is taken to be the same as that for the original
resistor network at p = 1.
The REMA is sharply more accurate than both the EMA and PSRG. For bond percolation,
the REMA predicts the percolation threshold pc to be the root of the following equation
R(pc) = 2
Z ,
bond percolation,
(803)
267

which should be compared with Eq. (61), the prediction of the EMA. For example, with the
3D RG cell of Figure 5.14, the RG transformation is given by
R(p) = p12 + 12p11q + 66p10q2 + 220p9q3 + 493p8q4 + 776p7q5 + 856p6q6
+616p5q7 + 238p4q8 + 48p3q9 + 4p2q10 ,
(804)
so that, using Eq. (194) in (193) with Z = 6, one obtains pc ≃0.267, only 7% larger than
the numerical estimate (see Table 2.2), pc ≃0.249 for the simple-cubic network. Moreover, so
long as one uses the type of 2D self-dual RG cells that are shown in Figure 5.14, the REMA
predicts the exact bond-percolation threshold of the square lattice for any cell size b. As for
site percolation, it is not diﬃcult to show, using Eq. (107), that the REMA predicts that the
site-percolation threshold of a lattice is the root of the following equation,
R(pc) = Γ−1/2
site percolation ,
(805)
which should be compared with Eq. (113), the EMA prediction for the site-percolation thresh-
old. Here, Γ is deﬁned by Eq. (108), and R(p) is the RG transformation for site percolation.
For example, if we use a 2 × 2 × 2 RG cell for site percolation in the simple-cubic lattice, we
obtain
R(p) = p8 + 8p7q + 28p6q2 + 56p5q3 + 54p4q4 + 24p3q5 + 4p2q6 ,
(806)
which should be compared with Eq. (194), the RG transformation for a 2 × 2 × 2 cell for
bond percolation. Using Eq. (196) in (195) we obtain, pc ≃0.367 for site-percolation threshold
of a simple-cubic lattice, which is 17% larger than the numerical estimate pc ≃0.3116 (see
Table 2.2), and represents a sharp improvement over pc ≃0.46 that is predicted by the EMA
(see Section 5.5). Finally, the REMA prediction for the correlated bond-percolation threshold
of a simple-cubic lattice is pc ≃0.105, in excellent agreement with the numerical estimate,
pc ≃0.103 (see Section 5.6). Therefore, the REMA predictions for the percolation thresholds
of various percolation models in both 2D and 3D lattices are accurate and close to the best
numerical estimates currently available.
Using the REMA, Sahimi et al. (1983c, 1984) and Sahimi (1988) also obtained very accurate
predictions of the eﬀective conductivity of various 2D and 3D networks. Figure 5.15 compares
the predictions of the REMA for the eﬀective conductivity of a square network in bond percola-
tion with those of the EMA and the simulation results, while Figure 5.16 does the same for the
268

simple-cubic network. In Figure 5.10, the REMA predictions for the eﬀective conductivity of a
simple-cubic network in site percolation are compared with those of the EMA, a PSRG method,
and the results of numerical simulations, while Figure 5.11 compares the REMA predictions
for the eﬀective conductivity of the same network in correlated bond percolation with those
of the EMA and the modiﬁed EMA proposed by Bernasconi and Wiesmann (1976), described
and discussed in Section 5.6. It is clear that in all cases the REMA provides very accurate
predictions for the eﬀective conductivities. Finally, we should mention that Zhang and Seaton
(1992) extended the above REMA to an arbitrary conductance distribution, and showed the
extension to be highly accurate.
5.13 The Critical Path Method
A powerful technique for analyzing conduction in heterogeneous materials is the critical
path method. This idea was ﬁrst proposed by Ambegaokar, Halperin and Langer (AHL) in 1971
who argued that conduction in a disordered solid with a broad distribution of conductances
is dominated by those conductances with magnitudes larger than a characteristic conductance
gc, which is the smallest conductance such that the set {g|g > gc} forms a conducting sample-
spanning cluster, which is called the critical path. Therefore, transport in a disordered medium
with a broad conductance distribution can be reduced to a percolation-conduction problem
with threshold gc. This idea was later proven rigorously by Tyc and Halperin (1989). Shante
(1977) and Kirkpatrick (1979b) modiﬁed this idea by assigning gc to all local conductances g
with g ≥gc, and setting all conductances with g < gc to be zero (since the contribution of such
conductances to the eﬀective conductivity is very small). They then arrived at a trial solution
for the conductance of the sample given by
ge = agc[p(gc) −pc]µ ,
(807)
which is just the usual power law for the eﬀective conductivity of the network near the percola-
tion threshold. Here, p(gc) denotes the probability that a given conductance is greater than or
equal to gc, and a is a constant. Equation (197) is then maximized with respect to gc in order
to obtain an estimate of gc and thus ge. Computer simulations of Berman et al. (1986) for 2D
networks with various conductance distributions, such as Gaussian, log-normal, and uniform
distributions, conﬁrmed the quantitative accuracy of the AHL idea, even for relatively narrow
distributions. Therefore, calculating the eﬀective conductivity of disordered materials in which
269

percolation may not seem to play any role at all may be reduced to the same problem but in
a percolation system, indicating the power and broad applicability of percolation theory. In
Section 6.2 we will discuss in detail the application of the AHL idea for determining hopping
conductivity of amorphous semiconductors.
Katz and Thompson (1986, 1987) extended the AHL method to estimating the perme-
ability and electrical conductivity of porous materials. In such materials the local hydraulic
conductance is a function of a length scale l. Therefore, the critical conductance gc deﬁnes a
corresponding characteristic length lc. Since both ﬂow and electrical conduction problems be-
long to the same class of percolation problems, the length that signals the percolation threshold
in the ﬂow problem also deﬁnes the threshold in the electrical conductivity problem. Thus, we
rewrite Eq. (197) as
ge = φgc(l)[p(l) −pc]µ ,
(808)
where the porosity φ (volume fraction of the pores) ensures a proper normalization of the ﬂuid
or the electric-charge density. The function gc(l) is equal to cfl3 for the ﬂow problem and ccl
for the conduction problem. For appropriate choices of the function p(l), the conductance ge(l)
achieves a maximum for some lmax ≤lc. In general, lf
max for the ﬂow problem is diﬀerent from
lc
max for the conduction problem, because the transport paths have diﬀerent weights for the two
problems.
If p(l) allows for a maximum in the conductance which occurs for lmax ≤lc, then we can
write
lf
max
= lc −∆lf =
lc

1 −
µ
1 + µ + lcµp′′(lc)/p′(lc)

,
(809)
lc
max
= lc −∆lc =
lc

1 −
µ
3 + µ + lcµp′′(lc)/p′(lc)

.
(810)
If the pore size distribution (and hence the pore conductance distribution) of the material is
very broad, then, lcµp′′(lc)/p′(lc) ≪1, and Eqs. (199) and (200) reduce to
lf
max
=
lc

1 −
µ
1 + µ

≃1
3lc ,
(811)
lc
max
=
lc

1 −
µ
3 + µ

≃3
5lc ,
(812)
if we use µ ≃2 for 3D percolation systems (see Table 2.3). If, for example, the morphology
of the material is such that µ is non-universal (see the discussion in Section 2.11), then the
270

non-universal value of µ, instead of µ ≃2, must be used in Eqs. (201) and (202). Using these
results, we can establish a relation between ge and ke, the eﬀective permeability of the porous
material. Writing
ge = a1φ[p(lc
max) −pc]µ ,
(813)
and
ke = a2φ(lf
max)2[p(lf
max) −pc]µ ,
(814)
we obtain to ﬁrst order in ∆lc or in ∆lf
p(lf,c
max) −pc = −∆lf,c p′(lc) .
(815)
To obtain the constants a1 and a2, Katz and Thompson (1986) assumed that at the local level
the conductivity of the porous medium is gf, the conductivity of the ﬂuid (usually brine) that
saturates the pore space, and that the local pore geometry is cylindrical. These assumptions
imply that a1 = gf and a2 = 1/32. Therefore, one obtains
ke = a3l2
c
ge
gf
,
(816)
where a3 = 1/226. A similar argument leads to (Katz and Thompson, 1987)
ge
gf
= lc
max
lc
φS(lc
max) ,
(817)
where S(lc
max) is the volume fraction (saturation) of the connected pore space involving pore
widths of size lc
max and larger.
Equations (206) and (207) involve no adjustable parameters. Every parameter is ﬁxed and
precisely deﬁned. To obtain the characteristic length lc, Katz and Thompson (1986, 1987)
proposed the use of mercury porosimetry, a method that is used for characterizing the mor-
phology of many porous materials (see, for example, Sahimi, 1993b, 1995b). Porosimetry is a
percolation process in which the volume of the mercury, which is injected into the pore space
of the material, is measured as a function of the pressure that is applied in order to push the
mercury into the pore space. In the initial stages of this process, before a sample-spanning
cluster of the pores that have been ﬁlled with the mercury, the curvature of the pressure versus
volume curve is positive. There is also an inﬂection point in the curve beyond which the pore
volume increases rapidly with the pressure. This inﬂection point signals the formation of the
271

sample-spanning cluster. According to the Washburn equation (see Sahimi, 1993b, 1995b) we
must have l ≥−4σ cos θ/Pi, where Pi is the pressure at the inﬂection point, σ is the surface
tension between the mercury and the vaccum, and θ is the contact angle between the mercury
and the pore surface. Hence
lc = −4σ cos θ
Pi
(818)
deﬁnes the characteristic length lc. Thus, a simple mercury porosimetry experiment yields the
characteristic length lc.
Katz and Thompson (1986, 1987) showed that, without any adjustable parameter, Eqs.
(206) and (207) provide accurate predictions for a wide variety of porous materials. The critical
path method has also been extended to estimating the non-linear conductivity of disordered
porous materials (Sahimi, 1993a).
5.14 Numerical Computation of the Eﬀective Conductivity
Having described the analytical approaches for estimating the eﬀective conductivity ge of
resistor networks, we now discuss the numerical methods. There are several eﬃcient numerical
methods for computing ge, and what follows is a description of each.
5.14.1 The conjugate-gradient method
One of the main numerical methods for estimating the eﬀective conductivity of a disordered
material is direct computer simulations using a resistor network model of the material. The
current Iij in a bond ij of the network is given by, Iij = gij(Vi −Vj), where gij is the bond’s
conductance, and Vi is the voltage at site i. The net current reaching any site of the network
must be zero, and therefore

j
Iij =

j
gij(Vi −Vj) = 0 ,
(819)
where the sum is over all the sites j that are connected to i by a bond. Writing down Eq.
(209) for every interior node of the network results in a set of simultaneous equations for nodal
voltages, from the solution of which the voltage distribution in the network and thus its eﬀective
conductivity are calculated. The boundary conditions are usually a ﬁxed current injected into
the network at one of its sites, and extracting it at another site, or a ﬁxed voltage diﬀerence
across the network in one direction and periodic boundary conditions in the other directions.
The conductance of the bonds can be selected from an arbitrary probability density function
which represents the conductance distribution of the disordered material.
272

Equations (209) can be solved by several iterative or exact methods. Gaussian elimina-
tion has the advantage that it yields the exact numerical solution of the voltage distribution
throughout the network. It requires, however, large computer memory. Moreover, its required
computer time scales as O(n2), where n is the number of equations to be solved. For these
reasons, Gaussian elimination is not used when n is very large. One may also solve Eqs. (209)
by an over-relaxation method which has the advantages of being simple and requiring minimal
computer memory. However, it suﬀers from critical slowing down as the percolation threshold
is approached, i.e., it requires an increasingly number of iterations to converge to a solution
with the required accuracy, and also becomes increasingly less accurate as pc is approached.
Currently, the most accurate and eﬃcient numberical method for solving Eqs. (209) is by the
conjugate-gradient method which is guaranteed to converge to the true solution in at most n
iterations. A detailed description of this method and its virtues is given in Chapter 9 of Volume
II, and therefore, we do not discuss it here.
If the conductance distribution is very broad and contains correlations at many length scales,
then one must use a very large network with millions of sites in order to accurately model the
material, and thus solving for the voltage distribution becomes a very time-consuming problem.
For such cases, an eﬃcient method due to Mehrabi and Sahimi (1997) can be used for calculating
the efective conductivity of the network. In this method, instead of solving for the voltage
distribution in the original large network, one ﬁrst identiﬁes the high conductance regions
using a wavelet transformation and coarsens the lattice. That is, since the low conductance
regions do not contribute signiﬁcantly to the overall conductivity of the lattice, they do not
need to be represented in the lattice by a ﬁne lattice structure. In addition, those regions of the
lattice in which the variation of the conductance is not very severe do need to be represented by
a very ﬁne grid structure. Thus, one can eliminate the lattice sites in such regions and reduce
the number of sites at which the voltage is computed. In this way, the number of the equations
that must be solved is reduced drastically (by 2-3 orders of magnitude), reducing the size of the
computational problem to a manageable level. Then, the conjugate-gradient method is applied
to the coarsened lattice. Mehrabi and Sahimi (1997) and Ebrahimi and Sahimi (2002) showed
that this method reduces the computation times by orders of magnitude.
Let us point out that, although the ﬁrst application of the resistor network models to
estimating the eﬀective transport properties of disordered materials and media is generally
273

attributed to Kirkpatrick (1971), many years before him, Fatt (1956) had used 2D network
models for estimating the eﬀective permeability of disordered porous materials, a problem that
is completely isomorphic to the resistor network problem and computation of the eﬀective
conductivity. Several papers published in 1960s also reported similar computations (see, for
example, Nicholson, 1968; Rink and Schopper, 1968; Greenberg and Brace, 1969).
5.14.2 Transfer-matrix method
In this method, which was ﬁrst proposed by Derrida and Vannimenus (1982), the eﬀective
conductivity of the network is calculated exactly as the network is constructed.
We follow
Derrida et al. (1984) and describe the method for a 2D network; its generalization to 3D will
then be obvious. For the sake of eﬃciency, the computations are usually done for a strip,
although the network can have any shape or structure.
Figure 5.17 presents the strip which is built by adding one bond at a time to it, starting
from the line on the left. At each stage of its construction, the left part of the strip is described
by a M × M matrix A, where M is the number of sites in a section (column), including the
sites of the ﬁrst (top) and the last (bottom) rows. To construct A we proceed as follows. If
we wish to estimate the conductivity of the left part of the strip, we attach to sites 1, 2, · · ·,
M a wire which imposes a potential Vα on site α, as a result of which a current Iβ ﬂows in the
wire attached to site β. Since the problem is linear, we must have, Iβ =

α AαβVα. On the
other hand, the currents depend only on the diﬀerence between the potentials, and thus we can
always set VM = 0. The only thing that we now need to specify is how A is transformed as we
add more bonds to the network (strip).
There are two types of bond that one adds to a 2D strip. If we add a horizontal bond with
resistance R = 1/g (where g is selected according to its statistical distribution) to site α (see
Figure 5.17), then A is transformed to A′ with entries A′
ij that are related to those of A by
A′
ij = Aij −AiαAjαR
1 + AααR ,
(820)
which can be proven easily by using the usual laws of connecting resistors together. Similarly,
if we add a vertical bond with resistance R′ between α and β, then
A′′
ij = A′
ij + (δαj −δβj)(δαi −δβi)
R′
,
(821)
274

where δij is the usual Kronecker’s delta. Note that A is symmetric, making the computations
more eﬃcient. The conductivity of a strip of length L ≫1 is then given by
σ = lim
L→∞
A(1, 1)
L
.
(822)
Thus, calculation of ge becomes extremely simple. We do not store A for the entire M × L
system, but only for the last two sections of it. For example, as soon as the construction of
the strip reaches, e.g., the fourth section (M = 4), the ﬁrst two sections are forgotten, and
only the last two are kept. Moreover, the size of A is independent of L, so that one can use
an extremely large L without worrying about the required computer memory. Derrida et al.
(1984) present a computer program for transfer matrix calculation of the eﬀective conductivity
of a M × M × L simple-cubic network. The calculations are similar to the 2D case, except that
M should be replaced by M 2 + 2, the number of sites in a section (plane). Equation (210) is
then used for all the bonds in the x-direction (the direction of macroscopic potential gradient),
while Eq. (211) is used for those in the y−and z−directions.
We should point out that the transfer-matrix approach is even more eﬃcient when it is used
for computing the eﬀective conductivity of a mixture of normal conductors and superconductors.
This fact has been demonstrated by Herrmann et al. (1984), Normand et al. (1988), and
Normand and Herrmann (1990). The latter two groups actually designed a special-purpose
computer that computed the conductivity exponents µ and s based on the transfer-matrix
method.
In its original form developed by Derrida and Vannimenus (1982), the transfer matrix
method could be used to calculate only ge, providing no information on the voltage distri-
bution throughout the network, as A stores information only about the last two sections of the
network. In its modiﬁed form developed by Duering and Bergman (1990), such distributions
can also be calculated.
5.14.3 Network reduction: The Lobb-Frank-Fogelholm methods
Lobb and Frank (1984) developed an eﬃcient method for exact computation of the eﬀective
conductivity of 2D lattices, which consisted of applying a sequence of transformations to the
bonds of the lattice. The ﬁnal outcome of this sequence is reduction of the lattice to a single
bond that has the same conductance as the entire lattice.
The details of the method are
described by Frank and Lobb (1988) whose paper we follow here.
275

A well-known transformation in the theory of electrical circuits is the Y −∇transformation,
which is deﬁned in both directions and is given by
Y →∇:
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
GA = g2g3∆1
GB = g1g3∆1
GC = g1g2∆1 ,
(823)
∇→Y :
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
g1 = GBGC∆2
g2 = GAGC∆2
g3 = GAGB∆2 ,
(824)
where, ∆1 = (g1 +g2 +g3)−1 and ∆2 = G−1
A +G−1
B +G−1
C . We should keep in mind that, similar
to the case of series and parallel arrangements of resistors, the conductor conﬁgurations are
completely equivalent, as far as the external circuit is concerned.
Figure 5.18 shows the primary transformation used in the Lobb-Frank method, which can
be decomposed into three separate parts: One ﬁrst applies a ∇→Y transformation, then
redeﬁnes the lattice point, and ﬁnally applies a Y →∇transformation again. In going from
Figure 5.18(a) to 5.18(b), conductances 6,7, and 8 are determined from 1, 2, and 3 by Eq.
(214). In the transformation from Figure 5.18(c) to 5.18(d), conductances 9, 10, and 11 are
calculated by Eq. (213).
If some of the bonds are not conducting, then the propagator usually becomes simpler in
the sense of not resulting in a new diagonal conductor. An example of this is shown in Figures
5.18(e)-(h), where one bond is insulating. In this case, the ﬁrst two parts of the propagator are
the same as before, but the ﬁnal Y →∇transformation is reduced to a simple combination of
two conductors in series, with no diagonal bond.
To illustrate the method, consider a small cell on the square lattice shown in Figure 5.19.
Starting with the full lattice in Figure 5.19(a), the two conductors attached to the top node of
the leftmost column are combined in series to form a diagonal bond, which is then propagated
through the lattice, as shown in Figure 5.19(b), until there is no diagonal bond left which, in
the present example, terminates at an edge. If there are some insulating bonds, the propagator
may terminate somewhere inside the lattice. The same procedure is now followed in Figures
5.19(c)-(g) for eliminating the uppermost site of the leftmost column by a series of reduction.
The resulting conductor is then propagated until it terminates, at which point one obtains the
276

conﬁguration in Figure 5.19(h), which is easily reduced to a single conductor with a conductance
equivalent to the conductance of the original lattice. Note that this algorithm is not restricted
to 2D lattices, but can be used with any 2D system in which the Y →∇and ∇→Y
transformations are well-deﬁned.
The algorithm proposed by Fogelholm (1980) is very similar to that of Lobb and Frank
(1984), except that it is also applicable to 3D systems. It is based on the fact that an internal
node in a network can be eliminated if new impedances are inserted between certain of the
remaining nodes.
Speciﬁcally, if node s0 is directly connected to the nodes s1, s2, · · · , sn
through conductances g1, g2, · · · , gn, its valence is n, and may be eliminated by
(1) deleting s0 and g1, g2 · · · , gn, and
(2) inserting the conductance gij = gigj/(g1 + g2 + · · · + gn) between each pair (si, sj) of
neighboring sites.
Thus, the conductance of the sample can be computed by successively eliminating all sites
except the terminal nodes on two opposite faces of the network. The result is a single bond
between the two terminal nodes, if the sample is conducting, and no bond at all if the material is
insulating (i.e., if the conducting bonds do not form a sample-spanning cluster). The algorithm
is highly eﬃcient, it yields the exact conductance of a given sample, and in fact its eﬃciency
increases as the percolation threshold pc is appropached. Fogelholm (1980) utilized this method
for 2D lattices, while Gingold and Lobb (1990) used it in their 3D simulations.
5.14.4 Random walk method
As discussed in Section 4.10, from the time dependence of the mean square displacement
of a random walker the eﬀective diﬀusivity, and hence the eﬀective conductivity ge, can be
calculated. The ﬁrst application of this idea for determining the eﬀective conductivity of a
heterogeneous material appeared in a paper of Haji-Sheikh and Sparrow (1967), who studied
heat conduction in a composite solid. Since then, the random walk method has been extensively
used for studying transport, and in particular conduction, in disordered materials.
In the
context of percolation and resistor network models of disordered materials, Brandt (1975)
appears to be the ﬁrst to have used this method, although the method was popularized by de
Gennes (1976b) who made an analogy between the motion of a random walker in a disordered
medium and that of an ant in a labyrinth. Mitescu and Roussenq (1976) followed de Gennes’
277

idea and performed relatively extensive simulations on percolation clusters. The developments
in this area have been reviewed extensively by Havlin and Ben-Avraham (1987), Haus and Kehr
(1987) and Hughes (1995,1996).
Bunde et al. (1985) considered a general two-component material with conductivities gA
and gB, and formulated a random-walk model for calculating the eﬀective conductivity of such
a mixture. In this model, one ﬁrst sets up a time scale. We know that, gA ∼DA ∼ℓ2/tA,
where DA is the diﬀusivity in the region A, ℓis the mean-free path (or the distance travelled
by a random walker), and τA the characteristic time for travelling a distance ℓ. Therefore,
τA
τB
= gA
gB
.
(825)
Next, one must specify the transition probability Wi, the probability that the random walker
takes a step to its ith neighbor. This probability is given by
Wi =
pi

i pi
,
(826)
where pi = gA or gB. More generally, if each bond ij of a lattice, that is connected to one of
its sites i, has a conductance gij, then the transition probability Wij for a step from i to j is
given by
Wij =
gij

j gij
.
(827)
Therefore, one may use a random walk method to simulate diﬀusion in a composite solid with
a continuous (or discrete) distribution of local conductances. The eﬀective conductivity of the
system will then be exactly equal to its eﬀective diﬀusivity. In practice, one must use certain
tricks in order to accelerate the simulations. For example, if gA ≪gB, then the random walker
may spend a long time in the A-region before making a transition to the B-region, and vice
versa. Using vectorization (for use in a vector or supercomputer), one can develop a highly
eﬃcient computer algorithm for simulating random walks in a disordered medium (Sahimi and
Stauﬀer, 1991) For the most recent application of this method to composite materials see Van
Siclen (2002).
5.15 Estimation of the Critical Exponents of the Conductivity
As discussed in the Introduction, and also in Chapter 2, an important property of the
eﬀective conductivity of composite solids with percolation disorder, which are a mixture of
278

conducting and insulating materials, is the universal power law that it follows near the perco-
lation threshold. The power law is characterized by the critical exponent µ [see Eq. (2.36)].
If the composite consists of normal and superconducting materials, then, its eﬀective conduc-
tivity, which diverges at the percolation threshold where the superconducting material forms
a sample-spanning cluster, follows a power law near pc and is characterized by a critical expo-
nent s. Aside from certain continuum models that were described in Section 2.10, the critical
exponents µ and s are universal. Therefore, accurate estimates of these exponents for both
2D and 3D systems have always been of great interest. In the 1970s these exponents were
estimated by computing the eﬀective conductivity for a range of p −pc, and ﬁtting the results
to the corresponding power laws. However, it became gradually clear that this is an utterly
inaccurate method of estimating the critical exponents. As a result, several accurate methods
were developed for estimating these exponents, and what follows is a brief description of each
method.
5.15.1 Finite-size scaling
We already described this method in Section 2.9, whereby one computes the eﬀective con-
ductivity of the networks as a function of their linear size L. The computations are carried out
at the percolation threshold of the inﬁnite system. For a network of conducting and insulating
bonds, one has
ge ∼L−µ/ν[a1 + a2g1(L) + a3g2(L) + · · ·] ,
(828)
where a1, a2, and a3 are constants, ν is the critical exponent of percolation correlation length,
and g1(L) and g2(L) represent corrections to scaling and vanish as L →∞. Often, g1(L), g2(L)
and all the higher-order corrections are combined, so that Eq. (218) is rewritten as
ge ∼L−µ/ν +
a1 + a′
2L−ωc,
,
(829)
where ωc is called the leading correction-to-scaling exponent. However, as discussed in Section
2.9, Sahimi and Arbabi (1991) showed that very often g1(L) = L−1 and g2(L) = (ln L)−1
provide very accurate ﬁt of the data. In any event, after computing ge(L), the results are ﬁtted
to Eq. (219) [or to Eq. (218) with the aforementioned g1(L) and g2(L)], leaving µ, ωc, a1 and
a′
2 as the ﬁtting parameters to be determined.
Similarly, the eﬀective conductivity of a network, that consists of normal conductors and
279

superconductors, is ﬁtted to
ge ∼Ls/ν +
b1 + b2L−ωs,
,
(830)
where b1 and b2 are constant, and ωs is the leading correction-to-scaling exponent for this
problem, which is not necessarily equal to ωc used in (219).
Provided that accurate data for ge(L) can be determined, these methods are highly reliable.
In fact, estimates of µ and s that are listed in Table 2.3 were obtained by this method. To our
knowledge, the ﬁrst application of ﬁnite-size scaling to estimation of µ was made by Sarychev
and Vinogradoﬀ(1981) and Mitescu et al. (1982) in 2D, and by Sahimi et al. (1983b) in 3D.
Since then, this method has been used very extensively by a large number of research groups.
5.15.2 Position-space renormalization group method
As discussed earlier, in the PSRG approach, after several iterations of Eq. (186), the ﬁxed-
point conductance distribution f∞(g) is reached. Suppose that this distribution is obtained
after m iterations, so that f∞(g) = fm(g). Since the shape of fm(g) does not change by further
renormalization, one must have λµfm+1(λµg) ≃fm(g), where λµ is a constant. The critical
exponent µ of the conductivity is then given by
µ = ν ln λµ
ln b .
(831)
In practice, λµ is computed by the following method. If, after m iterations, the conductance
distribution is fm(g), then, λ(m)
µ , the mth approximation to λµ, is deﬁned by

λ(m)
µ fm[λ(m)
µ g]h(g)dg =

fm+1(g)h(g)dg ,
(832)
where h(g) is a function chosen to speed up the convergence of the sequence λ(m)
µ
to λµ. Many
such h(g) have been proposed. One of the most accurate choice appears to be (Tsallis et al.,
1983)
h(g) =
g
g0 + g ,
(833)
where g0 is an arbitrary reference conductance. Other choices, such as h(g) = ln g and h(g) =
g−1 have also proven to be reasonably accurate.
The exponent s is computed by a similar method. In this case,
s = −ν ln λs
ln b ,
(834)
280

where λs is the corresponding eigenvalue for the the superconductivity problem, and is estimated
by an equation similar to (222), using the corresponding conducatance distribution after m
iterations and the same h(g). For example, using this scheme with the 2 × 2 RG cell of Figure
5.14 yields, µ = s ≃1.32, in excellent agreement with the numerical estimate, µ = s ≃1.3
(see Table 2.3). The 3D RG cell of Figure 5.14 yields, µ ≃2.14, only 7% larger than µ ≃2.0,
the most accurate numerical estimate of µ for 3D percolation network, and s ≃0.76, only 4%
larger than s ≃0.73 for 3D percolation networks. Therefore, even small, suitably selected RG
cells can yield reliable estimates of µ and s.
5.15.3 Series expansion
Recall from Section 2.7.2 that, for a d−dimensional system, the conductivity exponent µ
can be rewritten as
µ = (d −2)ν + ζ ,
(835)
where ζ is the exponent that describes the scaling of the resistance Rij between two points
i and j of a box of linear size L (L < ξp), R ∼Lζ/ν. In the series expansion method, ﬁrst
developed by Harris and Fisch (1977; see also Fisch and Harris, 1978), one deﬁnes a percolation
susceptibility χp by
χp =
)
j
sij
*
,
(836)
where sij = 1 if the two sites i and j belong to the same percolation cluster and sij = 0
otherwise, and the averaging is over all conﬁgurations of the occupied sites (probability p) and
unoccupied ones [probability (1 −p)]. One also deﬁnes a resistive susceptibility χR(C) for a
cluster C of sites via
χR(C) =

i∈C

j∈C
Rij .
(837)
Then, the total resistive susceptibility χR, deﬁned by
χR =
)
j
Rij
*
,
(838)
is obtained by summing χR(C) over all the clusters, weighting each cluster by its probability of
occurence. This is usually done in terms of cumulants, whereby one writes
χR =

C
N(C; d)pnb(C)χc
R(C) ,
(839)
281

where nb(C) is the number of bonds in the cluster, N(C; d) is the number of ways per site a
diagram, topologically equivalent to C, can be realized on a d−dimensional simple-cubic lattice,
and the sum is over all topologically inequivalent diagrams C. Moreover, χc
R(C) is a cumulant
deﬁned by
χc
R(C) = χR(C) −

γ∈C
χc
R(γ) ,
(840)
where the sum is over all subdiagrams γ of C. Then, the average resistance ⟨R⟩is deﬁned by
⟨R⟩= χR
χp
∼|p −pc|−ζ .
(841)
Therefore, the procedure for series analysis of resistance of random resistor networks is as
follows. For each cluster C and ﬁxed value of nb (the number of bonds in the cluster), the
resistance Rij is computed (by solving the Kirchhoﬀ’s equations). These computations are
carried out for all such clusters, from which χR(C) and hence χR are obtained. Writing
χR =

k

l
A(k, l)dlpk ,
(842)
one obtaines χR as a power series in p.
Since, in practice, the number of possible cluster
conﬁgurations increases very rapidly with nb, the power series cannot be very long, and has been
calculated (Essam and Bhatti, 1985) only up to the ﬁrst 16 terms. Another series is obtained
for χp, the computation of which is comparatively simple, since it involves only counting the
number of clusters’ conﬁgurations.
The resulting two power series are then analyzed by a
Pad´e approximation method, from which the average resistance ⟨R⟩and hence the resistivity
exponent ζ are computed.
The series expansion method has been used for estimating the exponent µ. Its predictions
are comparable with those obtained by ﬁnite-size scaling.
5.15.4 Field-theoretic approach
Harris et al. (1984) and Lubensky and Wang (1986) developed a ﬁeld-theoretic approach
to the percolation conductivity problem. This approach is a renormalization group treatment
of the problem in the Fourier space, by which the critical exponents are computed as a power
series in ϵ = du −d, where du is the upper critical dimension of the problem, i.e., the dimension
at which the mean-ﬁeld theory becomes exact. The upper critical dimension for percolation
and conduction is du = 6. The method is somewhat similar to the series expansion method in
282

that, one ﬁrst derives an ϵ−expansion for the resistivity exponent ζ, and then, by combining it
with the ϵ−expansion for the correlation length exponent ν, derives the expansion for µ. The
result is given by (Lubensky and Wang, 1986)
µ = 3 −5
21ϵ + 173
9261ϵ2 + O(ϵ3) .
(843)
Note that for ϵ = 0, i.e., d = 6, the expansion yields µ = 3, in agreement with Eq. (22) for the
conductivity of Bethe lattices, which represents the mean-ﬁeld limit.
Such ϵ−expansions, while predicting the general trends in the dimensionality dependence
of µ, are not accurate for the practical cases of d = 2 and 3. For example, for d = 3, Eq.
(233) yields, µ ≃2.45, which should be compared with the numerical estimate (see Table 2.3),
µ ≃2. However, such expansions do serve a useful purpose in the following sense. An unsolved
problem is whether µ is related to the static exponents of percolation, such as ν and β. Over the
years, many relations between µ and the static exponents of percolation have been proposed.
However, such relations, if exact, must be consistent with Eq. (233) in that, if one substitutes
the ϵ−expansions for the percolation exponents in the proposed relations, one must recover Eq.
(233). To date, no such relation has been found (see Sahimi, 1984a and references therein).
5.15.5 Comparison with the experimental measurements
Let us now compare the numerical estimates of the conductivity exponents µ and s with
the experimental estimates. We will show in Section 6.5 that the static dielectric constant
of a heterogeneous material follows a power law near the percolation threshold pc, and is
characterized by the superconductivity exponent s. Experimental veriﬁcation of this important
result will also be discussed in detail in Chapter 6. Moreover, as we will discuss in Section
9.2.5.4, the exponent s may also be relevant to the divergence of the viscosity of a gelling
solution at the gel point. Therefore, we do not discuss the relevance of s to, and its comparison
with, the experimental data, and consider only the exponent µ.
We already compared in Section 5.1 the numerical estimate of µ, obtained with random re-
sistor networks and various analytical and numerical computations that were described through-
out this chapter, with extensive experimental data that have been reported over the past three
decades. These data have established unequivocally the relevance of percolation, the EMA,
and in particular the conductivity exponent µ, to conductor-insulator composites. Hence, let
us make a comparison with one of the most recent sets of data, reported by Andrade et al.
283

(1998) on the conductivity of pure vapor-grown carbon ﬁbres (VGCF) under compression, and
as a conducting component of a polymer composite. They measured the dependence of the ef-
fective conductivity on the apparent density φ of unmixed VGCF, when submitted to a uniaxial
and low-speed compaction process. Near the percolation threshold, the contact resistance in
the conductivity measurement device plays a signiﬁcant role. Figure 5.19 presents their data. It
is seen that the change in the conductivity of VGCF during compression indicates the existence
of two regimes, where a characteristic non-linear dependence of the eﬀective conductivity ge on
the density φ at low consolidation levels is followed by a roughly linear dependence of ge on φ
at higher pressures. The linear regime, far from φc ≃0.019, can be accurately predicted by the
EMA. If the data of Figure 5.19 near φc are ﬁtted to
ge ∼(φ −φc)µ ,
(844)
then, one obtains, µ ≃1.91±0.06, consistent with the conductivity exponent of 3D percolation
systems (see Table 2.3), µ ≃2.0. The same behavior was observed when VGCF was used as a
conducting ﬁller for a polymer composite, poly-propylene.
Even when the morphology of the material is such that it gives rise to non-universal power
laws for the material’s conductivity near the percolation threshold, experimental data and the
predictions of percolation theory that were discussed in Section 2.11 have been found to be
consistent with each other. An example is the work of Lee et al. (1986) who measured the
eﬀective conductivity of both sliver-coated-glass-Teﬂon composites and indium-glass compos-
ites.
In one experiment with the conducting sphere-insulator composites, the silver-coated
glass spheres were randomly distributed inside the Teﬂon host, with the conduction occuring
through the contact points between the spheres. The conductivity exponent was measured
to be, µ ≃2.0 ± 0.2, in excellent agreement with that of 3D percolation (see Table 2.3).
In the second set of experiments with the insulating sphere-conductor composites, the hard
glass spheres were randomly distributed inside the indium, and therefore conduction took place
in the channels between the spheres. Scanning-electron microscope images showed that the
narrow necks of the conducting paths do exist.
The measured conductivity exponent was,
µ ≃3.1 ± 0.3, which agrees with the prediction (see Section 2.11) that, with a conductance
distribution f(g) = (1 −p)δ(g) + p(1 −α)g−α, one has, µα ≃µ + α/(1 −α) [see the bounds
(2.77)], where µ is the universal conductivity exponent. Since for this composite, α ≃1/2, we
284

obtain µα ≃3.0, in agreement with the measurements.
Therefore, once again, percolation theory provides a powerful tool for modelling and pre-
dicting the eﬀective conductivity of composite solids.
5.16 Resistance Fluctuations, Moments of the Current Distribution, and Flicker
Noise
Flicker noise, also called 1/f noise, is the measured low-frequency spectrum of excess voltage
ﬂuctuations, when a constant current is applied to a resistor. The spectrum deﬁned by
S(f) =
 ∞
0 ⟨V (t)V (0)⟩exp(ift)dt ,
(845)
almost always behaves as
S(f) ∼1
f a ,
(846)
with a usually being close to unity, hence the name 1/f. Here V (t) is the voltage at time t, and
⟨·⟩denotes an average over the time. The origin of this power law behavior of S(f) has been
very controversial (for a review see, for example, Weissman, 1988). However, two properties of
1/f noise are well-understood:
(1) Flicker noise is resistance noise. That is, if the current I is constant and there are voltage
ﬂuctuations δV , then δV is caused by resistance ﬂuctuations δR, since according to Ohm’s
law, δV = IδR. This is conﬁrmed by the facts that, (i) the noise spectrum is proportional
to I2, and that (ii) the spectrum of the resistance ﬂuctuations, which can be obtained from
1/f−noise experiments, can also be measured directly with no applied current from higher-
order equilibrium correlation function (Voss and Clarke, 1976).
(2) Experiments (see, for example, Black et al., 1981, and references therein) show that,
resistance ﬂuctuations at low frequencies are correlated only over microscopic scales.
These two facts were exploited by Rammal et al. (1985a,b) for studying 1/f noise in the
framework of random resistor networks via the following model. Each bond ij of a network
has a resistance rij and a small ﬂuctuating part δrij.
The ﬂuctuations are assumed to be
uncorrelated random variables with mean zero and a covariance, ⟨δrijδrkl⟩= σ2
ijδikδjl. If all
the bonds have the same resistance, then σ2
ij = σ2. The mechanism for the ﬂuctuations in the
resistance is considered immaterial. If the resistance of the network and its ﬂuctuations are,
285

respectively, R and δR, then, we deﬁne the noise spectrum SR,
SR = 1
Ld
⟨δRδR⟩
R2
= 1
Ld
⟨δV δV ⟩
V 2
= 1
Ld
⟨δIδI⟩
I2
,
(847)
as the relevant quantity for measuring the resistance ﬂuctuations.
To compute the resistance noise in a resistor network, the following important theorems are
utilized.
5.16.1 Tellegen’s theorems
B.D.H. Tellegen in 1952 proposed and proved three important theorems for resistor networks
that are used for calculating resistance ﬂuctuations (see, Spence, 1970, for a clear exposition of
Tellegen’s theorems). These theorems are as follows.
Theorem 1: In a given resistor network, the branch currents iα and the voltage diﬀerence
vα across the corresponding branches satisﬁes the following sum rule:

α
iαvα = 0 .
(848)
Theorem 2: If a set of voltages v′′
α satisﬁes the Kirchhoﬀ’s voltage law, i.e.,

α v′′
α = 0,
where the sum is over branches of the network that form closed loops, and if a set of currents
i′
α satisﬁes the Kirchhoﬀ’s current law, i.e.,

α i′
α = 0, then

α
i′
αv′′
α = 0 .
(849)
Theorem 3: Let L1 and L2 be two linear operators acting on the voltages or on the currents.
Then, within the conditions of theorem 2, one has

α
(L1iα)(L2vα) =

p
(L1ip)(L2vp) ,
(850)
where ip and vp refer to the current and voltage in diﬀerent ports p. In particular,

α
[(L1iα)(L2vα) −(L2iα)(L1vα)] =

α
[(L1ip)(L2vp) −(L2ip)(L1vp)] .
(851)
These theorems have many applications, among which is the Cohn’s theorem that can be used
for computing SR.
5.16.2 Cohn’s theorem
286

Suppose that in a one-port resistor network (one inlet and one outlet) I is the external
current and V the voltage between the two contacts. According to Cohn’s theorem (Cohn,
1950), the resistance ﬂuctuation in the network is given by
δR =

α
δRα
iα
I
2
,
(852)
where δRα is the ﬂuctuation of the resistance in the branch α, and iα is the current through
this branch in the original unperturbed resistor network. Equation (242) is a direct result of
Eq. (241). From Cohn’s theorem, one obtains, for a one-port network,
SR = 1
Ld
1
R2

α

β
⟨δRαδRβ⟩
iα
I
2 iβ
I
2
= 1
Ld

α

β
⟨δRαδRβ⟩i2
αi2
β
(

α
Rαi2
α)2
.
(853)
In particular, for uncorrelated ﬂuctuations in the resistances and identical resistances, Rα = r,
one obtains
SR = 1
L2
σ2
r2

α
i4
α

α
i2
α
2 ,
(854)
which implies that SR is related to the second and fourth moments of the current distribution.
One can also show that
σ2
r2
1
nc
≤SR ≤σ2
r2
r
R ,
(855)
where nc is the number of conducting bonds in the network.
5.16.3 Scaling properties
It is easy to see that, for a d−dimensional uniform network of linear size L with uncorrelated
resistance ﬂuctuations, one has, SR = (σ2/r2)L−d, i.e., SR scales as the inverse of the network’s
volume Ld. The question is: In a self-similar cluster of conducting bonds, such as the sample-
spanning percolation clusters at pc (or above pc for L < ξp), how does SR scale with L? Rammal
and Toulouse (1983) showed that the resistance R(L) of the sample scales with L as
R(L) ∼L−βL ,
(856)
where
βL = Df
Ds
(Ds −2) .
(857)
287

Here Df is the fractal dimension of the cluster, Ds = 2Df/Dw is called the spectral dimension
of the cluster, and Dw is the random walk fractal dimension. We will show in detail in Sections
61.9. and 6.1.10 that, diﬀusion in self-similar and fractal clusters is anomalous, i.e., the mean
square displacement of a diﬀusant in the cluster at time t scales with t as t2/Dw with Dw > 1,
rather than t. It will also be shown there that, for the sample-spanning percolation cluster at
pc (or above pc for L < ξp), one has Dw = 2 + (µ −β)/ν, where β, ν and µ are the usual
percolation exponents deﬁned by Eqs. (2.30), (2.31) and (2.36). Since for this cluster we also
have [see Eq. (2.47)], Df = d −β/ν, Eq. (246) becomes the familiar equation
R(L) ∼Lµ/ν−d+2 ,
(858)
so that, βL = −µ/ν+d−2 = ˜ζ, where ˜ζ is the familiar resistivity exponent. The noise spectrum
then satisﬁes the following scaling equation,
SR(λL) ∼λ−bSR(L) ,
(859)
where λ is a scaling factor, so that
SR ∼L−b+d
L ≫1 ,
(860)
where b is a new exponent that characterizes the scale-dependence of SR. For a percolation
network, Eq. (249) can be written as
SR(p, L) = L−b+dh(ξp/L) ,
(861)
where h(x) is a universal scaling function with the properties that, h(x) ∼1 for x ≫1 (ξp ≫L),
so that SR(p, L) ∼L−b, while for x ≪1, h(x) ∼xd−b. Therefore, near pc,
SR ∼(p −pc)ν(b−d) ∼(p −pc)−κ .
(862)
The exponent b (and hence κ) is independent of all other percolation exponents deﬁned so far.
In general
−βL ≤b ≤Dbb ,
(863)
where Dbb is the fractal dimension of the backbone (current-carrying part) of the sample-
spanning percolation cluster. Moreover, Wright et al. (1986) derived the following rigorous
bounds for κ,
(3d −4)ν + 1 −2µ ≤κ ≤2(d −1)ν −µ ,
(864)
288

which are consistent with (253). Numerical simulations indicate that, κ ≃1.12 and 1.56 in 2D
and 3D, respectively.
More generally, let us deﬁne the 2qth moment of the current distribution by
M2q =

b
i2q
b ,
(865)
where the sum is over all the current-carrying bonds. Then, for a self-similar cluster, we expect
to have
M2q ∼L−˜τq ,
(866)
where, for the sample-spanning percolation cluster, ˜τq = τq/ν. The exponents τq are all inde-
pendent of each other, and thus each moment of the current distribution describes one aspect of
physics of the cluster or the transport process through it. For example, Eq. (255) implies that
M0 is simply the total number of current-carrying bonds of the cluster, i.e., the total number of
the bonds in the backbone of the cluster, and therefore, −˜τ0 = Dbb. Moreover, ˜τ1 = βL, which,
for the sample-spanning percolation cluster, becomes, ˜τ1 = −µ/ν + d −2. In general,
τq−1 ≤τq ≤
q
q −1τq−1 −
1
q −1τ0 .
(867)
These exponents have also been calculated by Park et al. (1987) by an ϵ−expansion, and by
Blumenfeld et al. (1987) by a series expansion.
Wright et al. (1986) and Tremblay et al. (1992) also considered resistance ﬂuctuations in
resistor networks of normal and superconducting bonds. In particular, if for the superconduct-
ing percolation networks one has the power law, SR ∼(pc −p)−κ′, then, because of the duality
relation for 2D systems, one has κ = κ′.
Let us mention that de Arcangelis et al. (1985, 1986) studied a closely related quantity,
namely, the moments of the voltage distribution in a resistor network and found, not surprisingly
(in view of our discussion), that the voltage distribution is also characterized by an inﬁnite
hierarchy of exponents which are closely related to that of the current distribution.
5.16.4 Comparison with the experimental data
The above predictions for the noise spectrum SR have been tested against experimental
measurements by several research groups. To discuss the experimental data, let us write SR in
terms of the resistance R of the material. Since near pc one has, R ∼(p −pc)−µ, we can write
SR ∼Rκ/µ ∼Rw ,
(868)
289

so that w ≃0.86 and 0.78 for 2D and 3D percolation networks.
To our knowledge, these
values have never been observed in any experiment. On the other hand, Tremblay et al. (1986)
considered resistance ﬂuctuations in continumm models of disordered materials near pc and,
similar to what was discussed for the eﬀective conductivity of such models in Chapter 2 (see
Section 2.11), derived the appropriate exponents w for these models. They predicted that for
the Swiss-cheese (SC) model, w ≃3.2 and 2.1, while for the inverted SC model, w ≃0.86
and 2.4, in 2D and 3D, respectively. Note that, similar to the eﬀective conductivity, the value
of w for the inverted SC model in 2D is the same as that of 2D lattice models.
Some of
these predictions were conﬁrmed experimentally. For example, Chen and Chou (1985) reported
measurements of the resistance ﬂuctuations in carbon powder-wax composites, and obtained
w ≃2.2 ± 0.2, in good agreement with the 3D value of w for the inverted SC model. On
the other hand, Koch et al. (1985) measured resistance ﬂuctuations in thin samples of gold.
First, evaporated ﬁlms were prepared, and then their resistance was increased by ion milling.
Their measurements indicated that, w ≃2.0 ± 0.1, which agrees neither with the prediction of
the SC model nor with that of the inverted SC model. Similar discrepancies were reported by
Garfunkel and Weissman (1985).
Summarizing, the resistance ﬂuctuations can be expressed in terms of the moments of the
current distribution in a resistor network. For percolation networks (and more generally, self-
similar clusters), the current distribution is described by an inﬁnite hierarchy of independent
exponents, which can be estimated both by numerical simulations and direct experimental
measurements.
5.17 Hall Conductivity
An eﬀective tool for understanding electrical transport in a composite material that consists
of good and poor conductors is to study the material’s properties in the presence of a magnetic
ﬁeld H. In the presence of such a ﬁeld, the conductivity of the material is described by a
tensor ge which has non-zero oﬀ-diagonal components, even if the material is isotropic. Some
of the oﬀ-diagonal terms are symmetric and even in the magnetic ﬁeld H, while others are
antisymmetric and odd in H. If we choose H to be, for example, parallel to the z−direction,
290

then ge will have the following form
ge =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
g
0
0
0
g
0
0
0
g
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
+
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
0
gh
0
−gh
0
0
0
0
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
+
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
δg⊥
0
0
0
δg⊥
0
0
0
δg∥
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
(869)
where g is the Ohmic conductivity (at H = 0), gh is the Hall conductivity, and δg⊥and δg∥
are the transverse and longitudinal magnetoconductivities, respectively. Strictly speaking, Eq.
(259) is applicable only to an isotropic material, so that even crystals with cubic symmetry are
excluded. However, for cubic symmetry the form of the antisymmetric part of Eq. (259) is also
correct at low magnetic ﬁelds.
Suppose now that an electric ﬁeld E has also been imposed on the material. Then, the
material has an Ohmic conductivity ge, and a Hall conductivity geh. For an isotropic material
and small H, geh is proportional to H and is deﬁned by the Kirchhoﬀ’s law relating the current
density I and the electric ﬁeld E:
I = geE + E × geh .
(870)
If Eq. (260) is inverted for small H, the Hall coeﬃcient RH = geh/(Hg2
e) appears along the
Ohmic resistivity Re = 1/ge: E = ReI+RH(H×I). Thus, the main goal is to calculate the Hall
conductivity and Hall coeﬃcient in disordered composites. Volger (1950) and Juretschke et al.
(1956) pioneered such calculations by treating various types of disorder in 3D composites. In
particular, Juretschke et al. (1956) derived the exact general solution for the Hall eﬀect at low
H in isotropic 2D composite ﬁlms. However, their results were forgotten for a long time until
they were rediscovered in the 1970s.
To make further progress, one should restrict oneself to low values of H, so that the three
terms of the sum in Eq. (259) are proportional to successively higher powers of H, namely,
H0, H1, and H2. This then allows one to solve for the electric ﬁeld by a perturbation method,
leading to the following expressions for geh and δge:
geh = 1
Ω

gh(r)[E(x) × E(y)]z
E2
0
dΩ,
(871)
(δge)ab = ⟨E(a) · δg · E(b)⟩
E2
0
291

+ 1
ΩE2
0

dΩ

[gh(r) × E(a)(r)] · ∇∇′G(r, r′|g) · [g(r′) × E(b)(r′)] dΩ′ .
(872)
Here, Ωis the volume of the material, E(a)(r) is the local electric ﬁeld for the ohmic problem
(i.e., when H = 0) in the compsite when the average or applied ﬁeld E0 lies along the a−axis,
and G is the Green function for the same problem which is the solution of the following boundary
value problem:
∇· [g(r)∇G(r, r′|g)] = −δ(r −r′)] ,
G = 0
on the boundaries ,
(873)
which is a slight generalization of Eq. (148). Although one is able to write down such formal
expressions as (261) and (262), in practice neither the Green function G nor the local ﬁelds
E(a)(r) are straightforward to derive for any system but the most trivial ones. Nevertheless, as
discussed below, these expressions are useful for a variety of reasons.
5.17.1 Eﬀective-medium approximation
Long after the work of Volger (1950) and Jerutschke et al. (1956), Stachowiak (1970) carried
out a mean-ﬁeld type computation of the eﬀective conductivity of a composite material in the
presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. Soon after this work, Cohen and Jortner (1973) developed an EMA
for the problem of Hall conductivity of disordered materials, which represents an extension of
the EMA discussed ealier in this chapter and in Chapter 4. The goal is to compute the Hall
conductivity geh by an EMA, since we already know how to estimate the ohmic conductivity ge.
The derivation of Cohen and Jortner is along the lines discussed for the eﬀective conductivity
of continuum models of heterogeneous materials described in Section 4.9. They considered a
composite material in which any portion of it has a magnetoconductivity g1h(H) or g2h(H)
with probabilities p and and 1−p, respectively. Similarly, the Ohmic conductivity (the limit of
zero ﬁeld) of any portion of the material takes on values g1 and g2 with probabilities p and 1−p,
respectively. Except for a spherical inclusion, the material is now replaced by a uniform medium
with magnetoconductivity g(H). Far from the sphere, the applied ﬁeld retains it uniform value
E0. The ﬁeld Ei inside the sphere is constant and is given by
Ei = E0 −4
3πP ,
(874)
where P is a ﬁctitious polarization deﬁned such that the quantity
Pn = n · P
(875)
292

is identical to the surface-charge density on the boundary between the sphere and the eﬀective
medium, where n is a unit vector normal to the boundary. The ﬁeld Eo just inside the eﬀective
medium is given by
Eo = E0 + 4
3πP · (3nn −1) .
(876)
The continuity equation then requires the normal component of the current density across the
boundary to remain constant, that is,
n · gi · Ei = n · g · Eo ,
(877)
where
g = gd1 + gh .
(878)
Here gd is the diagonal part of g, and gh is antisymmetric and linear in H, so that
gh · V = AH × V ,
V · gh = AV × H ,
(879)
where V is any vector. Combining the above equations yields an equation for P:
4πP =

gd1 −1
3(g −gi)
−1
· (gi −g) · E0 ,
(880)
where the conductivity tensors are treated as 3 × 3 matrices.
The eﬀective medium is now deﬁned by requiring that, ⟨P⟩= 0, where the average is taken
with respect to the distribution of the conductivities. This requirement then results in
4
[gd1 −1
3(g −gi)]−1 · (gi −g)
5
= 0 ,
(881)
which, when solved to the ﬁrst order in the ﬁeld for gh, yields
gh = ⟨gih/(gi + 2g)2⟩
⟨(gi + 2g)−2⟩
,
(882)
where gih = g1h, g2h, and gi = g1, g2, with probabilities p and 1 −p, respectively.
Stroud (1980) extended this EMA to composite materials that are composed of normal and
superconducting components. He ignored quantum eﬀects (hence treated the problem “clas-
sically”) and, in order to take into account the possibility of the material being anisotropic,
considered ellipsoidal inclusions rather than the spherical ones considered by Cohen and Jort-
ner. In his model the (volume) fraction of the normal metal or conductor is 1 −p and has a
293

conductivity tensor gm(B), where B is the magnitude of the local magnetic induction. The
components of the tensor are given by
gxx
m = gyy
m =
g0
1 + ˜H2 ,
gzz
m = 0 ,
gxy
m = −gyx
m =
g0 ˜H
1 + ˜H2 ,
where ˜H is the dimensionless ﬁeld, and g0 is a constant conductance. The remaining components
of the tensor are zero. The (volume) fraction of the superconducting component of the material
is p. The composite is characterized by an eﬀective conductivity tensor ge with components
that are predicted by the EMA to be given by
gxx
e + pΓ−1
xx = gxx
m ,
gzz
e + pΓ−1
zz = gzz
m ,
(883)
gxy
e = −gyx
e = gxy
m ,
with gyy
e = gxx
e , where
Γxx =
1
2gzz
e R
⎡
⎣1 −
1
$
R(1 −R)
sin−1 √
R
⎤
⎦,
(884)
Γzz = −
1
gzz
e R
⎡
⎣1 −
!
1 −R
R
sin−1 √
R
⎤
⎦,
(885)
where R = 1 −gxx
e /gzz
e is the anisotropy. Equations (273) can be obtained in a straightforward
manner from the EMA for anisotropic materials, developed by Stroud (1975) and derived in
Section 4.9.2, by assuming that the conductivity of one of the two components is inﬁnite. It
can be shown that the result gxy
e = gxy
m is exact, not just within the EMA.
Examination of Eqs. (273) reveals an interesting phenomenon. The EMA predicts that,
in the presence of a strong magnetic ﬁeld, addition of a superconducting material to a normal
conductor increases the resistivity of the composite. This eﬀect, which arises from the cur-
rent distortions near the superconducting inclusions that cause extra dissipation in the normal
conductor (hence increasing its resistivity), is in qualitative agreement with the experimental
observations. Moreover, according to the EMA, at a ﬁxed value of p, the (volume) fraction of
the superconductors, the resistance of the material rises at ﬁrst linearly with the ﬁeld, with
294

the slope being proportional to p, and then saturates at large ﬁelds. If we deﬁne a Hall coeﬃ-
cient RH(p, ˜H) = 1/(gxx
e
˜H) (which is slightly diﬀerent from what was introduced earlier), then
according to the EMA,
RH(p, 0) = lim
˜H→0{ ˜H−1gxy
e (p, ˜H)/[gxx
e (p, ˜H)]2} = RH(0, 0)
p2
c
(pc −p)2 ,
(886)
where pc is the EMA prediction for the percolation threshold of the system. That RH vanishes
at pc (of the superconducting component) is expected, since for p > pc the composite cannot
support a potential diﬀerence across itself. In strong ﬁelds,
RH ∼
gxy
e
(gxx
e )2 ˜H−1 ∼˜H−2 ,
(887)
since gxx
e
saturates and gxy
e
decreases as ˜H−1. Moreover, RH(p, 0) satisﬁes the exact relation,
RH(p, 0)ge(p)2 = lim
˜H→0
gxy
m
˜H = constant ,
(888)
where ge(p) is the eﬀective conductivity of the composite in zero ﬁeld. Since, ge(p) ∼(pc −p)−s,
where s is the superconductivity exponent deﬁned and discussed earlier in this chapter and in
Chapter 2, we obtain
RH ∼(pc −p)2s ,
(889)
which is not only valid in any dimension, but is also consistent with the EMA prediction, Eq.
(276), since the EMA predicts that s = 1.
5.17.2 Network model
Unlike the case of the Ohmic conductivity ge, the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld makes the
development of a network model for calculating geh and RH a quite complex task. For example,
the general circuit element of a bond of the network cannot be a simple resistor, but must be
a conductance matrix. Bergman et al. (1990) proposed a network model for calculating geh
and RH which satisﬁes all the necessary requirements for being an appropriate model. In what
follows we describe this model.
The early network models for computing the Hall conductivity and Hall coeﬃcient suﬀered
from several shortcomings. For example, they allowed a Hall current to ﬂow in a conducting
bond as a result of a non-zerro ﬁeld across a neighboring perpendicular bond, even if this bond
was insulating. A reﬁnement of this model was one in which each element of the network was
295

either a pair (in 2D) or a triplet (in 3D) of identical, mutually perpendicular bonds which
represent electrically unconnected Ohmic conductors when H = 0.
When H ̸= 0, a Hall
current was allowed to ﬂow in each of these bonds as a result of a non-zero voltage on one of
the others, when H had a component that was perpendicular to both bonds. However, despite
many desirable properties, this model too suﬀered from a major shortcoming, in that it always
resulted in a network that was split up into two or more unconnected pieces that occupied
the same region of space, which is a particularly severe shortcoming for composites that are
near their percolation threshold. These problems were all addressed in Bergman et al.’s model.
They considered a square or a simple-cubic lattice and deﬁned the electric ﬁeld in a direction b
perpendicular to a given bond b to be a weighted average over the voltages on the four bonds
in direction b that are nearest neighbor to b. The weight of each of these bonds is 1/4 if it is
of the same type as b and 0 otherwise. In this model, an electric ﬁeld in one component cannot
produce a Hall current in another component, thus correcting the ﬁrst major shortcoming of
the earlier models mentioned above. Moreover, it does not also result in split networks, hence
addressing the second deﬁciency of the earlier models. An example of x −y layer of a sample
of linear size L = 4 in a simple-cubic network is shown in Figure 5.20.
These models are all restricted to low values of H. To our knowledge, a network model for
computing the Hall conductivity and Hall coeﬃcient, in the presence of a strong magnetic ﬁeld,
has not been developed yet.
5.17.3 Exact duality relations
As discussed earlier in Section 5.4.1, and also in Section 4.8, 2D composites possess a special
symmetry called duality, which enables one to derive exact results for such materials. To discuss
the implications of duality for the Hall conductivity, we consider a material with a conductivity
tensor g that is isotropic but may have an antisymmetric oﬀ-diagonal part, due to the presence
of a magnetic ﬁeld perpendicular to the plane of the system, taken to be the x −y plane, so
that
g =
⎛
⎜
⎝
g
gh
−gh
g
⎞
⎟
⎠.
(890)
Suppose that the eﬀective conductivity of the material is ge. Then, the dual of the material is
another composite with an eﬀective conductivity g′ = [ge(g)]−1. We thus write the components
296

of the resistivity tensor as
Re(g) = [ge(g)]−1 ≡
⎛
⎜
⎝
Rxx
e
−Rxy
e
Rxy
e
Rxx
e
⎞
⎟
⎠.
(891)
Consider now a two-component composite in which each portion of the material has good Ohmic
and Hall conductivities g1 and g1h with probability p and poor Ohmic and Hall conductivities
g2 and g2h with probability 1 −p. Since
Rxx
e = ge

g1
g2
1 + g2
1h
,
−g1h
g2
1 + g2
1h
,
g2
g2
2 + g2
2h
,
−g2h
g2
2 + g2
2h

,
Rxy
e = −geh

g1
g2
1 + g2
1h
,
−g1h
g2
1 + g2
1h
,
g2
g2
2 + g2
2h
,
−g2h
g2
2 + g2
2h

,
(892)
we take g2h ∼g2
2, and let both g2 →0 and g2h →0, so as to obtain
g2
g2
2 + g2
2h
→∞,
and
g2h
g2
2 + g2
2h
→
g1h
g2
1 + g2
1h
,
It then follows that (for p > pc)
Rxx
e = ge

g1
g2
1 + g2
1h
, 0, ∞, 0

= 1
ge
g2
1 + g2
1h
g1
, 0

= Re(Rxx
1 , ∞) ≡Re(Rxx
1 ) ,
(893)
Rxy
e =
g1h
g2
1 + g2
1h
= Rxy
1 ,
(894)
where Rxx
1 and Rxy
1 are the components of the resistivity tensor, and Re is the eﬀective resistivity
at H = 0. Equation (284) implies that the Hall resistivity of the composite is the same as that
of the conducting component. Likewise, Eq. (283) indicates that the relative magnetoresistance
of the composite is just that of the good conductor:
Rxx
e (H) −Rxx
e (0)
Rxx
e (0)
= Rxx
1 (H) −Rxx
1 (0)
Rxx
1 (0)
.
(895)
For weak magnetic ﬁelds, that is, when gh ≪g, we can derive explicit results when both
components have non-zero conductivities. In that case, we can write
g′ ≡(g)−1 ≃
⎛
⎜
⎝
1/g
−gh/g2
gh/g2
1/g
⎞
⎟
⎠
(896)
A careful examination of the duality relation, g′
e = (ge)−1, together with the fact that the ratio
(geh −g2h)/(g1h −g2h) depends only on g2/g1, leads to the following exact result
geh −g2h
g1h −g2h
= g2
e −g2
2
g2
1 −g2
2
.
(897)
297

5.17.4 Scaling properties
The study of the scaling behavior of geh and RH near pc was initiated by Levinshtein et
al. (1976), Shklovskii (1977), and Straley (1980a). However, a complete scaling theory was
developed by Bergman and Stroud (1985).
Consider again the two-component network in
which each bond has good Ohmic and Hall conductivities g1 and g1h with probability p, and
poor Ohmic and Hall conductivities g2 and g2h with probability 1 −p. Bergman and Stroud
(1985) proposed that for g2h/g1h ≪1 and for p close to pc
geh −g2h
g1h −g2h
= |p −pc|τF

g2h/g1h
|p −pc|µ+s

,
(898)
where µ and s are the usual conductivity exponents, ans τ is a new critical exponent charac-
terizing the power-law behavior of geh near pc when p > pc, g2 = 0, and g2h = 0, i.e.,
geh ∼(p −pc)τ .
(899)
Equation (288) has been written in complete analogy with Eq. (2.43). The scaling function
F(x) has the properties that,
F(x) ∼
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
constant
if x ≪1 and p > pc,
regime I ,
x2
if x ≪1 and p < pc,
regime II ,
xτ/(µ+s)
if x ≫1 and p ≃pc,
regime III .
(900)
However, a better way of understanding Eq. (288) is in terms of the Hall coeﬃcient RH.
To each bond of a network we assign a Hall coeﬃcient R1h = g1h/g2
1 with probability p or
R2h = g2h/g2
2 with probability 1 −p. Then, according to the scaling theory of Bergman and
Stroud (1985) one has
RH ∼
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
a1R1h|p −pc|−ψ + b1R2h(g2/g1)2|p −pc|−2µ
regime I ,
a2R1h|p −pc|−ψ + b2R2h|p −pc|2s
regime II ,
a3R1h(g2/g1)−ψ/(µ+s) + b3R2h(g2/g1)2s/(µ+s)
regime III ,
(901)
where the ai and bi are constant, and ψ is a critical exponent that characterizes the power-law
behavior of RH as pc is approached from below, and is related to µ and τ by
ψ = 2µ −τ .
(902)
298

It is not yet clear whether τ (or ψ) is an independent exponent, or is related to the other
percolation exponents deﬁned so far. Straley (1980a) proposed that
ψ = 2[µ −(d −1)ν] ,
(903)
where ν the critical exponent of percolation correlation length. Equation (293) predicts that
ψ(d = 3) ≃0.48, fully compatible with the numerical estimate, ψ ≃0.49 ± 0.06, and that in
the mean-ﬁeld limit, ψ = 1, in agreement with the exact calculation of Straley (1980b) using
a Bethe lattice. However, Eq. (293) also predicts that ψ(d = 2) ≃−0.066, in disagreement
with the exact result ψ(d = 2) = 0 obtained by Shklovskii (1977). As pointed out by Bergman
and Stroud (1985), the important point to remember is that in the regime I the ratio of the
second to the ﬁrst term is of the order of (g2h/g1h)|p −pc|−τ, and therefore, depending on the
morphology of the material, either term may dominate, so that the experimental veriﬁcation
of these scaling laws is not straightforward.
5.17.5 Comparison with experimental data
One of the ﬁrst experimental studies of Hall conductivity and Hall coeﬃcient in a material
with percolation disorder was carried out by Levinshtein et al. (1975). They performed Hall
experiments on 20 mm × 60 mm conducting graphite paper sheets with holes randomly punched
in them. In their 3D experiments a compressed stack of 15 individually punched graphite sheets
was used. The results conﬁrmed the divergence of RH as pc is approached. Sichel and Gittleman
(1982) measured geh and RH in granular metals Au-SiO2 and W-Al2O3 near their percolation
thresholds.
Quantitative experimental veriﬁcation of Eqs. (291) was provided by several groups. Palevski
et al. (1984) showed that the Hall coeﬃcient does indeed remain ﬁnite in a 2D (thin) metal ﬁlm.
Dai et al. (1987) studied the same problem in a 3D Al-Ge metal-insulator composite. In regime
I, the poor conductor was Al-doped-Ge which was found to dominate the Hall eﬀect. To make
the ﬁrst term of Eq. (291), for regime I, dominant, Dai et al. dissolved the metallic aluminum
in KOH, which left the doped Ge as the good conductor, the poor conductor role now being
played by the vacuum. In such a situation, the ﬁrst term of Eqs. (291) for regime I is dominant,
and therefore the critical exponents ψ and τ can be directly measured. Figure 5.21 shows the
measured Hall coeﬃcient RH versus p −pc, where p is the volume fraction of Al, and pc ≃0.15
is the percolation threshold. The data yielded, τ ≃3.8±0.2 and ψ ≃0.38±0.05, which should
299

be compared with accurate simulation results based on percolation networks, τ ≃3.56 ± 0.06
and ψ ≃0.49 ± 0.06. Rohde and Micklitz (1987) also measured the Hall conductivity geh on
the metallic side of a granular rare-gas metal mixture, Sr:Ar, and reported that, τ ≃2.7 ± 0.2,
which is somewhat low, and ψ ≃0.49 ± 0.07, which agrees with the numerical simulation and
the scaling theory of Straley (1980a). Thus, theory and experiment are in general agreement
with each other. Since the EMA of Cohen and Jortner (1973) and of Stroud (1980) can be used
for accurately estimating geh and RH away from pc, we now have a fairly complete theory of
Hall eﬀect in composite materials.
5.18 Classical Aspects of Superconductivity
Let us now brieﬂy review what may be called the classical properties of superconducting
composites, since in discussing these properties the quantum mechanical eﬀects are ignored.
Thus, we do not discuss the quantum properties which depend on the continuity of the su-
perconducting wave function and its behavior in a magnetic ﬁeld. If the quantum mechanical
eﬀects are ignored, then, percolation theory can explain some of the observed properties of
granular superconductors, which are composed of superconducting grains separated by thin
insulating grains, which are called the Josephson junctions. A granular superconductor can
be characterized by two parameters, the size of its grains, and the energy barrier between the
grains. The grain size distribution is measured by electron microscopy, while the properties of
the barriers are deduced from measurements of normal-state (non-superconducting) resistivity.
These two parameters determine the Josephson energy coupling Ej. Garland (1989) reviwed
many granular properties of superconducting materials.
5.18.1 Magnetoconductivity
As usual, let us consider a disordered binary composite in d dimensions (d = 2 or 3)
described by a conductivity ﬁeld g(r) that can take on two values, g1 = ∞with probability
p and a ﬁnite value g2 with probability 1 −p. The eﬀective conductivity ge(p) must therefore
diverge when p > pc, the percolation threshold for the superconducting component. For p < pc,
ge is ﬁnite, with an expected asymptotic behavior given by Eq. (2.37) and characterized by the
exponent s which depends on both the dimensionality and the microstructure of the composite;
its values for 2D and 3D materials are listed in Table 2.3. In the Swiss-cheese model which
consists of a random distribution of overlapping d−dimensional spheres of normal conductors
300

in a superconducting matrix, or in the inverted Swiss-cheese model, in which the roles of the
matrix and the spheres are reversed, the numerical value of s may be diﬀerent from the lattice
values listed in Table 2.3.
However, apart from an experimental study by Deutscher and Rappaport (1979), there
appears to be little experimental evidence conﬁrming this picture. In both 2D and 3D, an
experimental test of this prediction would be complicated by the proximity eﬀect, which causes
the superconducting region to grow a distance ξs into the surrounding normal region, where ξs,
is the temperature-dependent normal-conductor coherence length.
A better realization of such classical eﬀects may be obtained upon application of a magnetic
ﬁeld. How does a magnetic ﬁeld aﬀect the behavior of a granular superconductor? There are
two types of homogeneous superconductors that behave quite diﬀerently in an external magnetic
ﬁeld.
(1) Type-I superconductors remain superconducting and expel the magnetic ﬁeld up to a
critical ﬁeld Hc, since below Hc the ﬂux is excluded from the superconductor (except for a thin
layer). They then abruptly cross over to the normal state.
(2) Type-II superconductors allow the magnetic ﬁeld to penetrate into the system if H is
greater than a lower critical ﬁeld Hc1, but lose their superconductivity at an upper critical ﬁeld
Hc2. Between Hc1 and Hc2, the ﬂux penetrates partially and inhomogeneously, typically forming
a lattice of quantized ﬂux lines. Such a ﬁeld fully penetrates the superconducting composite,
and to a ﬁrst approximation the magnetic induction B can be assumed to be uniform and equal
to the applied H in the normal component. In a magnetic ﬁeld, the conductivity gN of the
normal component becomes a tensor, as does ge. Among the ﬁelds satisfying this condition,
there are two ranges to consider.
(i) At suﬃciently low ﬁelds, the oﬀ-diagonal elements of both ge and gN are linear in H,
while the diagonal elements are unchanged to ﬁrst order in H. Under such conditions, it can
be shown that ge,ij = gN,ij for i ̸= j, leading to the interesting prediction that, near pc, the Hall
coeﬃcient of the composite below the percolation threshold for superconductivity follows the
relation [see Eq. (279)]
RH(p) ≡
ge,12
Hg2
e,11
∼RH(1)(pc −p)2s .
(904)
This prediction also apparently remains to be tested in 2D or 3D.
(ii) At higher ﬁelds, one expects both a transverse and a longitudinal magnetoresistance in
301

the composite when a superconducting material is added, even if the pure normal conductor
has no magnetoresistance because, as discussed above, the superconducting inclusions distort
the nearby current lines, leading to increased dissipation. This conclusion was conﬁrmed by
measurements of Resnick et al. (1979) on a composite of Pb in an Al matrix and, as discussed
above, was also conﬁrmed by the EMA calculations of Stroud (1980).
5.18.2 Magnetic properties
The starting point for studying the magnetic properties of superconductors is the London
penetration depth of a composite that contains a volume fraction p of a superconductor and 1−p
of a normal conductor. In the London theory of superconductivity, the basic electrodynamic
properties are described by two macroscopic equations:
E
=
∂
∂t
 m
nsq2Is

,
(905)
B
=
−c∇×
 m
nsq2Is

.
(906)
Equation (295) simply describes the undamped response of ns particles per unit volume, each
of mass m and charge q, to the force generated by an electric ﬁeld E. If we combine Eq. (296)
with the Maxwell equation,
∇× B = 4π
c I
(907)
we obtain

∇2 −1
Λ2

B = 0 ,
(908)
where
Λ =
!
mc2
4πnsq2
(909)
is the London penetration depth of the superconductor. Physically, Eq. (298) implies that the
magnetic ﬁeld decays exponentially within the superconductor with a decay length Λ.
To obtain an analogous quantity in a normal conductor-superconductor composite, we write
Eq. (295) in the frequency domain as
IS = gSE ,
(910)
gS = iA
ω ,
(911)
302

where A = c2/(4πΛ2), and gS is clearly an imaginary, frequency-dependent (inductive) conduc-
tivity of the superconducting component.
5.18.3 Comparison with the experimental data
Let us now consider some percolation properties of superconducting materials that have
been tested either by experimental observations or by numerical simulations.
5.18.3.1 The London penetration depth
For p > pc, where pc is the percolation threshold of the superconducting component, the
conductivity of the composite at suﬃciently low frequencies is dominated by gS. We therefore
deduce that
ge ≡iAe
ω
∼gS(p −pc)µ ,
(912)
which implies that Ae ∼A(p −pc)µ, or
Λe ∼(p −pc)−µ/2 .
(913)
Experimental test of Eq. (303) would require making a series of samples with diﬀerent p, and
then measuring the penetration depth of each sample. Similar to the measurement of the expo-
nent s below pc, such a direct test would be complicated by the proximity eﬀect. Measurements
of the temperature-dependent penetration depth in a single sample of composite superconduc-
tor have also been interpreted in terms of a temperature-dependent volume fraction p(T) of the
superconductor. Assuming that p(T) is smooth, the normal conductor-superconductor transi-
tion occurs at a critical temperature Tc such that, p(Tc) = pc. If we expand p(T) around Tc,
we obtain, p(T) −p(Tc) = α(T −Tc), where α < 0. This argument then yields
Λ(T) ∼(Tc −T)−µ/2 ,
(914)
near Tc, in contrast to the usual Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieﬀer temperature dependence, Λ(T) ∼
(Tc −T)−1/2. It also predicts that for the resistivity above Tc, R(T) ∝(T −Tc)s, which diﬀers
from the predictions of superconducting ﬂuctuation theory. Both predictions rely, of course,
on a somewhat arbitrary (linear) translation from volume fraction p to temperature T, and it
remains to be seen whether this assumption is valid.
5.18.3.2 The speciﬁc heat
303

Deutscher et al. (1980) proposed a percolation model for the onset of superconductivity by
assuming that the grains are coupled if Ej > kBT, where kB is the Boltzman’s constant, and Ej
is the Josephson energy coupling. Because the coupling energy depends on T, more and more
grains become coupled as T is lowered. The coupling is obtained randomly with a probability
that, similar to what was discussed above, depends on T. This assumption deﬁnes a percolation
process, because when the coupling probability is equal to the percolation threshold, a sample-
spanning cluster of coupled superconducting grains is formed. If the temperature is still lowered,
the sample-spanning cluster of the superconducting grains grows in size. The distributions of
the grain sizes and the junction resistances give rise to randomness in the coupling energy. In
Deutscher et al.’s model, the coupling between the grains can be very strong, giving rise to a
broad grain size distribution. In this case the randomness in the coupling energy is due to the
dependence on the grain size of the temperature at which a grain becomes superconducting.
If, on the other hand, the grain size distribution is narrow, the coupling would be weak, which
was also the limit that Deutscher et al. considered. They used a dense random packing of hard
spherical grains with a size of about 30˚A, small enough that only the sample-spanning cluster
of the superconducting grains was the main contributor to the speciﬁc heat of the system,
the main property that was calculated. The coupling energy was estimated by assuming that
the normal-state resistances of the junctions follow a Gaussian distribution with a variance
proportional to the mean. The mean of the distribution was treated as the only adjustable
parameter of the model. Based on this model, the temperature dependence of the speciﬁc heat
of the system was calculated, and was found to be in excellent agreement with the experimental
data for granular Al-Al2O3 ﬁlms.
5.18.3.3 The critical current
Although there is Josephson tunnelling through the junctions, it does not generate any po-
tential diﬀerence between the grains up to a critical current Ic. If the temperature of the system
is lowered below the critical temperature Tc of the system, the number of superconducting links
Nℓ(per unit cross section area) increases. Percolation theory provides estimates for Nℓ, the
critical current Ic, and the critical temperature Tc at which the material becomes superconduct-
ing. In the percolation model of Deutscher et al. (1980) Tc is close to the temperature at which
the speciﬁc heat attains its maximum. Alternatively, Tc may be deﬁned as the temperature at
304

which 50% of transition in the resistivity occurs. Near pc one has the scaling law
Ic ∼(p −pc)v ,
(915)
where v is a new critical exponent. Near the percolation threshold, the granular superconductor
can be viewed as a network of superconducting blobs connected by links (see Section 2.6.3). The
links are quasi-linear chains of Josephson junctions. The current that ﬂows through parallel
links is inversely proportional to Nℓ, and the distance between the links is roughly proportional
to the percolation correlation length ξp. Thus, for a d-dimensional system, Nℓis of the order
1/ξd−1
p
. Since Ic ∼Nℓ, we obtain
Ic ∼(p −pc)v ∼(p −pc)ν(d−1) ,
(916)
so that v is a purely topological exponent. Equation (306) was conﬁrmed by Monte Carlo sim-
ulations in 2D percolation networks (Kirkpatrick 1979a, Lobb and Frank 1979), and by care-
ful experiments of Deutscher and Rappaport (1979) who prepared thin (2D) superconductor–
semiconductor ﬁlms of Pb-Ge and measured their critical currents. They reported v ≃1.3±0.1,
in very good agreement with the 2D prediction, v = ν = 4/3.
5.18.3.4 The critical ﬁelds
The variation of the magnetic induction B with H in typical type-I and type-II supercon-
ductors is well known. This behavior can be interpreted in terms of a ﬁeld-dependent magnetic
permeability ke = B/H which, for H < Hc (or H < Hc1) is zero. Above Hc in type-I supercon-
ductors, ke rises discontinuously to unity. In type-II superconductors, on the other hand, ke
rises continuously above Hc1, reaching unity at Hc2. According to this analysis, Hc or Hc1 may
be viewed as a type of breakdown ﬁeld above which the superconducting component begins
to become a normal conductor. Thus, this problem is seemingly similar to the phenomenon
of dielectric breakdown in a network of insulating and conducting bonds below the conduc-
tivity threshold, which will be described in Chapter 5 of Volume II. The ﬁeld H is curl free
(∇×H = 0) because the screening currents are viewed as magnetization currents and therefore
do not constitute a source for H. In a similar manner, the analogue of I is the divergenceless
ﬁeld B.
If this analogy is valid, one may deduce Hc1(p) from known results of the dielectric break-
305

down problem. Thus, at ﬁxed composite volume, we expect to have
Hc1(p) ∼Hc1(0)

p(n)
c
−p
y ,
(917)
where y = ν; the derivation of this equation (or its analogue for the dielectric breakdown
problem) will be described in Chapter 5 of Volume II. Here, p(n)
c
is the volume fraction of
the superconducting material at which the normal conductor ﬁrst forms a sample-spanning
cluster, and ν is the usual percolation correlation length exponent. In 3D, as well as in some
2D systems, p(n)
c
> pc, and therefore there exists a ﬁnite range of volume fractions where the
composite is an electrically-perfect conductor but has zero critical ﬁeld, since at such volume
fractions the composite is bicontinuous and hence can transport both supercurrent (through the
superconducting component) and ﬂux (through the normal component). In a real composite,
the validity of this analysis presumably depends on the manner in which the magnetic ﬁeld
is introduced.
If a bicontinuous composite is cooled in a ﬁeld, the ﬂux expelled from the
superconducting component might still continue to thread the composite even below Tc, just as
in a single superconducting loop. But if the ﬁeld is turned on below Tc, it will be screened out
by the induced supercurrents. Moreover, if the ﬂux through a given link of normal conductor is
suﬃciently small, and if the superconducting grains are all large compared to the penetration
depth ΛS of the superconducting material (as assumed in the above discussion), this model
must be modiﬁed by requirement of ﬂux quantization through each link.
A characteristic length scale of granular superconductors is their superconducting coher-
ence length ξs, already mentioned above, which can be deﬁned as the diﬀusion length over a
characteristic time tc for the relaxation of the order parameter at a given T. Therefore, one
has ξs ∼√Dtc, where D is a diﬀusion coeﬃcient, and tc ∼(Tc −T)−1. If ξs > ξp, one is in
the homogeneous regime in which Hc2 ∼(Tc −T) near Tc. The upper critical ﬁeld of a type-II
superconductor is proportional to ξ−2
s . In the inhomogeneous regime, where ξs ≪ξp, one has
fractal or anomalous diﬀusion (see Sections 6.1.9 and 6.1.10 for a comprehensive discussion),
instead of Fickian diﬀusion. Since ξs is deﬁned as a diﬀusion length scale, ξ2
s should be pro-
portional to ⟨R2(t)⟩, the mean square displacement of a diﬀusing particle at time t which, for
anomalous diﬀusion, is given by, ⟨R2(t)⟩∼t2/(2+θ), where θ = (µ−β)/ν, with µ, β and ν being
the usual percolation exponents. Therefore, one obtains, Hc2 ∼ξ−2
s
∼t−2/(2+θ)
c
, implying that
Hc2 ∼(Tc −T)2/(2+θ) .
(918)
306

Equation (308) was conﬁrmed experimentally by Gerber and Deutscher (1989), who measured
the upper critical ﬁeld of thin semicontinuous lead ﬁlms on Ge substrates and found that
Hc2 ∼(Tc −T)γ with γ ≃0.66 ± 0.06. Since in 2D, θ ≃2.87, the percolation prediction,
γ = 2/(2 + θ) ≃0.7, is in very good agreement with the measured value.
5.18.3.5 Diﬀerential diamagnetic susceptibility
The last property we consider is the diﬀerential diamagnetic susceptibility χ of a supercon-
ducting composite near the percolation threshold pc. It is known that in bulk superconductors
near Tc, χ increases sharply in magnitude due to diamagnetic ﬂuctuations, i.e., momentary
ﬂuctuations of the normal conductor into the superconducting state. A loosely analogous phe-
nomenon occurs in composites, as was ﬁrst discussed by de Gennes (1981) who noted that for
p < pc, the superconducting component is present only in the form of ﬁnite clusters, some
of which contain closed loops. In the presence of an applied DC magnetic ﬁeld, diamagnetic
screening currents can ﬂow in these loops, giving rise to a ﬁnite diamagnetic susceptibility χ.
As p →pc, the loops become larger and larger, as does χ. One therefore expects χ to diverge
at pc according to a power law:
χd ∼(pc −p)−b ,
(919)
where b depends on the dimensionality of the system, and is a measure of the number and
size of loops of the network. Equation (309) was ﬁrst proposed by de Gennes (1981), who also
suggested that b = 2ν −µ in all dimensions. Rammal et al. (1983) proposed an alternative
relation, b = 2ν −µ−β, where µ, β, and ν are the usual percolation exponents. The de Gennes
formula agrees slightly better with the numerical simulations in 2D, while that of Rammal et
al. agrees better in 3D. Lagarkov et al. (1987) suggested yet another relation, b = ν in 2D and
b = 0 (i.e., a logarithmic divergence) in 3D, and also argued that the divergence is removed if
one considers the inductive interaction between screening currents induced in diﬀerent clusters
(an eﬀect omitted in all the other estimates which considered such clusters as independent).
Summary
Several methods for estimating transport properties of disordered materials, both analyt-
ical and numerical, are now available. These methods are based on the discrete models of
heterogeneous materials, and have provided much better understanding of the transport prop-
erties of composites. Some of these methods, such as the eﬀective-medium approximations,
307

provide accurate estimates of the transport properties if the material is not near its percola-
tion threshold and its morphology does not contain correlations, while others, such as the the
renormalized EMA, are even more accurate and capable of providing accurate predictions for
the transport properties under a wide variety of conditions. However, when the heterogeneities
are broadly distributed, the EMA breaks down and lose its accuracy. These methods, together
with those that were described in Chapter 4, have provided a fairly complete understanding of
many transport properties of disordered materials.
308

Captions
Figure 5.1 One quadrant of a portion of a square lattice, with a reference bond 0 and a set
of its neighboring parallel bonds.
Figure 5.2 A reference bond 0 and a set of perpendicular bonds in the square lattice.
Figure 5.3 Schematic implementation of the eﬀective-medium approximation, transforming
a disordered material (left) to a homogeneous eﬀective material (right).
Figure 5.4 Embedding a bond and its true conductance g in an eﬀective-medium network
in which all bonds have the same conductance ge (left), and its equivalent circuit (right). I0 is
the injected current and g′
AB is the equivalent conductance of the rest of the network.
Figure 5.5 Frequency distribution of the bond-bond Green function γαα for the two-dimensional
Voronoi network.
Figure 5.6 Comparison of the EMA predictions for the eﬀective conductivity ge of the two-
dimensional Voronoi network, versus the fraction p of the conducting bonds. Solid curve and
large broken lines show, respectively, the results for the case in which the distributions of the
two coordination numbers of the reference bond are considered independently, and for the
correlated case, while the middle curve represents the results for the case in which an average
coordination number has been used.
Figure 5.7 Comparison of the predictions of the modiﬁed EMA, Eq. (81), for the eﬀective
conductivity of a two-dimensional square tessellation of a sheet, in which a randomly-selected
fraction p of the squares were made of graphite (low-conductivity phase), while the rest were
made of copper (high-conductivity phase), with the experimental data (circles) (after McLach-
lan, 1988).
Figure 5.8 The smallest clusters of bonds in two and three dimensions that preserve the
symmetries of the square and simple-cubic networks. The reference bond is denoted by α.
Figure 5.9 A cluster of six bonds used in the derivation of the EMA for site-disordered
systems. E is the applied ﬁeld.
Figure 5.10 Eﬀective conductivity of a site-disordered simple-cubic lattice, as predicted
by the position-space renormalization group (PSRG), eﬀective-medium approximation (EMA),
and renormalized EMA, and the comparison with the Monte Carlo (MC) data (after Sahimi et
al., 1984).
Figure 5.11 The same as in Figure 5.10, but for correlated-bond percolation problem. pB
309

is the fraction of the conducting bonds. BWEMA denotes the eﬀective-medium approximation
developed by Bernasconi and Wiesmann (1976). (after Sahimi et al., 1984).
Figure 5.12 Comparison of the EMA predictions for the eﬀective conductivities ge1 and
ge2 for anisotropic bond-disordered square networks (solid curves) with the simulation data
(symbols) (after Bernasconi, 1974).
Figure 5.13 The diagramatic representation of Eqs. (165)-(167) (after Hori and Yonezawa,
1977).
Figure 5.14 Two- and three-dimensional RG cells with scale factor b = 2, their equivalent
circuits (middle) and renormalized shape (right).
Figure 5.15 Comparison of the Monte Carlo data for the eﬀective conductivity of a square
network (symbols) with the predictions of the EMA (the left curve), and REMA with b = 2
(the middle curve) and b = 3 (the right solid curve) (after Sahimi et al., 1983c).
Figure 5.16 Comparison of the Monte Carlo data for the eﬀective conductivity of a simple-
cubic network (symbols) with the predictions of the EMA (right curve) and REMA with b = 2.
The middle curve represents the predictions of the cumulant theory (after Sahimi et al., 1983c).
Figure 5.17 Construction of the random network in the transfer-matrix method (after Der-
rida et al., 1984).
Figure 5.18 The propagator transformation which moves a diagonal bond through the lattice.
The general case is illustrated in (a)-(d), while (e)-(h) show the case in which some bonds are
insulating and hence missing (after Frank and Lobb, 1988).
Figure 5.19 Eﬀective conductivity of compressed vapor-grown carbon ﬁbers (VGCF) (in
Ω−1cm−1) as a function of the density p (in gr/cm3) of the unmixed VGCF. The solid curve
shows the percolation prediction, ge ∼(p −pc)µ with pc ≃1.91 ± 0.06 (after Andrade et al.,
1998).
Figure 5.20 One layer of the appropriate network model for computing the Hall conductivity
(after Bergman et al., 1990).
Figure 5.21 Logarithmic plot of the eﬀective Hall coeﬃcient RH versus p −0.15, where p is
the volume fraction of Al. Diﬀerent symbols refer to various substrates (after Dai et al., 1987).
310

6
Frequency-Dependent Properties: The Discrete Approach
6.0 Introduction
In this chapter we continue the discussions that we began in Chapters 4 and 5, and de-
scribe methods for computing the eﬀective dynamical properties of heterogeneous materials,
and in particular their eﬀective conductivity, including hopping and AC conductivity, the ef-
fective diﬀusivity, and the dielectric constant. The main diﬀerence between what we discuss
in this chapter and what was considered in Chapters 4 and 5 is that, here we consider mostly
frequency- and/or time-dependent properties. Of particular interest to us are dynamical prop-
erties of strongly heterogeneous materials, i.e., those with large contrast between the properties
of their constituent phases.
The prototype for such heterogeneities is percolation disorder,
and thus we emphasize predicting and computing frequency- and/or time-dependent transport
properties in materials with this type of disorder. As we emphasize throughout this book, one
main reason for considering percolation-type disorder is that, we believe that if a theoretical
approach (or a computational one for that matter) can provide reasonable estimates of the
transport and optical properties of materials with this type of disorder, it should be at least
equally accurate for midler types of disorder. As shown in Chapters 4 and 5, far from the
percolation threshold pc, the eﬀective properties of composite materials, under steady-state
conditions are accurately predicted by the eﬀective-medium approximation (EMA) and similar
mean-ﬁeld theories, rigorous bounds and cluster expansions. One of the main goals of this
chapter is to describe the application of the EMA and similar approximations to time- and/or
frequency-dependent phenomena. However, because as discussed in Chapters 4 and 5, the EMA
and similar theories are not accurate near pc, we also describe numerical methods of computing
the eﬀective properties and emphasize, as we did in Chapter 5, the scaling properties of the
composite materials in the critical region near pc, where percolation and clustering eﬀects are
dominant and universal properties, independent of the microscopic details of the materials, are
prevalent. As we discuss later in this chapter, it is often true that what is usually referred to as
the critical region is quite broad, and therefore the universal power laws, that are presumably
valid only near pc, can be very useful for predicting the eﬀective properties of composite mate-
rials, and developing correlations for them, over a broad range of the volume fractions of the
311

composites’ phases. We begin this chapter by discussing time-dependent diﬀusion processes in
heterogeneous materials, after which other types of transport phenomena will be considered.
6.1 Diﬀusion in Heterogeneous Materials
Because in a heterogeneous material the local diﬀusivity varies spatially, the relevant diﬀu-
sion equation is, ∂P/∂t = ∇·(D∇P), where D denotes a spatially-varying diﬀusion coeﬃcient.
Discretizing this equation by a ﬁnite-element or ﬁnite-diﬀerence method yields a master equa-
tion:
∂Pi
∂t =

j
Wij[Pj(t) −Pi(t)] ,
(920)
where Wij is related to the transport coeﬃcients Di and Dj at points i and j of the system.
For example, for a linear chain, Wij = (Di + Dj)/(2δ2), where δ is the distance between i and
j. Equation (1) can also be viewed as a probabilistic description of time-dependent diﬀusion
(and conduction) in a disordered material modelled by a disordered lattice or network, as
Pi(t) can be thought of as the probability that a diﬀusing particle would be found at site
i at time t, given that it started its motion at the origin. According to this interpretation
then, Wij would be the transition rate between sites i and j, i.e., the probability of diﬀusing
or hopping from i to j, taken to be non-zero only when sites i and j are nearest neighbors.
More general situations in which the diﬀusants can jump to second nearest-neighbor sites,
third nearest-neighbor sites, and so on, can also be considered, although the computations will
be considerably more complex. In general, the transition rates do not have to be symmetric
(i.e., in general, Wij ̸= Wji), and in fact ﬁnite-diﬀerence or ﬁnite-element discretization of the
continuum diﬀusion equation with a spatially-varying diﬀusivity will lead to an equation which
is more complex than Eq. (1) as it will contain asymmetric transition rates. However, for now
we ignore such complexities. Equation (1) is sometimes referred to as the symmetric random
hopping model (see also Section 6.2.2). The probabilistic interpretation of Eq. (1) also allows
us to study diﬀusion (and conduction) in heterogeneous materials by random walk (Brownian)
simulation, the essentials of which were already described in Sections 4.10 and 5.14.4.
Let us point out that, in addition to modelling of ordinary diﬀusion in solid materials,
Eq.
(1) can also be used for investigating conduction in a variety of other materials.
For
example, large conductivity observed in superionic conductors is often interpreted in terms of
the symmetric random hopping model, Eq. (1). This interpretation is appropriate so long as
312

the average time ⟨th⟩between the hops is considerably larger than the actual hopping time
th. If the frequency-dependent conductivity is of interest, then, as Kimball and Adams (1978)
showed, Eq. (1) can be used only if it yields a conductivity which increases monotonically with
frequency up to frequencies comparable with those of phonons. We will come back to this point
later in this chapter.
The exact solution of Eq. (1) is not available for any two- or three-dimensional (3D) model
of heterogeneous materials. Aside from numerical simulations, a powerful method of analyzing
transient diﬀusion (and conduction) in heterogeneous materials is by perturbation expansion.
The general technique for developing perturbation expansion for such problems was already
described in Section 5, where we analyzed steady-state conduction. In this chapter we extend
that formulation to time-dependent diﬀusion (and conduction) problem which parallels closely
the perturbation expansion developed in Chapter 5, with the main diﬀerence being the fact
that, due to transient nature of the problem, certain subtleties arise that must carefully be
treated; these subtleties will be discussed below.
The formulation presented below and its
predictions were ﬁrst developed by Sahimi et al. (1983a).
6.1.1 Green function formulation and perturbation expansion
Taking the Laplace transform of Eq. (1) yields
λ ˜Pi(λ) −δi0 =

j
Wij[ ˜Pj(λ) −˜Pi(λ)] ,
(921)
where λ is the Laplace transform variable conjugate to t, and the initial condition Pi(0) = δi0
has been used. A uniform lattice or network is now introduced in which all the transition rates
are equal to ˜We(λ), with site occupation probabilities being ˜P 0
i (λ), so that
λ ˜P 0
i (λ) −δi0 =

j
˜We(λ)[ ˜P 0
j (λ) −˜P 0
i (λ)] ,
(922)
where the eﬀective transition rate ˜We is yet to be determined. If one subtracts Eq. (2) from
(3), after some rearrangements one obtains
(Zi + ϵ)[ ˜Pi(λ) −˜P 0
i (λ)] −

j
[ ˜Pj(λ) −˜P 0
j (λ)] = −

j
∆ij[ ˜Pi(λ) −˜Pj(λ)] ,
(923)
where Zi is the coordination number of site i, ϵ = λ/ ˜We, and ∆ij = (Wij −˜We)/ ˜We. A site-site
Green function Gik is now introduced by the equation
(Zi + ϵ)Gik −

j
Gjk = −δik .
(924)
313

Gik is the response of the system at k if a unit current is injected into the network at i. In
terms of Gik, Eq. (4) is rewritten as
˜Pi(λ) = ˜P 0
i (λ) +

j

k
Gij∆jk[ ˜Pj(λ) −˜Pk(λ)] .
(925)
Similar to the steady-state transport discussed in Chapter 5, Eq. (6) is an exact but implicit
solution of Eq.
(1) which is applicable to any lattice, irrespective of its dimensionality or
topological structure. However, for topologically-disordered lattice, such as the Voronoi network
(see, for example, Sections 2.10 and 2.11), further progress requires a statistical treatment of the
Green function appropriately coupled to the topological disorder of the network. The statistical
treatment of Gik will be discussed later in this chapter, while its derivation for regular lattices
is described in the next section.
Equation (6) can also be rewritten in terms of the “ﬂux,” ˜Qij(λ) = ˜Pi(λ)−˜Pj(λ). We denote
bonds with Greek letters, assign directions to them, and let γαβ = (Gil + Gjk) −(Gjl + Gik) be
a bond-bond Green function, where i and l (j and k) are the network sites with tails (heads)
of arrows on bonds α and β, respectively. Similar to Gij, the bond-bond Green function γαβ is
the response of the system in bond β if a unit current is injected into the bond α. In terms of
γαβ one can rewrite Eq. (6) as
˜Qα(λ) = ˜Q0
α(λ) +

α
∆βγαβ ˜Qβ(λ) .
(926)
Similar to Eq. (6), (7) is also exact, and expresses the ﬂux ˜Qα in the bond α in the heterogeneous
network as the sum of the ﬂux ˜Q0
α in the same bond but in the uniform medium and the
ﬂuctuations in the ﬂux through the bond that arise as the result of the heterogeneity of the
network.
6.1.2 Self-consistent approach
The eﬀective transition rate ˜We is calculated by the following self-consistency condition:
Solve Eq. (7) for an arbitrary cluster of bonds with transition rates ∆β. Then select any bond
α of the cluster and require that
⟨˜Qα⟩= ˜Q0
α ,
(927)
where ⟨·⟩denotes an average over all possible transition rates of all the bonds in the cluster.
Equation (8), when rewritten as ⟨˜Qα −˜Q0
α⟩= 0, implies that, on average, the ﬂuctuations in
314

the ﬂux in bond α that are caused by the heterogeneities must vanish. If one substitutes the
eﬀective transition rate so obtained in Eq. (3) and invert the Laplace transform, one obtains
∂Pi(t)
∂t
=

j
 t
0 We(t −τ)[Pj(τ) −Pi(τ)]dτ .
(928)
Equation (9), which is referred to as a generalized master equation, indicates that matching a
heterogeneous medium to a uniform one induces memory eﬀects.
Before proceeding further, we must point out that, although the eﬀective transition rate
We that one determines by the self-consistent condition (8) is independent of spatial position,
it must be time-dependent. To see this, we need only consider the most naive approximate
analysis of Eq. (1) in which all the transition rates Wij are replaced by a single, constant
(independent of time) rate Wc. The resulting equation is the discretized equation for a homo-
geneous material and can therefore predict only macroscopic diﬀusive behavior. Consider now
a two-phase material with conducting and insulating phases, modelled by a random network
with a distribution of the transition rates which is percolation-like, i.e., only a fraction p < 1 of
all bonds of the network are open or conducting (have Wij > 0). Percolation theory has taught
us that if p < pc, no connected path of open bonds spans the lattice, and thus macroscopic
diﬀusion is precluded, whereas the naive replacement of all the transition rates with a constant
Wc still predicts macroscopic diﬀusion, and thus such an approximation breaks down. Only
when the analysis is performed in the Laplace transform space with a time-dependent ˜We(λ),
are these diﬃculties circumvented.
6.1.3 Self-consistent approximation, generalized master equation, and continuous-
time random walks
Kenkre et al. (1973) showed that, for a periodic lattice, a generalized master equation of
the following form
∂
∂tP(l, t) =
 t
0 φ(t −τ)

l′
[W(l −l′)P(l′, τ) −W(l′ −l)P(l, τ)]dτ ,
(929)
can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with a continuous-time random walk (CTRW)
on the same lattice (for an in-depth study of CTRWs see, for example, Hughes, 1995). In a
CTRW the random walker waits for a time t before making a jump from one site to another.
The waiting time is a statistically-distributed quantity characterized by a waiting time density
315

ψ(t). In Eq. (10), W(l −l′) is the transition probability from site l′ to site l, and φ(t) is a
memory kernel which, in the Laplace transform state, is related to the waiting time density by
˜ψ(λ) =
˜φ(λ)
λ + ˜φ(λ) .
(930)
If we restrict our attention to periodic lattices with lattice sites deﬁned by position vectors l
and diﬀusion commencing from site l = 0, we have
λ ˜P(l, λ) −δl,0 = ˜We(λ)

l′
[ ˜P(l′, λ) −˜P(l, λ)] .
(931)
This equation can be analyzed as a generalized master equation, or its equivalent CTRW,
characterized by a waiting time density ψ(t), with
˜ψ(λ) =
Z ˜We(λ)
λ + Z ˜We(λ) ,
(932)
where Z is the coordination number of the lattice.
6.1.4 The Green functions
We now describe how the Green function Gik is derived for a variety of periodic lattices.
Such functions arise in a variety of contexts, such as numerical analysis, theory of lattice
dynamics within the harmonic approximation (see, for example, Maradudin et al., 1971), and
in the theory of lattice random walks (see, for example, Hughes, 1995). Although such Green
functions have been extensively studied, it is useful to collect here most of the results of interest.
Consider ﬁrst a simple-cubic lattice in d dimensions, so that each site has a coordination
number Z = 2d. Because Gik depends only on the relative positions of sites i and k, there is
no loss of generality in writing k = (0, · · · , 0) and i = (m1, m2, · · · , md), with mi being integers,
and deﬁning Gik ≡G(m1, · · · , md). Equation (5) reduces to the diﬀerence equation
(2d + ϵ)G(m1, m2, · · · , md) −[G(m1 + 1, m2, · · · , md) + G(m1 −1, m2, · · · , md)
+G(m1, m2 + 1, · · · , md) + G(m1, m2 −1, · · · , md)
+ · · · + G(m1, m2, · · · , md + 1) + G(m1, m2, · · · , md −1)] = −δm10δm20 · · · δmd0 .
(933)
We now deﬁne a discrete Fourier transform by
ˆG(θ1, θ2, · · · , θd) =
∞

m1=−∞
∞

m2=−∞
· · ·
∞

md=−∞
exp(im1θ1+im2θ2+· · ·+imdθd)G(m1, m2, · · · , md) ,
(934)
316

with the help of which Eq. (14), in the Fourier space, becomes
[2d + ϵ −2(cos θ1 + cos θ2 + · · · + cos θd)] ˆG(θ1, θ2, · · · , θd) = −1 .
(935)
Therefore, by inverting the Fourier transform one obtains
G(m1, · · · , md) = −1
2
1
(2π)d
 π
−π
 π
−π · · ·
 π
−π
exp(−im1θ1 −im2θ2 −· · · −imdθd)
d + 1
2ϵ −(cos θ1 + cos θ2 + · · · + cos θd)dθ1 · · · dθd
= −1
2
1
(2π)d
 π
−π
 π
−π · · ·
 π
−π exp(−im1θ1 −im2θ2 −· · · −imdθd)dθ1dθ2 · · · dθd
×
 ∞
0
exp[−(d + 1
2ϵ)t + (cos θ1 + · · · + cos θd)t]dt = −1
2
 ∞
0
exp[−(dt + 1
2ϵ)]Im1(t) · · · Imd(t)dt ,
(936)
where we have used the integral representation of the modiﬁed Bessel function
Im(t) = 1
2π
 π
−π cos(mθ) exp(t cos θ)dθ .
(937)
Integral representations of the Green function for other periodic lattices are obtained by
mapping the sites of these lattices onto a subset of the sites of a simple-cubic lattice. For
example, any site j of the BCC lattice is coupled to eight sites, the coordinates of which diﬀer
from those of j by (±1, ±1, ±1), while any site j of the FCC lattice is coupled to 12 sites with
coordinates that diﬀer from those of j by (±1, ±1, 0), (±1, 0, ±1), or (0, ±1, ±1). Given such
considerations, it is straightforward to show that for the BCC lattice
G(m) = −
1
(2π)3
 π
−π
 π
−π
 π
−π
exp(−im1θ1 −im2θ2 −im3θ3)
8 + ϵ −8 cos θ1 cos θ2 cos θ3
dθ1dθ2dθ3 ,
(938)
while for the FCC lattice,
G(m) = −
1
(2π)3
 π
−π
 π
−π
 π
−π
exp(−im1θ1 −im2θ2 −im3θ3)
12 + ϵ −4(cos θ1 cos θ2 + cos θ2 cos θ3 + cos θ3 cos θ1)dθ1dθ2dθ3
(939)
where m = (m1, m2, m3). These Green functions vanish at those sites m of the underlying
simple-cubic lattice that do not belong to the BCC or FCC lattice. Ishioka and Koiwa (1978)
derived the Green function for the diamond lattice.
The triangular lattice may be analyzed as a sheared square lattice with one diagonal inter-
action or, more simply, as a square lattice with site j coupled to the six sites with coordinates
that diﬀer from those of j by (±2, 0) or (±1, ±1). Then,
G(m1, m2) = −
1
(2π)2
 π
−π
 π
−π
exp(−im1θ1 −im2θ2)
6 + ϵ −4 cos θ1 cos θ2 −2 cos 2θ2
dθ1dθ1 ,
(940)
317

with the integral vanishing identically for those (m1, m2) which do not correspond to sites of the
triangular lattice. At all other sites, when ϵ = 0, the integrand has non-integrable singularities
at the central point (θ1, θ2) = (0, 0), and also at the four corners (θ1, θ2) = (±π, ±π)
The hexagonal lattice is more diﬃcult to analyze, because it is not translationally invariant.
Horiguchi (1972) derived the Green function for this lattice, and here we merely quote the
results:
Ghex(2m1, m2) = −
1
(2π)2
 π
−π
 π
−π
(3 + ϵ) exp(−im1θ1 −im2θ2)
(3 + ϵ)2 −1 −4 cos θ1 cos θ2 −4 cos2 θ2
dθ1dθ2 ,
(941)
Ghex(2m1 + 1, m2) = −
1
(2π)2
 π
−π
 π
−π
exp(−im1θ1 −im2θ2)[1 + 2 exp(−iθ1) cos θ2]
(3 + ϵ)2 −1 −4 cos θ1 cos θ2 −4 cos2 θ2
dθ1dθ2 .
(942)
A transparent derivation of the results for the hexagonal and triangular lattices was presented
by Sahimi et al.
(1983a), who also discussed many other properties of these lattice Green
functions.
6.1.5 Eﬀective-medium approximation
In practice, one cannot solve Eq. (8) for an arbitrary cluster of bonds, and thus suitable
approximate schemes must be developed. As described in Section 5.6, in an EMA approach
one assigns to all but a ﬁnite cluster of bonds in the network the eﬀective transition rate ˜We(λ)
(so that ∆β ̸= 0 only for a ﬁnite set of bonds), and proceeds as above, now averaging over the
transition rates of the bonds in the cluster in order to to determine ˜We(λ). In the simplest case
(the lowest-order approximation), only a single bond α has its transition rate W diﬀering from
˜We(λ); this is called the single-bond EMA, but we simply refer to it as the EMA. In this case
Eq. (8) yields
)
1
1 −γαα∆α
*
= 1 .
(943)
If f(W) represents the statistical distribution of the transition rates, one obtains
 ∞
0
f(W)
1 −γαα∆α
dW = 1 .
(944)
We must point out that if, instead of the ﬂuxes ˜Qα, we require that ⟨˜Pi⟩= ˜P 0
i , we would obtain
the same equation as (25). Both methods imply that ˜We(λ) should be calculated by requiring
that the average of the excess ﬂux, ⟨˜Qα −˜Q0
α⟩, or excess “potential,” ⟨˜Pi −˜P 0
i ⟩, vanish. It is
318

not diﬃcult to show that, for periodic lattices,
γαα = −2/Z + (2ϵ/Z)G(ϵ) = −pc + (2ϵ/Z)G(ϵ) ,
(945)
where G(ϵ) = −Gii(ϵ) > 0, and pc = 2/Z is the EMA prediction of the bond percolation
threshold of the periodic lattices already derived in Section 5.6. Equation (25) is general and
can be used with an arbitrary f(W). Let us note that, as pointed out in Chapter 5, the EMA
is equivalent to the coherent-potential approximation.
6.1.6 The mean square displacement
The properties of diﬀusion in a heterogeneous material can be characterized in terms of the
mean square displacement ⟨R2(t)⟩of the diﬀusants. To calculate ⟨R2(t)⟩, we apply a discrete
Fourier transform to ˜P(l, λ),
ˆP(ω, λ) =

l
exp(iω · l) ˜P(l, λ) ,
(946)
so that
ˆP(ω, λ) = {λ + Z ˜We(λ)[1 −Λ(ω)]}−1 ,
(947)
where
Λ(ω) = 1
Z

l′
exp[iω · (l′ −l)] ,
(948)
is called the structure factor of the lattice. Then, the Laplace transform of the mean square
displacement ⟨R2(t)⟩of the diﬀusing particles is given by
˜
R2(λ) =

l
l2 ˜P(l, λ) = −∇2ω ˆP(ω, λ)|ω=0 .
(949)
If the bonds of the lattice all have unit length, we can easily see that −∇2ωΛ(ω) = 1 at ω = 0,
and therefore,
⟨R2(t)⟩= L−1
 Z
λ2 ˜We(λ)

,
(950)
where L−1 denotes an inverse Laplace transform.
Therefore, the behavior of the diﬀusion
process can be characterized by the mean square displacement ⟨R2(t)⟩or, equivalently, the
waiting time distribution ψ(t), both of which can be obtained once We has been computed.
Therefore, whether the computed ⟨R2(t)⟩or ψ(t) is exact or an approximate estimate depends
on whether We has been calculated exactly or approximately. Clearly, the self-consistent method
319

and its EMA simpliﬁcation provide a means of computing all the important properties of
diﬀusion processes in a heterogeneous material.
Once the mean equare displacement ⟨R2(t)⟩is computed through Eq. (31), the eﬀective
diﬀusivity De can also be calculated, as it is related to ⟨R2(t)⟩through the following equation
⟨R2(t)⟩= 2dDet .
(951)
Note that if we compare Eqs.
(31) and (32), we see that, for d−dimensional simple-cubic
lattices (for which Z = 2d), De = We.
6.1.7 Diﬀerence between transport in low- and high-dimensional materials
Before proceeding with analyzing the predictions of the EMA, let us point out an important
diﬀerence between diﬀusion in two- or lower-dimensional systems and that in d = 3. It is
necessary to keep Re(ϵ) ≥0, and insist that, when d ≤2, ϵ ̸= 0. Therefore, in 2D the behavior
of these Green functions near ϵ+ = 0 is particularly important, as this limit corresponds to the
time t →∞. It can be shown that (Sahimi et al., 1983a)
G(m1, m2) ∼A
4π ln(ϵ) ,
as ϵ →0+
(952)
where A is a constant given by
A =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
√
3 ,
hexagonal lattice
1 ,
square lattice
1/
√
3 ,
triangular lattice
(953)
In 3D, Gii →c as ϵ →0+, where c is a constant with −c = 0.44822, 0.25273, 0.17415, and
0.11206, for the diamond, simple cubic, BCC and FCC lattices, respectively.
The continuity of the Green function in three or more dimensions means that the steady-
state injection problem
ZGik −

j
Gjk = −δik
(954)
can be treated as the small λ limit of the general time-dependent problem deﬁned by Eq. (5).
However, for d = 1 and 2, one should, in principle, treat the steady state problem separately.
In this case, a Green function for the injection problem, Eq. (35), is constructed from that of
the time-dependent problem, Eq. (5), by subtracting Gkk and letting ϵ →0+. For example,
320

the time-dependent Green function for the square lattice
G(m1, m2) = −1
2
 ∞
0
exp(−2t −1
2ϵ)Im1(t)Im2(t)dt ,
(955)
is replaced, for ϵ = 0, by the Green function
G(m1, m2) = 1
2
 ∞
0
exp(−2t)[I2
0(t) −Im1(t)Im2(t)]dt .
(956)
It can be shown (see, for example, Sahimi et al., 1983a; Hughes, 1995) that the divergence of
the Green function at ϵ = 0 for d ≤2 ensures that the diﬀusants will return to the origin of
their motion, while its ﬁniteness for d = 3 establishes that the random walk of the diﬀusants is
transient, i.e., the diﬀusants need not return to the origin of their motion and will ultimately
escape to inﬁnity.
6.1.8 Predictions of the eﬀective-medium approximation
Equation (25) can be used for (approximate) analysis of diﬀusion in any heterogeneous
material. However, a stringent test of the accuracy of the EMA is its ability for predicting the
correct modes of transport in heterogeneous materials with percolation disorder. Therefore, we
consider a composite material for which
f(W) = (1 −p)δ+(W) + ph(W) ,
(957)
i.e., a fraction 1−p of the material (bonds) does not conduct (i.e., it does not allow diﬀusion or
conduction to take place), while the local transition rates (or, equivalently, the local diﬀusivity
or conductivity) of the rest of the material (bonds) are distributed according to h(W), where
h(W) is any normalized probability density function. Then, Eq. (25) becomes
p
 ∞
0
h(W)
1 −pc + pcϵG + pc(1 −ϵG)(W/ ˜We)dW = p −pc + ϵpcG
1 −pc + ϵpcG ,
(958)
which was ﬁrst derived by Odagaki and Lax (1981), Summerﬁeld (1981), and Webman (1981)
by methods that are diﬀerent from what is described here. We now summarize the predictions
of the EMA for 1D, 2D, and 3D systems. More details are given by Sahimi et al. (1983a).
6.1.8.1 One-dimensional materials
Let us point out at the outset that, diﬀusion in a 1D disordered material is not merely of
academic interest. Over the past twenty years, certain classes of materials have been discovered
321

to which 1D or quasi-1D description applies. The quasi-1D π−conjugated Polyacetylene (PA)
and Polydiacetylene (PDA), which have found many applications, have many features that are
the direct result of their low dimensionality. In particular, to describe transport properties
of such materials, the description of their morphology by a 1D or quasi-1D system is essen-
tial. Many other materials can described by such low-dimensional models, some of which were
already mentioned in Chapter 3.
We should also point out that diﬀusion in disordered chains has been studied very exten-
sively, as a result of which many interesting predictions, some of which exact, have emerged.
For example, Sinai (1982) considered a diﬀusion process in a linear chain in which the diﬀusant,
which is at site i at time t, moves to site i+1 with probability pi or to site i−1 with probability
1 −pi, where the probabilities pi are distributed according to a probability density function
f(pi). Subject to certain constraints on f(pi), Sinai found that the mean square displacement
of the diﬀusant at time t is give by, ⟨R2(t)⟩∼ln2 t, i.e., the diﬀusion process is very slow and
its eﬀective diﬀusivity at long times is zero. Derrida and Pomeau (1982) considered the same
problem, but removed the constraints imposed on f(pi). They showed that there exists a ﬁnite
velocity to the right (to the left) only if ⟨(1 −pi)/pi⟩< 1 [⟨pi/(1 −pi)⟩< 1]. If both of these
inequalities are violated, then ⟨R2(t)⟩∼tx, where x depends on f(pi). Denteneer and Ernst
(1983) carried out further analysis of this problem and obtained certain exact results. Movaghar
et al. (1987) analyzed the problem for the case in which there is a drift in the system (caused
by, for example, an external potential), and one in which there is trapping in the system, i.e.,
the diﬀusants react and disappear if they hit certain sites of the system. Most of such results
were reviewed by Alexander et al. (1981) and, more recently, by Hughes (1996) who presents
an elegant and rigorous analysis of this problem, and therefore we do not discuss them here.
On the other hand, the EMA provides a very accurate, yet simple, description of diﬀusion in
1D or quasi-1D disordered materials, and therefore we discuss its predictions in detail.
For a linear chain, pc = 1, and therefore Eq. (39) reduces to
 ∞
0
f(W)
ϵG(ϵ) + [1 −ϵG(ϵ)](W/We)dW = 1 ,
(959)
where
G(ϵ) =
1
$
ϵ(4 + ϵ)
,
(960)
322

which can be obtained easily from Eq. (17), the Green function for a d−dimensional simple-
cubic lattice. Consider the case in which the chain is uninterrupted, i.e., p = 1. Then, so long
as
f−1 =
 ∞
0
f(W)
W
dW < ∞,
(961)
one has, as λ →0+,
˜We(λ) →˜We(0) = De =
1
f−1
,
(962)
which is an exact result. However, if f−1 = ∞, we have, as λ →0+,
˜We(λ) ∼2[f(0) ln(λ−1)]−1 ,
(963)
so that the transport process evolves subdiﬀusively (that is, the growth of the mean square
displacement with the time t is slower than linearly):
⟨R2(t)⟩∼
2
f(0)
t
ln t .
(964)
More severe subdiﬀusive behavior arise if we consider
f(W) = (1 −α)W −α , 0 < α < 1 ,
(965)
which, as discussed in Section 2.11, is of the type of distribution that arises in the Swiss-cheese
model of a disordered material. We then ﬁnd that
˜We(λ) ∼
sin πα
2αcπ
2/(2−α)
λα/(2−α) ,
(966)
and
⟨R2(t)⟩∝t2(1−α)/(2−α) .
(967)
These results, which are exact, were ﬁrst derived by Alexander et al. (1981).
If the chain is interrupted, i.e., if p < 1, and if h−1 is ﬁnite, then it can be shown that
˜We(λ) ∼p(2 −p)
4(1 −p)2λ ,
(968)
and
⟨R2(t)⟩= p(2 −p)
2(1 −p)2 ,
(969)
so that the mean square displacement remains ﬁnite, which is not surprising since the chain is
a collection of ﬁnite clusters or segments, and therefore ⟨R2(t)⟩must reﬂect the mean size of
the clusters.
323

6.1.8.2 Two- and three-dimensional materials
Before we proceed with presenting and discussing the EMA predictions, we should point
out that extensive simulations of diﬀusion in 2D or 3D disordered lattices have been carried
out by various research groups. The techniques for such simulations were already described
in Sections 4.10 and 5.14.4. For composite materials with percolation disorder, the scaling
properties of the eﬀective diﬀusivity near the percolation threshold was discussed in Section
2.7.2. The scaling theory for the time-dependence of the mean square displacement will be
described below. Many other properties of diﬀusion and random walks in disordered media
were reviewed and discussed by Havlin and Ben-Avraham (1987) and Haus and Kehr (1987).
Thus, in this section, we consider the predictions of the EMA which provides an approximate
analytical solution of this problem.
For 2D and 3D systems, three distinct types of transport can occur.
(1) Consider ﬁrst the case of diﬀusive transport, where ˜We(λ) →˜We(0) > 0 as λ →0+.
Given the limiting behavior of G(ϵ) described above, we obtain
˜We(0)(p/pc)
 ∞
0
h(W)
(1 −pc) ˜We(0)/pc + W dW = p −pc
1 −pc
,
(970)
which can yield a solution for ˜We(0) only if p > pc. That is, diﬀusive transport is possible only
above the percolation threshold. If h−1 is ﬁnite, then
De = ˜We(0) ∼
p −pc
h−1(1 −pc) ,
p →p+
c ,
(971)
which implies that De vanishes linearly with p −pc as p →pc. Since De is proportional to the
eﬀective conductivity ge of the system, this results implies that the critical exponent µ = 1 [see
Eq. (2.36)], which is incorrect. Therefore, the prediction of the EMA near pc cannot be very
accurate, a conclusion that was already reached in Chapter 5.
If, however, h−1 = ∞, then the results are completely diﬀerent. It can be shown that if
h(W) →h0 > 0, then
De ∝˜We(0) ∼
1
h0(1 −pc)
p −pc
−ln(p −pc) ,
(972)
whereas if h(W) is of the type that arises in the Swiss-cheese model of heterogeneous materials,
i.e., if h(W) = (1 −α)W −α, then
De ∝˜We(0) ∼
sin πα
cπpα
c
1/(1−α) (p −pc)1/(1−α)
1 −pc
,
(973)
324

so that the EMA predicts that µ = 1/(1 −α), i.e., µ is non-universal, which is in qualitative
(but not quantitative) agreement with what we discussed in Section 2.11, where we considered
transport in continuum models of heterogeneous materials.
(2) The next transport regime to be considered is localization, i.e., when ⟨R2(t)⟩is ﬁnite as
t →∞. In the language of CTRWs, localization is equivalent to
 ∞
0
ψ(t)dt < 1 , localization .
(974)
Given this condition, we obtain in 2D
De ∝˜We(λ) ∼
pcA
4π(pc −p) ln(1 −p/pc)−1λ ,
(975)
lim
t→∞⟨R2(t)⟩∼
pcAZ
4π(pc −p) ln(1 −p/pc)−1 ,
(976)
where the constant A is given by Eq. (34). The corresponding results for 3D are
De ∝˜We(λ) ∼pcG(0)
pc −p λ ,
(977)
lim
t→∞⟨R2(t)⟩∼pcZG(0)
pc −p
.
(978)
Thus, localization is possible only if p < pc. Note that Eqs. (56) and (58) both predict that
De →0 as λ →0+ (i.e., as t →∞), which is the correct expected behavior.
(3) The third type of transport occurs at p = pc. Consider ﬁrst the case for which h−1 is
ﬁnite. Then, the EMA predicts that in 2D
De ∝˜We(λ) ∼

pcA ln λ
8πh−1(1 −pc)
1/2
λ1/2 ,
(979)
Then, as t →∞,
⟨R2(t)⟩∼Z
π

pcA ln t
2h−1(1 −pc)
1/2
t1/2 ,
(980)
while the corresponding results for 3D systems are
De ∝˜We(λ) ∼

pcG(0)
h−1(1 −pc)
1/2
λ1/2 ,
(981)
and as t →∞,
⟨R2(t)⟩∼2Z
√π

pcG(0)
h−1(1 −pc)
1/2
t1/2 .
(982)
325

In terms of the waiting time distribution of the associated CTRW, the EMA predicts that
ψ(t) ∼
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
t−3/2(ln t)1/2,
2D ,
t−3/2,
3D .
(983)
If h(W) →h0 as W →0+, then in 2D
De ∝˜We(λ) ∼

pcAλ
4πh0(1 −pc)
1/2
,
(984)
and in 3D,
De ∝˜We(λ) ∼

2pcG(0)λ
h0(1 −pc) ln(1/λ)
1/2
,
(985)
The mean square displacement, as t →∞, is then given by
⟨R2(t)⟩∼
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
t1/2,
2D ,
t1/2(ln t)−1/2,
3D .
(986)
The associated waiting time distributions are given by
ψ(t) ∼
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
t−3/2,
2D ,
t−3/2(ln t)−1/2,
3D .
(987)
Finally, if h(W) = (1 −α)W −α, then
De ∝˜We(λ) ∼
 A sin πα
4π2(2 −α)
1/(2−α) 
pc
1 −pc
(1−α)/(2−α)
(λ ln 1/λ)1/(2−α) ,
(988)
⟨R2(t)⟩∼t(1−α)/(2−α)(ln t)1/(2−α) ,
(989)
for 2D materials, and
De ∝˜We(λ) ∼
G(0) sin πα
π(1 −α)
1/(2−α) 
pc
1 −pc
(1−α)/(2−α)
λ1/(2−α) ,
(990)
⟨R2(t)⟩∝t(1−α)/(2−α) ,
(991)
for 3D material.
6.1.9 Anomalous diﬀusion
As the above discussions indicate, at p = pc, the mean square displacement ⟨R2(t)⟩does
not grow linearly with the time, rather it increases with t slower than linearly. This unusual
phenomenon is called anomalous diﬀusion (Gefen et al., 1983) or fractal diﬀusion (Sahimi et al.,
326

1983a). To better characterize this phenomenon, we introduce a random walk fractal dimension
Dw deﬁned by
⟨R2(t)⟩∼t2/Dw ,
(992)
so that Fickian diﬀusion corresponds to Dw = 2. It is then clear that the EMA predicts that,
so long as h−1 < ∞, one has a universal value Dw = 4. However, if h−1 = ∞, then Dw will be
non-universal. In particular, if h(W) = (1 −α)W −α, where 0 < α < 1, then the Eqs. (70) and
(72) imply that the EMA predicts that
Dw =
2 −α
2(1 −α) .
(993)
For p > pc diﬀusion will still be anomalous so long as ⟨R2(t)⟩1/2 ≪ξp, where ξp is the
correlation length of percolation.
Therefore, one may deﬁne a time scale tco such that for
t ≪tco diﬀusion is anomalous, whereas for t ≫tco diﬀusion is Fickian. The time scale tco is
then the time at which a crossover between Fickian and anomalous diﬀusion takes place. It
can be shown that, if h−1 is ﬁnite, then the EMA predicts that
[tco(p −pc)2]−1 ln[tco(p −pc)] ∼1 ,
(994)
in 2D, and
tco ∼(p −pc)−2 ,
(995)
in 3D, so that in both case the crossover time diverges at p = pc.
The divergence of tco is caused by two factors. (1) As pc is approached, the correlation length
ξp diverges [see Eq. (2.32)], and thus the material is inhomogeneous on a rapidly increasing
length scale. (2) As p →pc, the number of dead-end bonds or sites also increases rapidly.
Such bonds or sites slow down the diﬀusion process. The divergence of the time scale tco for the
crossover between Fickian and anomalous diﬀusion has an important implication for interpreting
experimental data for the diﬀusivity in that, one must ensure that Fickian diﬀusion regime has
been reached before interpreting the experimental data as implying a constant diﬀusivity De.
6.1.10 Scaling theory of anomalous diﬀusion
The accuracy of the predictions of the EMA for the time dependence of ⟨R2(t)⟩can be
tested against the scaling theory of diﬀusion in disordered materials with percolation disorder.
327

Suppose that diﬀusion takes place only on the sample-spanning percolation cluster. From Eq.
(2.40) one has
De ∼(p −pc)µ−β ∼ξ−θ
p
,
(996)
where θ = (µ−β)/ν, and µ, β and ν are, respectively, the critical exponents of the conductivity,
strength of the percolation system, and the percolation correlation length ξp.
If the mean
square displacement ⟨R2(t)⟩1/2 ≫ξp, then diﬀusion must be Fickian so that the mean square
displacement grows linearly with the time t, and therefore
⟨R2(t)⟩∝Det ∝t(p −pc)µ−β .
(997)
On the other hand, if the size of the cluster on which diﬀusion is taking place is ﬁnite, which
happens when p < pc, then after a long enough time the diﬀusant has explored the cluster
completely, and since the typical radius of such clusters is ξp, we must have
⟨R2(t)⟩= ξ2
p ∝|p −pc|−2ν .
(998)
We may combine Eqs. (78) and (79) and write down a general scaling equation for the mean
square displacement:
⟨R2(t)⟩1/2 = txf[(p −pc)ty] .
(999)
For p > pc and long times one must have f(z) ∼z(µ−β)/2 as z →∞, in order for Eq. (80)
to be consistent with Eq. (78), and thus, x + y(µ −β)/2 = 1/2. On the other hand, for
p < pc the mean square displacement must become independent of t, which would be the case
if f(z) →z−x/y as z →−∞, implying that x/y = ν. Thus, solving for x and y we obtain
x = ν/(2ν + µ −β) and y = x/ν. Since ⟨R2(t)⟩∼t2x we obtain
⟨R2(t)⟩∼t2ν/(2ν+µ−β) ,
(1000)
which, when compared with Eq. (73), implies that the random walk fractal dimension is given
by
Dw = 2 + µ −β
ν
= 2 + θ .
(1001)
This result is usually attributed to Gefen et al. (1983). Equation (82) can also be derived
by the following, more intuitive method. Since fractal or anomalous diﬀusion occurs only if
⟨R2(t)⟩1/2 ≪ξp, one can replace ξp with ⟨R2(t)⟩1/2 [since for ⟨R2(t)⟩1/2 ≪ξp the only relevant
328

length scale of the system is ⟨R2(t)⟩1/2] and write De ∼⟨R2(t)⟩−θ/2 [see Eq. (77)]. On the other
hand, Eq. (32) implies that De ∼d⟨R2(t)⟩/dt ∼⟨R2(t)⟩−θ/2, which after integration yields,
⟨R2(t)⟩∼t2/(2+θ), and thus we recover Eq. (82).
Since, as discussed in Chapter 2, the exponents µ, β and ν depend on the dimensionality
d of a system, the random walk fractal dimension Dw also varies with d. Only in the mean-
ﬁeld approximation, valid for d ≥6, which predicts that µ = 3, β = 1 and ν = 1/2, does
Dw = 6 become independent of d, but this prediction also disagrees with that of EMA, Dw = 4.
However, using the numerical values of the exponents given in Table 2.3, one ﬁnds that Dw(d =
2) ≃2.87 and Dw(d = 3) ≃3.8, so that the 3D value of Dw is only about 5% smaller than the
EMA prediction Dw = 4, and thus this prediction of EMA is reasonably accurate.
From the scaling equation (80) one can also obtain the time tco at which a crossover between
fractal and Fickian diﬀusion takes place. It is clear that tco ∼ξDw
p
, and therefore
tco ∼(p −pc)−(2ν+µ−β) .
(1002)
Equation (83) implies in 3D, tco ∼(p −pc)−3.34, which should be compared with the prediction
of the EMA, Eq. (76). Thus, once again the EMA prediction is qualitatively correct.
The results so far pertain to diﬀusion on the sample-spanning percolation cluster. One can
also consider diﬀusion on all the clusters. In this case ⟨R2(t)⟩must be averaged over all the
clusters. As discussed in Section 2.6.1, the probability that a site that belongs to a cluster of
size s is sns, where ns is the number of clusters of size s. If R2
s is the mean square displacement
of a particle on a cluster of size s, then
⟨R2(t)⟩(t →∞, p < pc) =

s
snsR2
s ∝|p −pc|β−2ν .
(1003)
Since diﬀusion is taking place on all the clusters, then, above pc the diﬀusivity is directly
proportional to ge, the eﬀective conductivity, and therefore in this case De ∼(p −pc)µ and
⟨R2(t)⟩∼Det ∼t(p −pc)µ, which can be combined with Eq. (84) and be written as a single
scaling equation,
⟨R2(t)⟩1/2 ∝tkf[(p −pc)ty] .
(1004)
Similar to Eq. (80), the exponents k and y can be obtained by demanding that, the scaling
function f(z) must be such that Eq. (85) can reproduce the results for p > pc (z →+∞) and
329

p < pc (z →−∞). One then obtains k = (ν −β/2)/(2ν +µ −β) and y = (2ν +µ −β)−1. Since
⟨R2(t)⟩∼t2k, we obtain
⟨R2(t)⟩∼t(2ν−β)/(2ν+µ−β) ,
(1005)
which should be compred with Eq. (81). Equation (86) predicts that in 3D one must have
⟨R2(t)⟩∼t0.33, if we use the 3D values of the various exponents, which should be compared with
the prediction of Eq. (80), ⟨R2(t)⟩∼t0.527. Clearly, diﬀusion on the ﬁnite clusters further slows
down the transport process. Note that, Eq. (86) implies that in the mean-ﬁeld approximation,
when ν = 1/2, β = 1 and µ = 3 (see Table 2.3), one obtains k = 0. However, this does not
imply that in this limit ⟨R2(t)⟩approaches a constant, rather it can be shown that in this limit
⟨R2(t)⟩∼ln t (i.e., the mean square displacement grows with t slower than any power of t).
Note also that, since the EMA replaces a heterogeneous material by a uniform one, it cannot
distinguish between diﬀusion on the sample-spanning cluster and diﬀusion on all the clusters.
Let us point out that a percolation system at p = pc, or one above the percolation threshold
but at length scales smaller than the correlation length ξp, is not the only system that can
give rise to anomalous diﬀusion. In fact, diﬀusion in any material with a fractal morphology is
anomalous. Many aspects of anomalous diﬀusion in such materials were discussed in detail by
Havlin and Ben-Avraham (1987) and Haus and Kehr (1987).
6.1.11 Comparison with the experimental data
Equations (81) and (86) and the predicted values of Dw have been tested and conﬁrmed
by numerical simulations of diﬀusion in percolation clusters. However, an interesting experi-
mental veriﬁcation of these results was presented by Knackstedt et al. (1995) who prepared a
porous material, a ternary microemulsion comprised of three components, didodecyl dimthyl
ammonium bromide, water, and cyclohexane, which was a bicontinuous water-oil system, but
by tuning the volume fraction of the three components could undergo, at high water contents, a
structural transition to disconnected water droplets in oil, i.e., the water phase would undergo
a percolation transition, thus allowing measurement of the various mechanical and transport
properties, including the diﬀusivity. Knackstect et al. (1995) measured water self-diﬀusion
De in such a system by pulsed ﬁeld gradient spin-echo technique at controlled temperature of
25 ± 0.5◦C. By varying the length of the gradient pulse T and maintaining a constant gradient
pulse interval ∆, the diﬀusion coeﬃcient was measured. The decay I of the echo density is
330

given by
I = I0 exp[−DeG2T 2γ2(T −∆/3)] ,
(1006)
where G is the gradient strength, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio of the observed nucleus (1H in this
case), and I0 is the signal intensity in the absence of a gradient pulse. The gradient strength
was calibrated with a sample of H2O for which De was known.
Diﬀusion in this material corresponds to the case in which transport takes place on all the
clusters, and therefore the relevant equation is (86). Anomalous diﬀusion was obtained at the
intermediate values of the water volume fractions, 13.5%–14.1%. Since De ∼d⟨R2(t)⟩/dt ∼
t2k−1, a logarithmic plot of De versus t should be a straight line with the slope 2k−1. Knackstedt
et al.’s results yielded 2k ≃0.3±0.1, in good agreement with the prediction of the scaling theory
2k ≃0.33 discussed above.
6.1.12 The governing equation for anomalous diﬀusion
Since anomalous diﬀusion results in an eﬀective diﬀusivity which depends on the time,
the classical diﬀusion equation with a constant diﬀusivity can no longer describe the diﬀusion
process. Therefore, an important question has been the form of the equation that governs
anomalous diﬀusion, a problem that has ben studied for many years. Havlin and Ben-Avraham
(1987) provided a detailed discussion of various approaches to this problem. For simplicity
we consider the problem in radial geometry and consider P(r, t), the probability of ﬁnding
the diﬀusant at position r at time t. It now appears that the correct governing equation for
anomalous diﬀusion is given by (Metzler et al., 1994; Zeng and Li, 2000)
∂2/DwP(r, t)
∂t2/Dw
=
1
rDs−1
∂
∂r

rDs−1∂P(r, t)
∂r

.
(1007)
Here Ds = 2Df/Dw, where Df is the fractal dimension of the system (for example, the fractal
dimension of the sample-spanning percolation cluster). The quantity Ds is called the spectral
or fracton dimensionality and, as discussed in Section 6.6.4, plays an important role in the
dynamical properties of heterogeneous materials. The derivative on the left-hand side of Eq.
(88) is called fractional derivative and is deﬁned by
∂γP(r, t)
∂tγ
=
1
Γ(1 −γ)
∂
∂t
 t
0
P(r, τ)
(t −τ)γ dτ ,
(1008)
where Γ(x) is the gamma function. Using the Laplace transform, the asymptotic solution of
331

Eq. (88) can be obtained with the result being
P(r, t) ∼t−Ds/2 exp

−c

r
t1/Dw
Dw/(Dw−1)
,
(1009)
where c is a constant. It can now be easily shown that
⟨R2(t)⟩=
 t
0 r2P(r, t)rDf−1dr ∼t2/Dw ,
(1010)
in agreement with Eq. (73).
6.2 Hopping Conductivity
Hopping refers to sudden displacement of a charge carrier from one position to another. In
the simplest model, non-interacting carriers are placed on a simple-cubic lattice and are allowed
to jump to only their nearest neighbors. The jump rates, i.e., the transition probabilities per
unit time, are assumed to be symmetric, i.e., they are equal for forward and backward jumps,
but, more generally, they can be unequal if, for example, an external ﬁeld is imposed on the
system. The major shortcomings of this model are (Dyre and Schr⊘der, 2000) that, (1) it
ignores the fact that the charge carriers repel each other; (2) it allows an arbitrary number
of charge carriers at each site, but - regardless of whether the carriers are ions or localized
electrons - there is room for just one at each site, and (3) it assumes constant site energies.
Thus, a more realistic model has the site energies to vary spatially, and allows only one carrier
at each site. Such a model is, in general, non-linear. However, it can be linearized with respect
to an external electric ﬁeld, in which case the model becomes equivalent to a symmetric hopping
model. This linearization was ﬁrst carried out in the context of development of a model for
hopping conductivity of amorphous semiconductors, which we now discuss in detail.
Hopping conduction in amorphous semiconductors was ﬁrst associated (Hung and Gliess-
man, 1950) with the observation that the activation energy of the conductivity in doped Ge
exhibits a break at low temperatures T, and was attributed to a distinct mechanism of con-
duction. Mott (1956) and Conwell (1956) proposed a model of conduction in which electrons
conduct by thermally-activated tunneling from a ﬁlled site to a vacant one, a process that is
usually called phonon-assisted hopping. Their model was modiﬁed and extended by Miller and
Abrahams (1960; see also the discussion by Butcher, 1976) who developed a model consisting
of two parts, the quantum mechanical theory of the wave functions and of the transition rates
Wij from a localized state i to another localized state j, and a statistical mechanical theory of
332

transport that employs such transition rates. They showed that their model is equivalent to
a random resistor network, so that it can be used for computing the hopping conductivity of
disordered solids, although, as we discuss below, it became clear later that the Miller-Abrahams
resistor network model suﬀers from certain deﬁciencies.
In the early 1970s, it was realized independently by Ambegaokar, Halperin, and Langer
(1971), Shklovskii and Efros (1971), and Pollak (1972) that hopping conduction in amorphous
semiconductors can be modeled successfully by percolation theory. Since their seminal papers,
several electronic properties of such materials have been successfully predicted by percolation
theory. This section summarizes the important elements of this successful application of perco-
lation to a technologically important problem. Our discussion is by no means exhaustive as the
number of published papers on the subject is too large. Thorough discussions of the subject are
given by Shklovskii and Efros (1984) and B¨ottger and Bryskin (1985), while an older account
of some of such percolation predictions is given by Pollak (1978).
In what follows we ﬁrst describe the derivation of the Miller-Abrahams resistor network,
and establish contact with what we discussed in the previous section to show that an EMA can
be used for estimating the hopping conductivity. We then describe the percolation model of
hopping conductivity of amorphous semiconductors.
6.2.1 The Miller-Abrahams network model
The starting point is the Boltzmann’s equation
∂Pi
∂t =

j
[WjiPj(1 −Pi) −WijPi(1 −Pj)] ,
(1011)
where the notation is the same as in Section 6.1. It is implicitly assumed that the occupation
probabilities are uncorrelated. If repulsion can cause strong correlations, then the exclusion
factor (1 −Pi) should be omitted. In the linear (ohmic) regime, the current is proportional to
the applied ﬁeld, and therefore we can linearize Eq. (92) by writing
Pi = P 0
i + ∆Pi ,
(1012)
Wij = W 0
ij + ∆Wij ,
(1013)
where 0 denotes the equilibrium value, and ∆an increment proportional to the applied ﬁeld.
It is clear that this linearization implies that ∆Wij = −∆Wji. We thus obtain the linearized
333

version of Eq. (92):
∂∆Pi
∂t
+

j
Aij∆Pi −

j
Aji∆Pj =

j
Bji∆Wji ,
(1014)
where
Aij = W 0
ij(1 −P 0
j ) + WjiP 0
j ,
(1015)
Bij = P 0
i (1 −P 0
j ) + P 0
j (1 −P 0
i ) .
(1016)
Equation (95) is a set of linear equations for the unknowns ∆Pi. The equilibrium values P 0
i
are given by the Fermi distribution,
P 0
i =
1
exp(Ei/kBT) + 1 ,
(1017)
where Ei is the energy of a carrier on site i, as measured from the Fermi level, and kB is the
Boltzmann’s constant. The equilibrium values W 0
ij are given by
W 0
ij =
uij
| exp[(Ej −Ei)/kBT] −1| ,
(1018)
with
uij = uji = 1
τ0
exp(−2rij/a) .
(1019)
In Eq. (100) 1/τ0 is of the order of a phonon frequency, rij is the distance between i and j, and
a is a Bohr radius. It is assumed that τ0 depends only weakly on rij and T. We point out that
the above linearization is based on the non-trivial assumption that the site occupation number,
which is either 0 or 1, can be replaced by a continuous variable.
Suppose that F is the intensity of an applied ﬁeld, and ri is the position of site i. The
applied ﬁeld changes the energy diﬀerence ∆ij between the energies of sites i and j. Thus, in
a linearized theory we should have
∆Wij = dWij
d∆ij
eF · (ri −rj) =
eF · (ri −rj)
sinh2(∆ij/kBT)uij ,
(1020)
where e is the charge of an electron. Miller and Abrahams deﬁned a new variable Vi such that
Pi = P 0
i + ∆Pi ≡
1
| exp[(Ei −eVi)/kBT] + 1| ,
(1021)
so that to ﬁrst order
∆Pi = dP 0
i
dEi
eVi =
eVi
4kBT cosh2(Ei/2kBT) ,
(1022)
334

The variable Vi is, in the linear regime, proportional to F. Thus, one can transform the set of
linear equations for Pi to another set for Vi, which is then given by
Di
∂Vi
∂t =

j
DjiVj −

j
DijVi +

j
GijF · rij ,
(1023)
where Di = P 0
i (1 −P 0
i ), Dij = DiAij, and Gij = BijW 0
ijW 0
ji/uij.
We now construct a network model for calculating the hopping conductivity. Consider ﬁrst
the steady-state case. We deﬁne a temperature-dependent conductance gij by
kBTgij
e2
= P 0
i (1 −P 0
j )W 0
ij = P 0
j (1 −P 0
i )W 0
ji .
(1024)
If we substitute Eq. (105) into the steady-state limit of Eq. (104), we obtain

j

Vi −F · ri(W 0
ij + W 0
ji)
uij

−

Vj −F · rj(W 0
ij + W 0
ji)
uij

gij = 0 ,
(1025)
where (W 0
ij + W 0
ji)/uij = coth(|∆ij|/2kBT). We are mainly interested in the regime for which
coth(|∆ij|/2kBT) ∼1, in which case Eq. (106) becomes

j
[(Vi −F · ri) −(Vj −F · rj)]gij = 0 .
(1026)
Equation (107) represents a network of resistors if we think of (Vi −F · ri) as the potential
at site i. Then, Zij = 1/gij is the resistance between sites i and j, and Eq. (107) is simply
Kirchhoﬀ’s equation for site i. Miller and Abrahams treated Zij more generally and considered
it as an impedance, which is what we also do here.
For unsteady-state conduction, the time dependent term of Eq. (104) does not vanish, and
Eq. (107) must be rewritten as
P 0
i e2(1 −P 0
i )
kBT
∂Vi
∂t =

j
[(Vi −F · ri) −(Vj −F · rj)]gij .
(1027)
To construct a network model for this case, we deﬁne a capacitance C = P 0
i e2(1 −P 0
i )/kBT
with a potential Vi across it, and refer all the potentials to “ground” potential which is zero.
Because F · ri is the applied potential at i, it is represented as an output from a generator
which is connected in series with C between the ground and site i. There is an impedance Zij
connected between any two junctions i and j. There is also a capacitor Ci in series with a
generator connected to the ground. Using the expressions for P 0
i and W 0
ij, and restricting our
335

attention to the case in which various site energies are of the order of, or larger than, kBT, we
obtain
Zij = kBT exp[(|Ei| + |Ej| + |Ei −Ej|)/2kBT]
e2uij
,
(1028)
Ci =
e2
kBT exp(−Ei/kBT) .
(1029)
Using Eq. (100), Eq. (109) is also rewritten as
Zij = kBT
e2 exp(Eij/kBT + 2rij/a)τ0 ,
(1030)
where Eij is either the energy of the site farther from the Fermi energy, or Eij = 1
2(|Ei|+|Ej|+
|Ei −Ej|). Equations (109) and (110) have an important implication: Even if the site energies
Ei are moderately distributed, the exponential dependence of the impedance and capacitance
on Ei implies that the distributions of Zij and Ci can be enormously broad. This fact is used
to reduce the computations of the eﬀective properties of the network, since the broadness of
the distribution of Zij implies that there are many small conductances that can be removed
from the network without aﬀecting its overall conductivity. The network that is obtained by
removing such conductances is called the reduced network.
The procedure for constructing the reduced network is as follows (Pollak, 1978). As the
ﬁrst step, one selects only the largest capacitances (for example, those within a given factor)
in the network. All such capacitances are then considered as equal with a common value C,
while the rest of the capacitances and their associated sites are deleted from the network. One
then discards all impedances (resistances) Zij that are larger than Zℓ= 2/(ωC), where ω is the
frequency at which the eﬀective conductivity of the network is to be computed, and replaces
all impedances that are smaller than Zℓby shorts. At high frequencies Zℓis very small, and
therefore there are very few resistances smaller than or equal to Zℓ. But as the frequency is
lowered, clusters of connected resistors begin to appear which gradually merge together and form
a sample-spanning cluster when a critical frequency ωc and the corresponding critical impedance
Zc = 2/(ωcC) are reached. The reduction procedure becomes ineﬀective for frequencies ω < ωc
because replacing the resistances by shorts would produce a macroscopic short throughout the
network.
6.2.2 The symmetric hopping model
336

It is clear that, if in Eq. (108) we take F = 0, we obtain a symmetric hopping model
in which [aside from the constant factor P 0
i e2(1 −P 0
i )/(kBT)] Vi plays the same role as that
of Pi in Eq. (1), and therefore the formulation and analysis that were developed in 6.1 can
be immediately utilized for computing the hopping conductivity of a disordered solid by the
symmetric hopping model.
However, Eq. (1) is applicable when there is no external electric ﬁeld in the system. If
the ﬁeld is non-zero, then the jumps in the ﬁeld direction are obviously more likely, and as
a result one has a net current in the system, which may seem to make the problem very
complex. However, the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem relates the frequency-dependent con-
ductivity ˆge(ω) in terms of the equilibrium (i.e., zero-ﬁeld) current autocorrelation function
(Kubo, 1957). According to this theorem, if n is the density of the charge carriers, then for a
system of non-interacting carriers one has
ˆge(ω) = ne2
kBT
ˆDe(ω) ,
(1031)
where the frequency-dependent diﬀusivity ˆDe(ω) is deﬁned by
ˆDe(ω) =
 ∞
0 ⟨v(0)v(t)⟩e−iωtdt .
(1032)
Here, v(t) is the velocity projected onto a ﬁxed direction in space. At zero frequency Eq. (113)
reduces to the well-known identity for the static diﬀusivity, in which case Eq. (112) reduces to
the Nernst-Einstein relation.
6.2.2.1 Exact solution for one-dimensional materials
One can derive an exact solution for the symmetric hopping model in a linear chain (Odagaki
and Lax, 1980). Consider a linear chain in which each bond is present (active) with probability
p and disconnected with probability (1 −p). The transition rate along the active bonds is W0.
The frequency-dependent eﬀective diﬀusivity of the chain can be written as
ˆDe(ω) =
∞

n=1
npn ˆDn(ω) ,
(1033)
where n is the size of a cluster of active bonds, i.e., n−1 active bonds terminated by an inactive
bond at each end of the cluster, pn is the probability of ﬁnding such a cluster, and ˆDn(ω) is
the frequency-dependent diﬀusivity for a cluster of size n which is given by
ˆDn(ω) = −ω2
2n
n

j,j0
(j −j0)2 ˜P(j, iω|j0) ,
(1034)
337

which is derived easily by combining Eqs. (30) and (31), and taking λ = iω and ˆDn(ω) =
˜We(iω). Here, j0 is the point at which the hopper begins its motion, and ˜P(j, iω|, j0) is the
Laplace transform of the probability that the hopper is at point j, given that it began its
motion at j0. The probability of ﬁnding a cluster of n −1 active bonds, terminated at its two
ends by two inactive bonds, is given by
pn = (1 −p)2 pn−1 .
(1035)
It remains to calculate ˜P(j, λ|j0). Equation (2) can be written in a matrix form, A˜P(λ, j0) =
δ(j0), where A, for a 1D system, is a n×n tridiagonal matrix. Since the transition rates for all
the active bonds is assumed to be W0, calculating the eigenvalues of A is not diﬃcult. Suppose
that Γ = (Γm, Γ3m, · · · , Γ(2n−1)m) is the eigenvector of A. Then, it is not diﬃcult to show (see,
for example, Noble and Daniel, 1977) that, Γm = cos(mπ/2n) (with m = 0, 1, 2, · · · , n−1), and
that the eigenvalue corresponding to Γ is simply λ + 2W0(1 −Γ2m). Therefore,
˜P(j, λ|j0) = 1
n
1
λ + 2
n−1

m=1
Γ(2j−1)mΓ(2j0−1)m
λ + 2W0(1 −Γ2m)

.
(1036)
Replacing λ with iω and using Eqs. (116) and (117) in (115), we obtain the following equation
for the frequency-dependent diﬀusivity of a cluster (ﬁnite chain) of size n (Odagaki and Lax,
1980):
ˆDn(ω) = 1 + 1
n
$
1 + 4/iˆω

1
z2n
+ + 1 −
1
z2n
−+ 1

,
(1037)
where z± = [(iˆω)1/2 ±(4+iˆω)1/2]/2, and ˆω = ω/W0. If we then substitute Eq. (118) into (114),
we obtain the desired expression for the frequency-dependent eﬀective diﬀusivity. In particular,
we ﬁnd that in the low-frequency limit,
ˆDe(ω) ∼p(1 + p)2
4(1 −p)4 ˆω2 + i
p
2(1 −p)2 ˆω ,
(1038)
while at high frequencies
ˆDe(ω) ∼p −2p(1 −p)
ˆω2
+ i2p(1 −p)
ˆω
.
(1039)
For comparison, we also list the EMA predictions. In the low-frequency limit,
ˆDe(ω) = p(2 −p)
8(1 −p)4 ˆω2 + i p(2 −p)
4(1 −p)2 ˆω ,
(1040)
338

while in the high-frequency limit,
ˆDe(ω) = p −2p(1 −p)(2 −p)
ˆω2
+ i2p(1 −p)
ˆω
.
(1041)
These results can be obtained from Eq. (38). Therefore, once again, the EMA predictions are
qualitatively, but not quantitatively, correct.
6.2.2.2 Exact solution for Bethe lattices
An exact solution of the symmetric hopping model can be derived if one assumes that the
disordered solid can be represented by a Bethe lattice of coordination number Z. We already
described in Section 5.3 how the solution of the steady-state conduction problem is derived for
the Bethe lattice (see also Chapter 3 of Volume II for the solution of the steady-state non-linear
conduction on the Bethe lattice). In this section, we generalize the method of Chapter 5 in
order to derive an exact solution of the symmetric hopping model in Bethe lattices.
To begin with, note that Eq. (2) is equivalent to an electrical network, with ˜Pj(λ) corre-
sponding to the voltage at site j and Wij the conductivity of the bond joining sites i and j. The
terms −δi0 and λ ˜Pi(λ) represent, respectively, a current source and an electrical connection to
the ground, with λ being a conductivity if it is real, or more generally an admittance if it is
complex. Consider an inﬁnite Bethe lattice of random transition rates (conductances) with a
statistical distribution f(W) and a grounded conductance (admittance) connected to each site
of the lattice. Then, consider a site O and let Gi be the total conductance looking outward
into the network from any site A which is a nearest neighbor of O (with conductance Wi). The
conductance of the branch that starts at O is in parallel with the grounded conductance λ.
Therefore, the conductance G, as seen from site O, is given by
G =
Z−1

i=1
 1
Gi
+ 1
Wi
−1
+ λ =
Z−1

i=1
 GiWi
Gi + Wi
+
λ
Z −1

.
(1042)
However, G and Gi are statistically equivalent and therefore the problem is simply to determine
the probability distribution of Gi and G self-consistently. That is, the distribution H(Gi, λ) of
Gi, when substituted into the right-hand side of Eq. (123), must yield the same distribution
for G on the left-hand side of (123), implying that
H(G, λ) =

· · ·

δ

G −
Z−1

i=1
 GiWi
Gi + Wi
+
λ
Z −1
 Z−1

i=1
f(Wi)H(Gi, λ)dWidGi .
(1043)
339

If we now take the Laplace transform of Eq.
(124), exploit the facts that Gi and Wi are
statistically independent, that all the Wi and Gi are identically distributed, and replace λ by
iω, we obtain
˜H(s, iω) =
 ∞
0
exp(−sG)H(G, iω)dG
=
2 
exp

−s
 GW
G + W +
iω
Z −1

f(W)H(G, iω)dGdW
3Z−1
.
(1044)
Following our discussions in Section 53, the frequency-dependent eﬀective conductivity ˆge(ω)
of a 3D lattice can be accurately approximated by the microscopic conductivity ˆgm(ω) of a
Bethe lattice of coordination number Z, provided that Z is selected in such a way that the
bond percolation threshold of the lattice is essentially the same as that of the Bethe lattice.
How to ensure the proximity of the percolation threshold of a 2D or 3D lattice to that of the
Bethe lattice was also discussed in Section 5.3. As discussed there, ˆgm is essentially the average
⟨G⟩of the distribution H(G, iω) and is given by, ˆgm = Z⟨G⟩/(Z −1). Using the properties
of the Laplace transform, it is straightforward to show that (Sahimi, 1980, unpublished notes)
the frequency-dependent eﬀective hopping conductivity, in the Bethe lattice approximation, is
given by
ˆge(ω) = Z
 
f(W)H(G, iω)
 GW
G + W +
iω
Z −1

dWdG
Z−2
,
(1045)
which provides accurate estimates of ˆge(ω). Movaghar et al. (1980a,b) derived the same results
as presented here using an entirely diﬀerent approach.
We may use the same line of analysis that was discussed in Section 5.3 in order to derive
an EMA for hopping conduction on a Bethe lattice. The idea is that, for a ﬁxed frequency, in
an eﬀective medium the probability distribution H(G, iω) is expected to achieve its maximum
around a mean value G∗, and thus it may be approximated as a simple delta function. Then,
the resulting equation will be similar to what was presented in Section 5.3, except that it
also depends on the Laplace transform variable λ. A slightly diﬀerent EMA was derived by
Movaghar et al. (1980a,b) and is given by
ˆge(ω) =
  1
W +
1
iω + (Z −1)ˆge(ω)
−1
f(W)dW .
(1046)
We will compare the predictions of the model of hopping conduction on a Bethe lattice with
the experimental data in 6.2.3.
6.2.2.3 Perturbation expansion and eﬀective-medium approximation
340

Given Eqs. (112) and (113), it should be clear how to estimate the frequency-dependent
hopping conductivity by a perturbation expansion. All one must do is replacing in Eqs. (7)
and (31) the Laplace transform variable λ by iω. Certain subtleties that arise from such a
replacement must be carefully addressed. In particular, Eq. (25) can be used for estimating
the frequency-dependent diﬀusivity ˆDe(ω), and hence the conductivity [via Eq. (112)], by an
EMA. Indeed, this technique was used by many in the early 1980s for calculating the frequency-
dependent hopping conductivity. All the strengths and shortcomings of the EMA that were
described in Chapter 5 and in Section 6.1 above are also true for the ˆge(ω) predicted by the
EMA.
We consider here d−dimensional lattices of coordination number Z with percolation-type
disorder, i.e., with a distribution of transition rates given by, f(W) = (1 −p)δ+(W) + pδ(W −
W0), and summarize the main predictions of the EMA for frequency-dependent hopping con-
ductivity ˆge(ω) of such models which were derived by, among others, Sahimi et al. (1983a)
and Odagaki et al. (1983). In general, in the low-frequency regime, the leading terms of the
frequency-dependent hopping conductivity ˆge(ω) is written as
ˆge(ω) = ˆge(0) + R(Z, d, p)hr(ω) + iI(Z, d, p)hi(ω) ,
(1047)
where R, I, hr and hi are functions that depend on d and p. Obviously, for p < pc one has
ˆge(0) = 0. The EMA predicts that, for p < pc, and regardless of d, one has
hr(ω) = ω2 ,
hi(ω) = ω .
(1048)
Table 6.1 summarizes the EMA predictions for p < pc. In this table, pc = 2/Z is the EMA
prediction of the bond percolation threshold [see Eq. (5.61)], c is a constant of order 1, and Iw
is called the Watson integral (Hughes, 1995) which represents the value of the Green functions
G, derived in Section 6.1.4, at the origin and in the limit λ = 0. For the main three 3D lattices,
one has
ISC = 1
π3
  π
0

dudvdw
3 −cos u −cos v −cos w =
√
6
96π3Γ( 1
24)Γ( 5
24)Γ( 7
24)Γ(11
24) ≃0.50546 ,
(1049)
IBCC = 1
π3
  π
0

dudvdw
1 −cos u cos v cos w =
1
4π3Γ(1
4)4 ≃1.3932 ,
(1050)
IFCC = 1
π3
  π
0

dudvdw
3 −cos u cos v −cos v cos w −cos w cos u =
3
214/3π4Γ(1
3)6 ≃0.4482 ,
(1051)
341

where Γ(x) is the gamma function.
Table 6.2 summarizes the EMA predictions for frequency-dependence of the hopping con-
ductivity at p = pc, while Table 6.3 does the same but for p > pc. Unlike the percolation state
of the system for which there are three distinct regimes (below, at, and above pc), the EMA
predicts that above pc, and depending on the dimensionality of the material, there are ﬁve
distinct functions that yield the frequency-dependence of the hopping conductivity. In Table
6.3, m1 is a constant given by
m1 =
 1
−∞
N(x)
(1 −x)2dx ,
(1052)
where N(x) is the density of states of the homogeneous (fully-connected) lattice at p = 1. For
example, for the simple-cubic lattice in d dimensions, one has
N(x) = Γ(d + 1)
√πΓ(d/2)(1 −x2)d/2−1 .
(1053)
The density of states for other regular 3D homogeneous lattices was calculated by Lax (1955).
According to Table 6.3, the EMA predicts that, above the percolation threshold pc and a
certain dimensionality of the system, the real and imaginary part of ˆge(ω) depend on the
frequency as ω2 and ω, respectively.
Table 6.3 indicates that, according to the EMA, this
“upper dimensionality” is d = 4. However, this upper dimensionality should not be confused
with the upper critical dimensionality of percolation which, as mentioned in Chapter 2, is d = 6.
6.2.3 The asymmetric hopping model: Perturbation expansion
In the presence of an external electric ﬁeld, the symmetric hopping model is no longer valid,
as hops in the direction of the applied ﬁeld are more likely than those in the opposite direction.
For this case, the theory of hopping conductivity developed by Movaghar and Schirmacher
(1981) turns out to be very accurate. The appropriate master equation is (92) which is, however,
non-linear and very diﬃcult to treat theoretically. However, it can be linearized in a manner
similar to what we described above. Then, the frequency-dependent hopping conductivity ˆge(ω)
is given by (Butcher, 1976)
ˆge(ω) = e2(iω)2
6ΩkBT
)
ij
FiR2
ij ˆGij(ω)
*
,
(1054)
where Ωis the volume of the system, the angular bracket denotes a conﬁgurational average,
Rij is the distance between i and j, and the rest of the notation is as before. The quantity
342

Fi is given by, Fi = h(Ei)[1 −h(Ei)], where, h(Ei) = {1
2 exp[β(Ei −EF)] + 1}−1, with EF
being the energy at the Fermi level. The quantity ˆGij(ω) is similar to the Green function
deﬁned earlier (in which the Laplace transform variable λ has been replaced by iω). It can be
interpreted as a Green function of the operator (iωI −H)−1, where H is a Hamiltonian with
diagonal elements, Hi = −

n Hin and oﬀ-diagonal elements, Hij = h(Ei)[1 −h(Ej)]Wij/Fi.
Alternatively, ˆGij may be thought of as the Fourier-Laplace transform of the time-dependent
Green function Gij(t) of the linear master equation with asymmetric transition rates Hij and
Hji. For convenience, we deleteˆand use Gij(ω) in place of ˆGij(ω).
To analyze the problem, Movaghar and Schirmacher (1981) developed a perturbation ex-
pansion for Gij(ω) given by
Gij(ω) = Giiδij + GiiHijG(i)
jj +

l̸=i̸=j
GiiHilG(i)
ll HljG(i,l)
jj
+ · · ·
(1055)
where G(n,k,···,s)
kk
represents, for example, the exact local Green function with transitions forbid-
den to the sites n, l, · · ·, and s. Therefore, for example,
G(n)
kk =
1
iω +

s Hks −∆(n)
k
,
(1056)
with
∆(n)
k
=

l̸=n
HklG(n,k)
ll
Hlk +

l̸=s̸=n
HklG(n,k)
ll
HlsG(n,k,l)
ss
Hsk + · · ·
(1057)
All repeated indices are eliminated in the summation. It is also useful to rewrite the Green
function expansion in the following form,
Gij(ω) = Giiδij + GiigijGjj(ij) +

l̸=i̸=j
GiigilGll(il)g(i)
lj Gjj(il; lj) + · · ·
(1058)
where, for example, Gjj(il; lj) refers to the exact local Green function with transition to sites
i and l excluded, and the bonds (i −l) and (l −j) removed from the system. Here,
gil =
Hil/Hli
1/Hli + Gll(il) ,
(1059)
g(i)
ij =
Hlj/Hjl
1/Hjl + Gjj(il; lj) .
(1060)
One may also rewrite these quantities in the following forms,
Gii =

iω +

k
gik −Ci
−1
,
(1061)
343

Gjj(ij) =
⎛
⎝iω +

k̸=i
g(i)
jk −C(i)
j
⎞
⎠
−1
,
(1062)
with
Ci = ∆i −

l
HilG(i)
ll Hli .
(1063)
Although these equations are all exact, regardless of the structure of the lattice used, it is
very diﬃcult in practice to exactly compute all of their terms, and hence one must resort to
approximate schemes, either in summing the terms in the perturbation expansions or in the
structure of the lattice used for the computations. For example, if the topology of the material
can be approximated by a Bethe lattice or Cayley tree of coordination number Z, then, one may
obtain exact results. We already discussed such an exact solution for the symmetric hopping
model. We now brieﬂy discuss such a solution for the asymmetric case.
6.2.3.1 Exact solution for Bethe lattices
Absence of closed loops of bonds on a Bethe lattice implies that all the Cs in Eqs. (142)
and (143) are identically zero, simplifying greatly the analysis of the problem. Equation (138)
is rewritten as
Gij(ω) =
δij
iω +

l gil
+
1
iω +

l gil
gij
1
iω +

s̸=i gjs
+

k̸=i̸=j
1
iω +

l gil
gik
1
iω +

n̸=i gkn
gkj
1
iω +

s̸=k gjs
+ · · ·
(1064)
where
gil =
Hil
Hli
  1
Hli
+
1
iω +

s̸=i gls
−1
.
(1065)
If we now write, R2
ij ≃n⟨R2⟩, where n is the number of steps from i to j and ⟨R2⟩is a mean
square nearest-neighbor distance, and use the facts that, F0G0n = FnGn0, and

k Gsk = 1/iω,
Eq. (135) simplies to
ˆge(ω) = ⟨R2⟩
6Ω
e2
kBT
)
n
1 −iωGnn
G(1)
nn
Fn
*
,
(1066)
which can also be written as
ˆge(ω) = ⟨R2⟩
6Ω
e2
kBT
)
n

l
′Fngnl + iω

1 −Gnn
G(1)
nn
Fn
*
,
(1067)
where the prime on the summation means that one neighbor is excluded from the sum. The
quantity Fngnl is given by
Fngnl =
 1
τnl
+
1
iωFl +

s̸=n Flgls
−1
,
(1068)
344

where, τij = h(Ei)[1 −h(Ej)]Wij. In the static limit, ω = 0, Eq. (148) is equivalent to the
microscopic conductivity of a Bethe lattice of coordination number Z, derived by Stinchcombe
(1973,1974) and described in Section 5.3.
6.2.3.2 Two-site self-consistent approximation
As discussed by Movaghar and Schirmacher (1981), the exact solution for the Bethe lattices
provides a clue for developing approximate solutions for real 2D or 3D lattices, since it provides
a means of eliminating the eﬀect of the closed loops of bonds on such lattices. The simplest
of such approximations is a two-site self-consistent approximation. Since the quantity C in
Eqs. (142) and (143) represent the eﬀect of the closed loops, the ﬁrst step in constructing
such approximate schemes is to eliminate them from these equations. Consider ﬁrst the case
of symmetric hopping rate. Setting the Cs to be zero, the total self-energy Σi now becomes
Σi =

l
Wil −∆i =

l
gil ,
(1069)
where
gil =
 1
Wil
+ Gll(il)
−1
= Wil[iω/Σ(il) + 1]Σ(il)
Wil + G−1
ll (il)
,
(1070)
where Σ(il) is deﬁned, in analogy to Eq. (150), as [G−1
ll (il) −iω]. The factor Σ(il) in the
numerator of (151) is now iterated to inﬁnite order, and terms that correspond to closed loops
are eliminated. This results in a quantity g(R)
il , the reduced gil, given by
g(R)
il
=

i̸=l̸=k̸=s···
Wil[1 + iω/Σl(il)]Wlk[1 + iω/Σk(il; lk)]Wks · · ·
[Wil + G−1
ll (il)][Wlk + G−1
kk (il; lk)] · · ·
,
(1071)
where no repeated indices are allowed.
The next step of constructing the approximation is to insert
Gnn(il; lk; · · · ; sn) = Gnn(sn)
(1072)
in Eq. (152) and reduce these quantities in the same way. Physically, Eq. (153) implies that
hops to sites i, l, k, · · ·, that were forbidden before, are now allowed. It also implies that all
the gs in (141) are equal. Therefore,
Gij(ω) = Giiδij + Giig(R)
ij Gjj(ij) +

l̸=i̸=j
Giig(R)
il Gll(il)g(R)
lj Gjj(lj) + · · ·
(1073)
345

where
Gjj(ij) =
⎛
⎝iω +

s̸=i
g(R)
js
⎞
⎠
−1
,
(1074)
which is the same as Eq. (142), except that the eﬀect of the closed loops (i.e., the Ci) has been
eliminated and gik has been replaced by its reduced value. Equation (155) is now identical with
that of a Bethe lattice. Therefore, deﬁning gi =

s g(R)
is
and using Eq. (152), we can write
gi =

i̸=s̸=k̸=···
Wis(1 + iω/gs)Wsk(1 + iω/gk) · · ·
(Wis + iω + gs)(Wsk + iω + gk) · · · .
(1075)
The eﬀective hopping conductivity would then be ˆge(ω) = ⟨g1⟩, where ⟨·⟩denotes an average
over the distribution of the transition rates Wij. To obtain the corresponding expression for
the asymmetric case, we make the replacements,
gi →

s
Fig(R)
is
,
Wij →τij .
(1076)
Physically, this approximation corresponds to breaking up the closed loops into products of
two-site contributions, as is evident in Eq. (156).
6.2.3.3 Two-site eﬀective-medium approximation
We now apply the EMA directly to the Green function expansion, Eq. (154) (Movaghar and
Schirmacher, 1981). The EMA that is obtained, and also the one that will be derived in the
next section, are not identical with the usual EMA that was developed for the DC conductivity,
because the EMA technique is applied directly to the Green function expansion, rather than
the ﬂux, as is usually done. This leads us to
⟨Gij⟩ij =

iω +

n
⟨gin⟩
−1
⟨gij⟩ij
⎛
⎝iω +

l̸=i
⟨gjl⟩
⎞
⎠
−1
+ · · ·
(1077)
The indices below the angular brackets indicate that the sites i and j are not to be averaged
out. Here, the conﬁgurational average of a quantity Q is deﬁned as
⟨Q(R1, R2, · · · ; E1, E2, · · ·)⟩=

QC(R1, R2, · · · , RN)h(E1)h(E2) · · · h(EN)
N

i=1
dRidEi ,
(1078)
where h(E) is a normalized energy distribution function, and C(R1, R2, · · ·) denotes the N−site
correlation function, which is typically approximated as a product of pair-distribution functions
Cij:
C(R1, R2, · · · , RN) = C12(R1 −R2)C23(R2 −R3) · · · CN−1,N(RN−1 −RN) .
(1079)
346

We ﬁrst assume symmetric transition rates with a structure given by
Wij = W(Rij)ν(|E|/kBT) ,
(1080)
and take the Fourier transform of (158), using (159) and (160); we ﬁnd that
Gk=0(ω) = [iω + ngk=0(ω) −ngk(ω)]−1 −[iω + ngk=0(ω)]−1 ,
(1081)
where
Gk(ω) = n

exp(−ik · Rij)Cij(Ri −Rj)⟨Gij⟩ij dRij ,
(1082)
gk(ω) =

exp(−ik · Rij)Cij(Ri −Rj)⟨gij⟩ij dRij .
(1083)
Therefore, the eﬀective hopping conductivity is given by
ˆge(ω) = −e2
kBT
(iω)2
6Ω
∂2Gk
∂k2 |k=0 =
e2
kBT
Nc(1 −nc)
6Ω
)
j
R2
ijg(R)
ij
*
,
(1084)
where nc = Nc/N is number of hopping particles per sites, Nc is the total number of particles,
while N is the total number of sites. The corresponding expression for the asymmetric case is
given by
ˆge(ω) =
e2
kBT
1
6Ω
)
i,j
FiR2
ijg(R)
ij
*
.
(1085)
6.2.3.4 Energy-dependent eﬀective-medium approximation
In the symmetric case, when all the Fns are equal and, Fn = nc(1−nc), Eq. (149) simpliﬁes
to
gnl =
 1
Wnl
+
1
iω +

k̸=n glk
−1
,
(1086)
from which we immediately obtain
⟨gij⟩ij =
 1
Wij
+
1
iω + ⟨

l̸=i gjl⟩j
−1
.
(1087)
If we substitute (168) in (165), we obtain
ˆge(ω) =
e2
kBT
Nc(1 −nc)
Ω
ˆDe(ω) ,
(1088)
where
ˆDe(ω) = ⟨ˆR2(ω)⟩
6ap
ˆg1(ω) .
(1089)
347

Here ap = e, where e is the natural logarithm base. The quantity ˆg1(ω), which is deﬁned by
Eq. (156), satisﬁes the following self-consistency equation
ˆg1(ω) = nap[ˆg1(ω) + iω]
  h(E)Cij(Rij)Wij
iω + ˆg1(ω) + Wij
dRijdE .
(1090)
while
⟨R2(ω)⟩=
)
R2
ij
Wij
iω + Wij + ˆg1(ω)
* )
Wij
iω + Wij + ˆg1(ω)
*−1
.
(1091)
The case of asymmetric hopping is more complex. In this case, the starting point, in analogy
with Eq. (168), is
⟨Figij⟩ij =
 1
τij
+
1
iωFj + ⟨

l̸=i Fjgjl⟩j
−1
,
(1092)
which, when substituted into (166), yields
ˆge(ω) =
e2
kBT
n2
6
  
h(E)h(E′)Cij(Rij)R2
ij
[τ(E, E′; R)]−1 + [iωF(E′) + ˆg1(E′, ω)]−1dRijdEdE′ .
(1093)
Here, ˆg1(E′, ω) satisﬁes the following integral equation
ˆg1(E′, ω) = nap
 
h(E′′)Cij(Rij)
[τ(E′, E′′; R)]−1 + [iωF(E′′) + ˆg1(E′′, ω)]−1dRijdE′′ .
(1094)
We must emphasize again that these EMAs are not the same as those that were derived previ-
ously, because of the way that the averaging procedure is carried out.
The predictions of these equations will be compared with numerical simulations and exper-
imental data later in this chapter.
6.2.4 Variable-range hopping: The critical path method
Mott (1968) pointed out that the exponential dependence of the resistances on the site
energies cannot be ignored in most cases, because if the activation energy of a nearest-neighbor
site is large, then a hop to a distant site with a lower energy may be easier than one to a nearest-
neighbor site. How far the hopper can go depends on the ease of activation to higher energies,
and therefore the hopping distance and the resistance both depend on the temperature. This
mechanism of hopping conduction, which is usually referred to as the variable-range hopping,
is in contrast with the original work of Miller and Abrahams that was restricted to nearest-
neighbor hopping. It is now generally believed that variable range hopping is the appropriate
mechanism at low temperatures, whereas nearest-neighbor hopping may be appropriate at high
temperatures. Moreover, Mott showed that at low temperatures
ge = g0 exp[−(T0/T)α] ,
(1095)
348

which is an important characteristic of variable-range hopping conductivity, and is now one of
most famous characteristics of hopping conductivity of amorphous semiconductors. In general,
α depends on the density of states near the Fermi level. In Mott’s theory the density of states
was assumed to be constant, which results in α = 1/(d + 1) for a d−dimensional system. Here,
g0 is a constant, and
T0 = Λa3
kBN ,
(1096)
where N is the density of states at the Fermi level EF, and Λ is a dimensionless parameter.
Equation (176) is particularly accurate for amorphous Ge in the range 60K ≤T ≤300K, with
T0 ≃7×107K. A similar temperature dependence of gh has also been found for amorphous silicon
and carbon, and vanadium oxide. However, as Pollak (1978) pointed out, unless ge is measured
over several orders of magnitudes, a T −1/4 behavior should be treated with caution, and should
not automatically be interpreted as evidence for variable-range hopping conductivity.
Hill
(1976) analyzed most of the published experimental data and showed that most of them do
follow Eq. (176) with α = 1/4. The conditions under which the behavior of ge might deviate
from α = 1/4 will be discussed shortly.
Over a decade after the original work of Miller and Abrahams (1960), Ambegaokar et al.
(1971), Shklovskii and Efros (1971), Pollak (1972), and Brenig et al. (1971) realized that the
transport paths that Miller and Abrahams had thought to be carrying most of the current
in the network carry little, if any, current in most situations.
The reason that the Miller-
Abrahams paths carry very little or no current is that, if one always proceeds through the
nearest-neighbour sites, as in the Miller-Abrahams model, one is certain to arrive at a site
where a nearest-neighbour site is a large distance away (in terms of the required energy), and
therefore it may be more eﬃcient to go through further neighbour sites, which is in agreement
with Mott’s arguments.
Let us ﬁrst discuss how Eq. (176) can be derived using the energy-dependent EMA derived
in the last section. If we assume that
Wij = ν0 exp(−2α|Rij|) exp(−|E|/kBT) ,
(1097)
where α is a constant, with
h(E) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
W −1
0
,
0 ≤W ≤W0 ,
0 ,
otherwise
(1098)
349

assume further that the heterogeneity of the material is random, so that, Cij(Rij) = 1, and
substitute these in Eq. (171) in the limit ω = 0, we obtain
4πkBnapT
8α3W0
 W0/kBT
0
 ∞
0
x2
(g1/ν0) exp(x + y) + 1dxdy = 1 .
(1099)
In the low-temperature limit - the regime of validity of variable-range hopping - W0/kBT →∞,
we can solve for g1 to ﬁnd
g1 = ν0 exp[−(T/T0)1/4] ,
(1100)
T0 = 24α3apW0
πkBn
.
(1101)
Equation (181) is of course in complete agreement with (176). In fact, if we set ap = 1, then
the predicted T0, Eq. (182), will also be in complete agreement with Mott’s prediction, Eq.
(177). This simple example demonstrates the predictive power of the approximations that were
derived and discussed above. We shall come back to this point later in this section.
Let us now describe and discuss the percolation model for calculating the hopping con-
ductivity of amorphous semiconductors. We consider the zero-frequency limit, ω = 0, and
follow Ambegaokar et al. (1971) (hereafter referred to as AHL) whose work is very elegant and
conceptually simple. AHL argued that an accurate estimate of ge is the critical percolation
conductance gc, which is the largest value of the conductance such that a subset of the network
with bond conductances gij > gc still contains a conducting sample-spanning cluster. Thus,
they divided the network into three parts:
(1) A set of isolated clusters of high conductivity, each cluster consisting of a group of sites
connected together by conductances gij ≫gc.
(2) A small number of resistors with gij of the order of gc, which connect together a subset of
high conductance clusters to form the sample-spanning cluster, called the critical subnetwork,
which is essentially the same as the static limit of reduced network discussed above.
(3) The remaining resistors with gij ≪gc.
It is clear that the resistors in group (2) dominate the overall conductance of the network.
Thus, the condition that gij > gc, together with Eq. (111), can be expressed as
rij
rm
+ |Ei| + |Ej| + |Ei −Ej|
2Em
≤1 ,
(1102)
where rm = a ln(g0/gc)/2 is the maximum distance between any two sites between which a hop
350

can occur, and Em = kBT ln(g0/gc) is the maximum energy that any initial or ﬁnal state can
have.
To construct the critical subnetwork, AHL began with an empty network and, starting with
the smallest ones, inserted resistors in the network one by one. As more resistors are inserted,
clusters of connected resistors begin to form until the critical resistance Zc = 1/gc is reached
at which a sample-spanning cluster is formed. To compute Zc, AHL used Eq. (111), assuming
that τ0 is constant. Moreover, they also assumed that the density of states N is constant near
the Fermi level, N(E) = N(EF). Thus, Zij is a monotonic function of the random variable
ζ = Eij/kBT +2rij/a, with its critical value Zc deﬁning a corresponding critical value ζc. Then,
around each site i such that Ei < ζkBT/2, a sphere of radius
ri = a
2
ζ
2 −Ei
kBT

,
(1103)
is drawn which increases with increasing ζ.
When two spheres overlap, a bond is inserted
between the two sites at their centers. This happens only if inequality (183) is satisﬁed. Perco-
lation occurs at ζc, corresponding to a critical radius rc. It should be clear that this problem,
as formulated by AHL, is a site percolation process. Pollak (1972) treated it as a bond per-
colation problem which allowed him to include the eﬀect of short-range correlations, but the
essence of his basic results was the same as that of AHL. Equation (184) indicates that there is
a maximum radius, rm = aζc/4, and a maximum energy, Em = ζckBT/2, with ζc = 2ln(g0/gc).
Thus, if two sites are separated by a distance larger than rm, or farther from energy level Em,
they will not contribute signiﬁcantly to the eﬀective hopping conductivity ge. The volume of
the sphere deﬁned by Eq. (184) is (π/6)a3(ζc/2 −Ei/kBT)3, and its average value ⟨Ω⟩, where
the averaging is taken over all the sites with a sphere with a non-zero radius (i.e., those for
which Ei < ζkBT/2), is given by
⟨Ω⟩=
π
384a3ζ3
c = π
48r3
m .
(1104)
On the other hand, φc, the volume fraction of the spheres at the percolation threshold, is given
by, φc ≃n⟨Ω⟩, where, assuming that the density of states is constant, n = NζckBT is the
fraction of the sites with a sphere, i.e., those with an energy in the interval (−Em, Em). AHL
estimated that φc ≃1/4, somewhat larger than φc ≃0.15 −0.17 mentioned in Section 2.10.1
and estimated by Scher and Zallen (1970) for 3D percolating continua. One can also calculate
351

the number of bonds per sites Bc of the network. We already learned in Section 2.5.2 that for
bond percolation Bc ≃d/(d −1). For 3D amorphous materials (or continuum percolation),
Bc = 4πnr3
c/3, and computer simulations of Pike and Seager (1974) indicated that Bc ≃2.8
for 3D systems. On the other hand, Bc is related to the density of states N(E) by
Bc = 4πn
3
 +Em
−Em
N(Ei)dEi
 +Em
−Em
(r3
m + 3r2
mDm + 3rmD2
m)N(Ej)dEj
 +Em
−Em
N(Ei)dEi
,
(1105)
where Dm is the mean size of the (spheres around the) sites. Combining φc = n⟨Ω⟩≃1/4
with Eq. (185), or using Eq. (186) together with the lattice or continuum value of Bc and the
appropriate expression for rm, one ﬁnally obtains
ge ≃gc = g0 exp[−(T0/T)1/4] ,
(1106)
T0 = 16a3
kBN .
(1107)
Comparison of Eq. (188) with (177) indicates that the percolation model of AHL predicts that
Λ ≃16. Thus, not only does their model predict the T −1/4 behavior proposed by Mott, but
also provides an estimate of the temperature T0 deﬁned by Eq. (176).
The pre-exponential factor g0 has also been estimated by several research groups, since
quantitative prediction of gc requires an accurate estimate of g0. For example, using some of the
ideas of Kurkij¨arvi (1974), Shklovskii and Efros (1975) proposed that Z0 = 1/g0 = rc(2rc/a)νRc,
where ν is the correlation length exponent of 3D percolation [see Eq. (2.32)], and Rc is the
resistance for ζ = ζc. Kirkpatrick (1974) suggested the same expression, except that in his
equation ν was replaced by (µ −1), where µ is the critical exponent of the conductivity of 3D
percolation [see Eq. (2.36)]. Pollak (1972), Butcher and McInnes (1978), and Butcher (1980)
also calculated the pre-exponential factor g0, although their results did not involve any critical
exponent of percolation. The predictions of Butcher, and of Movaghar et al., Eq. (182), are
particularly accurate.
6.2.4.1 Eﬀect of a variable density of states
In the percolation model described above, it was assumed that the density of states is
constant near the Fermi level.
Although the basic T −1/4 law has been observed in many
systems (see, for example, Knotek et al. 1973, Visˇcor and Yoﬀe 1982, among others), criticism
352

of this formulation was raised by many (see, e.g., Szpilka and Visˇcor 1982), mainly because the
predicted and measured values of g0 diﬀered by several orders of magnitude. It was suggested
that the assumption of a constant density of states in the above percolation model may not be
justiﬁed, and one must use a variable density of states, in which case one would have to use
Eq. (186).
Ortuno and Pollak (1983) investigated this problem and proposed that, if the density of
states is concave, then an appropriately modiﬁed percolation model can explain the experimen-
tal data and remove the disagreement between the predictions and the data. They used Eq.
(186) with N(E) = N(EF) exp(−E/E0), where E0 is the exponential decay rate, treated the
problem in detail, compared the predictions with the experimental data for amorphous Si and
amorphous Ge, and found good agreement between the predictions and the data. Moreover,
the predicted value of g0 was of the same order of magnitude as that of the experimental data.
Sheng and Klafter (1983) studied hopping conductivity of disordered granular materials.
In such disordered materials, conduction results from tunneling of electrons and holes from
charged grains to neutral ones. Thus, electrons must be transferred from one neutral grain
to another. This requires each grain to be characterized by a charging energy Ec = e2/(εD),
where ε is the dielectric constant, and D is the grain size. A disordered granular material is thus
characterized by a distribution h(Ec) (which is of course related to the grain size distribution),
and a density of states related to this distribution given by
N(E) =
1
⟨∆E⟩
 E
0 h(Ec)dEc ,
(1108)
where ⟨∆E⟩is the average electronic level separation inside the conducting grains.
Thus,
any distribution of energies h(Ec) can be immediately translated into one for the density of
states. Normally, one expects that N(0) = 0. However, in any composite material one can
have energy states other than those in the conducting grains. That is, one can have impurities
that could contribute a non-zero N(E) at E = 0, for which there is in fact some experimental
evidence. Thus, Sheng and Klafter (1983) assumed that N(E) = N0 + 1/⟨∆E⟩and a log-
normal distribution for h(Ec), where N0 = N(EF), and calculated the hopping conductivity
of a granular material, using Eq. (186). They used a two parameter ﬁt of the results, with
the ﬁtting parameters being the width of the distribution h(E), and x = πnDm/6, and showed
that varying the two parameters enables one to obtain a variety of temperature-dependence of
353

the conductivity, ranging from T −1/4 to T −1/2.
6.2.4.2 Eﬀect of Coulomb interactions
The T −1/2 behavior of hopping conductivity has been observed in several materials. Al-
though, as discussed above, a variable density of states, such as N(E) ∼Eβ or N(E) =
N0 + cEβ, can explain such data, the origin of such power-laws was not clear for some time un-
til it was explained by Efros and Shklovskii (1975). They suggested that Coulomb interactions
(which are long-range interactions) between localized electrons can generate a soft gap, called
the Coulomb gap, in the density of states near the Fermi level. This means that in a narrow
gap centered around the Fermi level, the density of states cannot be constant and must vary
with the energy, whereas outside the gap the density of states vanishes. If δ is the width of
the gap, Efros and Shklovskii (1975) showed that N(δ) ∼δd−1 in d dimensions. As a result,
they suggested that in 3D there must be a crossover from the T −1/4 behavior at relatively
high temperatures, where the Coulomb gap is not eﬀective, to T −1/2 at lower temperatures.
Although a T −1/2 behavior had been reported by several groups, the temperature below which
the gap could be detected by conductivity measurements is usually too low in amorphous semi-
conductors. Generally speaking, the Coulomb gap does not aﬀect the hopping conductivity of
amorphous semiconductors and, moreover, it cannot be found in good metals. It can only aﬀect
those materials that have localized electronic states. For example, the Coulomb gap aﬀects the
hopping conductivity of doped crystallic semiconductors which provide experimental evidence
for the crossover from T −1/4 to T −1/2 behavior.
6.2.4.3 Comparison with the experimental data
We should keep in mind that Eq. (187) yields a lower bound to the true hopping conductivity
of a solid material with microscopic conductances that vary over a broad range. That this
equation is a lower bound to the true ge is because the critical subnetwork corresponds to
replacing all gij < gc by 0, and all gij ≥gc by gc in the original network. Equation (187) is
exact only in the limit T →0. If T > 0, hops with conductance less than gc also contribute to
the eﬀective conductivity, which means that the optimal cutoﬀshould be somewhat larger than
gc. Moreover, the percolation approach of AHL cannot be used for 1D or quasi-1D conductors,
since percolation disorder divides a linear chain into ﬁnite segments and the problem becomes
meaningless, unless of course the frequency ω is non-zero. The physical systems to which this
354

situation may be relevant are a class of compounds that consist of weakly coupled parallel chains
of strongly coupled atoms or molecules. The conductivity of such materials is highly anisotropic,
and therefore they may be treated as essentially 1D conductors. Well-known examples of such
materials are salts of the organic ion-radical tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) and the square
planar complexes of transition metals, such as platinum and iridium. Shante (1977) proposed
a modiﬁcation of the percolation model of AHL that could take into account the eﬀect of
low dimensionality of the material. The model is a bundle of chains in which hopping occurs
along the chains. The interchain hopping was also allowed, although it was assumed to be
much more diﬃcult than intrachain hopping. Shante’s model allowed the possibility of such
intrachain hoppings in either 1D or 2D. At low temperatures Shante’s model corresponded
to 2D and 3D percolation model, and consequently T −1/3 and T −1/4 behavior was obtained.
At high temperatures the percolation model is no longer applicable, and a T −1 behavior was
obtained. Figure 6.1 compares the predictions of his model with the experimental data for
N-methylphenazinium-TCNQ compounds; the agreement is excellent.
The results of AHL can also be predicted by the perturbation expansion of Movaghar and
co-workers described above. One writes Wij as
Wij = ν0 exp[−(|Ei| + |Ej| + |Ei −Ej|)/2kBT −2α|Rij|] ,
(1109)
and takes the same approach that was used for deriving Eqs. (180)-(182). Movaghar et al.
(1980a) considered low-temperature hopping near EF, the energy at the Fermi level, and as-
sumed that the density of states is constant. Combining Eqs. (169) and (170), it is straight-
forward to obtain the following result:
ˆge(ω) = ⟨R2⟩
6
e2
kBT [nN(EF)kBTν0ˆg1(ω)] ,
(1110)
where
ˆg1(ω) = 4Tap
T0
[iω + ˆg1(ω)]
 ∞
0
x3 exp(−x)
iω + ˆg1(ω) + exp(−x)dx .
(1111)
The experimental value, T0 = 3.6 × 108K for germanium was used in place of T0/ap. Movaghar
et al. (1980a) also utilized ν0 = 1021 sec−1, and employed Eq. (172) for computing R2. Figure
6.2 presents the predicted real part of the frequency-dependent eﬀective diﬀusivity as a function
of ω, at two diﬀerent temperatures, and compares them with the experimental data for Ge.
355

The agreement between the predictions and the data is excellent. In general, the real part of
ˆge(ω) behaves as
Re[ˆge(ω)] ∼ωx ,
(1112)
where x is a temperature-dependent exponent, and 102 ≤ω ≤105Hz. Figure 6.3 shows the
predictions of Movaghar et al.’s model for the temperature-dependence of x which indicate that,
x = a1 −a2T ,
(1113)
where a1 ≃0.8 for both cases, consistent with many experimental data. For both cases T0 =
5 × 107K was used in the computations, and ω/ν0 = 10−8 and 10−6 were assumed. The linear
dependence of x on T has also been observed experimentally, and therefore in this sense also
the theory is very accurate.
Malouﬁet al. (1988) used the theory of Ortuno and Pollak with a variable density of states
to ﬁt their conductivity data for amorphous SiySn1−y with y = 0.47 −1. Figure 6.4 presents
the ﬁts of their data by this theory, and the agreement appears to be excellent over much of
the temperature range. As another example of a variable density of states, consider the case
for which N(E) ∼|E|β, where β is a positive constant. This case was analyzed by Hamilton
(1972) and Pollak (1972). Using Eq. (186) one obtains an equation similar to (176) but with
α = (β + 1)/(β + 4) [which does reduce to Eq. (176) when β = 0]. The limit β →∞is also
interesting because it corresponds to a system that has a sudden onset of states away from
the Fermi level, hence yielding a T −1 behavior for such materials. An experimental realization
of a power-law density of states was provided by Redﬁeld (1973), who carried out a careful
study of hopping conductivity of heavily doped and strongly compensated GaAs. His results
indicated a T −1/2 behavior rather than T −1/4. Redﬁeld showed that, although a T −1/4 might
look plausible, his data could be ﬁtted extremely accurately by a T −1/2 law; see Figure 6.5. His
data can be easily explained with a variable density of states, N ∼|E|2.
If, instead of the density of states that Sheng and Klafter used, we utilize N(E) = N0+cEβ,
where c is a constant, we obtain Eq. (176) with α = (β + 1)/(β + 2). Such a density of
states may correspond to a granular material with a broad particle size distribution. Mehbod
et al. (1987) showed that this type of density of states and the resulting exponent α can ﬁt
very well their experimental data for hopping conductivity of polymer-conducting-carbon-black
composites. Such materials contain randomly dispersed particles in the matrixwith a broad
356

size distribution. The polymeric matrices that were used by Mehbod et al. were polystyrene,
polyethylene, ethylene-propylene copolymer, and styrene-butadiene copolymer.
The ﬁrst convincing experimental evidence for the crossover, predicted by Efros and Shklovskii
(1975) as the result of Coulomb interactions, was probably provided by Zhang et al. (1990).
They measured the resistivity of ﬁve insulating compensated n-type CdSe samples, which are
doped semiconductors. Their data clearly indicated a crossover from T −1/4 behavior to T −1/2
as the temperature was decreased by about three orders of magnitude from 15 to 0.04 K. Over
this temperature range the hopping energy becomes comparable with, and then smaller than,
the energy gap discussed by Efros and Shklovskii (1975). The crossover temperature Tco was
found to decrease as the concentration of the donor was increased, which is expected. Aharony
et al. (1992) and Meir (1996) proposed a scaling theory for this crossover by suggesting that
the eﬀective resistivity Ze = 1/ge of the sample follows the following scaling law
ln(Ze/Z0) = Ah(T/Tco) ,
(1114)
where the scale factor A and the crossover temperature Tco both depend on the sample prop-
erties, but the scaling function h(x) is universal and has the limiting behaviors, h(x) ∼x−1/4
for x ≫1 and h(x) ∼x−1/2 for x ≪1. Moreover, using the percolation model, Aharony et al.
proposed that
h(x) = x + [√x + 1 −1]
x[√1 + x −1]1/2 ,
(1115)
and provided expressions for A and the crossover temperature Tco. The implication of Eqs.
(195) and (196) is that, if ln(Ze/Z0) for various samples are plotted as a function of T/Tco, then
all the data should collapse onto a single curve. Figure 6.6 presents such a collapse for the data
of Zhang et al.; it is clear that the data collapse is essentially complete.
6.2.4.4 Fractal morphology and superlocalization
As discussed above, a T −1/2 behavior for the hopping conductivity can be explained in terms
of the Coulomb interactions and gap. However, Coulomb interactions do not play any role in
many semiconductors which do exhibit a T −1/2 behavior. There has been some experimental
evidence that, if the material has a fractal morphology, then its hopping conductivity may
exhibit the T −1/2 behavior. L´evy and Souillard (1987) suggested that in a material with fractal
morphology impurity quantum states are superlocalized, i.e., their wave functions decay with
357

the distance r as exp(−rγ), with γ > 1 (recall that in the classical Anderson localization,
γ = 1). Ever since the publication of their paper, the possibility of such superlocalization of
electrons has been extensively studied. For example, Harris and Aharony (1987) and Aharony
and Harris (1990) argued that one must distinguish between the behavior of a typical geometry,
and that of a system with the average geometry, where the averaging is taken with respect to all
the possible geometries of the system. Moreover, they argued that the latter yields γ = 1, i.e.,
there is no superlocalization of electrons. Early numerical studies of this problem were carried
out by Lambert and Hughes (1991), but the most deﬁnitive study was probably carried out by
Kantelhardt and Bunde (1997), who investigated localization of electronic eigenfunctions and
vibrational excitations (usually called fractons; see Section 6.6) on percolation clusters, both
in the topological (rt) and Euclidean (re) space, and found three diﬀerent regimes. In the ﬁrst
regime, which corresponds to small rt and re, electrons and fractons are superlocalized in the
rt space, but the localization is not exponential in the re space. In the intermediate regime,
stretched exponential sublocalization was found in both spaces with γ ≃0.6.
In the third
regime, corresponding to large rt and re, the average behavior was found to depend strongly
on the number of percolation conﬁgurations used in the averaging, but the asymptotic regime
was a simple exponential decay with γ = 1, in agreement with the argument of Aharony and
Harris. We will come back to this issue in Section 6.6.7.2.
However, none of these results supports the view that a material with a fractal morphology
can by itself explain the observed T −1/2 behavior of hopping conductivity of semiconductors
in which Coulomb interactions are unimportant. van der Putten et al. (1992) measured the
conductivity of carbon-black-polymer composites as a function of carbon black concentration
from a point in the vicinity of the percolation threshold pc up to 33pc, and in the temperature
range from 4 K to 300 K. Their data indicated that α, the exponent deﬁned by Eq. (176), is
about 2/3. To interpret this value, they assumed that, N(E) ∼Eβ, and proposed that
α =
γ(β + 1)
Df + γ(β + 1) ,
(1116)
where Df is the fractal dimension of 3D sample-spanning percolation cluster at pc. Therefore,
with α = 2/3 and Df ≃2.53 one obtains β ≃2.75. Thus, their data can be best explained by
a combination of a percolating fractal morphology (i.e., one at pc) and a power-law density of
states. Moreover, if we take, β = 1, then Eq. (197) predicts that α ≃1/2, indicating that a
358

linear density of states and a percolating fractal morphology may be responsible for the observed
T −1/2 behavior of hopping conductivity of semiconductors in which Coulomb interactions are
unimportant. However, Aharony et al. (1993) argued that there are more than one way of
interpreting the data of van der Putten et al. (1992), and therefore their interpretation may
not provide the true solution to this controversy. Hence, the problem, at the time of writing this
book, had remained, to our knowledge, unsolved. For the most recent experimental data for
the conductivity of carbon-black polymer composites see Mandal et al. (1997) who, however,
claimed that their data can be understood on the basis of superlocalization.
6.2.5 Continuous-time random walk model
The last model we discuss for computing the frequency-dependent hopping conductivity is
the continuous-time random walk (CTRW) model, originally developed by Montroll and Weiss
(1965) and extended by Scher and Lax (1973a). We already discussed in Section 6.1.3 the
connection between the CTRW model, the generalized master equation that arises because of
averaging the disorder in the material and replacing it by an eﬀective homogeneous medium,
and the self-consistent approximation or the EMA, with the key equation being Eq. (13) that
establishes this connection. Note that, to the extent that ˜We can be estimated accurately, the
waiting time density ψ(t) is also computed accurately. If we solve for the eﬀective transition
rate ˜We(λ) and replace λ by iω, assuming a simple-cubic lattice model (Z = 2d), we obtain
ˆWe(iω) =
iω ˆψ(iω)
2d[1 −ˆψ(iω)]
.
(1117)
The equation that was derived by Scher and Lax (1973a) for the frequency-dependent eﬀective
diﬀusivity is completely similar to Eq. (198) (recall that, as discussed in Section 6.1.6, for a
simple-cubic lattice, De = We) and is given by
ˆDe(ω) =
iω ˆψ(iω)
2d[1 −ˆψ(iω)]
⟨ˆr2(ω)⟩,
(1118)
which is essentially the same as Eq. (198), but corrected by a factor ⟨ˆr2(ω)⟩which provides
the eﬀective diﬀusivity with the proper dimensions. Here
⟨ˆr2(ω)⟩=

s
s2 ˆψ(s, iω)
ˆψ(iω)
,
(1119)
where ˆψ(s, iω) is the causal Fourier transform of ψ(s, t), such that ψ(s, t)∆t is the probability
that the time between hops occurs in the interval (t, t + ∆t), resulting in a vector displacement
359

s, and
ψ(t) =

s
ψ(s, t) ,
(1120)
is the usual waiting time density. The frequency dependence of ⟨ˆr2(ω)⟩is weak. It typically
varies by at most a factor of 3 over several orders of magnitude variations in the frequency ω,
and hence it is assumed that ⟨ˆr2⟩is a constant, ⟨ˆr2(ω)⟩= ⟨ˆr2(ω = 0)⟩= ⟨r2⟩.
As an example, consider a waiting time density ψ(t) given by
ψ(t) = W0(W0t)α
Γ(α + 1) exp(−W0t) ,
(1121)
where W0 can be thought of as the minimum transition rate in the system, α is an arbitrary
parameter, and Γ(x) is the gamma function. Since, ˆψ(iω) = (1 + iω/W0)−α−1, we immediately
obtain
ˆDe(ω) = ⟨r2⟩
6
iω
(1 + iω/W0)⟨t⟩W0−1 ,
(1122)
with
⟨t⟩=
 ∞
0
ψ(t)dt = d ˆψ(iω)
d(iω) |ω=0 = α + 1
W0
(1123)
being the mean waiting time between the hops. As discussed by Scher and Lax (1973a), one
may consider three distinct limits:
(1) Consider ﬁrst the limit ⟨t⟩W0 →∞, which corresponds to a highly peaked distribution.
Then, for a ﬁxed ⟨t⟩, we let W0 →∞which results in ˆψ(iω) →exp(−iω⟨t⟩).
Therefore,
ψ(t) →δ(t −⟨t⟩), implying that that
ˆDe(ω) = 1
6⟨r2⟩
1
2ω cot
1
2ω⟨t⟩

−1
2iω

.
(1124)
Thus, in this limit the hops occur at ﬁxed time intervals, t = n⟨t⟩.
(2) We now consider the limit ⟨t⟩W0 = 1, which means that, ψ(t) = W0 exp(−W0t), and
therefore
ˆDe(ω) = 1
6⟨r2⟩W0 .
(1125)
Thus, with an exponential waiting time density, the eﬀective diﬀusivity is independent of the
frequency. This is due to the fact that the parameter W −1
0
is simply a time scale, and there
is only one transition rate in the system, whereas the frequency response of the material is
connected with the possibility of more than one, or a range of, transition rate.
360

(3) Consider now the limit ⟨t⟩W0 ∼0. It can be shown that, within the CTRW formulation,
a waiting time distribution with such a characteristic is necessary to describe impurity hopping
conduction. To see this, consider the high-frequency limit of Eq. (203), |iω/W0| ≫1. Then
ˆDe(ω) ∼⟨r2⟩W0(ω/W0)1−⟨t⟩W0 exp[iπ/2(1 −⟨t⟩W0)] .
(1126)
If we compare Eq. (207) to (193), we may identify the exponent x with 1−⟨t⟩W0, and therefore
Im[ ˆDe(ω)]/Re[ ˆDe(ω)] = tan 1
2πx. Therefore, 1 −⟨t⟩W0 must be small in order for the CTRW
model, with this type of waiting time density, to be able to describe hopping conduction. As
mentioned in Section 6.2.4, a typical value of x is 0.7 −0.9, and therefore one must have,
1 −⟨t⟩W0 ∼0.1 −0.3.
In their second paper, Scher and Lax (1973b) considered modelling of hopping conduction
in amorphous semiconductors, such as Si and Ge. They derived a waiting time density given
by
ψ(t)
W0
= 2η −(1
4η + 4η2)W0t + · · · ,
(1127)
where W0 was taken to be temperature dependent, W0 ∝exp(−Ea/kBT) (Ea is the activation
energy), and η = 1
2πna3, with n and a being the number of donors (per unit volume) and the
Bohr radius, respectively, with typical values, η/a ∼10−5 −10−1. Using the appropriate ex-
perimental values for Ea and Nd, they obtained accurate estimates of the hopping conductivity
over wide ranges of the frequency and temperature which were in good agreement with the
experimental data of Pollak and Geballe (1961).
6.3 AC Conductivity
In the literature, sometimes no distinction is made between Athe C conductivity of a dis-
ordered solid and its frequency-dependent hopping conductivity. The reality is that there is
not much that distinguishes the two quantities from each other, since hopping is just a mecha-
nism of conduction in materials. However, we consider the AC conductivity separately because
frequency-dependent conductivity of disordered materials appears to possess certain universal
properties that have always been discussed under the title “universal properties of AC con-
duction” (see, for example, Dyre and Schr⊘der, 2000, for an informative review), rather than
“universal properties of hopping conduction.”
If I is the current density, to which there are contributions from both free and bound charges,
and E is the electric ﬁeld, then the eﬀective conductivity ge is deﬁned by the usual relation,
361

I = geE. In general, ge depends on the frequency ω, in which case one writes, I0 = ˆge(ω)E0,
where I = Re(I0eiωt), and similarly for the electric ﬁeld. With the aid of ˆge(ω), we can deﬁne
the complex frequency-dependent dielectric constant ε(ω):
ˆge(ω) −ˆge(0) = iω[ε(ω) −1]ε0 ,
(1128)
where ε0 is the vacuum permittivity. If there are no free charges, then, ˆge(0) = 0, and I =
∂P/∂t, where P is the dipole density, in which case Eq. (209) reduces to the standard equation,
D0 = ε(ω)ε0E0, where D0 is the complex amplitude of the displacement vector, D = ε0E + P.
If we write the complex dielectric constant in the standard notation, ε(ω) = ε′(ω) + iε′′(ω),
then −ε′′(ω) is usually referred to as the dielectric loss, since it determines the dissipation in
excess of the DC dissipation. At frequencies ω ≪1013Hz, much below the phonon frequencies,
the bound charge dielectric constant ε∞is independent of frequency. To distinguish it from
the overall eﬀective conductivity ˆge(ω), we denote the AC conductivity by σ(ω) which, by
deﬁnition, is the free charge carrier contribution to the eﬀective conductivity ˆge(ω).
Since
ˆge(ω) = σ(ω) + iω(ε∞−1)ε0, Eq. (209) implies that
σ(ω) −σ(0) = iω[ε(ω) −ε∞]ε0 .
(1129)
If we now write σ(ω) in the standard notation, σ(ω) = σ′(ω) + iσ′′(ω), then, σ′(ω) must
be positive because thermodynamics constraints require positive dissipation. Below phonon
frequencies, the charge carrier displacements always lag behind the electric ﬁeld, but the lag is
at most one-quarter of a period, and therefore the current attains its maximum before the ﬁeld,
implying that σ′′(ω) > 0, and reﬂecting a capacitance response rather than an inductive one.
6.3.1 Universality of AC conductivity
Many disordered solid materials appear to possess very similar AC conductivities. The ex-
amples, and the references where the details of the experimental evidence can be found, are too
numerous to be given here, and therefore we only mention a few of the well-known examples
of such materials and the most recent references that we are aware of. Such disordered mate-
rials include ion conducting glasses (Roling, 1998), amorphous semiconductors (Long, 1991),
polycrystalline semiconductors (Kunar and Srivastava, 1994), electron conducting polymers
(Jastrzebska et al., 1998), ion conducting polymers (Rozanski et al., 1995), transition metal
oxides (Suzuki, 1980), metal cluster compounds (van Staveren et al., 1991), organic-inorganic
362

composites (Bianchi et al., 1999), and doped single-crystal semiconductors at helium tempera-
ture (Pollak and Geballe, 1961).
Figure 6.7 presents the AC conductivity of an ion conducting melt, 0.4Ca(NO3)2−0.6KNO3,
a highly viscous melt (Howell et al., 1974), while Figure 6.8 shows the same for a polycrystalline
diamond ﬁlm, an electron conducting material (Fiegl et al., 1994).
There are many other
such examples of disordered materials, all exhibiting very similar AC conductivities.
The
similarities between the two ﬁgures are striking, particularly in the light of the fact that ion
conduction is a classical barrier-crossing process, whereas electron conduction in heterogeneous
solids is typically by quantum-mechanical tunneling between localized states, a completely
diﬀerent mechanism. Therefore, the question is: What is the origin of this striking similarity?
Dyre (1988) pointed out that the common features among all the materials with similar AC
conductivity are very broad distributions of transition rates, tunneling rates, and/or local
mobilities, and therefore they may be responsible for this apparent universality of the AC
conductivity.
This universality was apparently ﬁrst discovered by Taylor (1956) for ion conducting glasses,
who showed that the dielectric loss for various glasses fall on a single curve when plotted versus
scaled frequency. Taylor also pointed out that the activation energy of the DC conductivity
was the same as that of the frequency that marks the onset of AC conduction. Subsequently,
Isard (1961) noted that if one plots the normalized AC conductivity versus Cω/σ(0), it exhibits
universal behavior. That is, one can write
ˆσ = σ(ω)
σ(0) = F

C ω
σ(0)

,
(1130)
where F(x) is the apparent universal function representing the master curve. C is called the
Taylor-Isard scaling constant, and has been taken by many to be proportional to the inverse
of the temperature T. Figure 6.9 presents an example of the Taylor-Isard master curve for
eight diﬀerent ion conducting glasses (Roling, 1998), while Figure 6.10 depicts the same for
Poly(methylthiophene) (Rehwald et al., 1987). To explain the origin of the apparent universality
of the AC conductivity, Dyre and Schr⊘der (2000) listed sixteen common AC characteristics of
the vast majority of disordered solids, which are as follows.
(1) σ′(ω), the real part of the AC conductivity increases with ω, while σ′′(ω) ≥0.
(2) As mentioned earlier, the real part of the hopping conductivity depends on the frequency
363

ω by a power law; see Eq. (193). Hence, we may write
σ′(ω) ∼ωx .
(1131)
(3) The exponent x is typically between 0.6 and 1.0.
(4) Deviations from Eq. (212) occur when the exponent x is a weakly increasing function
of ω.
(5) As discussed earlier, x is a decreasing function of the temperature; see Eq. (194).
(6) x ≃1 when the DC conductivity is essentially zero.
(7) When x ≃1, σ′(ω) is almost independent of the temperature.
(8) As the frequency decreases, the conductivity begins to become independent of ω.
(9) In a log-log plot, the power-law regime of σ(ω) has a much weaker temperature depen-
dence than does the DC conductivity.
(10) In a log-log plot, the shape of σ′(ω) is independent of T, making it possible to construct
a master curve for it. A similar principle also holds for σ′′(ω). Although this may seem an
apparent contradiction with the experimental observations that the exponent x depends on
the temperature, it is in fact not so because the power-law (212) is only an approximation.
If T is lowered the master curve is displaced to lower frequencies; at the same time x →1 if
the measurements are done in a ﬁxed frequency range. Therefore, the exponent x is not truly
constant.
(11) The shape of the master curve is roughly the same for all disordered solids, giving rise
to the universality; see Figures 6.9 and 6.10.
(12) If σ(0) is measurable, then there is always a dielectric loss peak.
(13) The onset of AC conduction takes place around the dielectric loss peak frequency ωm.
(14) The frequency ωm satisﬁes the following relation
σ(0) = cε0ωm∆ε ,
(1132)
where ∆ε = ε(0) −ε∞, and c is an O(1) constant. Equation (213) is known as the Barton-
Nakajima-Namikawa relation (Barton, 1966; Nakajima, 1972; Namikawa, 1975).
(15) Temperature dependence of the dielectric loss strength ∆ε is much weaker than that
of ωm or σ(0), and therefore Eq. (213) implies a rough proportionality,
σ(0) ∼ωm .
(1133)
364

(16) Both σ(0) and ωm have an Arrhenius-type temperature dependence with the same
activation energy.
These sixteen common AC characteristics of disordered solid materials provide strong em-
pirical support for the universality of AC conductivity. There is also strong theoretical evidence
for this universality that will be discussed shortly. However, as noted by Dyre and Schr⊘der
(2000), there are also some “dissenting” views, emphasizing the diﬀerences between various
disordered solids and their AC conductivity (see, for example, Elliot, 1994; Macdonald, 1997;
Ngai and Moynihan, 1998), since there are disordered solids for which the exponent x is slightly
larger than 1.0 (see, for example, Cramer and Buscher, 1998), and those for which the DC con-
ductivity is not of Arrhenius type (for example, group-IV amorphous semiconductors, or fast
ion conducting glasses). But, the vast majority of disordered solids do seem to exhibit universal
AC conductivity behavior.
Sidebottom (1999) proposed the following universal scaling representation of the AC con-
ductivity:
ˆσ = σ(ω)
σ(0) = F

ε0∆ε ω
σ(0)

,
(1134)
that is, the Taylor-Isard constant C is given by, C = ε0∆ε. The proof of this equation was
provided by Schr⊘der and Dyre (2000). Suppose that ˆω is the scaled frequency. Then, one
can expand the master curve to ﬁrst order, ˆσ = 1 + iˆωA + · · · Since, σ(ω) = ˆσσ(0), we
have, σ(ω) = σ(0) + iˆωAσ(0).
On the other hand, Eq.
(210) implies that to ﬁrst order
in ω, σ(ω) = σ(0) + iωε0∆ε, which, when compared with the last equation, implies that
ˆω = A−1[ε0∆ε/σ(0)]ω, and therefore C = ε0∆ε.
We now discuss theoretical evidence and computer simulations that support the universality
of AC conductivity.
6.3.2 Resistor-capacitor model
Consider a disordered solid with a spatially varying free charge conductivity g(r), which is
independent of frequency, and a uniform bound charge dielectric constant ε∞, so that I(r, t) =
g(r)E(r, t) and D(r, t) = ε∞ε0E(r, t). If we combine these equations with E = ∇φ (where φ
is a potential), ∇· D = ρ (where ρ is the free charge density), and the continuity equation,
∂ρ/∂t + ∇· I = 0, we obtain
∇· {[iωε0ε∞+ g(r)]∇φ} = 0 .
(1135)
365

If we discretize this equation by, for example, a ﬁnite-diﬀerence method, we obtain a network,
the 2D version of which is shown in Figure 6.11 (Fishchuk, 1986; Dyre, 1993). Each bond of
the network consists of a capacitor proportional to ε0ε∞and a resistor proportional to the local
resistivity 1/g(r). The currents through the resistors are the free charge currents. In a periodic
ﬁeld the current through the capacitors is proportional to iωε0ε∞times the potential drop.
However, since D = ε0ε∞E, and E is proportional to the potential drop, the current through
the capacitors should be proportional to ∂D/∂t.
Consider now a L × L or L × L × L network of this type. We impose a periodic potential
across two opposing faces of the network that act as electrodes, the admittance between which
is Y (ω). Then,
σ(ω) = Y (ω)
Ld−2 −iωε0ε∞,
(1136)
In a realistic simulation one should take, g(r) = g0 exp(−βEa), where g0 varies locally (which
can be selected from a given distribution), β = (kBT)−1 and Ea is the activation energy.
Alternatively, one may ﬁx g0 and take Ea to be a spatially varying quantity, selected from a
given distribution; this is what we assume in most of our discussions. It is clear that, within this
model, the mechanism of conduction (classical or quantum mechanical) is immaterial. Except
in 1D, one must use large-scale simulations in order to compute σ(ω). However, in the limit
of high frequencies, the capacitor admittances are so large that they dominate, resulting in
a spatially homogeneous electric ﬁeld or potential. Therefore, the average resistor current is
determined by the average free charge conductivity, i.e., σ(∞) = ⟨g⟩.
The resistor-capacitor model also provides the answer to a crucial question. As discussed
above, at low frequencies the AC conductivity is independent of ω.
The question then is:
What determines the onset of AC conduction? At very low frequencies each capacitor has an
admittance with a numerical value which is smaller than that of its partner resistor. As ω is
increased, an increasing number of the capacitor will have admittances that are larger than
the resistance of their partner resistors. As long as such capacitors are isolated, or have not
formed a sample-spanning cluster, the over conductivity of the system remains independent
of frequency. However, when the links of the sample-spanning cluster, i.e., those that, if cut,
split the cluster into two pieces (see Section 2.6.3), have a capacitor with an admittance larger
than the resistance of its partner resistor, then, the potential distribution in the system, and
hence its conductivity, begin to be frequency-dependent. The frequency at the onset of AC
366

conduction is roughly proportional to the DC conductivity, because both of them are roughly
proportional to the admittance of the links, hence explaining Eq. (214).
Let us now consider the qualitative behavior of the network response to an imposed periodic
potential.
If we lower temperature, β increases and the distribution of the conductivities
becomes increasingly broader, spanning many orders of magnitude. This is called the extreme
disorder limit. It is in this limit that the AC conductivity becomes independent of β (i.e., T)
and the distribution of the activation energies Ea, and hence exhibits a universal behavior.
Although it is very diﬃcult to prove this universality analytically, but, in addition to the
experimental evidence discussed above, computer simulations and analytical approximations
also support the universality. Let us discuss these analytical approximations, and compare
their predictions with the simulation results.
6.3.3 Universal AC conductivity: Eﬀective-medium approximation
As discussed in Chapter 5 and earlier in the present chapter, in the EMA for randomly
varying admittances y on a d−dimensional simple cubic lattice, the eﬀective admittance ym is
computed from [see Eqs. (4.239) and (4.240)]
)
y −ym
y + (d −1)ym
*
= 0 ,
(1137)
where ⟨·⟩indicates an average over the distribution of the admittances. We now substitute
the admittance y ∝g(r) + iωε0ε∞into Eq. (218). Then, ym(ω) ∝σ(ω) + iωε0ε∞. It is then
straightforward to see that Eq. (218) becomes
)
g −σ
g + (d −1)σ + idωε0ε∞
*
= 0 .
(1138)
Equation (219) is exact for d = 1 and also becomes exact for any d in the limit ω →∞, i.e., it
reproduces the exact results, σ(∞) = ⟨g⟩, mentioned above (Dyre, 1993). Note that the total
admittance Y of the network is Y = Ld−2ym.
We now show that the EMA predicts a universal AC conductivity at low temperatures. The
discussion that follows is a summary of the analysis presented by Dyre (1993). Let s = iωε0ε∞.
Because, g −σ = g + (d −1)σ + ds −d(s + σ), Eq. (219) is rewritten as
1
d(s + σ) =
)
1
g(Ea) + (d −1)σ + ds
*
Ea
,
(1139)
367

where the average is taken over the distribution h(Ea) of the activation energies. In the limit
β = 1/kBT →∞the local conductivity g(Ea) = g0 exp(−βEa) varies rapidly and, depending
on Ea, for given σ and s there are two extreme possibilities, either g(Ea) ≪(d −1)σ + ds or
g(Ea) ≫(d −1)σ + ds. In the former case g(Ea) can be ignored, while in the latter case the
denominator of Eq. (220) becomes very large and there is little contribution to the right-hand
side. The energy Eg(s) that separates the two cases is obtained from g = (d −1)σ + ds, so that
Eg(s) = −1
β ln
(d −1)σ + ds
g0

.
(1140)
On the other hand, Eq. (220), for large values of β, becomes
d −1
d
+
s
d(s + σ) =
 ∞
Eg(s) h(E)dE .
(1141)
If we set s = 0 in Eq. (222) and subtract the result from Eq. (222), we obtain
s
d(s + σ) =
 Eg(0)
Eg(s) h(E)dE .
(1142)
For large values of β, Eg(s) ≃Eg(0), and the integral can be replaced by h[Eg(0)][Eg(0)−Eg(s)]
[assuming that h(Ea) is smooth around Ea = 0], and therefore
s
d(s + σ) = −h[Eg(0)]
β

ln
σ(0)(d −1)
g0

−ln
σ(d −1) + ds
g0

= h[Eg(0)]
β
ln
 σ
σ(0) +
ds
σ(0)(d −1)

.
(1143)
Therefore, if one introduces the dimensionless variables,
ˆσ =
σ
σ(0) ,
ˆs =
βs
dσ(0)h[Eg(0)] ,
(1144)
then, Eq. (224), in the limit β →∞(low temperatures) becomes
ˆσ ln(ˆσ) = ˆs .
(1145)
Equation (226) states that, for d > 1, the AC conductivity of disordered solids at low temper-
atures is universal, independent of the distribution h(Ea) of the activation energies. Equation
(226) was derived by Bryksin (1980), Fishchuk (1986), and Dyre (1988) in various contexts.
More recently, Bleibaum et al. (1996) derived an equation similar to (226) by a completely
diﬀerent method.
368

Equation (226) can also provide information on the scaling of the AC conductivity with
frequency. Recall [see Eq. (212)] that the real part σ′ of the AC conductivity depends on the
frequency by a power law, and similarly for its imaginary part. Therefore, if we write ˆσ ∼ˆsu,
then,
ˆσ =
ˆs
ln(ˆσ) ≃
ˆs
ln(ˆs) ,
(1146)
so that
u = d ln(ˆσ)
d ln(ˆs) ≃1 −
1
ln(ˆs) ,
ˆs ≫1 .
(1147)
ˆs is imaginary at real frequencies. Therefore, if we write ˆs = iˆω, we obtain
ˆσ ≃
iˆω
ln(iˆω) =
iˆω
ln(ˆω) + iπ/2 ,
ˆω ≫1 ,
(1148)
and therefore
ˆσ′ ≃π
2
ˆω
ln2(ˆω) ,
ˆσ′′ ≃
ˆω
ln(ˆω) ,
ˆω ≫1 .
(1149)
Equations (230) imply that, if one deﬁnes the exponents x and y by
ˆσ′ ∼ˆωx ,
ˆσ′′ ∼ˆωy ,
(1150)
then, for ˆω ≫1
x = 1 −
2
ln(ˆω) ,
y = 1 −
1
ln(ˆω) ,
ˆω ≫1 ,
EMA.
(1151)
Figure 6.12 compares the results of computer simulations, using 200 × 200 square net-
works, with the predictions of the EMA, Eq. (219) (Dyre, 1993). In these simulations, β =
5, 10, 20, 40, 80, and 160, four diﬀerent distributions of the activation energy were utilized which
were, (i) asymmetric Gaussian; (ii) symmetric Gaussian; (iii) power-law, h(Ea) ∼(1 + Ea)−4,
and (iv) triangle, and the results were averaged over 10 diﬀerent realizations of the network.
In each case, the distribution was centered around a value ⟨Ea⟩. The agreement between the
predictions and the simulation results is excellent, particularly in the light of the fact that the
EMA has no adjustable parameter. Note that the AC conductivity becomes universal at low
temperatures (high values of β).
6.3.4 Universal AC conductivity: Symmetric hopping model
The symmetric hopping model described in Sections 6.1 and 6.2 can also be used for mod-
elling the AC conductivity. All the results discussed previously for this model are also applicable
369

to the AC conduction. In particular, one has two exact results:
σ(0) = ⟨W −1⟩−1 ,
d = 1 .
(1152)
σ(∞) = ⟨W⟩,
d ≥1 ,
(1153)
where W is the transition rate between the lattice sites, and the averages are taken with respect
to its statistical distribution f(W). Moreover, the various EMAs developed for the symmetric
hopping model can also be used for estimating the AC conductivity. As shown by Dyre (1994),
in the low-temperature limit, they all lead to Eq. (226), and hence the symmetric hopping
model also predicts universal behavior for AC conductivity. Figure 6.13 presents the results
of simulation of the 3D symmetric hopping model for various distributions of the activation
energies [that is, if one assumes that W = W0 exp(−βEa)], reported by Schr⊘der and Dyre
(2000), and compares them with the EMA predictions. Clearly, the EMA provides reasonably
accurate predictions for the simulation results and, moreover, the symmetric hopping model also
predicts universal behavior for the AC conductivity, independent of the statistical distribution
of the activation energies. Summerﬁeld and Butcher (1982) and Summerﬁeld (1985) were the
ﬁrst to point out the possible universality of AC conductivity based on the symmetric hopping
model.
6.3.5 Role of percolation in universality of AC conductivity
By now it should be clear to the reader how the activation energy EDC of the DC conduc-
tivity, deﬁned by, σ(0) ∝exp(−βEDC) for large values of β, can be determined by percolation.
If h(Ea) is the statistical distribution of the activation energies, then according to the critical
path concept described in Section 6.2.4, EDC is the solution of the following equation:
 EDC
0
h(E)dE = pc ,
(1154)
where pc is the bond percolation threshold of the system. The argument leading to Eq. (235)
can be extended to the symmetric hopping model as well (Dyre and Schr⊘der, 2000): The
main contributions to the (zero-ﬁeld) mean square displacement are made by charge carriers
that use the links of the network that have the largest transition rates. Thus, optimal carriers
hop preferably on the percolation cluster which is deﬁned by marking links in order of decreas-
ing transition rates until percolation (which is how the cluster is constructed in the critical
370

path method; see Section 6.2.4). Such optimal carriers must occasionaly overcome the largest
barriers on the percolation cluster, which act as bottlenecks, and therefore EDC, as given by
Eq. (235), determines the rate of the mean square displacement, hence the diﬀusivity and thus
the conductivity.
Computer simulations of Brown and Esser (1995) indicate that, at extreme disorder, the DC
current follows almost 1D paths, and thus a simplistic approach is to take these paths as strictly
1D. If so, one obtains what Dyre and Schr⊘der (2000) call the percolation path approximation
(PPA). To quote them, “The universal AC conductivity is equal to that of extreme disorder
limit of a 1D model with a sharp upper cutoﬀin the activation energy probability distribution.”
Then, it is straightforward to show that (Dyre, 1988, 1994)
1
σ + s = c
 EDC
−∞
h(E)
g(E) + sdE ,
(1155)
where c is a constant the value of which is unimportant. In a ﬁxed range of frequencies around
the transition frequency, the dominant contribution to Eq. (236) at low temperatures is due
to energies that are close to EDC. Thus, one may replace h(E) by h(EDC). It is then easy to
show that
ˆσ =
ˆs
ln(1 + ˆs) ,
(1156)
or, if we set ˆs = iˆω, we obtain (Dyre, 1988)
ˆσ ln(1 + iˆω) = iˆω .
(1157)
Thus, the PPA also predicts a universal AC conductivity at low temperatures. Equation (238)
provides a slightly more pronounced frequency dependence of the conductivity than Eq. (226),
the prediction of the EMA.
One may apply the PPA to hopping. To do so, the AC conductivity in 1D with a sharp
activation energy cutoﬀmust be computed in the limit of extreme disorder. Dyre and Schr⊘der
(1996) showed that the EMA in one dimension reprsents the simulation results very accurately.
It is not diﬃcult to show that, under these conditions, the EMA for AC conductivity of 1D
materials predicts the following universal AC conductivity:
√
ˆσ ln(1 +
√
iˆωˆσ) =
√
iˆω ,
(1158)
371

which can be considered as the PPA-EMA for the hopping model. Compared to Eq. (226), the
prediction of the EMA, Eq. (239) provides a somewhat less pronounced frequency dependence
of the conductivity.
We may conclude, based on the available experimental and computer simulation results
and the predictions of various analytical approximations, that the AC conductivity of the vast
majority of disordered solids, in the limit of low temperatures, exhibits universal behavior.
An important question is: How robust is the universality of AC conductivity? Dyre and
Schr⊘der (2000) provided the answer to this question by making an interesting analogy between
the universality of AC conductivity and that of second-order phase transitions which is highly
robust to very extensive modiﬁcation of the system. The unversality in the latter case is usually
associated with the existence of a diverging length scale as a critical point is approached. For
example, as we learned in Chapter 2, as the percolation threshold is approached, the percolation
correlation length diverges [see Eq. (2.32)]. Is there such a diverging length scale in the AC
conductivity problem? Consider, for example, the hopping model and deﬁne ℓ2
m to be the mean
square displacement of the hopper at time t = 1/ωm, where ωm is deﬁned through Eq. (213).
Recall that ωm is the frequency that deﬁnes the onset of AC conductivity. Both the EMA and
computer simulations indicate that ℓ2
m diverges as β →∞, and therefore the universality of AC
conductivity can also be associated with a diverging length scale, which in turn implies that
this universality is very robust.
For the most recent discussion of interpretation of experimental data for the AC conductivity
see L´eon et al. (2001).
6.4 Dielectric Constant and Optical Properties
Although as pointed out in Chapters 4 and 5, the analogy between various linear transport
processes in heterogeneous materials implies that most of the theoretical methods that have
been developed so far for predicting the eﬀective conductivity have their analogues for the ef-
fective dielectric constant, we wish, in this section, to describe and discuss the discrete models
for computing frequency-dependent eﬀective dielectric constant (or, more generally, dielectric
function) of composite materials. We ﬁrst describe numerical calculation of the dielectric con-
stant, and then discuss various analytical approximations that can be used for estimating this
important property.
372

6.4.1 Resistor-capacitor model
Let us ﬁrst describe and discuss how the dielectric constant of a composite material is com-
puted via a discrete model. Consider a disordered material, such as a mixture of a conducting
component and a dielectric one. A typical conducting grain size a in the material is much
smaller than the wavelength of the light in the visible and infrared spectral ranges. If so, one
can introduce a potential φ(r) for the local electric ﬁeld and write the local current density I as,
I(r) = g(r)[−∇φ(r) + E0], where E0 is the external ﬁeld, and g(r) is the local conductivity at
r. In the quasi-static limit, computation of the ﬁeld distribution reduces to ﬁnding the solution
of the Poisson equation since, due to current conservation, ∇· I = 0, one has
∇· {g(r)[−∇φ(r) + E0]} = 0 .
(1159)
The local conductivity g(r) is equal to either gc or gd, representing the conducting and dielectric
components, respectively. We rewrite Eq. (240) in terms of the local dielectric constant,
ε(r) = 4πi
ω g(r) ,
(1160)
so that
∇· [ε(r)∇φ(r)] = E ,
(1161)
where E = ∇· [ε(r)E0]. While the external ﬁeld E0 is real, φ(r) is, in general, a complex
function since εc is complex in the optical and infrared spectral ranges. Since Eq. (242) is very
diﬃcult to solve analytically, one discretizes it in order to solve it by numerical simulations.
If, for example, a standard 5-point (in 2D) or 7-point (in 3D) ﬁnite-diﬀerence discretization is
used, then, a discrete model on a simple-cubic lattice is obtained in which the conducting and
dielectric particles are represented by conducting and dielectric bonds of the lattice. In this
way, Eq. (242), in discretized form, takes on the form of Kirchhoﬀ’s equations deﬁned on a
lattice. Assuming that the external electric ﬁeld E0 is directed along a speciﬁc principal axis
of the lattice, say the z−axis, one obtains

j
εij(φj −φi) =

j
εijEij
(1162)
where φi is the electric potential at site i of the lattice, and the sum is over the nearest neighbors
j of the site i. For the bonds ij in the ±z−direction, the electromotive force Eij is given by,
Eij = ±E0a0 (where a0 is the spatial period of the lattice), while Eij = 0 for the other bonds
373

that are connected to site i. Thus, the composite material is modeled by a resistor-capacitor
network in which the bond permittivities εij are statistically independent and a0 is equal to
the conducting grain size, a0 = a. In the case of a two-phase conductor-dielectric random
composite, the permittivities εij are equal to either εc or εd with probabilities p and 1 −p,
respectively. We also write the permittivities in the standard form, εj = ε′
j + iε′′
j, where j = c
or d.
To make further progress, we take the lattice to be a simple-cubic lattice with a very large
but ﬁnite number of sites N, and rewrite Eq. (243) in a matrix form:
Hφ = E ,
(1163)
where φ = {φ1, φ2, . . . , φN}, and the elements of the vector E are, Ei =

j εijEij. Here H is a
N ×N matrix such that for i ̸= j, Hij = −εij = εd > 0 and εc = (−1+iκ)|ϵ′
c| with probabilities
p and 1 −p, respectively, and Hii = 
j εij, where j refers to nearest neighbors of site i, and κ
is the usual loss factor, κ = ε′′
c/ |ε′
c| ≪1. The diagonal elements Hii are distributed between
2dεc and 2dεd, where d is the dimensionality of the space.
Similar to the dielectric constant, we write H = H′ + iκH′′, where iκH′′ represents losses
in the system. The Hamiltonian H′ formally coincides with the Hamiltonian of the problem of
metal-insulator transition (Anderson transition) in quantum systems, i.e., it maps the quantum-
mechanical Hamiltonian for the Anderson transition problem with both on- and oﬀ-diagonal
correlated disorder onto the present problem. This mapping will be discussed in more detail in
Chapter 3 of Volume II.
Once a lattice model is set up, one may calculate the eﬀective dielectric constant of the
composite by several methods. Direct numerical simulations, similar to those for computing
the eﬀective conductivity of a composite that were described in Chapter 5, are, in principle,
not diﬃcult, except that one must deal with complex numbers, and therefore the size of the
lattice that can be used in the simulations may be somewhat limited. One may also tackle
the problem by several analytical approximations. Two of such approximations will described
shortly.
6.4.2 Resistor-capacitor-inductor model
A more general network model, which can be used for studying the optical properties of
heterogeneous materials is the resistor-inductor-capacitor network (Koss and Stroud, 1987;
374

Zeng, Hui and Stroud, 1989). In particular, one can use such networks to model a metal-
insulator composite and its absorption properties. To see this, recall, as pointed out in Section
4.13, that such composites possess surface plasmon modes or Mie resonances, which are easily
understood by considering a (spherical) metallic grain described by a Drude dielectric function
εm = 1 −(ωp/ω)2
1 + iωτ/ω ,
(1164)
embedded in an insulating matrix of dielectric constant of unity. Here ωp is the plasma frequency
and ωτ = 1/τ, with τ being a characteristic relaxation time. If, in the long-wavelength limit,
the composite is subjected to an external electric ﬁeld E0 exp(iωt), then the ﬁeld inside the
metallic particle will be uniform, given by
Ei =
3E0
2 + εm
exp(iωt) .
(1165)
In the limit ωp ≫ωτ, the real part of 3/(2 + εm) becomes very large at frequencies ω ∼ωp/
√
3,
the surface plasmon frequency of a small spherical metallic partricle. As a result, the absorption
coeﬃcient α = (ω/c)Im(√ε) will exhibit a strong peak near ω = ωp/
√
3.
Such a composite can be modelled by a network of resistors, inductors, and insulators (Koss
and Stroud, 1987; Zeng, Hui and Stroud, 1989). The bonds of the network present either a
metallic component or an insulating material. An insulating bond is represented simply as a
capacitor with an admittance
yi = iωCi ,
(1166)
where Ci is the capacitance. A metallic bond is composed of a resistance R and an inductance
L in series, the two in parallel with a capacitance Cm that admits displacement current, so that
the total admittance ym of a mettalic bond is given by
ym = 1 + iωRCm −ω2CmL
R + iωL
,
(1167)
and thus τ = L/R is the relaxation time of the system. It is easy to see that such a network
can model a composite of Drude metal and insulating material, if the dielectric function of the
insulating material is selected to be εi = 1, and the frequency units are such that ωp = 1. In
principle, the capacitances Ci and Cm, the resistance R, and the inductance L can vary from
bond to bond.
375

Once such a network is constructed, a variety of numerical methods can be used to compute
its eﬀective properties. Direct numerical simulation, while certainly possible, is hugely time
consuming. More eﬃcient methods include the Frank-Lobb method, and the transfer-matrix
method, both of which were described in Chapter 5. One can also use the EMA (see below) to
compute the eﬀective properties of the network, and it turns out that EMA can provide highly
accurate predictions for these properties. Figure 6.14 presents the real part of the eﬀective
conductivity ˆge(ω) of the network (which, of course, corresponds to absorption in the system),
as a function of frequency (Zeng, Hui and Stroud, 1989). The simulations were carried out
for a metallic fraction p = 0.6 on a 100 × 100 square network with τ = 10. Also shown are
the predictions of the EMA which are in excellent agreement with the simulation results. The
results shown in this ﬁgure are typical for p > pc, exhibiting a Drude peak which is due to a
non-zero DC conductivity. For p ≤pc, the real part of the conductivity exhibits a broad surface
plasmon resonance peak, an example of which is shown in Figure 6.15 for p = 0.5. The peak
becomes narrower as p decreases to small values.
Let us now concentrate on a conductor-dielectric composite, represented by a resistor-
capacitor network, and describe how its eﬀective properties can be computed. However, the
methods that we describe are equally applicable to resistor-inductor-capacitor networks.
6.4.3 Position-space renormalization group approach
Computing the eﬀective properties of a conductor-dielectric composite by a position-space
renormalization group (PSRG) method is similar to what we described in Section 5.11 for
calculating the eﬀective conductivity of disordered solids. Here, we describe one such PSRG
approach due to Wilkinson et al. (1983).
Consider a square lattice consisting of two types of bonds with conductances g1 and g2. The
bonds with g1 = gc are purely resistive and occur with probability p. The second type of the
bonds are purely capacitive with g2 = iωC, where ω is the frequency and C is the capacitance,
and occur with probability q = 1 −p. An example is show in Figure 6.16. Suppose that a
2 × 2 RG cell, of the type shown in Figure 6.17, is used, which is similar to the self-dual RG
cell used in Section 5.11 for computing the eﬀective conductivity. Each cell is renormalized
into conductive or capacitive bonds in the horizontal and vertical directions, also shown in
Figure 6.17. The equivalent conductances g′
1 and g′
2 of the renormalized bonds are, in general,
376

complex variables that occur with probabilities p′ and q′ = 1−p′, respectively. For convenience,
we shall refer to g′
1 and g′
2 as the conductor and capacitor, respectively, even though they both
are complex variables. Since the horizontal and vertical directions are independent of each
other and are equivalent, one can consider just one of them, say the vertical direction. Thus,
as discussed inSection 5.11, we impose a voltage drop between the top and bottom of the RG
cell, so that the eﬀective conductance of the cell is equivalent to that of a Wheatstone bridge
which contains 5 bonds, and therefore there are 25 = 32 possible conﬁgurations of the bridge.
These conﬁgurations are divided into two groups: The conducting ones in which the resistive
component g1 forms a conducting path, and the insulating conﬁgurations when it does not. This
grouping of the conﬁgurations is especially accurate when |g2| < g1, and therefore the results
discussed below are accurate when, ω < gc/C. The regime ω > gc/C can also be studied by
simply interchanging the roles of g1 and g2.
If α = g2/g1, then three recursion relations are obtained,
p′ = f(p) ,
p′g′
1 = g1f1(p, α) ,
q′g′
2 = g2f2(p, α) ,
(1168)
where
f(p) = p5 + 5p4q + 8p3q2 + 2p2q3 ,
(1169)
which is obviously the same as the one that we obtained in Chapter 5 [see Eq. (5.181)], as it
should be, and
f1(p, α) = p5 + p4q + 4p4q
5α + 3
3α + 5

+ 2p3q2
α + 1
2

+ 4p3q2
2α2 + 5α + 1
α2 + 5α + 2

+2p3q2
3α + 1
α + 3

+ 2p2q3
α + 1
2

,
(1170)
f2(p, α) = q5 + pq4 + 4pq4
3α + 5
5α + 3

+ 2p2q3

2
α + 1

+ 4p2q3
 α2 + 5α + 2
2α2 + 5α + 1

+2p2q3
 α + 3
3α + 1

+ 2p3q2

2
α + 1

.
(1171)
We combine these recursion relations into a single relation,
α′
α = p′f2(p, α)
q′f1(p, α) ,
(1172)
so that Eqs. (250) and (253) deﬁne the RG ﬂows in the space of three parameters which are p,
Re(α), and Im(α).
377

Next, the ﬁxed points of these recursion relations are determined. We consider ﬁrst the
ﬂows for the case in which g1 and g2 are both purely resistive. Then, the ﬂow diagram is shown
in Figure 6.18. Note that there are six ﬁxed points which are, p = 0, 1/2, and 1 with α = 0
or 1. The unstable ﬁxed point at p = 1/2 and α = 0 corresponds to the exact percolation
threshold of the square lattice. The ﬁxed points at α = 1 and p = 0 or 1 are stable. In the
complex α plane, the ﬂows are more complicated, but are qualitatively the same as in Figure
6.18. In particular, the system always ﬂows to α = 1 with p = 0 or 1.
The recursion relations are now linearized in the manner that was discussed in Chapter 5.
The results are,
p′ −pc ≃r(p −pc) ,
r = 13/8
(1173)
g′
1
g1
= 2f1(1/2, α) ≃a1 + b1α + · · · , a1 = 17/30
(1174)
g′
2
g2
= 2f2(1/2, α) ≃a2 + b2α + · · · , a2 = 23/12
(1175)
α′
α = f2(1/2, α)
f1(1/2, α) = A + Bα + · · · , A = 115/34 .
(1176)
Suppose that p is slightly larger than pc and that α = iωC/gc is small (so that ω is very
small). Then, Eq. (254) predicts that after n iterations, where n ∼−ln(2∆p)/ ln(r) (with
∆p = p−pc), the ﬂow reaches the vicinity of p = 1 and the transformed g1(n) yields the eﬀective
conductance ge ∼g1(n) ∼an
1gc ∼gc∆pµ with µ = −ln(a1)/ ln r ∼1.17, where µ is the usual
critical exponent that characterizes the power-law behavior of the eﬀective conductivity near
pc; see Eq. (2.36). This estimate of µ should be compared with the accepted value, µ ≃1.3,
for 2D percolation (see Table 2.3). We can also check to see whether α actually remains small
after the n iterations, since
α(n) = iωC
gc
n−1

m=0
[A + Bα(m)] ∼iωC
gc
An

1 + iωC
gc
B
A
An −1
A −1

,
(1177)
where α(m) ∼(iωC/gc)Am was used. Then, the criterion |α(n)| ≪1 becomes (iωC/gc)An ≪1,
or
ω ≪ωc ≡gc
C (∆p)µ+s .
(1178)
Here, s = ln(a2)/ ln(r) ≃1.34, is the critical exponent that is associated with the power-law
behavior of the conductivity of a percolation network of conductors-superconductors near pc,
deﬁned by Eq. (2.37). The relation between this exponent and the dielectric constant of a
378

composite will be discussed in more details in Section 6.5. As discussed in Sections 2.7.2 and
and 5.4, because of a duality relation for 2D percolation systems, one must have µ = s, and
therefore this PSRG treatment of the problem violates the duality relation. However, a slightly
diﬀerent treatment of the problem, along the lines that were described in Section 5.11, preserves
the duality. Since in the present analysis we are interested mostly in the qualitative aspects
of the phenomenon, the slight violation of the duality relation is not a serious setback to our
analysis.
Equation (259) indicates that as pc is approached, the range of ω for which our
criterion is valid shrinks.
The eﬀective capacitance Ce can also be computed. In order to do this, we retain the second
term of Eq. (255) and write
ge ∼gc
n−1

m=0
[a1 + b1α(m)] ∼gcan
1

1 + iωC
gc
b1
a1
An −1
A −1

,
(1179)
so that
Ce ≡1
ω Im(ge) ∼C(∆p)−s ,
(1180)
which implies that the eﬀective capacitance of the composite diverges at pc. Equation (261) is
a general result which will be discussed in more detail in Section 6.5.
A similar analysis can be carried out in the insulating regime, p < pc. In this case the
probability ﬂows to p = 0, and therefore ge must be calculated from the iterated value of g2.
The eﬀective capacitance Ce is still given by Eq. (261), while
ge ∼ω2C2
gc
|∆p|−(µ+2s) .
(1181)
The PSRG approach can also be used for computing the complex conductance in the frequency
region above ωc where, |∆pµ+s| ≪ωC/gc < 1. Within the linearized approximation, the two
conductances never become equal since g1 remains real while g2 remains imaginary. However,
one may estimate the number of iterations for the completely non-linear map [Eq. (261)] to
reach α = 1, which is the number of iterations n for which |α(n)| ∼1. Equation (254) predicts
this value of n to be, n ∼−ln(ωC/gc)/ ln(A), and therefore,
ge ∼an
1gc ∼gc
ωC
gc
µ/(µ+s)
,
(1182)
which, when used in Eq. (261), yields
Ce ∼C
ωC
gc
−s/(µ+s)
.
(1183)
379

We should keep in mind that the values of the exponents µ and s that are to be used in these
equations are those that are predicted by the PSRG method, namely, µ ≃1.17 and s ≃1.34.
However, as shown in Section 6.5, the general forms of Eqs. (261)-(264) agree completely with
the scaling properties of ge and Ce. Note also that ge is, in general, a complex quantity, so that
the eﬀective conductance of the network is actually the real part of ge.
As discussed in Section 5.11, a distinct advantage of such PSRG methods is that, not only
can they be used for estimating the eﬀective properties of a system near pc, but also away from
pc. To do this, one starts with speciﬁc values of g1 = gc, g2 = iωC, and p, and iterates the
non-linear recursion relations (249). The eﬀective conductivity ge is the limiting value of the
iteration process. Figure 6.19 presents typical results obtained by this method.
6.4.4 Eﬀective-medium approximation
The EMA can also be used for estimating the eﬀective dielectric constant, or the eﬀective
complex conductance ge. With a binary distribution, f(g) = pδ(g −g1) + (1 −p)δ(g −g2), and
g1 = gc, Eq. (5.57) [or Eq. (25) in the limits λ = 0 and Z = 4] predicts that
ge = gc[x + (x2 + α)1/2] ,
(1184)
where x = (p −1/2)(1 −α). The EMA predicts equations similar to (261) and (262), except
that, as discussed in Chapter 5, it also predicts that, µ = s = 1. Moreover, the EMA is exact
in the limits p = 0 and 1. As p →0, the EMA predicts that
ge = iωC

1 + 2p1 −α
1 + α

+ O(p2) ,
(1185)
while in the limit p →1,
ge = gc

1 −2q1 −α
1 + α

+ O(q2) .
(1186)
The PSRG approach discussed above produces the same types of results for p = 0 and 1,
except that, unlike the EMA, it is not exact in these limits.
An advatange of the EMA,
especially when one deals with complex conductances, is that, it can be used with ease with
any conductance distribution, whereas if the conductance distribution is anything but a simple
binary distribution, the computations become very complicated, if any method other than the
EMA is used.
A more general EMA for a two-phase material was suggested by Norris et al. (1985), and is
as follows. Suppose that ε1 and ε2 are the complex dielectric constants of the two components
380

of the material, and let p1 and p2 = 1 −p1 be their respective volume fractions. As usual,
we must specify the shape of the inclusion that is inserted in the eﬀective medium, in order
to compute the material’s eﬀective dielectric constant self-consistently. We take the shapes
to be ellipsoids that are randomly distributed in space. We also assume that each phase has
only one particular shape, and that the shape is the same for both phases. The ellipsoids are
characterized by depolarization coeﬃcients Ai > 0 (see Section, 4.6.2.4), with i = 1, 2, and 3 for
the three major axes of the ellipsoid with

i Ai = 1. For example, for d−dimensional spheres,
Ai = 1/d. If Di = Ai/(1 −Ai), then the EMA equation is given by
3

i=1

p1(εe −ε1)
(1 −Ai)εe + Aiε1
+
p2(εe −ε2)
(1 −Ai)εe + Aiε2

= 0 ,
(1187)
or
3

i=1
1
(1 −Ai)2

p1
εe + Diε1
+
p2
ε3 + Diε2

=
3

i=1
1
1 −Ai
.
(1188)
Therefore, the EMA equation, (268) or (269), provides us with the ﬂexibility of studying the
complex dielectric constant of a variety of two-phase disordered materials.
In general, the EMA equation has six roots. If the two dielectric constants are real, all the
roots are also real, with ﬁve of them being negative, and the remaining sixth, which is positive,
representing the EMA prediction for the eﬀective dielectric constant. If ε2 →0, three of the
roots are also zero. Whether the physical root is one of three zeros depends upon the volume
fraction p2 ≡p. For p smaller than the percolation threshold pc, the physical root is larger than
zero, but for p ≥pc the physical root is zero.
6.4.5 Random walk model
If one applies an external electric ﬁeld to a polymeric or glassy solid, the induced polarization
decays slowly with time when the external ﬁeld is removed. Williams and Watts (1970) and
Williams et al. (1971) found empirically that the probability φ(t) that a polar molecule, or a
polar group on a polymer molecule, has not relaxed by the time t after the external ﬁeld has
been removed is given by
φ(t) = exp[−(t/t0)β] ,
(1189)
where t0 is a characteristic time, and β an exponent, both of which depend on the temperature
and the nature of the material. For simple materials one has β = 1, which is often referred to
as the Debye model, while for glasses and polymers, 0 < β < 1.
381

The function φ(t) can be directly related to the frequency-dependent dielectric constant
ε(ω) of the material based on the linear response theory. Let us write down a most general
linear equation that relates the electric displacement D(t) to the electric ﬁeld E(t):
D(t) = E(t) +
 ∞
0
f(t′)E(t −t′)dt′ .
(1190)
Gaussian units have been utilized to ensure that D and E have the same units. For an oscillating
ﬁeld one has, D(t) = eiωtD and E(t) = eiωtE, so that, D = ε(ω)E, where
ε(ω) = 1 +
 ∞
0
e−iωtf(t)dt .
(1191)
In the static limit we have
εs = 1 +
 ∞
0
f(t)dt ,
(1192)
so that
ε(ω) −1
εs −1
=
 ∞
0
e−iωtf(t)
2 ∞
0
f(t′)dt′
3−1
dt .
(1193)
One now interprets
f(t)
2 ∞
0
f(t′)dt′
3−1
= −dφ(t)
dt
(1194)
as a probability density function for the relaxation time, so that φ(t) is the probability that
relaxation has not occured up to time t.
Since in an actual experiment the electric ﬁeld
is supplied by a capacitor of ﬁnite size, the measured real part of the dielectric constant is
increased by an additive contribution, so that we can write
ε(ω) −ε∞
εs −ε∞
= −
 ∞
0
e−iωtdφ(t)
dt
dt .
(1195)
It remains to determine the form of φ(t).
To do this, models have been developed in
which the solid has been assumed to contain defects that move in the material (as a result
of, for example, thermal disturbances). The dipoles are assumed to be frozen in place. The
defects keep moving in the solid until they reach the vicinity of a dipole where they stop their
motion. Among the many theoretical attempts for understanding this phenomenon, the work of
Shlesinger and Montroll (1984) and Shlesinger (1984) is particularly appealing. They modelled
the defects’ motion in terms of N non-interacting continuous-time random walkers moving on a
lattice. A walker stops when it encounters the dipole, at which time relaxation occurs at once.
Suppose that the lattice contains Ω+ 1 sites, one of which (s0, say) is occupied by the dipole.
382

The concentration of the defects is c = N/Ω, and we are interested in the joint limit N →∞
and Ω→∞.
Suppose that the walkers (defects) are at time t = 0 at sites s1, s2, · · · , sN, randomly and
independently of each other. Then, the probability that the walker (defect), initially at site sj,
reaches site s0 (the dipole) in the time interval (0, t) is given by
1
Ω

sj̸=s0
 t
0 f(s0|sj, t′)dt′ ,
and therefore, the probability φ(t) of the dipole surviving for at least a time t before a walker
(defect) reaches it is given by
φ(t) =
N

j=1
⎡
⎣1 −1
Ω

sj̸=s0
 t
0 f(s0|sj, t′)dt′
⎤
⎦=
⎡
⎣1 −1
Ω

s̸=s0
 t
0 f(s0|s, t′)dt′
⎤
⎦
N
.
(1196)
Taking the limit N →∞and Ω→∞, and recalling that, (1 + x/N)N →ex, we ﬁnd that
f(t) = exp[−ch(t)] ,
(1197)
with
h(t) =

s̸=s0
 t
0 f(s0|s, t′)dt′ .
(1198)
The basic idea behind this method of deriving an expression for f(t) [and hence φ(t)] has been
utilized by many authors; see Scher et al. (1991) for a review.
Suppose now that Pn(s|s0) is the probability that the walker is at site s after n steps, given
that the walk started at s0. A generating function for Pn(s|s0) is deﬁned by
Pn(s|s0; ξ) =
∞

n=0
Pn(s|s0)ξn .
(1199)
It can then be shown that, if ψ(t) is the waiting time density for the continuous-time random
walkers, then, ˜h(λ), the Laplace transform of h(t), is given by
˜h(λ) =
1
λP[s0|s0; ˜ψ(λ)]

1
1 −˜ψ(λ) −P[s0|s0; ˜ψ(λ)]

.
(1200)
Therefore, the long-time behavior of h(t), and hence φ(t), can now be extracted by the usual
Tauberian Theorem arguments.
Let us examine the transient random walks, i.e., those for which the probability R of return
to the origin of the walk is less than 1 (Hughes, 1995) which, for unbiased nearest-neighbor
383

walks, happen on periodic lattices of dimensionality d ≥3. For such walks, R = 1 −(ZG0)−1,
where G0 is the value of the Green function Gik, deﬁned by Eq. (5), at the origin and in the
limit λ = 0. For the three 3D cubic lattices, Gik is given by Eqs. (17), (19) and (20). For the
simple-cubic lattice, G0 = 1
2ISC = 0.25273, for the BCC lattice, G0 = 1
8IBCC = 0.17415, and for
the FCC lattice, G0 = 1
4IFCC = 0.11206, where ISC, IBCC and IFCC are the Watson integrals
given by Eqs. (130), (131) and (132). In such cases (Hughes, 1995), P[s0|s0; ˜ψ(λ)] →(1−R)−1
as λ →0 (i.e., in the limit of long times), so that
˜h(λ) ∼
1 −R
λ[1 −˜ψ(λ)] .
(1201)
Let us now consider two limiting cases.
(1) Suppose that the mean waiting time ⟨t⟩between the steps of the CTRWs is ﬁnite. Then,
1 −˜ψ(λ) ∼λ⟨t⟩,
(1202)
so that, ˜h(λ) ∼(1 −R)/(⟨t⟩λ2), and therefore
h(t) ∼(1 −R) t
⟨t⟩.
(1203)
This is the classical Debye relaxation with an exponential decay of φ(t), i.e., β = 1.
(2) If the mean waiting time between the steps of the CTRWs is inﬁnite, then
1 −˜ψ(λ) ∼Aλβ ,
as λ →0 ,
(1204)
where A is a constant. In this case one obtains the Williams-Watts law,
h(t) ∼(1 −R)tβ
AΓ(1 + β) .
(1205)
Therefore, an elegant CTRW model yields the classical William-Watts law for dielectric
relaxation of glasses and polymers, but also aﬀords us the ﬂexibility of predicting a variety
of other interesting possible behaviors. Bendler and Shlesinger (1985) extended these ideas to
obtain the temperature-dependence of the dielectric relaxation. Other random walk models for
this phenomenon were discussed by Niklasson (1989), to whom the interested reader is referred.
6.5 Scaling Propertries of AC Conductivity and Dielectric Constant
We now focus on the scaling properties of the AC conductivity and dielectric constant near
the percolation threshold pc. Some of such properties were already discussed in the previous
384

sections and also in Section 2.7.2, but in the present section we derive and discuss them in
a more systematic way. Consider ﬁrst a regular or random network in which each bond has
a conductance a with probability p or a conductance b with probability q = 1 −p. Using
dimensional analysis, it is not diﬃcult to show that the eﬀective conductivity ge of the network
is a homogeneous function and takes on the following form
ge(p, a, b) = aF(p, h) ,
(1206)
where h = b/a can assume any complex or (positive) real value. By deﬁnition, the eﬀective
conductivity ge is invariant under the interchange of a and b, and therefore we must have
ge(p, a, b) = ge(q, b, a)
(1207)
F(p, h) = hF(q, 1/h) .
(1208)
We already described and discussed in Chapters 2 and 5 two limiting cases of the system,
namely, the case in which b = 0 and a is ﬁnite (conductor-insulator mixtures), and one in which
a = ∞and b is ﬁnite (conductor-superconductor mixtures). Both cases correspond to h = 0,
and therefore the point h = 0 at p = pc is particularly important. Let us therefore focus our
attention on this singular point. In the critical region near this point, where both |p −pc| and
h are small, the eﬀective conductivity ge follows the following scaling equation,
ge ∼a|p −pc|µΦ±(h|p −pc|−µ−s) ,
(1209)
where the critical exponents µ and s were already deﬁned and described in Chapter 2 [Eqs.
(2.36) and (2.37)], and Φ+ and Φ−are two homogeneous functions corresponding, respectively,
to the regions above and below pc. Equation (290) was ﬁrst proposed by Efros and Shklovskii
(1976) and Straley (1976). Similar to the exponents µ and s, Φ± are universal and do not
depend on the network type once h and p −pc are ﬁxed.
For any ﬁxed and non-zero value of h, the eﬀective conductivity ge has a smooth dependence
on p −pc. This becomes clearer if we rewrite Eq. (290) in the following form
ge ∼ahµ/(µ+s)Ψ

|p −pc|h−1/(µ+s)
,
(1210)
where Ψ(x) = xµΦ+(x−µ−s) = (−x)µΦ−[(−x)−µ−s].
The scaling function Ψ(x) possesses a
Taylor expansion around x = 0, Ψ(x) = Ψ(0) + Ψ1x + Ψ2x2 + · · ·, implying that at p = pc and
385

for |h| ≪1 we must have
ge ∼Ψ(0)(asbµ)1/(µ+s) ≡Ψ(0)ahu ,
(1211)
where
u =
µ
µ + s .
(1212)
Equation (292) implies that Φ−(x) ∼Φ+(x) ∼Ψ(0)xu, which demonstrates clearly the homo-
geneous nature of these scaling functions. Many other properties of these scaling functions were
discussed by Clerc et al. (1990), to whom the interested reader is referred.
These results can now be used for understanding the AC conductivity and dielectric constant
of a disordered material near pc. Among the earliest studies of this problem we should mention
those of Efros and Shklovskii (1976), and Bergman and Imry (1977). A comprehensive review
of this subject is provided by Clerc et al. (1990). Here, we only summarize the main theoretical
results, and discuss their experimental veriﬁcation. To understand the AC conductivity and
dielectric constant near pc, we view a and b as complex conductances. Consider a percolation
network in which a fraction p of the bonds are purely resistive, while the remaining fraction
q = 1 −p of the bonds behave as perfect capacitors. Thus we set
a = 1
R ,
b = iCω ,
(1213)
where R is the resistance of the bond, and C is the capacitance. The conductance ratio h is
then given by
h = iω
ω0
,
(1214)
where ω0 = 1/(RC). In the static limit (ω = 0) the capacitors become insulators, and the
model reduces to the usual conductor-insulator composite already described and discussed in
Chapters 2 and 5. It is clear that this model is the resistor-capacitor (R −C) model already
described above. One key result is that if p is close to pc, the R −C model possesses scaling
properties, and the eﬀective conductivity ge(p, ω) of the material satisﬁes the following scaling
equation
ge(p, ω) ∼1
R|p −pc|µΦ±
iω
ω0
|p −pc|−µ−s

,
(1215)
which follows directly from Eq. (290). An immediate consequence of Eq. (296) is the existence
of a time scale ts that diverges as p is approached from both sides
ts ∼ω−1
0 |p −pc|−(µ+s) .
(1216)
386

The signiﬁcance of ts is discussed below.
We now deﬁne the frequency-dependent complex dielectric constant εe(p, ω) of the system
by the following equation
εe(p, ω) = ge(p, ω)
iω
,
(1217)
which is a generalisation of the usual static dielectric constant ε0. It is not diﬃcult to show that
for an insulating dielectric material ge ≃iωε0 as ω →0. By using general analytic properties of
the eﬀective complex dielectric constant of a disordered composite, Bergman and Imry (1977)
derived the following scaling relations which can be obtained from Eqs. (296) and (298):
ge(pc, ω) ∼ωx ,
(1218)
which was already mentioned above [see, for example, Eqs. (193) and (212)], and
εe(pc, ω) ∼ω−y ,
(1219)
where the exponents x and y are supposed to satisfy the following relation
x + y = 1 .
(1220)
Equation (301) is a direct consequence of the fact that a complex conductivity is an analytic
function of iω. Bergman and Imry (1977) argued that the main contribution to the AC prop-
erties is due to polarization eﬀects between the percolation clusters in the disordered material,
based on which they proposed that
x =
µ
µ + s ,
(1221)
y =
s
µ + s ,
(1222)
so that in 2D where µ = s, one has x = y = 1/2. Gefen et al. (1983), on the other hand,
who studied anomalous diﬀusion on percolation clusters (see Section 6.1.9), argued that the
anomalous nature of diﬀusion and the fractal morphology of percolation clusters at length scales
up to ξp, the correlation length of percolation, dominate the contributions to the AC properties,
and proposed instead that
x =
µ
ν(2 + θ) ,
(1223)
y = 2ν −β
ν(2 + θ) ,
(1224)
387

which also satisfy Eq. (301), where θ = (µ −β)/ν, with β, µ and ν being usual percolation
exponents. We discuss the experimental veriﬁcation of these equations shortly.
An important consequence of Eq. (296) is the power-law behavior of ε0 in the critical region
near pc. Using the Taylor expansion of Φ± discussed above, it is not diﬃcult to show that
ε0 ∼A±C|p −pc|−s ,
(1225)
that is, the static dielectric constant diverges as pc is approached from both sides, and the critical
exponent that characterizes this divergence is s, the critical exponent of a percolation network
of conductors-superconductors described and discussed in Chapters 2 and 5. This spectacular
result was ﬁrst derived by Efros and Shklovskii (1976). In Eq. (306), A+ and A−represent
the amplitudes of εs above and below pc, respectively. Although Eq. (306) is supposed to be
valid in the static limit, ω = 0, its validity actually extends to higher frequencies as long as
ω ≪1/ts, where ts is given by Eq. (297). An important property of the amplitudes A± is that
their ratio A+/A−is a universal quantity, independent of the microscopic details of the system.
If we now write ge(p, ω) in the usual way, namely, ge = g′ + ig′′ = iωεe(p, ω) = iω(ε′ −iε′′),
then a loss angle δ is deﬁned by
tan δ = g′
g′′ = ε′′
ε′ ,
(1226)
and it is clear that 0 ≤δ ≤π.
Consider now the eﬀective conductivity of the R −C model at pc. According to Eq. (292),
ge(p, ω) ∼Ψ(0)
R
iω
ω0
u
,
(1227)
so that at pc the loss angle δc is universal and is given by
δc = π
2 (1 −u) = π
2
s
µ + s .
(1228)
Although Eq. (309) is supposed to be valid exactly at p = pc, it is important to remember that
the universal loss angle δc can also be measured in a broad frequency range if |p −pc| is small
enough, which implies that 1/ts ≪ω ≪ω0. Note that, since for any 2D system, s = µ, we
must have δc = π/4, another remarkable result.
These scaling properties have been veriﬁed by extensive numerical simulations of 2D net-
works. In particular, Bug et al. (1986) and Laugier et al. (1986b) used a transfer-matrix
method described in Section 5.14.2 and bond percolation networks to verify the existence of
388

the universal scaling functions Φ±, and Koss and Stroud (1987) did the same for site percolation
networks. We now discuss experimental veriﬁcation of these predictions.
6.5.1 Comparison with the experimental data
One of the earliest experimental studies of dielectric properties was reported by Castner
et al. (1975), who measured the static dielectric constant of n−type silicon. Approximately
1200 ˚A of Au was evaporated on thin-disk samples which consisted of two imperfect Schottky
barriers with thin (about 5-10 ˚A thick) oxide barriers bounding from 0.2 to 1.0 mm of bulk
semiconductor. They varied the concentration cd of the donor, and showed that the static
dielectric constant εs diverges as cd approaches a critical concentration from the insulating
side. Although percolation was not mentioned in this work, the divergence of εs was a clear
indication of the percolation transition indicated by Eq. (306). To explain these data, Dubrov
et al. (1976) developed a model in which each bond of a percolation network represented a
300 Ωresistor and a 0.5 µF capacitor in parallel. Starting with a square network with only
the capacitors, they added resistors to the network at randomly-selected bonds, and made
measurements of the conductivity of the system at very low frequencies. As the fraction of the
resistors approached the percolation threshold of the network, the dielectric constant of the
network appeared to diverge. Dubrov et al. did write down a scaling law for this divergence
that was similar to Eq. (306), but did not attempt to estimate the associated critical exponent,
since the network that was used was too small.
A deﬁnitive experimental study of dielectric constant of composite materials near pc was
undertaken by Grannan et al. (1981) who used small spherical Ag particles randomly dis-
tributed in a non-conducting KCl host. The metal particles were prepared by evaporating Ag
in the presence of argon gas and a small amount of oxygen. The particles were polydisperse,
their sizes varied between 60 ˚A and 600 ˚A, and the overall size distribution was log-normal.
The composite was prepared by mixing a given amount of Ag particles and KCl powder and
by compressing the mixture into a solid pellet under high pressure. The dielectric constant
of the sample was measured by a capacitance bridge operated at 1 kHz. Figure 6.20 presents
their data as a function of the volume fraction of Ag. The dielectric constant appears to di-
verge at pc ≃0.2, somewhat larger than φc ≃0.15 −0.17 for 3D percolating continua. Figure
6.21 presents a logarithmic plot of the same data, all of which appear to lie on a straight line
389

indicating that ε0 diverges as pc is approached with an exponent s ≃0.73 ± 0.01, in perfect
agreement with the 3D percolation prediction, s ≃0.735 (see Table 2.3). Similar results were
obtained by Nicklasson and Grangvist (1984).
Laibowitz and Gefen (1984) prepared a series of samples of Au ﬁlms on Si3N4 with varying
thicknesses which were selected to span the entire metal–insulator transition. Insulating samples
below pc were easily achievable indicating that the contribution of tunneling and hopping to the
conductivity can be ignored in the more metallic samples. The AC conductivity and capacitance
(which is proportional to the dielectric constant) of the samples were then measured. When
the data were ﬁtted to Eqs. (299) and (300), they yielded x ≃0.95 ± 0.05 and y ≃0.13 ± 0.05,
roughly satisfying Eq. (301). On the other hand, Eqs. (302) and (303) predict that for 2D
percolation systems (where µ = s) x = y = 1/2, while Eqs. (304) and (305) predict that
x ≃0.34 and y ≃0.66, neither of which agree with the experimental data.
Song et al. (1986) measured the AC electrical properties of a powder mixture of amorphous
carbon and Teﬂon in the frequency range 10 Hz to 13 MHz. Because of its stability, Teﬂon
powder was used as the insulating component. Moreover, the low conductivity of amorphous
carbon powder made it possible to easily observe the change of the conductivity as a function of
p. The samples were prepared by mixing the carbon and Teﬂon powder to the desired volume
fraction and were then compressed. The electrical conductivity ge was then measured near pc
and was found to follow ge ∼(p −pc)µ with µ ≃1.85 ± 0.25, in good agreement with 3D
percolation conductivity (see Table 2.3). The static dielectric constant was found to diverge
according to Eq. (306) with s ≃0.68±0.05, in good agreement with value of s for 3D percolation
(see Table 2.3). The AC conductivity and the frequency-dependent dielectric constant were also
measured, from which it was estimated that x ≃0.86± 0.06 and y ≃0.12± 0.04, which neither
agree with Eqs. (302) and (303) which predict that x ≃0.73 and y ≃0.27, nor with the
predictions of Eqs. (304) and (305), x ≃0.60 and y ≃0.4.
Partial resolution of the disagreement between theory and experimental data was provided
by Hundley and Zettl (1988). They measured the AC conductivity and dielectric constant of
thin Au ﬁlms, similar to those of Laibowitz and Gefen (1984), but extended the frequency
range to between 100 Hz and 1 GHz, and also considered both high (> 100 K) and low (< 50
K) temperatures. Their measurements, shown in Figure 6.22 for 300 K, indicated that in the
intermediate frequency regime, corresponding to that of Laibowitz and Gefen and Song et al.,
390

x ≃1.0 and y ≃0, in agreement with their data, while at higher frequencies x ≃0.32, in
excellent agreement with the prediction of Eq. (304) for 2D systems, x ≃0.34, and y ≃0.8, in
rough agreement with the prediction of Eq. (305) for 2D systems, y ≃0.64. The reasonable
agreement between the results of Hundley and Zettl (1988) at high temperatures and the
predictions of Eqs. (304) and (305) indicates that, at such temperatures the fractal morphology
of percolation clusters plays an important role in the AC conductivity and dielectric properties
of disordered materials at high frequencies. However, the data of Hundley and Zettl at low
temperatures were in complete disagreement with the predictions of Eqs. (302) and (303), and
also with those of (304) and (305).
On the other hand, measurements of Chen and Johnson (1990) for the AC conductivity
and dielectric constant of composites of nickel particles in a matrix of polypropylene, and silver
particles in potassium chloride yielded results which seem to favor Eqs. (302) and (303). For
example, for the Ag-KCl composite, x ≃0.77 and y ≃0.22 were obtained which satify Eq.
(301), and are in good agreement with the predictions of Eqs. (302) and (303) for 3D systems,
x ≃0.73 and y ≃0.27. Yoon and Lee (1990) fabricated 2D lattices on an aluminum ﬁlm by
using a computer-controlled x −y plotter, and measured the AC conductivity and dielectric
constant of the composite for frequencies between 10 Hz and 1 MHz. Their measurements near
the percolation threshold pc yielded x ≃1 and y ≃0, in agreement with the data of Laibowitz
and Gefen (1986) and satisfying Eq. (301), but in complete disagreement with the predictions
of Eqs. (302) and (303), and also those of (304) and (305). Measurements of McLachlan et al.
(1994) in a composite of NbC-KCl were also inconclusive.
To rectify this unsatisfactory situation, Sarychev and Brouers (1994) proposed that below
pc tunneling eﬀects are important and must be taken into account. To do so, they proposed a
modiﬁed scaling equation given by
ge(p) ∼a|p −pc|µΦ±
⎡
⎣T ν(d−2)
0
|p −pc|µ+m
exp(−pcT )
⎤
⎦,
(1229)
which should be compared with Eq. (290). Here T is called the renormalized tunneling constant
which follows a power-law near pc given by
T ∼T0|p −pc|n ,
(1230)
where n = (d −2)ν + s. The exponent m is given by, m = ν(d −2)[ν(d −2) + s −1]. For
T ≫1, the scaling function Φ behaves as Φ ∝1 for p > pc, and Φ ∝gt|p −pc|µ for p < pc,
391

where gt is the tunneling conductivity. Thus, above pc, where tunneling is unimportant, one
recovers Eq. (290). For the frequency-dependent conductivity ge(p, ω), Sarychev and Brouers
(1994) proposed that
ge(p, ω) ∼ge(p)Ψ
−iωεs(p)
ge(p)

,
(1231)
Although computer simulations of Sarychev and Brouers seem to support these new scaling
representation of the conductivity, we are not aware of their experimental veriﬁcation, since it
would in fact be diﬃcult to experimentally test the tunneling hypothesis.
Laugier et al.
(1986a) measured the AC conductivity of random mixtures of glass mi-
crobeads, a varying fraction of them having their surface coated with silver which, however,
did not change appreciably the density of the powder. The average diameter of the beads was
about 30 µm, and the frequencies used were as large as 50 MHz. The loss angle δ was also
measured. Equation (309) predicts that at pc one must have tan δc ≃0.45, while the measured
value was tan δc ≃0.5, in good agreement with the prediction.
Another class of disordered materials for which the AC conductivity and dielectric prop-
erties have been measured is microemulsions, which are thermodynamically stable, isotropic,
and transparent dispersions of two immiscible ﬂuids, such as water and oil, with one or more
surfactants that are surface active. A water in oil (W/O) microemulsion usually consists of
small spherical water droplets surrounded by a monomolecular layer of surfactant and dispersed
in a continuous oil phase. The W/O microemulsions usually have a small macroscopic conduc-
tivity, because the water droplets are separated by the surfactant layers and the oil phase.
Ionic surfactants can donate an ion to the water phase and increase its conductivity. If the
volume fraction φw of the water phase exceeds a critical value φwc, the conductivity increases
sharply, usually by several orders of magnitudes, indicating that the charge carriers are able
to move along connected paths in the microemulsion, and hence the conductivity transition in
microemulsions is a percolation phenomenon.
van Dijk (1985) was probably the ﬁrst to measure the dielectric constant of a microemulsion
at φwc. His material was a microemulsion of AOT, sodium di-2-ethylhexylsulfosuccinate (an
anionic surfactant with a SO−
3 head group and two hydrocarbon tails), water and iso-octane.
The volume fraction of water was varied by changing the amount of oil and keeping the molar
ratio water/AOT constant.
Figure 6.23 presents the data which exhibit a sharp peak for
the dielectric constant and a dramatic increase for the electrical conductivity, both at φwc, in
392

agreement with the predictions of percolation. Moreover, according to Eq. (309), at φwc the
loss angle δc is independent of frequency ω, and van Dijk’s data indicated that, over more than
one order of magnitude variations in ω, this is indeed the case. From his data one obtains
u ≃0.62 ± 0.02, reasonably close to the percolation prediction u = µ/(µ + s) ≃0.73. More
extensive measurements of the properties of the same microemulsions were reported by van
Dijk et al. (1986).
Moha-Ouchane et al. (1987), Clarkson and Smedley (1988), and Peyrelasse et al. (1988) all
measured the AC conductivity and dielectric constant of the same microemulsion that van Dijk
et al. used. However, they found that the static dielectric constant diverges at φwc with an
exponent s′ ≃1.6, signiﬁcantly larger than s ≃0.73, predicted by Eq. (306). Grest et al. (1986)
argued that in microemulsions one must take into account the eﬀect of cluster diﬀusion that
rearranges the system and dynamically changes its structure. Thus, they proposed a dynamic
percolation model in which the percolation clusters diﬀuse randomly in the network. Based on
this argument and their model, Grest et al. (1986) proposed that the exponent s, characterizing
the divergence of the static dielectric constant, must be replaced by s′ = 2ν −β, where β and
ν are the usual percolation exponents. However, even s′ ≃1.35 (using the 3D values of β and
ν; see Table 2.3) seems to be in disagreement with the measurements of Moha-Ouchane et al.,
Clarkson and Smedley, and Peyrelasse et al. To our knowledge, the disagreement between these
measurement and the predictions based on the exponent s or s′ remains unexplained.
On the other hand, Bhattacharye et al. (1985), who measured the static dielectric constant
εs of a W/O microemulsion above pc, reported that εs diverges as pc is approached from above
[hence providing the ﬁrst experimental verﬁcation of Eq. (306) for p > pc] with an exponent
s′ ≃1.3, which is in excellent agreement with the theoretical prediction of Grest et al. (1986).
Bhattacharya et al. (1985) also reported that the value of the exponent y deﬁned by Eq. (300)
to be, y ≃0.29 ± 0.04, which is in good agreement with the prediction of Eq. (303). For
an extensive discussion of various properties of microemulsion systems, and the comparison
between experimental data and the predictions of percolation see Clarkson (1988).
6.6 Vibrational Density of States: The Scalar Approximation
In Chapters 7 and 8 we will describe useful models for investigating mechanical properties
of heterogeneous materials. In particular, Chapter 8 will describe the discrete models that are
393

based on a lattice or network representation of a material in which each bond is an elastic
element, such as a spring. How such a model comes about (that is, how it is derived from the
classical equations of linear elasticity) will be described in Chapter 8, but for now we take this
model for granted in order to describe an important property of solids, namely, their vibrational
density of states.
Consider a L × L × L network (or a L × L in 2D) in which each site contains a particle of
mass m, with the nearest-neighbor particles connected to each other by springs. Suppose that
ui = (uix, uiy, uiz) is the vector displacement of the particle at i. Then, the equation of motion
for this particle at time t is given by Newton’s law
m∂2ui
∂t2 =

F ,
(1232)
where F represents any force that acts on the particle. If the springs that connect the particles
are harmonic and can only tolerate stretching forces, then
 F is given by the Hook’s law (force
= spring constant × displacement), and the equation of motion becomes
m∂2ui
∂t2 =

<ij>
kij [(uj −ui) · Rij] ,
(1233)
where Rij is a unit vector from i to j, kij is the spring (elastic) constant of the bond between
i and j, and the sum is over all the bonds ij that are connected to i. For simplicity we take
m = 1. We can of course include other types of forces in Eq. (314), e.g., the bond-bending or
angle changing forces that will be described in Chapters 8 and 9.
The standard method of analyzing Eq. (313) for vibrational properties is to assume, ui =
Ai exp(−iωt), where ω is the frequency of the vibrations, and Ai is an unknown vector to be
determined. Substituting this expression into Eq. (313) yields a set of n = L3 simultaneous
linear equations for the Ai’s which has n positive eigenvalues ω2
1, ω2
2, · · ·, and n eigenvectors
Ae1, Ae2, · · · Then, the solution to ui is given by
ui = Re[

j
cjAej exp(−iωjt)] ,
(1234)
where cj are complex numbers that must be determined from the initial conditions. Having
determined ui’s, we obtain all the vibrational properties of the system.
One of the most
important such properties is N(ω), the vibrational density of states (DOS). N(ω)dω is the
number of vibrational modes with a frequency between ω and ω+dω. The DOS is an important
394

quantity for obtaining the speciﬁc heat and thermal conductivity of a solid material (see below),
as well as the study of proteins and other biomaterials (see, for example, Elber and Karplus,
1986), and can itself be computed from the distribution of the eigenmodes ωi. However, under
certain conditions there is a much simpler way of computing the DOS which is as follows.
Consider, for example, Eq. (314) and take its Fourier transform
−ω2ˆui =

<ij>
kij[(ˆuj −ˆui) · Rij] .
(1235)
If we write Eq. (316) for one principal direction of the network, say x, we obtain
−ω2ˆuix =

<ij>
kij(ˆujx −ˆuix) .
(1236)
Consider now the diﬀusion equation in discretized form, Eq. (1), the Laplace transform of
which, ignoring the term that arises from the initial condition, is given by
λ ˜Pi(λ) =

<ij>
Wij( ˜Pj −˜Pi) ,
(1237)
which is completely similar to Eq. (318), we see that they are very similar: The role of ˆuix is
played by ˜Pi, and that of −ω2 by λ. We may then interpret λ as the frequency for diﬀusion,
just as ω is the frequency for vibrations. This analogy was ﬁrst exploited by Alexander et al.
(1978) for computing the DOS. We refer to this method of computing the DOS as the scalar
approximation. Alexander et al. (1978) showed that the numerical diﬀerence between the DOS
computed based on Eq. (313) and one based on the scalar approximation is of the order of the
time derivatives.
To compute the DOS, we consider ⟨P0(t)⟩, the average probability that a random walker
(diﬀusant) that is moving in the network is at the origin (of its motion) at time t, where
the averaging is taken over all the initial positions of the walker. For classical diﬀusion in
macroscopically-homogeneous materials, i.e., when the random walk fractal dimension is Dw =
2 and the fractal dimension Df of the system is the same as the Euclidean dimensionality d,
Eq. (90) predicts that
⟨P0(t)⟩∼t−d/2 .
(1238)
This equation can also be derived by observing that
⟨P0(t)⟩= [⟨S(t)⟩]−1 ,
(1239)
395

where ⟨S(t)⟩is the mean number of distinct sites visited by the diﬀusant (random walker)
at time t. It can be shown (Hughes, 1995) that for diﬀusion in macroscopically-homogeneous
media, ⟨S(t)⟩∼td/2, which, together with Eq.
(320), immediately yields Eq.
(319).
As
discussed above, N(ω) should in principle be computed from the solution of the vector model,
Eq. (313) or (314). However, it is not diﬃcult to show that, if the scalar approximation can
be used for computing the DOS, then N(ω) and ⟨P0(t)⟩are related to each other through the
following equation (Alexander et al., 1978)
N(ω) = −2ω
π Im⟨˜P0(−ω2)⟩.
(1240)
If we take the Laplace transform of Eq. (319) and substitute the result into Eq. (321), we
obtain
N(ω) ∼ωd−1 ,
(1241)
which is the well-known result for the DOS in the Debye regime.
Equation (322) is valid
at low frequencies (i.e., long wavelengths or large length scales over which the material is
homogeneous), such that ω < ωco, where ωco is a cutoﬀor crossover frequency to be described
below. It can be shown that, in the Debye regime, even if we compute N(ω) based on the
solution of the true vectorial model of the system [that is, Eq. (313)], it would still follow
Eq. (322), provided that the material is macroscopically homogeneous. The general form of
Eq. (322) is also consistent with this claim: There is nothing in this equation that indicates
whether N(ω) was computed from the solution of Eq. (313) or (318); only the dimensionality
d of the material has entered this equation. Vibrational states in homogeneous materials that
are expressed by Eq. (322), are usually called phonons. Later in this chapter, we will discuss
the precise conditions under which the scalar approximation can be used for computing the
DOS.
6.6.1 Numerical computation
Before embarking on describing analytical theories of the DOS, let us ﬁrst discuss how this
quantity is computed numerically. This is an important issue, since in order to compute the
DOS of a highly heterogeneous material one must use a large network, and therefore direct
use of an equation such as (315), the solution of which requires computing the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors of a very large matrix, becomes problematic. What makes the problem diﬃcult
396

is that, for systems without any particular symmetry properties (such as disordered materials
considered here), it is necessary to determine all the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the dy-
namical matrix that arises in such problems, if one is to take the direct route of computing the
DOS via Eq. (315).
There are many methods for numerical computation of the DOS (see, for example, Williams
and Maris, 1985; Lam and Bao, 1985; Li et al., 1988, 1990; Beniot et al., 1992; Royer et al.,
1992). Let us substitute λ = −ω2 into Eq. (318) and rewrite it as
ω2 ˜Pi = −zi ˜Pi +

j
Wij ˜Pj ,
(1242)
where zi =

j Wij. Equation (323) is completely analogous to the tight-binding Hamiltonian
of the electronic problem (see also Chapter 9 of Volume II) for which a considerable amount
of analytical as well as numerical work has been carried out which can be used for the present
problem. The most straightforward method for computing the eigenvalues and eigenvectors is
to simply diagonalize the dynamical matrix that arises in Eq. (323). However, only relatively
small matrices can be diagonalized directly, implying that only small networks can be used
with this method.
Here we describe an eﬃcient method which is called the Strum sequence method (Li et al.,
1988, 1990). It consists of an application of Gaussian elimination on the consecutive columns or
rows of the matrix (ω2U −H), where U is the identity matrix, and the matrix H is such that,
Hij = Wij −ziδij. The Gaussian elimination of the matrix’s entries is continued until the matrix
is reduced to a triangular form. The DOS is then computed by counting the fractional number of
positive elements in the main diagonal of the reduced triangular matrix. The main advantages
of this method are the economy of storage and its speed. In this method the computing time
for an M × N network scales as M 3(d−1) × N, hence allowing one to use very long strips with
length N of a considerable width M. Moreover, this method does not require matrix inversion.
Later in this chapter we will brieﬂy discuss large-scale numerical computations of the DOS of
disordered materials, including those modelled by percolation networks.
6.6.2 Eﬀective-medium approximation
The DOS of a disordered network can be computed by an EMA (Derrida et al., 1984;
Sahimi, 1984b). Consider the Green function Gij deﬁned by Eq. (5). To calculate the DOS we
397

only need to know the value of the Green function at the origin, since the Laplace transform
⟨˜P0(λ)⟩of ⟨P0(t)⟩is given by
˜P0(λ) = −G00(λ)
˜We(λ) ,
(1243)
where ˜We(λ) is the (Laplace-transformed) eﬀective transition rate, the computation of which
was described in detail in Section 6.1. Since ˜We(λ) can be computed by an EMA via Eq. (25),
and because the Green functions Gij, and in particular G00, are known for many lattices, we
can calculate ˜P0(λ) and hence the DOS via Eq. (321). For simplicity, let us denote G00(λ) by
G(λ). We consider a network with percolation-type disorder in which a fraction p of the bonds
have a non-zero transition rates, while the remaining bonds are inactive.
As discussed in detail in Section 6.1, as p →p+
c , ˜We(λ) remains ﬁnite and, furthermore,
to leading order varies linearly with p −pc, so that ˜We(λ)/(p −pc) also remains ﬁnite as the
percolation threshold pc is approached.
Thus, if p −pc ≪1, we must have ˜We(λ) ≫1.
Therefore, we expand G(λ) in powers of λ/ ˜We(λ) to obtain
G(λ) = −1
2Iw(d) + 1
λ

λ
˜We(λ)
d/2
I(d) + · · ·
(1244)
which is valid for 2 < d < 4, where d, the dimensionality of the system, has been treated as a
continuous variable. Here Iw is the Watson integral which, for the 3D cubic lattices, is given
by Eqs. (130)-(132), and
I(d) = cosec π[(d −2)/2]
2dΓ(d/2)πd/2−1
.
(1245)
If we restrict our attention to a percolation-type distribution of the transition rates, f(W) =
(1 −p)δ(0) + pδ(W −1), then the EMA, Eq. (25), yields
˜We(λ) = p + γαα
1 + γαα
,
(1246)
where γαα = −1/d−λG(λ)/[d ˜We(λ)], as deﬁned earlier by Eq. (26), if we restrict our attention
to d−dimensional simple-cubic lattices. We now substitute the expansion for G(λ) into Eq.
(25) to compute γαα and then insert the result into Eq. (327). Let ˜We(λ) = A1 +A2 +· · · Then
A1 =
d
2(d −1)
⎧
⎨
⎩p −pc +

(p −pc)2 + 2λ(d −1)Iw(d)
d2
1/2⎫
⎬
⎭,
(1247)
and
A2 = −A1I(d)
d
 λ
A1
d/2 
1 −1
d + λIw(d)
2dA2
1
−1
.
(1248)
398

Therefore, the following equation is obtained for ⟨˜P0(λ)⟩
⟨˜P0(λ)⟩= Iw(d)
2A1
⎧
⎨
⎩1 + I(d)
d
 λ
A1
d/2 d −1
d

A1 + λIw(d)
2dA1
−1/2⎫
⎬
⎭,
(1249)
which is the EMA prediction for ⟨˜P0(λ)⟩. According to Eq. (330), ⟨˜P0(λ)⟩becomes singular at
a crossover value λco of the Laplace transform variable λ given by
λco = −
d2
2(d −1)Iw(d)(p −pc)2 .
(1250)
Therefore, if we set λ = −ω2 and use Eq. (321), we obtain our ﬁnal expression for the DOS,
valid for 2 < d < 4:
N(ω) = 2
πω
1
2Iw(d)(d −1)
1/2
(ω2 −ω2
co)1/2 ,
ω > ωco ,
2 < d < 4 ,
(1251)
where ω2
co = −λco. According to Eq. (332), in the vicinity of (or at ) pc, the DOS approaches
a constant for ω ≫ωco (when ωco/ω ≪1). As discussed in the next section, Alexander and
Orbach (1982) showed that, within the scalar approximation, the vibrational DOS of a material
at its percolation threshold pc, or at p > pc but over length scales that are smaller than ξp, the
correlation length of percolation, is given by
N(ω) ∼ωDs−1 ,
ω ≫ωco ,
(1252)
where
Ds = 2 Df
Dw
(1253)
is the spectral or fracton dimension of the network, with Df and Dw being, respectively, the
fractal dimension of the sample-spanning cluster and its random walk fractal dimension. For
the sample-spanning percolation cluster, the latter quantity is given by Eq. (82). Equations
(333) and (334) are actually supposed to be more general and valid for any material that has
a fractal morphology with a fractal dimension Df and a random walk fractal dimension Dw.
Since according to the EMA, near or at pc the DOS N(ω) approaches a constant for ω ≫ωco,
the implication is that the EMA predicts the spectral dimension to be
Ds = 1 ,
2 < d < 4 .
(1254)
Since the EMA also predicts that, for the sample-spanning cluster at pc, one has, Dw = 4 [see
the discussion after Eq. (73)], we also obtain an EMA estimate for the fractal dimension Df
399

of the sample-spanning percolation cluster, Df = 2 for 2 < d < 4. This estimate should be
compared with the numerical estimate of Df in 3D, namely, Df ≃2.53 (see Table 2.3).
As discussed in Sections 6.1.9 and 6.1.10, for the times t ≫tco transport in percolation
networks is diﬀusive, while it is anomalous or fractal for t ≪tco, where tco is the crossover
time. It should be clear to the reader that the time scale tco is nothing but |λ−1
co |, and therefore
according to the EMA, Eq. (331),
tco = 2d−2(d −1)Iw(d)(p −pc)−2 ,
(1255)
which should be compared with the (correct) prediction of the scaling theory, Eq. (83). For
the DOS the role of tco is playmed by the crossover frequency ωco deﬁned above. Hence, for
ω < ωco and p > pc, the mechanical vibrations of disordered materials, modelled by a percolation
network, are of ordinary, Debye type, and are given by Eq. (322), whereas for ω ≫ωco they
are described by a new regime characterized by Eq. (332). All the results presented so far were
derived independently and simultaneously by Derrida et al. (1984) and Sahimi (1984b).
It is not diﬃcult to calculate within an EMA the DOS for the Debye or phonon regime. In
this case, the leading-order term for the expansion of ˜We(λ) [which is of the order of (p−pc)−1]
does not contribute much, and therefore one must calculate the higher-order terms which, when
done, results in
N(ω) = 2
πJdωd−1 sin[(d/2 −1)π]
⎧
⎨
⎩1 −ω2
2d

1 −1
d −ω2Iw(d)
2d
−1⎫
⎬
⎭,
(1256)
where
Jd =
Sd
(2π)d
 ∞
0
xd−1
x2(x2 + 1)dx ,
(1257)
with Sd = 2(π)d/2/Γ(d/2) being the surface of the unit sphere in d dimensions.
One can also develop an expansion similar to one that led to Eq. (332) for 1 < d < 2. One
then ﬁnds (Derrida et al., 1984) that at p = pc, or for p > pc and ω > ωco,
N(ω) ∼ω(d−2)/(d+2) ,
1 < d < 2 ,
(1258)
which, when compared with Eq. (333), implies that
Ds =
2d
d + 2 ,
1 < d < 2 .
(1259)
400

The corresponding equation for the Debye or phonon regime is
N(ω) ∼
ωd−1
(p −pc)d/2 ,
ω ≪ωco ,
(1260)
which, in terms of frequency-dependence of the DOS, is similar to Eq. (322), conﬁrming once
again that the EMA can produce exact results, or provide very accurate approximations, for
low-dimensional systems.
Figure 6.24 presents the vibrational DOS for the simple-cubic lattice with percolation disor-
der, as a function of frequency ω, for several values of p, the fraction of the active bonds. There
is a qualitative change in the DOS at the crossover frequency ωco. For ω > ωco the DOS quickly
approaches a constant value, consistent with our discussion above. For ω ≪ωco the DOS varies
linearly with the frequency, whereas in the vicinity of ωco (but below it) it appears to depend
on the frequency quadratically, consistent again with Eq. (322). Moreover, ωco appears to vary
linearly with p−pc, which is again consistent with Eq. (331) (with λco = −ω2
co). Similar results
are obtained for 2D systems (Derrida et al., 1994; Sahimi, 1984b).
6.6.3 Cluster eﬀective-medium approximation
All of the EMA predictions for the DOS are in qualitative agreement with the predictions
of the scaling theory discussed in the next section, and also with direct numerical simulations
(see, for example, Lam and Bao, 1985; Li et al., 1990; see also below) which again indicates
the usefulness of the EMA. However, these predictions are not very accurate near pc, which
is the region where the EMA begins to be inaccurate. An obvious method of improving the
performance of the EMA for predicting the DOS near pc is to use higher order or cluster EMAs,
since according to Eq. (324) the more accurate ˜We(λ) is computed, the more accurate the EMA
predictions for the DOS will be. The development of such cluster EMAs was already discussed
in detail in Section 5.6.7 for the steady-state transport. The same approach is utilized here
for the present problem. As Eq. (7) indicates, the “current” ˜Qα is written in terms of the
ﬂuctuations in the normalized conductivities ∆α of the bond α itself and those of the other
bonds β that surround α. Thus, instead of embedding in the eﬀective medium only a single
bond α with a random conductance, which would result in Eq. (25), one can embed a cluster
of such bonds in the eﬀective-medium network, calculate ˜Qα for a reference bond α within the
cluster, and insist that the average ⟨˜Qα⟩must be equal to ˜Q0
α, with the averaging performed
with respect to the statistical distribution of the conductances (transition rates) of all the bonds
401

in the cluster. In practice, one must apply Eq. (7) to every bond of the cluster and calculate
˜Qα numerically. Since near pc the currents and potentials in the active bonds are correlated, a
cluster of bonds includes to some extent the eﬀect of such correlations, and thus one may obtain
more accurate predictions for ˜We(λ) and hence the DOS. To obtain rapid convergence (with
increasing the cluster size) to those for an inﬁnite system, it is important to choose a suitably
symmetric cluster of bonds with transition rates that are allowed to be randomly distributed.
Clearly, the cluster EMA must provide more accurate predictions than the EMA itself. Since
the EMA predicts the exact bond percolation threshold of the square network, pc = 1/2, any
cluster EMA must also do so. Since in 3D the EMA predicts pc = 1/3 for the simple-cubic
network, any cluster EMA must provide a more accurate prediction for pc, closer to the true
value, pc ≃0.249. For steady-state transport this method has been used by many with various
degrees of success. For the present problem, Sahimi (1984b) carried out such cluster EMA
computations, the results of which are also presented in Figure 6.24. The cluster that was used
was the smallest of such clusters that can preserve all the symmetry properties of the lattice
(see Chapter 5, Figure 5.8). The resulting cluster EMA predicts a bond-percolation threshold,
pc ≃0.316 for the simple-cubic lattice, an improvement of about 10% over the EMA prediction.
As Figure 6.24 indicates, it is clear that the cluster EMA does improve the predictions of the
EMA. In particular, while the EMA cannot provide any physical predictions for p < 1/3, the
present cluster EMA can do so for p ≥0.316. However, the convergence of the predictions of
the cluster EMA to the true values is relatively slow.
6.6.4 Scaling theory: Phonons versus fractons
The spectral dimension Ds (also called the fracton dimension) is a key quantity for describing
the dynamical properties of materials with a fractal morphology, in addition to the fractal
dimension Df which describes how the mass of the material depends on its length scale. As
discussed Section in 6.1.12, the spectral dimension Ds characterizes anomalous diﬀusion in a
fractal material. We already mentioned that Alexander and Orbach (1982) mapped the problem
of anomalous diﬀusion onto the problem of vibrational DOS using the scalar approximation,
and showed that the basic properties of vibrations of fractal materials, such as their DOS,
the dispersion relation, and localization, are all characterized by the spectral dimension Ds.
Rammal and Toulouse (1983) derived Ds via a scaling analysis, and showed that various random
402

walk properties, such as the probability P0(t) of return to the origin, and the mean number
⟨S(t)⟩of the visited sites, are governed by the spectral dimension. In this section we describe
and discuss the works of Alexander and Orbach (1982) and Rammal and Toulouse (1983), and
then consider their implications. Our discussions follow rather closely the comprehensive review
of Nakayama et al. (1994).
The linear size of a region of sites visited by a diﬀusant or random walker is, R = ⟨R2(t)⟩1/2 ∼
t1/Dw ∼t1/(2+θ), where, θ = (µ −β)/ν, as usual. The mean number ⟨S(t)⟩of sites visited is
therefore proportional to the volume RDf of the region, ⟨S(t)⟩∼RDf, and thus (Rammal and
Toulouse, 1983)
⟨S(t)⟩∼tDs/2 .
(1261)
As long as Ds ≤2, Eq. (330) is valid. Therefore,
⟨P0(t)⟩∼t−Ds/2 ,
(1262)
with Ds < 2 given by Eq. (334). In view of Eq. (321), we immediately obtain Eq. (333),
the main prediction of Alexander and Orbach (1982). In analogy with the usual Debye DOS,
Eq. (322), Alexander and Orbach (1982) called the related excitations “fractons” and Ds the
“fracton dimension.” Ds was called the “spectral dimension” by Rammal and Toulouse (1983)
because it represents the DOS for the vibrational excitation spectrum. We use the terminology
of Rammal and Toulouse throughout this book.
Rammal and Toulouse (1983) also derived the vibrational DOS of fractal materials using
a ﬁnite-size scaling approach (see Section 2.9 for a detailed discussion of this approach). The
essense of their analysis is as follows. Consider a fractal material of linear size L with fractal
dimension Df. Its DOS per particle at the lowest frequency ∆ω is deﬁned by
N(∆ω, L) = (LDf∆ω)−1 .
(1263)
If we assume that the dispersion relation for ∆ω is given by
∆ω ∼L−a ,
(1264)
where a is an exponent to be determined, we can eliminate L from Eq. (344) to obtain
N(∆ω) ∼∆ωDf/a−1 .
(1265)
403

The explicit expression for the exponent a is obtained from Eqs.
(73) and (82) with the
mappings, t →1/∆ω2 (see above) and ⟨R2(t)⟩1/2 →L. We thus obtain
L ∼∆ω−2/Dw .
(1266)
Therefore
a = 2ν + µ −β
2ν
= Dw
2
= Df
Ds
.
(1267)
Since the material is fractal and self-similar, ∆ω can be replaced by an arbitrary frequency ω,
and therefore we recover Eq. (333). Equation (346) also deﬁnes a “dispersion relation,”
ω ∼[L(ω)]−Df/Ds .
(1268)
Immediately after the invention of Ds and the discussion of its importance to dynamics of
fractal materials, it was observed that, if we use the most accurate estimates of the percolation
exponents µ, β and ν (see Table 2.3), then Ds = 2Df/Dw = 2(νd −β)/(2ν + µ −β) takes on
a numerical value which is almost independent of the dimensionality d of the system, and is
given by
Ds ≃4/3 ,
all d .
In fact, Ds = 4/3 was conjectured by some to be an exact result, which would have been
a signiﬁcant result, because it would have led us to an exact scaling relation between the
dynamical exponent µ and the static exponents ν and β. However, it is now established that
Ds = 4/3 is not an exact result, albeit 4/3 is a very accurate approximate estimate of the true
value of the spectral dimension Ds.
6.6.5 Characteristics of fractons
Let us now discuss important properties of the fracton DOS and compare them with the
corresponding Debye DOS.
6.6.5.1 Localization
Rammal and Toulouse (1983) showed that, for Ds < 2, fractons are spatially localized. To
prove this, they used the βL function, deﬁned by Abrahams et al. (1979) in their scaling theory
of localization:
g(L) ∼LβL ,
(1269)
404

where g(L) is the dimensionless conductance of a sample of linear size L, i.e., a quantity of the
order of geLd−2, where ge is the conductivity of the sample. It is clear that the wave functions
should be localized when βL ≤0. In the case of percolating networks, ge ∼L−µ/ν [see Eq.
(2.54)]. Therefore, the conductance is given by
g(L) ∼L−µ/ν+d−2 ∼LDf(Ds−2)/Ds ,
(1270)
and therefore, βL = Df(Ds −2)/Ds. Since as discussed above, for materials with percolation
disorder, Ds ≃4/3, βL < 0 for all Euclidean dimensionalities d. We should note that for
length scales, L ≫ξp, Ds →d, implying that for d = 3, for example, βL may well be positive,
indicating delocalized vibrations (phonons).
At length scales L ≪ξp one has, Ds ≃4/3,
leading to negative values of βL and localization. Therefore, the crossover can be thought of as
a dimensionality change in so far as localization is concerned.
6.6.5.2 Dispersion relation
The dispersion relation is given by Eq. (349). To derive this equation (Alexander, 1989),
consider the vibrations of an isolated fractal cluster of linear size L. Although high-frequency
modes of the vibrations are not aﬀected by a change in the boundary conditions, the low-
frequency modes will disappear from the spectrum. The crossover between the two regimes
occurs at a frequency ωL, such that
L ∼Λ(ωL),
(1271)
where Λ(ω) is the wavelength. The integrated spectral weight of the missing low-frequency
modes is lumped together in the center-of-mass degrees of freedom of the disconnected cluster
(for example, the rotational and translational modes). Since this quantity cannot depend on L
and ωL, one must have
[Λ(ωL)]Df
 ωL
0
ωDs−1dω ∼ΛDfωDs
L = constant ,
(1272)
and thus one has a dispersion relation for an arbitrary frequency ω:
ω ∼Λ(ω)−Df/Ds .
(1273)
If we apply the argument of a frequency-dependent length scale Λ(ω) to waves in a ﬁnite
homogeneous material (for which Df = Ds = d), we obtain a length scale Λ = 2πvs/ω = λ,
405

where vs is the sound velocity, because the lowest frequency of a cluster of linear size Λ is
ω(Λ) = 2πvs/Λ.
6.6.5.3 Crossover from phonons to fractons
If the wavelengths λ of excited modes in a disordered material with percolation disorder and
p > pc are larger than the percolation correlation length ξp(p), the material is homogeneous
on this scale and its vibrational excitations are weakly-localized phonons. This is because the
scattering is determined by the square of the mass-density ﬂuctuations, averaged over regions
of volume λd. Hence, even if the short-range disorder is strong, the eﬀective strength of the
disorder for phonons with λ ≫ξp is very weak. If the characteristic length λ of waves becomes
of the order of, or shorter than, ξp, the fractality of the material’s morphology becomes relevant.
Thus, there must be a crossover in the nature of the vibrational excitations when λ(ωco) ∼ξp.
From Eq. (349) or (354) the crossover frequency ωco is given by
ωco ∼(p −pc)νDf/Ds .
(1274)
By substituting ωco = vs(p)k (at k ∼1/ξp) in Eq. (355), the p−dependence of the phonon
velocity becomes
vs(p) ∼(p −pc)νDf/Ds−ν ∼(p −pc)(µ−β)/2 .
(1275)
Because µ −β > 0 for all d, vs(p) →0 as p →pc. Thus, the results for the DOS can be
summarized as
N(ω) ∼
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
ωd−1/[vs(p)]d ,
ω ≪ωco ,
ωDs−1 ,
ω ≫ωco ,
(1276)
while the dispersion relations become
ω ∼
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
vs(p)k ,
ω ≪ωco ,
kDf/Ds ,
ω ≫ωco ,
(1277)
where, for ω ≫ωco, k does not represent the wave number due to the lack of the translational
symmetry of the system, but rather it describes the inverse of the characteristic length Λ−1.
6.6.6 Large-scale computer simulations
In this section, we brieﬂy discuss the results of computer simulations for the vibrational
DOS of large percolation networks using the scalar approximation. These data provide rich
406

insight into the fracton dynamics. We also discuss the characteristic properties of fracton wave
functions. The numerical results based on a vector model, Eq. (313), will be discussed in
Chapter 9.
Grest and Webman (1984) were the ﬁrst to calculate the DOS of 3D percolation networks,
using the scalar approximation and the standard diagonalization method (see above) for a cubic
lattice of linear size L = 18, which was of suﬃcient accuracy, except at low frequencies. For
larger systems and lower frequencies, they used a recursive technique (Lam and Bao, 1985) to
calculate the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues. Although, as discussed above, there are consid-
erable diﬃculties in simulating large-scale systems, the situation since the early work of Grest
and Webman has been changing as array-processing supercomputers have become available.
Several numerical methods have been reported to overcome such diﬃculties, and have been
used for investigating fracton dynamics. The list of these papers is too long to be given here;
the interested reader should consult the comprehensive review of Nakayama et al. (1994). Here,
we only consider a few of more notable of such eﬀorts and discuss their results.
Li et al. (1990) used the Sturm sequence method described above to calculate the integrated
DOS. They treated a square lattice of size 160×640 with site-percolation disorder. Royer et al.
(1992) used the spectral moment method, which allowed them to work with a very large square
network of linear size L = 1415. Yakubo and Nakayama (1989) and Yakubo et al. (1990a,b)
succeeded in treating systems with N = 106 sites, using the forced oscillator method of Williams
and Maris (1985). This algorithm is based on the principle that a complex mechanical system,
when driven by a periodic external force of frequency ω, will respond with a large amplitude in
those eigenmodes that are close to this frequency. Yakubo et al. (1991) formulated a method
for judging the accuracy of the calculated eigenmodes and eigenfrequencies. Their algorithm
can be readily vectorized for use on an array-processing supercomputer, and has the great
advantage that it becomes more accurate with increasing number of the sites.
Figure 6.25 presents the DOS at the site percolation threshold pc ≃0.593 of the square
network (Yakubo and Nakayama, 1989). The line through the solid circles has a slope of about
1/3, which holds even in the low-frequency region, because the lower cutoﬀfrequency ωL (see
above) is determined from the ﬁnite size of the clusters. The DOS of a square network with
site-percolation disorder and a fraction p = 0.67 of the active sites is shown in Figure 6.26
(Yakubo and Nakayama, 1989). These results indicate that the frequency dependence of the
407

DOS is characterized by two regimes. In the frequency region ωco ≪ω ≪1, the DOS is closely
proportional to ω1/3, in agreement with Eq. (333) with Ds ≃4/3. The crossover frequency ωco
corresponds to the mode of wavelength λ which is equal to the percolation correlation length
ξp. Therefore, for ω ≪ωco the DOS should be given by the conventional Debye law, Eq. (322),
and N(ω) ∼ωDs−1 for ω ≫ωco The simulation results shown in Figures 6.25 and 6.26 are
consistent with this view, because the frequency dependence of the DOS for low frequencies
(ω ≪ωco) clearly follows N(ω) ∼ω, appropriate foe d = 2. Vibrational excitations in this
frequency regime behave as phonons. The region in the vicinity of ωco is the crossover region
between phonons and fractons. Note that the DOS varies smoothly in this region, exhibiting
neither a notable steepness nor a hump in the vicinity of ωco. Moreover, the DOS does not
follow the ω1/3 law above ω ∼1.
The absence of the hump in the crossover region has also been demonstrated in the case
of 3D percolation networks (Yakubo and Nakayama, 1989). The DOS of a site-percolation
simple-cubic network (pc ≃0.3116) at p = 0.4, computed with a 70×70×70 network, is shown
in Figure 6.27. For this value of p the phonon-fracton crossover frequency ωco is about 0.1.
The DOS in the frequency region 0.1 < ω < 1 is again proportional to ω1/3, while in the low-
frequency regime (ω ≪0.1) it follows the Debye law, N(ω) ∼ω2. The sharp peak at ω = 1 is
attributed to vibrational modes of a single site connected by a single bond to a relatively rigid
part of the network. It is clear that no steepness or hump of the DOS exists in the crossover
region in the vicinity of ωco. The behavior of the DOS at the phonon-fracton crossover has
been determined from mean-ﬁeld treatments (Loring and Mukamel, 1986; Korzhenevskii and
Luzhkov, 1991). In particular, Loring and Mukamel (1986) suggested a smooth transition of
the DOS at the phonon-fracton crossover, in contrast to the prediction of the EMA discussed
above, or that of the scaling theory (Aharony et al., 1985). We will come back to this point
later.
The DOS calculated with bond-percolation networks exhibits some interesting diﬀerences
with site-percolation networks discussed above.
The diﬀerence is due to the fact that site
percolation generates short-range correlations that are absent in bond percolation, since in the
former case a bond is active only if its end sites are also active. In Figure 6.28 the DOS for the
square and simple-cubic lattices at their bond-percolation thresholds (see Table 2.2) are shown.
For the 2D case, a spectral dimension Ds ≃1.33 ± 0.01 is obtained, whereas for the 3D case,
408

Ds ≃1.31 ± 0.02 is estimated.
6.6.7 Missing modes
The above simulation results for the DOS, using the scalar approximation, conﬁrm that the
crossover between the phonon and fracton regimes is smooth, with no visible accumulation of
modes or a hump in the DOS around the crossover frequency ωco, which is in agreement with
neither the early predictions based on scaling considerations (Alexander et al., 1983; Aharony
et al., 1985), nor with arguments based on the EMA computations described above, nor with
the numerical results obtained by a recursion technique (Lam and Bao, 1985). The scaling
considerations attributed the origin of this hump to the fact that the crossover from fractons to
phonons is accompanied by missing modes in the normalized DOS. We now discuss the possible
whereabouts of these missing modes, following the work of Yakubo et al. (1990a,b).
We ﬁrst discuss the early scaling arguments about missing modes. In this analysis, the
DOS of a percolation network above pc was characterized by two regimes: The fracton DOS,
Nfr(ω, p) ∼ωDs−1, for high frequencies (ω > ωco ), and the phonon DOS, Nph(ω, p) ∼ωd−1, for
low frequencies (ω < ωco). Assuming strict similarity in the fractal regime, we may expect that,
Nfr(ω, p) = Nfr(ω, pc), where the DOS per particle is normalized,
 ∞
0 N(ω)dω = 1. Because
d > Ds, we have Nph < Nfr, when Nfr is extrapolated to phonon frequencies. As the integration
of Nfr(ω, pc) is normalized to unity, some modes must be missing for N(ω, p > pc), in view of
the existence of the phonon regime, and therefore their spectral weight must be recovered
somewhere. It was argued that the most reasonable place for their accumulation is near ωco,
leading to a hump in the DOS and to a corresponding hump in the low-temperature speciﬁc
heat. This is shown in Figure 6.29. However, a hump is seen neither in the simulations of the
phonon-fracton crossover nor in actual experiments on silica aerogels (see below).
To explain the absence of a hump in the crossover region, we write a scaling equation for
the DOS of a percolation network for p > pc:
N(ω, p) = A(p)ωDs−1F(ω/ωco) .
(1278)
The crossover frequency ωco is deﬁned as the intercept of the asymptotic phonon and fracton
lines in a double-logarithmic plot of the DOS versus ω (Alexander et al., 1983). As discussed
above, for an inﬁnite percolation network, the phonon-fracton crossover frequency follows a
power law given by, ωco = c(p−pc)νDf/Ds [see Eq. (349) if we replace L(ω) with the correlation
409

length ξp ∼(p −pc)−ν], where c is a constant. The scaling function F(x) has the properties
that, F(x) ∼1 for x ≫1 and F(x) ∼xd−Ds for x ≪1. Equation (359) yields a prediction for
the p−dependence of N(ω, p) in the phonon regime:
N(ω) ∼A(p)(p −pc)νDf(Ds−d)/Dsωd−1 ,
(1279)
which should be compared with Eq. (341), the EMA prediction. In fact, if we plot the simu-
lation results as N(ω)/ω1/3 versus ω, the validity of Eq. (360) in the phonon-fracton crossover
region is conﬁrmed. This is shown in Figure 6.30 where the data for the DOS of a square
network at its site percolation threshold, pc ≃0.593, and also for p = 0.67, are shown. Because
the ordinate in this ﬁgure is N(ω)/ω1/3, the fracton regime corresponds to a horizontal line of
height A(p). One can clearly discern the two regimes in Figure 6.30, with a crossover frequency
ωco ∼0.1. It is clear that these results do not exhibit any noticeable hump near ωco. Further-
more, the magnitude of the DOS in the fracton regime is diﬀerent for the two values of p, hence
invalidating Nfr(ω, p) = Nfr(ω, pc) assumed by Aharony et al. (1985), and also justifying the
non-trivial dependence of A(p) on p. We also note that the two curves of Figure 6.30 could not
possibly be made to scale towards the upper end of the fracton range, where modes missing
from the low-frequency regime could have possibly accumulated.
The above considerations can now be put on a ﬁrm theoretical foundation. The discus-
sion is facilitated by adopting the nodes-links-blobs model of the sample-spanning percola-
tion clusters described in Section 2.6.3. The typical separation distance between the nodes
that form the macroscopically-homogeneous network is about the correlation length ξp. With
Nph = A(p)ω/ω2/3
co , and Nfr = A(p)ω1/3, the number of missing modes Mph associated with the
phonon regime is given by
Mph ∼
 ωco
0
(Nfr −Nph)dω = 1
4A(p)ωDs
co = 1
4A(p)cDs(p −pc)νDf .
(1280)
From Figure 6.30 one can estimate that, A(p) ∼A(pc) ≃0.4 and c ≃13, and therefore,
Mph ∼3(p −pc)νDf. The fraction of occupied sites on the sample-spanning cluster is simply
XA(p), the accessible fraction deﬁned in Section 2.6.1.
Near pc one has [see Eq.
(2.30)],
XA(p) = X0(p −pc)β, with β = 5/36 (see Table 2.3) and X0 ≃1.53 for the square network.
Hence, the actual number of missing modes within the correlation area is ξ2
pXA(p)Mph ∼3ξ2
0X0,
where ξ0 is deﬁned by ξp = ξ0|p −pc|−ν, independent of p −pc. Using ξ0 ≃0.95 for the square
410

network, the number of missing modes is of the order of unity. Thus, there is only one missing
mode per area. One should also note that, for any non-negligible ξp, the number Mph relative
to the total number of modes with ω < ωco is very small compared to one.
However, the more important quantity is the number of missing modes Mfr, produced by
the depression of the fracton density from A(pc) to A(p). If we ignore the hump near the
high-frequency cutoﬀ, Mfr will be given by
Mfr ≃
 ωD
0
[Nfr(ω, pc) −Nfr(ω, p)]dω = 1 −A(p)
A(pc) ,
(1281)
where for the second equality we used Eq. (360) and the fact that,
 ∞
0 Nfr(ω, pc)dω = 1. Here
ωD is the Debye frequency associated with the phonon velocity of sound vs. The numerical
results for Mfr on a square network and for several values of p were obtained by Yakubo et
al. (1990a) which exhibited critical behavior near pc, Mfr = M0(p −pc)m, with m ≃4/3 and
M0 ≃4.1.
These results can be explained as follows. Within an area ξ2
p, a number of sites have higher
coordination than those in the network at pc. The number of such sites is much larger than the
small number of sites that eventually form the homogeneous system, with their relative density
being 1/ξ2
pXA(p) ∼Mph. One may naively expect the number of these sites to be proportional
to the length of the perimeter, i.e., be proportional to ξd−1
p
. In the case of a percolation cluster,
however, the perimeter at ξp is a fractal of dimension Df −1 with its length being ξ
Df−1
p
.
With the total number of occupied sites within this perimeter being ξ
Df
p , the relative number of
modes rejected to high frequencies is Mfr ∼ξ
Df−1
p
/ξ
Df
p
∼ξ−1
p
∼(p−pc)ν, in agreement with the
results of Yakubo et al. (1991). Both the exponent and the amplitude of Mfr agree well with
that of ξp. Although there is, strictly speaking, no well-deﬁned perimeter at ξp for which the
connectivity of all the sites increases, the concept remains well-deﬁned from an average point
of view. The eﬀect of the higher connectivity is to depress the number of modes throughout
the fracton regime.
6.6.8 Localization properties of fractons
Let us now describe a few important localization properties of fractons.
6.6.8.1 Mode patterns of fractons
411

Yakubo and Nakayama (1989) were the ﬁrst to compute mode patterns of large-scale frac-
tons. They used a square network at its site percolation threshold, pc ≃0.593. If we examine a
cross section of amplitudes of their calculated mode pattern for a single fractor, we see that the
fracton core possesses very clear boundaries for the edges of the excitation, almost of steplike
character, with a long tail in the direction of the weak segments. This is in contrast with the
case of homogeneously extended modes, i.e., phonons, in which the change of their amplitudes is
correlated smoothly over a long distance. Moreover, displacements of the sites in the dead-end
bonds move in phase, while the vibrational amplitudes fall oﬀsharply at their edges. Finally,
the tail of the pattern extends over a very large distance with many phases changes.
6.6.8.2 Ensemble-averaged fractons
Since the pioneering work of Anderson (1958), localization phenomena in disordered mate-
rials, including localization of phonons, photons, and spin waves, have received much attention.
In particular, it was predicted by John et al. (1983) that the vibrational excitations in dis-
ordered materials with dimensionality d ≤2 should always be localized, with the localization
length ξl behaving as ξl ∼exp(l/ω2) for d = 2 and as ξl ∼ω−2 for d = 1.
As already discussed above, Rammal and Toulouse (1983) applied the scaling theory of
localization (Abrahams et al., 1979) to fracton excitations on percolation networks. The key
parameter in their scaling theory is the exponent βL, deﬁned by Eq. (35), which was predicted
to be given by
βL = Df
Ds
(Ds −2) .
(1282)
Because Ds ≃4/3 for percolation in any dimension d, it is clear that fractons are always
localized. In this context, Entin-Wohlman et al. (1985) proposed that the ensemble average of
the fracton wave function Ψ on percolation networks is localized with
⟨Ψfr⟩∼exp

−

r
Λ(ω)
γ
,
(1283)
where Λ(ω) is the frequency-dependent fracton length scale (dispersion or localization), r a
radial distance from the center, and the exponent γ denotes the strength of localization. Many
studies have been carried out for estimating the numerical value of γ, some of which were
discussed in Section 6.2.4.4 where we considered the eﬀect of fractal morphology of a material
on its hopping conductivity.
412

To study the localized nature of fractons, Nakayama et al. (1989) focused on the value of the
exponent γ for the core region of fractons, and carried out computer simulations using a square
network in site percolation in order to determine γ for the cores of the fractons. The core has a
large amplitude around the center of a localized fraction (r ≃Λ). Smoothly varying ensemble-
averaged mode patterns were obtained. The resulting shape of the fracton core was calculated
by averaging over 129 fractons at ω = 0.01.
Their computations yielded γ ≃2.3, larger
than all other numerical estimates. In addition, γ and Λ(ω) were calculated for four diﬀerent
eigenfrequencies, excited on ﬁve independent percolation networks. Their results indicated that
the localization length Λ(ω) depends on frequency as, Λ(ω) ∼ω−0.71, in good agreement with
the theoretical dispersion law, Eq. (349), Λ(ω) ∼ω−Ds/Df, with Ds/Df ≃0.705. However, it
is now understood that this large value of γ applies only to the core region of fractons, and
that two exponents are required to characterize the localized nature of fractons, namely, one
for the core and another one for the tail (Roman et al., 1991). In fact, as discussed in Section
6.2.4.4, the asymptotic value of γ, when the vibrational equations for large percolation clusters
are solved and averaged over many individual fracton modes for each frequency, is γ = 1. Note
that a large crossover regime exists when r ≃Λ, with an eﬀective exponent γ > 1 (which
coincides with the result of Nakayama et al., 1989). However, asymptotically, for r ≫Λ, one
has γ = 1.
Bunde and Roman (1992) presented an analytical explanation for the asymptotic behavior of
fractons. Within the scalar approximation, the envelope function |Ψ(r, ω)| of fractons is related
to P(r, t), the probability of ﬁnding a random walker at position r at time t (see Section 6.1.12):
P(r, t) =
 ∞
0
N(ω)|Ψ(r, ω)| exp(−ω2t)dω ,
(1284)
where N(ω) is the DOS normalized to unity. If we now use Eq. (90) for P(r, t), we obtain,
upon taking the inverse Laplace transform of Eq. (365) using the method of steepest descent,
γ = 1 with Λ(ω)−1 ∼cos(π/Dw)ω2/Dw (Roman et al., 1991).
6.6.9 Comparison with the experimental data
In this section we discuss experimental observations of fracton dynamics and the corre-
sponding DOS. Most of such studies involve aerogels, and therefore we ﬁrst brieﬂy discuss the
preparations and properties these materials.
413

Aerogels are highly porous solid materials that have a very tenuous structure. Their porosity
can be as high as 99%, and for this reason they often have very unusual and unique proper-
ties. For example, they can be prepared in transparent form, they have very small thermal
conductivity, solid-like elasticity and, because of their large porosity, they possess large internal
‘surface area. Because of such unusual properties, they also have a wide-range of applications,
from catalyst supports to thermal insulators and radiators, and detectors of Cerenkov radiation
(see, for example, Fricke, 1988; Brinker and Scherer, 1990). They are prepared by a variety of
methods using diﬀerent materials, but silica aerogels have received the widest attention. They
are produced by hydrolysis of Si(OR)4, where R represents either CH3 or C2H5. A catalyst,
which is either an acid or a base, is also used which strongly inﬂuences the reaction. The degree
of hydrolysis is controlled by the concentration ratio Si(OR)4/H2O, while the ﬁnal density of
the aerogel is controlled by Si(OR)4/ROH. Because of the acid or base catalyst, the pH of
the solution also has a strong eﬀect on the morphology of the gel. Hydrolysis produces -SiOH
groups which then polymerise into -Si-O-Si-. Then, particles start to grow in the liquid solution
and after some time form a gel network. The solvent is then removed to obtain the solid porous
structure. Aerogels are obtained if the solvent is removed at a temperature above its critical
point. Comprehensive discussion of preparation of such gels is given by Courtens et al. (1989)
to whom we refer the interested reader.
Small-angle scattering techniques using neutrons and x-rays are very well-suited for sys-
tematically investigating the morphology of silica aerogels using such techniques. It has been
reported (see, for example, Schaefer and Keefer, 1986; Courtens and Vacher, 1987; Vacher et
al., 1988; Woignier et al., 1990; Posselt et al., 1992) that aerogels may have a fractal mor-
phology. Bourret (1988) and Duval et al. (1992) reported high-resolution electron microscopy
observations that were compatible with a fractal morphology for these materials. Beck et al.
(1989) and Ferri et al. (1991) used light-scattering techniques for characterizing the geometrical
features of these materials.
To characterize the structure of these materials, the structure factor S(q), which describes
the correlation between particles in a cluster, has been measured. This quantity is obtained
from the Fourier transform of the particle density-density correlation function C(r):
S(q) = 1 + N
Ω

Ω|C(r) −1|eiq·rdr ,
(1285)
414

where q = |q| = (4π/λ) sin(θ/2), with λ being the wavelength of the radiation scattered by the
material through an angle θ. If, as discussed in Section 2.3.2, the self-similarity of a material
extends up to a correration length ξs, then the correlation function C(r) will be given by Eq.
(2.15), which is the most convenient, but not unique, choice. For small values of q with qξs ≪l,
S(q) is almost independent of q. When qξs ≫1, one obtains, by substituting Eq. (2.15) into
Eq. (366)
S(q) ∼q−Df ,
(1286)
which is similar to Eq. (2.14) [often S(q) and I(q), the intensity of the scattering, are used
interchangeably]. According to Eq. (367), the value of Df can be deduced from the slope of
the logarithm of the observed corrected intensity versus the logarithm of q.
An example of such scattering measurements is shown in Figure 6.31 for silica aerogels
(Vacher et al., 1988).
The various curves are labeled by the macroscopic density ρ of the
sample. The solid curves represent the best ﬁts to the data, and have been extrapolated into
the particle regime (q > 0.15˚A−1) to emphasize that the ﬁts do not apply in that region,
particularly for the denser samples. Remarkably, the fractal dimension Df ≃2.4 ± 0.03 is
independent of sample density to within experimental accuracy. Furthermore, ξs scales with ρ
as ξs ∼ρ−1.67. The departure of S(q) from the q−Df dependence at large q indicates the presence
of particles with radii of gyration of about a few angstr¨oms. Thus, silica aerogels exhibit three
diﬀerent length-scale regions. (1) At short distances, elementary particles aggregate together to
form clusters with linear size ξs at intermediate sizes, forming a gel by connecting the clusters at
larger distances. (2) At intermediate length scales, the clusters possess fractal morphology. (3)
At large length scales the gel is a homogeneous porous glass; see Courtens and Vacher (1987)
and Kjems (1993) for more details.
Incoherent inelastic neutron scattering experiments measure the amplitude-weighted DOS.
The scattered intensity is given by
I(q, ω) ∼q2ks
ki
n(ω)
ω

i
e−2WiNi(ω),
(1287)
where n(ω) is the Bose-Einstein distribution function, the wave vectors ki and ks correspond
to the incident and scattered neutrons, respectively, and q = ks −ki. Here Ni(ω) and Wi are
the DOS and the Debye-Waller factor characteristic of the ith site, respectively. The sum is
over the diﬀerent sites (the atoms), each of which contributes to the incoherent-scattering with
415

an intensity proportional to the amplitude of vibration at frequency ω. Incoherent neutron
scattering from protons that are chemically bonded to the particle surfaces can be used to
determine the DOS in porous materials (Richter and Passell, 1980). The incoherent inelastic
scattering by aerogels have been measured by several groups, a list of which is too long to
be given here.
Buchenau et al.
(1992) and Kjems (1993) reviewed these experiments and
theirimplications.
The phonon-fracton crossover in silica aerogels has been studied using such inelastic neutron
scattering experiments on back scattering spectrometers (see, for example, Pelous et al., 1989;
Conrad et al., 1990), and also the spin-echo technique (Courtens et al., 1990; Schaefer et
al., 1990). The former technique has the advantage that it enables ones to observe the low-
frequency Debye regime as a constant-intensity level, extending from the elastic line to the
crossover frequency, and thus any excess modes at the phonon-fracton crossover should show
up as a peak in the scattering intensity at that frequency, although no such peak has yet
been observed in the backscattering experiments. Rather, a gradual decrease is observed as
one passes through the crossover regime. The neutron-scattering spin-echo technique has the
advantage that its larger spectral range makes it a suitable tool for determining the spectral
dimension Ds.
The crossover frequencies determined by both backscattering and spin-echo measurements
are generally in good agreement with those determined by Brillouin scattering (see, for example,
Courtens et al., 1987). Some investigations at higher frequencies (Reichenauer et al., 1989;
Vacher et al., 1989) exhibited a change of slope in the log-log plot of the DOS versus ω at
ω = 200 GHz, giving a stronger increase with frequency at higher frequencies, which was
interpreted as a crossover from fractons to vibrational modes within the particles. The eﬀective
slope of the DOS (i.e., Ds −1) was about 1.5, which appears to have originated from the
contributions by both surface (which is proportional to ω) and the bulk (which is proportional
to ω2) particle modes. However, the energy resolution was insuﬄcient to observe the crossover to
the long-wavelength phonon regime. Measurements of Vacher et al. (1989) at higher resolutions
conﬁrmed the existence of the extended fracton region. To further discuss this phenomenon,
one must in fact take into account the eﬀect of the vectorial nature of the vibrational modes,
and therefore we will come back to this issue in Chapter 9.
Neutron-scattering experiments on other disordered materials have also been analyzed in
416

terms of the fracton theory. Freltoft et al. (1987) measured the low-frequency DOS for fractal
silica aggregates by inelastic neutron scattering and estimated their spectral dimensions. Page
et al. (1989) performed inelastic neutron scattering experiments on fumed silica and compared
the results with analogous results for amorphous quartz. They observed no evidence for a hump
in the DOS near the phonon-fracton crossover, nor did they ﬁnd that the temperature and wave-
vector dependence of the intensity was in agreement with simple phonon models. Fontana et
al. (1990) reported on a study of low-frequency vibrational dynamics and electron-vibration
coupling in AgI-doped glasses. By using both time-of-ﬂight neutron-scattering and Raman-
scattering spectroscopies, they were able to determine the vibrational DOS and the frequency
dependence of the electron-vibration coupling. The spectral dimension of this material was
estimated to be about Ds ≃1.4. Zemlyanov et al. (1992) employed inelastic neutron scattering
measurements to study low-frequency vibrational excitations in polymethyl metacrylate. The
measured DOS followed a power law in the energy, with a spectrum corresponding to a spectral
dimension Ds ≃1.8±0.05. Other experimental eﬀorts in this area were reviewed by Nakayama
et al. (1994).
There have also been experimental studies of the dynamical properties of fractal materials
without involving any scattering measurements. For example, Kopelman et al. (1986) mea-
sured the exciton recombination characteristics of naphthalene-doped microporous materials.
This technique yields the spectral dimension of the embedded naphthalene structure, or, equiv-
alently, the eﬀective random-walk fractal dimension Dw of the porous network. Kopelman et al.
obtained 1 ≤Ds ≤2. Fischer et al. (1990) studied the trap-depth distribution of dibenzofuran
singlet excitons and the temperature-dependent energy migration by time-resolved spectroscopy
via synchrotron radiation and two photon laser excitation, and obtained Ds ≃1.14.
6.7 The Dynamical Structure Factor
The dynamical structure factor (DSF) S(q, ω) provides deep insight into the properties of
fractal materials. We thus describe and discuss the theoretical and experimental developments
for the DSF. However, before doing so, we should clarify the meaning of energy width of
fractons. Clearly, one can ﬁnd exact eigenstates of a random medium which would have no
energy width: They would be precisely deﬁned in energy. It is only when one projects them
onto plane-wave states that a lifetime is generated equally in the ω or q space, because of
417

the linear phonon-dispersion relation. Therefore, when we calculate an energy width for the
fractons, it is meant to be that width that a plane wave would experience.
6.7.1 Theoretical analysis
In general, as described in Section 2.3.2, the intensity I(q, ω) of inelastic neutron or light
scattering with a frequency shift ω is proportional to the Fourier transform of the density-density
correlation function, deﬁned by C(r −r′, t) = ⟨ρ(r, t)ρ(r′, 0)⟩, where ρ(r, t) is the density and
⟨·⟩denotes an equilibrium ensemble average. We now introduce the density ﬂuctuation δρ(r, t)
deﬁned by, δρ(r, t) = ρ(r, t)−ρ(r), where ρ(r) is the static density given by, ρ(r) =

i δ(Ri−r),
and Ri is the equilibrium position of the ith atom. The term that contributes only to elastic
scattering (ω = 0) is usually neglected, in which case a closely-related quantity S(q, ω) (see
below) is expressed in terms of the Fourier transform of the density ﬂuctuation,
S(q, ω) = 1
2π

⟨δρ−q(0)δρq(t)⟩exp(−iωt)dt .
(1288)
Because the density ﬂuctuations, δρ(r, t), induced by lattice vibrations with displacements
ui(t), is written as, δρ(r, t) = 
i{δ[Ri + ui(t) −r) −δ(Ri −r]}, the Fourier transform of δρq(t)
becomes
δρq(t) =

i

eiq·[Ri+ui(t)] −e−q·Ri
.
(1289)
Decomposing ui(t) into normal modes, ui =

λ uλ
i e−iωλt, one obtains
δρq(t) =

λ
ρλ(q, t) + O(u2) ,
(1290)
where, δρλ(q, t) = e−iωλtδρλ(q), and
δρλ(q) = −i

i
(q · uλ
i )e−iq·Ri .
(1291)
If we substitute Eq. (371) into (369), we obtain
S(q, ω) =

λ
δ(ω −ωλ)⟨δρλ(q)δρλ(−q)⟩.
(1292)
Hereafter, for convenience, the reduced dynamical structure factor S(q, ω) is used by factoring
out from S(q, ω) the usual mode quantization and the thermal factor [n(ω) + 1]/ω, where n(ω)
is the Bose-Einstein distribution function:
S(q, ω) =
ω
n(ω) + 1S(q, ω) .
(1293)
418

Changing the sum in Eq. (373) into a frequency integral, one has
S(q, ω) = N(ω)⟨δρλ(q)δρλ(−q)⟩λ≃ω ,
(1294)
where ⟨·⟩λ≃ω denotes an average of δρλ(q) over all modes λ with frequencies that are close to
ω. The ﬁnal expression for the intensity of inelastic scattering is then given by,
I(q, ω) ∼n(ω) + 1
ω
N(ω)⟨δρλ(q)δρλ(−q)⟩ω .
(1295)
In principle, S(q, ω) can be calculated analytically from Eq. (373) or (375) if, for a speciﬁc
realization, δρλ(r), or the fracton wave function Ψλ(r), is known. However, because of the com-
plex characteristics of fractons, this is not straightforward. Although certain scaling arguments
have been made (Aharony et al., 1988), and EMA-based computations have been carried out
(Polatsek and Entin-Wohlman, 1988; Entin-Wohlman et al., 1989a; Polatsek et al., 1989), the
explicit form of the DSF is not known, except for some deterministic fractals (Entin-Wohlman
et al., 1989b).
6.7.2 Scaling analysis
Alexander (1989) and Alexander et al. (1993) presented scaling analysis of the asymptotic
behavior of S(q, ω), based on the assumption that the only relevant length scale is Λ(ω), deﬁned
be Eq. (352). The essence of their analysis can be summarized as follows.
If the assumption of Alexander et al. (1993) is valid, then S(q, ω) should have the following
scaling form,
S(q, ω) = qyH[qΛ(ω)] ,
(1296)
where the DSF is a function of q = |q|, due to the spherical symmetry of the averaged structure
of the random networks. The asymptotic behavior of the scaling function H(x) is given by
H(x) ∼
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
xa
x ≪1 ,
x−a′
x ≫1 ,
(1297)
where a and a′ are new scaling exponents to be given shortly. Therefore,
S(q, ω) ∼
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
qy+aω−aDs/Df ,
qΛ(ω) ≪1 ,
qy−a′ω−a′Ds/Df ,
qΛ(ω) ≫1 .
(1298)
419

Consider ﬁrst the limit qΛ ≪1. In this case, Eq. (372) can be expanded as
δρλ(q) ≃−e−iq·Rλ 
i
(q · Riλ)(q · uλ
i ) ,
(1299)
where Riλ = Ri −Rλ and Rλ is the center of the λ−mode fracton. The summand in Eq. (380)
can be written as q·{Riλ⊗uλ
i }·q, where ⊗denotes the dyadic product. If we choose the center
of the fracton at the origin, i.e., if Rλ = 0 and

i Riλ = 0 from the condition,

i uλ
i = 0, then
δρλ(q) ≃−
νλ

i
q · {Riλ ⊗[uλ
i −uλ]} · q
(1300)
where uλ is the amplitude at the center of the λ−mode fracton, and the sum is restricted to
a vibrating region νλ which is the smallest zone for which the boundary condition plays no
signiﬁcant role for the vibration λ. If an average strain tensor ˆeλ is deﬁned by
uλ
i −uλ = ˆeλ · Riλ ,
(1301)
one obtains
δρλ(q) ≃−q ·
 νλ

i
(Riλ ⊗Riλ)ˆeλ

· q .
(1302)
Since in νλ, Riλ ∼O(Λ), the magnitude of δρλ(q) can be estimated as
δρλ ∼q2ΛDf+2ˆeλ ,
(1303)
and therefore,
S(q, ω) ∼N(ω)q4[Λ(ω)]2Df+4⟨(ˆeλ)2⟩ω .
(1304)
Alexander et al. (1993) assumed that, to leading order
[⟨(eλ)2⟩ω]1/2 ∼
u(ω)
[Λ(ω)]σ ,
(1305)
where
u(ω) =
) 1
Nλ
νλ

i
|uλ
i |2
*
ω
1/2
,
(1306)
and Nλ is the number of sites contained in the region νλ of the vibrations [i.e., where ⟨Nλ⟩ω =
ΛDf].
The new exponent σ characterizes an eﬀective length relevant to an average strain.
Due to the normalization condition,

i |uλ
i |2 = 1, the magnitude of u(ω) is proportional to
[Λ(ω)]−Df/2, and from the dispersion relation, Eq. (354), Λ ∼ω−Ds/Df. Therefore,
S(q, ω) ∼q4ω(Ds/Df)(2σ−4)−1 ,
qΛ(ω) ≪1 .
(1307)
420

Thus, the exponents y and a are given by
y = 2σ −Df
Ds
= 2σ −1
2Dw ,
(1308)
a = 4 + Df
Ds
−2σ = 4 + 1
2Dw −2σ .
(1309)
A similar analysis can be carried out for the limit qΛ ≫1. For this case, Alexander et al.
(1993) obtained the following results,
S(q, ω) ∼ωDs−1q2−Df+x ∼N(ω)q2−Df+x ,
qΛ(ω) ≫1 .
(1310)
The exponents a′ and x are now given by
a′ = Df
Ds
(Ds −1) = 1
2Dw(Ds −1) .
(1311)
and
x = 2(σ −1) .
(1312)
To summarize, the scaling analysis predicts, by introducing the averaged strain exponent
σ, that the DSF behaves as
S(q, ω) ∼
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
q4ω(Ds/Df)(2σ−4)−1 ,
qΛ(ω) ≪1 ,
q2σ−DfωDs−1 ,
qΛ(ω) ≫1 .
(1313)
6.7.3 Numerical computation
The dynamical structure factor S(q, ω) has been computed by computer simulations (see,
for example, Nakayama et al., 1994, for a review). We discuss only those computations in which
large networks were utilized, since the early simulations (Montagna et al., 1990; Pilla et al.,
1992; Mazzacurati et al., 1992) used small 2D or 3D percolation networks.
Nakayama and Yakubo (1992) carried out numerical simulations to calculate S(q, ω) using
500×500 square networks at their site percolation threshold, pc ≃0.593, with periodic boundary
conditions. The DSF was calculated by the same numerical technique employed in their work
on calculating the DOS described earlier. They excited several modes simultaneously with
frequencies close to a ﬁxed frequency ω, thereby decreasing slightly the monochromaticity
of the excited modes. Their algorithm then automatically performed the average ⟨·⟩λ≃ω in
421

Eq. (375). Using the mode-mixed displacement patterns {vω
i }, which were normalized by the
condition,

i(vω
i )2 = 1, it is not diﬃcult to see that S(q, ω) is given by
S(q, ω) = N(ω)
)
ij
(q · vω
i )(q · vω
j )e−iq·(Ri−Rj)
*
,
(1314)
where ⟨·⟩indicates an average over realizations of the network. The scalar approximation was
used, whence, q · vω
i = qvω
i . The Fourier transform of the correlation function ⟨vω
i vω
j ⟩was
calculated by assuming a spherically symmetric correlation function, Cω(ri −rj) ≡⟨vω
i vω
j ⟩,
which leads to

ij
⟨vω
i vω
j ⟩exp[−q · (Ri −Rj)] ∼

Rij
RijCω(Rij)J0(qRij) ,
(1315)
where Rij = |ri −rj|, and J0(x) is the zeroth-order Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind.
The results are shown in Figures 6.32 and 6.33, where the former presents the results for
the q−dependence of S(q, ω) for 50 frequencies in the range, 0.005 < ω < 0.5. The q−axis
is actually q/q0(ω), where q0(ω) is the wave number at which S(q, ω) has the maximum value
Smax(ω) for each ﬁxed frequency, while values of S(q, ω) have been rescaled by Smax(ω). The
results exhibit a S(q, ω) for various ω which can be scaled by a single characteristic wave number
q0. In particular, S(q, ω) ∼q4.0±0.1 for q ≪q0, and, S(q, ω) ∼q−1.6±0.1 for q ≫q0. Figure 6.33
presents the results for the ω−dependence of S(q, ω) for 125 values of the wave number in the
range 2π/250 ≤q ≤π. The frequency axis represents ω/ω0(q), where ω0(q) is the frequency
at which S(q, ω) has the maximum value Smax(q) for each ﬁxed wave number, while values of
S(q, ω) have been re-scaled by Smax(q). These results indicate universal behavior for the DSF
scaled by a single frequency ω0. Moreover, the asymptotic behavior of the DSF can be expressed
as, S(q, ω) ∼ω1.7±0.1 for ω ≪ω0, and S(q, ω) ∼ω−2.25±0.1 for ω ≫ω0. Nakayama and Yakubo
(1992) also obtained estimates of the exponents a, a′ and y from the four asymptotic regimes
for S(q, ω) (the q−dependence for q ≪q0 and q ≫q0, and the ω−dependence for ω ≪ω0 and
ω ≫ω0) and found, a ≃3.2 ± 0.1, a′ ≃2.4 ± 0.1, and y ≃0.8 ± 0.1, all of which are consistent
with the four asymptotic relations in Eq. (394). These results then yield, σ ≃1.1, in agreement
with the prediction of Alexander et al. (1993) that, σ > 1.
Stoll et al. (1992) computed S(q, σ) for d−dimensional simple-cubic networks of size 68×68
and 21 × 21 × 21 in bond percolation, and employed the standard diagonalization technique.
422

Their estimates were, a(d = 2) ≃3.32, a(d = 3) ≃3.65, σ(d = 2) ≃1.05, and σ(d = 3) ≃1.11.
The 2D results are all consistent with those of Nakayama and Yakubo (1992).
These results conﬁrm the main hypothesis that Alexander et al. (1993) made in order to
derive the scaling forms of S(q, ω), namely, that there are three distinct length scales for strongly
disordered (fractal) materials (the so-called Ioﬀe-Regel strong scattering limit; see Aharony et
al., 1987), a wavelength, a scattering length, and a localization length, all of which collapse onto
one single length scale Λ(ω) that, for percolation disorder, has a frequency dependence given
by [see Eq. (354)], Λ(ω) ∼ω−Ds/Df. Thus, fractons are strongly localized with the localization
length Λ(ω). For weakly-localized phonons, the characteristic lengths have diﬀerent frequency
dependencies (John et al., 1983).
We will come back to these issues in Chapter 9, where we discuss the eﬀect of the true
vectorial nature of the elasticity on the vibrations of materials and their DOS.
6.8 Fractons and Thermal Transport in Heterogeneous Materials
The existence of a fracton vibrational density of states has important implications for ther-
mal transport in disordered materials which exhibit such a DOS. We now consider phonon-
assisted fracton hopping and the eﬀect of vibrational anharmonicity, and describe the charac-
teristic hopping distance and the contribution to the thermal conductivity g.
6.8.1 Anharmonicity
The thermal conductivity ge at temperature T is given by
ge = 1
ΩCα′(T)Dα′(T) ,
(1316)
where, as usual, Ωis the volume of the system, Cα′ is the speciﬁc heat and Dα′ the diﬀusivity
associated with the mode α′. However, in the absence of diﬀusion, ge vanishes, implying that
whenever the condition for localization in the sense of Anderson localization occurs (Anderson,
1958), thermal transport ceases, which means that thermal conductivity approaches zero where
the mean-free path is of the order of, or less than, the wavelength for vibrational excitations.
Transport in materials with a morphology that permits a crossover from phonon to fracton
vibrational excitations is an example of this phenomenon since, as discussed above, fractons
are strongly localized, and therefore thermal transport can occur only by the (extended) phonon
normal modes.
423

Therefore, it is imperative to calculate ge under these conditions. Clearly, gph, the contri-
bution of phonons to the thermal conductivity, wil increase with increasing temperature. The
reason for this increase is that both the occupied mode density and the Bose factor increase
as the temperature T increases. The increase continues until one exhausts all of the extended
phonon states, at which time gph saturates in the Dulong-Petit regime (kBT ≫¯hωph). However,
experiments (see below) have shown that this is not the case for aerogels, as its thermal conduc-
tivity continues to increase above the value where gph saturates. This apparent contradiction
can be explained by introducing anharmonicity into the phonon-fracton excitation spectrum,
which makes it possible for the fractons to contribute to thermal transport. The introduction
of anharmonicity is essential for thermal transport in the fracton regime (Alexander et al.,
1986a,b). It allows for fracton hopping in much the same sense as the phonon-assisted elec-
tronic hopping of Mott (1969) for localized electronic states, which was described earlier in this
chapter. While in ordered materials anharmonicity reduces thermal transport, in disordered
materials thermal transport is a result of anharmonicity.
6.8.2 Phonon-assisted fracton hopping
The schematics of the introduction of vibrational anharmonicity and its result are shown
in Figure 6.34 (Alexander et al., 1986a,b; Jagannathan et al., 1989). We ﬁrst introduce the
corresponding Hamiltonian,
H = Ce

α,α′,α′′
(Aα,α′,α′′b†
α′bα′′bα + · · ·) ,
(1317)
where the bα (b†
α) operators annihilate (create) phonons or fractons, depending on whether the
index α refers to modes with frequencies less than or greater than the crossover frequency ωco.
Because fractons are strongly localized, the two fractons in Figure 6.34 are, in general, located at
diﬀerent spatial positions. To compute their distance from each other, the concept of the most
probable hopping distance, due to Mott (1969), is invoked. A region of volume ξDf contains
Nfr(ω′
α)∆ω′
α fractons with an energy in the interval [ω′
α, ωα′ +∆ωα′]. The diﬀerential probability
of ﬁnding such fractons in a volume element rDf−1dr (assuming a uniform distribution of the
fractons in the volume) is then
dP(r, ωα′) =
1
ξDf Nfr(ωα′)∆ωα′rDf−1dr .
(1318)
424

Consider the ﬁrst fracton in Figure 6.34(b) (index α′′) and assume that it lies at the ori-
gin. Then, to calculate the most probable hopping distance, we integrate Eq. (399) up to a
distance R(α′) that would give us a second fracton within the same volume with probability 1.
Integrating up to the maximum distance ξ would yield Nfr(ωα′)∆ωα′, i.e., the total number of
fractons inside the volume ξDf. Therefore,
R(α′) = Λ(ωα′)
ωα′
ωco
1/Df
,
(1319)
where the uncertainty ∆ωα′ has been assumed to be ωco (Alexander et al., 1983). Note that
Rα′ > Λ(ωα′), so that in fact the fracton hops a signiﬁcant distance relative to its localization
length scale. The diﬀusion constant associated with the hopping of the α′ fracton is then given
by
Dα′ =
R2(ωα′)
tfr(ωα′, T) ,
(1320)
where tfr(ωα′, T) is the lifetime of the fracton of energy ωα′ at temperature T associated with
its hopping a distance Rα′.
These results can now be used for calculating the thermal transport associated with fracton
hopping. At temperatures greater than the crossover energy, substitution of Eq. (401) into Eq.
(397) yields ghop (Jagannathan et al., 1989):
ghop(T) = 24cπ3C2
eD2
sωD
8ρ3v2
sξ8ω3
co
k2
BT ,
(1321)
where all the notations are the same as before. Here, c is an adjustable parameter, ωD is the
Debye frequency associated with the phonon velocity of sound vs, and ρ is the mass density.
An important feature of Eq. (402) is the absence of any dependence upon the fracton DOS
for ω > ωco, which is due to the fact that the dispersion relation for fractons [Eq. (358)] leads
to a rapid spatial diminution of the fracton size with increasing fracton energy. Therefore, the
fracton overlap associated with vertex (b) in Figure 6.34 deceases so rapidly with increasing
fracton energy that the principal contribution to ghop arises from fractons with ω ≃ωco. Hence,
only the fractons with the lowest energies contribute to the thermal conductivity via phonon-
assisted fracton hopping. This may explain the universal form found for thermal transport
in amorphous materials (see also Section 6.3.1) above the plateau temperature, in which the
thermal conductivity appears to increase linearly with temperature independent of the precise
nature of the DOS.
425

The vertex (b) in Figure 6.34 not only determines the fracton hopping rate, but also the
phonon lifetime associated with fracton hopping. Because the same vertex is involved for both
processes, one can express ghop in terms of the inelastic lifetime tph(ωph, T) for a phonon of
frequency ωph at temperature T. In this case, there are essentially no adjustable parameters,
and one ﬁnds (Jagannathan et al., 1989) that
ghop =
2DfaγIωD
8DfΓ(Df/γ)
kBω2
co
ξ
1
ω2
phtph(ωph, T) ,
(1322)
where a = 5 −Ds −4Ds/Df, I is an integral of the order of unity, and γ is the exponent for
the wave function Ψfr, Eq. (364).
6.8.3 Dependence of sound velocity on temperature
The above results allow one to calculate the change δvs in the velocity of sound caused
by the (b) vertex of Figure 6.34, in terms of the fracton hopping contribution to the thermal
conductivity. Jagannathan and Orbach (1990) found that
δvs
vs
= −0.1
ξ2
2π2vs
ghop(T)
T
T
kB
.
(1323)
The term ghop(T)/T is independent of temperature for phonon-assisted fracton hopping, so
that Eq. (404) is linear in the temperature but independent of the frequency of the sound
wave. Equation (404) diﬀers signiﬁcantly from that derived by the so-called two-level models
in amorphous materials (see, for example, Tielb¨urger et al., 1992):
δvs
vs
= ckBT
E0
ln(ωt0) ,
(1324)
where c is a constant, E0 is the ground-state energy of the tunneling particle, ω is the sound
wave frequency, and t0 is a few times the vibrational frequency of the tunneling particle in a
single well.
The speciﬁc heat and thermal conductivity of aerogels were ﬁrst measured by Calemczuk
et al. (1987) and de Goer et al. (1989). These measurements were carried out over a restricted
temperature range that did not cover the phonon-fracton crossover energy. The speciﬁc heat
and thermal conductivity measurements by Sleator et al. (1991), Posselt et al. (1991), and
Bernasconi et al. (1992) were carried out on the same materials, but over a temperature range
that included the phonon-fracton crossover energy.
426

Figure 6.35 presents the experimental data of Posselt et al. (1991) for the thermal con-
ductivity of two aerogels of density ρ = 0.145 g/cm3 (low density, LD) and ρ = 0.275 g/cm3
(high density, HD). These are the ﬁrst measurements ever to explore the thermal conductivity
of aerogels over such a temperature range. For the HD sample, Tc = ¯hωco/kB = 0.37 K, and a
strong break in slope occurs around T = 0.13 K, which is shown in Figure 6.36. This can be
interpreted as evidence of a crossover from phonon-dominated to fracton-dominated thermal
transport. The sharp increases in ge above about 3 K is attributed to particle modes, caused
by the approximately 20˚A spheres that make up the fractal network in the aerogels. For the
LD sample, Tc = 0.1 K, and the crossover from phonon- to fracton-dominated transport was
not possible to measure.
The phonon-fracton model predicts the following form for the thermal conductivity:
ge = gph + ghop ,
(1325)
which can be written, for T > Tc, as
ge = A + BT .
(1326)
Posselt et al. (1991) found that A scales with ξ in a consistent manner for both the HD and
LD samples, the limiting phonon mean-free path being of the order of ξ. Thus, the predictions
for thermal transport based on phonon-assisted fracton hopping appear to be quantitatively
veriﬁed in the aerogels.
Summary
This chapter demonstrates that, eﬀective-medium approximation, percolation and fractal
concepts, and scaling analysis are powerful tools for accurately predicting many dynamical,
frequency-dependent, properties of a wide variety of disordered materials. These predictions
have been conﬁrmed by large-scale computer simulations, as well as careful experimental mea-
surements. Thus, we now have a much better understanding of many frequency-dependent prop-
erties of heterogeneous materials. In particular, the apparent universality of AC conductivity
of many disordered materials, and their vibrational density of states are now well-understood.
427

Table 6.1
The EMA predictions for asymptotic form of R(Z, d, p) and I(Z, d, p) [see Eq. (128)] for p < pc,
where d and Z are the lattice dimensionality and coordination number, respectively.
d
R(Z, d, p)
I(Z, d, p)
1 < d < 2
2
dZ2
cΓ(1 −d/2)
Z
4/d
1 −p
(pc −p)1+4/d
1
Z
2cΓ(d/2)Γ(1 −d/2)
Z(pc −p)
2/d
d = 2
4c2[ln(pc −p)]2
4(pc −p)3
−2c ln(pc −p)
Z2(pc −p)
d > 2
4I2
w(1 −p)
Z4(pc −p)3
2Iw
Z2(pc −p)
428

Table 6.2
The EMA predictions for the frequency-dependent hopping conductivity at the percolation
threshold pc of a d−dimensional lattice of coordination number Z.
d
ˆge(ω) −ˆge(ω = 0)
1 < d < 2
1
Z
 2Z
Z −2cΓ(d/2)Γ(1 −d/2)
2/(d+2)
[cos(dπ/d + 2) + i sin(dπ/d + 2)] ωd/(d+2)
d = 2

c
2Z(Z −2)
1/2
(1 + i)(−ω ln ω)1/2
d > 2

c
Z(Z −2)
1/2
(1 + i)ω1/2
429

Table 6.3
The EMA predictions for the frequency-dependent hopping conductivity of a d−dimensional
lattice of coordination number Z above the percolation threshold pc, in the low-frequency limit.
d
ˆge(ω) −ˆge(ω = 0)
1 < d < 2
2cΓ(d/2)Γ(1 −d/2)(Z −2)2−d/2(1 −p)
Zd−1(p −pc)d/2
[cos(dπ/4) + i sin(dπ/4)] ωd/2
d = 2
2c(1 −p)
Z(Z −2)(p −pc)(−ω ln ω)i +
πc(1 −p)
(Z −2)(p −pc)ω
2 < d < 4
2Iw(1 −p)
Z(Z −2)(p −pc)ωi + 2cΓ(d/2 −1)Γ(2 −d/2)(1 −p)
Zd−1(Z −2)2−d/2(p −pc)d/2
cos(dπ/4)ωd/2
d = 4
2Iw(1 −p)
Z(Z −2)(p −pc)ωi −
2c(1 −p)
Z3(p −pc)2ω2 ln ω
d > 4
2Iw(1 −p)
Z(Z −2)(p −pc)ωi +
2(1 −p)
Z3(p −pc)2

2I2
w
Z(p −pc) + m1

ω2
430

Captions
Figure 6.1 Temperature dependence of the hopping conductivity of NMP-TCNQ. Temper-
ature is in Kelvin, and the straight lines are the best ﬁts of the data (after Shante, 1977).
Figure 6.2 Real part of the eﬀective (frequency-dependent) hopping conductivity for two
temperatures. Symbols are the experimental data, while the curves are the theoretical pre-
dictions. The absolute magnitude of the DC conductivity has been ﬁtted to one curve (after
Movaghar et al., 1980a).
Figure 6.3 Temperature dependence of the exponent x [see Eqs. (193) and (194)] for (×)
ω/ν0 = 10−8 and (⃝) ω/ν0 = 10−6, with T0 = 5 × 107K (after Movaghar et al., 1980a).
Figure 6.4 Comparison of the predicted temperature dependence of hopping conductivity ge
of a−SiySi1−y (the lines), obtained with an exponential density of states, with the experimental
data (symbols). The data are, from left, y = 0.47, 0.62, 0.77, 0.9, and 1. T is in Kelvin (after
Malouﬁet al., 1988).
Figure 6.5 Temperature dependence of hopping conductivity ge of doped and compensated
GaAs. Symbols reprersent the experimental data, the line on the left is their T −1/2 ﬁt, while
that on the right is their T −1/4 ﬁt (after Redﬁeld, 1973).
Figure 6.6 Temperature dependence of hopping conductivity ge of carbon-black polymer
composite. Temperature is in Kelvin (after van de Putten et al., 1992).
Figure 6.7 Frequency and temperature dependence of AC conductivity of 0.4Ca(NO3)2-
0.6KNO3 highly porous melt (after Howell et al., 1974).
Figure 6.8 Frequency and temperature dependence of AC conductivity of polycrystalline
diamond ﬁlms (after Fiegl et al., 1994).
Figure 6.9 AC conductivity master curve for eight diﬀerent ion conducting oxide glasses
(after Roling, 1998).
Figure 6.10 AC conductivity master curve for conducting polymer Poly(methylthiophene).
The data were collected for temperatures 210K ≤T ≤295K (after Rehwald et al., 1987).
Figure 6.11 Two-dimensional network model that arises from discretizing Eq. (216). All
capacitors are equal, proportional to the bound charge dielectric constant, while each resistor
is proportional to the inverse free charge conductivity at the corresponding position in the
material.
Figure 6.12 Logarithmic plot of the dimensionless conductivity ˆσ (symbols) versus real
431

dimensionless Laplace frequencies ˆs, and its comparison with the EMA predictions (curves).
The distribution of the activation energies is asymmetric Gaussian, and symbols represent the
results for β = 5 (△), 10 (⃝), 40 (⋄), 80 (2), and 160 (+) (after Dyre, 1993).
Figure 6.13 Comparison of symmetric hopping model in 3D at real frequencies, obtained
by numerical simulation of the master equation, with the predictions of the EMA (solid upper
curve). The symbols represent the simulation results with ﬁve diﬀerent distributions for the
activation energy. Solid circles to the right indicate a straight line with slope one (after Schr⊘der
and Dyre, 2000).
Figure 6.14 Real part of the frequency-dependent conductivity for a Drude metal-insulator
composite, obtained by numerical simulations on a square lattice, for metal volume fraction
p = 0.6, and its comparison with the EMA predictions (curve). The relaxation time is 10 (after
Zeng et al., 1989).
Figure 6.15 Same as Figure 6.14, but for metal volume fraction p = 0.5 (after Zeng et al.,
1989).
Figure 6.16 Two-dimensional resistor-capacitor model in which each bond is occupied by a
conductor with probability p or a capacitor with probability 1−p (after Wilkinson et al., 1983).
Figure 6.17 Two examples of a RG transformation in the bimodal approximation (after
Wilkinson et al., 1983).
Figure 6.18 RG ﬂows in the real case. The point p = 1/2 and α = 0 is the unstable ﬁxed
point. All points ﬂow to α = 1 with p = 0 or 1 (after Wilkinson et al., 1983).
Figure 6.19 Frequency dependence of the normalized capacitance Ce. Numbers on top of
the curves indicate the frequency ω. The results on the left and right ﬁgures are, respectively,
for p > pc and p < pc (after Wilkinson et al., 1983).
Figure 6.20 Static dielectric constant ε0 of two series of Ag-KCl composites versus the
volume fraction p of Ag. The curves represent the best ﬁts of the data to Eq. (306) (after
Grannan et al., 1981).
Figure 6.21 Logarithmic plot of the data shown in Figure 6.20 (after Grannan et al., 1981).
Figure 6.22 Frequency dependence of the resistance R and capacitance C of an Au fractal
ﬁlm at T = 300K. The critical exponents x and y are deﬁned by Eqs. (299) and (300) (after
Hundley and Zettl, 1988).
Figure 6.23 Static dielectric constant ε0 and DC conductivity ge of two diﬀerent microemul-
432

sions as a function of the volume fraction φ of water. The data are for W0 =[H2O]/[AOT]=25
and T = 318K (circles), and for W0 = 35 and T = 313K (triangles) (after van Dijk, 1985).
Figure 6.24 Density of states N(ω) versus frequency, as predicted by the EMA (full curves)
and cluster EMA (dotted curves) on a simple-cubic lattice. The fraction p of the conducting
bonds is p = 0.316 (A), 0.334 (B), 0.35 (C), and 0.50 (D) (after Sahimi, 1984b).
Figure 6.25 Density of states at the site percolation threshold of the square lattice, pc ≃
0.593. The straight line represents N(ω) ∝ω1/3 (after Yakubo and Nakayama, 1989).
Figure 6.26 Same as Figure 6.25, but at p = 0.67. The straight line on the left corresponds
to N(ω) ∝ω, while the one on the right represents N(ω) ∝ω1/3 (after Yakubo and Nakayama,
1989).
Figure 6.27 Density of states for site percolation in the simple-cubic network at p = 0.4.
The straight line on the left corresponds to N(ω) ∝ω2, while the one on the right represents
N(ω) ∝ω1/3 (after Yakubo and Nakayama, 1989).
Figure 6.28 Density of states at the bond percolation threshold of d−dimensional cubic
lattices (after Nakayama, 1992).
Figure 6.29 Schematics of density of states (solid curve) and its crossover.
The dotted
(dashed) curve represents the continuation of phonon (fracton) asymptotic behavior into the
crossover regime (after Nakayama et al., 1994).
Figure 6.30 Density of states, normalized to one particle and divided by ω1/3, as a function
of the frequency ω in site percolation in the square lattice. Solid and open circles represent,
respectively, the results for p = pc = 0.593 and p = 0.670. The lines are guide to the eye (after
Yakubo et al., 1990a).
Figure 6.31 Scattered intensities, for eleven silica aerogel samples, versus the magnitude q
of the scattering vector in ˚A−1. The top ten curves are for untreated and neutrally reacted
samples of increasing density, while the bottom one is for an oxidized sample. The curves are
labeled with the density in kg/m3 (after Vacher et al., 1988).
Figure 6.32 The dynamic structure factor S(q, ω), for 50 diﬀerent frequencies ω, versus the
wave number q (normalized by q0). The results are for site percolation in a square network. The
data have been averaged over a narrow range of q close to the reduced q/q0 (after Nakayama
and Yakubo, 1992).
Figure 6.33 The dynamic structure factor S(q, ω) versus the reduced frequency ω/ω0 for 125
433

diﬀerent wave numbers in the range 2π/250 ≤q ≤π. The results are for site percolation in
the square network. The data have been averaged over a narrow frequency close to ω/ω0 (after
Nakayama and Yakubo, 1992).
Figure 6.34 Schematics of anharmonic process (after Nakayama et al., 1994).
Figure 6.35 Temperature dependence of the thermal conductivity of silica aerogels. The
symbols from the top to bottom indicate the data for samples with density 0.275, 0.190, and
0.145, all in gr/cm3 (after Bernasconi et al., 1992). The inset shows the data for vitreous silica.
Figure 6.36 Thermal conductivity of silica aerogels in a narrow temperature range. The top
and bottom data are for samples with density 0.275 and 0.145, both in gr/cm3. The straight
lines represent the ﬁts of the data to Eq. (407) (after Bernasconi et al., 1992).
434

7
Rigidity and Elastic Properties: The Continuum Approach
7.0 Introduction
In Chapters 4-6 we described and discussed theoretical modelling and numerical estimation
of linear scalar properties of heterogeneous materials, based on both the discrete and continuum
models. In the present chapter and the next two, we consider rigidity of disordered materials,
describe various theoretical and numerical approaches for predicting their linear elastic prop-
erties and, as usual and when possible, compare the theoretical predictions with the relevant
experimental data and the results of computer simulations. In the present chapter we describe
the continuum mechanics approach to this class of problems.
Chapter 8 will describe and
discuss in detail the discrete models of elastic properties of composite solids, and various theo-
retical and computational approaches for analyzing such problems. Chapter 9 will demostrate
the validity of such models by predicting their predictions with the experimental data for the
elastic properties of several important classes of materials. In Volume II, we will describe and
discuss the same types of models and approaches for non-linear transport and mechanical prop-
erties, and will, in particular, consider both the constitutive and threshold non-linearities that
were described in Chapter 1. The latter type of non-linearities describe mechanical fracture,
and electrical and dielectric breakdown of materials, an important class of phenomena of great
industrial interest. In addition, in Volume II we will describe atomistic modelling of materials’
properties.
It is of course always desirable to develop predictive theories for the mechanical properties
of materials by approaching the problem in its most general form. However, although such
an approach will be completely rigorous, it will also have little predictive power, since the
theoretical framework worked out for the general problem will be too complex and contain
too many parameters (some of which may be too diﬃcult, or even impossible, to measure)
to be useful.
Therefore, one must set a less ambitious goal, one in which one does make
certain simplifying assumptions and hypotheses which, of course, must be realistic from a
physical view point. In this vein, linear elasticity theory has provided important contributions
to our understanding of mechanical properties of a wide variety of materials by providing
a realistic theoretical framework for analyzing their mechanical behavior.
Moreover, when
435

applied to many practical problems, the predictions of the theory take on relatively simple
forms that can be tested and used readily. Linear elasticity theory does not of course solve all
the important problems on mechanical properties of materials, as many materials do in fact
behave inelastically, the description of which is well beyond the realm of the linear theory.
We begin this chapter by summarizing some elementary but important elements of con-
tinuum mechanics, which will be useful to our discussions in this chapter, after which various
continuum models of linear elastic properties of heterogeneous materials will be described and
discussed. For an in-depth discussion of elements of continuum mechanics of the mechanical
properties the reader can consult, for example, Timoshenko and Goodier (1970).
Let us ﬁx our notations for this chapter and in Chapters 8 and 9. Second-order tensors
are denoted by either bold face capital letters or bold face Greek letters, while in most cases
fourth-order tensors are denoted by bold face letters. We consider mainly two-phase materials
that consist of a matrix (phase 1, volume fraction φ1) and inclusions (phase 2, volume fraction
φ2) that are distributed in the matrix. The properties of the phases are given subscripts 1 and
2. We use νp to denote the Poisson’s ratio. When we refer to the Poisson’s ratio of a phase,
we use a double subscript, e.g., νp1 for phase 1, and νpe for the eﬀective Poisson’s ratio of the
material.
7.1 The Stress and Strain Tensors
In our discussions, we utilize Cartesian coordinates with the usual tensor notation that
involves summation over repeated indices. In its most general form, the linear elastic stress-
strain relationship is expressed by
σ(x) = C(x) : ϵ(x) ,
(1327)
where : denotes the contraction with respect to two indices, so that in indexed notations,
σij = Cijklϵkl, with j = 1, 2 and 3, where σ and ϵ are, respectively, the linear stress and strain
tensors and C is the fourth-order tensor of elastic constants of the material. Equation (1) is the
generalization of Hooke’s law. The stress-strain relation can also be expressed in inverted form,
ϵ(x) = S(x) : σ(x), where S is the compliance tensor. The stiﬀness and compliance tensors are
related by, S : C = I, where I is the fourth-order indentity tensor.
The fact that C and S are fourth-order tensors can be proven by showing that their d4
components in d dimensions, relative to a coordinate system, transform to d4 components
436

in another “primed” coordinate system according to the transformation rule for fourth-order
tensors, e.g., C′
ijkl = limljnlkpllqCmnpq, where lij are the direction cosines. Thus, in general, the
tensor C has 81 independent components. Since the stress and strain tensors are symmetric
(that is, σij = σji and ϵij = ϵji), we must have Cijkl = Cjikl and Cijkl = Cijlk. These two
conditions reduce the 81 independent components of Cijkl to just 36 for three-dimensional (3D)
elasticity. More generally, in d dimensions, the d4 components are reduced to [d(d + 1)/2]2
independent components. Moreover, the stress can be expressed as a derivative of the strain
energy density function Hs: σij = ∂Hs/∂ϵij. Therefore, it immediately follows from the Hooke’s
law that Hs, up to an additive constant, is given by Hs = 1
2σijϵij = 1
2ϵklCijklϵij ≥0, and hence
we have the additional symmetry that Cijkl = Cklij, which, in d dimensions, further reduces the
number of independent elastic constants to 1
8d(d+1)(d2 +d+2). In particular, for 3D systems,
the number of independent elastic constants is reduced to 21. Note that the compliance tensor
S possesses the same symmetries as the stiﬀness tensor C, and that Hs ≥0 implies that C and
S are both positive deﬁnite.
If u is the displacement vector, then
ϵ = 1
2

∇u + (∇u)T
,
(1328)
where T denotes the transpose operation, so that, for example,
ϵij = 1
2
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi

,
with x = (x1, x2, x3) representing the coordinates. Since the six independent components of
ϵ are derived from three independent displacements, some of the strain components cannot
be independent. Instead, the strain components are related through 81 so-called compatibility
equations, according to which
∂2ϵij
∂xk∂xl
+ ∂2ϵkl
∂xi∂xj
=
∂2ϵik
∂xj∂xl
+
∂2ϵjl
∂xi∂xk
.
(1329)
These 81 equations are not entirely independent of each other. One may also write the compat-
ibility equations in terms of the stresses, using the stress-strain relations. Finally, the governing
equation expressing the balance of momenta in a (linear) material is given by
∇· σ + F(x, t) = ρ∂2u
∂t2 ,
(1330)
437

where ρ is the mass density and F(x, t) is the body force.
7.1.1 Symmetry properties of the stiﬀness tensor
As described above, for 3D materials the number of independent components of C is 21.
Any additional reduction in the number of independent components of C must come through
the constraints imposed by the material’s symmetry properties. To see how further reduction
in the number of independent components of C can be achieved, we restrict ourselves to 3D.
The generalized Hooke’s law, Eq. (1), really represents only six independent equations with 21
elastic constants, which can be conveniently represented as a matrix equation that expresses a
six-column vector of stresses in terms of a six-element column vector of strain. Thus, we write
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
σ11
σ22
σ33
σ23
σ13
σ12
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
=
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
C11
C12
C13
C14
C15
C16
C22
C23
C24
C25
C26
C33
C34
C35
C36
C44
C45
C46
C55
C56
C66
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
ϵ11
ϵ22
ϵ33
ϵ23
ϵ13
ϵ12
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(1331)
where the matrix C is symmetrical. For symmetry with respect to a plane, such that the
coordinate x3 is normal to the plane of symmetry, C has 13 independent components with the
following form
C =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
C11
C12
C13
0
0
C16
C22
C23
0
0
C26
C33
0
0
C36
C44
C45
0
C55
0
C66
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
(1332)
This referred to as monoclinic symmetry. As in the general anisotropic case, here a pure shear
strain can give rise to a normal stress.
We may also consider another class of symmetry properties called orthotropic symmetry,
which consists of symmetry with respect to three mutually orthogonal planes.
Orthotropy
438

reduces the number of independent components of C to 9, such that
C =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
C11
C12
C13
0
0
0
C22
C23
0
0
0
C33
0
0
0
C44
0
0
C55
0
C66
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(1333)
For symmetry with respect to a 90◦rotation about one axis, say the x1−axis, it can be
shown that C has six independent components:
C =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
C11
C12
C12
0
0
0
C22
C23
0
0
0
C33
0
0
0
C44
0
0
C66
0
C66
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
(1334)
This is referred to as transverse square symmetry. For example, a tetragonal crystal has such
symmetry.
Further reduction in the number of independent components of C can be obtained by
considering transversely isotropic materials, for which one of the planes for the orthotropic case
is a plane of isotropy. If, for example, x1 is normal to the plane of isotropy, then C will have
only 5 independent components, such that
C =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
C11
C12
C12
0
0
0
C22
C23
0
0
0
C22
0
0
0
1
2(C22 −C23)
0
0
C66
0
C66
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
(1335)
This is referred to as transversely isotropic symmetry. For example, a crystal with a six-fold
rotational symmetry axis (hexagonal) is transversely isotropic with respect to the stiﬀness.
439

Although a crystal with a three-fold rotational symmetry axis (trigonal) is not transversely
isotropic, there are only two independent elastic moduli in the transverse plane, and therefore
2D crystals with three-fold rotational symmetry axis are elastically isotropic. For materials
with transversely isotropic symmetry, there are many interrelation between the various elastic
moduli and the Poisson’s ratio (see, for example, Christensen, 1979, and Torquato, 2002).
For example, one has, µT = 1
2Y T(1 + νT
p )−1, and 4/Y T = 1/KT + 1/µT + 4(νL
p )2/Y L, where
µ, K and Y are, respectively, the shear, bulk and Young’s moduli, and superscripts L and
T denote the longitudinal and transverse directions. Thus, one obtains, νT
p = [KT −µT −
4KTµT(νL
p )2/Y L][KT + µT + 4KTµT(νL
p )2/Y L]−1. Materials with this type of symmetry can,
therefore, have a transverse Poisson’s ratio, −1 ≤νT
p ≤1. The lower limit of −1 corresponds
to the case when µT/KT →∞and Y L/µT →∞, while the upper limit of +1 corresponds to
the case in which KT/µT →∞and Y L/KL →∞
For symmetry with respect to 90◦rotations about two perpendicular axes, say the x1−axis
and x2−axis, it can be shown that C has three independent components:
C =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
C11
C12
C12
0
0
0
C11
C12
0
0
0
C11
0
0
0
C44
0
0
C44
0
C44
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
(1336)
This is called cubic symmetry.
Finally, for a completely isotropic material, C has only two independent components, such
that
C =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
C11
C12
C12
0
0
0
C11
C12
0
0
0
C11
0
0
0
1
2(C11 −C12)
0
0
1
2(C11 −C12)
0
1
2(C11 −C12)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(1337)
We emphasize that since C is symmetric, we do not specify its lower-diagonal part in Eqs.
(8)-(12).
440

For completely isotropic materials, the stress-strain relation can be written as
σij = λϵkkδij + 2µϵij ,
i, j = 1, · · · , d .
(1338)
where λ is the Lam´e elastic constant [in Eq. (12), the shear modulus µ is also often referred to
as a Lam´e constant), and δij is the usual Kronecker delta. The strain-stress relation can also
be written as
ϵij = −νp
Y σkkδij + 1 + νp
Y
σij ,
i, j = 1, · · · , d .
(1339)
Note that the Poisson’s ratio is deﬁned (here) as the negative of the strain in the direction of
a uniaxial stress divided by the associated transverse strain.
The stress-strain relations can also be represented in terms of the deviatoric and dilatational
(hydrostatic) components of σ and ϵ. Thus, we write
sij = σij −1
dσkkδij ,
(1340)
eij = ϵij −1
dϵkkδij ,
(1341)
where sij and eij are the deviatoric components of the stress and strain. Therefore,
sij = 2µeij ,
deviatoric relation,
(1342)
σkk = 3Kϵkk ,
dilatational relation.
(1343)
We can now see the elastic moduli µ and K as representing volumetric changes in a material
as a result of deforming it. Due to isotropy of the material, only two of the three parameters
λ, µ and K are independent. In fact,
C11 = λ + 2µ ,
C12 = λ ,
(1344)
and more importantly
µ =
Y
2(1 + νp) ,
(1345)
K = λ + 2
dµ =
Y
d[1 + (1 −d)νp] .
(1346)
The Poisson’s ratio νp for an isotropic material is given by
−1 ≤νp =
dK −2µ
d(d −1)K + 2µ ≤
1
d −1 .
(1347)
441

The deﬁnition of νp for an anisotropic material is, of course, not unique.
The upper bound in (21) is reached when K/µ →∞, i.e., the incompressible limit. For
example, for 3D materials such as rubbery solids and liquids, K ≫µ, and νp ≃1/2. The lower
bound in (21) is reached when µ/K →∞. Elastically isotropic materials with νp < 0 are called
auxetic materials, and are rare in nature. However, as discussed in Section 9.7, such materials,
which have unusual properties, have been fabricated.
7.1.2 Theorems of minimum energy
In analyzing the mechanical behavior of heterogeneous materials, two minimum energy
theorems have proven very useful, especially for deriving rigorous upper and lower bounds to
the eﬀective elastic moduli of materials (see Section 7.5). The analogous theorems for deriving
rigorous bounds for the eﬀective conductivity were stated in Section 4.6.1.2. Here, we state
these theorems without proof. The proofs are found in many books on mechanical properties
of materials.
Theorem of minimum potential energy: Consider a static elasticity problem with body forces
Fi and the boundary conditions
σi = σijnj = fi
on Sσ
(1348)
ui = u
on Su
(1349)
where Sσ and Su are complementary portions of the surface of the system with volume Ω, and
nj are the components of the unit outward vector normal to the surface. We deﬁne a potential
energy functional
Hp =

Ω[H(ϵij) −Fiui]dΩ−

Sσ
fiuidS ,
(1350)
where H(ϵij) = 1
2Cijklϵijϵkl. An admissible displacement ﬁeld u(a) is deﬁned as any continuous
ﬁeld that satisﬁes the displacement boundary condition (23), but is otherwise arbitrary. Then,
the theorem of minimum potential energy states that:
Of all the admissible displacement ﬁelds, the one that satisﬁes the equations of equilibrium
makes the potential energy functional (24) an absolute minimum.
Theorem of minimum complementary energy: Likewise, we deﬁne the complementary energy
functional by
Hc =

ΩHs(σij)dΩ−

Su
σiudS ,
(1351)
442

where the strain energy Hs is expressed in terms of the stresses as
Hs = 1
2Sijklσijσkl ,
(1352)
with Sijkl being the tensor of elastic compliances (the inverse of the elastic constants), de-
ﬁned above. An admissible stress σ(a)
ij
is one that satisﬁes the equilibrium equations and the
stress boundary condition (22), but is otherwise arbitrary. Then, the theorem of minimum
complementary energy states that:
Of all the admissible stress ﬁelds, the one that satisﬁes the compatibility equations makes the
complementary energy functional (25) an absolute minimum.
7.1.3 The strain energy of a composite material
A very useful result for the analysis of heterogeneous materials is the formula that was
derived by Eshelby (1956) for computing the strain energy in materials that contain inho-
mogeneities. Consider a material that is subjected to surface traction and contains a single
inclusion of another material. The elastic strain energy of the heterogeneous material is given
by
Hs = 1
2

ΩσijϵijdΩ,
(1353)
where Ωis the volume of the material. Eshelby derived a formula that reduces the volume
integral in Eq. (27) to a particular type of surface integral. To do this, he deﬁned the strain
energy in a material idential with the original one, but with the inclusion replaced by the
homogeneous matrix material. The resulting homogeneous material is subjected to the same
set of surface tractions as in the heterogeneous material, and its elastic strain energy is given
by
H0 = 1
2

Ωσ0
ijϵ0
ijdΩ.
(1354)
In the ﬁrst step, Eshelby (1956) showed that
Hs = H0 + 1
2

S σ0
i (ui −u0
i )dS ,
(1355)
where S represents the surface of the material, σi = σii, and on the external surface S, σi = σ0
i .
He then showed that
Hs = H0 + 1
2

Si
(σ0
i ui −σiu0
i )dS ,
(1356)
443

where Si is the surface of the inclusion. Eshelby also showed that if, instead of surface traction,
one considers a problem that involves speciﬁed displacements on the outer boundary of the
material, then
Hs = H0 + 1
2

Si
(σiu0
i −σ0
i ui)dS .
(1357)
The generalization of Eshelby’s formulae to a composite with many inclusions is straightforward.
7.1.4 Volume averaging
In order to estimate the eﬀective mechanical properties of heterogeneous materials, one must
assume the existence of a characteristic length scale for the inhomogeneities. For example, in
a ﬁbrous composite, this characteristic length is the mean distance between the ﬁbers. For
the class of heterogeneous materials that we consider in this chapter, there is a length scale,
much larger than the characteristic scale for the inhomogeneities, over which the mechanical
properties of a material can be averaged in an unambiguous manner. If this length scale is much
smaller than the linear size of the material, then the material is macroscopically homogeneous.
Suppose that Ωis the volume of an element of a heterogeneous material over which its prop-
erties are to be averaged. If we impose a macroscopically-homogeneous stress or deformation
ﬁeld on this volume element, we can then deﬁne the volume-averaged stress by
⟨σij⟩=

ΩσijdΩ,
(1358)
and the volume-averaged strain by
⟨ϵij⟩=

ΩϵijdΩ,
(1359)
where ϵ is an inﬁnitesimal strain tensor. These average properties are then related to each
other by
⟨σij⟩= (Cijkl)e⟨ϵkl⟩,
(1360)
which deﬁne the eﬀective elastic stiﬀness or moduli tensor Ce of the material. Although the
averaging procedure is conceptually simple, its implementation for anything but the simplest
morphology of composite materials is a diﬃcult task. Therefore, models of composite materials
cannot have an arbitrary morphology, because otherwise predicting their eﬀective mechanical
properties, even with the current powerful computers, will be an extremely diﬃcult task.
444

Because of such diﬃculties, one must classify the possible morphologies into several groups,
each with distinct properties. According to Christensen (1979), there are at least ﬁve such
groups. In the ﬁrst group is the crystal grain structure of common metals, where each grain is
anisotropic and the orientation of its axes or planes of symmetry is diﬀerent from that of the
other grains. The materials of this type contain only one phase. In the second class of materials
are those that have two or more distinct phases. Each phase is continuous, and there are no
distinguishing geometrical features of the interface between the phases that can help one to
decide which phase is on which side of the interface. In the remaining three classes of materials’
morphology are those that are composed of a continuous matrix, populated with inclusions of
another phase that are spherical, cylindrical or lamellar (see Chapter 3). These three types of
inclusions are in fact the limiting cases of a general ellipsoidal inclusion, with the cylindrical
and lamellar inclusions being associated with prolate and oblate ellipsoids, respectively. An
ellipsoidal inclusion also oﬀers great ﬂexibility for gradual gradation in between these limiting
cases. Moreover, although a composite that consists of a matrix and such inclusions may seem
rather abstract, it is in fact encountered in practical situations. For example, in some polymeric
materials where kinetic driving forces are present and thermodynamical equilibrium is achieved,
one always obtains either a spherical or cylindrical or lamellar structure.
Consider now a two-phase material with one phase being continuous (the matrix) and
the other material being in the form of discrete inclusions. We assume that both phases are
isotropic. The stress-strain relation for the inclusion phase is given by
σij = λ2ϵkkδij + 2µ2ϵij ,
(1361)
while for the matrix phase one has
σij = λ1ϵkkδij + 2µ1ϵij ,
(1362)
where λ and µ are the usual Lam´e constants. The average stress in the material can be written
as
⟨σij⟩= 1
Ω

V σijdV + 1
Ω
N

m=1

Ωm
σijdΩm ,
(1363)
where V = Ω−N
m=1 Ωm, Ωm is the volume of the mth inclusion, and N is the total number
of the inclusions. If we use the stress-strain relation in Eq. (37), we obtain
⟨σij⟩= 1
Ω

V (λ1ϵkkδij + 2µ1ϵij)dV + 1
Ω
N

m=1

Ωm
σijdΩm ,
(1364)
445

which can be rewritten as
⟨σij⟩= 1
Ω

Ω(λ1ϵkkδij + 2µ1ϵij)dΩ−1
Ω
N

m=1

Ωm
(λ1ϵkkδij + 2µ1ϵij)dΩm + 1
Ω
N

m=1

Ωm
σijdΩm .
(1365)
If we now use the deﬁnition of the volume-averaged properties, we obtain (Russel and Acrivos,
1972)
Cijkl⟨ϵkl⟩= λ1⟨ϵkk⟩δij + 2µ1⟨ϵij⟩+ 1
Ω
N

m=1

Ωm
(σij −λ1ϵkkδij −2µ1ϵij)dΩm ,
(1366)
which implies that, in order to evaluate the eﬀective tensor Ce, only the conditions within the
inclusions are needed.
We are now in a position to begin describing and discussing various continuum models for
estimating linear mechanical properties of heterogeneous materials.
7.2 Exact Results
There are several exact, and very useful, results for the eﬀective elastic properties of both
2D and 3D composites.
In this section we brieﬂy describe these results and discuss their
implications. We do not provide the proofs of these results; they can be found in the original
references. To begin with, let us write down the constitutive equations for a linear elastic and
isotropic material in 2D and 3D, and summarize the known results between the two that will
be useful to our discussions. These equations, in explicit forms, are given by
ϵx1x1 =
1
Y (3)

σx1x1 −ν(3)
p (σx2x2 + σx3x3)

,
ϵx1x2 = 1 + ν(3)
p
Y (3)
σx1x2 ,
(1367)
where Y is the Young’s modulus of the material, and superscript 3 denotes the dimensionality.
The rest of the governing equations are obtained by cyclic permutations, x1 →x2 →x3. Similar
equations hold in 2D, namely,
ϵx1x1 =
1
Y (2)

σx1x1 −ν(2)
p σx2x2

,
ϵx1x2 = 1 + ν(2)
p
Y (2)
σx1x2 ,
(1368)
with cyclic permutations, x1 →x2. As Eqs. (19) and (20) indicate, the bulk modulus K and
the shear modulus µ can be written in terms of the Young’s modulus Y and the Poisson’s ratio
νp.
7.2.1 Interraltions between two- and three-dimensional moduli
446

When we wish to connect the elastic moduli of isotropic 2D (planar) elasticity to those of
isotropic 3D systems, we must specify either plane-strain or plane-stress elasticity. The former
one is relevant in studying the elastic behavior of a ﬁber-reinforced material, while the latter
is relevant in considering two-phase composites in the form of thin sheets.
For plane strain we have ϵx1x3 = ϵx2x3 = ϵx3x3 = 0, so that Eq. (41) can be written as
ϵx1x1 = 1 −[ν(3)
p ]2
Y (3)

σx1x1 −
ν(3)
p
1 −ν(3)
p
σx2x2

,
ϵx1x2 = 1 + ν(3)
p
Y (3)
σx1x2 ,
(1369)
with cyclic permutations, x1 →x2. The longitudinal stress component is given by, σx3x3 =
ν(3)
p (σx1x1 + σx2x2). If we compare Eqs. (42) and (43), we see that for plane strain
Y (2) =
Y (3)
1 −[ν(3)
p ]2 ,
ν(2)
p
=
ν(3)
p
1 −ν(3)
p
.
(1370)
For plane stress we have, σx1x3 = σx2x3 = σx3x3 = 0, so that Eq. (41) can be rewritten as
ϵx1x1 =
1
Y (3)

σx1x1 −ν(3)
p σx2x2

,
ϵx1x2 = 1 + ν(3)
p
Y (3)
σx1x2 ,
(1371)
with cyclic permutations, x1 →x2; moreover, ϵx3x3 = −[ν(3)
p /(1 −ν(3)
p )](ϵx1x1 + ϵx2x2). If we
compare Eq. (45) with Eq. (42), we ﬁnd that for plane stress
Y (2) = Y (3) ,
ν(2)
p
= ν(3)
p
.
(1372)
The governing equations for plane stress and plane strain are sometimes combined by using a
quantity κ called the Kosolov constant (Muskhelishvili, 1953), such that Eqs. (42) have the
same form, but the coeﬃcients involve κ rather than ν(2)
p , and the shear modulus µ(3) rather
than Y (2):
ϵx1x1 =
1
2µ(3)

σx1x1 −1
4(3 −κ)(σx1x1 + σx2x2)

,
ϵx1x2 =
1
2µ(3)σx1x2 ,
(1373)
together with cyclic permutations, x1 →x2. The mapping to 2D now takes the forms
µ(2) = µ(3) ,
κ = 3 −4ν(3)
p
= 3 −ν(2)
p
1 + ν(2)
p
plane strain
(1374)
µ(2) = µ(3) ,
κ = 3 −ν(3)
p
1 + ν(3)
p
= 3 −ν(2)
p
1 + ν(2)
p
plane stress .
(1375)
7.2.2 Exact results for regular arrays of spheres
447

In Sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 we described in detail how the exact solution for the problem of
conduction in a two-phase material, that consists of a regular array of d−dimensional spheres
dispersed in a uniform background matrix, is derived. One can carry out a similar analysis
for the analogous problem of computing the eﬀective elastic moduli of a two-phase material
that consists of a regular array of d−dimensional sphere (phase 2) in a uniform matrix (phase
1). We do not provide the details of such an analysis, as they are the elastic analogue of the
conductivity problem, but only summarize the results.
Nunan and Keller (1984) analyzed the problem of the eﬀective elastic moduli of the three
3D cubic arrays of rigid spheres in a matrix. As pointed out earlier, such composite materials
are characterized by three independent elastic moduli. Therefore, the eﬀective stiﬀness tensor
Ce, in component form, is given by
(Ce)ijkl = (λ1 + µ1γ)δijδkl + µ1(1 + β)(δikδjl + δilδjk) + 2µ1(α −β)δijkl .
(1376)
Here, δijkl = 1, if i = j = k = l, and δijkl = 0, otherwise. All the notations are as before.
[There is a misprint in the original paper of Nunan and Keller (1984).] The main problem
is then developing expressions for the three coeﬃcients, α, β, and γ, for which low-density
asymptotic expansions were given by Nunan and Keller (1984):
α = 15φ2(1 −νp1)
2(4 −5νp1)

1 −

1 −
3a1
4 −5νp1

φ2 +
3a2
4 −νp1
φ5/3
2
+ O(φ7/3
2 )
−1
,
(1377)
β = 15φ2(1 −νp1)
2(4 −5νp1)

1 −

1 +
2a1
4 −5νp1

φ2 −
2a2
4 −5νp1
φ5/3
2
+ O(φ7/3
2 )
−1
,
(1378)
γ =
3φ2(1 −νp1)
(4 −5νp1)(1 −2νp1)

1 −νp1(3 −2a3) + a3
4 −5νp1
φ2 + a4(1 −2νp1)
4 −5νp1
φ5/3
2
+ O(φ7/3
2 )
−1
. (1379)
The coeﬃcients (a1, a2, a3, a4) for the three cubic lattices are, (−1.396, 1.714, 2.889, −3.077),
(0.430, −0.520, −6.163, 3.373), and (0.388, −0.411, −5.928, 2.750) for the simple-cubic, BCC and
FCC lattices, respectively.
The problem in the opposite limit, namely, the case of nearly close-packed spheres, is more
complex. Flaherty and Keller (1973) and Nunan and Keller (1984) observed that the elastic
interaction between spheres near the maximum close-packing sphere density is concentrated in
the regions near the points of contact. Thus, a local analysis of the region between two nearly
touching spheres, together with knowledge of nearest-neighbor locations, produce the domiant
contribution of the interaction for the entire sphere.
448

For 2D systems, asymptotic expressions for the eﬀective elastic moduli of periodic lattices
of circular holes, and of superrigid (inﬁnite elastic constants), circular inclusions that are ap-
plicable near the percolation threshold, have also ben derived. For circular voids, arranged on
the sites of a hexagonal lattice near its percolation threshold φ2c = π/(33/2), the elastic moduli
are given by (Day et al., 1992)
µe
µ1
=
√
3(1 + νp1)
2π
φ2c −φ2
φ2c
1/2
,
Ke
K1
=
√
3(1 −νp1)
π
φ2c −φ2
φ2c
1/2
.
(1380)
For a composite in which superrigid circles are arranged on the sites of the hexagonal lattice,
one has (Chen et al., 1995)
µe
µ1
=
2π
√
3(3 −νp1)
φ2c −φ2
φ2c
−1/2
,
Ke
K1
=
π
√
3(1 + νp1)
φ2c −φ2
φ2c
−1/2
.
(1381)
The analogous results for the triangular lattice are given by (Day et al., 1992)
µe
µ1
= 4(1 + νp1)
3
√
3π
φ2c −φ2
φ2c
3/2
,
Ke
K1
= 1 −νp1
√
3π
φ2c −φ2
φ2c
3/2
,
(1382)
for circular holes distributed on the sites of the lattice near its percolation threshold φ2c =
π/(2
√
3), and (Chen et al., 1995)
µe
µ1
=
√
3π(3 −νp1)
4(1 −νp1)
φ2c −φ2
φ2c
−1/2
,
Ke
K1
=
√
3π
1 + νp1
φ2c −φ2
φ2c
−1/2
,
(1383)
for superrigid circles on the sites of the triangular lattice near its percolation threshold.
7.2.3 Exact results for coated spheres and laminates
Another model for which exact computations can be carried out is the coated-spheres model.
Recall from Section 4.4 that this model consists of composite spheres that are composed of a
spherical core of a given transport property (for example, conductivity or elastic moduli) and
radius a, surrounded by a concentric shell that has a diﬀerent transport property and an outer
radius b. The ratio a/b is ﬁxed and in d−dimensions, the spheres volume fraction is φ2 = (a/b)d.
In Section 4.4., the exact solution of conduction in this system was derived. Similar exact
computations can be carried out for some, but not all, of the eﬀective elastic moduli of the
system. Hashin and Rosen (1964) showed that one cannot exactly compute the shear modulus
of this model, because the shear ﬁeld outside a composite sphere is not uniform, whereas as
discussed in Section 4.4, and also below, the uniformity of such ﬁelds outside the composite
449

sphere is essential to deriving the exact solution. Christensen and Lo (1979) did show that a
variant of this model, the so-called three-phase model, allows exact computation of the eﬀective
shear modulus µe, but we do not consider their model here.
Here we derive an exact expression for the eﬀective bulk modulus Ke of the d−dimensional
coated-spheres model. Consider a uniform material with (as yet) unknown bulk modulus Ke,
on which a uniform hydrostatic strain ﬁeld ϵ0 has been imposed. The analysis parallels that
presented in Section 4.4 for the eﬀective conductivity. The displacement ﬁeld u satisﬁes the
follwing equations
(λ2 + µ2)∇(∇· u) + µ2∇2u = 0 ,
r ≤a ,
(1384)
(λe + µe)∇(∇· u) + µe∇2u = 0 ,
r ≥b ,
(1385)
(λ1 + µ1)∇(∇· u) + µ1∇2u = 0 ,
a ≤r ≤b ,
(1386)
subject to the usual continuity of the displacement ﬁeld u at r = a and r = b, and that of the
radial component of the stress tensor at r = a. Thus, analogous to Eq. (4.52) for the voltage
ﬁeld, the general solution for the displacement ﬁeld u is given by
u =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
c1ϵ0 · r ,
r ≤a ,
c2ϵ0 · r + c3
ϵ0 · n
rd−1 ,
a ≤r ≤b ,
ϵ0 · r ,
r ≥b ,
(1387)
where r = |r|, n = r/r, and the three constants c1, c2, and c3 must be determined from
continuity of u at r = a and r = b, and continuity of the radial component of the stress at
r = a. These constants are given by
c1 =
dK1 + 2(d −1)µ1
dK2 + 2(d −1)µ1 −dφ2(K2 −K1) ,
(1388)
c2 =
dK2 + 2(d −1)µ1
dK2 + 2(d −1)µ1 −dφ2(K2 −K1) ,
(1389)
c3 =
dad(K1 −K2)
dK2 + 2(d −1)µ1 −dφ2(K2 −K1) .
(1390)
Having determined u, the strain ﬁeld ϵ is obtained from Eq. (2). The stress ﬁeld is then given
by
σ =

Ke −2
dµe

Tr(ϵ)U + 2µeϵ ,
(1391)
450

where Tr denotes the trace of the tensor. Continuity of the radial component of the stress
tensor at r = a then yields
Ke = c2K1 −2c3µ1(d −1)
dbd
,
(1392)
and therefore
Ke = φ1K1 + φ2K2 −
dφ1φ2(K2 −K1)2
d(φ2K1 + φ1K2) + 2µ1(d −1) ,
(1393)
which is very similar to Eq. (4.55) for the eﬀective conductivity.
Similarly, one may obtain exact results for the eﬀective elastic moduli of two-phase laminates
of isotropic phases. The calculations are similar to, but more complex than, the analogous
calculations for the eﬀective conductivity. Consider, for example, the calculation of the eﬀective
stiﬀness tensor Ce for a 2D laminate of rank 1, which is composed of alternating layers of phases
1 and 2 according to some random process such that, for example, the thickness of the layers
vary in space. In plane elasticity, one has
Ce =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
(Ce)11
(Ce)12
0
(Ce)12
(Ce)22
0
0
0
(Ce)66
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
,
(1394)
with
(Ce)11 =
)1 −ν2
p
Y
*−1
,
(Ce)12 = ⟨νp⟩
)1 −ν2
p
Y
*−1
,
(1395)
(Ce)22 = ⟨ν2
p⟩
)1 −ν2
p
Y
*−1
+ ⟨Y ⟩,
(Ce)66 = ⟨µ−1⟩−1 ,
(1396)
where for any property p the average ⟨p⟩is deﬁned by, ⟨p⟩= φ1p1 + φ2p2. As expected, the
Young’s modulus of the laminate is anisotropic and depends on the direction. Thus,
(Ye)11 = (Ce)11 −(Ce)2
12
(Ce)22
,
(Ye)22 = (Ce)22 −(Ce)2
12
(Ce)11
,
(1397)
whereas the eﬀective shear modulus is given by the harmonic average of the shear moduli of
the two phases, (µe)12 = ⟨µ−1⟩−1.
Similar results can be derived for the 3D version of the same laminate (Postma, 1955). The
451

eﬀective stiﬀness tensor Ce is symmetric and is given by
Ce =
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
(Ce)11
(Ce)12
(Ce)12
0
0
0
(Ce)22
(Ce)23
0
0
0
(Ce)22
0
0
0
1
2[(Ce)22 −(Ce)23]
0
0
(Ce)66
0
(Ce)66
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
,
(1398)
with
(Ce)11 = ⟨(K + 4
3µ)−1⟩−1 ,
(Ce)12 =
)3K −2µ
3K + 4µ
*
(Ce)11 ,
(1399)
(Ce)22 =
)3K −2µ
3K + 4µ
*2
(Ce)11 + ⟨K + 4
3µ⟩−
)(3K −2µ)2
3(3K + 4µ)
*
,
(1400)
(Ce)23 =
)3K −2µ
3K + 4µ
*2
(Ce)11 + ⟨K −2
3µ⟩−
)(3K −2µ)2
3(3K + 4µ)
*
,
(Ce)66 = ⟨µ−1⟩−1 .
(1401)
The eﬀective Young’s moduli along the coordinate axes are then give by
(Ye)11 = (Ce)11 −
2(Ce)2
12
(C2)22 + (Ce)23
,
(1402)
(Ye)22 = (Ye)33 = (Ce)22 −(Ce)2
12[(Ce)23 −(Ce)22] + (Ce)23[(Ce)2
12 −(Ce)11(Ce)23]
(Ce)11(Ce)22 −(Ce)2
12
.
(1403)
Note that under a uniform applied ﬁeld, the local ﬁelds in the laminate are piecewise con-
stant, a property that can be taken advantage of in the construction of disordered materials
with a desired eﬀective stiﬀness tensor. Moreover, although when the Poisson’s ratios of the
two phases are equal, the eﬀective Young’s moduli of the laminate are given by arithmetic
and harmonic averages of the Young’s moduli of the two phases, such averages provide poor
estimates of the moduli for the more general case of isotropic materials in which the Poisson’s
ratios of the two phases are not the same. In general (and similar to the eﬀective conductivity),
the arithmetic average ⟨Y ⟩overestimates the true Young’s modulus of an isotropic two-phase
material, whereas the hamonic average ⟨Y −1⟩−1 underestimates it.
7.2.4 Connection to two-dimensional conductivity
Consider tranversely isotropic ﬁber-reinforced composite materials with phase boundaries
that are cylindrical surfaces of arbitrary shape and with generators that are parallel to one axis.
452

Hashin (1970) observed that the governing equation for conduction in the transverse plane, i.e.,
the Laplace equation, is identical to that for out-of-plane shear. Therefore, determination of
the eﬀective longitudinal (that is, axial) shear modulus of the composite is mathematically
equivalent to the determination of its eﬀective transverse conductivity.
7.2.5 Exact duality relations
Certain extensions of the exact duality relations for the eﬀective conductivity of 2D two-
phase materials, that were explained in Section 4.8, have been made to their mechanical prop-
erties. Suppose that Ke(K1, µ1, K2, µ2) and µe(K1, µ1, K2, µ2) are the eﬀective bulk and shear
moduli of a 2D, two-phase isotropic material, and that Ke(K2, µ2, K1, µ1) and µe(K2, µ2, K1, µ1)
are the corresponding eﬀective moduli for the “dual” material, obtained from the original mate-
rial by interchanging the bulk and shear moduli of its two phases. Berdichevsky (1983) proved
that, if the material is incompressible, then
µe(K1, µ1, K2, µ2)µe(K2, µ2, K1, µ1) = µ1µ2 .
(1404)
Moreover, if the bulk moduli of the two phases are equal, then Helsing et al. (1997) showed
that
Ye(µ1, µ2)Ye(µ2, µ1) = Y1Y2 .
(1405)
Equations (78) and (79) are completely similar to Eq. (4.224) for the eﬀective conductivity
of the same material. As in the case of the eﬀective conductivity, there are no known duality
relations for 3D materials, although certain inequalities have been derived.
7.2.6 The Cherkaev-Lurie-Milton theorem and transformation
Cherkaev, Lurie and Milton (1992) proved an interesting and useful theorem for 2D com-
posites, which is applicable to linearly elastic materials with general anisotropy. The theorem
requires no restrictions on the number of components or on the geometry of the material. It
does, however, require that the displacements and the tractions to be continuous functions
across all the interfaces, i.e., bonding at all the interfaces must be perfect. We refer to this
work as the CLM theorem, which is as follows.
Suppose that a 2D composite material has spatially-varying bulk and shear moduli K(r)
and µ(r), and that the eﬀective bulk and shear moduli of the material are Ke and µe. If
1
Kt(r) =
1
K(r) −C and
1
µt(r) =
1
µ(r) + C ,
(1406)
453

where C is a constant, then
1
Kt
e
= 1
Ke
−C and
1
µt
e
= 1
µe
+ C ,
(1407)
where the superscript t denotes a transformed composite. We refer to Eq. (80) as the CLM
transformation, and Eq. (81) as the CLM theorem. The CLM transformation connects com-
posites materials that Cherkaev et al. (1992) call equivalent, which are materials that have the
same stress ﬁeld, for given external tractions, even though their material parameters diﬀer. To
prove the CLM theorem, one must show that the local stress tensor is the same in both mate-
rials when they are both subjected to the same external loading. Although the CLM theorem
has been proven only for perfect bonding, but, as discussed by Thorpe and Jasiuk (1992), it
presumably holds more generally. The constant C is constrained by
−min [1/µ(r)] < C < min [1/κ(r)] ,
to ensure that the elastic moduli are positive everywhere in the transformed material. This
constraint implies that the CLM theorem is most powerful when the inclusions in the composite
are cavities (so that −∞< C < ∞), thus being very useful to describing composite materials
with percolation-type disorder, but is useless when the inclusions are completely rigid, since in
this case the bounds collapse, resulting in C = 0.
It may be more useful to rewrite the CLM transformation in terms of the Young’s which
then yields, Y t(r) = Y (r), indicating that the Young’s moduli of the materials are invariant
under this transformation, and therefore the CLM theorem can be written as
Y t
e = Ye .
(1408)
7.2.7 Universality of Poisson’s ratio in percolation composites
As discussed by Thorpe and Jasiuk (1992), an important application of the CLM theorem
is to 2D composite materials that are prepared by removing material to form holes of any
size, shape, area fraction, etc. Numerical simulations of Day et al. (1992) showed that, for
a prescribed geometry, the relative Young’s modulus Ye/Y1 of a 2D sheet containing such
holes, overlapping or not (where Y1 is the Young’s modulus of the sheet without any holes
or inclusions), is the same for all materials, independent of the host Poisson’s ratio νp. The
454

CLM theorem provides a simple proof for these numerical results as the CLM transformation
leaves holes as holes.
Therefore, any matrix material can be obtained by using the CLM
transformation together with an overall scaling factor.
Figure 7.1 demonstrates this universality for the Young’s modulus. These results, computed
by Day et al. (1992), were obtained with the 2D Swiss-cheese model, i.e., one in which one
randomly punches the system with circular holes, regardless of whether they overlap or not,
and are plotted as the Young’s modulus of the system versus the volume fraction φ1 of the
remaining material. It is clear that the results are independent of the Poisson’s ratio of the
matrix, so that
Y t
e
Y1
= Ye
Y1
.
(1409)
Figure 7.1 also presents the eﬀective value νpe of the Poisson’s ratio as a function of the volume
fraction of the matrix. It is seen that, as the percolation threshold φc of the system is ap-
proached, where φc ≃0.34, regardless of the initial state of the system (i.e., regardless of value
of the Poisson’s ratio νp1), the eﬀective Poisson’s ratio of the material approaches a constant
value of about 1/3. To see this, note that one can write
νt
pe −νpe = (νt
p1 −νp1) Ye
Y1
.
(1410)
Since the ratio Ye/Y1 is universal, so must also be the value of the eﬀective Poisson’s ratio.
Now, since as the percolation threshold is approched, one has, Ye/Y1 →0, and therefore one
must also have, νt
pe →νpe, and Figure 7.1 indicates that this is indeed the case.
A similar universal behavior was found in the lattice models of mechanical properties of
disordered materials, which will be described in Chapter 8 (see Section 8.8.8).
We should
emphasize that the universal value of the Poisson’s ratio shown in Figure 7.1 is only with
respect to the elastic constants of the material. If, instead of circular holes, one punches other
types of inclusions into the material, other values of the Poisson’s ratio will emerge which will
be universal so long as the shape of the inclusion is held ﬁxed. Finally, one may expect the same
type of universality if the inclusions are completely rigid, rather than being holes, although in
this case the CLM theorem is useless for proving the universality of the Poisson’s ratio.
7.2.8 Composite materials with equal shear moduli
Hill (1963,1964) and Hashin (1965) suggested that if all the components of a composite
material have the same shear modulus µ, then the elastic constants of the composite can be
455

calculated exactly, in both 2D and 3D, because under this condition the upper and lower bounds
for the elastic constants collapse onto a single value. In particular, for 2D composites of this
type, one has the following exact results,
µe = µ ,
Ke = K1 +
1 −φ1
1
K2 −K1
+
φ1
K1 + µ
.
(1411)
Here φ1 is the volume fraction of phase 1, and K1 and K2 are the bulk moduli of the individual
phases. Equation (58) is independent of the material’s geometry. Although not obvious, the
equation for Ke is symmetric under interchange of 1 and 2. To see this symmetry, Thorpe and
Jasuik (1992) expressed Eq. (85) in terms of the Young’s modulus and the Poisson’s ratio, with
the results given by
Ye =
2

i=1
φiYi ,
νpe =
2

i=1
φiνpi ,
(1412)
hence demonstrating the symmetry of the exact results in Eq. (85). The proof of Eqs. (85)
and (86) via the CLM theorem is straightforward (Thorpe and Jasuik, 1992). We take the
transformed composite to have µt
1 = µt
2 = ∞, and therefore
µt
e = ∞,
Kt
e = φ1Kt
1 + φ2Kt
2 .
(1413)
The result for µt
e is obvious, if the bonding at the interface is perfect, while the result for Kt
e
follows because the material can only sustain a homogeneous hydrostatic strain if it is to hold
together. One now applies the CLM theorem with the constant C = 1/µ, and Eqs. (85) and
(86) follow immediately. Note that this proof and Eqs. (86) can easily be generalized to more
than two components. Equations (85) can also be generalized, although not as easily as (86).
7.2.9 Dundurs constants
Dundurs (1967) proved that if a composite material that consists of two linearly elastic and
isotropic phases is subjected to speciﬁed tractions and undergoes plane deformation, then the
stress in the material exhibits a reduced dependence on the material’s elastic constants. In
particular, for materials of this type, the stress depends only on two dimensionless parameters,
as opposed to the usual three combinations of elastic constants for the 3D case. Speciﬁcally,
Dundurs (1967) showed that the stress ﬁeld at point r in the material can be written as
σ(r) = σ0h(r; α12, β12) ,
(1414)
456

where
α12 = Y −1
1
−Y −1
2
Y −1
1
+ Y −1
2
,
(1415)
4β12 = K−1
1
−K−1
2
Y −1
1
+ Y −1
2
.
(1416)
As pointed out by Thorpe and Jasuik (1992), these results follow from the CLM transformation,
since Eq. (80) states that the components of the stress tensor are unchanged by this transfor-
mation, which reduces the number of parameters needed to describe the material by one. Note
that α12 and β12 are invariant under the CLM transformation. Moreover, they are not unique.
For example, using the relations between the elastic moduli, one can obtain another constant
γ12 given by
γ12 = 4(α12 −β12) = µ−1
1
−µ−1
2
Y −1
1
+ Y −1
2
,
(1417)
and thus any two of the three parameters α12, β12, and γ12 can be used.
An important limiting case is when one of the composites contains percolation-type disorder,
i.e., when one of the two components, say 2, represents cavities (of any size or shape), so that,
K2 = Y2 = 0, and hence, α12 = −1 and 4β12 = −Y2/K2 = −2(1 −νp2). Thus, in this case
there is only one parameter, β12, that depends on the Poisson’s ratio, and the stress becomes
independent of the elastic constants, a famous result going back to Mitchel (1899). This result is
the basis for the experimental technique of mapping out the stress ﬁeld by optical birefringence,
since the stress ﬁeld depends only on the geometry of the holes and not on the value of the
elastic constants.
We will return to discussing further properties of the CLM transformation and theorem
when we describe the eﬀective-medium approximation.
7.2.10 Relations between elastic moduli and thermoelastic properties
The thermal expansion coeﬃcient α of a material, which is a measure of its volumetric
strain due to a change in temperature under traction-free conditions, is an important property.
Levin (1967) showed that the eﬀective thermal expansion coeﬃcient αe of a two-phase isotropic
material, in which the two phases have thermal expansion coeﬃcients α1 and α2, is given by
αe = φ1α1 + φ2α2 +
α2 −α1
K−1
2
−K−1
1
 1
Ke
−
4 1
K
5
.
(1418)
Levin’s equation has been generalized to macroscopically anisotropic two-phase materials, poly-
crystals (Benveniste, 1996), and elastic-plastic two-phase composites (Dvorak, 1986). Rosen
457

and Hashin (1970) showed that the eﬀective speciﬁc heat (Cp)e of a two-phase isotropic material
at constant pressure is given by
(Cp)e = φ1Cp1 + φ2Cp2 + 9T

α2 −α1
K−1
2
−K−1
1
2  1
Ke
−
4 1
K
5
,
(1419)
from which, through use of thermodynamics, one can also compute the eﬀective speciﬁc heat
of the material at constant volume. The extension of these results to materials with more than
two phases appears not to be possible.
Let us end this section by noting that Grabovsky et al. (2000) developed a systematic pro-
cedure for ﬁnding exact relations for the eﬀective properties of materials, that are independent
of the microstructure, such as the Levin equation, Eq. (92).
7.3 Dispersion of Spherical Inclusions
The ﬁrst class of models that we consider consists of a continuous matrix of one material and
spherical inclusions of another material dispersed in the matrix. A great amount of work has
been done for estimating the linear elastic moduli of such models. We already summarized in
Section 7.2.2 the exact results for the elastic properties of regular arrays of spheres distributed
in a uniform background matrix.
In this section we describe and analyze the problem of
determining the elastic properties of composite materials that consist of one or two spherical
inclusions inserted in a uniform background matrix, which also serve as an approximation to
the true problem of determining the elastic properties of a composite material composed of a
random dispersion of inclusions in a uniform matrix.
7.3.1 The dilute limit: A single sphere
The simplest model to consider is an inﬁnite matrix of a material in which a single spherical
inclusion has been inserted. Suppose that a strain ﬁeld ϵ0 is applied to the material at inﬁnity.
If r is the position vector emanating from the center of the sphere, then, to determine the
displacement ﬁeld u one must solve Eq. (60) for the region inside the sphere, where the Lam´e
constants are λ1 and µ1, and Eq. (58) for the region outside the sphere (within the matrix),
where the Lam´e constants are λ2 and µ2. The boundary conditions are the continuity of the
displacement ﬁeld u, and of the radial component of the stress ﬁeld, σ · n (where n = r/|r|),
at the interface between the inclusion and the matrix. In addition, as r →∞, one must have
u = ϵ0 · r.
458

The solution of this problem in 3D for a hydrostatic applied ﬁeld, i.e., one with ϵ0 = (ϵ0/d)U
(where U is the second-order identity tensor), and also for an applied deviatoric strain ﬁeld,
i.e., one with Tr(ϵ0) = 0 (where Tr denotes the trace operation), was derived a long time ago by
Goodier (1933). More generally, such solutions can be derived for any d ≥2. For a hydrostatic
applied ﬁeld, one has
u =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
(1 −K21)ϵ0 · r ,
r ≤a ,
ϵ0 · r + K21ϵ0 · r
a
r
d
,
r ≥a ,
(1420)
where a is the radius of the sphere, and K21 is the d−dimensional bulk modulus polarizability,
given by
K21 =
K2 −K1
K2 + 2d−1(d −1)µ1
.
(1421)
The local strain ﬁeld ϵ within the inclusion is uniform and is related to the applied strain by
ϵ = (1 −K21)ϵ0 for r < a. The strain ﬁeld for the region outside the sphere is obtained by
using Eq. (2) and the solution for u, Eq. (94).
The solution for the case in which a deviatoric strain ﬁeld is applied to the material is more
complex. The most general form of the solution for the d isplacement ﬁeld is now given by
u = (1 + c1)ϵ0 · r ,
r ≤a ,
(1422)
u = ϵ0 · r + c2ϵ0 : ∇
 1
rd−2

+ c3ϵ0 : ∇∇∇
 1
rd−2

+ c4ϵ0 : ∇∇∇
+
rd−2,
,
r ≥a , (1423)
where c1, c2, c3, and c4 are four constants that must be determined from the boundary condi-
tions. If
h1 = µ1[d2K1 + 2(d + 1)(d −2)µ1]
2d(K1 + 2µ1)
,
(1424)
then in terms of the d−dimensional shear modulus polarizability µ21,
µ21 = µ2 −µ1
µ2 + h1
,
(1425)
the displacement ﬁeld within the sphere is given by
u = (1 −µ21)ϵ0 · r ,
r ≤a ,
(1426)
i.e., c1 = −µ21. If
A =
ad(µ1 −µ2)
µ1[d3K1 + 2d(d + 1)(d −2)µ1] + µ2[2d2(K1 + 2µ1)] ,
459

then, c2 = 2A(d + 2)[dK1 + 2(d −1)µ1], c3 = a2A[dK1 + (d −2)µ1], and c3 = A(d + 2)[dK1 +
(d −2)µ1]. Similar to the case of an applied hydrostatic ﬁeld, the local strain ﬁeld within the
inclusion is uniform and is given by, ϵ = (1 −µ21)ϵ0, for r < a. The strain ﬁeld for the region
outside the sphere is obtained by using Eq. (2) and the solution for u.
These results can be extended to the case in which an ellipsoidal inclusion is embedded
within the matrix. The derivation of the results is, however, considerably more complex than
for the spherical inclusion; see Mura (1987).
One may also think of the single inclusion model as a two-phase material with many spherical
inclusions which, however, do not interact with each other. Based on this assumption, one can
obtain estimates for the eﬀective bulk and shear moduli of the material which, however, would
be accurate only when the inclusion volume fraction φ2 is small. As such, the approximation is
a type of mean-ﬁeld approach to the problem. Hence, suppose that a simple shear deformation
at a large distance from the inclusion is imposed on the composite material. Then, according
to the theoretical developments of Section 7.1.4, we may write
2µe⟨e⟩= 2µ1⟨e⟩+ 1
Ω

Ωi
(λ2ϵkkδij + 2µ2ϵij −λ1ϵkkδij −2µ1ϵij)dΩi ,
(1427)
where µe is the eﬀective shear modulus of the composite, Ωi is the volume of the spherical
inclusion, and ⟨e⟩is the mean shear strain. Eshelby (1957) showed that a single ellipsoidal
inclusion in an inﬁnite matrix is in a state of homogeneous deformation, corresponding to what
is imposed on the matrix at large distances from the inclusion. Therefore, using Eshelby’s
result, Eq. (101) can be rewritten as
µe⟨e⟩= µ1⟨e⟩+ φ2(µ2 −µ1)⟨e2⟩,
(1428)
where φ2 = Ωi/Ωis the sphere’s volume fraction, and ⟨e2⟩is the uniform shear in the inclusion.
Solving Eq. (102) for the eﬀective shear modulus µe, we obtain
µe −µ1
µ2 −µ1
= ⟨e2⟩
⟨e⟩φ2 ,
(1429)
which predicts a linear dependence of µe on the sphere’s volume fraction. In a similar way, we
obtain an expression for the eﬀective bulk modulus Ke of the composite:
Ke −K1
K2 −K1
= ⟨ϵ2⟩
⟨ϵ⟩φ2 ,
(1430)
460

which is completely similar to Eq. (103); here ⟨ϵ⟩is the average dilatational strain, and ⟨ϵ2⟩is
the corresponding uniform strain in the inclusion. Equations (103) and (104) resemble some-
what the Maxwell-Garnett approximation for the eﬀective conductivity and dielectric constant
of composite solids described in Section 4.9.4.
7.3.2 Non-dilute dispersions
To make further progress and understand the elastic propertries of composite solids in the
non-dilute limit, one must go beyond the single-sphere limit analyzed in the last section. In
order to be able to do this, we ﬁrst derive and discuss a general expression for the elastic
moduli of a composite containing a distribution of spherical inclusions. The analysis that we
present here is due to Chen and Acrivos (1978b). One goal of discussing their analysis here is to
demonstrate the complexities that are involved in analyzing the elastic properties of composite
materials, even when they are modelled as a seemingly simple dispersion of spheres embedded
in a uniform background matrix.
With the use of the divergence theorem, Eq. (40) can be rewritten as
⟨σij⟩= λ1⟨ϵkk⟩δij + 2µ1⟨ϵij⟩+ 1
Ω
N

m=1

Am
[xjσiknk −λ1nkukδij −µ1(uinj + ujni)]dAm , (1431)
where Am is the surface of the mth inclusion, x (with components xi) is the position vector
with respect to a ﬁxed origin, and n (with components ni) is the unit outer vector normal to
Am. The quantity
Sij =

Ar
[xjσiknk −λ1uknkδij −µ1(uinj + ujni)]dAr ,
(1432)
called the stresslet and, as shown below, is the key to calculating the average stress ﬁeld in the
material and hence its elastic properties. Equation (105) is now rewritten as
⟨σij⟩= λ1⟨ϵkk⟩δij + 2µ1⟨ϵij⟩+ n⟨Sij⟩,
(1433)
where n = φ2/Ωp is the number density of the inclusions in the material, φ2 is their volume
fraction, and Ωp = 4πa3/3 is the volume of a single particle of radius a. The quantity ⟨Sij⟩is
the volume average of Sij over all the particles, and is given by
⟨Sij⟩=

Sij(C|0)P(C|0)dC .
461

Here, P(C|0) is the probability density function of the conﬁguration C of the material with
the reference sphere at the origin. If the spheres volume fraction φ2 ≪1, so that the particle-
particle interactions can be neglected, ⟨Sij⟩can be approximated by S(0)
ij , the value of Sij for a
single inclusion in an inﬁnite matrix (see above). In this limit, Eq. (107) becomes
⟨σij⟩= λ1⟨ϵkk⟩δij + 2µ1⟨ϵij⟩+ φ2
vp
S(0)
ij + O(φ2
2) .
(1434)
If the applied strain at inﬁnity is set equal to the bulk strain ⟨ϵij⟩, then, the solution for S(0)
ij is
given by
S(0)
ij = vpγ1

K1 + 4
3µ1

⟨ϵkk⟩δij + 40πa3µ1γ2(1 −νp1)

⟨ϵij⟩−1
3⟨ϵkk⟩δij

,
(1435)
where γ1 = 3(K2−K1)/(3K2+4µ1), and γ2 = (β−1)/[2β(4−5νp1)+(7−5νp1)], with β = νp2/νp1
being the ratio of the Poisson’s ratios of the inclusions (phase 2) and the matrix (phase 1).
Therefore, if the eﬀective moduli are deﬁned by
⟨σij⟩≡λe⟨ϵkk⟩δij + 2µe⟨ϵij⟩,
(1436)
we obtain
µe
µ1
= 1 + 15γ2(1 −νp1)φ2 + O(φ2
2) ,
(1437)
λe
λ1
= 1 + 1
λ1

γ1

K1 + 4
3µ1

−10µ1γ2(1 −νp1)

φ2 + O(φ2
2) ,
(1438)
which are similar to what we already obtained in the last section with a single spherical inclu-
sion, except that they now contain an O(φ2
2) term.
To derive the O(φ2
2) terms of the above expressions, one must compute the dipole, S(1) =
S −S(0) [or, in component form, S(1)
ij = Sij −S(0)
ij ], on the reference sphere, due to the presence
of the second sphere, which, due to linearity of the problem, must be linear in ⟨ϵ⟩(or, in
component form, must be linear in ⟨ϵij⟩). Therefore, its general form is given by
S(1)
ij = F1⟨ϵkk⟩δij + F2⟨ϵkl⟩rkrl
R2 δij + F3⟨ϵkk⟩rirj
R2 + F4

⟨ϵij⟩−1
3⟨ϵkk⟩δij

+F5⟨ϵkl⟩
rirkδjl + rjrkδil
R2
−2
3
rkrl
R2 δij

+ F6⟨ϵkl⟩rkrl
R2
rirj
R2 −1
3δij

,
(1439)
where the scalar functions Fi depend on the properties of the two spheres and ρ = a/R, with
R = |r| being the distance between the centers of two spheres of radius a, assuming that the
462

reference sphere is at the origin and the second sphere is at r = {ri}. The functions Fi are
given by
F1
=
−80
3 πa3µ1(1 −νp1)γ1γ2ρ3 + 100
3 πa3µ1(1 −νp1)(5 −4νp1)γ2
2ρ3 + F ′
1 ,
F2
=
40πa3µ1(1 −νp1)γ1γ2ρ3 + F ′
2 ,
F3
=
40πa3µ1(1 −νp1)γ1γ2ρ3 −100πa3µ1(1 −νp1)(5 −4νp1)γ2
2ρ3 + F ′
3 ,
F4
=
−200πa3µ1(1 −νp1)(1 −2νp1)γ2
2ρ3 + F ′
4 ,
F5
=
−600πa3µ1(1 −νp1)νp1γ2
2ρ3 + F ′
5 ,
F6
=
1500πa3µ1(1 −νp1)γ2
2ρ3 + F ′
6 .
(1440)
We now write Eq. (107) as
⟨σij⟩= λ1⟨ϵkk⟩δij +2µ1⟨ϵij⟩+nS(0)
ij +n

r

S(1)
ij (r|0)P(r|0) −S(0)
ij [ϵ(1)]P(r)

dr+O(φ3
2) . (1441)
Here, ϵ(1) = ϵ−⟨ϵ⟩is the excess strain at the origin due to a single sphere being at r undergoing
the applied strain ⟨ϵ⟩. As pointed out by Jeﬀrey (1974), the second term of the integral in Eq.
(115) is necessary in order to make the integral absolutely convergent.
We now need to compute the probabilities P(r|0) and P(r) which are, respectively, the
probability of having a sphere at r with and without a sphere at the origin. For a random
distribution of spheres in a matrix (the Swiss-cheese model) one has (see Chapter 3), P(r) = n,
where n is the number density of the spheres. To specify P(r|0) one assumes that the second
sphere can be anywhere in the matrix, but cannot overlap with the test sphere. Therefore,
P(r|0) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
0
R < 2a
n
R ≥2a ,
where R is the distance between the centers of the two spheres of radius a.
If (the center of) a sphere is at r = {ri}, and the applied strain at inﬁnity is ⟨ϵ⟩, then
Eshelby (1961) calculated the excess strain ϵ(1) at the origin:
ϵ(1)
ij =
1
8π(1 −νp1) ekl
∂4h
∂ri∂rj∂rk∂rl
−1
4π

eik
∂2˜h
∂rk∂rj
+ ejk
∂2˜h
∂rk∂ri

−
νp1
4π(1 −νp1)ekk
∂2˜h
∂ri∂rj
,
(1442)
with
eij = −3(1 −νp1)
1 + νp1
γ1⟨ϵkk⟩δij −15γ2(1 −νp1)

⟨ϵij⟩−1
3⟨ϵkk⟩δij

,
463

h =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
πa4 + 2
3πa2R2 −π
15R4
R ≤a
4π
3 a3R + 4π
15
a5
R
R ≥a ,
˜h =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
2πa2 −2π
3 R2
R ≤a
4πa2
3
1
R
R ≥a .
Therefore, one obtains
⟨σij⟩=

A −2
3B

⟨ϵkk⟩δij + 2B⟨ϵij⟩,
(1443)
so that
Ke = A ,
µe = B ,
(1444)
where
A = K1
2
1 + γ1

1 + 4µ1
3K1

φ2 + γ2
1

1 + 4µ1
3K1

×
⎡
⎢⎢⎣1 +
27
 ∞
2a

F ′
1 + 1
3F ′
2 + 1
3F ′
3

R2dR
4πa6γ2
1(3K1 + 4µ1)
⎤
⎥⎥⎦φ2
2
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
,
(1445)
B = µ1

1 + 15γ2(1 −νp1)φ + 30γ2
2(1 −νp1)(4 −5νp1)
×
⎡
⎢⎢⎣1 +
3
 ∞
2a

F ′
4 + 2
3F ′
5 + 2
15F ′
6

R2dR
80πa6µ1γ2
2(1 −νp1)(4 −5νp1)
⎤
⎥⎥⎦φ2
2
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
.
(1446)
Thus, the procedure to calculate the eﬀective elastic properties of the composite material
is as follows. One ﬁrst solves the problem for a composite that consists of a matrix and two
spherical inclusions. The solution of this problem is described and discussed in the following
section. From this solution, S = {Sij}, S(0) = {S(0)
ij }, and hence S(1) = S −S(0) are computed.
Using Eq. (114), the functions Fi and hence, via Eqs. (115), F ′
i are computed, from which the
elastic moduli Ke = A and µe = B are calculated. We now describe and discuss the technique
for deriving the solution of the two-sphere problem.
7.3.3 Two spherical inclusions
This problem was analyzed by Chen and Acrivos (1978a). Due to linearity of the problem,
its solution can be obtained as a superposition of the solutions for the following four independent
applied strains:
(1) ϵij = δij ,
(2) ϵij = δi1δj1 + δi2δj2 −2δi3δj3 ,
464

(3) ϵij = δi1δj2 + δi2δj1 ,
(4) ϵij = δi2δj3 + δi3δj2 ,
(1447)
where the x3−axis is along the line of centers of the spheres. The ﬁrst two strains give rise
to axisymmetric problems that can be solved for the general case of two elastic spheres in an
inﬁnite matrix. Cases (3) and (4) are, however, more complex, and therefore Chen and Acrivos
(1978a) considered the limiting cases in which the two inclusions were either totally rigid or
were cavities. In what follows, we summarize and discuss their solutions.
The centers of the two spheres are located at O(x, y, z) and O1(x1, y1, z1), where zz1 is along
the line that connects the centers, with R being the distance between them. The two sets of
coordinates, one for each sphere, are related by, x = x1, y = y1, and z = z1 + R. Therefore, in
spherical coordinates, we have
x = r sin θ cos α
x1 = r1 sin θ1 cos α
y = r sin θ sin α
y1 = r1 sin θ1 sin α
(1448)
z = r cos θ
z1 = r1 cos θ1
where r ≥0, r1 ≤∞, θ ≥0, θ1 ≤π, and 0 ≤α ≤2π.
In the absence of body forces, the general solution for the displacement equations,
∂2uj
∂xi∂xj
+ (1 −2νp)∂2ui
∂x2
j
= 0 ,
(1449)
is represented in terms of the the Boussinesq-Papkovich stress functions (Eubanks and Stern-
berg, 1956) as
2µui = ∂ψ
∂xi
+ xj
∂τj
∂xi
−(3 −4νp)τi = ∂ψ
∂xi
+ ∂(xjτj)
∂xi
−4(1 −νp)τi ,
(1450)
with ∇2ψ = ∇2τi = 0. It is well known (Naghdi and Hsu, 1961) that, of the four harmonic
functions given in Eq. (124), only three are independent. However, by retaining all of them
one can arbitrarily either eliminate one or combine two of them in order to analyze particular
cases. When the problem is axisymmetric, only two functions are needed, namely ψ and τ3,
with x3 being the axis of symmetry.
The boundary conditions that must be satisﬁed are that, far from the inclusions the dis-
placement ﬁeld must approach that of the corresponding loading, and that the displacement
and the traction be continuous on the surface of each sphere. If the spheres are rigid, the total
force and couple acting on each of them must be zero.
465

Axisymmetric solution for ϵ∞
ij = δij
With this boundary condition, the corresponding displacement and stress ﬁelds are
u∞
i = x∗
i
(1451)
σ∞
ij = 3K1δij
(1452)
where x∗
i is at the midpoint between the two spheres’ centers. In spherical coordinates with
their origin at O, Eqs. (125) and (126) become
u∞
r
=
r −1
2R cos θ ,
u∞
θ = 1
2R sin θ ,
u∞
α = 0
(1453)
σ∞
rr
=
σ∞
θθ = σ∞
αα = 3K1 ,
σ∞
rθ = σ∞
rα = σ∞
θα = 0 .
(1454)
Since the solution to this case involves only two stress functions ψ and τ3, which depend only
on r and θ, the displacement ﬁeld is represented as:
(a) Outside the spheres:
2µ1u
=
2µ1u∞+ ∇ζ + ∇(zψ + z1ψ1) −4(1 −νp1)(ψ + ψ1)ez
(1455)
ζ
=
∞

n=0

An
an+3
rn+1 Pn(cos θ) + A1
n
an+3
rn+1
1
Pn(cos θ1)

(1456)
ψ
=
∞

n=0
Cn
an+2
rn+1 Pn cos θ ,
ψ1 =
∞

n=0
Cn
an+2
rn+1
1
Pn(cos θ1) ,
(1457)
where Pn(x) is the Legendre polynomial of order n.
(b) Inside sphere centered at O:
2µ2u = ∇η + ∇(zξ) −4(1 −νp2)ξez .
(1458)
with
η =
∞

n=0
Bn
rn
an−2Pn(cos θ) ,
ξ =
∞

n=0
Dn
rn
an−1Pn(cos θ) .
(1459)
A similar expression can be written down for the region inside sphere centered at O1. The
relations between the harmonic functions referred to each of the two spheres are given by
Hobson (1931):
P m
n (cos θ)
rn+1
=
∞

s=m
(s + n)!
(s + m)!(n −m)!
rs
1
Rs+n+1(−1)s+mP m
s (cos θ1).
(1460)
466

P m
n (cos θ1)
rn+1
1
=
∞

s=m
(s + n)!
(s + m)!(n −m)!
rs
Rs+n+1(−1)n+mP m
s (cos θ).
(1461)
where r1 > 0 and r < R.
In order to satisfy the boundary conditions at the surface of the sphere centered at O, Eq.
(129) should be written in terms of the (r, θ, α) coordinates. Using z1 = z + R and Eqs. (134)
and (135), we obtain
2µ1u = 2µ1u∞+ ∇(ζ −Rψ1) + ∇[z(ψ + ψ1)] −4(1 −νp1)(ψ −ψ1)ez ,
(1462)
ζ −Rψ1 =
∞

n=0

An
an+3
rn+1 Pn(cos θ) + (A1
na −RC1
n)an+2
∞

s=0
gns(−1)nrsPs(cos θ)

,
(1463)
ψ + ψ1 =
∞

n=0

Cn
an+2
rn+1 Pn(cos θ) + C1
nan+2
∞

s=0
gns(−1)nrsPs(cos θ)

,
(1464)
where
gns = (s + n)!
s! n!
R−(s+n+1).
The corresponding displacement and stress ﬁelds are then given by
ur
=
u∞
r +
1
2µ1
∞

n=0

−An
(n + 1)an+3
rn+2
Pn −Cn
an+2
rn+1
n + 4 −4νp1
2n + 1
×[(n + 1)Pn+1 + nPn−1] + (A1
na −RC1
n)an+2
∞

s=0
gns(−1)nrs−1sPs
+C1
nan+2
∞

s=0
gns(−1)nrss −3 + 4νp1
2s + 1
[(s + 1)Ps+1 + sPs−1]

,
(1465)
uθ = u∞
θ −sin θ
2µ1
∞

n=0

An
an+3
rn+2 P ′
n + Cn
an+2
rn+1
1
2n + 1 × [(n −3 + 4νp1)P ′
n+1 + (n + 4 −4νp1)P ′
n−1]
+(A1
na −RC1
n)an+2
∞

s=0
gns(−1)nrs−1P ′
s + C1
nan+2
×
∞

s=0
gns(−1)nrs
1
2s + 1[(s −3 + 4νp1)P ′
s−1 + (s + 4 −4νp1)P ′
s+1)

(1466)
uα = 0
(1467)
and
σrr
=
σ∞
rr +
∞

n=0

An(n + 1)(n + 2)an+3
rn+3 Pn + +Cn
an+2
rn+2
n + 1
2n + 1
×[(n + 4 −4νp1)nPn−1 + (n2 + 5n + 4 −2νp1)Pn+1] + (A1
na −RC1
n)an+2
×
∞

s=0
gns(−1)ns(s −1)rs−2Ps + C1
nan+2
∞

s=0
gns(−1)nrs−1
s
2s −1
×[(s2 −3s −2νp1)Ps−1 + (s + 1)(s −3 + 4νp1)Ps+1]

(1468)
467

σrθ
=
σ∞
rθ + sin θ
∞

n=0

An(n + 2)an+3
rn+3 P ′
n + Cn
an+2
rn+2
1
2n + 1[(n2 + 2n −1 + 2νp1)P ′
n+1
+(n + 1)(n + 4 −4νp1)P ′
n−1] −(A1
na −RC1
n)an+2
∞

s=0
gnsrs−2(−1)n(s −1)P ′
s
−C1
nan+2
∞

s=0
gns
rs−1
2s + 1[(s −3 + 4νp1)sP ′
s+1 + (s2 −2 + 2νp1)P ′
s−1]

.
(1469)
σrα = 0 .
(1470)
In a similar way, the expressions for the displacement and the stress ﬁelds inside the sphere
centered at O are obtained:
u(I)
r
=
1
2µ2
∞

n=0

Dn
rn
an−1
n −3 + 4νp2
2n + 1
[(n + 1)Pn+1 + nPn−1] + Bn
nrn−1
an−2 Pn

,
(1471)
u(I)
θ
= −sin θ
2µ2
∞

n=0
2
Dn
rn
an−1
1
2n + 1[(n −3 + 4νp2)P ′
n+1 + (n + 4 −4νp2)P ′
n−1]
+Bn
rn−1
an−2P ′
n

,
(1472)
u(I)
α = 0
(1473)
and
σ(I)
rr =
∞

n=0

Dn
rn−1
an−1
n(n + 1)(n −3 + 4νp2)
2n + 1
Pn+1 + n(n2 −3n −2νp2)
2n + 1
Pn+1

+Bn
n(n −1)rn−2
an−2
Pn

,
(1474)
σ(I)
rθ = −sin θ
∞

n=0

Dn
rn−1
an−1
1
2n + 1

(n −3 + 4νp2)nP ′
n+1 + (n2 −2 + 2νp2)P ′
n−1

+Bn
rn−2
an−2(n −1)P ′
n

,
(1475)
σ(I)
rα = 0 .
(1476)
From the deﬁnition of the stresslet Sij, Eq. (106), and the exterior solution, we can now
easily determine that, for a sphere of radius a,
Sij = 4πa3(1 −νp1)
1 −2νp1
{A0δij + C1[δi1δj1 + δi2δj2 + (3 −4νp1)δi3δj3]} ,
(1477)
and
Sii = 4πa3(1 −νp1)
1 −2νp1
[3A0 + (5 −4νp1)C1] .
(1478)
468

Since the loading given by Eqs. (125) and (125) is symmetric both with respect to the axis of
symmetry of the two spheres and for equal-sized spheres, to the plane of symmetry perpendicu-
lar to this axis, we have, Am = (−1)mA1
m and Cm = (−1)m+1C1
m, implying that the two sphere
problem simpliﬁes to that of determining the unknown coeﬃcients Am and Cm by satisfying
the boundary conditions on the surface of sphere centered at O.
Substituting the exterior and the interior solutions, Eqs.
(139)-(150), in the boundary
conditions that require the continuity of displacement and traction at the interface between the
matrix and the spheres, and using the orthogonality of the Legendre polynomials, one obtains
a set of relations for the coeﬃcients Am, Bm, Cm and Dm. However, since the calculation of
the eﬀective bulk modulus Ke involves only Sii, which depends only on A0 and C1, the interior
coeﬃcients Bm and Dm are eliminated and one obtains
A0 + 5 −4νp1
3
C1 = 2µ1γ1 + 2
3γ1(1 −2νp1)
∞

s=0
Cs(s + 1)ρs+2 ,
(1479)
and for m ≥0
Am
=
2µ1γ1δm0 +
∞

s=0
as+m{(Asa + RCs)[M1gms + M2a2gs(m+2)]
−Cs[M3gs(m−1) + M4a2gs(m+1) + M5a4gs(m+3)]} ,
(1480)
Cm = −
∞

s=0
as+m+1{M6(Asa + RCs)gs(m+1) −Cs(M7gsm + M8a2gs(m+2))} ,
(1481)
where, as before, ρ = a/R, γ1 = 3(K2 −K1)/(3K2 + 3µ1), gms = [(s + m)!/s!m!]R−(s+m+1), and
the ﬁrst few Mis are given by
M1 =
m(1 −β)(m −1)(2m −1)
2[β(m −1)(3m −4mνp1 + 2 −2νp1) + (m2 + m + 1 −2mνp1 −νp1)] ,
M2 =
(1 −β)(2m + 5)(m + 1)(m + 5 −4νp1)
2[β(m + 1)(3m −4mνp1 + 8 −10νp1) + (m2 + 5m + 7 −2mνp1 −5νp1)] ,
M3 = m −4 + 4νp1
2m −1
M1 .
Equations (153)-(155) can be solved by expanding Am and Cm as power series in ρ and obtaining
a recurrence formula for the appropriate coeﬃcients. Since to compute the stresslet Sij only
A0 is needed, we quote the result:
A0
γ1µ1
= 2 +
5(1 −β)(5 −4νp1)
2β(4 −5νp1) + (7 −5νp1)ρ3 −
50(1 −β)2(5 −4νp1)(2 −νp1)
[2β(4 −5νp1) + (7 −5νp1)]2
469

+
20(1 −νpM)(1 −2νpM)
2β(4 −5νpM) + (7 −5νpM)γ1

ρ6 + O(ρ8) .
(1482)
Axisymmetric solution for ϵ∞
ij = δi1δj1 + δi2δj2 −2δi3δj3
In this case, the displacement and the stress ﬁelds at inﬁnity are (with x∗
j taken from the
midpoint of the centers of the two spheres)
u∞
i = x∗
1δi1 + x∗
2δi2 −2x∗
3δi3 ,
(1483)
σ∞
ij = 2µ1(δi1δj1 + δi1δj2 −2δi3δj3) .
(1484)
Since the system is also axisymmetric, the method is exactly the same as that for the ﬁrst
case, the only diﬀerence being in the ﬁeld applied at inﬁnity. The solutions for the unknown
coeﬃcients Am and Cm are therefore similar to Eqs. (153)-(155), except that the terms before
the summation signs are 5µ1(5−4νp1)γ2δm0+6µ1γ2δm2 in the equation for Am, and −15µ1γ2δm1
in the equation for Cm, where, as before, γ2 = (β −1)/[2β(4 −5νp1) + (7 −5νp1)]. Hence,
A0
γ2µ1
= 5(5 −4νp1) +

−50(5 −4νp1)(2 −νp1)(1 −β)
2β(4 −5νp1) + (7 −5νp1)
−20γ1(1 −2νp1)

ρ3 + O(ρ5) .
(1485)
Asymmetric solution for ϵ∞
ij = δi1δj2 + δi2δj1
The corresponding displacement and stress at inﬁnity are
u∞
i = x∗
2δi1 + x∗
1δi2 ,
(1486)
σ∞
ij = 2µ1(δi1δj2 + δi2δj1) .
(1487)
Transforming to the center of the sphere centered at O in spherical coordinates yields
u∞
r
=
r
3P 2
2 (cos θ) sin 2α ,
u∞
θ
=
−r sin θ
6
P 2′
2 sin 2α ,
(1488)
u∞
α
=
r
3 sin θP 2
2 cos 2α .
σ∞
rr
=
2µM
3 P 2
2 sin 2α ,
σ∞
rθ
=
−µM sin θ
3
P 2′
2 sin 2α ,
(1489)
σ∞
rα
=
2µM
3 sin θP 2
2 cos 2α ,
470

where the P m
n ’s are the associated Legendre polynomials and, P m′
n (x) = dP m
n (x)/dx. To satisfy
the conditions at inﬁnity, we take into account that the displacement and stresses are all
proportional to cos 2α or sin 2α, and choose the four stress functions as:
ψ = ψ∗sin α ,
(1490)
τ1 = τ ∗
1 sin α ,
τ2 = τ ∗
1 cos α ,
τ3 = τ ∗
3 sin 2α ,
(1491)
where ψ∗, τ ∗
1 and τ ∗
3 depend only on r and θ. In Eqs. (164) and (165), the four stress functions
are combined to yield three independent functions.
The solution of the displacement ﬁeld
outside the two spheres is then represented by
2µ1u
=
2µ1u∞+ ∇(ψ∗sin 2α) + ∇(xτ sin α + yτ cos α + zξ sin 2α
+z1ξ1 sin 2α) −4(1 −νp1)[τ sin α, τ cos α, (ξ + ξ1) sin 2α] ,
(1492)
where
ψ∗
=
∞

n=2

An
an+3
rn+1 P 2
n(cos θ) + A1
n
an+3
rn+1
1
P 2
n(cos θ1)

,
τ
=
∞

n=1

Bn
an+2
rn+1 P 1
n(cos θ) + Bn
an+2
rn+1
1
(cos θ1)

,
(1493)
ξ
=
∞

n=2
Cn
an+2
rn+1 P 2
n(cos θ) ,
ξ1 =
∞

n=2
C1
n
an+2
rn+1 P 2
n(cos θ1) .
Since the boundary conditions on the surfaces of both spheres must be satisﬁed, Eq. (166) is
ﬁrst expressed in terms of the coordinates (r, θ, α) with respect to spheres centered at O and O1
using z = z1 + R, and the relations between the harmonic functions referred to each of the two
spheres, Eqs. (134) and (135). Because the spheres are identical, the system is symmetric with
respect to the plane passing through the midpoint of the distance between the spheres’ centers
and perpendicular to the common axis of the system. Therefore, one obtain, An = (−1)nA1
n,
Bn = (−1)n+1B1
n, and Cn = (−1)n+1C1
n. Hence, only the boundary conditions on one of the
spheres must be satisﬁed. For this applied strain, the only non-zero component of the stresslet
of the reference sphere of radius a is
S21 = S12 = 8πa3(1 −νp1)B1 .
(1494)
Chen and Acrivos (1978a) derived the solutions for the limiting cases of either rigid particles
or cavities.
471

In the case of the rigid inclusions, the displacements on the surfaces vanish, i.e., because
of the symmetry of the problem, ui = 0. Upon satisfying this condition on the surface of the
sphere centered at O, one obtains a set of equations relating An, Bn and Cn which, when solved,
yields the solutions in terms of power series in ρ. In particular,
BI
1 = 5 −25(1 −2νp1)
2(4 −5νp1) ρ3 −
15
4 −5νp1
ρ5 + 125(1 −2νp1)2
4(4 −5νp1)2 ρ6 + O(ρ8) .
(1495)
where the superscript I denotes multiplication of the corresponding quantity by 2(4−5νp1)/µ1.
When the inclusions are cavities, the proper boundary condition becomes σijnj = 0, where
n is the unit normal vector of the surfaces. Thus,
σrr = σrθ = σrα = 0 ,
at r = a .
(1496)
After satisfying the boundary conditions, one again obtains a set of equations for the coeﬃcients
An, Bn and Cn, the solutions of which are power series in ρ. In particular,
BII
1 = −5 −25(1 −2νp1)
7 −5νp1
ρ3 −
30
7 −5νp1
ρ5 −125(1 −2νp1)2
(7 −5νp1)2
ρ6
−
300(1 −2νp1)
7 −5νp1
+ 75(9 −44νp1 + 77ν2
p1)
2(13 −7νp1)(7 −5νp1)

ρ8 + O(ρ9) ,
(1497)
where superscript II indicates multiplication of the corresponding quantity by (7 −νp1)/µ1.
Asymmetric solution for ϵ∞
ij = δi2δj3 + δj3δj2
The corresponding displacement and stress at inﬁnity are
u∞
i = x∗
2δi3 + x∗
3δi2 ,
(1498)
σ∞
ij = 2µ1(δi2δj3 + δi3δj2) .
(1499)
In the new coordinates with the origin being at O, Eqs. (172) and (173) become
u∞
r
=
2
3rP 1
2 −1
2RP 1
1

sin α ,
u∞
θ
=

−1
3rP 1′
2 + 1
2RP 1′
1

sin θ sin α
(1500)
u∞
α
=
1
3rP 1
2 −1
2RP 1
1
 cos α
sin θ ,
σ∞
rr
=
4
3µ1P 1
2 sin α ,
σ∞
rθ
=
−2
3µ1P 1′
2 sin θ sin α
(1501)
σ∞
rα
=
2
3 sin θµ1P 1
2 cos α .
472

Since the displacements and stresses are all proportional to either sin α or cos α, the four stress
functions are chosen as
ψ = ψ∗(r, θ) sin α ,
τ1 = 0 ,
τ2 = τ ∗
2 (r, θ) ,
τ3 = τ ∗
3 (r, θ) sin α .
(1502)
Using the multipole expansion method (see Chapter 4), the displacement ﬁeld outside the two
spheres is expressed as
2µ1u = 2µ1u∞+∇(ψ∗sin α)+∇(yτ+zξ sin α+z1ξ1 sin α)−4(1−νp1)[0, τ, (ξ+ξ1) sin α] , (1503)
where
ψ∗
=
∞

n=1

An
an+3
rn+1 P 1
n(cos θ) + A1
n
an+3
rn+1
1
P 1
n(cos θ1)

,
τ
=
∞

n=0
 
Bn
an+2
rn+1 Pn(cos θ) + B1
n
an+2
rn+1
1
Pn(cos θ1)

,
(1504)
ξ
=
∞

n=1
Cn
an+2
rn+1 P 1
n(cos θ) ,
ξ1 =
∞

n=1
C1
n
an+2
rn+1
1
P 1
n(cos θ1) .
One again follows the procedures described above by transforming the origin to O and satisfying
the boundary conditions. However, unlike the previous case, there is no plane of symmetry in
this system. Nevertheless, one ﬁnds that the solution of this case should be symmetric with
respect to the midpoint of the spheres’ centers. Thus, one has
ur(r, θ, α)
=
u′
r(r, π −θ, π + α) ,
uθ(r, θ, α)
=
u′
θ(r, π −θ, π + α) ,
(1505)
uα(r, θ, α)
=
u′
α(r, π −θ, π + α) ,
where the primes denote the quantities referred to the origin being at O1.
Therefore, one
obtains, An = (−1)nA1
n, Bn = (−1)n+1B1
n and Cn = (−1)n+1C1
n, which satisfy the two-sphere
problem. In order to solve for the unknown coeﬃcients An, Bn and Cn, the boundary conditions
on the surface of the sphere centered at O must be satisﬁed. The stresslet for this applied strain
is then given by
Sij = 8πa3B1(1 −νp1)(δi2δj3 + δi3δj2) .
(1506)
For the case of the rigid inclusions, the displacement must be continuous and the net force
and torque must vanish there. Since on the sphere centered at O,
473

total force =
 σijnjdS = 8πa2B0(1 −νp1)δi2 ,
total torque =
 ϵijknjσkmnmdS = 8πa2(C1 −B1)δi1 ,
we conclude that B0 = 0 and C1 = B1, conditions that are necessary for obtaining a unique
solution for rigid spheres, but not for cavities.
The rigid particle displacement on sphere
centered at O under the applied strain ϵ∞
ij = δi2δj3 + δi3δj2 is expressed in the form, u(p)
i
=
V (p)δi2 + aΩ(p)ϵi1knk, where the function V (p) and Ω(p) depend upon ρ = a/R and the elastic
moduli of the matrix. After satisfying the boundary conditions on the surface of the sphere
centered at O, a set of relations for An, Bn and Cn is obtained which are solved using the
method described above. In particular,
BI
1 = 5 −25(1 + νp1)
2(4 −5νp1)ρ3 +
60
4 −5νp1
ρ5 + 125(1 + νp1)2
4(4 −5νp1)2 ρ6
+
150(18 −23νp1 + 14ν2
p1)
(4 −5νp1)(11 −14νp1) −225(4 + νp1)
2(4 −5νp1)2

ρ8 + O(ρ9) ,
(1507)
where, as before, the superscript I denotes multiplication of the corresponding quantity by
2(4 −5νp1)/µ1. Similarly, in case of cavities, one obtains
BII
1 = −5 −25(1 + νp1)
7 −5νp1
ρ3 +
120
7 −5νp1
ρ5 −125(1 + νp1)2
(7 −5νp1)2 ρ6
+
15(1 + νp1)
7 −5νp1
+ 1200(1 + νp1)
(7 −5νp1)2
−30(139 + 38νp1 + 14ν2
p1)
(7 −5νp1)(13 −7νp1)

ρ8 + O(ρ9) .
(1508)
where, as before, BII
1 is deﬁned as B1 multiplied by the quantity (7 −5νp1)/µ1.
7.4 Exact Strong-Contrast Expansions
Torquato (1997, 1998) considered the general problem of exact determination of the eﬀective
stiﬀness tensor Ce of a macroscopically anisotropic two-phase material with an arbitrary, but
statistically homogeneous, morphology.
For the case in which the variations in the phase
stiﬀness tensors are small, formal perturbation series were derived by Dederichs and Zeller
(1973), Gubernatis and Krumhansl (1975), and Willis (1981).
Although such perturbation
expansions, which are valid at all volume fractions, have fundamental importance, as they lead
to rigorous bounds on the eﬀective properties of heterogeneous materials, they provide accurate
predictions only when the contrast between the properties of the two phases is small.
In the problems of determining the eﬀective conductivity and elastic moduli of heterogeneous
materials, one must usually deal with conditionally-convergent integrals, i.e., integrals that
474

depend on the materials’ macroscopic shape. However, this is physically unacceptable as the
eﬀective properties of a material cannot depend on its macroscopic shape. Therefore, proper
techniques must be developed in order to circumvent this diﬃculty, and develop formulations
that involve absolutely-convergent integrals.
We already described in Sections 4.3 and 4.5
how this diﬃculty is circumvented in the problem of determining the eﬀective conductivity of
disordered materials. To remove the conditionally-convergent integrals from the solutions of
these problems, a type of renormalization is carried out by identifying the contributions of such
integrals and replacing them by convergent terms that make the same contributions. Torquato’s
solution for the elasticity problem are free of such restrictions. In what follows we describe his
method and discuss the results.
7.4.1 Integral equation for the cavity strain ﬁeld
Consider a large but ﬁnite-sized, ellipsoidal macroscopically anisotropic composite material
in arbitary space dimension d, comprised of two isotropic phases. The microstructure possesses
a characteristic microscopic lenght scale which is much smaller than the smallest semi-axes of
the ellipsoid, and thus the material is statistically homogeneous. For now it is assumed that
the volume is ﬁnite, but the passage to the inﬁnite-volume limit will be taken at the end of the
analysis. The local stiﬀness tensor C(x) is given in terms of the local bulk modulus K(x) and
the local shear modulus µ(x) by the relation
C(x) = dK(x)Λh + 2µ(x)Λs ,
(1509)
or in component form
(Λh)ijkl = 1
dδijδkl,
i, j, k, l = 1, 2, ..., d,
(1510)
(Λs)ijkl = 1
2(δikδjl + δilδjk) −1
dδijδkl,
i, j, k, l = 1, 2, ..., d .
(1511)
The tensor Λh projects onto ﬁelds that are everywhere isotropic, i.e., hydrostatic ﬁelds, whereas
the tensor Λs projects onto ﬁelds that are everywhere trace-free, i.e., shear ﬁelds. Thus, we refer
to Λh and Λs as the hydrostatic projection tensor and the shear projection tensor, respectively.
The following identities will be useful in subsequent discussions,
(Λh)ijkl + (Λs)ijkl = Uijkl
(1512)
(Λh)ijkl(Λs)ijkl = (Λh)ijmn(Λs)mnkl = 0
(1513)
475

(Λh)ijklIijkl = (Λh)ijkl(Λh)ijkl = 1,
(1514)
(Λs)ijklIijkl = (Λs)ijkl(Λs)ijkl = 1
2(d −1)(d + 2) ,
(1515)
(Λh)ijmn(Λh)mnkl = (Λh)ijkl ,
(1516)
(Λs)ijmn(Λs)mnkl = (Λs)ijkl ,
(1517)
where Uijkl = 1
2(δikδjl + δilδjk) is the fourth-order unit tensor. The local stiﬀness tensor can be
written in terms of the phase stiﬀness
C(i) = dKiΛh + 2µiΛs ,
i = 1, 2
(1518)
by the relation
C(x) = C(1)m1(x) + C(2)m2(x) ,
(1519)
where
mp(x) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1
x in phase p
0
otherwise
is the chracteristic function of phase p, with p = 1, 2.
The d−dimensional ellipsoidal composite is now embedded in an inﬁnite reference phase q
which is subjected to an applied strain ﬁeld ϵ0(x) at inﬁnity. The reference phase is taken to
be either phase 1 or phase 2, i.e., q = 1 and 2. The local stress σ(x) is related to the local
strain ϵ(x) via Hooke’s law, Eq. (1), and, at steady state and in the absence of body forces F,
satisﬁes the simpliﬁed version of Eq. (4), i.e., ∇· σ = 0. If we introduce a polarization ﬁeld
deﬁned by
p(x) = [C(x) −C(q)] : ϵ(x) ,
(1520)
we can re-express the stress as
σ(x) = C(q)ϵ(x) + p(x) .
(1521)
The symmetric, second-order tensor p(x) is the induced polarization ﬁeld relative to the medium
in the absence of phase p, and hence vanishes in the reference phase q, but is non-zero in the
“polarized” phase p with p ̸= q. Throughout our discussion, the indices p and q will be used
only for the polarized and reference phases, respectively. The choice of which is the reference
or polarized phase is arbitrary; all the results are valid for any p ̸= q, i.e., p = 1 and q = 2 or
p = 2 and q = 1.
476

With the aid of Eq. (195), we can write
C(q)
ijkl
∂2ˆuk(x)
∂xj∂xl
= −∂pij(x)
∂xj
,
(1522)
with ˆuk(x) →0 as x →∞, where ˆu(x) is the displacement ﬁeld in excess of the displacement
ﬁeld u0(x) at inﬁnity, i.e., ˆu(x) = u(x) −u0(x). In component form, the Green function G(q)
ij
satisﬁes,
C(q)
ijkl
∂2G(q)
im(x, x′)
∂xj∂xl
= −δkmδ(x −x′) ,
(1523)
with G(q)
km(x −x′) →0 as x →∞. The physical interpretation of the Green function is similar
to that for the conduction problem discussed in Chapters 4 and 5: G(x, x′) is the strain at x
as a result of an applied stress at x′. Therefore,
ui(x) = u0
i (x) +

∂
∂xl
G(q)
ik (x, x′)pkl(x′)dx′ .
(1524)
Note that, because of the polarization p in Eq. (198), the integration volume extends only over
the region of space occupied by the ellipsoidal composite. It is not diﬃcult to show that in d
dimensions,
G(q)
ij (r) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
1
2Ωsµq
ln
1
r

δij + bqninj
d = 2
aq
δij
rd−2 + bq
ninj
rd−2
d ≥3
(1525)
with
aq =
1
2(d −2)Ωsµq
dKq + (3d −2)µq
dKq + 2(d −1)µq
,
(1526)
bq =
1
2Ωsµq
dKq + (d −2)µq
dKq + 2(d −1)µq
,
(1527)
where Ωs(d) = 2πd/2/Γ(d/2) is the total solid angle contained in a d−dimensional sphere, Γ(x)
is the gamma function, r = x−x′, and n = r/|r|. Since the Green function has a singularity at
x′ = x, one must exclude a small region containing this point. Roughly speaking, the integral
is convergent if it exists in the limit that the excluded region vanishes, independent of its shape.
According to this criterion then, the integral in Eq. (198) is convergent.
To obtain the strain ﬁeld, one must diﬀerentiate Eq. (162); however, because of the singular
nature of the integral, one cannot simply diﬀerentiate the integrand. If we exclude a spherical
region or “cavity” from the origin in Eq. (162), we ﬁnd that the components of the strain ﬁeld
are given by
ϵij(x) = ϵ0
ij(x) +

G(q)
ijkl(r)pkl(x′)dx′ ,
(1528)
477

where
G(q)
ijkl(r) = −A(q)
ijklδ(r) + H(q)
ijkl(r) .
(1529)
In Eq. (203), the components of the constant fourth-order tensor A(q) (that arises because of
the exclusion of the spherical cavity) are given by
A(q)
ijkl =
1
dKq + 2(d −1)µq
(Λh)ijkl +
d
(d + 2)µq

Kq + 2µq
dKq + 2(d −1)µq

(Λs)ijkl ,
(1530)
and H(q)(r) is a position-dependent fourth-order tensor given by
H(q)
ijkl = 1
2
 ˜H(q)
ijkl(r) + ˜H(q)
ijlk(r)

=
1
2Ωs[dKq + 2(d −1)µq]
1
rd [αqδijδkl −d(δikδjl + δilδjk)
−dαq(nknlδij + ninjδkl) + 1
2d(d −αq)(njnlδik + njnkδil + ninlδjk + ninkδjl)
+ dαq(d + 2)ninjnknl] ,
(1531)
where αq = dKq/µq + d −2. It is understood that integrals involving the tensor H(q) are to be
carried out with the exclusion of an inﬁnitesimal sphere in the limit that the sphere approaches
zero. The components of the tensor ˜H(q) are given by
˜H(q)
ijkl = 1
2
⎛
⎝∂2G(q)
ik
∂xj∂xl
+ ∂2G(q)
jk
∂xi∂xl
⎞
⎠.
(1532)
The symmetry of the polarization tensor p enables one to deﬁne the symmetric tensor H(q)
which is symmetric with respect to the ﬁrst two indices and the second two indices, as well as
with respect to interchange of ij and kl, i.e.,
H(q)
ijkl = H(q)
jikl = H(q)
ijlk = H(q)
klij .
Moreover, the integral of H(q)(r) over the surface of a sphere of radius a > 0 is identically zero,
i.e.,

r=a H(q)(r)dΩs = 0 .
(1533)
Some properties of the tensor H(q) that will be of use in the subsequent analysis are as follows,
H(q)
ijkk(r) =
d
Ωs[dKq + 2(d −1)µq]
1
rd(dninj −δij) ,
(1534)
478

H(q)
iikl(r) =
d
Ωs[dKq + 2(d −1)µq]
1
rd(dnknl −δkl) ,
(1535)
H(q)
iikk(r) = H(q)
ikik(r) = 0 .
(1536)
Moreover,
H(q)
iikl(r)H(q)
kljj(s) =
d3
Ω2
s[dKq + 2(d −1)µq]2
1
rd
1
sd[d(n · m)2 −1] ,
(1537)
H(q)
ijkl(r)H(q)
klij(r)
=
1
4Ω2
s[dKq + 2(d −1)µq]2
1
rd
1
sd{d(d + 2)α2
q[d(n · m)4 −3]
−
d(5d + 6)α2
q[d(n · m)2 −1] + 2d2(d −2)αq[d(n · m)2 −1]
+
d3(d + 2)[d(n · m)2 −1]} ,
(1538)
where m = s/|s| is a unit vector in the direction of s.
An integral equation for the “cavity” strain ﬁeld f is now introduced.
If Eq.
(203) is
substituted into Eq. (202), the following integral equation is obtained
f(x) = ϵ0(x) +

ϵ H(q)(x −x′) : p(x)dx′ ,
(1539)
which is related to the usual strain by
f(x) = {U + A(q) : [C(x) −C(q)]} : ϵ(x) ,
(1540)
with

ϵ dx′ ≡lim
ϵ→0

|x−x′|>ϵ dx′ ,
(1541)
that is, integration over the sample volume is carried out with the exclusion of an inﬁnitesimally
small sphere centered at x of radius ϵ, with the limit ϵ →0 ultimately taken. We refer to f(x)
as the cavity strain ﬁeld because, as can be seen from Eq. (214), it is a modiﬁed starin ﬁeld
equal to the usual strain plus a contribution involving the constant tensor A(q) which arises as
a result of excluding a spherical cavity from the origin. The cavity strain ﬁeld is the elasticity
analog of the Lorentz electric ﬁeld used in dielectric theory (see Chapters 4-6).
If we now combine Eq. (194) and (214), we obtain a relation between the stress polarization
and cavity strain ﬁeld, i.e.,
p(x) = L(q)(x) : f(x) ,
(1542)
where the fourth-order tensor L(q)(x) is given by
L(q)(x) = {C(x) −C(q)}{I + A(q) : [C(x) −C(q)]}−1 ,
(1543)
479

and has the same symmetry properties as the stiﬀness tensor C(x).
If the stiﬀness tensor
has an isotropic form, then L(q)(x) can be written as a constant tensor L(q) multiplied by the
characteristic indicator function mp(x), i.e.,
L(q)(x) = L(q)mp(x) ,
(1544)
with
L(q) = [dKq + 2(d −1)µq]

KpqΛh +
µq(d + 2)
d(Kq + 2µq)µpqΛs

,
(1545)
where
Kpq =
Kp −Kq
Kp + 2(d −1)
d
µq
,
(1546)
µpq =
µp −µq
µp + µq[dKq/2 + (d + 1)(d −2)µq/d]
Kq + 2µq
.
(1547)
Note that Kpq and µpq are not tensors. As pointed out earlier in Section 7.3.1, and in analogy
with the dielectric theory (see Chapters 4-6), one may refer to Kpq and µpq as the bulk modulus
polarizability and the shear modulus polarizability, respectively.
7.4.2 Exact series expansions
The eﬀective tensor L(q)
e
is deﬁned via the relation linking the average polarization to the
average cavity strain ﬁeld, that is,
⟨p(x)⟩= L(q)
e
: ⟨f(x)⟩,
(1548)
where
L(q)
e
=

Ce −C(q) 
U + A(q) :

Ce −C(q)−1 .
(1549)
The constitutive relation (222) is independent of the shape of the ellipsoidal composite in the
limit of inﬁnite volume. In light of Eq. (223), we see that the eﬀective tensor L(q)
e
has the same
symmetry properties as the Ce. Keeping in mind that the tensors L(q)(x), L(q)
e
and H(q) are all
associated with the reference phase q, we temporarily drop, in the subsequent discussions, the
superscript q when referring to these tensors.
We now wish to derive an explicit expression for the eﬀective moduli tensor Le using the
solution of the integral equation (213). It is not diﬃcult to show that
p = Lϵ0 + LHp .
(1550)
480

A solution for the polarization p in terms of an operator acting on the applied strain ﬁeld ϵ0 is
obtained by successive substitution using Eq. (224) with the result being
p = Lϵ0 + LHLϵ0 + LHLHLϵ0 + · · · = Tϵ0 ,
(1551)
where the fourth-order tensor operator T is given by
T = L(U −LH)−1 .
(1552)
More explicitly,
p(1) = L(1) : ϵ0(1) +

L : H(1, 2) : L(2) : ϵ0(2)d2
+

L(1) : H(1, 2) : L(2) : H(2, 3) : L(3) : ϵ0(3)d2d3 + · · · =

T(1, 2) : ϵ0(2)d2 .
(1553)
where the notation has been shortened by representing x and x′ by 1 and 2, respectively.
Ensemble averaging Eq. (225) yields
⟨p⟩= ⟨T⟩ϵ0 .
(1554)
Since the tensor H decays as r−d, ⟨T⟩at best involves conitionally convergent integrals and,
hence, must be dependent upon the shape of the ellipsoidal composite. Thus, the relation
between the polarization and the applied strain ﬁeld is non-local.
Given this non-locality,
the startegy for developing a local relation between the average polarization ⟨p⟩and ⟨f⟩as
prescribed by Eq. (222) is to eliminate the applied ﬁeld ϵ0 in favor of the appropriate average
ﬁeld. Thus, inverting Eq. (228) yields, ϵ0 = ⟨T⟩−1⟨p⟩, and from the relation, ⟨f⟩= ϵ0 + H⟨p⟩,
we obtain
⟨f⟩= X⟨p⟩,
(1555)
where
X = ⟨T⟩−1 + H .
(1556)
More explicitly, Eq. (193) reads
⟨f(x)⟩=

X(1, 2) · ⟨p(2)⟩d2 = ⟨L(1)⟩−1 : ⟨p(1)⟩
−
 
⟨L(1)⟩−1 : ⟨L(1) : H(1, 2) : L(2)⟩: ⟨L(2)⟩−1
−⟨L(1)⟩−1 : ⟨L(1)⟩: H(1, 2) : ⟨L(2)⟩: ⟨L(2)⟩−1
: ⟨p(2)⟩d2 −· · · ,
(1557)
481

which means that

L(q)
e
−1 = X .
(1558)
It is convenient to mutliply this equation by the constant fourth-order tensor L(q) from the left
to yield
L(q) 
L(q)
e
−1 = LX ,
(1559)
or, more explicitly,
L(q) :

L(q)
e
−1 =
1
S(p)
1 (1)
U −
 ⎡
⎣S(p)
2 (1, 2) −S(p)
1 (1)S(p)
1 (2)
S(p)
1 (1)S(p)
1 (2)
⎤
⎦U(q)(1, 2)d2
−
 ⎡
⎣S(p)
3 (1, 2, 3)
S(p)
1 (1)S(p)
1 (2)
−
S(p)
2 (1, 2)S(p)
2 (2, 3)
S(p)
1 (1)S(p)
1 (2)S(p)
1 (3)
⎤
⎦U(q)(1, 2) : U(q)(2, 3) −· · · ,
(1560)
where
U (q)
ijkl(r) = L(q)
ijmnH(q)
mnlk(r)
= [dKq + 2(d −1)µq]

Kpq −
(d + 2)µq
d(Kq + 2µq)µpq
 δij
d H(q)
mmkl(r)
+ (d + 2)µq
d(Kq + 2µq)µpqH(q)
ijkl(r)

.
(1561)
Here the n−point correlation function S(p)
n
for the polarized phase p is deﬁned by
S(p)
n (x1, · · · , xn) = ⟨mp(x1) · · · mp(xn)⟩.
(1562)
As discussed in Section 3.4.1.3, S(p)
n
is the probability of simultaneously ﬁnding n points with
positions x1, · · · , xn in phase p, and is sometimes called the n-point probability function. For
statistically-anisotropic but homogenous materials, S(p)
n
depends on the relative displacements
xij = xj −xi, with 1 ≤i < j ≤n; in particular, S(p)
1
is simply the volume fraction φp
of phase p.
The reason why S(p)
n
arises in the expansion (234) is becasue the operator X
contains averages over products of the position-dependent tensor L(q)(x) which, in turn, depends
on the characteristic function mp(x). Note that we still have not passed to the statistically
homogeneous, inﬁnite-volume limit.
The general term of the expansion (234) can be easily written down as
φ2
pL(q) :

L(q)
e
−1 = φpU −
∞

n=2
B(p)
n ,
(1563)
482

where the tensors B(p)
n
are given by
B(p)
2
=

ϵ U(q)(1, 2)[S(p)
2 (1, 2) −φ2
p]d2 ,
(1564)
B(p)
n
=
(−1)n
 1
φp
n−2 
d2

dnU(q)(1, 2) : U(q)(2, 3) :::
U(q)(n −1, m)∆(p)
n (1, · · · , n) ,
n ≥3 ,
(1565)
and ∆(p)
n
is a position-dependent determinant associated with phase p given by
∆(p)
n
=
0000000000000000000000000
S(p)
2 (1, 2)
S(p)
1 (2)
· · ·
0
0
S(p)
2 (1, 2, 3)
S1(p)(2, 3)
· · ·
0
0
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
S(p)
n−1(1, · · · , n −1)
S(p)
n−2(2, · · · , n −1)
· · ·
S(p)
2 (n −2, n −1)
S(p)
1 (n −1)
S(p)
n (1, · · · , n)
S(p)
n−1(2, · · · , n)
· · ·
S(p)
3 (n −2, n −1, n)
S(p)
2 (n −1, n)
0000000000000000000000000
(1566)
A few points are worth mentioning here.
(1) Equation (237) actually represents two diﬀerent series expansion, one for p = 1 and
q = 2 and a second one for p = 2 and q = 1.
(2) Since the quantity within the brackets of Eq. (238) and the determinant ∆(p)
n identically
vanish at the boundary of the sample (due to the asymptotic preperties of the S(p)
n
described
in Chapters 3 and 4), the integrals in (238) and (239) are independent of the shape of the
macroscopic ellipsoid, i.e., they are absolutely convergent and, hence, any convenient shape,
such as a d−dimensional sphere, may be employed in the limit of inﬁnite volume. Moreover,
when n ≥3, the limiting process of excluding an inﬁnitesimally small cavity about rij = 0 in
the integrals (239) is no longer necessary since ∆(p)
n
is identically zero for such values.
(3) As shown below, for macroscopically isotropic materials, the series (237) may be regarded
as expansions that perturb about the optimal structures that realize the Hashin-Shtrikman
bounds (Hashin and Shtrikman, 1963; Hashin, 1965). For macroscopically anisotropic materials,
the series (237) may be regarded as expansions that perturb about the optimal structures that
483

realize the bounds due to Willis (1977). Later in this chapter, we will derive and discuss rigorous
bounds to the eﬀective linear elastic properties of disordered materials.
(4) The n−point tensors B(p)
n
are functionals of the correlation functions S(p)
1 , · · · , S(p)
n
but,
unlike their conductivity counterpart A(p)
n
(see Section 4.5.1), they also depend on the phase
properties through the polarizabilities Kpq and µpq, since, in Eq. (239), U(q) can be written
in terms of products of the tensor H(q) which involves terms such as Km
pqµm
pq, where m =
0, 1, 2, · · · , n. Some of these terms will vanish identically, depending on the value of n. For
example, for any n, all terms that involve Kn
pq vanish.
(5) The expansion parameters Kpq and µpq arise because of excluding a spherical cavity
from the point x′ = x in the integrals in Eqs. (198) and (213). Had another cavity shape been
selected, the expansion parameters would have been diﬀerent.
(6) The tensors B(p)
n
for all n do not possess common principal axes, implying that, in
general, the principal axes of the eﬀective stiﬀness tensor Ce will rotate as the phase moduli
ratio varies. An example is provided by materials with chirality. Nonetheless, there exists a
signiﬁcant class of microstructures that have the necessary symmetry for the tensors B(p)
n
to
possess common principal axes. An example is provided by unidirectionally-oriented cylinders
in a uniform matrix.
7.4.3 Exact series expansions for isotropic materials
For macroscopically isotropic materials, it is seen from Eq. (223) that
L(q)
e
= [dKq + 2(d −1)µq]

KeqΛh +
(d + 2)µq
d(Kq + 2µq)µeqΛs

,
(1567)
where the eﬀective polarizabilities Keq and µeq are deﬁned by the scalar relations (220) and
(221). Therefore, series (237) becomes
φ2
p
Kpq
Keq
Λh + µpq
µeq
Λs

= φpU −
∞

n=2
B(p)
n .
(1568)
To derive an explicit expression for the eﬀective bulk modulus Ke, we take the quadruple dot
product of the hydrostatic projection tensor Λh with Eq. (242) and use identities (187) and
(188) to obtain
φ2
p
Kpq
Keq
= φp −
∞

n=3
C(p)
n
,
(1569)
where the scalar microstructural coeﬃcients C(p)
n
are given by
C(p)
n
= Λh
... B(p)
n ,
(1570)
484

and ... denotes a quadruple dot product. Note that the series (243) begins with the third-order
term, i.e., C(p)
2
is zero because the invariant H(q)
iikk vanishes. Note also that when the shear
moduli of the phases are equal (µ1 = µ2), the well-known exact result
Keq = φpKpq
(1571)
due to Hill (1963,1964), which was already discussed in Section 7.2.8, immediately follows
because
U (q)
ijkl(r) = [dKq + 2(d −1)µq]Kpq
δij
d H(q)
mmkl(r) ,
(1572)
and therefore each coeﬃcient C(p)
n
possesses the invariant Λh
... H(q) which vanishes.
Classical perturbation expansions involve small parameters that are simple diﬀerences in
the phase moduli, e.g., (K1 −K2) and (µ1 −µ2) (see, for example, Beran and Molyneux,
1966; Silnutzer, 1972; Milton and Phan-Thien, 1982; Milton, 1984), and have a small radius of
convergence, and hence require many terms in the series if the phase moduli are appreciably
diﬀerent from one another. By contrast, the expansions (243) are non-classical in the sense that
their parameters are the polarizabilities Keq and µeq and, for certain morphologies (described
below) can converge rapidly for any values of the phase moduli. It may be helpful to consider
the morphologies for which the microstructural parameters C(p)
n
vanish for any values of the
phase moduli, i.e., for the class of composites for which Eq. (209) or, equivalently,
Ke −Kq
Ke + 2(d −1)
d
µq
=
Kp −Kq
Kp + 2(d −1)
d
µq
φp
(1573)
exact. For d = 2 and d = 3, Eq. (247) coincides with the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds (see the
discussion on such bounds later in this chapter) on the eﬀective bulk modulus for any isotropic
two-phase composite (Hashin and Shtrikman, 1963; Hashin, 1965), and hence is exact for the
assemblages of coated circles (d = 2) and coated spheres (d = 3) (see Sections 4.4 and 7.2.3)
that realize the bounds. The Hashin-Shtrikman bounds are also realized for certain ﬁnite-rank
laminates (i.e., layered materials) in both 2D and 3D (Francfort and Murat). It is important to
emphasize that for either the coated-inclusion assemblages or ﬁnite-rank laminates, one of the
phases is always a disconnected, dispersed phase in a connected matrix phase. Equation (247)
is the d−dimensional generalization of the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds on Ke for any d ≥2; it
yields, for K2 ≥K1 and µ2 ≥µ1, a lower bound for q = 1 and p = 2 and an upper bound for
485

q = 2 and p = 1. Therefore, series (243) may be viewed as an expansion that perturbs around
the optimal Hashin-Shtrikman structures, and thus it is expected to converge rapidly for any
value of the phase moduli for dispersions in which the inclusions, taken to be the polarized
phase, are prevented from forming large clusters. This will be further discussed below.
We now write down Eq. (243) through third-order terms and simplify it to ﬁnd that
φp
Kpq
Keq
= 1 −C(p)
3
φp
= 1 −(d + 2)µqKpqµpq
d(Kq + 2µq)
Mp
φp
,
(1574)
where Mp is a three-point microstructural parameter independent of the phase moduli, given
by
Mp = d2
Ω2
s
 
1
rd
1
sd[d(n · m)2 −1]
⎡
⎣S(p)
3 (r, s) −S(p)
2 (r)S(p)
2 (s)
φp
⎤
⎦drds ,
(1575)
and n = r/|r| and m = s/|s| are unit vectors. Note that Mp is the same as the parameter A(p)
n ,
described in Section 4.5.1, where we considered perturbation expansions for the eﬀective con-
ductivity of disordered anisotropic materials. Note also that, M1 and M2 are not independent
of one another; speciﬁcally, one has
M1 + M2 = (d −1)φ1φ2 ,
(1576)
which is easily proven by using the fact that Eq. (236) yields the exact results for the eﬀective
bulk modulus Ke through third-order in the diﬀerence in the moduli, i.e.,
Ke = Kq + a(p)
1 (Kp −Kq) + a(p)
2 (Kp −Kq)2 + a(p)
3 (Kp −Kq)3 + b(p)
3 (Kp −Kq)2(µp −µq) , (1577)
where, a(p)
1
= φp, and
a(p)
2
= −
dφpφq
dKq + 2(d −1)µq
,
a(p)
3
=
d2φpφ2
q
[dKq + 2(d −1)µq]2 ,
(1578)
b(p)
3
=
2dMp
[dKq + 2(d −1)µq]2 .
Since Ke remains invariant under diﬀerent labels of the reference phase, Eq. (250) follows
immediately. The parameter Mp is closely related to the mictrostructural parameter ζp (and in
particular ζ2) that was described in detail in Section 4.5.3. In general,
ζp =
Mp
(d −1)φ1φ2
.
(1579)
486

Derivation of an explicit expression for the eﬀective shear modulus µe proceeds along the
same lines as that for Ke, namely, we take a quadruple dot product of the shear tensor Λs with
(241) and use identities (187) and (189) to obtain
φ2
p
µpq
µeq
= φp −
∞

n=3
D(p)
n
,
(1580)
with the scalar coeﬃcients
D(p)
n
=
2
(d + 2)(d −1)Λs
... B(p)
n .
(1581)
Note that this series also begins with the third-order term, i.e., D(p)
2
is zero because the invariant
H(q)
ikik vanishes. Truncating the series (254) after the ﬁrst term yields
µeq = φpµpq
(1582)
or, equivalently,
µe −µq
µe + µq[dKq/2 + (d + 1)(d −2)µq/d]
Kq + 2µq
=
µp −µq
µp + µq[dKq/2 + (d + 1)(d −2)µq/d]
Kq + 2µq
φp .
(1583)
Following the discussion on the bulk modulus, it is helpful to consider the class of morphologies
for which Eq. (256) is exact. For d = 2 and d = 3, Eq. (256) coincides with the Hashin-
Shtrikman bounds on the eﬀective shear modulus for all isotropic two-phase composites that
realize the bounds (see below). Again, for such hierarchical laminates, one of the phases is
always a disconnected, dispersed phase in a connected matrix phase. Equation (256) is the
d−dimensional generalization of the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds on µe for any d ≥2; it yields,
for (K2 −K1)(µ2 −µ1) ≥0 and µ2 ≥µ1, a lower bound for q = 1 and p = 2 and an upper
bound for q = 2 and p = 1. Consequently, series (254) can be viewed as an expansion which
perturbs around the optimal hierarchical laminates that achieve the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds,
and therefore it is expected to have the same convergence properties as that of the series for
the bulk modulus Ke. This will be demonstrated below.
If we now write down Eq. (254) through third-order terms and simplify it, we obtain
φp
µpq
µeq
= 1 −D(p)
3
φp
,
(1584)
where
D(p)
3
φp
=
2
(d + 2)(d −1)Λs : B(p)
n
487

=
2
(d + 2)(d −1)
  ⎡
⎣U (q)
ijkl(r)U (q)
klij(s) −U (q)
iikl(r)U (q)
klmm(s)
d
⎤
⎦
⎡
⎣S(p)
3 (r, s) −S(p)
2 (r)S(p)
2 (s)
φp
⎤
⎦drds
2µqKpqµpq
d(d −1)(Kq + 2µq)
Mp
φp
+ µq(d2 −4)(2Kq + 3µq)µ2
pq
2d(d −1)(Kq + 2µq)2
Mp
φp
+
1
2d(d −1)
dKq + (d −2)µq
Kq + 2µq
2
µ2
pq
Np
φp
.
(1585)
The quantity Np is a microstructural parameter independent of the phase moduli, given by
Np
=
−(d + 2)(5d + 6)
d2
Mp + (d + 2)2
Ω2
s
 
1
rd
1
sd[d(d + 2)(n · m)4 −3]
×
⎡
⎣S(p)
3 (r, s) −S(p)
2 (r)S(p)
2 (s)
φp
⎤
⎦,
(1586)
where n = r/|r| and m = s/|s| are unit vectores. Similar to M1 and M2, N1 and N2 are not
independent of one another; speciﬁcally, one has
N1 + N2 = (d −1)φ1φ2 ,
(1587)
which is easily proven by writing down the expansion for µe through third-order in the diﬀerence
in the moduli, i.e.,
µe = µq + c(p)
1 (µp −µq) + c(p)
2 (µp −µq)2 + c(p)
3 (µp −µq)3 + d(p)
3 (µp −µq)2(Kp −Kq) ,
(1588)
where, c(p)
1
= φp, and
c(p)
2
= −
2dφpφq(Kq + 2µq)
µq(d + 2)[dKq + 2(d −1)µq] ,
c(p)
3
=
4d2(Kq + 2µq)2φpφ2
q
µ2
1(d + 2)2[dKq + 2(d −1)µq]2 +
2dMq(d −2)[2Kq + 3µq]
µq(d + 2)(d −1)[dKq + 2(d −1)µq]2
+
2d
µ2
q(d −1)(d + 2)2
 dKq + (d −2)µq
dKq + 2(d −1)µq
2
Np ,
d(p)
3
=
4dMp
(d + 2)(d −1)[dKq + 2(d −1)µq]2 .
(1589)
Since µe remains invariant under diﬀerent labels of the reference phase, Eq.
(261) follows
immediately.
For d = 2 and d = 3, Eqs. (262) and (263) agree with the corresponding expansions of the
Silnutzer (1972) and McCoy (1970) bounds on µe, respectively, which involve the three-point
488

parameter ζp, as well as another three point parameter ηp, which also lies in the interval [0,1]
(Milton, 1981a, 1982b), and is given by
ηp =
Np
(d −1)φ1φ2
.
(1590)
7.4.4 Macroscopically-anisotropic materials
Since it was shown that the series expansion for macroscopically-isotropic composites may be
regarded as one that perturbs around the structures that realize the isotropic Hashin-Shtrikman
bounds, one may expect that the expansion for the macroscopically-anisotropic composites can
be regarded as one that perturbs around the optimal structures that realize the anisotropic
generalization of the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds obtained by Willis (1977); this indeed is the
case.
Recall that, for statistically isotropic materials, B(p)
2
= 0. However, the two-point tensor
B(p)
2
does not vanish for statistically anisotropic materials, since the two-point probability
function S(p)
2 (r) depends on the distance r = |r| as well as the orientation of r. Now, consider
morphologies for which the n−point tensors B(p)
n
= 0 for all n ≥3. For such composites, Eq.
(237) reduces exactly to
φ2
pL(q) :

L(q)
e
−1 = φpU −B(p)
2
.
(1591)
Multiplying Eq. (264) by

L(q)−1 from the left gives
φ2
p

L(q)
e
−1
=
φp

L(q)−1 −

L(q)−1 : B(p)
2
,
=
φp

L(q)−1 −

ϵ H(q)(1, 2)

S(p)
2 (1, 2) −φ2
p

d2 .
(1592)
Equations (266) are indeed the generalized Hashin-Shtrikman bounds for anisotropic composites
derived by Willis (1977), albeit expressed in a diﬀerent form than given originally by him.
7.4.5 The microstructural parameter η2
Similar to the microstructural parameter ζ2 (see Section 4.5.3), the parameter η2 has also
been evaluated for a variety of morphologies. In principle, η2 depends on the volume fraction
of a material’s phases. Thus, let us write, in analogy with Eq. (4.82), for a two-phase material,
η2 = η(0)
2
+ η(1)
2 φ2 + · · ·
(1593)
489

In general, for 3D randomly-oriented ellipsoids one has (Torquato et al., 1987)
η(0)
2
=
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
0 ,
spheres,
1
4 ,
needles,
1 ,
disks,
(1594)
while in 2D,
η(0)
2
=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
0 ,
disks
1 ,
needles.
(1595)
Some results have also been obtained for symmetric-cell materials (see Section 3.4.6). These
results indicate that for the following cell shapes,
η2 =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
φ2 ,
d−dimensional spherical cells,
1
4φ1 + 3
4φ2 ,
3D disk-like cells,
φ1 ,
2D needle-like cells,
(1596)
and that η2 = ζ2.
For distribution of three-dimensional, identical overlapping spheres, a good approximation
is given by η2 ≃0.7468φ2.
The parameter η2 was also evaluated exactly (Torquato et al.,
1987) through ﬁrst order in φ2 for equilibrium interpenetrable spheres, in the limit of fully-
impenetrable spheres, and for 2D equilibrium distribution of impenetrable disks (cylinders).
The results are
η2 =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
0.48274φ2 ,
fully-impenetrable spheres,
56
81φ2 + 0.0428φ2
2 ,
fully-impenetrable disks.
(1597)
Thovert et al. (1990) computed η2 exactly through ﬁrst order in φ2 for equilibrium impenetrable
spheres with two diﬀerent and widely separated sizes, with the result being,
η2 = 0.49137φ2 .
(1598)
7.4.6 Comparison with numerical simulation
Torquato (1998) compared his theoretical predictions derived and discussed above with the
results of numerical simulations for a variety of important model composite materials that
consist of well-deﬁned shapes, such as oriented circular or elliptical cylinders, spheres or ellip-
soids, in a matrix. This class of models includes certain ﬁber-reinforced materials, particulate-
reinforced composites, and colloidal dispersions. In what follows we discuss such comparisons
for both 2D and 3D systems.
490

7.4.6.1 Two-dimensional materials
We ﬁrst consider 2D dispersions, and therefore the ensuing results apply to ﬁber-reinforced
materials with transverse isotropy, or to thin sheets of isotropic two-phase materials. To em-
phasize the planarity of the bulk modulus, we denote it by Ke2. In the case of ﬁber-reinforced
dispersions, the appropriate planar bulk modulus Ke2 is the plane-strain modulus which is re-
lated to the 3D one by the relation, Ke2 = Ke+ 1
3µ, where Ke is the corresponding 3D modulus.
For plane stress elasticity (appropriate for a composite sheet), the plane-stress bulk modulus
Ke2 is obtained from the following relation
Ke2 =
9Keµe
3Ke + 4µe
,
where µe is the eﬀective shear moduli of the corresponding 3D material.
Suppose that phases 1 and 2 denote the matrix and dispersed phases, respectively. For
d = 2, Eqs. (248), (249) and (253) yield
Ke2
K1
=
1 + µ1
K1
κφ2 −
2µ1
K1 + 2µ1
κµφ1ζ2
1 −κφ2 −
2µ1
K1 + 2µ1
κµφ1ζ2
,
(1599)
µe2
µ1
=
1 +
K1
K1 + 2µ1
µφ2 −
µ1
K1 + 2µ1
κµφ1ζ2 −
K2
1
(K1 + 2µ1)2µ2φ1η2
1 −µφ2 −
µ1
K1 + 2µ1
κµφ1ζ2 −
K2
1
(K1 + 2µ1)2µ2φ1η2
,
(1600)
where
κ ≡K21 = K2 −K1
K2 + µ1
,
µ ≡µ21 =
µ2 −µ1
µ2 +
K1
K1 + 2µ1
µ1
.
As discussed above and in Section 4.5.1, for any isotropic 2D material, the three-point param-
eters ζ2 and η2 are given by
ζ2 =
4
πφ1φ2
 ∞
0
dr
r
 ∞
0
ds
s
 π
0 cos(2θ)
⎡
⎣S(2)
3 (r, s, t) −S(2)
2 (r)S(2)
2 (s)
φ2
⎤
⎦dθ ,
(1601)
η2 =
16
πφ1φ2
 ∞
0
dr
r
 ∞
0
ds
s
 π
0 cos(4θ)
⎡
⎣S(2)
3 (r, s, t) −S(2)
2 (r)S(2)
2 (s)
φ2
⎤
⎦dθ ,
(1602)
where θ is the angle opposite the side of the triangle of length t. The predictions of the 2D
series must always lie within the most restrictive three-point upper and lower bounds. These
491

bounds will be derived and discussed later in this chapter; for now we take them for granted
and compare the predictions of the series expansions with them. Requiring the predictions
of the series expansions to lie within the upper and lower bounds imposes tight restrictions
on the range of the parameters ζ2 and η2. In most cases, such restriction can be determined
only numerically, but for the present case of 2D materials one can show that, ζ2 ≤0.5, which
would then ensure that the series predictions for the bulk modulus would lie between the lower
and upper bounds. It is diﬃcult to obtain similar analytical conditions for the eﬀective shear
modulus. However, in the case of a 2D composite in which both phases are incompressible
(i.e., when K1/µ1 = K2/µ2 →∞), it can be shown that there is no additional restriction on
η2. Thus, in this limit, for any physically realizable η2, the predictions of Eq. (274) always
lie within the most restrictive three-point bounds. Moreover, as shown below, Eq. (274) is in
fact independent of ζ2 for an incompressible composite. It is noteworthy that for a number of
realistic models of 2D dispersions the parameters ζ2 and η2 are such that the estimates from
Eqs. (273) and (274) always lie within the tightest three-point bounds.
In order to further validate Eqs. (273) and (274) as accurate approximations for the eﬀective
moduli of 2D dispersions, their predictions are compared to the results of numerical calculations.
A set of such calculations was carried out by Eischen and Torquato (1993) who obtained
comprehensive numerical data for elastic moduli of models of hexagonal arrays of inﬁnitely
long, aligned cylinders in a matrix, and presented data for eight diﬀerent phase-material values
over a wide range of inclusion volume fractions. To compare the predictions of Eqs. (273) and
(274) to these data, the functions ζ2(φ2) and η2(φ2) are needed. These functions were evaluted
for hexagonal arrays of inclusions by McPhedran and Milton (1981) and Eischen and Torquato
(1993). In Figure 7.2, the predictions of Eq. (274) for the eﬀective transverse shear modulus
µe2 of hexagonal arrays of glass ﬁbers in an epoxy matrix (with µ2/µ1 = 22.5, µ1/K1 = 0.3,
and µ2/K2 = 0.6) are compared to the corresponding simulation data of Eischen and Torquato
(1993); the agreement is excellent for the entire range of volume fractions. The three-point
lower bound of Silnutzer (1972) (which will be derived in the next section) is very slightly
below the predictions of Eq. (274), and hence is not shown. The predictions of Eq. (273) for
the eﬀective bulk modulus are equally accurate. The three-point upper bound of Gibiansky
and Torquato (1995a; see below) are also shown in Figure 7.2.
Consider now a sheet (phase 1) that contains non-overlapping holes in which K2 = µ2 = 0.
492

As mentioned in Section 7.2.2, Day et al. (1992) studied the elastic moduli of hexagonal arrays
of circular holes near the percolation threshold φc, and derived Eqs. (54) for the eﬀective bulk
and shear moduli. On the other hand, Eqs. (273) and (274) are simpliﬁed for this limit to
Ke2
K1
=
φ1(1 −2ζ2)
1 + K1
µ1
φ2 −2φ1ζ2
,
(1603)
µe2
µ1
=
φ1(1 −ζ2 −η2)
1 + K1 + 2µ1
K1
φ2 −φ1(ζ2 + η2)
.
(1604)
Figure 7.3 compares the predictions of Eq.
(277) to the corresponding simulation data of
Eischen and Torquato (1993) for hexagonal arrays of circular holes in a matrix for which
µ2/µ1 = K2/K1 = 0 and µ1/K1 = 0.5. Equation (277) provides excellent estimates of Ke2
which, near φc, follow closely Eq. (54) for Ke. The three-point upper bound of Gibiansky and
Torquato (1995a) is virtually indistinguishable from the predictions of Eq. (277), and of course
the associated three-point lower bound is 0.
We pointed out in Section in 7.2.6 that Cherkaev et al. (1992) showed that the dimensionless
eﬀective Young’s modulus Ye/Y1 of any sheet containing holes of arbitrary geometry is inde-
pendent of the Poisson’s ratio of the solid phase. It is straightforward to show that the above
series expansions are consistent with Cherkaev et al.’s theorem, since using the interrelations
between the elastic moduli we obtain
Ye
Y1
=
φ1(1 −2ζ2)(1 −ζ2 −η2)
1 + 2φ2 −2ζ2(1 + φ2) + (ζ2 + η2)(2φ1ζ2 −1) ,
(1605)
indicating that Ye/Y1 is indeed independent of the Poissons’ ratio, and depends only on the
volume fractions and the microstructural ζ2 and η2.
Consider next a ﬁber-reinforced composite consisting of rigid ﬁbers, i.e., one for which
µ2/µ1 = K2/K1 = ∞, in a compressible matrix. For such a composite, κ = µ = 1 and hence,
according to Eqs. (273) and (274) one has
Ke2
K1
=
1 + µ1
K1
φ2 −
2µ1
K1 + 2µ1
φ1ζ2
1 −φ2 −
2µ1
K1 + 2µ1
φ1ζ2
,
(1606)
µe2
µ1
=
1 +
K1
K1 + 2µ1
φ2 −
µ1
K1 + 2µ1
φ1ζ2 −
K2
1
(K1 + 2µ1)2φ1η2
1 −φ2 −
µ1
K1 + 2µ1
φ1ζ2 −
K2
1
(K1 + 2µ1)2φ1η2
.
(1607)
493

Figure 7.4 compares the predictions of Eq. (280) to the simulation data of Eischen and Torquato
(1993) for hexagonal arrays of rigid circular ﬁbers in a compressible matrix in which µ2/µ1 =
K2/K1 = ∞and µ1/K1 = 0.4. The predictions are highly accrate. The three-point lower bound
of Silnutzer (1972) is again indistinguishable from the predictions of Eq. (280); the associated
upper bound diverges to inﬁnity. In the case of a ﬁber-reinforced material consisting of rigid,
non-overlapping, circular ﬁbers that are randomly arranged in a compressible matrix (i.e., one
with µ2/µ1 = K2/K1 = ∞, µ1/K1 = 0.4), Torquato (1998) showed that the predictions of Eq.
(280) are consistent with the upper bound of Gibiansky and Torquato (1995a).
The next model material to be considered is an incompressible ﬁber-reinforced composite,
i.e., one with K1/µ1 = ∞and K2/µ2 = ∞, for which Eq. (274) reduces to
µe2
µ1
= 1 + µφ2 −µ2φ1η2
1 −µφ2 −µ2φ1η2
,
(1608)
with, µ = (µ2 −µ1)/(µ2 + µ1). In addition, we consider the limit in which the included phase
is rigid (i.e., one with µ2/µ1 →∞), which is the most diﬃcult case to treat theoretically. For
such an incompressible composite Eq. (282) yields
µe2
µ1
= 1 + φ2 −φ1η2
1 −φ2 −φ1η2
,
(1609)
which, in the limit of an incompressible matrix (K1/µ1 = ∞), is identical with Eq. (281).
Figure 7.5 compares the predictions of Eq. (283) and the three-point lower bound of Silnutzer
(1972) to the simulation data of Eischen and Torquato (1993) for an incompressible composite
in which rigid circular ﬁbers are arranged in an hexagonal array (with µ2/µ1 = K2/K1 = ∞,
and µ1/K1 = 0). Equation (283) provides excellent estimates of the shear modulus up to a
ﬁber volume fraction φ2 = 0.6, but begins to deviate from the data for φ2 > 0.6.
7.4.6.2 Three-dimensional materials
Let 1 and 2 denote the matrix and dispersed phases, respectively. For d = 3, series (248)
and (254) yield
Ke
K1
=
1 + 4µ1
3K1
κφ2 −
10µ1
3(K1 + 2µ1)κµφ1ζ2
1 −κφ2 −
10µ1
3(K1 + 2µ1)κµφ1ζ2
,
(1610)
494

µe
µ1
=
1 + 9K1 + 8µ1
6(K1 + 2µ1)µφ2 −2κµµ1φ1ζ2
3(K1 + 2µ1) −µ2
6
⎡
⎣
3K1 + µ1
K1 + 2µ1
2
φ1η2 + 5 2K1 + 3µ1
(K1 + 2µ1)2µ1φ1ζ2
⎤
⎦
1 −µφ2 −2κµµ1φ1ζ2
3(K1 + 2µ1) −µ2
6
⎡
⎣
3K1 + µ1
K1 + 2µ1
2
φ1η2 + 5 2K1 + 3µ1
(K1 + 2µ1)2µ1φ1ζ2
⎤
⎦
,
(1611)
where
κ ≡K21 = K2 −K1
K2 + 4
3µ1
,
µ ≡µ21 =
µ2 −µ1
µ2 + µ1
6
9K1 + 8µ1
K1 + 2µ1
.
For any isotropic, 3D composite, the three-point parameters ζ2 and η2 are deﬁned by
ζ2 =
9
2φ1φ2
 ∞
0
dr
r
 ∞
0
ds
s
 1
−1 d(cos θ)P2(cos θ)
⎡
⎣S(2)
3 (r, s, t) −S(2)
2 (r)S(2)
2 (s)
φ2
⎤
⎦,
(1612)
η2 = 5ζ2
21 +
150
7φ1φ2
 ∞
0
dr
r
 ∞
0
ds
s
 1
−1 d(cos θ)P4(cos θ)
⎡
⎣S(2)
3 (r, s, ℓ) −S(2)
2 (r)S(2)
2 (s)
φ2
⎤
⎦, (1613)
where P2 and P4 are the Legendre polynomials, and θ is the angle opposite the side of the
triangle of length ℓ. Similar to the 2D systems, we require that the predictions of Eqs. (285)
and (286) always lie within the most restrictive three-point upper and lower bounds, which will
be derived and discussed later in this chapter. This requirement implies that the intervals in
which ζ2 and η2 lie should be more restrictive than just the interval [0,1]. For the 3D eﬀective
bulk modulus predicted by Eq. (284), one can show that when µ1/K1 ≤0.75, then
ζ2 ≤0.6 + 8
15
µ1
K1
,
in order for the predictions of Eq. (284) to lie between the upper and lower bounds. However,
if µ1/K1 > 0.75, then, there will be no additional restriction on ζ2. For the shear modulus, it is
very diﬃcult to obtain similar analytical conditions. However, in the case of a 3D composite in
which both phases are incompressible (i.e., when K1/µ1 = K2/µ2 →∞), it can be shown that
1 + η2
2 −3η2
≥
1 −11
16ζ2 −5
6η2
2(1 −ζ2)(1 + 5
16ζ2 −21
16η2)
.
To further validate the accuracy of Eqs. (284) and (285), we compare their predictions to
rigorous bounds (and, later on, to the eﬀective-medium approximations; see Section 7.7) for
495

ordered and disordered model microstructures. Consider ﬁrst a random dispersion of identical
glass spheres in an epoxy matrix, such that µ2/µ1 = 22.5, K2/K1 = 10.0 and µ1/K1 = 0.33.
The non-overlapping spheres are in equilibrium and thus the system has a maximum volume
fraction at random-close packing when φ2 ≃0.644 (Rintoul and Torquato, 1996). One can
compare the predictions to the rigorous bounds, since the parameters ζ2 and η2 have been
computed for this model for various values of φ2 (see Chapter 4, Table 4.2). This is illustrated
in Figure 7.6 for Ke, and it is clear that the predictions of Eq. (284) lie between the very
narrow bound widths formed by the upper bound of Gibiansky and Torquato (1996), obtained
from cross-property relation (see Section 7.9), and the three-point lower bound of Beran and
Molyneux (1966).
Consider now a composite in which the dispersed phase consists of non-overlapping cavities
(K2 = µ2 = 0). Then, Eqs. (284) and (285) reduce to
Ke
K1
=
1 −φ2 −
15K1
9K1 + 8µ1
φ1ζ2
1 + 3K1
4µ1
φ2 −
15K1
9K1 + 8µ1
φ1ζ2
,
(1614)
µe
µ1
=
1 −φ2 −
3K1
9(K1 + 8µ1)φ1ζ2 −6
 3K1 + µ1
9K1 + 8µ1
2
φ1η2 −30µ1(2K1 + 3µ1)
(9K1 + 8µ1)2
φ1ζ2
1 + 6(K1 + 2µ1)
9K1 + 8µ1
φ2 −
3K1
9K1 + 8µ1
φ1ζ2 −6
 3K1 + µ1
9K1 + 8µ1
2
φ1η2 −30µ1(2K1 + 3µ1)
(9K1 + 8µ1)2
φ1ζ2
.
(1615)
For cavities in an incompressible matrix one can simplify Eqs. (288) and (289) by taking the
limit, K1/µ1 →∞, which leads to
Ke
µ1
= 4φ1
3φ2

1 −5
3φ1ζ2

,
(1616)
µe
µ1
= 1 −φ2 −1
3φ1ζ2 −2
3φ1η2
1 −2
3φ2 −1
3φ1ζ2 −2
3φ1η2
.
(1617)
The eﬀective Lam´e constant λe is also obtained:
λe
µ1
= 4φ1
3φ2

1 −5
3φ1ζ2

−2φ1
3

1 −1
3ζ2 −2
3η2
1 −2
3φ2 −1
3φ1ζ2 −2
3φ1η2

.
(1618)
Interestingly, a composite consisting of spherical cavities in an incompressible matrix of shear
modulus µ1 is exactly equivalent to an incompressible liquid of shear viscosity µ containing air
bubbles. The analogues of the shear modulus, bulk modulus and Lam´e constant in the liquid
problem are the shear viscosity, bulk viscosity and expansion viscosity, respectively.
496

We now consider a composite that consists of rigid inclusions, i.e., one with µ2/µ1 =
K2/K1 = ∞, in a compressible matrix. In this case, κ = µ = 1, and hence
Ke
K1
=
1 + 4µ1
3K1
φ2 −
10µ1
3(K1 + 2µ1)φ1ζ2
1 −φ2 −
10µ1
3(K1 + 2µ1)φ1ζ2
,
(1619)
µe
µ1
=
1 + 9K1 + 8µ1
6(K1 + 2µ1)φ2 −
2µ1
3(K1 + 2µ1)φ1ζ2 −1
6
 3K1 + µ1
K1 + 2G1
2
φ1η2 + 5µ1
2K1 + 3µ1
(K1 + 2µ1)2φ1ζ2

1 −φ2 −
2µ1
3(K1 + 2µ1)φ1ζ2 −1
6
⎡
⎣
3K1 + µ1
K1 + 2µ1
2
φ1η2 + 5µ1
2K1 + 3µ1
(K1 + 2µ1)2φ1ζ2
⎤
⎦
.
(1620)
Composites with cubic symmetric, such as cubic lattices of spheres, serve as useful benchmark
models since their symmetry enables one to estimate the eﬀective moduli essentially exactly.
Thus, using the numerical values of ζ2 for cubic lattices obtained by McPhedran and Milton
(1981) and listed in Table 4.2, we compare the predictions of Eq. (293) to the numerical results
of Nunan and Keller (1984) for the eﬀective bulk moduli of rigid cubic arrays of spheres in
compressible matrices.
The eﬀecive stiﬀness tensor Ce of such a composite, in component
form, is given by Eq. (50), from which the eﬀective bulk modulus of such a composite is given
by
Ke = K1 + µ1(γ + 2
3α) .
(1621)
Figure 7.7 compares the predictions of Eq. (293) to the numerical data of Nunan and Keller
for FCC arrays of rigid spheres in a compressible matrix in which µ2/µ1 = K2/K1 = ∞and
µ1/K1 = 0.46. The accuracy of the predictions of Eq. (293) is remarkably good. The Beran-
Molyneux three-point lower bound is virtually indistinguishable from the predictions of (293),
while the associated upper bound diverges to inﬁnity in this case.
Finally, let us consider an incompressible isotropic composite, i.e., one with K1/µ1 →∞
and K2/µ2 →∞, for which Eq. (285) reduces to
µe
µ1
= 1 + 3
2µφ2 −3
2µ2φ1η2
1 −µφ2 −3
2µ2φ1η2
,
(1622)
where, µ = (µ2 −µ1)(µ2 + 3µ1/2). If we now allow the included phase of the composite to be
rigid (µ2/µ1 →∞), Eq. (296) yields
µe
µ1
= 1 + 3
2φ2 −3
2φ1η2
1 −φ2 −3
2φ1η2
.
(1623)
497

This is the most diﬃcult system to treat theoretically, especially at high particle concentrations.
Interestingly, the determination of the eﬀective shear modulus of such a dispersion is exactly
equivalent to computing the eﬀective viscosity of the dispersion in the inﬁnite-frequency limit.
Torquato (1998) showed that the predictions of Eq. (296) are consistent with the three-point
lower bound of Milton and Phan-Thien (1982) for the case of an incompressible composite
containing a random array of rigid spheres (µ2/µ1 = K2/K1 = ∞, µ1/K1 = 0) in an equilibrium
arrangement.
7.5 Rigorous Bounds
In Chapter 4 we described and discussed derivation of rigorous upper and lower bounds to
the eﬀective conductivity and dielectric constant of disordered materials. Such bounds are useful
for several reasons. (1) As we discussed in the last section, rigorous upper and lower bounds
help one to test the merit and accuracy of a theory in the sense that, the prediction of the theory
cannot violate the bounds. (2) As the accuracy of the bounds improves by incorporating in
them more detailed information about the microstructure of a material, the diﬀerence between
the upper and lower bounds decreases, and therefore they can provide sharper estimates of
the eﬀective property of interest. (3) As we saw in the last section, usually one of the bounds
provides a relatively accurate estimate of the property of interest.
In this section we describe and discuss derivation of such bounds for the eﬀective linear
elastic moduli of heterogeneous materials. We provide some details of derivation of the bounds,
since it is very similar to the procedure for deriving the bounds on the eﬀective conductivity
described in Chapter 4.
7.5.1 Isotropic materials
As usual, we ﬁrst consider the bounds for isotropic materials, and then take up the problem
of upper and lower bounds for anisotropic materials.
7.5.1.1 One-point bounds
Similar to the eﬀective conductivity, upper and lower bounds on the eﬀective stiﬀness tensor
Ce can be derived by using the minimum energy theorems outlined in Section 7.1.2. In words,
the minimum energy theorem states that the actual macroscopic energy is bounded from above
by the trial macroscopic energy, and thus leads to an upper bound on Ce, while according to
498

the minimum complementary energy theorem, the actual macroscopic energy of a material is
bounded from below by the trial macroscopic energy, hence leading to a lower bound on Ce.
Constant stress ﬁeld ⟨σ⟩and strain ﬁeld ⟨ϵ⟩both trivially satisfy the admissibility conditions
of the trial stress and strain ﬁelds (see Section 7.1.2), and lead immediately to the so-called
Reuss-Voigt bounds:
⟨C−1⟩≤Ce ≤⟨C⟩.
(1624)
The bounds (298) represent one-point bounds. These bounds, for macroscopically-anisotropic
materials with isotropic phases, simplify to
d⟨K−1⟩−1Λh + 2⟨µ−1⟩−1Λs ≤Ce ≤d⟨K⟩Λh + 2⟨µ⟩Λs ,
(1625)
where the tensors Λh and Λs were deﬁned by Eq. (183). If the material is macroscopically
isotropic, the bounds (299) reduce to the following one-point bounds for the elastic moduli:
⟨K−1⟩−1 ≤Ke ≤⟨K⟩,
⟨µ−1⟩−1 ≤µe ≤⟨µ⟩,
Ye ≥⟨Y −1
e
⟩−1 ,
(1626)
which are valid for an isotropic material with n ≥2 phases. The bounds (299) do not, however,
lead to an upper bound for the eﬀective Young’s modulus. However, if the Poisson’s ratios of
all the phases are equal, then one also recovers the upper bound, Ye ≤⟨Y ⟩. As in the case of
the eﬀective conductivity, the Bounds (298)-(300) are not accurate.
7.5.1.2 Two-point bounds
Hashin and Shtrikman (1963) derived the most accurate two-point bounds on the eﬀective
elastic moduli of 3D isotropic materials, which were extended by Hashin (1965) to 2D materials.
To derive these bounds, we must ﬁrst state the Hashin-Shtrikman variational principle, similar
to what was described in Section 4.6 for the eﬀective conductivity and dielectric constant.
Hashin-Shtrikman Variational Principle:
Let g be deﬁned by g = ϵ −ϵ0 (where ϵ0 is the strain ﬁeld of a homogeneous comparison
material), with ˆg = ˆϵ−ϵ0 being the associated trial diﬀerence strain ﬁeld, and let p = (C−C0) :
ϵ [see Eq. (194)] and ˆp be the corresponding polarization ﬁelds. Then, subject to the conditions
that
∇· (C0 : g) + ∇· ˆp = 0 ,
(1627)
∇× (∇× g)T = 0 ,
(1628)
499

⟨ˆg⟩= 0 ,
(1629)
a hydrostatic strain ﬁeld (ϵ0)ij = 1
dδij imposed externally on any two-phase material results in
KB = K0 +
-
ˆp : ˆg + 2ˆp : ϵ0 −ˆp : (C −C0)−1 : ˆp
.
,
(1630)
which is an upper bound on Ke when µ0 ≥µ1 and a lower bound on Ke when µ0 ≤µ2. If,
however, a deviatoric (traceless) strain ﬁeld, (ϵ0)ij = 2−1/2(δ1iδ2j + δ2iδ1j), is imposed on the
material, it will result in
µB = µ0 +
-
ˆp : ˆg + 2ˆp : ϵ0 −ˆp : (C −C0)−1 : ˆp
.
,
(1631)
which is an upper bound on µe if K0 ≥K1 and µ0 ≥µ1 and a lower bound on µe when K0 ≤K2
and µ0 ≤µ2.
The original Hashin-Shtrikman bound was derived for a very large but ﬁnite sample material,
subjected to a homogeneous displacement on the sample’s surface (instead of requiring ⟨ˆg⟩= 0).
But because for inﬁnite systems the eﬀect of the boundary conditions vanishes, the above
variational principle is equivalent to the original Hashin-Shtrikman principle. This variational
principle has been extended to periodic media (see, for example, Nemat-Nasser and Hori, 1993),
as well as anisotropic materials (Willis, 1977).
One can now derive the two-point Hashin-Shtrikman bound for a d−dimensional isotropic
material. One assumes that
ˆg(x) =
m

i=1
aiϵi(x) ,
(1632)
ˆp(x) = [C(x) −C0] :
m

i=1
aiϵi−1(x) ,
(1633)
where ϵi is the exact ith-order solution of the strain ﬁeld in the exact contrast expansion derived
in Section 7.4, with ϵ0 = ⟨ϵ⟩. If one substitutes these trial ﬁelds into the Hashin-Shtrikman
variational principle and optimizes over the vector a, one obtains a 2m−point lower bound
on the eﬀective moduli when C0 = C1. Interchanging the phase subscripts then yields the
corresponding 2m−point upper bound. Hence, to derive the two-point bounds, we take m = 1
to obtain
φ1K1+φ2K2−
φ1φ2d(K2 −K1)2
d(φ2K1 + φ1K2) + 2(d −1)µ1
≤Ke ≤φ1K1+φ2K2−
φ1φ2d(K2 −K1)2
d(φ2K1 + φ1K2) + 2(d −1)µ2
,
(1634)
500

φ1µ1 + φ2µ2 −
φ1φ2(µ2 −µ1)2
φ2µ1 + φ1µ2 + h1
≤µe ≤φ1µ1 + φ2µ2 −
φ1φ2(µ2 −µ1)2
φ2µ1 + φ1µ2 + h2
,
(1635)
where
hi = d2Ki + 2(d + 1)(d −2)µi
2d(Ki + 2µi)
.
(1636)
These bounds, which are exact through second order in the diﬀerence in the phase moduli, are
completely similar to the (4.118), the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds for the eﬀective conductivity
of isotropic two-phase materials.
The Hashin-Shtrikman bounds on Ke are optimal for the set of all two-phase isotropic
materials with given phase volume fractions, because they can be realized exactly by certain
microstructures including, as discussed in Chapter 4, singly-coated sphere assemblages and
some ﬁnite-rank laminates (see Sections 4.4 and 4.5). On the other hand, although the Hashin-
Shtrikman bounds on the eﬀective shear modulus µe are not realized by the coated-spheres
microstructures, they are still optimal because they are attained by certain ﬁnite-rank laminates
(see, for example, Francfort and Murat, 1986; Milton, 1986). Milton (1986) also showed that
the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds on either Ke or µe are attained if and only if the ﬁeld in phase 1
or phase 2 is uniform. Thus, as our discussions of the bounds on the eﬀective conductivity (see
Chapter 4) and the elastic moduli indicate, attainability of any bounds by some microstructure
is an important factor to their accuracy.
Walpole (1966) generalized the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds for 3D materials by removing the
restrictions on the phase moduli. That is, Walpole showed that these bounds are applicable
not only to the “well-ordered” materials for which (K2 −K1)(µ2 −µ1) ≥0, which was the
case considered by Hashin and Shtrikman, but also to “badly-ordered” materials for which
(K2 −K1)(µ1 −µ2) ≥0. However, we are not aware of any microstructure that can realize the
bounds in the badly-ordered case.
The Hashin-Shtrikman-Walpole bounds can be generalized to d−dimensional isotropic ma-
terials with n phases. Suppose that (KM, µM) and (Km, µm) are the maximum and minimum
bulk and shear moduli among all the phases. Then, the bounds are given by
 n

i=1
φi(K∗
m + Ki)−1
−1
−K∗
m ≤Ke ≤
 n

i=1
φi(K∗
M + Ki)−1
−1
−K∗
M ,
(1637)
 n

i=1
φi(µ∗
m + µi)−1
−1
−µ∗
m ≤µe ≤
 n

i=1
φi(µ∗
M + µi)−1
−1
−µ∗
M ,
(1638)
501

where K∗
m = 2d−1(d −1)µm, K∗
M = 2d−1(d −1)µM, µ∗
m = hm and µ∗
M = hM, where hm and hM
are the minimum and maximum values of the quantity hi deﬁned by Eq. (310). The bounds
(311) and (312) are completely similar to the bounds (4.119) for the eﬀective conductivity of
an isotropic material with n ≥2 phases.
7.5.1.3 Cluster bounds
Quintanilla and Torquato (1995) derived cluster bounds for the eﬀective bulk and shear
moduli of a two-phase material composed of equisized spheres, distributed randomly throughout
a matrix. The interaction potential between the spheres was assumed to be completely arbitrary,
and therefore one could consider a variety of composites, ranging from non-overlapping spheres
to completely overlapping ones. Their approach is similar to what we described and discussed
in Section 4.6.1.2 for deriving cluster bounds for the eﬀective conductivity of such composites.
In what follows we derive the cluster bounds for the eﬀective bulk and shear moduli. The
derivation serves another useful purpose, namely, it provides the details of the complexities
that are involved in deriving such bounds.
Consider a trial strain ﬁeld ˆϵ(r) at r. We require the ensemble average ⟨ˆϵ⟩to be equal to
the average strain ﬁeld ⟨ϵ⟩. If
Hp(ˆϵ) = 1
2⟨Cijklˆϵijˆϵkl⟩
(1639)
is the potential energy of the system for the trial strain ﬁeld, then according to the theorem of
minimum energy described in Section 7.1.2, among all trial strain ﬁelds, the one that satisﬁes
∇· σ = 0 is the one that uniquely minimizes Hp(ˆϵ) which, for isotropic systems, implies that
Ke⟨ϵii⟩⟨ϵkk⟩+ 2µe⟨˜ϵij⟩⟨˜ϵij⟩≤⟨Kˆϵiiˆϵkk⟩+ 2⟨µ˜ˆϵij˜ˆϵij⟩,
(1640)
where ˜ϵij = ϵij −1
3ϵkkδij is the deviatoric component of the strain ﬁeld ϵ [see Eq. (15)].
We now take the trial strain ﬁeld to be of the form
ˆϵ = ⟨ϵ⟩+ λϵ′ ,
(1641)
where λ is a parameter and ϵ′ is a perturbation chosen such that ˆϵ satisﬁes the requirements of
a trial strain ﬁeld. Setting ⟨ϵ⟩= U, the unit dyadic, and minimizing over λ yields the following
rigorous upper bound on Ke:
Ke ≤⟨K⟩−
⟨Kϵ′
ii⟩2
⟨Kϵ′
iiϵ′
kk⟩+ 2⟨µ˜ϵ′
ij˜ϵ′
ij⟩.
(1642)
502

Likewise, setting ⟨ϵij⟩= δi1δj1 −δi2δj2 and minimizing over λ yields an upper bound on µe:
µe ≤⟨µ⟩−
⟨µ(ϵ′
11 −ϵ′
22)⟩2
⟨Kϵ′
iiϵ′
kk⟩+ 2⟨µ˜ϵ′
ij˜ϵ′
ij⟩.
(1643)
We next consider trial stress ﬁelds ˆσ(r) that are symmetric, satisfy the equilibrium equa-
tions, and also, ⟨ˆσ⟩= ⟨σ⟩. If
T(ˆσ) = 1
2⟨Sijklˆσijˆσkl⟩,
(1644)
where Sijkl is the compliance tensor, then, according to the theorem of minimum complemen-
tary energy described in 7.1.2, among all trial stress ﬁelds, the one that is derivable from a
displacement ﬁeld, ˆσ = Ceˆϵ, is the one that uniquely minimizes T(ˆσ) which, for isotropic
systems, implies that
1
9K−1
e ⟨σkk⟩2 + 1
2µ−1
e ⟨˜σij⟩⟨˜σij⟩≤1
9⟨K−1ˆσiiˆσkk⟩+ 1
2⟨µ−1˜ˆσij˜ˆσij⟩,
(1645)
where ˜σ is the deviatoric component of the stress ﬁeld. As before, we now take
ˆσ = ⟨σ⟩+ λσ′ ,
(1646)
set ⟨ϵ⟩= U, so that ⟨σ⟩= 3K1U, and minimize over λ to obtain a lower bound on Ke:
K−1
e
≤⟨K−1⟩−
2⟨K−1σ′
ii⟩2
2⟨K−1σ′
iiσ′
kk⟩+ 9⟨µ−1˜σ′
ij˜σ′
ij⟩.
(1647)
Likewise, setting ⟨ϵij⟩= δi1δj1 −δi2δj2, so that σij = 2µ1(δi1δj1 −δi2δj2), and minimizing over
λ yield a lower bound on µe:
µ−1
e
≤⟨µ−1⟩−
9⟨µ−1(σ′
11 −σ′
22)⟩2
2(2⟨K−1σ′
iiσ′
kk⟩+ 9⟨µ−1˜σ′
ij˜σ′
ij⟩) .
(1648)
Thus, to obtain speciﬁc bounds, appropriate choices for ϵ′ and σ′ must be made. To do
this, the morphology of the composite must be speciﬁed. We consider composites of volume Ω
that consist of a matrix phase (phase 1) with volume fraction φ1 and bulk and shear moduli
K1 and µ1, and N possibly overlapping spherical inclusions (phase 2) of radius a, volume
fraction φ2 = 1 −φ1, and bulk and shear moduli K2 and µ2. The ensembles are assumed to be
statistically homogeneous. The spheres’ centers, rN = {r1, · · · , rN}, are randomly distributed
and follow a probability density function PN(rN). The reduced n−particle probability density
Pn(rn), deﬁned by
Pn(rn) =

· · ·

PN(rN) drn+1 · · · drN ,
503

is the probability of ﬁnding sphere i in a volume dri about ri for i = 1, · · · , n. Therefore, the
probability of ﬁnding any sphere in a volume dri about ri for i = 1, · · · , n is given by
ρn(rn) =
N!
(N −n)!Pn(rn) .
This is called the generic n−particle probability density function. The number density ρ and
the reduced density η are given by, ρ = limN,Ω→∞N/Ω, and η =
4π
3 ρa3 (we use ρ here to
denote the number density of the particles, instead of the usual n, so as not to confuse it with
the number of particles n). Subject to these conditions, the interaction potential between the
spheres is completely arbitrary. The spheres may overlap to varying degrees; an example of
such an interpenetrable-sphere system is the penetrable concentric-shell (the cherry-pit) model,
described in detail in Chapter 3.
As discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, the distribution function associated with ﬁnding phase i
at r and a particular conﬁguration of q = n −1 spheres at positions rq is deﬁned as
G(i)
n (r; rq) =
N!
(N −q)!

· · ·

mi(r, rN)PN(rN) drn · · · drN ,
(1649)
where
mi =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1,
r ∈Di,
0,
otherwise ,
and Di is the region of space occupied by phase i. Recall from Chapter 3 that G(i)
n (r; rq) is
called the phase point/q-particle function for phase i. It is convenient to deﬁne another set of
point/q-particle distribution functions H(i)
n
by
H(i)
n (r; rq) = G(i)
n (r; rq) −G(i)
0 (r)ρq(rq) ,
(1650)
so that H(i)
n
→0 as r moves away from r1, · · · , rq. These functions, for ensembles of spheres
that are statistically homogeneous and isotropic, depend only on the relative positions of the n
points. For example, ρ1(r1) = ρ, G(i)
2 (r; r1) = G(i)
2 (x1) and G(i)
3 (r; r1, r2) = G(i)
3 (x1, x2, ˆx1, ˆx2),
where xi = r −ri, xi = |xi|, and ˆxi = xi/xi. As discussed in Chapter 3,
G(2)
2 (x) = ρ ,
x < a
(1651)
H(2)
2 (x) = ρφ1 ,
x < a.
(1652)
Finally, the radial distribution function g2(x) [denoted by C(r) in Chapter 3] and the total
correlation function h(x) are deﬁned by, g2(x) = ρ2(x)/ρ2 and h(x) = g2(x) −1.
504

To derive the cluster bounds on Ke, we use Eqs. (262) and (266) and choose
ϵ′(r; rN) =
N

i=1
ϵ∗(xi) −

ρ(x1)ϵ∗(x1)dx1 ,
(1653)
and
σ′(r; rN) =
N

i=1
σ∗(xi) −

ρ(x1)σ∗(x1)dx1 ,
(1654)
where
ϵ∗(xi) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
−αU,
xi < a,
αa3
r3 (3ˆxiˆxi −U) ,
xi > a
(1655)
σ∗(xi) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
4αµ1U ,
xi < a,
2αµ1a3
r3
(3ˆxiˆxi −U) ,
xi > a
(1656)
where, xi = r −ri, xi = |xi|, and, α = 3(K2 −K1)/(3K2 + 4µ1). The ensemble averages of the
various quantities are now given by
⟨Kϵ′
ii⟩= −12πα(K2 −K1)I1 ,
⟨K−1σ′
ii⟩= 48παµ1(K−1
2
−K−1
1 )I1 ,
(1657)
⟨Kϵ′
iiϵ′
kk⟩= α2[A1K1 + B1(K2 −K1)] ,
⟨µ˜ϵ′
ij˜ϵ′
ij⟩= α2[C1µ1 + D1(µ2 −µ1)] ,
(1658)
⟨K−1σ′
iiσ′
kk⟩= 16µ2
1α2[A1K−1
1 +B1(K−1
2 −K−1
1 )] ,
⟨µ−1˜σ′
ii˜σ′
kk⟩= 4µ2
1α2[C1µ−1
1 +D1(µ−1
2 −µ−1
1 )] ,
(1659)
where
A1 = ⟨ϵ′
iiϵ′
kk⟩= 9η + 81
2a6η2I2 ,
B1 = ⟨I(2)ϵ′
iiϵ′
kk⟩= 27η
a3ρI3 + 81η2
2a6ρ2I4 ,
(1660)
C1 = ⟨˜ϵ′
ij˜ϵ′
ij⟩= 6η + 27η2I5 ,
D1 = ⟨I(2)˜ϵ′
ij˜ϵ′
ij⟩= 18ηa3
ρ
I6 + 27η2
ρ2 I7 ,
(1661)
I1 =
 a
0 r2H(2)
2 (r)dr ,
I2 =
 a
0 r2dr
 a
0 s2ds
 1
−1 h(|r −s|)du ,
(1662)
I3 =
 a
0 r2G(2)
2 (r)dr ,
I4 =
 a
0 r2dr
 a
0 s2ds
 1
−1 Q(r, s)du ,
(1663)
I5 =
 ∞
a
dr
r
 ∞
0
ds
s
 1
−1 h(|r −s|)P2(u)du ,
I6 =
 ∞
a
G(2)
2 (r)
r4
dr ,
(1664)
I7 =
 ∞
a
dr
r
 ∞
a
ds
s
 1
−1 Q(r, s)P2(u)du ,
(1665)
and
Q(r, s) = G(2)
3 (r, s, u) −ρG(2)
2 (r) −ρG(2)
2 (s) + ρ2φ2 ,
(1666)
505

where u = (r2 + s2 −|r −s|2)/(2rs).
The bounds on Ke are then given by
Ke ≤⟨K⟩−
9η2φ2
1(K2 −K1)2
A1K1 + B1(K2 −K1) + 2[C1µ1 + D1(µ2 −µ1)] ,
(1667)
Ke ≥

⟨K−1⟩−
4η2φ2
1(K−1
2
−K−1
1 )2
4
9[A1K−1
1
+ B1(K−1
2
−K−1
1 )] + 1
2[C1µ−1
1
+ D1(µ−1
2
−µ−1
1 )]
−1
.
(1668)
To derive the cluster bounds on µe, one proceeds in a manner similar to that for Ke,
namely, one uses (317) and (322) and again chooses Eqs. (327) and (328), where for the strain
perturbation ﬁeld one instead takes
ϵ∗
ij = c1(δi1δj1 −δi2δj2) , r < a ,
(1669)
while for r > a
ϵ∗
11 = ∂p
∂xx(x2 −y2) + p(3x2 −y2) + x∂q
∂x + q ,
(1670)
ϵ∗
12 = ϵ∗
21 = 1
2(x2 −y2)

x∂p
∂y + y ∂p
∂x

+ 1
2

x∂q
∂y −y ∂q
∂x

,
(1671)
ϵ∗
13 = ϵ∗
31 = 1
2(x2 −y2)

x∂p
∂z + z ∂p
∂x

+ pxz + 1
2x∂q
∂z ,
(1672)
ϵ∗
22 = ∂p
∂yy(x2 −y2) + p(x2 −3y2) −y ∂q
∂y −q ,
(1673)
ϵ∗
23 = ϵ∗
32 = 1
2(x2 −y2)

y∂p
∂z + z ∂p
∂y

−pyz −1
2y ∂q
∂z ,
(1674)
and
ϵ∗
33 = ∂p
∂zz(x2 −y2) + p(x2 −y2) ,
(1675)
where
p(r) = 5c2
r7 + 3K1 + µ1
µ1
c3
r5 ,
(1676)
q(r) = −2c2
r5 + 2c3
r3 ,
(1677)
c1 = 6(K1 + 2µ1)γ ,
c2 = −a5(3K1 + µ1)γ ,
c3 = 5a3µ1γ ,
(1678)
γ =
µ1 −µ2
9µ1K1 + 6µ2K1 + 8µ2
1 + 12µ1µ2
.
(1679)
For the stress perturbation ﬁeld, one takes
σ∗
ij =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
2c4(δi1δj1 −δi2δj2) ,
r < a
(K1 −2
3µ1)ϵkkδij + 2µ1ϵ∗
ij ,
r > a,
(1680)
506

where
c4 = µ2 −µ1 + µ2c1 = −µ1(9K1 + 8µ1)γ .
(1681)
Such perturbation ﬁelds arise from the solution of the single-sphere boundary value problem
described in Section 7.3.1.
One must now simplify the ensemble averages in (317) and (322). Doing so introduces the
following quantities,
A2 = 48c2
3
5a6 η + 216c2
3
5a6 η2I5 ,
B2 = 144c2
3
5a3ρ ηI6 + 216c2
3
5a6ρ2η2I7 ,
(1682)
C2 =

2c2
1 + 48
c2
2
a1 + 2c2c3(3K1 + µ1)
5µ1a8
+ c2
3(27K2
1 + 24K1µ1 + 16µ2
1)
60µ2
1a6

η
+
9c2
1
a6 I2 + 18c2
3(9K2
1 + 48K1µ1 + 92µ2
1)
35µ2
1a6
I5 + 72
7a6I10

η2 −1
3A2 ,
(1683)
D2 =
 6c2
1
a3ρI3 + 48
a3ρI8

η +
 9c2
1
a6ρ2I4 + 18c2
3(9K2
1 + 48K1µ1 + 92µ2
1)
35µ2
1a6ρ2
I7
+ 72
7a6ρ2I11

η2 −1
3B2 ,
(1684)
A3 = 9K2
1A2 ,
B3 = 9K2
1B2 ,
(1685)
C3
=

8c2
4 + 192
c2
2µ2
1
a10 + 2c2c3µ1(3K1 + µ1)
5a8
+ c2
3(3K2
1 + 2K1µ1 + µ2
1)
5a6

η
+
36
a6 c2
4I2 + 576c2
3(9K2
1 + 6K1µ1 + 8µ2
1)
35a6
I5 + 288µ2
1
7a6 I10

η2 −1
3A3 ,
(1686)
and
D3 =
 24
a3ρc2
4I3 + 192
5a3ρI9

η +
 36
a6ρ2c2
4I4 + 576c2
3(9K2
1 + 6K1µ1 + 8µ2
1)
35a6ρ2
I7
+288µ2
1
7a6ρ2 I11

η2 −1
3B3 .
(1687)
In these equations I1 through I7 are given by Eqs. (336)-(339), and
I8 =
 ∞
a
G(2)
2 (r)
7c2
2
r8 + 2c2c3(3K1 + µ1)
µ1r6
+ c2
3(27K2
1 + 24K1µ1 + 16µ2
1)
20µ2
1r4

dr ,
(1688)
I9 =
 ∞
a
G(2)
2 (r)
35c2
2µ2
1
r8
+ 10c2c3µ1(3K1 + µ1)
r6
+ 3c2
3(3K2
1 + 2K1µ1 + µ2
1)
r4

dr ,
(1689)
I10 =
 ∞
a
dr
r3

7c2 + 3K1 + µ1
µ1
c3r2
  ∞
a
ds
s3

7c2 + 3K1 + µ1
µ1
c3r2
  1
−1 h(t)P4(u)du ,
(1690)
507

and
I11 =
 ∞
a
dr
r3

7c2 + 3K1 + µ1
µ1
c3r2
  ∞
a
ds
s3

7c2 + 3K1 + µ1
µ1
c3s2
  1
−1 Q(r, s)P4(u)du ,
(1691)
where t = |r −s|.
Given these quantities, the eﬀective shear modulus is bounded by
µe ≤⟨µ⟩−
4c2
1η2φ2
1(µ2 −µ1)2
A2K1 + B2(K2 −K1) + 2[C2µ1 + D2(µ2 −µ1)] ,
(1692)
and
µe ≥

⟨µ−1⟩−
4c2
4η2φ2
1(µ−1
2
−µ−1
1 )2
1
9[A3K−1
1
+ B3(K−1
2
−K−1
1 )] + 1
2[C3µ−1
1
+ D3(µ−1
2
−µ−1
1 )]
−1
.
(1693)
One can now compute these general bounds for various models of composite materials. It is
clear that in order to do this, the function G(i)
n must be speciﬁed which, as discussed in Chapters
3 and 4, depends on the microstructure of the composite and the degree of penetrability of the
spheres.
Consider the case of fully-impenetrable sphere model for which the results for G(i)
n
were
already described in Chapters 3 and 4. Using these results, the followings are obtained,
I2 = −2
9a6 ,
I3 = 1
3ρa3 ,
I4 = 2
9ρ2a6(φ2 −2) ,
(1694)
I5 = −2/9 ,
I6 = 1
a3ρφ2J1 ,
I7 = 2
9ρ2φ2J2 ,
(1695)
where
J1 = a3
 ∞
2a
r2
(r2 −a2)3g2(r)dr ,
and
J2 =
9
32π2
∞

l=2
l(l −1)a2l−4
 
[g3(r, s, t) −g(r)g(s)] Pl(u)
rl+1sl+1drds ,
where g3 is the three-particle distribution function which is related to the function ρ3 through,
g3(r, s, t) = ρ3(r, s, t)/ρ3. Moreover,
I8 = 75
14ρηa3(3K1 + µ1)2γ2Υ + 5
28ρηa3(9K2
1 + 48K1µ1 + 92µ2
1)γ2J1 ,
(1696)
I9 = 375
14 ρηa3(3K1 + µ1)2µ1γ2Υ + 50
7 ρηa3(9K2
1 + 6K1µ1 + 8µ2
1)µ2
1γ2J1 ,
(1697)
508

where
Υ = 1
2π
 ∞
2a r2g2(r)W(r)dr
(1698)
with
W(r) = 4
3π

a3
(r2 −a2)3 −14
5
a5
(r2 −a2)4 −63
25
a7
(r2 −a2)5 + 196
25
a9
(r2 −a2)6 + 168
25
a11
(r2 −a2)7

.
(1699)
In addition
I10 = −8
9(3K1 + µ1)2γ2a6 ,
(1700)
and
I11 = 25ρ2ηa6(3K1 + µ1)2γ2Ψ ,
(1701)
with
Ψ =
1
16π2

g3(r45, r46, r56)Q(r45, r46, r56)dr5dr6 ,
(1702)
where the origin is at r4, and
Q(r45, r46, r56) = 14
5!
∞

l=4
l(l −1)(l −2)(l −3)2l −3
2l −1
a2l −8
rl−1
45 rl−1
46
×

1 −2
5(l + 1)
2l −1
2l −3
  a
r45
2 
1 −2
5(l + 1)
2l −1
2l −3
  a
r46
2
Pl(cos θ546)
+ 8
5!
∞

l=3
l(l −1)(l −2)(11l + 15)
(2l + 3)(2l −3)
a2l−4
rl+1
45 rl+1
46
Pl(cos θ546) ,
(1703)
and cos θ546 = ˆr45 · ˆr46, with ˆr45 = r45/|r45| and ˆr46 = r46/|r46|. Given these integrals, one then
ﬁnds that for fully-impenetrable spheres,
A1 = 9φ1φ2 ,
B1 = 9φ2
1φ2 ,
(1704)
C1 = 6φ1φ2 ,
D1 = 18φ2
2J1 + 6φ3
2J2 .
(1705)
The resulting bounds are then equivalent to Beran-Molyneux bounds which will be described
in the next section. Note that for this composite the microstructural parameters ζ2 is given by
ζ2 = 1
φ1
(3J1φ2 + J2φ2
2) .
(1706)
We now consider the bounds on the eﬀective shear modulus µe of suspensions of totally-
impenetrable spheres. In general, as discussed in the next section, the three-point bounds on
µe are written in the following form
µe ≤⟨µ⟩−6φ1φ2(µ2 −µ1)2
6⟨˜µ⟩+ Θ
,
(1707)
509

and
µ−1
e
≥

⟨µ−1⟩−φ1φ2(µ−1
2
−µ−1
1 )2
⟨˜µ−1⟩+ 6Ξ
−1
,
(1708)
where
⟨b⟩η = b1η1 + b2η2 ,
(1709)
with η2 = 1 −η1 deﬁned by Eqs. (260) and (264) and described in detail in Section 7.4.5. For
fully-impenetrable sphere model, η2 is simpliﬁed to
η2 = φ2
2(Υ + φ2Ψ) .
(1710)
The required constants are then given by
A2 = 240µ2
1γ2φ1φ2 ,
B2 = 240µ2
1γ2φ1φ2ζ2 ,
(1711)
C2 = 60(3K2
1 + 8K1µ1 + 8µ2
1)γ2φ1φ2 ,
(1712)
D2 = 72(K1 + 2µ1)2γ2φ1φ2 + 60(2K1 + 3µ1)µ1γ2φ1φ2ζ2 + 12(3K1 + µ1)2γ2φ1φ2η2 ,
(1713)
A3 = 2160K2
1µ2
1γ2φ1φ2 ,
B3 = 2160K2
1µ2
1γ2φ1φ2ζ2 ,
(1714)
C3 = 40µ2
1(27K2
1 + 48K1µ1 + 32µ2
1)γ2φ1φ2 ,
(1715)
D3 = 8µ2
1(9K1+8µ1)2γ2φ2
1φ2+240µ3
1(2K1+3µ1)µ1γ2φ1φ2ζ2+48µ2
1(3K1+µ1)2γ2φ1φ2η2 . (1716)
We then ﬁnd that the cluster bounds on µe can also be represented in the form of (381) and
(382), if we replace Θ and Ξ with
Θ1 = 10µ2
1⟨K⟩ζ + 5µ1(2K1 + 3µ1)⟨µ⟩ζ + (3K1 + µ1)2⟨µ⟩η
(K1 + 2µ1)2
,
(1717)
and
Ξ1 = 10K2
1⟨K−1⟩ζ + 5µ1(2K1 + 3µ1)⟨µ−1⟩ζ + (3K1 + µ1)2⟨µ−1⟩η
(9K1 + 8µ1)2
.
(1718)
For composites with K1 > K2 and µ1 > µ2,
Θ1 ≤ΘHS ≡µ1(9K1 + 8µ1)
K1 + 2µ1
,
(1719)
where ΘHS refers to the corresponding expression in the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds, and there-
fore the cluster upper bound on µe is more restrictive than the Hashin-Shtrikman upper bound.
Likewise, for composites with K1 < K2 and µ1 < µ2,
Ξ1 ≤ΞHS ≡
K1 + 2µ1
µ1(9K1 + 8µ1) ,
(1720)
510

and therefore the cluster lower bound on µe is more restrictive than the Hashin-Shtrikman lower
bound.
At a given volume fraction φ2, both the cluster upper and lower bounds are more restrictive
than the McCoy upper bound (see the next Section) for some values of the elastic moduli and
less restrictive for others; this is determined by the values of ζ2 and η2 at volume fraction φ2 and
the larger of K2/K1 and µ2/µ1. However, both bounds will not be as restrictive as those due
to Milton and Phan-Thien, which are based on small-contrast trial ﬁelds and will be described
in the next section.
For a composite with spherical voids (i.e., one with K2 = µ2 = 0), the cluster bound is
identical to the McCoy bound, is a substantial improvement upon the Hashin-Shtrikman bound,
and is almost identical to the Milton-Phan-Thien bound. For an incompressible composite
with impenetrable rigid spherical inclusions (i.e., one with K1 = K2 = ∞and µ2 ≫µ1),
the only possible non-trivial bound is the lower bound on µe, the determination of which for
such composites is called the Einstein problem. Once again, the cluster bound for this case
is identical to the McCoy bound, a substantial improvement on the Hashin-Shtrikman bound,
but is slightly less restrictive than the Milton-Phan-Thien bound.
We now consider the fully-penetrable sphere (the Swiss-cheese) model. In this case the
cluster bounds can be evaluated analytically, which is in contrast to the other three-point
bounds (described below), which require umerical evaluation of ζ2 and η2 at a given volume
fraction. One has
η = −ln φ1
(1721)
G(2)
2 (x) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
ρ
x < a ,
ρφ2
x > a ,
(1722)
h(x) = 0 ,
(1723)
and
Q(x1, x2) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
−ρ2φ1
x1, x2 < a ,
0
otherwise ,
(1724)
and therefore,
Ke ≤⟨K⟩−
3ηφ2
1(K1 −K2)2
3[K2 −ηφ1(K2 −K1)] + 4⟨µ⟩,
(1725)
511

and
Ke ≥

⟨K−1⟩−
4ηφ2
1(K−1
1
−K−1
2 )2
4[K−1
2
−ηφ1(K−1
2
−K−1
1 )] + 3⟨µ−1⟩
−1
,
(1726)
µe ≤⟨µ⟩−
6ηφ2
1(µ1 −µ2)2
6[µ2 −ηφ1(µ2 −µ1)] + Θ2
,
(1727)
µe ≥

⟨µ−1⟩−
ηφ2
1(µ−1
1
−µ−1
2 )2
µ−1
2
−ηφ1(µ−1
2
−µ−1
1 ) + 6Ξ2
−1
,
(1728)
where
Θ2 = 10⟨K⟩µ2
1 + ⟨µ⟩(9K2
1 + 16K1µ1 + 16µ2
1)
(K1 + 2µ1)2
.
(1729)
and
Ξ2 = 10⟨k−1⟩K2
1 + ⟨µ−1⟩(9K2
1 + 16K1µ1 + 16µ2
1)
(9K1 + 8µ1)2
.
(1730)
For small φ2, these bounds collapse onto those for the dilute limit described in Section 7.3.1.
If the spherical inclusions represent voids, then the lower bounds trivially become zero, while
the upper bounds reduce to
Ke
K1
≤
4fφ1
3η + 4f ,
(1731)
and
µe
µ1
≤
(9 + 8f)φ1
6η(1 + 2f) + (9 + 8f) ,
(1732)
where f = µ1/K1. If we now consider the Einstein problem, allowing the particles to be fully
penetrable, the cluster lower bound on µe reduces to
µe
µ1
≥3η + 2
2φ1
,
(1733)
which is not as sharp as the McCoy and Milton-Phan-Thien bounds (see the next section), but
is simple, while evaluation of the other bounds requires numerical integrations.
7.5.1.4 Three- and four-point bounds
In this section, we describe the most restrictive three-point bounds that are currently avail-
able. These bounds are expressed in compact forms by utilizing the so-called Y-transformation
that was ﬁrst described by Gibiansky and Torquato (1995b). Consider a two-phase composite
material with phase volume fractions φ1 and φ2. In general, all the existing bounds, as well
as the three-point series expansions that were described and discussed in Section 7.4, can be
expressed as
F(a1, a2, φ1, φ2, y) = a1φ1 + a2φ2 −φ1φ2(a1 −a2)2
a1φ2 + a2φ1 + y ,
(1734)
512

where a is any phase property. The Y-transformation is the inverse of the function F, as a
function of the variable y, i.e.,
y(a1, a2, φ1, φ2, ae) = −a1φ2 −a2φ1 + φ1φ2(a1 −a2)2
a1φ1 + a2φ2 −ae
.
(1735)
If we use the shortened notation, ya(a1, a2, φ1, φ2, ae) = y(ae), then it can be shown that the
bounds
F(a1, a2, φ1, φ2, y1) ≤ae ≤F(a1, a2, φ1, φ2, y2) ,
(1736)
are equivalent to
y1 ≤ya(ae) ≤y2 .
(1737)
Beran and Molyneux (1966) derived bounds on the eﬀective bulk modulus of 3D composites,
while Silnutzer (1972) did the same for 2D materials. Their bounds were simpliﬁed by Milton
(1981a,b,c,1982a,b) and, as pointed out by Gibiansky and Torquato (1995b), can be written in
the following general form:
F

K1, K2, φ1, φ2, 2
d(d −1)⟨µ−1⟩−1
ζ

≤Ke ≤F

K1, K2, φ1, φ2, 2
d(d −1)⟨µ⟩ζ

,
(1738)
where the average is deﬁned by, ⟨µ⟩ζ = ζ1µ1 +ζ2µ2, and d is the dimensionality of the material.
In terms of the Y-transformation, the bounds (412) can be rewritten as
2
d(d −1)⟨µ−1⟩−1
ζ
≤yK(Ke) ≤2
d(d −1)⟨µ⟩ζ ,
(1739)
which is rewritten as
F
2
d(d −1)µ1, 2
d(d −1)µ2, ζ1, ζ2, 0

≤yK(Ke) ≤F
2
d(d −1)µ1, 2
d(d −1)µ2, ζ1, ζ2, ∞

,
(1740)
which, upon applying the Y-transformation again, is rewritten as
0 ≤zK(Ke) ≤∞,
(1741)
where
zK(Ke) ≡y
2
d(d −1)µ1, 2
d(d −1)µ2, ζ1, ζ2, yK(Ke)

.
(1742)
For 2D materials, these bounds were improved by Gibiansky and Torquato (1995a) who
derived the following tighter bound
yK(Ke) ≤F(µ1, µ2, ζ1, ζ2, KM) ,
(1743)
513

or, in terms of zK,
zK(Ke) ≤KM ,
(1744)
with zK(Ke) = y[µ1, µ2, ζ1, ζ2, yK(Ke)], and KM is the maximal phase bulk modulus. Gibiansky
and Torquato (1995a) showed that the most restrictive bounds on eﬀective shear modulus of
2D materials can be written as
+
2⟨K−1⟩ζ + ⟨µ−1⟩η
,−1 ≤yµ(µe) ≤y−1
U ,
(1745)
where the lower bound is due to Silnutzer (1972) while the upper bound was derived by Gib-
iansky and Torquato (1995a). Here,
yU =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
y1 ,
if t ∈[−K−1
M , µ−1
M ] ,
y2 ,
if t ≤−K−1
M ,
y3 ,
if t ≥µ−1
M ,
(1746)
where µM is the maximal phase shear modulus, and
y1 = ⟨2K−1⟩ζ + ⟨µ−1⟩η −
$
2ζ1ζ2(K−1
1
−K−1
2 )2 +
$
η1η2(µ−1
1
−µ−1
2 )2
2
η1µ−1
2
+ η2µ−1
1
+ 2ζ1K−1
2
+ 2ζ2K−1
1
,
(1747)
y2 =
)
1
µ−1 + K−1
M
*−1
+
1
KM
,
y3 = 2
)
1
K−1 + µ−1
M
*−1
−1
µM
,
(1748)
t =
$
2ζ1ζ2(K−1
1
−K−1
2 )2(η1µ−1
2
+ η2µ−1
1 ) −
$
η1η2(µ−1
1
−µ−1
2 )2(ζ1K−1
2
+ ζ2K−1
1 )
$
2ζ1ζ2(K−1
1
−K−1
2 )2 +
$
η1η2(µ−1
1
−µ−1
2 )2
.
(1749)
If the material is incompressible, i.e., if K1/µ1 = K2/µ2 = ∞, then these bounds are rewritten
in the following form,
0 ≤zµ(µe) ≤∞,
(1750)
where zµ(µe) = F[µ1, µ2, η1, η2, yµ(µe)].
For 3D composite materials, three-point bounds on the eﬀective shear modulus were derived
by McCoy (1970), which were then improved by Milton and Phan-Thien (1982), who showed
that
Ξ ≤yµ(µe) ≤Θ ,
(1751)
where
Ξ =
)128
K + 99
µ
*
ζ
+ 45
)1
µ
*
η
30
)1
µ
*
ζ
) 6
K −1
µ
*
ζ
+ 6
)1
µ
*
η
) 2
K + 21
µ
*
ζ
,
(1752)
514

Θ = 3⟨µ⟩η⟨6K + 7µ⟩ζ −5⟨µ⟩2
ζ
6⟨2K −µ⟩ζ + 30⟨µ⟩η
.
(1753)
In these bounds, ζ2 can lie anywhere in [0, 1], while Milton and Phan-Thien showed that (for
d = 3) η2 lies in the smaller interval [ 5
21ζ2, (16 + 5ζ2)/21].
In order to compare the series expansions that were described in Section 7.4 to the afore-
mentioned three-point bounds, one must recast the series in terms of the Y-transformation.
For example, Eq. (248) can be rewritten as
˜zK(Ke) = 1 −d
d
µ1{(4 + 2d −2d2)µ1 + d[(d + 2)ζ2 −d]K1}
[2d −(d + 2)(d −1)ζ2]µ1 + dK1
,
(1754)
where ˜zK(Ke) is the corresponding z−function deﬁned by Eq. (416). Since this new form of the
series expansion must satisfy the above bounds, one can obtain constraints on the numerical
values of ζ2 and η2. For example, in order for the predictions of Eq. (284) for the eﬀective bulk
modulus of 3D materials to lie between the above upper and lower bounds, one must have,
ζ2 ≤0.6 + 8µ1/(15K1), a constraint that was in fact mentioned in Section 7.4.4.2.
Milton and Phan-Thien (1982) derived four point bounds on the elastic moduli of 3D two-
phase materials. However, their bounds on the eﬀective bulk modulus involve three diﬀerent
structural parameters, and those on the eﬀective shear modulus involve eight parameters. De-
termination of such a large set of parameters is very diﬃcult and impractical. Therefore, the
bounds are not listed here.
7.5.2 Anisotropic materials
We consider d−dimensional, macroscopically-anisotropic materials that consist of two isotropic
phases. The two-point generalization of the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds on Ce when C2 ≥C1,
with C(L)
e
≤Ce ≤C(U)
e
, are given by
C(L)
e
= ⟨C⟩−φ1φ2(C1 −C2) : P(1) : (C1 −C2) :

U + φ1P(1) : (C2 −C1)
−1 ,
(1755)
C(U)
e
= ⟨C⟩−φ1φ2(C2 −C1) : P(2) : (C2 −C1) :

U + φ2P(2) : (C1 −C2)
−1 ,
(1756)
where P(q) is a two-point tensor given by
P(q) = A(q) −
1
φpφq

ϵ H(q)(1, 2)

S(p)
2 (1, 2) −φ2
p

d2 .
(1757)
The tensors A(q) and H(q) were already deﬁned by Eqs. (204) and (205). These bounds can be
generalized to the case of a macroscopically-anisotropic material with n ≥2 phases (see also
Nemat-Nasser and Hori, 1993).
515

Given only the phase volume fractions φ1 and φ2, bulk moduli K1 and K2, and shear moduli
µ1 and µ2 of a two-phase transversely isotropic ﬁber-reinforced material, Hill (1964) and Hashin
(1965, 1970; see also Hashin, 1980) derived the most accurate bounds on its eﬀective transverse
bulk modulus K(t)
e , the eﬀective axial shear modulus µ(a)
e , and the eﬀective transverse shear
modulus µ(t)
e . Silnutzer (1972) derived improved bounds on these properties that additionally
depend upon ζ2. His bounds are referred to as third-order bounds since they are exact up to
third order in the diﬀerence in the phase properties. Silnutzer also derived third-order bounds
on the eﬀective transverse shear modulus µ(t)
e
which Milton showed can be expressed in terms
of ζ2 and η2. The simpliﬁed forms of the Silnutzer third-order bounds (Milton, 1982a,b) for the
axial shear modulus and transverse bulk modulus are given by

⟨µ⟩−φ1φ2(µ2 −µ1)2
⟨¯µ⟩+ ⟨µ⟩ζ
−1
≤µ(a)
e
≤

⟨1/µ⟩−φ1φ2(1/µ2 −1/µ1)2
⟨1/¯µ⟩+ ⟨1/µ⟩ζ
−1
,
(1758)
⎡
⎣⟨K(t)⟩−φ1φ2(K(t)
2 −K(t)
1 )2
⟨¯
K(t)⟩+ ⟨¯µ⟩ζ
⎤
⎦
−1
≤K(t)
e
≤
⎡
⎣⟨1/K(t)⟩−φ1φ2(1/K(t)
2 −1/K(t)
1 )2
⟨1/ ¯
K(t)⟩+ ⟨1/µ⟩ζ
⎤
⎦
−1
,
(1759)
and

⟨µ⟩−φ1φ2(µ2 −µ1)2
⟨¯µ⟩+ ⟨Θ⟩
−1
≤µ(t)
e ≤

⟨1/µ⟩−φ1φ2(1/µ2 −1/µ1)2
⟨1/¯µ⟩+ ⟨Ξ⟩
−1
,
(1760)
with
Θ = 2⟨K(t)⟩ζ⟨µ⟩2 + ⟨K(t)⟩2⟨µ⟩η
⟨K(t) + 2µ⟩2
,
(1761)
Ξ = 2⟨1/K(t)⟩ζ + ⟨1/µ⟩η .
(1762)
Here,
⟨b⟩= b1φ1 + b2φ2 ,
⟨¯b⟩= b1φ2 + b2φ2 ,
(1763)
⟨b⟩ζ = b1ζ1 + b2ζ2 ,
⟨b⟩η = b1η1 + b2η2 ,
(1764)
where ζ1 = 1 −ζ2 and η1 = 1 −η2. The quantity K(t)
i
is the transverse bulk modulus of phase
i for transverse compression but without axial extension and may be expressed in terms of the
isotropic phase moduli as K(t)
i
= Ki +µi/3 (i = 1 and 2). Since the microstructural parameters
ζi and ηi lie in the closed interval [0,1], the above third-order bounds always improve upon
the second-order bounds of Hill and Hashin. Note that, as mentioned in Section 7.2.4, the
problem of determining the eﬀective axial shear modulus µ(a)
e
is mathematically equivalent to
determining the eﬀective transverse thermal or electrical conductivity (Hashin, 1970).
516

Fourth-order bounds on the eﬀective transverse conductivity or axial shear modulus µ(a)
e
of transversely isotropic ﬁber-reinforced materials that depend upon the phase properties φ2
and ζ2 and an integral over the four-point probability function S4 were derived by Milton
(1981a,b,c), who demonstrated that the integral involving S4 can be expressed in terms of φ2
and ζ2 only. The fourth-order bounds, for the case µ2 ≥µ1, are given by
µ(a)
L ≤µ(a)
e
≤µ(a)
U ,
(1765)
where
µ(a)
U = µ2
(µ1 + µ2)(µ1 + ⟨µ⟩) −φ2ζ1(µ2 −µ1)2
(µ1 + µ2)(µ2 + ⟨¯µ⟩) −φ2ζ1(µ2 −µ1)2

,
(1766)
µ(a)
L = µ1
(µ1 + µ2)(µ2 + ⟨µ⟩) −φ1ζ2(µ2 −µ1)2
(µ1 + µ2)(µ1 + ⟨¯µ⟩) −φ1ζ2(µ2 −µ1)2

.
(1767)
As discussed earlier in this chapter and also in Chapters 3 and 4, computing ζ2 and η2
requires knowledge of the three-point probability function S3 for inﬁnitely long, oriented, eq-
uisized, impenetrable cylinders (disks in 2D). Consider the limit of a statistically isotropic
distribution of identical, impenetrable disks (inﬁnitely long, parallel cylinders) of radius a at
an area (volume) fraction φ2 = nπa, where n is the number density of the disks (cylinders).
Torquato and Lado (1988) found that for impenetrable disks of unit diameter one has the exact
(to second order in φ2)
ζ2 =
2
πφ1
(b2φ2 + b3φ2
2) ,
(1768)
where
b2 = π
4
 ∞
1
rg2(r)
(r2 −1/4)2dr ,
(1769)
and
b3 =
∞

n=2
n −1
4n−3
 ∞
1
dr
rn−1
 r
1
ds
sn−1
 π
0 [g3(r, s, t) −g2(r)g2(s)]Tn(cos θ)dθ ,
(1770)
with Tn(cos θ) = cos(nθ) being the Chebyshev polynomial of the ﬁrst kind.
Although the
pair distribution function g2(r) is known accurately in the Percus-Yevick approximation [see
Eq. (3.25), where g2(r) is denoted by C(r)], computing g3 is more problematical, and hence
Torquato and Lado (1988) resorted to the commonly-used superposition approximation (Hansen
and McDonald, 1986) according to which
g3(r12, r13, r23) ≃g2(r12)g2(r13)g2(r23) .
(1771)
517

to evaluate the integrals in Eq. (444). As discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, the exact expansion of
ζ2 through second order in φ2 yields excellent agreement with the simulation results for a very
wide range of volume fractions up to the disorder-order phase transition which, for disks occurs,
at φ2 ≃0.71, indicating that cubic and higher-order terms make negligible contributions to ζ2
(and hence to η2), even at high densities. For disks this exact expansion is given by Eq. (4.90),
which we quote here again,
ζ2 = 1
3φ2 −0.05707φ2
2 .
(1772)
Note that φ2 ≃0.7 corresponds to approximately 87% of the maximum random close-packing
volume fraction, φ2c ≃0.81. As for η2, Torquato and Lado (1992) derived the exact (to order
φ2
2) result that
η2 =
8
πφ1
(c2φ2 + c3φ2
2) ,
(1773)
where
c2 =
 ∞
1
rg2(r)W(r)dr ,
(1774)
where W(r) is given by Eq. (373), and
c3 =
∞

n=2
 ∞
1
rdr
 r
1 sds
 π
0 [g3(r, s, t) −g2(r)g2(s)]Qn(r, s, cos θ)dθ ,
(1775)
and
Qn(r, s, cos θ) =
1
4n−4rn−2sn−2
2 n −1
16r2s2 + (n −3)
×

(n −2) −n(n −1)
8r2
 
(n −2) −n(n −1)
8s2

Tn(cos θ) .
(1776)
Due to appearance of g2(r) and g3, the coeﬃcients c2 and c3 depend upon the particle fraction
φ2.
The radial distribution function for impenetrable disks of unit diameter is known exactly
through ﬁrst order in φ2 (Hansen and McDonald, 1986),
g2(r) = U(r −1)[1 + A2(r)φ2] ,
(1777)
where
A2(r) = 4
π

π −2 sin−1
r
2

−r

1 −1
4r2
1/2
U(2 −r) ,
(1778)
and U(x) is the unit step function. We then obtain
c2 = 7
81π + 0.1387φ2 .
(1779)
518

Equation (453) is exact to the order and number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures indicated. The zero-
density limit of g3 is given by the expression
g3(r12, r13, r23) = U(r12 −1)U(r13 −1)U(r23 −1) ,
(1780)
and hence, c3 = −0.3934, which is exact to zeroth order in φ2 (to the number of signiﬁcant
ﬁgures indicated). Putting these results together, one ﬁnally obtains the expression for η2 given
by Eq. (271) for fully-impenetrable spheres. Such results for ζ2 and η2 should be compared with,
for example, those for the symmetric-cell material with cylindrical cells (Beran and Silnutzer,
1971) for which ζ2 = η2 = φ2, already mentioned in Section 7.4.5.
Figure 7.8 compares the third and fourth-order bounds on the scaled eﬀective axial shear
modulus µ(a)
e /µ1 as a function of the cylinder volume fraction φ2 for a composite with a shear
modulus ratio µ2/µ1 = 10. Also shown are accurate Monte Carlo computer simulation data
obtained by Kim and Torquato (1990) for the same model for the mathematically equivalent
problem of determining the eﬀective transverse conductivity of the same system. The agreement
between the computer simulation data and the fourth-order lower bound is excellent. In Figure
7.9 the same bounds are shown for the case where the ﬁbers are 50 times more rigid than the
matrix (µ2/µ1 = 50). Not surprisingly, although the bounds widen, the fourth-order lower
bound still provides an accurate estimate of the eﬀective axial shear modulus for a wide range
of cylinder volume fractions.
7.6 Multiple Scattering Method
A very diﬀerent approach to calculating the eﬀective elastic moduli of heterogeneous materi-
als was proposed by Mondescu and Muthukumar (1999). They considered a composite material
containing rigid, equisized spherical particles distributed randomly in a matrix. The spheres
could overlap completely, and of particular interest was the regime in which their volume frac-
tion was high enough for a percolation transition to occur and a sample-spanning cluster (of
the spheres) to form.
Since their approach to the problem is very diﬀerent from what we
have discussed so far, and because the predictions of the theory are in good agreement with
experimental data, we describe and discuss their method.
Consider a rigid sphere of radius a inside a linear elastic, isotropic matrix of volume Ω
(which is essentially inﬁnite), on which an external force ﬁeld F(r) is imposed. The system is
519

assumed to be at steady state. Thus, the stationary equilibrium displacement ﬁeld u(r) in the
matrix satisﬁes the Lam´e equation:
(λ1 + µ1)∇(∇· u) + µ1∇2u + F = 0 ,
(1781)
where λ1 and µ1 are the usual Lam´e constants of the matrix. Suppose that R(θ) = R0 + r0(θ)
is the position of a point on the surface of the sphere, where R0 is the position of the center
of mass of the particle, and r0(θ) is the relative coordinate of the point in the center-of-mass
frame (|r0| = a) with θ being the angular orientation of r0. We also assume that the particle
is ﬁxed in the matrix, i.e., there is perfect bonding. The boundary condition at the surface of
the sphere is the usual continuity of the displacement ﬁeld, i.e., up(θ) = uM(θ), where p and
M denote the particle and the matrix, respectively. The solution of the Lam´e equation can be
formally written in terms of a Green function:
u(r) =

G(r, r′) · F(r′)dr′ +

G[r, R(θ)] · T(θ)dθ ,
(1782)
Here, T(θ) is the traction ﬁeld density on the surface of the sphere, the normal at the surface
pointing out of Ωand into the sphere, and G(r, r′) is the (tensor) Green function given by
G(r, r′) =
1
16πµ1(1 −νp1)|r −r′|

(3 −4νp1)U + (r −r′)(r −r′)
|r −r′|2

,
(1783)
in which νp1 is the Poisson’s ratio of phase 1, the matrix. We now calculate the Fourier transform
ˆG(ω) of the Green function:
ˆG(ω) =
1
µ1ω2(U −ˆω ˆω) +
1
(λ1 + 2µ1)ω2 ˆω ˆω ,
(1784)
where ˆω is the unit vector in the ω direction. Since the traction ﬁeld associated with a rigid
body rotation is zero, the integral solution (456) is valid both in the particle and in the matrix,
which means, physically, that one has replaced the spherical inhomogeneity with a layer of
surface forces. Averaging these forces over the matrix by an ensemble-volume averaging and
applying the boundary conditions lead one to the desired eﬀective elastic properties.
The transition from a microscopic to a macroscopic description of the material is achieved
by averaging the Lam´e equation, Eq. (455), and its solution, Eq. (456), over the position R0(θ)
of the center of the inclusion. One then obtains
⟨u(r)⟩=

G(r, r′) · F(r′)dr′ +
 
G(r, r′) · Σ(r′, r′′) · ⟨u(r)⟩dr′dr′′ ,
(1785)
520

where Σ(r, r′) is called the self-energy of the material (named so in analogy with a similar
quantity that arises in the problem of determining the eﬀective conductivity and dielectric
constant) deﬁned by

Σ(r, r′) · ⟨u(r′)⟩dr′ = Σ ∗⟨u⟩|r =
4
δ[r −R(θ)]T(θ)dθ
5
,
(1786)
where the external force ﬁeld does not depend upon R0, the symbol ∗combines two operations,
a convolution-like integral and an inner product, and |r indicates the ﬁnal argument of the
expression. The key quantity to compute is Σ which contains information on the change in the
elastic properties of the matrix due to the prescence of the inclusions, and is directly related to
the many-body interactions amoing the particles.
From Eq. (459) one obtains
⟨u(r)⟩= (U −G ∗Σ)−1 ∗G ∗F|r .
(1787)
An eﬀective Green tensor G(r, r′) is now deﬁned by
G(r, r′) = (U −G ∗Σ)−1 ∗G|r,r′ ,
(1788)
in terms of which Eq. (461) is written in a simple form:
⟨u(r)⟩= G ∗F|r =

G(r −r′) · F(r′)dr′ .
(1789)
To obtain the change in the elastic properties (due to the presence of the inclusions), we Fourier
transform Eq. (459), separate its transverse and logitudinal components by taking its inner-
product with the projectors U −ˆω ˆω and ˆω ˆω that satisfy
(U −ˆω ˆω) · (U −ˆω ˆω) = U −ˆω ˆω ,
(1790)
ˆω ˆω · (U −ˆω ˆω) = 0 ,
(1791)
and use the decomposition
D(ω) = D⊥(ω)(U −ˆω ˆω) + D∥(ω)(ˆω ˆω)
(1792)
to obtain
G(ω) =
G⊥(ω)
1 −G⊥(ω)Σ⊥(ω)(U −ˆω ˆω) +
G∥(ω)
1 −G∥(ω)

∥(ω) ˆω ˆω
521

=
1
µ1ω2 −Σ⊥(ω)(U −ˆω ˆω) +
1
(λ1 + 2µ1)ω2 −Σ∥(ω) ˆω ˆω .
(1793)
The eﬀective elastic moduli, in the limit |ω| →0, are given by
µe −µ1
µ1
= 1
µ1
∂
∂ω2Σ⊥(ω) ,
(1794)
λe −λ1
λ1
= −1
λ1
∂
∂ω2[Σ∥(ω) −2Σ⊥(ω)] ,
(1795)
Ke −K1 = −∂
∂ω2

Σ∥(ω) −4
3Σ⊥(ω)

.
(1796)
One must now compute the self-energy tensor Σ(r, r′). As the sphere executes a rigid-body
motion, the boundary condition can be written as
u0 + ϖ × r0(θ) =

G[R(θ), r′] · F(r′)dr′ +

G[R(θ), R(θ′)] · T(θ′)dθ ,
(1797)
where u0 and ϖ are the translational displacement of the center of mass and the angular
displacement of the particle, respectively. Equation (471) can be solved for T(θ). Writing

G−1(θ, θ′′) · G[r0(θ′′) −r0(θ′)]dθ′′ = δ(θ −θ′)U ,
(1798)
multiplying Eq. (469) by G−1(θ′′, θ), and relabeling the indices, one arrives at
T(θ) = −

G−1(θ, θ′) · G(θ′, r′) · F(r′)dθ′
+

G−1(θ, θ′) · u0 dθ′ −

[G−1(θ, θ′) × r0(θ′)] · ϖdθ′ .
(1799)
The new unknowns u0 and ϖ are eliminated by applying the constraints of force- and torque-
free inclusion, namely,

T(θ)dθ = 0 ,
(1800)

r0(θ) × T(θ)dθ = 0 ,
(1801)
and substituting for T(θ) to obtain
gt · u0 + gtr · ϖ =
  
G−1(θ, θ′) · G(θ′, r′) · F(r′)dr′dθdθ′ ,
(1802)
grt · u0 + gr · ϖ =
  
r0(θ) × G−1(θ, θ′) · G(θ′, r′) · F(r′)dr′dθdθ′ ,
(1803)
where
gt =
 
G−1(θ, θ′)dθdθ′ ,
(1804)
522

gtr = −
 
G−1(θ, θ′) × r0(θ′)dθdθ′ ,
(1805)
gr = −
 
r0(θ) × G−1(θ, θ′) × r0(θ′)dθdθ′ ,
(1806)
grt =
 
r0(θ) × G−1(θ, θ′)dθdθ′ .
(1807)
For spherical particles, gtr = grt = 0. We can invert Eqs. (476) and (477) to obtain
u0 = g−1
t
·
  
G−1(θ, θ′) · G(θ′, r′) · F(r′)dr′dθdθ′ ,
(1808)
ϖ = g−1
r
·
  
r0(θ) × G−1(θ, θ′) · G(θ′, r′) · F(r′)dr′dθdθ′ .
(1809)
Substituting Eqs. (482) and (483) into Eq. (473), we ﬁnd that
T(θ) = −

dθ′
2
G−1(θ, θ′) −
 
G−1(θ, θp) · g−1
t
· G−1(θq, θ′)dθpdθq
+
 
G−1(θ, θp) × r0(θp) · g−1
r
· r0(θq) × G−1(θq, θ′)dθpdθq
3
·

G(θ′, r′) · F(r′)dr′
(1810)
Therefore, one ﬁnally obtains
u(r) =

G(r, r′) · F(r′)dr′ +
  
G(r, r′) · T (r′, r′′) · G(r′′, r′′′) · F(r′′′)dr′dr′′dr′′′ , (1811)
which represents the governing microscopic equation of motion of the two-phase composite.
The operator T represents the inﬂuence of the inclusions, and is given by
T (r, r′) = −
 
δ[r −R(θ)] × T (θ, θ′)δ[r′ −R(θ′)]dθdθ′ ,
(1812)
T (θ, θ′) = G−1(θ, θ′) −

G−1(θ, θp) · g−1
t
· G−1(θq, θ′)dθpdθq
+
 
G−1(θ, θp) × r0(θ) · g−1
r
· r0(θq) × G−1(θq, θ′)dθpdθq .
(1813)
T (r, r′) depends upon the position, and the structure and geometry of the inclusion. The phys-
ical interpretation of Eq. (485) is that the displacement u is the result of a direct contribution
by the force F acting at r′ and an indirect contribution that arises from the scattering from
the surface of the particle of the deformation produced by F at r′.
The macroscopic description of the material’s deformation is obtained by taking the ensemble-
volume average of Eq. (485) which produces
⟨u(r)⟩= G ∗F|r + G ∗⟨T⟩∗G ∗F|r .
(1814)
523

On the other hand, iteration of Eq. (459) yields
⟨u(r)⟩= G ∗F|r + G ∗Σ ∗G ∗F|r + G ∗Σ ∗G ∗Σ ∗G ∗F|r + · · ·
(1815)
Representing Σ as a series in the number i of distinct scattering events (or the number of T
propogators), one writes
Σ(r, r′) =
∞

i=1
Σ(i)(r, r′) ,
(1816)
susbstitutes (490) in Eq. (489), and compares the result to Eq. (488) to obtain
Σ(1)(r, r′) = ⟨T (r, r′)⟩,
(1817)
Σ(2)(r, r′) = −⟨T (r, r1)⟩∗G(r1, r2) ∗⟨T (r2, r′)⟩,
(1818)
Σ(3)(r, r′) = ⟨T ⟩∗G ∗⟨T ⟩∗G ∗⟨T ⟩|r,r′ ,
(1819)
where integration in the multiple convolutions is implied.
The expression for Σ(ω) is then derived by summing the series after Fourier transforming
all the tensors and projecting their longitudinal and transverse parts:
Σ(ω) =
T⊥(ω)
1 + G⊥(ω)T⊥(ω)(U −ˆω ˆω) +
T∥(ω)
1 + G∥(ω)T∥(ω) ˆω ˆω
(1820)
where T (ω) is the Fourier trasnform of ⟨T (r, r′)⟩.
7.6.1 The dilute limit
We begin by computating the expression for T (ω),
T (ω) = 1
Ω

dR0

T (r −r′) exp[iω · (r −r′)]d(r −r′)
=
 
T (θ, θ′) exp{iω · [r0(θ) −r0(θ′)]}dθdθ′ .
(1821)
Since the averaged system is isotropic, one should have, ω = ωˆz. Expanding the exponential
term in partial waves and the operators in speherical harmonics, one obtains
T (ω) = −4π
Ω
∞

l=0
∞

j=0
(−1)jil+j$
(2l + 1)(2j + 1)Jl(ωa)Jj(ωa)Ti0:i0 ,
(1822)
which, in the limit ω →0 and in the ω2 order, reduces to
T (ω) = −4π
Ω[J2
0(ωa)T00;00 + 3J2
1(ωa)T10;10 −2
√
5J0(ωa)J2(ωa)Re{T00;20}] ,
(1823)
524

where Jn is the Bessel function of nth order, and Re{ } represents the real part of the quantity.
It can be shown that T00;10 = 0. We must now compute the Tlm;l′m′ matrix and gt and gr.
Mondescu and Muthukumar (1999) showed that
gt = 4πG−1
00;00 = 24πa(1 −νp1)µ1
5 −6νp1
U ,
(1824)
and
gr = 8πa3µ1U .
(1825)
Introducing a vector Ym by
Ym =

r0(θ)Y ∗
lm(θ)dθ =
!
2π
3 aδ1l[(−δ1m + δ−1m)ˆx + i(δ1m + δ−1m)ˆy +
√
2δ0mˆz] ,
(1826)
one obtains
Tlm;l′m′ = G−1
lm;l′m′ −G−1
lm;00 · G00;00 · G−1
00;l′m′ +
1
8πa3µ1
×
l

i=−1
l

j=−1
(G−1
lm;1i × Yi) · (Y∗
j × G−1
1j;l′m′) .
(1827)
Since the G−1
lm;l′m′ elements are diagonal in the l index, after expanding the cross-product, one
obtains
T00;00 = 0 ,
T00;10 = T T
10;00 = 0 ,
T00;20 = 0 ,
(1828)
T10;10 = G−1
10;10 −3
2aµ1(U −ˆzˆz) = 3
2aµ1
5(1 −νp1)
4 −5νp1
(U −ˆzˆz) + 6aµ1
(3 −5νp1)(1 −νp1)
(4 −5νp1)(1 −2νp1)ˆzˆz .
(1829)
Substituting these results in Eq. (497) and considering the small ω limit [so that J1(ωa) ≃
(ωa/3)], one ﬁnds that at low φ2, the volume fraction of the spheres,
T (ω) = −µ1ω2
15(1 −νp1)
2(4 −5νp1)(U −ˆzˆz) + 6(3 −5νp1)(1 −νp1)
(4 −5νp1)(1 −2νp1)ˆzˆz

φ2 ,
(1830)
where φ2 = (1/Ω)(4πa3/3). Therefore,
µe −µ1
µ1
= 15(1 −νp1)
2(4 −5νp1)φ2 ,
(1831)
λe −λ1
λ1
=
3(1 −νp1)
2νp1(4 −5νp1)φ2 .
(1832)
These expressions reproduce the classical result of Eshelby (1957) in the limiting case of rigid
inclusions, which was discussed earlier in this chapter. Equation (505) is also in agreement with
Eq. (103).
525

7.6.2 Non-dilute systems
To extend the model to non-dilute systems, Mondescu and Muthukumar (1999) used a type
of mean-ﬁeld approximation. Consider a composite with N −1 spherical, rigid, fully penetrable
particles randomly distributed in an elastic matrix of shear modulus µ1. Following the deriva-
tions described above, an exact multiple scattering solution for the average displacement ﬁeld
⟨u⟩can be written as
⟨u(r) = G ∗F +
N−1

α≥1
G ∗⟨Tα⟩∗G ∗F +
N−1

α̸=β
G ∗⟨Tα ∗G ∗Tβ⟩∗G ∗F
+
N−1

α̸=β;β̸=γ
G ∗⟨Tα ∗G ∗Tβ ∗Tγ⟩∗G ∗F + · · · ,
(1833)
where all convolutions are functions of r. The Greek indices label diﬀerent spheres, with Tα
being given by Eqs. (486) and (487). Thus, the self-energy ΣN−1 and all the elastic properties
can be deduced for any types of interactions among particles, if one wishes so. Although this
procedure is rigorous, it is also computationally intensive. An approximate, but simpler way of
analyzing the problem is to assume ﬁrst that the two-phase composite can be represented as an
eﬀective, homogenous medium, where the average elastic disturbances are transmitted by the
eﬀective Green function G(r, r′), which is a function of some self-energy ΣN−1 that includes all
possible sequences of elastic, long-range interactions mediated by the matrix. Adding one more
particle changes the self-energy of the eﬀective medium by δΣN−1 = ΣN−1/(N −1). Then,
provided it has a solution, the self-consistent equation for ΣN−1 is given by
δΣN−1[G(ΣN−1)] = ΣN−1
N −1 .
(1834)
When the spheres are penetrable, one has the following exact result:
Σ(ω)
N −1 = 1
ΩT e(ω) ,
(1835)
where T e(ω) is the eﬀective value of T (ω) if one uses the eﬀective G propogator instead of
G. Then, if c = (N −1)/Ωis the number concentration of the spheres, choosing ω = ωˆz and
keeping only terms up to ω2 order, yield
Σ(ω) = −4πc[J2
0(ωa)T e
00;00 −i
√
3(T e
00;10 −T e
10;00)
+3J2
1(ωa)T e
10;10 −2
√
5J0(ωa)J2(ωa)Re{T e
00;20}] ,
(1836)
526

which is the governing equation for Σ. This implies that one must postulate a functional form
for the self-energy based on the structure of Σ(ω) deduced from Eq. (510). To select such a
function, two key observations regarding the physics of the two-phase composite at large and
low ωa must be kept in mind.
(1) For small ωa the composite should behave like an eﬀective medium, where the elastic
deformations are propogating freely. Thus, we expect to have, Σ ∼ω2.
(2) Large values of ωa correspond to the region inside the particles, where the presence of
other inclusions is not felt. Then, the self-energy may reach a constant value, as soon as the
observation length becomes smaller than the particle diameter 2a.
Based on these observations, the presumed limiting behavior of Σ(ω) is given by
Σ⊥(ω) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
−µ1W⊥(ωa)2
ωa < 1/2
−µ1ξ−2
⊥
ωa ≥1/2
(1837)
Σ∥(ω) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
−(λ1 + 2µ1)W∥(ωa)2
ωa < 1/2
−(λ1 + 2µ1)ξ−2
∥
ωa ≥1/2
(1838)
where W⊥, W∥, ξ⊥, and ξ∥are positive, unknown functions of the particle density. Continuity
of Σ(ω) at ωa = 1/2 requires that
ξ−2
⊥= 1
4W⊥,
ξ−2
∥
= 1
4W∥.
(1839)
Mondescu and Muthukumar (1999) then showed that
a2W⊥= 1
2
1
D1[2
5]η ,
(1840)
a2W∥= 1 −2νp1
2(1 −νp1)
D1[4
5]
D2
1[3
5] −1
5D1[1
5]f1[1]η ,
(1841)
where η = (N −1)(4πa3/3)/Ωis the reduced density of the spheres, and
Dl[x] = (1 −x)Il+1/2(y⊥)Kl+1/2(y⊥) + x 1 −2νp1
2(1 −νp1)Il+1/2(y∥) + 2
π

Al(1/2)
 1 −x
1 + 4y2
⊥
+
x
1 + y2
∥
1 −2νp1
2(1 −νp1) +
x
2(1 −νp1) −1
⎤
⎦+ (1 −x)y2
⊥Fl(1/2; y∥) + x 1 −2νp1
2(1 −νp1)y2
∥Fl(1/2; y∥)
⎫
⎬
⎭,
(1842)
with In and Kn being the modiﬁed Bessel functions, and
Al(x) =
 x
0 J2
l (y) dy ,
(1843)
527

Fl(y, z) =
 y
0
J2
l (x)
x2 + z2 dx ,
(1844)
fl[1] = 5

Dl[1
5] −Dl[2
5]

.
(1845)
Here, y⊥= a/ξ⊥and y∥= a/ξ∥. Mondescu and Muthukumar (1999) then derived the following
equations for y⊥and y∥:
y2
⊥(η) = 1
8
1
D1[2
5]η ,
(1846)
y2
∥(η, νp1) = 1
4
1 −2νp1
2(1 −νp1)
D1[4
5]
D1[2
5]D1[1]η ,
(1847)
in terms of which the elastic moduli of the composite are predicted to be given by
µe
µ1
= 1 + 4y2
⊥,
(1848)
Ye
Y1
=
1 + 121 −νp1
1 + νp1
y2
∥−81 −2νp1
1 + νp1
y2
⊥
1 + 8(1 −νp1)y2
∥−4(1 −2νp1)y2
⊥
(1 + 4y2
⊥) ,
(1849)
Ke
K1
= 1 +
4
1 + νp1
[3(1 −νp1)y2
∥−2(1 −2νp1)y2
⊥] ,
(1850)
and the eﬀective Poisson’s ratio νpe of the material is predicted to be given by
νpe = 1
2
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎣1 −1 −2νp1
2(1 −νp1)
1 + 4y2
⊥
1 + 4y2
∥−1 −2νp1
2(1 −νp1)(1 + 4y2
⊥)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎦.
(1851)
We should also recall from Chapter 3 that
φ2 =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
η ,
impenetrable spheres,
1 −exp(−η) ,
fully-penetrable spheres.
(1852)
7.6.3 Comparison with the experimental data
To assess the accuracy of the above theoretical predictions, comparison is made with two
types of experimental data. The ﬁrst type involves composites consisting of spherical glass
beads in an epoxy polymer (Smith, 1976) and in polyester (Richard, 1975) matrices.
The
elastic properties of these composites are:
epoxy polymer :
Y1 = 3.01Gpa ,
νp1 = 0.394 ,
Y2 = 760GPa ,
νp2 = 0.23 ,
polyester :
Y1 = 2.45 × 105psi ,
νp1 = 0.444 ,
Y2 = 10.2 × 106psi ,
νp2 = 0.21 ,
528

where subscripts 1 and 2 denote, as usual, the matrix and the inclusions, respectively. The
second type of the experiments was reported by Nishimatsu and Gurland (1960) and Doi et al.
(1970) using an alloy consisting of tungsten carbide (Wc) particles dispersed in a cobalt (Co)
matrix. The elastic properties of the materials used by Nishimatsu and Gurland (1960) are:
Y1 = 30 × 106psi ,
νp1 = 0.3 ,
Y2 = 102 × 106psi ,
νp2 = 0.22 ,
and those of the materials used by Doi et al. (1970) are:
Y1 = 2.11 × 10−4kg/mm2 ,
νp1 = 0.31 ,
Y2 = 7.14 × 10−4kg/mm2 ,
νp2 = 0.19 .
Figure 7.10 compares the predicted Ye/Y1 to the experimental data of Smith and of Richard.
Figure 7.11 compares the predicted Young’s modulus to the experimental data for the Wc/Co
composites, while Figure 7.12 makes the same comparison for the shear modulus of Wc/Co
composites. Recall that, in order to derive the above theoretical predictions, Mondescu and
Muthukumar (1999) assumed that the inclusions are rigid, randomly distributed, equal-sized
and pentrable spheres. According to Eqs. (522)-(525), the variables that control the eﬀective
elastic properties are the volume fraction φ2 of the inclusions and the Poisson’s ratio νp1 of the
matrix. The eﬀect of all other paramters, such as the particles’ size, shapes, positions, and
conﬁgurations, have been ignored. At the same time, both the glass beads in the glass/polymer
system and the tungsten carbide grains in the Wc/Co composites are elastic solid (although al-
most rigid) and impenetrable objects. Moreover, the Wc inclusions are typically non-spherical,
highly polydispersed, and usually agglomerate in clusters even for low values of φ2. Considering
such aspects, one may not expect the predictions to be quantitatively accurate, at least not for
all values of φ2. Surprisingly, however, in most cases there is qantitative agreement between
the predictions and the experimental data. In the case of glass/epoxy and glass/polymer com-
posites, the theoretical predictions are consistent with the general trend for the dependence of
the eﬀective Young’s modulus (and also the shear modulus that is not shown) on φ2. How-
ever, there are some deviations from the data for φ2 > 0.4, which is presumably the result of
assuming no correlation among the particles.
In the case of the Wc/Co composites, the change in the continuity of the inclusion phase
plays an important role.
More precisely, as discussed in Chapter 2, for irregularly-shaped,
polydispersed particles, a percolation transition occurs at a volume fraction φ2 ≃0.59 of the
529

inclusions, beyond which the role of the matrix and of the inclusions reverses. This is indeed
the case in the experiments on the Wc/Co composites, where the value of the Young’s modulus
varies from that of the matrix (Co) at φ2 = 0 to the value typical of Wc at φ2 = 1. If the
penetrability condition is assumed, then the multiple scattering method proves to be more
appropriate and accurate, as indicated by the ﬁgures.
7.7 Eﬀective-Medium Approximations
In this section we describe and discuss the eﬀective-medium approximation (EMA) approach
to estimation of the eﬀective elastic moduli of heterogeneous materials. Similar to the EMA
for the eﬀective conductivity and dielectric constant of such materials that was described and
discussed in Chapters 4 and 5, estimation of the eﬀective elastic moduli based on an EMA
has a long history. In the solid mechanics literature, this approach has been referred to as
the self-consistent method (SCM), and its origin goes back, to our knowledge, to the work of
Bruggeman (1937) who, using spherical inclusions, derived a correct EMA for the eﬀective bulk
modulus and an incorrect EMA for the eﬀective shear modulus. This approach was revived
in the 1950s by Hershey (1954), Eshelby (1957), and Kr¨oner (1958). Hill (1965), Budiansky
(1965), Wu (1966), Walpole (1969), and Boucher (1974) proposed various SCMs or EMAs,
although the works of Hill and Budiansky are perhaps better known.
On the other hand,
various perturbation expansions, similar to those described and discussed in Chapters 4 and 5
for the eﬀective conductivity and dielectric constants, were also propopsed by Dederichs and
Zeller (1973), Korringa (1973) and Gubernatis and Krumhansl (1975). These works, although
referred to as multiple-scattering approaches (MSAs), are not identical with the approach of
Mondescu and Muthukumar (1999) described above, which is also referred to as a MSA. Watt
et al. (1976) provided a comprehensive review of all of these works.
Even among the SCMs or EMAs, there are two distinct approaches. In one approach, the
two phases of the material (i.e., the matrix and the inclusions) are treated asymmetrically in
that, one phase is singled out to serve as the matrix. This is the approach taken by Hill (1965),
Budiansky (1965), Wu (1966), Walpole (1969), and Boucher (1974). The second approach,
in which the two phases are treated symmetrically, was developed by Berryman (1980a,b).
The two approaches yield identical results if the inclusions are spherical. However, there are
signiﬁcant diﬀerences between their predictions for anisotropic inclusions, such as ellipsoids,
530

disks, and penny-shaped cracks.
Before describing these two EMAs, certain tensors and fundamental properties must be
computed. Their computation will be described in the next section, after which we describe
both types of the EMAs without discussing their derivations, as they are entirely similar to
that for the eﬀective conductivity and other properties already described in Chapters 4-6. After
presenting the general formulation, we will consider two particular limits. In one, the inclusions
have K = µ = 0, i.e., they represent holes (or exceedingly weak regions) in the matrix, and
therefore the system is equivalent to the Swiss-cheese model, already described and utilized
in Chapters 2-4.
In the second limit, the model contains completely rigid inclusions with
K = µ = ∞, which we refer to it as the reinforced material.
7.7.1 Fundamental tensors and invariant properties
In order to derive the EMAs, certain quantities must ﬁrst be described and computed.
Consider an ellipsoidal inclusion of a ﬁxed orientation. The material is subjected to a uniform
strain ϵ0 at inﬁnity and the ellipsoidal axes coincide with the specimen axes. In component
form, the strain within the inclusion is given by
ϵc
ij = Tijklϵ0
kl .
(1853)
Here, the tensor Tijkl is related to a fourth-rank tensor Silmn computed by Eshelby (1957) for
the ellipsoidal inclusion,
x2
a2 + y2
b2 + z2
c2 = 1 ,
for which the tensor Silmn is deﬁned by
ϵc
ij =

m

n
SilmnϵT
mn ,
(1854)
where ϵc
ij is the constrained strain and ϵT
mn is what Eshelby (1957) called the stress-free strain,
which is the strain that the inclusion would undergo in the absence of the matrix. Physically,
ϵc
ij is the strain produced when a surface traction is applied to the inclusion, while ϵT
mn is the
strain on the outside surface which correspond to this surface traction. Since ϵc
mn is related to
uniform strians ϵ0
mn at inﬁnity through the tensor Tijkl, ϵT
ij also has simple relations to ϵ0
mn.
Eshelby (1957) showed that
S1111 = qa2Iaa + ( 1
4π −1
3q)Ia ,
531

S1122 = qb2Iab −( 1
4π −1
3q)Ia ,
(1855)
S1212 = 1
2q(a2 + b2)Iab + 1
2( 1
4π −1
3q)(Ia + Ib) ,
where q = 3/[8π(1 −νp)], and
Ia = 2πabc
 ∞
0
du
(a2 + u)∆=
4πabc
(a2 −b2)(a2 −c2)1/2(F −E) ,
Iaa = 2πabc
 ∞
0
du
(a2 + u)2∆= 4π
3a2 −Iab −Iac ,
(1856)
Iab = 2
3πabc
 ∞
0
du
(a2 + u)(b2 + u)∆=
Ib −Ia
3(a2 −b2) ,
with ∆=
$
(a2 + u)(b2 + u)(c2 + u).
Here, F = F(θ, k) and E = E(θ, k) are elliptic in-
tegrals of the ﬁrst and second kinds of amplitude θ = sin−1 $
1 −c2/a2, and modulus k =
$
(a2 −b2)/(a2 −c2), Ib = 4π −Ia −Ic, and
Ic =
4πabc
(b2 −c2)(a2 −c2)1/2
b
√
a2 −c2
ac
−E

.
For oblate spheroids (a = b > c),
Ia = Ib =
2πa2c
(a2 −c2)3/2
⎡
⎣cos−1
c
a

−c
a
!
1 −c2
a2
⎤
⎦,
in which case, Iab = 1
3Iaa, with Iaa given by Eq. (480). For prolate spheroids (b = c < a), we
have
Ib = Ic =
2πac2
(a2 −c2)3/2
⎡
⎣a
c
!
a2
c2 −1 −cosh−1
a
c
⎤
⎦.
The remaining coeﬃcients are determined by simultaneous cyclic interchange of (1,2,3) and
(a, b, c).
Moreover, coeﬃcients that couple an extension and a shear, such as S1112, S1123,
S2311, · · ·, or one shear to another, e.g., S1223, are zero.
For a 2D inclusion, Eshelby’s results can be simpliﬁed considerably (Thorpe and Sen, 1985).
If we take the limit in which one of the axes of the 3D ellipsoid diverges, c →∞, while the
other two major semi-axes a and b remain ﬁnite, we obtain a cylinder with an elliptical cross
section in the (x, y) plane, and
S1111 =
b
a + b

1 +
a
2(a + b)[1 −ν(3)
p ]

,
532

S1122 =
b
(a + b)[1 −ν(3)
p ]

ν(3)
p
−
a
2(a + b)

,
(1857)
S1212 = 1
2

1 −
ab
(a + b)2[1 −ν(3)
p ]

,
where superscript 3 indicates that the quantity should be evaluated for a 3D system. All other
Sijkl in the (x, y) plane involving only the indices 1 and 2 can be found by permuting the
parameters (1,2) and (a, b). For example,
S2222 =
a
a + b

1 +
b
2(a + b)[1 −ν(3)
p ]

.
(1858)
All other Sijkl are zero, except for
S1133 =
b
a + b
ν(3)
p
1 −ν(3)
p
,
(1859)
and S2233 which is determined from S1133 by interchanging 1 and 2.
Next, we proceed to determine the components of Tijkl. Wu (1966) related this tensor to
Sijkl to show that
T1212 = T2121 =
1
2(1 + 2AS1212) ,
(1860)
with similar expressions for T2323 = T3232 and T3131 = T1313. Moreover,
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
T1111
T1122
T1133
T2211
T2222
T2233
T3311
T3322
T3333
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
=
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
1 + AS1111 + BS1
AS1122 + BS1
AS1133 + BS1
AS2211 + BS2
1 + AS2222 + BS2
AS2233 + BS2
AS3311 + BS3
AS3322 + BS3
1 + AS3333 + BS3
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
−1
(1861)
and all other components of Tijkl vanish. Here,
A = µ2
µ1
−1 ,
(1862)
B = 1
3
K2
K1
−µ2
µ1

,
(1863)
S1 = S1111 + S1122 + S1133 ,
(1864)
533

with similar expressions for S2 and S3. As usual, K1 and K2, and µ1 and µ2 denote, respectively,
the bulk and shear moduli of the matrix and the inclusion. These expressions can of course be
simpliﬁed for a 2D inclusion.
The elastic properties of the 2D inclusion can also be expressed in terms of the corresponding
3D properties. Using the interrelations among the elastic moduli for 2D and 3D materials, it is
straightforward to show that the relations between the 2D and 3D elastic properties are given
by
µ(2) = µ(3) ,
K(2) = K(3) + 1
3µ(3) .
(1865)
These results were derived based on the assumption that the ellipsoidal inclusion has a
ﬁxed orientation. In general, however, we must consider the case in which the inclusions are
randomly and uniformly oriented. This was studied by Berryman (1980a,b) who showed that
two key invariant quantities are needed when an isotropic averaging is done over all directions.
These key properties are given by
P = 1
d

i

j
Tiijj ,
(1866)
Q = 1
c

i

j

Tijij −1
dTiijj

,
(1867)
where c = 2 and 5 for d = 2 and 3, respectively. We are now ready to describe the symmetric
and asymmetric EMAs.
7.7.2 Symmetric eﬀective-medium approximation
The symmetric EMA (SEMA), developed by Berryman (1980a,b), treats the host and the
inclusions symmetrically, and leads to the following equations for the eﬀective bulk and shear
moduli of a n−phase material,
n

i=1
φiP ei(Ke −Ki) = 0 ,
(1868)
n

i=1
φiQei(µe −µi) = 0 ,
(1869)
where φi is the volume fraction of phase i. No distinction is made in Eqs. (542) and (543)
between the diﬀerent components, i.e., one does not designate one material as the matrix and
the others as inclusions. The superscripts on the P and Q are intended for emphasizing that
they contain A = µi/µe −1 and C = Ki/Ke −1 for inclusions with moduli Ki and µi which
534

are embedded in an eﬀective medium with eﬀective moduli Ke and µe. The coeﬃcients P ei
and Qei for 3D systems with various inclusion shapes were given by Berryman (1980b) and are
listed in Table 7.1, where the various quantities are as follows,
F = µ
6
9K + 8µ
K + 2µ ,
(1870)
α = c
a ,
(1871)
β = 3K + µ
3K + 4µµ ,
(1872)
γ = 3K + µ
3K + 7µµ .
(1873)
Table 7.1
The invariants P mi and Qmi for various 3D inclusion shapes. The quantities F, α, β and γ are
deﬁned by Eqs. (544)-(547).
Inclusion
P mi
Qmi
Spheres
Km + 4µm/3
Ki + 4µm/3
µm + Fm
µi + Fm
Needles
Km + µm + µi/3
Ki + µm + µi/3
1
5

4µm
µm + µi
+ 2µm + γm
µi + γm
+
Ki + 4µm/3
Ki + µm + µi/3

Disks
Km + 4µi/3
Ki + 4µi/3
µm + Fi
µi + Fi
Penny cracks
Km + 4µi/3
Ki + 4µi/3 + παβm
1
5

1 +
8µm
4µi + πα(µm + 2βm) + 2Ki + 2µi/3 + 2µm/3
Ki + 4µi/3 + παβm

Consider, as an example, a 2D composite with elliptical inclusions that represent holes in
the material (i.e., the generalized 2D Swiss-cheese model). In this case (Thorpe and Sen, 1985),
P ei →Pe =
a2 + b2
ab(1 −νpe) ,
(1874)
Qei →Qe =
(a + b)2
ab(1 −νpe) ,
(1875)
where νpe is the eﬀective Poisson’s ratio of the composite. If the volume fraction of the elliptical
holes is φ2 = 1 −φ1, the EMA is given by
φ1P e1(Ke −K1) −φ2P e0Ke = 0 ,
(1876)
535

or
Ke
K1
= 1 −α1/φ1
1 −α1
,
(1877)
with α1 = (1 −P e1/P e0)−1 = (1 −P e1/Pe)−1. Similarly, the eﬀective shear modulus is given by
µe
µ1
= 1 −α2/φ1
1 −α2
,
(1878)
with α2 = (1 −Qe1/Qe0)−1 = (1 −Qe1/Qe)−1.
In these equations, superscript 1 refers to
the component with non-zero moduli, and 0 to the void. These equations should be solved
simultaneously in order to compute Ke and µe as functions of φ1 (or φ2).
As the volume fraction of the holes increases, the remaining material becomes increasingly
disjointed, and eventually disconnected when its volume fraction falls below a critical value
φc = φ1c at which Ke and µe vanish. In this limit one obtains,
φc = 2
⎡
⎣1 +
!
2(a + b)2
a2 + b2
⎤
⎦
−1
,
(1879)
and
νpc = 1 −φc ,
(1880)
thus indicating that, at the critical volume fraction or the percolation threshold, the Poisson’s
ratio is independent of the bulk and shear moduli of the material, and depends only on the
aspect ratio a/b, in agreement with what we discussed in Section 7.2.7. For the special case of
circular inclusions (a = b), the SEMA predicts that at φc = 2/3,
νpc = 1
3 ,
Ke
µe
= 2 .
(1881)
Similarly, for b/a →0, i.e., for needle-shaped inclusions, one obtains
φc = 2(
√
2 −1) ≃0.8284 ,
νpc = 3 −
√
8 ≃0.1716 ,
Ke
µe
=
√
2 ≃1.414 .
(1882)
Note that the universal values of νpc predicted by the SEMA are only approximate. Indeed,
the point (φc, νpc) in the (φ1, νp) plane can be thought of as a ﬁxed point, much like the ﬁxed
points in the renormalization group theory described in Chapter 5.
7.7.3 Asymmetric eﬀective-medium approximation
536

In the asymmetric EMA (AEMA), one treats the matrix and inclusions asymmetrically in
the sense that, a particular component is designated as the matrix. Then, the general equations
of AEMA for the eﬀective bulk and shear moduli of a n−phase composite are given by
1
Ke
= 1
K1

1 +
n

i
(1 −φi)P ei
K1 −Ki
Ke

,
(1883)
1
µe
= 1
µ1

1 +
n

i
(1 −φi)Qei
µ1 −µi
µe

,
(1884)
where material 1 has been designated as the matrix.
As the ﬁrst example, consider the 2D Swiss-cheese model with elliptical inclusions, for which
the AEMA predicts that
Ke
K1
= φ1 −α1
1 −α1
,
(1885)
µe
µ1
= p −α2
1 −α2
,
(1886)
where, α1 = 1 −P −1
e
= 1 −ab(1 −νpe)/(a2 + b2), and α2 = 1 −Q−1
e
= 1 −ab(1 + νpe)/[(a + b)2].
The percolation threshold is predicted to be given by
φc =

1 +
ab
a2 + b2
−1
,
(1887)
at which
νpc = 1 −φc .
(1888)
Several points are worth noting. (1) Except for circular inclusions, the percolation thresholds
predicted by the SEMA and AEMA are not identical. (2) Both the SEMA and AEMA predict
that, φc + νpc = 1, although the values of φc and νpc that the two approximations predict are
quite diﬀerent. (3) The coupled equations for Ke and µe decouple if rewritten in terms of the
eﬀective Young’s modulus Ye and νpe. This result is only true for the AEMA with elliptical
holes, i.e., for the 2D Swiss-cheese model, but not so for the reinforced model or for the SEMA.
(4) All the EMAs discussed here yield the correct initial slope near φ1 = 1, indicating that
dYe/dφ1 is independent of µi, and dνpe/dφ1 is independent of Y1 as φ1 →1, hence providing a
convenient way of determining the initial slopes of Ke and µe based on the SEMA or AEMA.
(5) All the initial slopes are inﬁnite for needles which have νpc = 0.
As the second example, consider the 2D reinforced problem, for which the AEMA yields
the following equations,
1
Ke
= 1
K1

1 + (1 −φ1)P e∞
K1 −K∞
Ke

,
(1889)
537

1
µe
= 1
µ1

1 + (1 −φ1)Qe∞
µ1 −µ∞
µe

,
(1890)
which, after taking the limits K∞→∞and µ∞→∞, yield
Ke
K1
= 1 −α1
φ1 −α1
,
(1891)
µe
µ1
= 1 −α2
φ1 −α2
,
(1892)
indicating that both moduli diverge at the percolation threshold, as expected, where
(1 −α1)−1 =
2
3 −νpe

1 +
1 −νpe
1 + νpe
 (a + b)2
2ab

,
(1893)
(1 −α2)−1 = 1
2
 (a + b)2
ab(3 −νpe) +
(a + b)2
(a + b)2 −ab(1 + νpe)

.
(1894)
As another example, consider a 2D model of hexagonal array of inﬁnitely-long, aligned
cylinders in a matrix, or a thin-plate composite consisting of hexagonal arrays of disks in a
matrix. The AEMAs for this model, due to Hill (1965), Budiansky (1965), Wu (1966), and
others, are given by
φ1
Ke −K1
µe + K1
+ φ2
Ke −K2
µe + K2
= 0 ,
(1895)
φ1
µe −µ1
µeKe/(Ke + 2µe) + µ1
+ φ2
µe −µ2
µeKe/(Ke + 2µe) + µ2
= 0 .
(1896)
The predictions of Eqs. (569) and (570) for the eﬀective shear modulus µe are shown in Figure
7.2, where they are compared with the results of numerical simulations of Eischen and Torquato
(1993), the three-point lower bound of Silnutzer (1972), and the truncated series expansion of
Torquato (1997), Eq. (274). Figure 7.3 compares the predictions of Eqs. (519) and (520) for the
eﬀective bulk modulus of the 2D Swiss-cheese model with circular holes [i.e., in limits, K2 = 0
and µ2 = 0, in Eqs. (569) and (570)], with the results of numerical simulations of Eischen
and Torquato (1993) and the truncated series expansion of Torquato (1997), Eq. (273), in the
limits, K2 = 0 and µ2 = 0. In this case, the AEMA badly fails, except when φ2, the volume
fraction of the holes (i.e., the porosity of the material), is low.
As the ﬁnal example, we consider a 3D random dispersion of identical spheres in a matrix.
The AEMA equations (Hill, 1965; Budiansky, 1965, among others) are now given by
φ1
Ke −K1
4µe/3 + K1
+ φ2
Ke −K2
4µe/3 + K2
= 0 ,
(1897)
538

φ1
µe −µ1
µe(9Ke + 8µe)/(6Ke + 12µe) + µ1
+ φ2
µe −µ2
µe(9Ke + 8µe)/(6Ke + 12µe) + µ2
= 0 .
(1898)
Figure 7.6 compares the predictions of these equations for the eﬀective bulk modulus Ke with
the three-point lower bound of Beran and Molyneux (1966), the upper bound of Gibiansky and
Torquato (1995a), and the truncated series expansion of Torquato (1997), Eq. (284). Once
again, the predictions of the AEMA are not accurate if φ2 > 0.35.
For spherical inclusions, the EMA equations can be generalized and written in a compact
form. Equations (569) and (571) can be generalized to a d−dimensional material with n phases:
n

i=1
φi
Ke −Ki
Ki + 2d−1(d −1)µe
= 0 ,
(1899)
while Eqs. (570) and (572) are written in the general form,
n

i=1
φi
µe −µi
µi + he
= 0 ,
(1900)
where he is given by Eq. (310) with i = e. Generally speaking, and similar to the EMA for the
eﬀective conductivity and dielectric constant (see Section 4.9), Eqs. (573) and (574) violate
bounds the improve upon the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds for realistic microstructures.
7.7.4 The Maxwell-Garnett approximations
The Maxwell-Garnett (MG) approximation, that was described in Section 4.9.4 for the
eﬀective conductivity of heterogeneous materials, can be extended to estimating the eﬀective
elastic moduli. For spherical inclusions, the MG approximation for the eﬀective bulk modulus
is given by
Ke −K1
Ke + 2d−1(d −1)µ1
= φ2
K2 −K1
K2 + 2d−1(d −1)µ1
,
(1901)
while for the eﬀective shear modulus, the MG approximation is governed by
µe −µ1
µe + h1
= φ2
µ2 −µ1
µ2 + h1
,
(1902)
where h1 is deﬁned by Eq. (310) with i = 1. Equations (575) and (576) are very similar to
Eq. (4.262) for the eﬀective conductivity. As in the case of the eﬀective conductivity, the MG
approximation provides reasonable estimates of the elastic moduli if the spherical inclusions are
widely separated. Moreover, the MG approximation for the eﬀective bulk modulus conincides
with the optimal Hashin-Shtrikman lower bound (308) if µ2 ≥µ1, and the corresponding
539

optimal upper bound (308) if µ2 ≤µ1. Furthermore, the MG approximation is identical to the
Hashin-Shtrikman lower bound (309).
The MG approximation can be generalized to macroscopically-anisotropic materials that
consist of n −1 diﬀerent types of unidirectionally aligned isotropic inclusions of the same
shape, and is given by
n

i=1
φi(Ce −C1) · T(1)
i
= 0 ,
(1903)
where
T(1)
i
=

U + S : C−1
1
: (Ci −C1)
−1 .
(1904)
Here, S is Eshelby’s tensor for an ellipsoid in an isotropic matrix of stiﬀness C1, deﬁned and
given by Eqs. (528)-(533). The case in which the ellipsoidal inclusions are randomly distributed
in the matrix can also be obtained from Eq. (577). One obtains the following equations for the
eﬀective bulk and shear moduli,
n

i=1
φi(Ke −Ki)T (1h)
i
= 0 ,
(1905)
n

i=1
φi(µe −µi)T (1s)
i
= 0 ,
(1906)
where T (1h)
i
and T (1s)
i
are the hydrostatic and shear contributions to T(1)
i .
7.8 Numerical Simulation
So far, we have described the theoretical methods of estimating the elastic properties of
heterogeneous materials, based on the continuum models. In this section we discuss brieﬂy the
numerical simulation methods for estimating the elastic moduli.
7.8.1 Finite-diﬀerence methods
Early numerical calculation of the eﬀective elastic moduli was based on the standard ﬁnite-
diﬀerence (FD) discretization of the continuum equations of elasticity. Examples of such com-
putations include the computations of Adams and Doner (1967), Chen and Cheng (1967), and
Flaherty and Keller (1973) who computed the eﬀective elastic moduli of square and hexagonal
arrays of cylinders in a matrix (see Section 7.2.2). The main advantage of the FD methods is
their simplicity. The equations that are obtained by the FD discretization are typically very
simple, and the resulting matrix of coeﬃcients that arise in the numerical solution of these
540

equations is usually sparse and banded. The main disadvantages of FD methods are twofold:
(1) If the boundary of the system, and/or the interface between various phases or components
of a composite material is complex (e.g., curved), then, one must use highly reﬁned FD mesh in
such areas in order to ensure accuracy of the computed properties and their convergence to the
true values. (2) The same sort of problem arises if the contrast between the elastic properties
of the phases is large, even if the interfaces, and/or the boundary of the material, are smooth.
The problem in this case is the sharp variations of the local elastic properties near the interface
between the various phases of the material. Thus, once again, one must use highly reﬁned FD
mesh in order to realistically represent the material and its constituents. However, such reﬁned
meshes would require large computation time and computer memory. In addition, for large
contrasts between the elastic properties of the various phases, the convergence may not even
be guaranteed. In fact, the computations of Adams and Doner (1967), Chen and Cheng (1967)
and Flaherty and Keller (1973) were restricted to a very limited range of material properties.
7.8.2 Boundary-element and ﬁnite-element methods
More accurate and eﬃcient alternatives to the FD methods are based on the ﬁnite-element
(FE) and boundary-element (BE) methods. There are already many books that describe these
methods in great details (see, for example, Cook et al., 1989; Becker, 1992), and therefore we
only provide a brief discussion and describe an example.
The basis of the BE method is the integral representation of the displacement ﬁeld u which,
in component form, is given by (see, for example, Phan-Thien and Kim, 1994)
cij(ξ)ui(ξ) +

Γ T ∗
ij(ξ, x)uj(x)dΓ(x) =

Γ u∗
ij(ξ, x)Tj(x)dΓ(x) ,
(1907)
where a summation over repeated indices is implied, and Γ(ξ) represents the bounding curve,
including inclusion boundaries in a composite material, of the elastic system. Here, ui and
Ti are, respectively, the displacement and traction components on the boundary. Therefore,
Equation (581) is a very important result as it expresses the displacement ﬁeld u inside a
material in terms of boundary displacements and tractions. Equation (581) must be satisﬁed
at each “source” point ξ on the boundary, while the ﬁeld point is at x. In analogy with the
potential theory, the integral on the left-hand side of Eq.
(581) is called the double layer
potential. The jump in the integral representation, from u to 0 across the boundary is due to
541

the double layer. For any Poisson’s ratio νp, the kernel Tij of the integral is strictly O(r−2) and
singular.
The integral on the right-hand side of Eq. (581) represents a displacement ﬁeld generated
by a distribution of surface forces of strength Tj(x)dΓ(x), because u∗(ξ, x) is a displacement
ﬁeld in direction j at ﬁeld point x due to a unit force applied in direction i at the source point
ξ. Likewise, T ∗
ij(ξ, x) is the traction in direction j at ﬁeld point x due to a unit force applied in
direction i at the source point ξ. In analogy with the potential theory, this integral is called the
single-layer potential, i.e., the single layer of charges distributed on the boundary is replaced by
a single layer of forces. On the surface, u∗
ij ∼O(1/r), and therefore the integral is regular, since
the singularity is removable when the integral is evaluated using a local coordinate system
located at the singular point, noting the fact that dΓ ∼O(r2). The quantities u∗
ij and T ∗
ij
are related to the Green function for the linear elasticity problem for isotropic materials. For
example, for a 2D isotropic material and under the plane strain condition, they are given by
u∗
ij(ξ, x) =
1
8πµ(1 −νp)

(3 −4νp) ln
1
r

δij + rirj
r2

,
(1908)
T ∗
ij(ξ, x) = −
1
4πr(1 −νp)
2
(1 −2νp)δij + 2rirj
r2
 rini
r
−(1 −2νp)rinj −rjni
r
3
,
(1909)
where we recognize the ln(1/r) term as the basic feature of the 2D Green function [see Eq.
(199)]. Here, µ is the transverse shear modulus, ri = xi −ξi, r = √rirj, and ni are (the
components of) the measure numbers of the unit outward vector normal to the bounding curve
Γ. Note that, in this context, µ and the Poisson’s ratio νp are the 3D material properties. The
components of the tensor cij are computed by requiring that rigid body displacements yield
zero tractions.
For a composite material, the BE equation, Eq. (581), is enforced along the matrix external
boundary, the inclusion external boundary, and the matrix/inclusion interfaces. Continuity of
displacement and traction ﬁelds are enforced along the matrix-inclusion interfaces. If, for exam-
ple, in a 2D problem there are corner points in the system, one can allow for two independent
displacement components and four traction components.
Consider, as an example, a hexagonal array of circles (or inﬁnitely-long cylinders) that was
studied by Eischen and Torquato (1993) by the BE method. They used a rectangular unit cell
shown in Figure 7.13, with dimensions 2L1 ×2L2, with L2 =
√
3L1. The origin of the Cartesian
542

coordinates is at the center of the cell. Also shown are two quarters of circular inclusions of
radius a, with a volume fraction φ2 which is given by
φ2 =
π
2
√
3
 a
L
2
,
(1910)
where L2 = L2
1 + L2
2. We note that a/L = 1 corresponds to the critical volume fraction of the
inclusions. Eischen and Torquato (1993) solved two problems with imposed average stress and
strain. In the ﬁrst problem, the strains were ⟨ϵ11⟩= 0, ⟨ϵ22⟩= 1, with ⟨σ12⟩= 0, where ⟨· · ·⟩
denotes average quantities which are deﬁned by
⟨ϵij⟩=
1
4L1L2
 L2
−L2
 L1
−L1
ϵij(x1, x2)dx1dx2 ,
(1911)
⟨σij⟩=
1
4L1L2
 L2
−L2
 L1
−L1
σij(x1, x2)dx1dx2 .
(1912)
The appropriate boundary conditions are given by
u2(x1, L2) = −u2(x1, −L2) = L2 ,
u1(−L1, x2) = u1(L1, x2) = 0 ,
(1913)
σ12(x1, L2) = σ12(x1, −L2) = σ12(−L1, x2) = σ12(L1, x2) = 0 .
(1914)
The average stress ⟨σ22⟩is given by
⟨σ22⟩=
1
2L1
 L1
−L1
σ22(x1, L2)dx1 ,
(1915)
which is related to the eﬀective bulk and shear moduli of the composite by,
⟨σ22⟩= Ke −µe .
(1916)
In the second problem solved by Eischen and Torquato (1993) the imposed shear strain was
⟨ϵ12⟩= 1/2 with ⟨σ11⟩= ⟨σ22⟩= 0. The boundary conditions for the displacements u1 and u2
are the same as (529), but the stress conditions are replaced by
σ22(x1, L2) = σ22(x1, −L2) = σ11(−L1, x2) = σ11(L1, x2) = 0 .
(1917)
Moreover,
⟨σ12⟩= µe =
1
2L1
 L1
−L1
σ12(x1, x2)dx1 ,
(1918)
and therefore the eﬀective bulk modulus Ke can be calculated using Eq. (590).
543

Conceptally, the FE method is somewhat similar to the BE method, in that it subdivides
the system into elements. However, unlike the BE method, the resulting discrete equations
govern the displacement ﬁeld u throughout the material, as opposed to on the boundary in the
BE method. Since we demonstrate in Chapter 8 how the FE discretization of the continuum
equations of linear elasticity is used for generating discrete or lattice models of elastic properties
of heterogeneous materials, we postpone further discussion of this method. In general, there
are at least three basic issues that one must deal with when using a BE or FE method.
(1) Since the BE method involves integral equations, how to carry out numerical integration
of the integral is an important issue. In particular, since as pointed above, the kernel of these
integrals involves singular functions, an eﬀective way of dealing with such singularities must be
developed.
(2) The way the system and/or its boundary are discretized in the FE and BE methods is
also an important issue that must be addressed carefully. For example, the integration over
the entire boundary is replaced by a sum of many integrations over individual ﬁnite elements
or, in the case of the BE method, a BE over the surface.
(3) In utilizing the BE or FE method, one major task is eﬃcient solution of the system of
algebraic equations which is the result of discretizing the continuum equations. The matrix of
coeﬃcients for this system is dense and fully populated. For small- or medium-size problems,
a direct method of solving the matrix problem, such as the Gauss elimination method, is very
eﬃcient, as it provides the exact numerical solution of the problem (aside from the round-
oﬀerrors).
However, the direct methods cannot be used for large-scale problems, because
the required computer memory will be too large, and therefore one must resort to iterative
techniques, the most eﬃcient of which is perhaps the conjugate-gradient method which will
be described in detail in Chapter 9 of Volume II. Iterative algorithms also lend themselves to
parallel computations, a distinct advantage.
7.9 Links between the Conductivity and Elastic Moduli
A fundamental scientiﬁc problem with great practical implications is whether various trans-
port properties of a heterogeneous material are rigorously linked to one another. Such cross-
property relations can be especially useful if one property is more easily measured than another
property. Since, as emphasized throughout this book, the eﬀective transport properties reﬂect
544

certain morphological information about a material, one might to be able to extract useful in-
formation about one eﬀective property given an accurate (experimental or theoretical) estimate
of another property, even if their respective governing equations are uncoupled or seemingly un-
related. This is a fertile area of research (see, for example, Prager 1969; Berryman and Milton
1988; Torquato 1990) which has produced many interesting and useful results. The purpose of
this section is to summarize the most recent and useful of such results due to Gibiansky and
Torquato (1995b,1996). At the same time, their results are compared to other older predictions
in order to obtain a better understanding of the progress that has been made. We begin our
discussion with 2D systems and provide a somewhat detailed discussion of the results, after
which we summarize the 3D results.
7.9.1 Two-dimensional materials
We wish to derive cross-property relations between the eﬀective transverse conductivity and
eﬀective transverse elastic moduli of transversely isotropic, two-phase, ﬁber-reinforced compos-
ites, the phase boundaries of which are cylindrical surfaces with generators parallel to one axis.
Thus, the essential problem is studying 2D two-phase, isotropic disordered materials (that is,
plane elasticity and conductivity) with eﬀective properties that are identical to the correspond-
ing transverse properties of ﬁber-reinforced composites. For an isotropic medium, the material
is characterized by the triples (g1, K1, µ1) and (g2, K2, µ2) for the two phases, where gi, Ki and
µi denote, respectively, the conductivity, bulk modulus and shear modulus of phase i. Sim-
ilarly, the triple (ge, Ke, µe) denotes the eﬀective properties of the composite material which,
of course, depend on the phase properties, phase volume fractions φ1 and φ2 = 1 −φ1, and
the material’s morphology. A given ﬁxed morphology corresponds to some point (ge, Ke, µe)
in a 3D ge −Ke −µe space. Changing the material’s morphology moves and traces out this
space, and the goal is to ﬁnd some bounds on this set or space. In particular, we restrict our
attention to the bounds of the projection of this set onto the ge −Ke and ge −µe planes. Our
discussion follows closely that of Gibiansky and Torquato (1995b). Their results for the eﬀec-
tive conductivity and bulk modulus are not restricted to only isotropic composites, but are also
applicable as well to anisotropic composites with square symmetry. Moreover, as pointed out
in Chapter 4, the determination of the electrical conductivity is mathematically equivalent to
ﬁnding either the thermal conductivity, dielectric constant, magnetic permeability, or diﬀusion
545

coeﬃcient, and thus the cross-property relations connect the elastic moduli to any of these
properties as well.
We use the notations introduced by Eqs. (408) and (409) and, for the sake of simplicity,
we use the briefer notation, F(a1, a2, φ1, φ2, y) = Fa(y). As mentioned in Section 7.5.1.4, this
function is a scalar-variant of the inverse Y-transformation. Now let g1e and g2e denote the
expressions,
g1e = Fg(g1) ,
g2e = Fg(g2) .
(1919)
Similarly, suppose that
K1e = FK(µ1) ,
K2e = FK(µ2) ,
(1920)
and µ1e, µ2e, µ3e, and µ4e denote the quantities given by
µ1e = Fµ[µ1K1/(K1 + 2µ1)] ,
µ2e = Fµ[µ2K2/(K2 + 2µ2)] ,
(1921)
µ3e = Fµ[µ1K2/(K2 + 2µ1)] ,
µ4e = Fµ[µ2K1/(K1 + 2µ2)] .
(1922)
Moreover, the harmonic average of the phase bulk moduli is deﬁned by,
Kh =
 φ1
K1
+ φ2
K2
−1
= FK(0) .
(1923)
Equations (593) and (594) coincide with the 2D upper and lower Hashin-Shtrikman bounds on
the eﬀective conductivity (Hashin and Shtrikman, 1962a) and eﬀective bulk modulus (Hashin
and Shtrikman, 1963) of isotropic composites, respectively, which were already described in
Sections 4.6.1.1 and 7.5.1.2. Equations (595) and (596) coicide with the 2D Hashin-Shtrikman-
Walpole bounds on shear modulus (Hashin and Shtrikman, 1963; Hashin 1965; Walpole 1966,
1969), which were also obtained by Hill (1964).
The bounds that Gibiansky and Torquato (1995b) derived are given by segments of hyper-
bolae in the ge −Ke and ge −µe planes with asymptotes that are parallel to the axes ge = 0
and Ke = 0, or µe = 0. Thus, every such hyperbola in the xe −ye plane can be described by
the equation
A(xe −x0)(ye −y0) = 1 ,
(1924)
and can be deﬁned by three points that it passes through. We denote by
Hyp[(x1, y1), (x2, y2), (x3, y3)]
546

the segment of such hyperbola that passes through the points (x1, y1), (x2, y2) and, when
extended, the point (x3, y3). Thus, it can be parametrically described in the xe −ye plane by
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
xe = γx1 + (1 −γ)x2 −
γ(1 −γ)(x1 −x2)2
(1 −γ)x1 + γx2 −x3
,
ye = γy1 + (1 −γ)y2 −γ(1 −γ)(y1 −y2)2
(1 −γ)y1 + γy2 −y3
,
(1925)
where γ ∈[0, 1]. The bounds that connect the eﬀective conductivity and the elastic moduli can
now be stated.
7.9.1.1 Conductivity-bulk modulus bounds
To obtain cross-property bounds on the set of the pair (ge, Ke) for any isotropic composite
material at a ﬁxed volume fraction φ1, one should inscribe in the conductivity-bulk modulus
plane the segments of the following four hyperbolae:
Hyp[(g1e, K1e), (g2e, K2e), (g1, Kh)] ,
Hyp[(g1e, K1e), (g2e, K2e), (g2, Kh)] ,
Hyp[(g1e, K1e), (g2e, K2e), (g1, K1)] ,
Hyp[(g1e, K1e), (g2e, K2e), (g2, K2)] .
The outermost pair of these curves yield the desired bounds. This is shown in Figure 7.14
which depicts conductivity-bulk modulus bounds for the following values of the parameters:
g2
g1
= 20 ,
K2
K1
= 20 ,
νp1 = νp2 = 0.3 ,
φ1 = 0.2 .
(1926)
The corner points A = (g1e, K1e) and B = (g2e, K2e) of the set enclosed by the bounds are
optimal because they correspond to assemblages of coatted circles (Hashin and Shtrikman,
1963; see Section 7.5.1.2), as well as to isotropic matrix laminate composites (Francfort and
Murat, 1986). The hyperbolae Hyp[(g1e, K1e), (g2e, K2e), (g1, K1)] (curve 1 of Figure 7.14) and
Hyp[(g1e, K1e), (g2e, K2∗), (g2, K2)] (curve 2 of Figure 7.14) correspond to the assemblages of
doubly coated spheres, or to doubly coated matrix laminate composites (Cherkaev and Gibi-
nasky 1992; Gibiansky and Milton 1993). Depending upon the values of the paremeters, one
of these curves always forms part of the bound (upper bound of Figure 7.14). Thus, this is an
optimal bound because there exist composites that realize it.
In order to obtain bounds for an arbitrary volume fraction (of either phase) one can take
the union of the sets deﬁned by these bounds over the phase volume fractions. This union
547

is bounded by the curves 5 and 6 of Figure 7.14. The unmarked straight line of Figure 7.14
corresponds to the upper bound of relation (Torquato, 1992),
Ke
K1
≤ge
g1
.
(1927)
The bound (601) holds for d−dimensional isotropic, two-phase materials of arbitrary topology
having positive phase Poisson’s ratio νpi, if K2/K1 ≤g2/g1, and is optimal and coincides with
the new bound when g2/g1 = K2/K1 and νpi = 0 (i = 1 and 2), i.e., µ1/K1 = µ2/K2 = 1. In
general, the Gibiansky-Torquato volume-fraction independent upper bound is more restrictive
than (601).
7.9.1.2 Conductivity-shear modulus bounds
To derive cross-property bounds on the set of the pairs (ge, µe) for any composite at ﬁxed
volume fraction φ1, one should inscribe in the conducitvity-shear modulus plane the segments
of the following four hyperbolae:
Hyp[(g1e, µ1e), (g2e, µ3e), (g1, µ1)] ,
Hyp[(g1e, µ1e), (g2e, µ3e), (g2, µ2)] ,
Hyp[(g1e, µ4e), (g2e, µ2e), (g1, µ1)] ,
Hyp[(g1e, µ4e), (g2e, µ2e), (g2, µ2)] ,
and the segments of two straight lines:
ge = g1e ,
µe ∈[µ1e, µ4e] , and ge = g2e ,
µe ∈[µ2e, µ3e] .
The outermost of these curves yield the desired bounds. Figure 7.15 presents the conductivity-
shear modulus bounds for the phase moduli and volume fractions given in (600), where the cross-
property bounds in the ge −µe plane are represented by a curvilinear trapezium. The straight
sides AB and CD are given by the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds on the eﬀective condctivity. The
other two curvilinear sides (new bounds that are denoted as curves 1 and 4 of Figure 7.15)
are the hyperbola segments. The two corner points A = (g1e, µ1e) and C = (g2e, µ2e) of the
set enclosed by the bounds correspond to the matrix laminate composites that realize the
Hashin-Shtrikman bounds for elasticity and conductivity, and thus are optimal (Francfort and
Murat, 1986). The other two points, B = (g1e, µ4e) and D = (g2e, µ3e), correspond to the
structures that could realize the Walpole bounds on the shear modulus of a composite. Note
that composites with the pair (ge, µe) that lies on the vertical sides of the trapezium (see Figure
548

7.15) are polycrystals made of square symmetric matrix laminate composites (Cherkaev and
Gibiansky, 1984).
The union of the sets deﬁned by these bounds over the phase volume fractions yield cross-
property bounds for arbitrary volume fraction (the set bounded by the curves 5 and 6 of Figure
7.15). The unmarked straight line of Figure 7.15 corresponds to the upper-bound (Torquato,
1992)
µe
K1
≤ge
g1
1 −νpe
1 + νpe
,
(1928)
(where K2/K1 ≤g2/g1) with νpe = 0 [i.e., the weaker form of (602)], which does not incorpo-
rate volume fraction information. The Gibiansky-Torquato volume-fraction independent upper
bound is more restrictive than the weak form of (602) (with νpe = 0).
Therefore, the eﬀective elastic moduli and conductivties of composite materials are in fact
not independent, but are connected through the morphology. However, this relation is not
one-to-one because materials of diﬀerent morphologies may possess the same conductivities but
very diﬀerent elastic moduli, and vice versa. The cross-property bounds derived by Gibiansky
and Torquato indicate how the values of eﬀective bulk or shear modulus (conductivity) of the
composite are constrained assuming that the phase properties and volume fractions are ﬁxed
and the eﬀective conductivity (bulk or shear modulus) is known.
The proof of these cross-property bounds is based on the so-called translation method (see,
for example, Cherkaev and Gibiansky 1984, 1987, 1992, 1993; Francfort and Murat 1986; Milton
1990a,b; Gibiansky and Milton 1993), which bounds from below the relevant energy functional
H that, for the present problem, has the general form
H =
N

i=1
H∗
ϵ[ϵ(i)
0 ] + H∗
E(E0) ,
(1929)
and is equal to the sum of the elastic and electrical energies stored in the element of periodicity
of a composite which is exposed to N elastic ﬁelds and two electrical ﬁelds with ﬁxed mean
values, where N = 1 for the bulk modulus bounds and N = 2 for the shear modulus bounds.
Here, H∗
ϵ is the elastic energy density stored in the composite, which is given by
H∗
ϵ(ϵ0) = ϵ0 : Ce : ϵ0 = inf⟨ϵ : C : ϵ⟩,
(1930)
where the inﬁmum is taken over all admissible ﬁelds, ϵ = 1
2[∇u + (∇u)T], that are the strain
ﬁelds with given mean value ϵ0 = ϵ : ⟨ϵ⟩that satisfy compatibility conditions. For the conjugate
549

functional of the complementary energy we have
H∗
τ(τ) = τ 0 : Se : τ 0 = inf⟨τ : S : τ⟩,
(1931)
where the eﬀective compliance tensor Se is determined as, Se = C−1
e , and the inﬁmum is
taken over stress ﬁelds with given mean value τ 0 = τ : ⟨τ⟩that satisfy equilibrium condition
∇· τ = 0.
For the conductivity problem one uses the functionals that are sums of the energy stored
by the composite, namely,
H∗
E(E0) = E0 · ˆge · E0 = inf⟨E · ˆg · E⟩,
(1932)
where the inﬁmum is taken over all admissible ﬁelds, E = −∇(ϕ(1), ϕ(2)), with ϕ denoting the
potential, E0 = E · ⟨E⟩, and g is the conductivity tensor. In a similar way, a functional in
terms of the current density can be deﬁned. Note that the energy functional H can also be
written in terms of the stress and the current ﬁelds, as given above. The reason for utilizing this
energy functional is that its value is equal to the energy stored by an equivalent homogeneous
medium in the uniform ﬁeld. The equivalent medium is characterized by the tensor of the
eﬀective properties and the uniform external ﬁeld coincides with the mean value of the ﬁeld in
the composite. Clearly, the lower bound on the functional H provides bounds on the eﬀective
moduli of interest.
To better understand the functionals that yield the cross-property bounds, it is instructive to
begin with functionals for the pure elasticity and pure conductivity problems before presenting
those for the cross-property bounds. To obtain bounds on the bulk modulus, the composite is
exposed to an external hydrostatic strain ϵh = ϵhd1 or stress τ h = τhd1, where
d1 = 1
√
2
⎛
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
1
⎞
⎟
⎠
The energy of an isotropic composite under the action of such ﬁelds is proportional to the
eﬀective bulk modulus Ke according to
Hϵ(ϵh) = H∗
ϵ(ϵh) = ϵh : Ce : ϵh = 2Ke(ϵh)2 ,
(1933)
or its inverse value 1/Ke according to
Hτ(τ h) = H∗
τ(τ h) : Se : τ h =
1
2Ke
(τh)2 .
(1934)
550

The minimization (by changing the morphology) of the energy stored in the hydrostatic strain
ﬁeld is equivalent to the minimization of the bulk modulus. By contrast, the minimization of
the energy stored in the hydrostatic stress ﬁeld leads to maximization of Ke. One must express
the elastic energy in terms of ζ = ∇u instead of the strain ﬁelds ϵ, i.e.,
Hϵ(ϵh) = Hζ(ζh) = ζh : Ce : ζh ,
(1935)
where we assume that ϵh : di = ζh : di, with i = 1, 2, 3 and
d2 = 1
√
2
⎛
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
−1
⎞
⎟
⎠;
d3 = 1
√
2
⎛
⎜
⎝
0
1
1
0
⎞
⎟
⎠
By using the same type of argument, it is clear if E = Eh = Ehd1, then minimization of
the functional
HE(Eh) = H∗
E(Eh) = Eh · ˆg · Eh = ge(Eh)2 ,
(1936)
is equivalent to the minimization of the eﬀective conductivity ge of an isotropic composite. If
I = Ih = Ihd1, then the minimization of the functional
HI(Ih) = H∗
I(Ih) = Ih · ˆg−1 · Ih = 1
ge
(Ih)2 ,
(1937)
is equivalent to maximization of the eﬀective conductivity.
In order to derive the conductivity-bulk modulus bounds, one combines the functionals for
the pure cases. Then, one has a choice between stress and strain trial ﬁelds for the elastic-
ity problem, and between the electrical and current ﬁelds for the electrostatic problem. The
following functionals should then be considered for the conductivity-bulk modulus bounds:
HζE(ζh, Eh) = H∗
ζ(ζh) + H∗
E(Eh) ,
(1938)
HζI(ζh, Ih) = H∗
ζ(ζh) + H∗
I(Ih) ,
(1939)
HτE(τ h, Eh) = H∗
τ(τ h) + H∗
E(Eh) ,
(1940)
HτJ(τ h, Ih) = H∗
τ(τ h) + H∗
E(Ih) .
(1941)
The lower bound of each of these functionals gives some component of the boundary where
the bounds are located. By using linear combinations of the four functionals, one can ﬁnd the
functional that moves one in any ﬁxed direction in the ge −Ke plane. Therefore, by bounding
551

the functionals from below one can ﬁnd bounds on the set of pairs (ge, Ke) of composites of
all possible morphologies. For example, consider the functional (612). For ﬁxed amplitudes
Eh and ϵh, the bounds on the functional (612) show how far one can move in the direction
v = −E2
heg−ϵ2
heK, where eg and eK are the unit vectors of the ge−axis and Ke-axis, respectively.
By changing the ratio E2
h/ϵ2
h one can direct v at any point within the third quadrant of the
ge −Ke plane, implying that the functional (612) can provide the part of the cross-property
boundary that has a normal directed into the third quadrant. Similarly, the functional (613)
provides the part of the boundary with a normal directed into the second quadrant of the plane
ge −Ke. The functional (614) corresponds to that part of the boundary that has a normal
directed into the fourth quadrant of the plane (ge, Ke), while the functional (615) provides the
part of the boundary with a normal directed into the ﬁrst quadrant of the plane (ge, Ke).
In a similar manner, one can obtain bounds on the shear modulus of a composite material
by bounding the energy stored in a composite exposed to shear-type trial strain or stress ﬁelds.
In this way, one obtains bounds on any of the two shear moduli of the composite which, in
general, is anisotropic. To ensure isotropy of the system, one must consider the response of the
composite to two orthogonal shear ﬁelds. Hence, to estimate the shear modulus of an isotropic
composite one should minimize the functional equal to the sum of the values of the energy
stored by the medium under the action of two trial orthogonal shear strain or stress ﬁelds. The
details of the proofs of these theorems are given by Gibiansky and Torquato (1995b), to whom
we refer the interested reader.
7.9.1.3 Applications
Let us now discuss some speciﬁc applications of cross-property relations.
Rigid superconducting phase: Suppose that one of the phases of a material is characterized
by K2/K1 = ∞, µ2/µ1 = ∞, and g2/g1 = ∞, i.e., phase 2 is totally rigid and superconducting.
In this limit, the boundary hyperbolae degenerate into straight lines and the bounds for ﬁxed
φ1 are given by
ge ≥gu ,
Ku ≤Ke ≤Ku + max
K1 + µ1
2g1
,
2µ2K2
g2(K2 + µ2)

(ge −gu) ,
(1942)
µl ≤µe ≤µu + max
K1 + 2µ1
4g1
,
µ2K2
g2(K2 + µ2)

(ge −gu) ,
(1943)
552

with
gu = 1 + φ2
φ1
g1 ,
Ku = K1 + µ1φ2
φ1
,
µl = (1 + φ2)µ1K1 + 2µ2
1
φ1(K1 + 2µ1)
,
µu = φ2K1 + 2µ1
2φ1
.
Although it may seem unphysical that these bounds depend on the ratio of the inﬁnite moduli
of the ideal phase, we should keep in mind that a very small amount of a rigid, conducting
material can yield ﬁnite eﬀective properties. In the same manner, one obtains the cross-property
bounds for an arbitrary volume fraction φ1:
ge ≥g1 ,
K1 ≤Ke ≤K1 + max
K1 + µ1
2g1
,
2µ2K2
g2(K2 + µ2)

(ge −g1) ,
(1944)
µ1 ≤µe ≤µ1 + max
K1 + 2µ1
4g1
,
µ2K2
g2(K2 + µ2)

(ge −g1) .
(1945)
The lower bounds are trivial and the same as the Hashin-Shtrikman bounds for Ke and, for
reasons discussed above, are optimal, as are the upper bounds.
Insulating phase: Now consider the opposite limit in which K2/K1 = 0, µ2/µ1 = 0, and
g2/g1 = 0. For ﬁxed volume fractions, the cross-property bounds are given by
1
ge
≥1
g0
,
1
Ke
≥1
K0
+ min
g1(K1 + µ1)
2µ1K1
,
2g2
K2 + µ2)
  1
ge
−1
g0

,
(1946)
1
µe
≥1
µ0
+ min
g1(K1 + µ1)
µ1K1
,
4g2
K2 + 2µ2
  1
ge
−1
g0

,
(1947)
with
g0 = φ1g1
1 + φ2
,
K0 =
φ1µ1K1
µ1 + φ2K1
,
µ0 =
φ1µ1K1
K1(1 + φ2) + 2φ2µ1
.
The corresponding bounds for arbitrary volume fractions are obtained by replacing g0, K0 and
µ0 with g1, K1 and µ1, respectively. Gibiansky and Torquato (1995b) showed that these bounds
provide excellent predictions for the eﬀective bulk and shear moduli of various composites, if
accurate estimates of the eﬀective conductivity of the material are used.
7.9.2 Three-dimensional materials
We now discuss cross-property relations for 3D materials, summarizing and discussing
the work of Gibiansky and Torquato (1996), and making a comparison between their theo-
retical predictions and the previous bounds.
Similar to the 2D case, we use the notations
introduced by Eqs.
(408) and (409), and use again, for the sake of brevity, the notation,
Fa(y) = F(a1, a2, φ1, φ2, y). We now deﬁne the following quantities,
g1e = Fg(2g1) ,
g2e = Fg(2g2) ,
(1948)
553

g1∗Fg(−2g1) ,
g2∗= Fg(−2g2) ,
(1949)
K1e = FK(4
3µ1) ,
K2e = FK(4
3µ2) .
(1950)
In addition, we also deﬁne the arithmetic and harmonic averages of the conductivity,
ga = φ1g1 + φ2g2 = Fg(∞) ,
gh =
φ1
g1
+ φ2
g2
−1
,
(1951)
and similar averages for the bulk modulus.
The bounds derived by Gibiansky and Torquato (1996) are given by segments of hyperbolae
in the ge −Ke plane with asymptotes that are parallel to the axes ge = 0 and Ke = 0. Every
such hyperbola in the (xe, ye) plane is described by Eq. (598) and can be parametrized by Eqs.
(599). The proof of the cross-property relations discussed below are entirely similar to that of
2D systems outlined above, the details of which are given by Gibiansky and Torquato (1996).
7.9.2.1 Conductivity-bulk modulus bounds
The cross-property bounds on (ge, Ke) for any isotropic material at a ﬁxed volume fraction
φ1 are obtained by inscribing in the conductivity-bulk modulus plane the following ﬁve segments
of hyperbolae:
Hyp[(g1e, K1e), (g2e, K2e), (g1, K1)] ,
Hyp[(g1e, K1e), (g2e, K2e), (g2, K2)] ,
Hyp[(g1e, K1e), (g2e, K2e), (g1∗, Kh)] ,
Hyp[(g1e, K1e), (g2e, K2e), (g2∗, Kh)] ,
Hyp[(g1e, K1e), (g2e, K2e), (ga, Ka)] .
The outermost pair of these hyperbolae yields the desired bounds. This is shown schematically
in Figure 7.16 for the parameters given in (600), where curves 1-5 represents the ﬁve hyperbolae.
Berryman and Milton (1988) used a diﬀerent technique for deriving cross-property bounds
on the pair (ge, Ke). To derive their bounds, they used the three-point bounds described in
Section 7.5.1.4 that depend on the microstructural parameters ζ2 and η2. By excluding these
parameters from the conductivity and elastic moduli bounds, they obtained their cross-property
relations which can be written in terms of the Y-transformation notation, since one can write
2(ζ1g1 + ζ2g2) −
4ζ1ζ2(g1 −g2)2
2ζ2g1 + 2ζ1g2 + gmin
≤y(ge) ≤2(ζ1g1 + ζ2g2) ,
(1952)
 3ζ1
4µ1
+ 3ζ2
4µ2
−1
≤y(Ke) ≤4
3(ζ1µ1 + ζ2µ2) ,
(1953)
554

where ζ1 and ζ2 = 1 −ζ1 are the microstructural parameters deﬁned earlier in this chapter
and in Chapters 3 and 4, and gmin = min{g1, g2}. The idea of Berryman and Milton (1988)
was to exclude ζ1 from these relations in order to obtain bounds on the eﬀective bulk modulus.
For a ﬁxed ζ1, the pair [y(ge), y(Ke)] lies within the square (626)-(627) in the y(ge) −y(Ke)
plane. When ζ1 changes within the interval [0,1], this square traces out the set that contains
the pair [y(ge), y(Ke)] of any composite. The bounds of this set are traced out by certain of
the corner points of the sqaure (626)-(627). Therefore, the Berryman-Milton cross-property
bounds can be obtained by inscribing in the y(ge) −y(Ke) plane the following ﬁve segments of
the hyperbolae:
Hyp[(2g1, 4
3µ1), (2g2, 4
3µ2), (−g1, 0)] ,
Hyp[(2g1, 4
3µ1), (2g2, 4
3µ2), (−g2, 0)] ,
Hyp[(2g1, 4
3µ1), (2g2, 4
3µ2), (−g1, ∞)] ,
Hyp[(2g1, 4
3µ1), (2g2, 4
3µ2), (−g2, ∞)] ,
Hyp[(2g1, 4
3µ1), (2g2, 4
3µ2), (∞, 0)] ,
and the straight line that connects the points (2g1, 4
3µ1) and (2g2, 4
3µ2). Then, the outermost
two of these curves represent the Berryman-Milton bounds, shown as dashed curves in Figure
7.16. Therefore, it is clear that the Gibiansky-Torquato bounds are tighter than the Berryman-
Milton bounds. Also shown is the bound (601) as the straight dotted line, which is clearly a
weak bound.
To obtain the cross-property bounds for arbitrary volume fractions, one should take the
union of the sets deﬁned by bounds of Figure 7.16 over the phase volume fraction. This is
illustrated in Figure 7.17 for the set of parameters given in (600). The solid curves repre-
sent the Gibiansky-Torquato bounds, the dashed curves the Berryman-Milton bounds, and the
dotted straight line the upper bound of (543) which coincides with the Gibiansky-Torquato
bounds when g2/g1 = K2/K1 and the Poisson’s ratios of the phases are zero, i.e., when
2µ1/3K1 = 2µ2/3K2 = 1. Similar to the 2D systems discussed above, the points A= (g1e, K1e)
and B= (g2e, K2e) of the set enclosed by the bounds are optimal because they correspond to
the assemblages of coated spheres (Hashin and Shtrikman, 1963) described earlier, as well as
to isotropic matrix laminate composites. Curves 2 and 1 of the same ﬁgure correspond to the
assemblages of doubly coated spheres, or to doubly matrix laminate composites (Schulgasser,
1976). Polycrystals that consist of laminates of two original phases and made of coated cylinder
geometries correspond to curve 3.
555

To see the usefulness of these bounds, consider a random dispersion of identical glass spheres
in an epoxy matrix with µ2/µ1 = 22.5, K2/K1 = 10.0, and µ1/K1 = 0.33. Figure 7.6 compares
the predictions of the cross-property bounds for the eﬀective bulk modulus with the predictions
of Eq. (284), the truncated series expansion of Torquato (1997, 1998), and the three-point lower
bound of Beran and Molyneux (1966), described in Section 7.5.1.4. To obtain the cross-property
bounds for the bulk modulus, estimates of the eﬀective conductivity of the same system obtained
by numerical simulations were used. It is clear that the cross-property bounds and the Beran-
Molyneux bound form a very narrow region that contain the predictions of Eq. (284), and
therefore provide very accurate predictions for the elastic moduli of such composites.
7.9.2.2 Applications
Similar to the 2D systems, the 3D cross-property bounds can be simpliﬁed in several special
limits, some of which are as follows.
Rigid superconducting phase: If phase 2 consists of a completely rigid, superconducting
material, then, by an analysis entirely similar to that for 2D materials, one obtains, for a ﬁxed
volume fraction φ1,
ge ≥gu ,
Ku ≤Ke ≤Ku + max
3K1 + 4µ1
9g1
,
6µ2K2
g2(3K2 + 4µ2), 2µ2
3g2

(ge −gu) ,
(1954)
with
gu = 1 + 2φ2
φ1
g1 ,
Ku = 3K1 + 4φ2µ1
2φ1
.
To obtain the corresponding bounds for any volume fraction, one should replace gu and Ku by
g1 and K1.
The important point about the upper bounds of (628) is that, unlike the Hashin-Shtrikman
and Berryman-Milton upper bounds, they do not diverge if ge remains ﬁnite, since a ﬁnite ge
carries microstructural information about the material in that, it implies that the rigid phase
has not formed a sample-spanning cluster, whereas the Hashin-Shtrikman and Berryman-Milton
bounds lack such microstructual information, and therefore they diverge in this limit.
Insulating phase: If phase 2 is insulating, then, by an analysis similar to that for 2D systems,
one obtains, for a ﬁxed volume fraction φ1,
1
ge
≥1
g0
,
1
Ke
≥1
K0
+ min
g1(3K1 + 4µ1)
6µ1K1
,
9g2
3K2 + 4µ2
, 3g1
2µ1
  1
ge
−1
g0

,
(1955)
556

with
g0 = 2φ1g1
1 + φ2
,
K0 =
4φ1µ1K1
4µ1 + 3φ2K1
.
For an arbitrary volume fraction φ1, one should replace g0 and K0 with g1 and K1. While the
lower bound is trivial, the upper bound is tighter than the Hashin-Shtrikman bound. Gibiansky
and Torquato (1996) discussed many other examples in which their cross-property bounds
provided very useful estimates of the elastic moduli of the composites.
Summarizing, cross-property relations and bounds provide accurate estimates of the eﬀective
transport properties of composite materials, as they utilize (experimental or numerical) data
on one type of transport property, which carry with them some information on the morphology
of the material, in order to make prediction for another type of transport property.
Summary
In this chapter we described and discussed several theoretical and theoretical approaches
to the problem of estimating the linear elastic properties of heterogeneous materials. Accu-
rate calculation of several microstructural parameters that appear in the general formulation
of rigorous upper and lower bounds on the eﬀective elastic moduli have made such bounds
progressively tighter. These bounds are very useful as long as the inclusion phase does not
form a sample-spanning cluster. The exact series expansions, as well as the multiple scatter-
ing approach, provide accurate estimates of the eﬀective elastic moduli for many composites.
As in the case of the eﬀective conductivity and dielectric constant, the eﬀective-medium ap-
proximations provide easy-to-calculate estimates of the elastic moduli that, in many cases, are
relatively accurate. Such approximations also provide simple interpolation formulea for the
eﬀective transport properties. Finally, cross-property relations that utilize information on one
type of transport property in order to provide estimates for other transport properties are pow-
erful new tools for computing such characteristics of disordered material. Thus, together with
the discrete models discussed in Chapter 8, we now have a reasonably deep understanding of
the eﬀective linear elastic properties of heterogeneous materials. This claim will be conﬁrmed
in Chapter 9 where we will be discussing the applications of these theoretical approaches to
modelling mechanical properties of a variety of disordered materials.
557

Captions
Figure 7.1 Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio of a sheet that contains randomly-centered
circular holes. Symbols in the Young’s modulus plot indicate materials with diﬀerent Poisson’s
ratios. The plot for the Poisson’s ratio was constructed from the solid reference line at νp1 = 1/3
(after Day et al., 1992).
Figure 7.2 Dimensionless eﬀective transverse shear modulus µe/µ1 versus the ﬁber volume
fraction φ2 for hexagonal arrays of circular glass ﬁbers in an epoxy matrix with µ2/µ1 = 22.5,
µ1/K1 = 0.3 and µ2/K2 = 0.6. Solid circles are the simulation data, while the dashed curve
shows the predictions of the EMA, Eqs. (569) and (570). The lower and upper continuous
curves present the predictions of Eq. (274) and the three-point bound (419), respectively (after
Torquato, 1998).
Figure 7.3 Dimensionless eﬀective transverse bulk modulus Ke/K1 versus the ﬁber volume
fraction φ2 for hexagonal arrays of circular holes in a compressible sheet, with µ2/µ1 = K2/K1 =
0, and µ1/K1 = 0.5. Solid circles are the simulation data, solid curve shows the predictions of
Eq. (277), while the dashed curve presents the EMA predictions, Eqs. (569) and (570) (after
Torquato, 1998).
Figure 7.4 Dimensionless eﬀective transverse bulk modulus Ke/K1 versus ﬁber volume frac-
tion φ2 for hexagonal arrays of circular rigid ﬁbers in a compressible sheet, with µ2/µ1 =
K2/K1 = ∞and µ1/K1 = 0.4. Solid circles are the simulation data, solid curve shows the
predictions of Eq. (280), while the dashed curve presents the EMA predictions, Eqs. (569) and
(570) (after Torquato, 1998).
Figure 7.5 Dimensionless eﬀective transverse shear modulus µe/µ1 versus ﬁber volume frac-
tion φ2 for hexagonal arrays of rigid ﬁbers in an incompressible matrix, with µ2/µ1 = K2/K1 =
∞and µ1/K1 = 0.0. Solid circles are the simulation data, while the dashed curve presents
the EMA predictions, Eqs. (569) and (570). The lower and upper solid curves correspond,
respectively, to the predictions of the lower bound (419) and Eq. (283) (after Torquato, 1998).
Figure 7.6 Dimensionless eﬀective bulk modulus Ke/K1 versus particle volume fraction φ2
for random arrays of glass spheres in an epoxy matrix, with µ2/µ1 = 22.5, µ1/K1 = 0.33 and
µ2/K2 = 0.75. Dashed curve presents the predictions of the EMA, Eqs. (569) and (570), while
the middle solid curve shows the predictions of Eq. (284). The other two solid curves are
the lower three-point bound (412) and the Gibiansky-Torquato cross-property upper bound,
558

described in Section 7.9.2 (after Torquato, 1998).
Figure 7.7 Dimensionless eﬀective bulk modulus Ke/K1 versus particle volume fraction φ2
for FCC arrays of rigid spheres in a compressible matrix, with µ2/µ1 = K2/K1 = ∞and
µ1/K1 = 0.46. Solid circles are the simulation data, dashed curve shows the predictions of
the EMA, Eqs. (571) and (572), while solid curve presents the predictions of Eq. (293) (after
Torquato, 1998).
Figure 7.8 Dimensionless eﬀective axial shear modulus µ(a)
e /µ1 versus the cylinder volume
fraction φ2 with µ2/µ1 = 10. Dotted curves are the two-point bounds, dashed curves are three-
point bounds, while solid curves are four-point bounds. Solid circles are the simulation data
(after Torquato and Lado, 1992).
Figure 7.9 Same as in Figure 7.8, but with µ2/µ1 = 50.
Figure 7.10 Dimensionless eﬀective Young’s modulus Ye/Y1 of composites of spherical glass
beads in epoxy polymer (circles) and in polyester (diamonds). Large symbols are the exper-
imental data, while smaller symbols joined by symbols are the theoretical predictions. The
dashed curves are the theoretical predictions of Ju and Chen (1994) (who used a probabilis-
tic pair-interaction formulation coupled with ensemble-volume averaged micromechanical ﬁeld
equations), while the solid curves are the predictions of multiple scattering theory (after Mon-
descu and Muthukumar, 1999).
Figure 7.11 Dimensionless eﬀective Young’s modulus Ye/Y1 of the composite of Wc particles
dispersed in Co matrix. Squares and triangles represent, respectively, the experimental data
of Nishimatsu and Gurland (1960) and Doi et al. (1970). Solid and dotted curves represent,
respectively, the predictions of multiple scattering theory using fully-penetrable spheres and
fully-impenetrable spheres models [see Eq. (526)], while dashed curve shows the predictions of
Ju and Chen (1994) (after Modescu and Muthukumar, 1999).
Figure 7.12 Same as in Figure 7.11, but for the dimensionless eﬀective shear modulus µe/µ1.
Large triangles represent the experimental data.
Figure 7.13 Unit cell for BE computations of elastic moduli of hexagonal arrays (after
Eischen and Torquato, 1993).
Figure 7.14 Cross-property bounds in the conductivity-bulk modulus plane. On the scale
of the ﬁgure, curves 1 and 2 are almost indistinguishable from each other. The internal region,
bounded by curves 1 and 4, represents the bounds for ﬁxed volume fraction, while the larger
559

region, bounded by curves 5 and 6, represents the bounds for arbitrary volume fractions. The
unmarked straight line is the bound, Ke/K1 ≤ge/g1 (after Gibiansky and Torquato, 1995b).
Figure 7.15 Cross-property bounds in the conductivity-shear modulus plane. Points B and C
are joined by curve 1. The trapezium ABCD represents the bounds for ﬁxed volume fraction,
while the larger internal area, bounded by curves 5 and 6, shows the bounds for arbitrary
volume fraction. The unmarked straight line is the bound (602) with νpe = 0 (after Gibiansky
and Torquato, 1995b).
Figure 7.16 Cross-property bounds in the conductivity-bulk modulus plane. On the scale of
the ﬁgure, curves 1 and 2 coincide. The internal region, bounded by curves 1 and 5, represents
the bounds for ﬁxed volume fraction. Dashed curvea represent the Berryman-Milton bounds,
while the dotted line is the bound, Ke/K1 ≤ge/g1 (after Gibiansky and Torquato, 1996).
Figure 7.17 Cross-property bounds in the conductivity-bulk modulus plane for the composite
with arbitrary (the larger external region) and ﬁxed (the internal regions) volume fraction. Solid
and dashed curves correspond, respectively, to the Gibiansky-Torquato and Berryman-Milton
bounds, while the dotted line is the bound, Ke/K1 ≤ge/g1 (after Gibiansky and Torquato,
1996).
560

8
Rigidity and Elastic Properties: The Discrete Approach
8.0 Introduction
In this chapter the discrete models of disordered materials, which were utilized in Chapters
5 and 6 for predicting their eﬀective conductivity, dielectric constant, and other dynamical
properties, are signiﬁcantly extended in order to analyze their linear elastic properties. We
consider discrete models of disordered two-phase materials, the discrete counterparts of what
we described in Chapter 7, and pay particular attention to elastic percolation networks (that is,
networks in which each bond is an elastic element) which are examples of vector percolation, as
opposed to the percolation models for the eﬀective conductivity and other transport properties
of disordered materials that were studied in Chapters 5 and 6, which are scalar percolation
models. Elastic percolation networks are discrete models of disordered two-phase materials in
which the contrast between the elastic properties of the two phases is large. As shown in this
chapter, in at least one type of vector percolation, namely, the rigidity percolation model, the
deformation of the material represents a linear, vector, but non-local transport process that
possesses complex properties that are absent in many other discrete (or continuum) models of
disordered materials. As shown below, the non-locality is due to the fact that, under certain
conditions, formation of a sample-spanning cluster of one of the material’s phases that can
support transport of stress and deformation is not a function of the connectivity of the phase
alone. That is, the mere fact that the cluster is sample spanning is not suﬃcient for it being
able to support transmission of stress and strain across the material, as as there are long-range
correlations in the system. The existence of such long-range correlations gives rise to very
interesting phenomena that are completely absent in the scalar percolation models described so
far. The applications of these models to predicting the eﬀective mechanical properties of real
disordered materials will be described in Chapter 9.
In general we consider disordered lattices or networks in which each bond represents an
elastic element, e.g., a spring, with an elastic constant e, the numerical value of which is
selected from a probability density function ψ(e). In the most general case, and similar to
models of disordered two-phase materials that we considered in Chapter 7, one may consider a
561

two-phase network in which
ψ(e) = ph1(e) + (1 −p)h2(e) ,
(1956)
that is, the elastic constants of phases 1 and 2 are selected from probability density functions
h1(e) and h2(e), respectively. The simplest case when h(e) = δ(e −a) and h2(e) = δ(e −b),
i.e., when the network is a mixture of two types of bonds with elastic constants e1 and e2, is
the discrete analogue of two-phase composites studied in Chapter 7.
If h2(e) = δ+(0),
ψ(e) = ph1(e) + (1 −p)δ+(0) ,
(1957)
that is, if a fraction p of the bonds have an elastic constant e which is selected from a normalized
probability density function h1(e), while the elastic constant of the rest of the bonds is zero
(i.e., such bonds represent voids or pores in the material), then the model is referred to as
the elastic percolation network (EPN). Since, at this point, we have no reason to believe, a
priori, that the percolation threshold of this system is the same as that of scalar percolation,
i.e., since it is not yet clear whether the percolation threshold for the eﬀective conductivity
and elastic moduli are exactly the same, we denote the percolation threshold of the elastic
networks by pce to distinguish it from pc, the percolation threshold of scalar percolation and
the eﬀective conductivity, dielectric constant, etc.
As the percolation threshold pce of the
network is approached, all the elastic moduli of the network decrease and eventually vanish at
p = pce. Similar to the eﬀective conductivity, dielectric constant and other dynamical properties
of the material that were considered in Chapters 4-6, near the percolation threshold, all the
elastic moduli of the network follow the power law,
Em ∼(p −pce)f ,
(1958)
where Em is any of the eﬀective elastic moduli of the network, and f is a critical exponent.
If, on the other hand, h1(e) = δ(e −∞),
ψ(e) = pδ(e −∞) + (1 −p)h2(e) ,
(1959)
that is, if a fraction p of the bonds are superrigid, while the rest of them are comparatively
“soft” with a ﬁnite elastic constant that is selected from a normalized probability density
function h2(e), then the model is usually called a superelastic percolation network (SEPN). As
562

the percolation threshold pce is approached from below, all the elastic moduli of the network
increase and eventually diverge at p = pce, where a sample-spanning cluster of the superrigid
bonds is formed. Near pce, one has
Em ∼(pce −p)−χ ,
(1960)
where χ is another critical exponent.
It should be clear that the exponents f and χ are
the elastic analogues of µ and s, the critical exponents that characterize the conductivity of
conductor-insulator, and conductor-superconductor percolation composites, which were utilized
extensively in Chapters 2-6. Later in this chapter, we will describe and discuss the conditions
under which f and χ may be expected to be universal, i.e., to be independent of the morphology
of the network and the constitutive equation that describes the elastic behavior of the network’s
bonds.
8.1 Elastic Networks in Biological Materials
Although, as we show in Section 8.4, the elastic networks that we describe in this chapter
can be derived rigorously by discretizing the continuum elasticity equations, and even though
Chapter 9 will describe many applications of such networks to computing and predicting the
elastic properties of real materials, such as polymers and gels that do have a discrete morphol-
ogy, it should be interesting to motivate the use of elastic networks by describing the structure
of such networks in an important class of materials, namely, biological tissues and cells.
Two-dimensional (2D) networks arise in many situations in biological cells. Such networks
are attached to the cells’ plasma or nuclear membrane. Alternatively, they may be wrapped
around the cells, acting as their walls. The human red blood cells contain neither a nucleus
nor other cytoskeletal components (for example, microtubules). Instead, they possess only a
membrane-associated cytoskeleton that is composed of tetramers of the protein spectrin. The
erythrocyte cytoskeleton is highly convoluted in vivo, but when stretched by about a factor
of about seven in area, it reveals its structure in the form of a relatively uniform 2D network
with a coordination number of between four to six. The spectrin tetramers are attached, about
midway along their contour length, to the plasma membrane by the protein ankyrin using,
as an intermediary, a protein called band 3. Typically, 120,000 tetramers cover the 140 µm2
membrane area of a typical erythocyte, which corresponds to a tetramer density of 800 µm−2.
The tetramers are attached to one another at junction complexes that contain actin segments
563

of about 35 nm long. The erythrocyte is covered by about 35,000 junction complexes (that is,
nodes in the language of networks) with an average separation (bond length) of about 75 nm.
Lateral cortex of the auditory outer hair cells provides an example of a 2D biological network
with low (less than six) coordinatiuon number. In such networks the nodes are connected to
only four of their neighbors. In guinea pigs, for example, outer hair cells are roughly cylindrical
with a diameter of about 10 µm, with the lateral cortex attached to the plasma membrane.
The cortex consists of parallel ﬁlaments with a thickness of about 6 nm, that are spaced about
60 nm apart, and wound around the cylinder’s axis. The ﬁlaments are crosslinked at intervals
of about 30 nm by thinner ﬁlaments.
Experiments indicate that the network is elastically
anisotropic, as the circumferential ﬁlaments are actin while the crosslinks are spectrin.
Although these 2D materials can also be represented as solid sheets, it is better to view
them as 2D networks, which are what they really are. Some key questions regarding these
networks are as follows.
(1) What happens when ﬁlaments, both soft and stiﬀ, are linked together to form an elastic
network?
(2) To what extent do the network’s elastic (and other) properties represent those of the
individual ﬁlaments?
(3) What is the role of interactions among the ﬁlaments?
(4) How do the elastic properties of biological networks depend on stress and temperature?
It is clear that to answer these questions, proper network models must be developed, in
which bending and stretching deformation of the ﬂexible ﬁlaments are taken into account.
Isotropic materials, and their network representation in terms of a triangular network, possess
in-plane deformations involving only two deformation modes - compression and shear. The
compression mode preserves the internal angles of the network by uniformly scaling its linear
dimensions, whereas the shear mode preserves the network’s area, but not its internal angles.
We may characterize these two deformation modes with the area compression, or bulk, modulus
K and the shear modulus µ. For a triangular network of simple Hookean springs with spring
constant α, one has (see Section 8.5 for derivation of these results)
Ke = 2µe =
√
3
2 α .
(1961)
These results are applicable only for inﬁnitesimal deformations of an unstressed network at
564

zero temperature. As the temperature increases, the network may deviate from its uniform
conﬁguration, its elastic moduli change, and therefore Eqs. (6) become increasingly inaccurate.
The Hokean spring description of the bonds also has its limitations. For example, at large
deformations, real protein ﬁlaments cannot be extended indeﬁnitely, whereas a Hookean spring
can be. Moreover, a triangular network of Hookean springs at zero temperature can expand
without limit if subjected to a tensile stress larger than
√
3α, or collapse under moderate
compression.
Three-dimensional elastic networks are also formed in biological materials, such as cells. The
ﬁlaments of the cytoskeleton and extracellular matrix material form a variety of networks, the
chemical and geometrical structure of which can be homogeneous or heterogeneous. To describe
such networks, consider, ﬁrst, a uniform straight rod of length L bent into an arc of a circle of
radius R. The energy Harc required to perform this deformation is given by, Harc = KfL/(2R2),
where Kf is called the ﬂexural rigidity of the rod. Large values of Kf correspond to stiﬀrods.
The combination Kf/(kBT), where kB is the Boltzmann’s constant and T is the temperature,
is called the persistence length of the material. So long as the persistence length is much larger
than the counter length, a ﬁlament appears relatively straight. However, if the persistence
length is much smaller than the contour length, the ﬁlaments adopt more convoluted shapes.
Consider, for example, the network of microtubules that are found in the cell. The per-
sistence length of microtubules is of the order of millimeters, so that they bend only gently
on the scale of microns, and therefore do not form contorted networks. That is, they are not
crosslinked, but rather extend like spikes towards the cell boundary, growing and shrinking
with time. However, there exist many microtubule-associated proteins that form links between
microtubules, resulting in a bundled structure. In this case, linking proteins are spaced along
the microtubule like the rungs of a ladder, tying two microtubules parallel to one another. Such
microtubule bundles exist in the long axon of a nerve cell, or in the whip-like ﬂagella extending
from some cells. They do not resemble the 2D regular networks of the erythrocyte cytoskeleton
or the nuclear lamina described above.
The intermediate ﬁlaments of a cell form a variety of networks that may run through the
cell, i.e., they may be three dimensional, or have a sheet-like, 2D structure. In some cases, the
ﬁlaments terminate at a desmosome at the cell boundary; in these and other ways, extended
networks of ﬁlaments bind the cells into collective structures. The principal components of the
565

internal networks of cells are actin, intermediate ﬁlaments and microtubules. Other proteins
are present in the 2D or 3D networks that surround the cells, such as the extracellular matrix.
These networks tend to be composite structures with heterogeneous molecular composition and
organization.
As one may expect, the engineering speciﬁcations for a biological elastic network may vary
from cell to cell. For example, the elastic networks in red blood cells must be ﬂexible enough
to deform in a capillary and then recover their equilibrium shape in a reasonable time frame.
Therefore, a cell, and its associated elastic network, may experience a variety of stresses during
their everyday operations, and hence the network design must be able to respond to such stresses
in an appropriate way. Thus, the question of how the elastic properties of these networks depend
on stress or temperature is very important. In addition, we must recognize that there may or
may not be permanent crosslinks between the ﬁlaments of a biological elastic network. There
is a well-deﬁned threshold for the average connectivity of the network above which the network
elements are suﬃciently linked to their neighbors that a continuous path can be traced along
the elements from one side of the network to an opposite side, hence making clear the relevance
and importance of percolation to biological elastic networks.
It is only such a continuous
path exists that one can speak of the elastic properties of the network.
At temperatures
above zero, it is believed, but not proven yet, that the elastic moduli are non-zero above the
connectivity percolation threshold pc. However, as we demonstrate in this chapter, certain
elastic networks, at least at T = 0, do not possess non-vanishing elastic moduli unless the their
average connectivity is signiﬁcantly above what is predicted by scalar percolation, described
and utilized in Chapters 2-6.
8.2 Number of Elastic Moduli of a Lattice
Before embarking on describing the discrete models, it is necessary to recall (see Section 7.1)
the number of independent elastic moduli that one needs for describing the elastic properties
of a 2D or 3D network, since most of the networks that have been used in the numerical
simulations or theoretical analyses of elastic properties of composite materials are not, in the
sense of symmetry group of crystals, isotropic.
As is well-known, and as also described in
Section 7.1, the number of independent elastic moduli of isotropic materials is two. One may
measure, for example, the Young’s modulus Y , the shear modulus µ, and the bulk modulus
566

K, and any two of these moduli suﬃce for characterizing the elastic properties and rigidity of
an isotropic network or material. The triangular network, which has been used extensively in
the numerical simulations of elastic properties of materials, is an isotropic lattice. In 3D all
topologically-ordered lattices are elastically anisotropic. For the cubic family of lattices, namely,
the square, simple-cubic, body-centered (BCC), and face-centered (FCC) lattices, that have also
been extensively used in the numerical simulations, three independent elastic moduli are needed
in order to characterize theie elastic behavior. In terms of the components of the elastic stiﬀness
tensor C described in Chapter 7, the three main elastic moduli for a d−dimensional material
are given by
µ =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
C44 ,
simple shear,
1
2(C11 −C12) ,
pure shear ,
Y
=
(C11 −C12)(C11 + 2C12)
C11 + C12
,
K
=
1
d(C11 + 2C12) .
The equations for the shear modulus apply when the lattice is elastically anisotropic.
An
example is the square lattice which can have two diﬀerent shear modes, the simple shear (used
in most theoretical discussions) and pure shear. This means that the Young’s and shear moduli
of the cubic family of lattices are not isotropic (Turley and Sines, 1971) in the sense that, they
are direction-dependent. Thus, unless otherwise speciﬁed, whenever in this chapter we refer to
Y and µ, we mean the Young’s and shear moduli in the principal directions of the network. On
the other hand, the bulk modulus K of the same lattices is isotropic.
8.3 Numerical Simulation and Finite-Size Scaling
Let us brieﬂy discuss numerical simulation of linear deformation of EPNs and SEPNs and
computation of their elastic moduli.
To calculate the elastic properties of a given lattice,
we minimize its total elastic energy H with respect to ui, i.e., we write down the equation,
∂H/∂ui = 0, where ui is the vector displacement of site i of the lattice. Writing down this
equation for every interior node of the network results in a dN simultaneous linear equations
for the nodal displacements ui of a d−dimensional network of N internal nodes, if no rotational
motion is involved (see Section 8.11 when such rotations must also be taken into account).
The boundary conditions depend on the elastic modulus to be calculated. For example, to
567

calculate the elastic constant C11, i.e., a tensile experiment, we stretch two opposite faces
of the network by a given strain ϵ and impose periodic boundary conditions in the other
directions. The resulting set of linear equations are solved by either Gaussian elimination or
by an iterative method such as the conjugate-gradient method (see Chapter 9 of Volume II
for a detailed discussion of the conjugate-gradient method). The convergence criterion for the
iterative method is that for all sites i, |u(k)
i
−u(k−1)
i
|/|u(k−1)
i
| < δ, where u(k)
i
is the displacement
of site i after the kth iteration, and δ is a small number of the order of 10−3 −10−5. From the
solution of the set of equations for the nodal displacements we calculate the elastic energy H,
and hence the elastic modulus C11 = 2H/ϵ2.
Since throughout this chapter we will frequently speak of the critical exponents that char-
acterize the power-law behavior of the elastic moduli near the percolation threshold, let us
brieﬂy recall from Chapter 2 how such exponents are estimated. The most accurate method
for estimating most of the critical exponents is based on the ﬁnite-size scaling. Recall from
Chapter 2 (see Section 2.9) that, according to the ﬁnite-size scaling theory, for any eﬀective
property P of a network of linear size L, that follows a power law in p −pce| at the percolation
threshold (of the same network when L →∞), one can write
P(L, pce) ∼L−˜ζ [a1 + a2h1(L) + a3h2(L)] ,
(1962)
where h1(L) and h2(L) represent the non-analytical and analytical correction-to-scaling terms,
respectively, which are particularly important for small to moderate values of L, and ˜ζ =
ζ/ν, with ζ being the critical exponent associated with the power-law behavior of P near
the percolation threshold, and ν is the critical exponent that characterizes the divergence of
percolation correlation length ξp at p = pc [see Eq. (2.32)]. As shown later in this chapter, one
may deﬁne a correlation length ξe for EPNs and SEPNs which also diverges at p = pce according
to a power law which is characterized by a critical exponent νe, which may be diﬀerent from
ν, in which case one must use νe rather than ν in Eq. (7). For example, an equation similar
to (7) has been used for estimating the exponents f and χ by studying the elastic moduli of
ﬁnite-size networks at pce (see below).
If one is interested in studying the scaling behavior of the topological properties of the
elastic networks (such as the accessible fraction of the elastic bonds, and the backbone of the
networks), then the functions h1(L) and h2(L) are usually combined into a single correction-
568

to-scaling function h(L) = a2L−ω, so that Eq. (7) is rewritten as
P(L, pce) ∼L−˜ζ +
a1 + a2L−ω,
,
(1963)
where ω is the leading correction-to-scaling exponent, and is presumably universal. On the
other hand, if one is interested in investigating the scaling properties of the elastic moduli
and estimating the associated exponents f and χ, then the most accurate results are obtained
(Sahimi and Arbabi, 1991) if one uses
h1(L)
=
(ln L)−1 ,
(1964)
h2(L)
=
L−1 .
(1965)
8.4 Derivation of Elasstic Networks from Continuum Elasticity
We begin our discussion by deriving the elastic networks, beginning with the static limit of
the continuum equation of linear elasticity. The linear equation governing elastic equilibrium
of a continuum is given by the usual equation,
∇· σ = 0 ,
(1966)
where σ is the stress tensor deﬁned by the usual relation,
σ = λ(∇· u)U + µ

∇u + (∇u)T
,
(1967)
with µ and λ being the Lam´e constants of elasticity, U the identity tensor, and u the dis-
placement ﬁeld (presumed inﬁnitesimal) of a material point from its original position. The
Galerkin ﬁnite-element approximation (see, for example, Strang and Fix, 1973) transforms the
continuum medium into a discrete mesh and Eq. (11) into a discrete system of linear equations
that govern the displacements of the grid points in the mesh. If φ is a trial function, then one
forms the following equation

Ωφ(∇· σ) dΩ= 0 ,
(1968)
where Ωis the volume of the space over which the integration is carried out.
Using the
divergence theorem, Eq. (12) is converted to

A(n · φσ) dS −

Ω(∇φ · σ) dΩ= 0 ,
(1969)
569

where A is the external surface of the system, and n is the unit normal vector pointed outward.
We can either take the stress to be zero along the surface, or ﬁx the displacement along the
surface by restricting the class of functions used to represent u; hence the above surface integral
is eliminated and will not appear anymore. In Galerkin’s method u is represented by
u =

i
uiφi
where {φi} is a set of basis functions, and the sum is over all the basis functions in the set.
Thus,
σ = λ

i
ui∇φi

U + µ

i
ui∇φi +

i
∇φiui

.
(1970)
Hence, Eq. (11) becomes

Ω

λ

i
(ui · ∇φi)∇φj + µ

i
(ui · ∇φj)∇φi +

i
(∇φi · ∇φj)ui

dΩ= 0 .
(1971)
Note that, since Eq. (11) is self-adjoint, Eq. (16) can also be derived from minimizing the
associated elastic energy H with respect to ui.
The basis {φi} is selected such that only a small number of the basis functions are non-
zero in any particular region of the system. Those basis functions that overlap in any region
are nearest neighbors. Any useful basis can represent a constant exactly; thus, if the basis is
normalized, i.e., if

i
φi = 1
(1972)
then, by taking the gradient of both sides of Eq. (17) one obtains
∇φk = −

i̸=k
∇φi
(1973)
Using Eq. (18) in (16) leads to an alternative form

Ω

i̸=j
{λ∇φj∇φi + µ [∇φi∇φj + (∇φi · ∇φj)U] · (ui −uj)} dΩ= 0 ,
(1974)
which can be written in the compact form

j
Wij · (ui −uj) = 0 ,
(1975)
where the sum is over all the nearest neighbors j of i. The total region of overlap of two nearest-
neighbor basis functions usually consists of one or two elements; one or both basis functions
570

are identically zero outside this region. Hence, the surface integrals in

Ω∇φi∇φjdΩ=

A nφi∇φjdS −

Ωφi∇∇φjdΩ
and

Ω∇φi∇φjdΩ=

A nφj∇φidS −

Ωφj∇∇φidΩ
are both zero, so that
2

Ω∇φi∇φjdΩ= −

Ω(φj∇∇φi + φi∇∇φj)dΩ,
and therefore

Ω∇φj∇φidΩ=

Ω∇φi∇φjdΩ.
(1976)
Thus, with the aid of Eq. (21) we obtain
Wij =

Ω[(λ + µ)∇φi ∇φj + µ(∇φi · ∇φj)U] dΩ.
(1977)
It is then clear that Wij=WT
ij=Wji, and thereby that Eq. (20) can be derived by minimizing
the elastic energy H deﬁned by
H = 1
2

ij
(ui −uj) · Wij · (ui −uj) .
(1978)
Since the sum is over all nearest-neighbor pairs ij, Wij ̸= 0 can be thought of as forming a
bond between i and j, and therefore Eq. (23) describes an elastic network in which the elastic
properties of the bonds are distributed according to a statistical distribution function.
8.4.1 The Born model
To construct the above model on a triangular lattice, which has been used extensively in
the computer simulations, the simplest basis functions which are
φ1 = 1
2 + x −y
√
3 ,
φ2 = 1
2 −x −y
√
3 ,
φ3 = 2y
√
3
are deﬁned on the equilateral triangle {(1/2, 0), (−1/2, 0), (0,
√
3/2)}. With such basis functions
we obtain
Wij = µ[4(1 + νp)RijRji + (1 −3νp)U]
4(1 −νp)
,
(1979)
571

and the associated elastic energy is given by
H = 1 + νp
1 −νp

ij
µ[(ui −uj) · Rij]2 + 1 −3νp
4(1 −νp)

ij
(ui −uj)2 ,
(1980)
where νp is the Poisson’s ratio, µ is the shear modulus, and Rij is the unit vector along the line
from i to j. The standard ﬁnite-diﬀerence discretization on the triangular mesh leads to the
same equation. The ﬁrst term of Eq. (25) is the energy of a network of central-force springs,
i.e., springs which transmit force only in the Rij direction, but do not transmit shear forces,
whereas the second term is a contribution analogous to scalar transport (for example, the
power dissipated in conduction), since (ui −uj)2 represents the magnitude of the displacement
diﬀerence ui −uj. This model may be considered as an analogue of a 3D solid in plane-stress
with holes normal to the x-y plane, or as a 2D solid with the Poisson’s ratio deﬁned as the
negative of ratio of the strain in the y−direction to that in the x−direction, when a stress is
applied in the x−direction but none is applied in the y−direction. Results for a 3D solid in
plane-strain can be generated from those of this model using the transformation ν′
p = νp/(1+νp),
where ν′
p is the Poisson’s ratio for the plain strain (see also Section 7.2).
8.4.2 Shortcomings of the Born model
Equation (25), which is popularly known as the Born model (see Born and Huang), suﬀers
from some pecularities. For example, it is not diﬃcult to show (although at ﬁrst glance it
may not be obvious) that the elastic energy H deﬁned by Eq.
(24) is not invariant with
respect to arbitrary rigid body rotations, a fundamental requirement for any reasonable model
of elastic properties of materials, except in the limit νp = 1/3 which reduces the model to
a network of central-force springs. When the elastic energy of a system is written in terms
of an expansion in the displacement ﬁeld u, its rotational invariance is not obvious. In this
situation, to demonstrate the lack of rotational invariance of the elastic energy, one substitutes
an inﬁnitesimal rotation ω × Ri for the displacement vector ui, where Ri is the position vector
of i.
An arbitrary rotation of the solid should not contribute to its energy, but Eq.
(22)
indicates that, while the contribution of the central-force part would be zero, that of the scalar-
like part would not be, and therefore H is not rotationally invariant.
Moreover, although
materials do exist that have a Poisson’s ratio as high as 1/2 (and can theoretically be as high
as 1 in 2D materials), the model fails to have a strictly positive energy for νp > 1/3 and
therefore violates the thermodynamic requirement that the potential energy be a minimum at
572

zero strain. Another example of discplacements that contribute to the scalar-like portion of the
energy of this model, but not to the central-force portion, arises when a signiﬁcant fraction of
the lattice’s bonds is removed. In such a lattice a site that is connected to only one bond can
have an arbitrary displacement in the direction orthogonal to the direction of the bond without
aﬀecting the central-force part of the elastic energy, as can a site which is connected to only a
set of two collinear bonds.
In his original formulation of this model, Born inserted the scalar-like part of the elastic
energy (25) as a substitute for the many-body, angular and bending terms (see below) that
normally arise in describing the elastic properties of materials, because the expansion of such
scalar two-body terms is much simpler and more convenient than expanding the many-body
terms that they replace. When viewed in this way, the coeﬃcients of the model should be
treated as ﬁtting parameters. Hence, let us rewrite Eq. (25) as
H = 1
2α1

ij
[(ui −uj) · Rij]2 + 1
2α2

ij
(ui −uj)2 ,
(1981)
where α1 and α2 now represent two adjustable parameters (without any regard to their theo-
retical relation to the Poisson’s ratio νp). When introduced in this way, one may use the Born
model for modelling and ﬁtting elastic properties of certain materials, a subject that will be
discussed in Chapter 9.
Interestingly, as shown above, the Born model can also be derived by direct discretization
of Eq. (11). At ﬁrst glance, this may be surprising, since the starting point of the derivation
is a well-known and well-established Eq. (10), which implies a rotationally-invariant elastic
energy for the system. However, a closer inspection of the discretization process reveals the
cause of this apparent contradiction. Let uij = ui −uj. Then, uij has two components, a
longitudinal component uℓ
ij and a transverse one ut
ij. The latter component represents a ﬁrst-
order rotation δθ of Rij, i.e., δθ ≃ut
ij/Rij, where we have used the magnitude of the vectors.
For a pure rotation δθ, the distance rij between i and j should not change, and therefore δrij,
the ﬂuctuations in rij, must vanish in all orders. However, for a purely transverse deviation,
uℓ
ij = 0, ut
ij ̸= 0, and therefore, δrij = (ut
ij)2/(2Rij) ̸= 0, implying that to second-order ut
ij
does not correctly describe the rotation. In eﬀect, what this implies is that the discretization
procedure eliminates certain ﬁrst-order terms that are rotationally invariant, and gives rise to
second-order terms that are not. Alexander (1998) provided a rather detailed discussion of this
573

point.
Finally, note that, so long as α2 > 0, the scalar-like term of Eq.
(25) or (26) is the
dominating contributing factor to the elastic energy H. This implies immediately that, although
the Born model is a vector model, it behaves eﬀectively as a scalar model and therefore, for
example, the percolation threshold of the model, at which the elastic moduli vanish or diverge,
is the same as that of scalar percolation models described in Chapters 2-6, and that near the
percolation threshold the elastic moduli of the model follow Eqs. (3) or (5), but with f = µ and
χ = s, where µ and s are the critical exponents that characterize, respectively, the power-law
behavior of a conductor-insulator, and a conductor-superconductor mixtures near pc. That is,
the power-law behavior of the elastic moduli of the Born model is the same as that of the
eﬀective conductivity of the same model. We will return to the Born model in Chapter 9 where
we describe applications of vector percolation models.
8.5 The Central-Force Network
Consider now the limit νp = 1/3, i.e., a network of central-force, or Hookean, springs. Since
the elastic materials that we wish to consider are heterogeneous, the local shear modulus (or
Lam´e constant) µ varies spatially. Thus, writing µ = eijα/4 and taking νp = 1/3 reduce Eq.
(25) to
H = 1
2α

ij
[(ui −uj) · Rij]2eij
(1982)
where α is the central-force constant. We can easily compute the elastic moduli of such net-
works, if no percolation eﬀect is present, i.e., no bond is broken. Consider, as an example, a
uniform triangular network (in which all the eij are equal). Each spring has an unstretched
length ℓ0, and an elastic energy, H =
1
2α(ℓ−ℓ0)2, where ℓis the spring’s length under the
deformation. We consider a pure compressional mode in which each spring is stretched a small
(inﬁnitesimal) amount δ ≡ℓ−ℓ0 away from its equilibrium length ℓ0. The change in the energy
is then given by
∆H = 3
2αδ2 ,
(1983)
where the fractor 3 is due to the fact that the number of bonds in a triangular network is three
times the number of nodes. The network area per node is, S =
√
3
2 ℓ2
0, and therefore the change
574

in the energy density of the network as a result of the deformation is given by
∆V = ∆H
S
=
√
3α
 δ
ℓ0
2
.
(1984)
Because the deformations are uniform, and since the displacements in the y−direction are
independent of those in x−direction, we have, uxx = uyy, and uxy = 0. Therefore,
∆V = 1
2K(uxx + uyy)2 + µ
1
2(uxx −uyy)2 + 2u2
xy

= 2K2
 δ
ℓ0
2
,
(1985)
which, when compared with Eq. (29), yields
K =
√
3
2 α ,
triangular network ,
(1986)
which was already mentioned in Eq. (6). Note that, the ﬁrst equation in (30) is easily obtained
by writing the argument of the summation in Eq. (27) in a general (x, y) coordinate, and
dividing the result by S, the area per node of the network.
Similar calculations can be carried out for determining the shear modulus of the network.
Consider a triangle with a base that is parallel to the lines of this page. If we move the top node
of the triangle by an amount δ in the x−direction (the horizontal direction), then, to ﬁrst order
in δ, the left spring of the triangle is lengthened by 1
2δ, while the right spring is shortened by
the same amount. Thus, to lowest order in δ, the change in the elastic energy of either spring is
1
8αδ2, and since the base spring remains intact, the total energy change is 1
2αδ2, and the change
in the energy density is, (2
√
3)−1α(δ/ℓ0)2.
In the simple shear mode, the y−coordinate of
the nodes and the distance between nodes in the x−direction remain unchanged, and therefore,
uxx = uyy = 0. On the other hand, each successive row of nodes is displaced by δ in the positive
x−direction for each increase
√
3
2 ℓ0 in the y−direction, and thus uxy = 3−1/2δ/ℓ0. Hence, from
the ﬁrst equation of (30), we obtain, ∆V = (2µ/3)(δ/ℓ0)2, and therefore
µe =
√
3
4 α ,
triangular network,
(1987)
also mentioned in Eq. (6). Note that Eqs. (31) and (32) imply that, for a uniform triangular
network, the Poisson’s ratio νp = (Ke −µe)/(Ke + µe) = 1/3.
We can carry out the same type of calculations for the square network. The change in the
elastic energy density ∆V as a result of deformation of a square cell is given by
∆V = 1
2K(uxx + uyy)2 + 1
2µp(uxx −uyy)2 + 2µsu2
xy ,
(1988)
575

where µp and µs are the shear moduli in pure and simple shear, respectively. However, if there
is no restoring force between adjacent network elements, i.e., if the energy does not depend
even implicitly upon the angle between neighboring bonds, then, a square cell and its deformed
conﬁgurations in simple shear have the same energy. That is, their deformation is done at no
cost to the total energy of the system, and therefore the shear moduli µs = 0, even when all
the bonds of the network are connected. A similar reasoning would then yield
K = µp = 1
2α .
(1989)
Since the square network is elastically anisotropic, its POisson’s ratio is not unique and depends
on how it is deﬁned.
Calculations of similar quantities in 3D regular lattices, all of which are elastically anisotropic,
is slightly more complex. The change in the elastic energy density for the cubic family of lattices
is given by
∆V = 1
2C11(uxx + uyy + uzz)2 + C12(uxxuyy + uxxuzz + uyyuzz) + 2C44(u2
xy + u2
xz + u2
yz) . (1990)
If ℓ0 is the initial length of the bonds, then, straightforward calculations indicate, for example,
that
Ke =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
1
3ℓ0
α ,
simple-cubic lattice,
1
√
3ℓ0
α ,
BCC lattice,
2
√
2
√
3ℓ0
α ,
FCC lattice.
(1991)
A simple-cubic lattice does not possess a shear modulus in simple shear. We emphasize that
Eqs. (31), (32), (34) and (36) are valid at zero temperature and when the external stress is
zero (inﬁnitesimally small). Later in this chapter, we will come back to this problem when the
temperature of the system and the stress are both ﬁnite.
8.6 Rigidity Percolation
If, in Eq. (27), the elastic constant eij is distributed according to the distribution (2) or (4),
then one obtains an elastic percolation network (EPN) [when eij is distributed according to the
distrbution (2)] or a superelastic percolation network (SEPN) [when eij is distributed according
to the distribution (4)]. Percolation on such networks of springs is called rigidity percolation,
although percolation in more general elastic networks (see below) has also been referred to as
such.
576

Such networks are of both theoretical and practical interest. In addition to the biological
materials described in Section 8.1, in many engineering problems, structures composed of bars
or beams connected at nodes, which are called trusses, acquire their rigidity mainly from the
tensile and compressive stiﬀness of the beams, and these are central-force type of contributions.
In contrast, those in which angular forces, e.g., covalent bonds at the molecular level, are the
most important are usually referred to as frames.
For example, in the absence of friction
between the particles of a granular packing, which is a reasonable model of unconsolidated
porous materials (such as powders), the mechanical behavior of the packing is similar to those
of rigidity percolation.
It is not diﬃcult to see that rigid systems in which angular forces
dominate their behavior support an applied stress as long as they are simply connected. In
contrast, central-force systems require higher degrees of connectivity, and because of their
importance to granular media, glasses, and gels, they must be carefully studied.
It was established in mid 1980s (Feng and Sen, 1984; Jerauld, 1985) that the bond perco-
lation threshold pB
ce of rigidity percolation is much larger than pB
c , the corresponding threshold
of scalar percolation which also represents the threshold in random resistor networks. The
reason for the diﬀerence is clear: On a central-force percolation network there may be a cluster
of intact springs which, although sample-spanning, is not rigid, i.e., its deformation does not
cost any energy, and hence the deformation does not change the elastic energy of the system.
Because of this phenomenon, it is necessary to precisely deﬁne rigidity of lattices. This is done
in the next section.
8.6.1 Static and dynamic rigidity and ﬂoppiness of networks
Consider, as an example, a square lattice of central-force (Hookean) springs. As shown
in Section 8.5, this lattice has no shear rigidity in the plane (in simple shear), as it can be
sheared without changing the lengths of any bond (i.e., without changing the elastic energy)
and cannot maintain shear stresses. We refer to such a state as ﬂoppy. Moreover, one can
rotate the horizontal edges of all the squares belonging to the same column by one angle and
the vertical edges in each row by another angle, which result in a network conﬁguration that can
also be obtained from the original square lattice by a continuous deformation of its boundaries
which is not a simple shear. On the other hand, if one ﬁxes the external boundary of this
network in any one of the set of allowed shapes, then, the entire network will be completely
577

rigid. Thus, the position of all the interior sites are determined by ﬁxing the boundary. In this
sense, the ﬂoppiness of the square network in central-force percolation is macroscopic, because
its boundaries are ﬂoppy.
It is also important, from a practical view point, to distinguish
between macroscopic and microscopic or local ﬂoppiness, as the latter refers to ﬂoppiness of
a small portion of the system. Thus, although a material may be macroscopically rigid, some
local regions of it can still be ﬂoppy. In this case, some of the microscopic degrees of freedom
remain free and are not determined by the bonding structure, even if the external boundaries
are ﬁxed.
Microscopic ﬂoppiness can appear in a trivial way when the positions of some of the sites
(or atoms at the molecular level) are not completely determined by the bonds that are attached
to them. Therefore, one can introduce the concept of local rigidity, which is the requirement
that the position of every site be ﬁxed completely by the positions of the other sites to which
it is directly bonded. This is then a necessary, but not suﬃcient, requirement for microscopic
rigidity.
Based on such considerations, one may introduce the concept of a geometrically-rigid net-
work as one in which the conﬁguration of the sites cannot be deformed without changing the
lengths of at least some of the bonds. According to this deﬁnition then, the network rigidity
depends only on its bonding structure, i.e., its topology. The question of whether a given net-
work is geometrically rigid is equivalent to asking whether the conﬁguration of a network of N
sites can determine all the 1
2N(N −1) distances rij between the sites. Although this question is
conceptually simple, it is, nevertheless, a quite complex problem to determine the rigidity of a
given network based on geometrical criteria alone. In fact, to our knowledge, there is no known
way of determining the rigidity of 3D network, based solely on geometrical criteria. We refer
to networks that do not satisfy the geometrical rigidity requirements as geometrically ﬂoppy.
For 2D systems exact conditions relating rigidity to connectivity have existed for a long time
(Laman, 1970; Lovasz and Yemini, 1982; Recski, 1992; Hendrickson, 1992). Laman’s theorem
states that,
A random lattice consisting of N Sites and B bonds so that 2N-B=3 is rigid if and only if there
is no subset of the lattice, consisting of n sites connected by b bonds for which the relation
2n-b=3 is violated.
578

This condition is not diﬃcult to understand. Each node of a 2D lattice has two degrees of
freedom, which are two translations, and each bond is a constraint. In the rigidity condition,
2n−b = 3, with the 3 indicating the fact that in 2D a rigid body has 3 degrees of freedom, which
are two translations and one rotation. This constraint can be used for constructing 2D central-
force percolation networks and determining whether they are rigid without solving for the stress
or strain distribution in the network. However, this constraint is restricted to 2D systems, and
its 3D version, 3N −B = 6, is known (Hendrickson, 1992) not to be a general necessary and
suﬃcient condition for rigidity. We will come back to this theorem and its application later in
this chapter.
In practice, however, geometrical criteria are very diﬃcult, if not impossible, to utilize for
checking the rigidity of a material, since such criteria are not directly accessible to experiments.
What can be veriﬁed experimentally, such as vanishing of a shear modulus, or of the velocity of
sound in some directions, and the presence of local vibration modes with no harmonic restoring
forces, are all related to dynamical stability of the material which, in turn, gives rise to the
concept of dynamical ﬂoppiness. In turn, dynamical ﬂoppiness is related to the stability of the
expansion of the energy H({r}) of the material around reference conﬁguration {R}.
Thus, consider a network (material) of n sites (particles) and energy H({r}). The reference
position of the sites is the set {R} = {R1, R2, · · · , RN}. Then expand the energy in the Nd
dimensional space of positions {r} = {r1, r2, · · · , rN} around the reference state. Then, the
problem of rigidity of the material reduces to the question of stability of this expansion. The
simplest way of investigating this stability is by carrying out a linear stability analysis. Hence,
consider a set of displacement deviations {d} = {d1, d2, · · · , dN}, where di represents the
deviation of the site or atom i from its equilibrium position Ri. The harmonic expansion of
the energy is then written as
Hh = [d]D[d] ,
(1992)
where D is the Nd × Nd dynamical matrix for the expansion, which is deﬁned by
Dii = [∇i · ∇i]H({r})|{R} ,
(1993)
Dij = [∇j · ∇i]H({r})|{R} .
(1994)
Both Dii and Dij are d−dimensional matrices.
579

The dynamical matrix D has Nd = N1 + N2 eigenvalues, of which N1 = 1
2d(d + 1) corre-
spond to the rigid-body degrees of freedom of the system, and therefore must vanish because
of the macroscopic translational and rotational invariance of the system. The remaining N2
eigenvalues λα are the force constants for the internal harmonic eigenmodes {dα} that satisfy,
D[dα] = λα[dα], with [dα] = {dα
1, dα
2, · · · , dα
N}, where dα
i is the d−dimensional vector which
describes the deviations of atom or site i in mode α. If the equilibrium state {R} is dynamically
stable, all the force constants must be positive, λα > 0, for all values of α. For geometrically
ﬂoppy networks there are restrictions on the dynamical matrix D that may reduce its rank and
cause some of its eigenvalues to vanish. Since such networks have free degrees of freedom, it is
natural to assume that there are also free eigenmodes {dβ} corresponding to the free degrees
of freedom. There are no restoring forces for such free modes, and therefore λβ = 0 for all
free modes β. This implies immediately that the equilibrium reference conﬁguration {R} of
ﬂoppy networks is not stable with respect to such free eigenmodes. In this case one has large
ﬂuctuations and anharmonic eﬀects become important, some of which were discussed in Section
6.8.1.
Having deﬁned precisely static and dynamical rigidity and ﬂoppiness of elastic networks, we
can now resume our discussion of the properties of rigidity percolation.
8.6.2 The correlation length of rigidity percolation
We already mentioned that for rigidity percolation a correlation length ξe is deﬁned that,
similar to the correlation length ξp of scalar percolation, diverges as pce is approached:
ξe ∼(p −pce)−νe .
(1995)
Early computer simulations of 2D rigidity percolation (Sahimi and Goddard, 1985; Lemieux et
al., 1985, Arbabi and Sahimi, 1988a) yielded, νe ≃1.1 for bond percolation. Moreover, these
simulations, based on the ﬁnite-size scaling analysis (see Section 8.3), indicated that for rigidity
percolation on the triangular network one has, f/νe ≃1.45, an interesting result due to the
fact that it diﬀered from the critical exponent µ of the eﬀective conductivity of percolation
networks for which, µ/ν ≃0.973 (see Table 2.3). These studies did not hint at the possibility
of having signiﬁcant corrections-to-scaling [see Section 8.2 and Eq. (7)]. However, Roux and
Hansen (1988) and Hansen and Roux (1988, 1989) used a transfer-matrix method, similar to
what was described in Chapter 5 (see Section 5.14.2; see also Section 8.12) for computing
580

the eﬀective conductivity, and studied bond percolation on the triangular network with central
forces. They showed that the location of the percolation threshold pce and the scaling properties
of the central-force model are extremely sensitive to whether one accounts for the efect of
the correction-to-scaling. They estimated that for the triangular network, pB
ce ≃0.642 and
f/νe ≃3.0. Although their estimate of pB
ce is only 1.2% less than the earlier estimates, it
apparently causes a dramatic shift in the value of f/νe from 1.45 to 3.0. Moreover, it appears
that while the corrections-to-scaling are large at pB
ce ≃0.642, they are practically non-existent
at p ≃0.65, which is in agreement with the ﬁndings of the early simulations and explains why
a much lower value of f/νe had been found by these simulations. It is thus clear that accurate
estimation of the critical exponents of rigidity percolation requires very accurate estimates of
the percolation thresholds, and also taking into account the eﬀect of corrections-to-scaling. We
now discuss these aspects of the problem.
8.6.3 The force distribution
A fruitful way of investigating an EPN is (Sahimi and Arbabi, 1989) by studying its force
distribution (FD) - the distribution of the forces that the intact (uncut) bonds of the network
suﬀer. In order to calculate the FD, one imposes a given boundary condition on the network
and determines the nodal displacements ui from which the total force Fi, exerted on a bond
i, and thus its distribution, are calculated. Of particular interest are the moments of the FD
deﬁned by
M(q) =

i
nFiF q
i
,
(1996)
where nFi is the number of bonds that suﬀer a force with magnitude Fi. It should be clear
to the reader that the FD for EPNs is the analogue of the distribution of currents in random
resistor networks described and studied in Chapter 5 (see SEction 5.16). In EPNs near pce, the
moments M(q) follow the power law,
M(q) ∼(p −pce)τ(q) ∼ξ−τ(q)/νe
e
,
(1997)
where, similar to the exponents that characterize the moments of the current distribution in
random resistor networks, all the τ(q) are distinct (Sahimi and Arbabi, 1989). For length scales
L ≪ξe one should replace ξe in Eq. (42) by L, and therefore
M(q) ∼L−˜τ(q) ,
(1998)
581

where ˜τ = τ/νe. One includes only non-zero values of Fi in Eq. (31), and therefore M(0) is
simply the total number of bonds that suﬀer a non-zero force, i.e., the total number of bonds in
the backbone of the EPN, and hence −˜τ(0) is simply the fractal dimension De
bb of the backbone
of the EPN, which is not necessarily the same as Dbb, the backbone of scalar percolation or
random resistor networks. On the other hand, M(1) is the average force that a bond suﬀers,
and M(2) is proportional (and, in some cases, is exactly equal) to the elastic moduli of the
network and hence, τ(2) = f. Therefore, each moment of the FD provides some insight into
the properties of EPNs (or SEPNs).
8.6.4 Determination of the percolation threshold
The macroscopic ﬂoppiness of the square network in central-force models can be extended
to any d−dimensional cubic network. The ﬂoppiness also implies that, for a d−dimensional
simple-cubic network one has, pB
ce = pS
ce = 1, where pS
ce is the site percolation threshold of the
system, whereas for scalar percolation in the square network pS
c ≃0.5928 and pB
c = 1/2, and
for the simple-cubic network pS
c ≃0.3116 and pB
c ≃0.2488 (see Tables 2.1 and 2.2). Therefore,
a meaningful study of rigidity percolation is restricted to certain lattices, e.g., the triangular
and BCC networks, which are regular lattices, and also random lattices discussed below. Early
simulations of rigidity percolation on the triangular network (Feng and Sen, 1984; Jerauld,
1985; Sahimi and Goddard, 1985) indicated that, pB
ce ≃0.65, as compared with pB
c = 0.347.
Since it appears that accurate estimation of the critical exponents that characterize various
properties of rigidity percolation near pce depends sensitively on precise estimates of pce itself,
the important question is how to estimate pce with high precision. There are currently two
methods for precise estimation of pce, one of which is applicable to both 2D and 3D networks,
while the second one can be utilized only for 2D systems. Moreover, mean-ﬁeld like arguments
and eﬀective-medium approximations to be described below, can also provide estimates of the
percolation thresholds, although such estimates are not accurate enough for use in ﬁnite-size
scaling analyses of critical behavior of central-force networks near pce.
8.6.4.1 Moments of the force distribution
The ﬁrst method of obtaining precise estimates of pce is based on the moments of the FD.
Arbabi and Sahimi (1993) proposed that if, in a network of linear size L with a fraction p of
intact springs, one calculates the ratio r = M(2)/M(1) for various values of L and p, where
582

M(1) and M(2) are the ﬁrst two moments of the FD distribution, then at the true value of pce a
plot of ln r versus ln L should be a straight line since, if one writes down an equation similar to
(7) for the moments M(q), then, at the true value of pce the contributions of the corrections-to-
scaling to both moments should be of the same order of magnitude and would therefore cancel
one another. In principle, this should be ttue for any ratio, r = M(q)/M(q −1). However, for
q > 2, the moments of the FD are subject to large uncertainties. This idea was tested (Arbabi
and Sahimi, 1993) on the triangular network with modest network sizes, L = 25, 35, 45 and 55,
and a few values of p, ranging from 0.636 to 0.65. It was found that a plot of lnr versus ln L
is a straight line only if 0.640 < p < 0.642; see Figure 8.1. Thus, pB
ce is estimated to be
pB
ce ≃0.641 ± 0.001 ,
triangular lattice ,
(1999)
in excellent agreement with the estimate of Roux and Hansen mentioned above. The same
method was also used (Arbabi and Sahimi, 1993) for estimating the site percolation threshold
pS
ce of the central-force triangular network with the result being
pS
ce ≃0.713 ± 0.002 ,
triangular lattice .
(2000)
A BCC lattice of central-force springs is also rigid with respect to a transverse shear, and
also a volume change, and therefore it should possess a well-deﬁned pce < 1. Thus, the moment
method was also used to study bond percolation on the BCC lattice with central forces (Arbabi
and Sahimi, 1993). As in the case of the triangular lattice, M(1) and M(2) were calculated for
various network sizes L in the range, 0.72 ≤p ≤0.75. It was found that a plot of ln[M(2)/M(1)]
versus ln L for various values of p would produce a straight line if pB
ce ≃0.737, but for not for
p < 0.735 or p > 0.739. Therefore,
pB
ce ≃0.737 ± 0.002 ,
BCC lattice ,
(2001)
much larger than pB
c ≃0.1795 for scalar bond percolation on the BCC network (see Table 2.2).
Note that, with pure elongational shear along the cubic axis, the BCC lattice would have no
restoring elastic constant.
8.6.4.2 The pebble game
Estimating the rigidity percolation thresholds by the moments of its FD is a general method
which is applicable to any lattice of any dimensionality. However, for 2D lattices, Laman’s the-
583

orem described above can be fruitfully used for estimating the percolation threshold of central-
force networks. This theorem was ﬁrst used by Prunet and Blanc (1986) and Wang (1988) to
count the number of rigid animals, i.e., large rigid percolation clusters below pce with radii that
are larger than the rigidity correlation length ξe (see also Chapter 9 for application of lattice
animals to modelling of branched polymers). Laman’s theorem was also used by Moukarzel and
Duxbury (1995) and Jacobs and Thorpe (1995, 1996) for determining the percolation thresh-
old of 2D central-force, topologically-random lattices. For example (Moukarzel and Duxbury,
1995), for a given p, the probability that a site is occupied, one ﬁnds the conﬁguration of the
cluster of occupied sites and from it the conﬁguration of the cluster of occupied (uncut) bonds.
One starts with an empty lattice and adds the bonds one by one at a time. Each rigid cluster
is a body with 3 degrees of freedom, so that one must generalize (Moukarzel and Duxbury,
1995) the constraint 2n −b = 3 of the original lattice to 3nb −b = 3, where nb is the number
of bodies or rigid clusters in a conﬁguration. For example, Figure 8.2 shows a conﬁguration
with two bodies and three bars. The algorithm can be made very eﬃcient by the realization
(Hendrickson, 1992) that one can determine whether a bond (or bar) is redundant with respect
to the bonds that are already in the lattice. If the bonds are central-force (Hookean) springs,
a redundant bond violates 3nb −b = 3, leading to internal stresses in the lattice. Thus, if
a redundant spring is added to a cluster of bonds that is already rigid (that is, it satisﬁes
3nb −b = 3), the algorithm identiﬁes the bonds that become internally stressed when the extra
spring is added, in which case the bonds are given the same label as that of the cluster. In this
way one determines whether a given central-force percolation network is rigid.
Jacobs and Thorpe (1995) used a somewhat diﬀerent algorithm to implement Laman’s
theorem, calling it a pebble game. A free pebble is one that is on a site, while an anchored one
covers a bond. A free pebble represents a single motion that a site can execute. If two additional
free pebbles are found at a diﬀerent site, then the distance between these sites is not ﬁxed. If
we place a bond between the two sites, it will constrain their distance of separation. This
independent constraint is recorded by anchoring one of the 4 free pebbles to the bond, which
must always remain covered. In this way, one constructs an eﬃcient algoritms for determining
whether a cluster of Hooke’s springs is rigid.
Thus, the pebble game for rigidity percolation is as follows. One starts with a network
of n sites. Nearest-neighbor bonds are randomly selected and tested. The pebbles are then
584

shuﬄed around the network in order to free two pebbles at each site at the ends of the test
bonds. In the shuﬄing, an anchored pebble can be released from covering a bond by anchoring
a neighboring free pebble to that bond. For example, Figure 8.3 shows an example of how
pebbles are shuﬄed. It is always possible to free three pebbles, because they correspond to the
rigid body motion of that bond. A redundant bond is identiﬁed when the search for the fourth
pebble results in a closed loop back to the sites at the ends of the test bond, indicating that
the distance between the incident sites is already ﬁxed, and the redundant bond is not covered.
When a redundant bond is found, the set of sites searched in the failed trial to free the fourth
pebble deﬁnes an overconstrained region. If a bond is redundant, then the sites are mutually
rigid. A systematic search is then undertaken for mapping out all rigid clusters after building
the network. Figure 8.4 shows a section of a large network after applying the pebble game.
An important aspect of this method is that it should be used with random lattices which
are called (Jacobs and Thorpe, 1995) generic lattices. These are lattices of a given topology but
with no special symmetry. For example, one can take a regular lattice and randomly displace
each site’s location by a small amount, thereby eliminating the presence of connected collinear
and parallel bonds, such as those that are in the triangular lattice. For a generic network
built on the triangular lattice, the bond percolation threshold was estimated to be (Jacobs and
Thorpe, 1995)
pB
ce ≃0.6602 ± 0.0003 ,
(2002)
which is somewhat larger than that of the triangular network given by (44). The advantage
of this method is that it allows one to use huge lattice in the simulations. Lattices as large as
1000 × 1000 were used by Moukarzel and Duxbury (1995) and Jacobs and Thorpe (1995) for
investigating percolation properties of central-force networks. The disadvantage of this method
is that it is restricted to 2D lattices, whereas most practical applications are concerned with
3D systems.
8.6.4.3 Constraint-counting method
The percolation threshold of central-force networks can also be estimated by a constraint-
counting argument (Feng et al., 1985). Suppose that p is the fraction of uncut springs. When p
is small, the central-force network consists of disconnected ﬂoppy regions, and hence has many
zero-frequency modes, the number of which is given by the degrees of freedom Nf = Nd minus
585

the number of constraints Nc = ZNp/2, where N is the number of nodes of the lattice, and Z
is its coordination number. Thus, the fraction f0 of zero-frequency modes is given by
f0 = Nd −ZNp/2
Nd
= 1 −Zp
2d ,
(2003)
which vanishes at p = pB
ce and therefore
pB
ce = 2d
Z .
(2004)
As we show shortly, Eq. (49) is idential with the bond percolation threshold that the eﬀective-
medium approximation predicts for the central-force networks. The constraint-counting method
has also been used for determining the percolation threshold of a variety of other EPNs
(Schwartz et al., 1985). Note, however, that if the same constraint-counting arguments are
used for estimating the site percolation threshold of central-force networks (Thorpe and Gar-
boczi, 1987), it results again in Eq. (49), i.e., the same as the bond percolation threshold, and
thus in this sense the constraint-counting arguments fail.
Equation (49) predicts that for the triangular network pB
ce = 2/3 ≃0.666, which should be
compared with the numerical estimate given by (44), a 3.7% diﬀerence. It predicts, for the BCC
lattice, pB
ce = 3/4 = 0.75, which should be compared with the numerical estimate given by (46),
a 1.7% diﬀerence. Thus, as far as predicting the percolation threshold of central-force networks
is concerned, unlike scalar percolation (e.g., resistor networks), the performance of mean-ﬁeld-
like arguments, such as the constraint-counting method, improves as the dimensionality of the
system increases.
8.6.5 Mapping between rigidity percolation and resistor networks
Let us point out that there is one central-force model with a percolation threshold which is
the same as that of scalar percolation. Roux and Hansen (1987) proposed a triangular lattice
model in which the bonds in one preferred direction are inﬁnitely rigid.
In the other two
directions (that make +60◦and −60◦angles with the preferred direction), a fraction p of the
bonds, selected at random, are also inﬁnitely rigid, while the rest are Hookean springs with a
ﬁnite strength. Roux and Hansen showed that the bond percolation threshold of this lattice
at which the elastic moduli diverge is exactly equal to bond percolation threshold of a square
lattice in scalar percolation, i.e., pB
ce = 1/2, and, moreover, the exponent χ deﬁned by Eq. (4)
586

is χ = s ≃1.3, where s is the exponent that characterizes the power-law divergence of the
eﬀective conductivity of a conductor-superconductor network at pc.
The model of Roux and Hansen is, however, pathological. In general, the rigidity percolation
thresholds are not the same as those of the scalar percolation thresholds, and therefore an
interesting question is whether central-force percolation networks can be mapped onto random
percolation networks or, more speciﬁcally, random resistor networks. This is in fact possible.
Tang and Thorpe (1987,1988) demonstrated how this mapping can be achieved by showing
that, if a central-force network with zero natural length is stretched onto a frame, then there is
an exact mapping onto the random resistor network. More speciﬁcally, their model is as follows.
On a lattice background with lattice spacing ℓ, one places between the nearest-neighbor sites
Hookean springs with natural length ℓ0 with ℓ> ℓ0. The area of the lattice is held ﬁxed either
by a frame or by imposing periodic boundary conditions. At equilibrium, no net force is exerted
on any site, but the springs around any site can be stretched, which can be considered as an
internal strain. The limit ℓ0 = 0 corresponds to a random resistor network, while ℓ0 = ℓis the
usual rigidity percolation. Since the natural length of the springs is not the same as that of
the lattice spacing, such networks are under tension, with the tension being supplied by the
frame. Varying η = ℓ0/ℓresults in networks with percolation thresholds that vary continuously
between pc (corresponding to η = 0) and pce (corresponding to η = 1). However, except for the
limiting cases of η = 0 and 1, the elastic properties of these networks behave non-linearly, and
thus are diﬀerent from both random resistor and central-force networks.
8.6.6 Nature of phase transition in rigidity percolation
Equations (42) and (43) are valid if the percolation transition at pce is continuous and
second-order. In fact, before there was any discussion as to whether the rigidity percolation
represents a second-order transition, it was assumed for many years that, in analogy with
scalar percolation at pc, the percolation transition at pce is also second-order and continuous.
Therefore, based on this assumption, many well-known techniques for scalar percolation, such
as the ﬁnite-size scaling method described above, were utilized for studying the power-law and
scaling behavior of the topological properties of rigidity percolation clusters.
For example,
Lemieux et al. (1985) and Day et al. (1986) used a transfer-matrix approach (see Section
8.12) to study percolation properties of central-force percolation networks. Wang and Harris
587

(1985,1988), Marshall and Harris (1988), and Wang et al. (1992) used the series expansion
method described in Chapters 5 (see Section 5.15.3) to estimate the exponents βe and νe of
rigidity percolation, where βe is the analogue of the exponent β for scalar percolation [see Eqs.
(2.29) and (2.30)], and several other exponents associated with the topology of central-force
percolation clusters.
However, rigidity percolation has proven to be a far more complex problem than previously
thought. As discussed earlier in this chapter, in a d-dimensional central-force lattice, no element
of the structure can be moved in any direction with respect to the remaining lattice, and it
cannot also be rotated along 1
2d(d −1) independent axes (Obukhov, 1995), implying that there
are 1
2d(d + 1) constraints on the possible motion of each element of the rigid lattice. Thus,
there are long-range, non-decaying correlations in rigidity percolation that are absent in ran-
dom scalar percolation. The existence of such long-range correlations immediately provides an
important hint about the nature of phase transition in the sample-spanning rigid cluster at pce:
As discussed in Chapter 2 (see Section 2.12.2), long-range, non-decaying correlations may give
rise to compact clusters and ﬁrst-order phase transitions (Sahimi and Mukhopadhyay, 1996;
Knackstedt et al., 2000), implying that rigidity percolation may represent a ﬁrst-order phase
transition. Using a mean-ﬁeld theory, Obukhov (1995) argued that this is indeed the case,
although the speciﬁc model that he claimed to be using in his analysis is not completely clear
to us. Moukarzel et al. (1997b), using large-scale simulations, provided numerical evidence
in support of Obukhov’s argument. Moreover, by solving the problem on the Bethe lattices
(Moukarzel et al., 1997a), which corresponds to the mean-ﬁeld limit of percolation at its upper
critical dimension (see Chapters 2 and 5), they found that, at least in some cases, the percola-
tion transition in the sample-spanning rigid cluster at pce is ﬁrst-order. They also found that
some variations of the problem are similar to bootstrap percolation described and discussed
in Chapter 2 (see Section 2.12.2). As mentioned there, Sahimi and Ray (1991) had already
speculated that bootstrap percolation might be relevant to describing mechanical properties of
disordered lattices.
If it is true that rigidity percolation represents a ﬁrst-order phase transition, then how can
one interpret the power-law properties of the elastic moduli of central-force percolation net-
works, Eqs. (3) and (5), which are characteristics of second-order phase transitions? Although
the sample-spanning central-force cluster may be compact (and, hence, the percolation tran-
588

sition in the cluster may be ﬁrst-order), its backbone is not (Moukarzel et al., 1997b). The
backbone is in fact a fractal object with a well-deﬁned fractal dimension De
bb, which Moukarzel
et al. (1997b) estimated it to be about 1.78 for 2D central-force clusters, larger than that of
scalar percolation, Dbb ≃1.64 (see Table 2.3). Because of this fractality, the rigidity percolation
transition, deﬁned as the point at which the elastic moduli vanish, is also second-order and thus
the critical exponents f and χ, deﬁned by Eqs. (3) and (5), are well-deﬁned and non-trivial.
On the other hand, Jacobs and Thorpe (1995,1996) disputed the notion that the percolation
transition in the sample-spanning central-force cluster is ﬁrst order. They calculated the critical
exponents νe and βe, and the fractal dimensions De
f and De
bb, where De
f is the analogue of the
fractal dimension Df of the sample-spanning scalar cluster at the percolation threshold. Their
estimates for 2D networks are, νe ≃1.21, βe ≃0.175, De
f ≃1.86, relatively close to (but
still distinct from) those of scalar percolation (see Table 2.3), and De
bb ≃1.8, consistent with
the estimate of Moukarzel et al. (1997b), but much larger than that of scalar percolation,
De
bb ≃1.64. The numerical results of Jacobs and Thorpe (1996) also indicated that the critical
exponents are the same for both bond and site rigidity percolation, consistent with the result
of Knackstedt and Sahimi (1992) who reached the same conclusion using a position-space
renormalization group method (see Section 8.11.9). For the most recent discussion of this issue
see Moukarzel and Duxbury (1999).
Let us point out that all the results of Jacobs and Thorpe, and of Moukarzel, Duxbury, and
Leath, were obtained using random lattices. It remains an open question whether the same
conclusions are true about regular lattices, such as the triangular and BCC lattices.
8.6.7 Scaling properties of the elastic moduli
The moments M(q) of the force distribution (FD) for q = 0 −4 at pB
ce ≃0.642, the rigidity
bond percolation threshold of the triangular network, were calculated by Hansen and Roux
(1989), Sahimi and Arbabi (1989), and Arbabi and Sahimi( 1993). Figure 8.5, taken from
Sahimi and Arbabi (1989), presents the results, while in Table 8.1 we present the numerical
estimate of ˜τ(q). In particular, −˜τ(0) ≃1.62 is in agreement with the fractal dimension of the
backbone of 2D scalar percolation (Rintoul and Nakanishi, 1992; Sheppard et al., 1999), but
lower than De
bb ≃1.78 for central-force random lattices. Note also that
˜τ(2) = f
νe
≃2.95 ,
(2005)
589

and that for q ≥2
˜τ(q) = ˜τ(q −1) + 2 ,
(2006)
that is, there is a constant gap between ˜τ(q −1) and ˜τ(q). We emphasize the importance of
the correction-to-scaling terms h1(L) and h2(L) [see Eq. (6)], especially when L is relatively
small. If such corrections are neglected, then one obtains ˜τ(2) = f/νe ≃2.2, instead of 2.95. It
is only by including such correction terms that one can obtain accurate and reliable estimates
of the exponents.
Table 8.1
Estimates of the critical exponents ˆτ(q) of the moments of the force distribution in rigidity
bond percolation on the triangular network at pB
ce ≃0.641. Note that for random lattices,
ˆτ(0) ≃−1.78.
q
0
1
2
3
4
ˆτ(q)
−1.62 ± 0.06
0.86 ± 0.05
2.95 ± 0.25
4.94 ± 0.45
7.05 ± 0.75
However, the scaling exponent of the elastic moduli of rigidity site percolation on the tri-
angular lattice appear to be quite diﬀerent from that of bond percolation (Arbabi and Sahimi,
1993):
f
νe
≃1.12 ± 0.05 ,
(2007)
which is much smaller than (50) for bond percolation. This diﬀerence indicates that the scaling
properties of elastic moduli of central-force models in site and bond percolation on the triangular
network may belong to two diﬀerent universality classes.
The FD and the scaling properties of its moments have also been calculated for rigidity
bond percolation on the BCC lattice. For this lattice the second moment M(2) of FD is exactly
equal to the corresponding elastic modulus. The estimated exponents are given in Table 8.2
which indicate that
f ≃2.1 ± 0.2 .
(2008)
Note that estimates of ˜τ(q) given in Table 8.2 satisfy the scaling relation (51).
Moreover,
the estimate f ≃2.1 is close to the critical exponent of conductivity of 3D random percolation
590

networks, µ ≃2.00±0.04 (Gingold and Lobb, 1990; see Table 2.3). However, we believe that the
apparent closeness of these two exponents is coincidental, because, excepts for some pathological
cases, there is no reason to believe that there is a fundamental physical basis for the equality
of the critical exponent a of scalar property - the eﬀective conductivity - and that of the elastic
moduli - a vector property. On the other hand, as Table 8.2 indicates, −˜τ(0) = De
bb ≃2.5,
which is essentially equal to the fractal dimension Df of the sample-spanning scalar percolation
cluser at pc (see Table 2.3). The reason may be that the bond percolation threshold pB
ce of the
BCC network is so much larger than pB
c , the corresponding percolation threshold of the scalar
model, that the backbone of the elastic network is very similar to the sample-spanning cluster
in the scalar problem. This is, however, speculation and, at the time of writing this book,
remained to be tested further.
Table 8.2
Estimates of the critical exponents ˆτ(q) of the moments of the force distribution in rigidity
percolation on the BCC network at pB
ce ≃0.737.
q
0
1
2
3
4
ˆτ(q)
−2.5 ± 0.3
1.0 ± 0.1
2.1 ± 0.1
3.97 ± 0.20
5.91 ± 0.35
Superelastic percolation networks with central forces, ﬁrst introduced by Sahimi and God-
dard (1985), have also been studied extensively (Roux and Hansen, 1988; Hansen and Roux,
1988,1989; Burton and Lambert, 1988; Wang and Harris, 1988; Arbabi and Sahimi, 1990c,1993)
by various techniques. For bond percolation on a triangular network the most accurate current
estimate of the exponent χ, deﬁned by Eq. (5), is (Arbabi and Sahimi, 1993)
χ
νe
≃0.92 ± 0.02 ,
(2009)
while for site percolation on the same network
χ
νe
≃1.05 ± 0.03 ,
(2010)
591

which does not agree with that of bond percolation. This again may indicate that the critical
exponents of the elastic moduli in rigidity bond and site percolation in 2D may belong to two
diﬀerent universality classes. For rigidity bond percolation on a BCC network the estimate is
(Arbabi and Sahimi, 1993)
χ
νe
≃0.80 ± 0.03 .
(2011)
Later in this chapter we will compare these results with those of EPNs and SEPNs with stretch-
ing and bond-bending forces, which are more realistic models of disordered solids.
8.7 Green Function Formulation and Perturbation Expansion
We now formulate the problem of calculating the eﬀective elastic moduli of the Born model
(which, in the limit νp →1/3, reduces to rigidity percolation) in terms of an appropriate Green
function, and develop a perturbation expansion for the problem, based on which an eﬀective-
medium approximation (EMA) is derived. The Green function formulation of the problem
and the derivation of the perturbation expansion are generalizations of those for diﬀusion and
conduction developed by Sahimi et al. (1983a), which was described and discussed in Chapters
5 and 6. In what follows we use the same notations that we utilized in Chapters 5 and 6 in
order to make transparent the similarities between the present formulation and those described
in Chapters 5 and 6.
We introduce an eﬀective-medium as a lattice in which the Wij are replaced with We
ij,
where superscript e denotes the value of the quantity in the eﬀective-medium. Thus, Eq. (20)
becomes

j
We
ij · (ue
j −ue
i) = 0 ,
(2012)
where ue
i is the displacement of site i in the eﬀective-medium. Subtraction of Eq. (57) from
(20) and some rearrangements yield

j
We
ij · [(uj −ue
j) −(ui −ue
i)] = −

j
∆ij · (uj −ui) ,
(2013)
where ∆ij = Wij −We
ij. A vector Green function is now introduced by

We
ij · (Gjm −Gim) = −δiju ,
(2014)
with the aid of which the exact but implicit solution of Eq. (20) is obtained:
ui = ue
i +

k

j
Gij · ∆jk · (uj −uk) .
(2015)
592

Because the elastic moduli appear as the coeﬃcients of uij= ui−uj, it is more convenient to
work with uij. We thus obtain
uij = ue
ij +

l

k
(Gik −Gjk) · ∆lk · ulk .
(2016)
Since uij = −uji, and ∆lk = ∆kl, we can rewrite Eq. (61) in a more compact form
uij = ue
ij +

l

k
γijkl · ∆lk · ulk ,
(2017)
where γijkl =(Gil−Gjl)−(Gik−Gjk).
8.7.1 Eﬀective-medium approximation
The EMA is obtained by taking all the ∆lk = 0, except for a ﬁnite set of bonds for which
this quantity is not zero. If this set contains only one bond mk for which ∆mk ̸= 0, then Eq.
(62) becomes
umk = (U −γmkmk · ∆mk)−1 · ue
mk .
(2018)
In the eﬀective-medium approach one demands that ⟨umk⟩= ue
mk, where the averaging is taken
with respect to the statistical distribution of the heterogeneities. The EMA equation is ﬁnally
obtained:
⟨(U −γmkmk · ∆mk)−1⟩= U
(2019)
It remains to specify the Green functions Gij which depend on the topology of the lattice. This
can be done most conveniently by discrete Fourier transformation technique, along the lines
described in Chapter 6 (see Section 6.1.4). We do not give the details of the computations,
as they are entirely similar to what was discussed there. We merely note that, because the
Green functions depend only on distance and orientation, we must have Gjm = G(j −m),
and We
jm = We(j −m). Moreover, because of translational invariance, m may be set to zero
without loss of generality.
8.7.2 The Born model
Consider ﬁrst the Born model on a d−dimensional simple-cubic lattice. For the sake of
simplicity we rewrite Eq. (24) as
Wij = a1RijRij + a2U .
(2020)
593

To derive the EMA we must only compute γ = γ0k0k · W0k. In general, one can show that
γ0k0k = −
2
(2π)d
 π
−π
 π
−π
 π
−π [1 −cos(k · θ)] ˆG(θ)dθ ,
(2021)
where ˆG(θ) is the Fourier transform of the Green function.
With θ = (θ1, · · · , θd), for a
d−dimensional cubic lattice one has
2 ˆG(θ) =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
[da2 + a1(1 −cos θ1)]−1
0
· · ·
0
0
[da2 + a1(1 −cos θ2)]−1
· · ·
0
·
·
·
·
0
0
· · ·
[da2 + a1(1 −cos θd)]−1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
.
(2022)
Without loss of generality, k may be taken to be (1, 0, · · · , 0)T, as all the bonds are equivalent.
Thus, we only need γ0k0k which requires only the two quantities,
γ11 = −
2
(2π)d

· · ·
 (a1 + a2)(1 −cos θ1)
da2 + a1(1 −cos θ1) dθ1 = −

1 + a2
a1
 ⎡
⎣1 −
d
$
d(d + 2a1/a2)
⎤
⎦, (2023)
and
γkk = −
2
(2π)d

· · ·

a2(1 −cos θ1)
da2 + a1(1 −cos θk)dθ1dθk = −
1
$
d(d + 2a1/a2)
,
(2024)
where both integrals are over the ﬁrst Brillouin zone, (−π, π). Therefore, if the eﬀective values
of a1 and a2 are, respectively, a1e and a2e, then, with a simple percolation distribution, ψ(x) =
(1 −p)δ+(0) + pδ(x −ai) (i = 1 and 2), and ce = ae1/ae2, one obtains
a2e(1 + 1/ce)
a2(1 + 1/c) = p + γ11
1 + γ11
,
(2025)
a2e
a2
= p + γ22
1 + γ22
,
(2026)
where c = a1/a2. It is then straightforward to show that the EMA, Eq. (64), predicts that the
elastic moduli vanish at pce = 1/d = 2/Z, the same as in scalar transport derived in Chapter 5
(see Section 5.6.1). This is not surprising because, as discussed in Section 8.4.2, the presence
of the scalar-like contribution to the elastic energy (25) ensures that the power-law behavior of
the elastic moduli of the Born model near pce is the same as that of the eﬀective conductivity
near pc, and that the percolation threshold of the system is pc not pce. Moreover, if we set
a2 = 0 (i.e., the Poisson’s ratio νp = 1/3), we ﬁnd that the EMA predicts the exact, albeit
594

trivial, result that removal of any springs at all will cause a d−dimensional cubic lattice of
central-force springs to have a zero eﬀective spring constant, i.e., the percolation threshold of
the lattice is unity.
As another example, consider the Born model on the triangular lattice. In this case, there
are three distinct Wij which correspond to three directions along three vectors with components
(1, 0), (1/2,
√
3/2), and (−1/2,
√
3/2), which can, however, be transformed into one another
upon coordinate rotation. Moreover,
ˆG(θ) =
⎛
⎜
⎝
S11
−S12
−S12
S22
⎞
⎟
⎠,
(2027)
where
S11 = (5 −νp) −(1 −3νp) cos2 θ1 −4 cos θ1 cos θ2 ,
(2028)
S22 = (7 −νp) −(5 + νp) cos2 θ1 −2(1 −νp) cos θ1 cos θ2 ,
(2029)
S12 =
√
3(1 + νp) sin θ1 sin θ2 .
(2030)
The bond-bond Green function γ is then given by
γ = −
2
(2π)2
 π
−π
 π
−π 2(1 −cos2 θ1) ˆG(θ)dθ .
(2031)
Moreover, it can be shown that for the triangular lattice, γ12 = γ21 = 0, and therefore one needs
only to compute γ11 and γ22. In the limit νp = −1 one recovers the random resistor network
model with a percolation threshold at pc = 2/Z, which is also the percolation threshold of the
Born model (within the EMA), while νp = 1/3 reduces Eq. (64) to an EMA for the elastic
moduli of the triangular network with central-force springs.
8.7.3 Rigidity percolation
If only central forces are present, then a2 = 0 (νp = 1/3), and Wij = a1RijRij. Therefore,
in this case
γkk = −
2
(2π)d

· · ·
 
l
[1 −cos(l · θ)] ll
−1
· [1 −cos(k · θ)kk] dθ .
(2032)
This equation can be integrated case by case for a variety of Bravais lattices to yield the
necessary Green functions for constructing the EMA. Since only γ11 is needed for constructing
595

the EMA, it is not diﬃcult to show that γ11 = −2d/Z, and therefore for a d−dimensional
network of coordination number Z, the eﬀective force constant αe is given by
 ∞
0
αe −α
α + αe(Z/2d −1)ψ(α)dα = 0 ,
(2033)
which is very similar to Eq. (5.57) for the eﬀective conductivity of random resistor networks.
Here, ψ(α) is the probability density function of the force constant α. Note that, as pointed
out at the beginning of this section, αeij may be interpreted as the force constant of the bond
ij, so that any statistical distribution of eij may be converted to one for α. From the eﬀective
force constant αe, one calculates the elastic moduli of the network. For example, the eﬀective
shear modulus of the triangular network is given by Eq. (32), in which α is replaced by the
eﬀective αe.
To test the accuracy of Eq. (78), we examine its predictions in certain well-understood
limits. For example, it is not diﬃcult to see that with a percolation-type distribution, ψ(α) =
(1 −p)δ+(0) + pδ(α −α1), Eq. (78) predicts a bond percolation pB
ce that is given by Eq. (49),
which is also the prediction of constraint-counting method. According to Eq. (59), the average
coordination number ⟨Z⟩of a d−dimensional central-force network at the rigidity percolation
threshold pce is given by, ⟨Z⟩= pB
ceZ = 2d, independent (of course approximately) of the
coordination number of the network itself. This implies that, for a network of central-force
springs to be rigid, one must have
Z > 2d ,
macroscopic rigidity ,
(2034)
hence explaining why study of central-force percolation on the simple-cubic lattices, and also
the hexagonal lattice (in 2D) and the diamond lattice (in 3D), is meaningless. The inequality
(79) expresses the condition for macroscopic rigidity of the network. It is straightforward to
show that the condition for microscopic rigidity of central-force spring networks is
Z > d ,
microscopic rigidity .
(2035)
Central-force networks with Z = 2d are usually called marginally-bonded networks. Examples
include d−dimensional cubic lattices.
As usual, Eq. (78), the EMA for predicting the eﬀective elastic constants of central-force
spring networks, also predicts that the critical exponents f and χ of the elastic moduli are unity,
596

in disagreement with the numerical estimates discussed above. However, since the predicted
percolation threshold diﬀers very little from its actual value, then, except for a very small region
near pB
ce, the predictions of Eq. (78) are in very good agreement with numerical simulation
results (Jerauld, 1985; Feng et al., 1985; Garboczi and Thorpe, 1985, 1986a,b; Thorpe and
Garboczi, 1987; Pla et al., 1990). A typical example of the comparison of the numerical results
with the EMA predictions is shown in Figure 8.6.
Let us point out that another type of random central-force lattice models was developed
and studied by Kellom¨aki et al. (1996), who generated such lattices by placing Nf 1D straight
lines of length ℓf and zero width on a rectangle of area A. The distributions of the lines centers
and of the orientation of the lines were random. Lines were bounded together at their crossing
points. The dead-end lines were removed, and thus the coordination number of each node was
2, 3, or 4. The lines between neighboring nodes were assumed to be Hookean springs with
a given Young’s modulus and cross section. The density of such networks is ρ = Nfℓf/A,
and percolation (formation of the sample-spanning cluster) occurs at ρc ≃5.71. Kellom¨aki
et al. (1996) showed that such random lattices are not rigid which, in view of Eq. (79) and
our discussion above, is not surprising since the average coordination number of such networks
is less than 4, the minimum required value for rigidity in 2D. Many other properties of such
networks were also studied by Kellom¨aki et al. (1996).
8.8 The Critical Path Method
As discussed in Chapters 5 (see Section 5.13) and 6 (see Section 6.2.4), a powerful method
for analyzing transport processes in heterogeneous materials is the critical path method, ﬁrst
proposed by Ambegaokar, Halperin and Langer (AHL, 1971). According to AHL arguments, in
a material in which the local conductances are broadly distributed, the eﬀective conductivity is
approximately equal to the critical conductivity gc, deﬁned as the smallest conductivity needed
to form a sample-spanning conducting path, when the network representing the material is built
up in descending order, starting with the largest bond conductance. Applied to central-force
spring networks (Garboczi, 1988a), the AHL method would predict that the eﬀective force
constant αe is approximately equal to the critical force constant αc, deﬁned similarly to gc.
However, we should keep in mind that, when the AHL method is applied to central-force spring
networks, the critical force constant αc is deﬁned as that value of α at which a sample-spanning
597

rigid cluster has formed for the ﬁrst time. In other words, αc should not be taken as the value
of the force constant when a cluster has formed (at pc) and is merely connected, rather it should
also be rigid which happens for the ﬁrst time at pce, since for pc < p < pce such a cluster is
ﬂoppy.
Therefore, suppose that the force constants are distributed uniformly between α1 and α2.
Beginning with α2 and working down, a fraction p of the bonds will be in place when a fraction
p of the values of the force constants from α2 to α1 has been used. Therefore,
αc = α2 −p(α2 −α1) = α1 + (1 −p)(α2 −α1) .
(2036)
Garboczi (1988a) showed that the predictions of Eq. (81) are in good agreement with the
results of computer simulations using the triangular lattice. They were also found to be very
close to the predictions of the EMA, Eq. (78).
8.9 Central-Force Networks at Non-zero Temperatures and under Stress
All the results described and discussed so far (as well as those that will be described later
in this chapter for more sophisticated models of elastic networks) are applicable to unstressed
networks at zero temperature. In practice, however, all the experimental measurements are
carried out at temperatures above T = 0, and therefore it is important to understand the
temperature-dependence of the elastic moduli, at least in the context of the network models.
In addition, in many practical situations, the material under study is exposed to a ﬁnite stress
or tension (as opposed to an inﬁnitesimal one), and thus the role of such an external driving
force in determining the elastic properties of materials must be understood. In principle, the
role of the temperature can be understood by carrying out Molecular Dynamics simulations
in which the material is represented as a collection of atoms and/or molecules, and Newton’s
equation of motion is solved for all the atoms and molecules, taking into account the eﬀect of
the interatomic interactions. This is easier said than done, as a realistic simulation may require
(at the very least) hundreds of thousands of atoms, accurate representation of the interatomic
interactions, and powerful computers to integrate the equation of motion for long enough times
to observe the dynamic evolution of the material. Over the past few years, there has been
very signiﬁcant advances in all these aspects, which will be described in detail in Chapter 9 of
Volume II. For now, we restrict ourselves to simple phenomenological models in order to gain
a better understanding of the eﬀect of non-zero temperatures and stresses on the mechanical
598

properties of elastic networks. We restrict our attention to homogeneous networks, and then
discuss the extension to heterogeneous networks, and in particular elastic percolation networks.
Consider, as an example, the triangular network of identical springs. At zero temperature
and stress, all the springs have the same length ℓ0. The network can be thought of as a plane of
triangular plaquettes, each bounded by three springs. The length of the springs changes from ℓ0
to ℓσ if a 2D isotropic tension σ is imposed on the network. We adopt the sign convention that
σ > 0 corresponds to tension and σ < 0 to compression. The plaquettes, however, retain their
equilateral triangular shape, albeit with a diﬀerent area. The springs’ length ℓσ is calculated
by minimizing the enthalpy H of the system,
H = Hs −σS ,
(2037)
where Hs is the energy of the springs and S is the surface area of the network. As described in
Section 8.5, the energy per node of the springs (of equal length ℓ) is 3
2α(ℓ−ℓ0)2, and the area
per node is
√
3
2 ℓ2, and therefore the enthalpy per node is
Hn = 3
2α(ℓ−ℓ0)2 −
√
3
2 σℓ2 .
(2038)
Thus, ℓσ, obtained by solving ∂Hn/∂ℓ= 0, is given by
ℓσ =
√
3αℓ0
√
3α −σ .
(2039)
Equation (84) indicates that the network expands under tension and shrinks under compression.
The corresponding enthalpy per node is given by
Hn = −
3σαℓ2
0
2(
√
3α −σ) .
(2040)
More importantly, Eq. (84) indicates that the area per node Sn of the network,
Sn =
3
√
3α2ℓ2
0
2(
√
3α −σ)2 ,
(2041)
diverges under tension as σ →
√
3α. This is understandable as both the energy of the springs
and the term σSn scale, at large extensions, as ℓ2. However, these two terms have opposite
signs under tension (σ > 0), and for large enough σ the tension term dominates the enthalpy,
as a result of which Sn increases without bound.
599

In addition, Eqs.
(84) and (85) indicate that the network collapses under compression
which, however, is not seen in networks of equilateral plaquettes. This apparent contradiction
is due to the assumption that was made for deriving Eq. (85), namely, that this equation was
obtained by ﬁrst solving ∂Hn/∂ℓ= 0. However, if shapes other than equilateral plaquettes
are considered, then, Eq. (85) may not provide the global minimum of the enthalpy per node,
as equilateral triangles provide the largest surface for a ﬁxed perimeter, and therefore they
may not provide the optimal shape under compression, where the term σS derives the system
towards small surface areas. It is clear that the term σS would be minimum (for σ < 0) if the
plaquettes have zero surface area. Plaquettes that are shaped like isosceles triangles have this
property and the lowest spring energy given by
Hs = 1
2α

(2ℓ1 −ℓ0)2 + 2(ℓ1 −ℓ0)2
,
(2042)
where a zero-surface area triangle has two short sides of length ℓ1 and a long side of length
2ℓ1. The minimum of Hn, as given by Eq. (87), is when ℓ1 = 2
3ℓ0, and is given by, Hn = 1
6αℓ2
0,
implying that Hn per node of the network increases with pressure (σ < 0) according to Eq.
(85) until it exceeds the enthalpy of a network of zero-surface area isosceles plaquettes (1
6αℓ2
0)
at the collapses tension σc given by
σc = −
√
3
8 α .
(2043)
Equation (88) implies that the spring length at which the collapse transition occurs is ℓσ/ℓ0 =
8/9. Thus, for any σ > σc the network will collapse.
Having determined the springs’ length ℓσ, the elastic moduli of the network are computed
by exactly the same method that we used in Section 8.5 to calculate the elastic moduli of the
uniform network at zero temperature and stress. Therefore, we only present the results here:
Ke = 1
2(
√
3α −σ) ,
(2044)
µe =
√
3
4 (α +
√
3σ) ,
(2045)
both of which reduce to Eqs. (31) and (32) in the limit σ = 0. The Poisson’s ratio of the
network is then give by
νp = Ke −µe
Ke + µe
=
√
3α −5σ
3
√
3α + σ ,
(2046)
so that νp < 0 if σ/α >
√
3/5.
600

We should be cautious in using the above results, since the collapse transition actually occurs
if the assumption of having springs of the same length is not made. Thus, we should expect
these results to be accurate at low temperatures and/or high tensions, where the springs have
more or less the same length which, however, may be diﬀerent from ℓ0. Monte Carlo simulations
of Boal et al. (1993) indicate that Eq. (84) to be accurate at the 90% level or better for the
range, 1
8αℓ2
0 ≤kBT ≤αℓ2
0.
Similar reasoning and computations can be carried out for the square network. In this case,
one obtains
ℓσ =
αℓ0
α −σ ,
(2047)
so that the surface area per node of square plaquettes increases without bound as σ →α. The
collapse transition occurs under any negative tension, σ < 0, because all the square plaquettes
have the same energy (see Section 8.5). As for the elastic moduli, we obtain
Ke = 1
2(α −σ) ,
(2048)
µp = 1
2(α + σ) ,
µs = σ ,
(2049)
all of which reduce to Eqs. (34) in the limit σ = 0.
What happens if the networks contain percolation disorder, i.e., only a fraction p < 1 of the
springs is intact, with the rest of them being cut? In this case, one should be able to use Eqs.
(89)-(94) in which the spring constant α has been replaced by the eﬀective value of the spring
constant of the network, αe, which can be estimated by, for example, the eﬀective-medium
approximation, Eq. (78). This approximation should be reasonably accurate so long as p is not
too close to the percolation threshold pce. For p close to pce one must carry out Monte Carlo
simulations in order to estimate the eﬀective elastic moduli at low temperatures and non-zero
stresses.
8.10 Shortcomings of the Central-Force Networks
One main shortcoming of central-force percolation networks is that their percolation thresh-
olds pce are much larger than those of scalar percolation pc. What this implies is that, for
pc ≤p ≤pce, where p is the fraction of the intact bonds (or sites), an EPN with only central
forces is geometrically connected, but its elastic moduli are all zero, which, in most cases, is
not a physically-realistic situation. If there are correlations between the intact bonds (Arbabi
601

and Sahimi, 1988a), then the percolation threshold of a central-force EPN will be less than pce,
but in order to force the percolation threshold of a correlated central-force network to be equal
to pc, one must introduce inﬁnitely long-range correlations between the intact bonds. Another
shortcoming of central-force percolation networks is that, in such models the signiﬁcance of a
straight-bond chain in transmitting elastic forces is ambiguous, because in a non-linear model
(such as those considered for brittle fracture of solids described later in Chapter 8 of Volume
II) the straight bonds could buckle under compression but not under extension, which is again
unrealistic. The third shortcoming of the model is that the matrix Wij may not be invertible
for some complex conﬁgurations, hence leading to unphysical predictions. Therefore, in the rest
of this chapter we consider vector percolation models that do not suﬀer from such shortcomings.
8.11 Elastic Percolation Networks with Bond-Bending Forces
We now describe more general vector percolation models which are free of the shortcomings
of the central-force networks. It is known that microscopic many-body interactions (as opposed
to two-body interactions in the central-force models), and in particular three-body bending
and four-body twisting, have important eﬀects on the elastic moduli of solids, especially their
shear moduli. Such interactions are expected to be particularly important for weakly-bonded
tenuous materials, such as certain types of aggregates and gels. Including such many-body
interactions in a lattice model also reveals an important advantage of the discrete models. In
a continuum model, the distinction between two-body and multibody interactions can become
obscure, whereas in a lattice model the sites that interact with each other directly clearly leave
a signature and distinguish themselves from any other types of interactions.
Hence, consider an EPN in which such many-body interactions exist. The simplest of such
models is perhaps an EPN in which there are both central and bond-bending, or angle-changing,
forces, with the latter type representing three-body interactions. One of the main advantages
of such models is that their percolation threshold can be the same as that of scalar percolation,
if the many-body interactions are such that any deformation of the lattice is done at some
costs to its elastic energy. In general, the elastic energy of such models is given by (Kantor and
Webman, 1984)
H = 1
2α

⟨ij⟩
[(ui −uj) · Rij]2eij + 1
2γ

⟨jik⟩
(δθjik)2eijeik ,
(2050)
602

where α and γ are the central and bond-bending force constants, respectively.
Here ⟨jik⟩
indicates that the sum is over all triplets in which the bonds j-i and i-k form an angle with its
vertex at i. The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq. (95) represents the usual contribution of
the central forces (see above), while the second term is due to bond-bending, or angle-changing,
forces. The precise form of δθjik depends on the microscopic details of the model. One may
consider at least two classes of such models which we now describe.
8.11.1 The Kirkwood-Keating model
If bending of the bonds that make an angle of 180◦with one another (i.e., the collinear
bonds) is not allowed, then
δθjik = (ui −uj) · Rik + (ui −uk) · Rij .
(2051)
We refer to this particular version of the model as the Kirkwood-Keating (KK) model. Kirk-
wood (1939) used this model to study vibrational properties of rod-like molecules, while Keating
(1966) studied the elastic properties of covalent crystals with essentially the same model. In
Keating’s model, the bond-stretching term represented a repulsive interaction to perturbations
from the equilibrium length of covalent bonds, while the bond-bending term represented a re-
pulsive interaction to perturbations from the equilibrium tetrahedral angle. Neither Kirkwood
not Keating studied percolation properties of this model. A similar model was used by Gazis
et al. (1960), except that in their model there was also a central force between every site and
its second-nearest-neighbor sites. All terms of the equation of motion, i.e., ∂H/∂ui = 0, with
H given by Eq. (95), when written for a site i and all of its neighbors that contribute to H, can
be expressed in terms of diﬀerence operators. Using Taylor’s series, such diﬀerence operators
can be expressed in terms of the partial derivatives of the continuous function u(x, y, z). Then,
if we assume that the wavelengths of deformations are much longer than the lattice constant,
all but the second derivatives of ui can be neglected. In the continuum limit one obtains
(C11 −C12 −2C44)

j
∂2uj
∂x2
j
Rj + C44 [2∇(∇· u) −∇× (∇× u)] + C12∇(∇· u) = 0 , (2052)
where uj = ux, uy, uz, xj = x, y, z, and Rj are the corresponding unit vectors in the x, y, and
z directions. Here C11 = α/ℓ, C12 = 0, and C14 = 4γ/ℓare the usual elastic constants of the
lattice, with ℓbeing the lattice constant. If a Hookean spring is also inserted between a site
603

and its second-nearest neighbor (as in the model of Gazis et al., 1960), then Eq. (97) would
still hold but with, C11 = (α + 4αsn)/ℓ, C12 = 2αsn/ℓand C44 = 2(2γ + αsn)/ℓ, where αsn is
the central-force constant between a site and its second-nearest neighbors. Clearly, Eq. (97) is
rotationally invariant. Therefore, similar to the Born and central-force models, the KK model
can be derived by discretization of a well-deﬁned continuum equation.
8.11.2 The bond-bending model
If bending of the collinear bonds is allowed, then (Wang, 1989; Arbabi and Sahimi, 1990a)
δθjik =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
(uij × Rij −uik × Rik) · (Rij × Rik)/|Rij × Rik| ,
Rij not parallel to Rik ,
|(uij + uik) × Rij| ,
Rij parallel to Rik ,
(2053)
where, uij = ui −uj. For all 2D systems, Eq. (98) is simpliﬁed to
δθjik = (ui −uj) × Rij −(ui −uk) × Rik .
(2054)
We refer to this version of Eq. (95) as the bond-bending (BB) model. It is clear that, similar
to the KK model, the BB model also has a well-deﬁned continuum counterpart. For most
materials to which the KK or the BB models are applicable, one has γ/α ≤0.3 (Martins and
Zunger, 1984).
8.11.3 The percolation thresholds
Phillips and Thorpe (1985) used a constraint-counting analysis which, as described earlier,
is a mean-ﬁeld theory, to predict the bond percolation threshold (pB
c )kk of the d-dimensional
KK model in a lattice with coordination number Z. The number of constraint Nc associated
with bond-stretching and BB forces is given by, Nc = Nα + Nγ, where
Nα(Z) = 1
2Z ,
Nγ(d, Z) = 1
2(d −1)(2Z −d) ,
(2055)
where all the sites with Z ≤d−2 must be eliminated from the counting. Since in a percolation
network each bond is present with probability p, we must write, Nc(p) = Nα(pZ) + Nγ(d, pZ),
and therefore, (pB
c )kkZ +(d−1)[2(pB
c )kkZ −d] = 2d [see the inequality (79)] which, when solved
for the percolation threshold, yields
(pB
c )kk ≃1
Z
d(d + 1)
2d −1 ,
(2056)
604

which should be compared to Eq. (49) for the central-force model. On the other hand, recall
from Chapter 2 (see Section 2.5.2) that for scalar percolation one has (Shante and Kirkpatrick,
1971)
pB
c ≃1
Z
d
d −1 .
(2057)
Thus, for 2D lattices, (pB
c )kk = pB
c ≃2/Z, and simulations have conﬁrmed that the percolation
threshold of the KK model in 2D is the same as that of the scalar percolation. However, for
3D systems Eq. (101) predicts that
(pB
c )kk ≃2.4
Z ,
(2058)
so that the average coordination number of the network at the percolation threshold, i.e.,
⟨Z⟩= (pB
c )kkZ, should be about 2.4, whereas Eq. (102) yields pB
c ≃1.5/Z; that is, in scalar
percolation the average coordination number of the sample-spanning percolation cluster at pc is
about 1.5. The accuracy of Eq. (101) was conﬁrmed by numerical simulations (He and Thorpe,
1985). Note a striking feature of Eq. (101): The percolation threshold does not depend on the
force constants α and γ.
On the other hand, the BB model in d−dimensions has the same percolation threshold as
the scalar percolation if each site of the network interacts with at least 1
2d(d −1) of its nearest-
neighbors. In practice, this can be easily achieved, and therefore, by using suitable three-body
interactions between the sites of the lattice, one can obtain EPNs with percolation thresholds
that are equal to those of scalar percolation, a highly desirable property as far as many practical
applications are concerned. Hence, in what follows we restrict most of our discussions to the
BB model. Figure 8.7 shows the typical dependence of the elastic moduli of the BB model in
a simple-cubic network on the fraction p of the intact bonds.
8.11.4 The force distribution
Similar to rigidity percolation, the force distribution (FD) in the BB models has also been
computed and studied (Sahimi and Arbabi, 1989,1993). Unlike the central-force model, there
are some subtleties in this distribution that must be discussed. Far from pc the contributions
of the central forces totally dominate the elastic energy H, in which case we may expect a
unimodal FD, similar to that of rigidity percolation far from its percolation threshold pce.
However, if we decrease γ, holding α ﬁxed, bending of two bonds with respect to each other
becomes easier, implying that the contribution to H of the BB forces increases.
If γ/α is
605

lowered to a small value, say of the order of 0.01, the contributions of the central and BB
force become comaprable, and therefore the FD takes on a distinct bimodal shape. Figure 8.8
presents the FD for the square network. The appearance of the second (smaller) maximum in
the distribution, which is to the left of the larger maximum (due to central forces) is due to
the BB forces. Further decrease in γ/α means that the BB contributions are so large that the
central-force contributions can be neglected, and therefore we may expect the distribution to
take on a unimodal shape again. At pc and for ﬁxed γ/α, the BB contributions are always larger
than those of the central forces and depend only weakly on γ/α. As a result, although the FD
is bimodal, the magnitude of the maximum due to the BB forces is much larger than that of
the central forces. Similar results were also obtained for a simple-cubic network (Sahimi and
Arbabi, 1993). The moments M(q) of the force distribution in the square and cubic networks
at pc have also been studied, and their associated critical exponents have been determined
(Sahimi and Arbabi, 1993); Table 8.3 presents the results. The values of ˜τ(0) agree nicely with
the estimates of the fractal dimension Dbb of the backbone of scalar percolation clusters (see
Table 2.3), as they should.
Table 8.3
Estimates of the exponents ˆτ(q) of the moments of the force distribution in the bond-bending
model.
q
0
1
2
3
4
ˆτ(q) (Square)
−1.65 ± 0.07
1.08 ± 0.8
3.4 ± 0.4
7.3 ± 0.9
11.3 ± 1.5
ˆτ(q) (Cubic)
−1.9 ± 0.1
2.2 ± 0.2
4.6 ± 0.5
8.5 ± 1.3
—
8.11.5 Comparison of the central-force and bond-bending networks
We now compare the central-force and the BB models, using the moments of their respective
FD as the basis of the comparison. A glance at Tables 8.1 −8.3 shows that the diﬀerence
between the values of ˜τ(q) for the two models is larger for larger values of q. This is due to the
fact that the higher moments of the FD are aﬀected more strongly by the ﬁne details of the
606

backbone, and the backbones of the two models are in fact very diﬀerent. The backbone of the
central-force model is dominated by multiply-connected loops, whereas that of the BB model
can be well-approximated by the relatively simple node-link-blob model described in Section
2.6.3. Further evidence for the diﬀerence between the two backbones is provided by the values
of ˜τ(1) in the two models which are quite diﬀerent, indicating that the average force exerted on
a bond of the backbone of the two models is very diﬀerent. At this point, two questions must
be addressed.
(1) Why do the scalings of M(0) and M(2) for rigidity bond percolation on the triangular
network appear to be consistent with those of the BB model? Roux and Hansen (1989) argued
that this is due to the lever arm eﬀect which is caused by a force coupling at the two ends of a
connected cluster, and hence it is similar to the BB forces. In other words, if the contributions
of the central forces and lever arm eﬀect are comparable, a central-force percolation network
behaves eﬀectively as one with BB forces. However, this argument is not rigorous.
(2) Why does rigidity site percolation not behave like rigidity bond percolation networks?
If we calculate the FD for site percolation on the triangular network for 0.71 ≤p ≤0.72,
although we still obtain a bimodal distribution (which is similar to the FD of a BB model), the
magnitude of the smaller maximum, which is supposedly due to the lever arm eﬀect, is always
much smaller than the larger maximum (which is contributed by the central forces), implying
that the lever arm eﬀect for site percolation on the triangular network, if it in fact exists, is
much weaker than that for bond percolation, so much so that the contribution of the central
forces dominates that of the lever arm eﬀect. This might explain why in the triangular network
the scaling of elastic moduli in rigidity site percolation does not seem to be in the universality
class of elastic moduli of rigidity bond percolation. Note that there appears to be no relation
between the exponents of the FD of the BB model, in contrast with the central-force model for
which Eq. (51) relates the exponents.
Study of the FDs of the rigidity percolation and the BB models shows that, at most two
moments of the FD distributions of the two models, namely, M(0) and M(2), may have the
same critical exponents. Therefore, one may consider a very general criterion for the universality
of elastic percolation models: In order for two elastic percolation models belong to the same
universality class, all moments of their force distribution must have the same critical exponents.
According to this criterion then, rigidity percolation and the BB percolation models do not
607

belong to the same universality class.
8.11.6 Scaling properties
The critical exponents f and χ have been estimated for the BB models using a variety of
techniques (Feng et al., 1984; Feng, 1985a; Feng and Sahimi, 1985; Zabolitzky et al., 1986;
Bergman, 1986b; Bergman and Duering, 1986; Duering and Bergman, 1988). In 2D the most
accurate estimate of f was obtained by a transfer-matrix method (Zabolitzky et al., 1986), to
be described below, and is given by
f ≃3.96 ± 0.04 ,
(2059)
while in 3D large scale Monte Carlo calculations yielded (Arbabi and Sahimi, 1988b)
f ≃3.75 ± 0.10 .
(2060)
These results agree with ˜τ(2)/ν given in Table 8.3. We emphasize that, similar to rigidity
percolation, the contributions of the corrections-to-scaling to the leading power law for the
elastic properties of the BB model near pc are quite large.
Two-dimensional superelastic percolation networks (Sahimi and Goddard, 1985) with BB
forces have been studied extensively (Bergman, 1985, 1986b; Feng, 1985a; Bergman and Duer-
ing, 1986; Duering and Bergman, 1988). Such networks were ﬁrst proposed by Sahimi and
Goddard (1985) for modelling the divergence of the viscosity of a gelling solution near and
below the gel point (see Chapter 9 for details). In addition to their relevance to modelling vis-
coelastic properties of gel polymers, SEPNs can be thought of as models of randomly-reinforced
disordered materials. In analyzing the scaling properties of SEPNs, the contributions of the
corrections-to-scaling have been found to be even more important than those for EPNs. The
most accurate estimates of the critical exponent χ for BB models are (Arbabi and Sahimi,
1990c; Sahimi and Arbabi, 1993)
χ ≃1.24 ± 0.03 ,
2D ,
(2061)
χ ≃0.65 ± 0.03 ,
3D .
(2062)
Both estimates are somewhat smaller than the corresponding values for the exponent s which
characterizes divergence of the eﬀective conductivity of conductor-superconductor percolation
networks studied in Chapter 5.
608

More generally, let us rewrite Eq. (95) in a slightly diﬀerent form,
H = 1
2

⟨ij⟩
[(ui −uj) · Rij]2kij + 1
2

⟨jik⟩
(δθ)2mjik ,
(2063)
where the meanings of kij and mjik are clear. We now consider a two-component elastic network
of linear size L with the two types of bonds, having (k1, m1) and (k2, m2) as their streching and
BB force constants, where k1 < k2 and m1 < m2. The fractions of the two types of bonds are
(1 −p) and p, respectively. If
˜m =
m1/m2
L−(f+χ)/ν ,
˜k =
k1/k2
L−(f′+χ)/ν .
then Duering and Bergman (1988) showed that, depending on the values of the elastic constants,
one may have four distinct scaling regimes which are as follows,
µe ≃
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
µ1Lχ/νh1(k1/m1) ,
˜k ≪1 and ˜m ≪1 ,
µ1h2(k1/m1)(k1/k2)−χ/(f′+χ) ,
˜k ≫1 and ˜m ≪1 ,
µ1h3(k1/m1)(m1/m2)−χ/(f+χ) ,
˜k ≪1 and ˜m ≫1 ,
µ1h4

(k1/k2)f′+χ(m2/m1)f+χ, k1/m1

(k1/k2)−χ/(f′+χ) ,
˜k ≫1 and ˜m ≫1 .
(2064)
Here, h1 h2 h3 and h4 are universal scaling functions, and µ1 is the shear modulus of a homo-
geneous material with microscopic force constants k1 and m1. Observe that in the last three
cases the shear modulus does not depend on the linear size L of the network. Moreover, in
the fourth case, the scaling function h4 depends on two variables, whereas for the ﬁrst three
cases the scaling functions depend only on a single scaling variable. Similar scaling laws can
also be written down for the other elastic moduli of the network. The scaling representations
(109) have been developed in analogy with those for the eﬀective conductivity and the dielectric
constant that were described in Chapter 6 (see SEction 6.5). Although, intuitively, one expects
to have f = f ′, Duering and Bergman (1988) found that, at least in 2D, f ′ = µ, where µ is the
critical exponent of the eﬀective conductivity of the network near pc.
8.11.7 Relation with scalar percolation
Rigorous upper and lower bounds were derived for the exponent f by Kantor and Web-
man (1984) and Roux and Guyon (1986) that link f with the topological exponents of scalar
percolation deﬁned and described in Chapter 2. These bounds are given by
1 + νd < f < ν(Dmin + d) ,
(2065)
609

where Dmin is the fractal dimension of the shortest path of a percolation cluster deﬁned in
Section 2.8. These bounds yield 11/3 ≃3.66 < f < 4.17 and 3.64 < f < 3.85 for 2D and 3D
materials, respectively, and are relatively sharp.
Sahimi (1986a), and later Roux (1986), proposed that
f = µ + 2ν ,
(2066)
where µ is the critical exponent of the eﬀective conductivity of percolation networks. The
predictions of Eq. (111) are in excellent agreement with the numerical results given by (104)
and (105), and thus Eq. (111) is likely to be an exact scaling law. The origin of Eq. (111) is
clear: Elasticity introduces two extra factors of ξp, the correlation length of percolation, and
therefore one must have
elastic moduli
conductivity ∼ξ2
p ,
which immediately results in Eq. (111).
On the other hand, Limat (1988a,b) argued that Eq. (111) is not exact because, according
to him, one must include the eﬀect of the eccentricity Ec of elastic percolation clusters which
measures the strength of a coupling eﬀect between displacements and rotation that tends to
rigidify the loops of the cluster. He suggested instead that f = µ + 2ν −∆e, where ∆e is
a supposedly new exponent which describes the power-law behavior of Ec near pc. However,
the numerical estimates of f given by (104) and (105) indicate that ∆e(d = 2) ≃0.0 and
∆e(d = 3) ≃0.01. In the mean-ﬁeld approximation which becomes exact for d ≥6, one has
f = 4, µ = 3, and ν = 1/2 and thus, ∆e = 0. Therefore, ∆e ≃0 for all d, implying that either
Ec is not a critical quantity near pc at all (i.e., it does not diverge or vanish at pc), or that near
pc one must have, Ec ∼ln(p −pc), so that ∆e = 0.
It has also been proposed (Arbabi and Sahimi, 1990c; Sahimi and Arbabi, 1993) that
χ = ν −1
2β .
(2067)
The predictions of Eq. (112) agree with the numerical estimates of χ given by (106) and (107).
Moreover, for 1D percolation systems, ν = 1, β = 0, and hence χ = 1, which is easily seen
to be an exact result, and in the mean-ﬁeld approximation, which is exact for d ≥6, one has
χ = 0 which also agrees with the prediction of Eq. (112) (with ν = 1/2 and β = 1). Thus,
Eq. (112) may be an exact scaling relation for all dimensions 1 ≤d ≤6, and in particular for
610

d = 3. Limat (1988c, 1989) also proposed that χ = s −∆s, where ∆s is the analogue of the
exponent ∆e deﬁned above for the superelasticity problem, and estimated that ∆s ∼s/5 and
hence, ∆s(d = 2) ≃0.26 and ∆s(d = 3) ≃0.14, consistent with the numerical results given
above.
8.11.8 Fixed points of vector percolation: University of the Poisson’s Ratio
Bergman and Kantor (1984) found that the ratio K/µ of the bulk to shear modulus of
EPNs appears to approach a constant value as the percolation threshold is approached. Based
on an EMA, they conjectured that K/µ = 4/d represents an exact and universal value. A
universal value of K/µ at pc would represent a type of a ﬁxed point, much like the ﬁxed points
of renormalization group transaformations described in Chapter 5 (see Section 5.11), and to
be described below for the elasticity problem. Further studies and simulations of Schwartz et
al. (1985) and Arbabi and Sahimi (1988b) indicated that, in the lattice models this ratio does
appear to approach an apparently universal value, and that this type of ﬁxed point behavior
seems to hold for the ratios of other elastic moduli as well. For example, in the simple-cubic
lattice and for all values of γ/α, [the two force constants of the BB model; see Eq. (103)],
the ratio Y/µ of the Young’s and shear moduli appears to approach 4/3 (Arbabi and Sahimi,
1988b), in agreement with the conjecture of Bergman and Kantor (1984). Renormalization
group calculations, to be described in the next section, also conﬁrm the existence of such a
ﬁxed point. Moreover, in an experimental study with a randomly perforated Cu foil (Benguigui
and Bergman, 1987), the ratio C11/µ was also found to be universal and consistent with the
theoretical prediction.
That the ratio of the elastic moduli might be universal is plausible, because as the perco-
lation threshold of the lattice is approached, all the elastic moduli follow the same power law
with the same critical exponent [see Eq. (3)], and therefore the ratios of the elastic moduli
represent amplitude ratios. It is known (Aharony, 1980) that certain amplitude ratios at the
percolation threshold are universal and depend only on the dimensionality of the system. Thus,
it is plausible that the ratios of the elastic moduli of EPNs at the percolation threshold might
also be universal. However, we must mention that Schwartz et al. (1985) found that in certain
continuum models this apparent universality breaks down, the reason for which is presently not
known.
611

Let us point out that, a universal value of the ratio of the elastic moduli appears to also exists
in brittle fracture of materials, near the point at which a sample-spanning crack forms. The
existence of such a ﬁxed point, which has been demonstrated both by computer simulations and
experiments, has important practical implications for brittle fracture of disordered materials,
and will be discussed in Chapter 8 of Volume II.
8.11.9 Position-space renormalization group method
Similar to the eﬀective conductivity of disordered networks, the elastic moduli of such
networks, and in particular their power-law behavior near the percolation threshold, can be
computed and studied by a position-space renormalization group (PSRG) method. This idea,
which is a signiﬁcant extension of the PSRG method for the eﬀective conductivity, was ﬁrst
developed by Feng and Sahimi (1985) for the BB model. It was later extended to the central-
force networks by Knackstedt and Sahimi (1992). More recently, Novikov et al. (2001) also
utilized this method to compute the elastic moduli of 3D models of disorderd materials.
Since an EPN with central and BB forces is described by three parameters, namely, α, γ,
and p (the fraction of the intact bonds), one must also develop three RG recursion relations for
the three parameters. As the percolation threshold of the BB model is the same as that of scalar
percolation, the recursion relation for p′ = R(p) (see Section 5.11), the renormalized probability
of having an intact bond in the renormalized network, does not change on passing from the
scalar model to the BB model. Therefore, let us consider the 2D RG cell of Figure 5.14. Then,
the recursion relation for p′ is given by Eq. (5.181) which has a ﬁxed point at p∗= 1/2, the
exact bond percolation threshold of the square network. To develop the recursion relation for
α′, the renormalized stretching force constant, we ﬁx the displacements of the left-most sites of
the RG cell at (0, ∆), where ∆is a constant, hold the displacements of the right-most sites of
the cell at (0,0), solve for the displacements of the interior sites (by solving the usual equation,
∂H/∂ui=0), and determine all the conﬁgurations of the RG cell that transmit elastic forces.
In analogy with Eq. (5.192), we also write
p′ ln α′ =
n

i=1
ai(p) ln hi(α, γ) ,
(2068)
where ai(p) is the probability of the spanning conﬁguration i, hi(α, γ) is its equivalent bond
stretching force constant, n is the total number of the spanning conﬁgurations, and

i ai(p) =
p′. Since those conﬁgurations of the RG cell that transmit elastic forces are exactly the same as
612

those through which electrical current passes, the coeﬃcients ai(p) in Eqs. (5.192) and (113)
are also identical. Thus, for the RG cell of Figure 5.14 with linear size b = 2, we obtain
p′ ln α′ = p5 ln α+4p4q ln α
 α + 6γ
2α + 9γ

+p4q ln α+(6p3q2+2p2q3) ln(α/2)+2p3q2 ln

4αγ
2α + 9γ

,
(2069)
where q = 1 −p.
Determination of the recursion relation for the BB force constant γ is somewhat more
complex. The exterior sites of the RG cell are displaced as much as ∆/2 in each direction,
and therefore one must have symmetric cell conﬁgurations in which both of rescaled bonds are
present. For the 2D RG cell of Figure 5.14 with b = 2, one ﬁnds that
p′ ln γ′ = p5 ln γ + p4q ln(5γ/9) + 2p3q2 ln(γ/3) + (4p4q + 6p3q2 + 2p2q3) ln(γ/9) .
(2070)
In analogy with the conduction problem, Eqs.
(114) and (115) can be thought of as the
working equations for deterimining the renormalized force constants, and hence the eﬀective
elastic moduli of the RG cell (that is, the network).
Together with Eq. (5.181), Eqs. (114) and (115) have ﬁxed points at (α∗, γ∗, p∗). However,
if we let r = γ/α and r′ = γ′/α′, we obtain a single recursion relation of the form, r′ = F(p, r),
which has two stable ﬁxed points at p = p∗= pc = 1/2, namely, r∗= 0 and = ∞, and one
stable point at r∗= 1/66843, which is the relevant ﬁxed point. If we linearize the recursion
relation for r′, we obtain an eigenvalue, λr = ∂r′/∂r evaluated at r = r∗and p = p∗, which, for
the RG cell used here, is given by λr ≃0.875. This means that, after many iterations of the
RG transformation, the ratio r ﬂows stably into the point r∗. In analogy with the problem of
computing the eﬀective conductivity described in Chapter 5 (see Section 5.11), we may write
f
ν = −ln λα
ln b ,
λα = ∂α′
∂α |α=α∗,
(2071)
where ν is the critical exponent of percolation correlation length, which is computed (in the
PSRG approach) by Eq. (5.186). To compute λα one must iterate Eqs. (114) and (115) (or,
equivalently, the recursion relation for r′) many times to reach the true ﬁxed points for α and
γ. In the present problem, one obtains, after many iterations, λα ≃0.1617, which implies that
f ≃3.75, where we used ν ≃1.43, the PSRG prediction for b = 2 RG cell [see the discussion
after Eq. (5.186)]. This estimate is only about 5% lower than what is given by Eq. (104),
hence indicating the high accuracy of the PSRG method in 2D. Calculations with a 3D RG cell
613

of size b = 2 (see Figure 5.14) yields (Novikov et al., 2001), f ≃3.2, which is about 30% lower
than the estimate given by Eq. (105). On the other hand, the same PSRG method in 3D, but
for the superelasticity problem, yields (Novikov et al., 2001), χ ≃0.63, only 3% lower than the
estimate given by Eq. (107).
The PSRG method described here also provides many useful insights into the behavior of
EPNs. For example, the fact that the ﬁxed point r∗= 1/66843 is so small is not accidental,
but has clear physical meaning. Recall that near pc strongly bonded regions, i.e., the multiply-
connected regions of the backbone, are connected by tenuous weak regions. Compared to these
regions, the strong regions can be considered as being perfectly rigid, and therefore the elastic
properties are actually controlled by the weak regions, which can be roughly approximated
by tortuous chains. If γ ≫α, i.e., if r∗≫1, and for any ﬁxed chain length, it will cost less
elastic energy to accomplish a displacement of the chain’s ends by adjusting the length of bonds
parallel to the stress, rather than bending bond angles, so that the elastic moduli of the system
scale as (p −pc)µ, i.e., the same as the eﬀective conductivity. However, if γ ≪α, i.e., if r∗≪1,
then the opposite is true and the behavior of the system crosses over to the expected behavior,
i.e., Eq. (3) [or Eq. (5) in the case of SEPNs]. Therefore, any reasonable PSRG method must
yield r∗≪1, as is the case here.
Another insight that PSRG methods provide is the conﬁrmation that the ratio of any two
elastic moduli of disordered materials near pc is a type of a RG ﬁxed point. That is, as pc is
approached and regardless of the values of α and γ, this ratio takes on a universal value. For
example, Figure 8.9 presents the ratio K/µ of the bulk and shear moduli of the simple-cubic
network, calculated for various values of α/γ by the above PSRG method. It is seen that as
one approaches p = p∗≃0.21, which is the prediction of the PSRG method for the bond
percolation threshold of the simple-cubic lattice with a RG cell of size b = 2 (see Sections 5.11
and 5.12), values of K/µ for all cases approach the same value which is about 4/3, in agreement
with what was discussed in the last section.
The third important insight that the PSRG approach provides is the universality of the
geometrical exponents of rigidity percolation, such as the the correlation length exponent νe
deﬁned by Eq. (40). According to the RG calculations of Knackstedt and Sahimi (1992), these
exponents are the same for site, bond and correlated rigidity percolation, provided of course
that the range of the correlations is short. We may then conclude that PSRG methods provide
614

a very useful tool for computing the elastic properties of disordered materials.
8.11.10 Eﬀective-medium approximation
The BB models have also been studied within an EMA (Schwartz et al., 1985; Mall and
Russel, 1987). The general form of the EMA for this case is similar to those for the continuum
models in that, the equations for the eﬀective elastic constants (for stretching and BB forces)
and the moduli are coupled and non-linear. They predicts that the bond percolation threshold
of the system is at pB
c = 2/Z, the same as for the scalar percolation, implying correctly that
the percolation threshold of the BB model is just pc, the scalar percolation threshold. The
numerical predictions of the EMA equation for the BB models in 2D are also accurate, except
very near the percolation threshold. A somewhat diﬀerent approach for deriving such an EMA
was developed by B¨ottger et al. (1993).
8.12 Transfer-Matrix Method
Similar to the eﬀective conductivity, an eﬃcient method for computing the elastic moduli
of EPNs and SEPNs is by a transfer-matrix method, both for the central-force (Lemieux et al.,
1985; Roux and Hansen, 1988) and the BB models (Bergman, 1985; Zabolitzky et al., 1986). As
described in Chapter 5 (see Section 5.14.2) for the eﬀective conductivity, the transfer-matrix
method is a technique for calculating the elastic properties of percolation networks, and in
particular their scaling properties near pc, in which the properties of the network, in the shape
of a long strip, are computed exactly. The method for computing the elastic moduli is very
similar to what we described in Chapter 5 for the eﬀective conductivity. Brieﬂy, a symmetric
compliance matrix S = (Sij) provides the displacements ui that must be applied at each of
the nodes at the two right-hand columns of the strip in order to produce a given set of force
components Fi:
ui =

j
FjSij .
Then, similar to the computation of the eﬀective conductivity, additional bonds are added, one
by one or in groups of a few (depending on the topology of the network), to the right-hand
column of the strip, and the compliance matrix is recalculated at every step. Starting with
S = 0 is equivalent to applying a zero displacement to the left-most side of the strip. As
the strip is built up, new elements of S appear. At the same time, older elements Sij of the
compliance matrix are discarded as soon as site i or j becomes an interior node of the strip,
615

which happens when the total internal force exerted upon the site can be calculated entirely in
terms of the displacements at the existing sites. Since, at equilibrium, the total internal force
must vanish, one can eliminate all elements of S connected to that site. The compliance matrix
S is of course much simpler for the central-force model than for the BB model. More details
about this algorithm for the BB model are given by Duering and Bergman (1988).
8.13 The Beam Model
A model related to the KK and BB models is the beam model. In this model each bond
of the lattice is a beam rather than a spring. The elastic behavior of each beam is governed
by three material dependent constants, a1 = l/(Y A), a2 = l/(µA), and a3 = l3/(Y I), where Y
and µ are the Young’s and shear moduli, A the cross section of the beam, and I the moment
of inertia for ﬂexion. Each site of the network is characterized by a displacement vector ui
and a rotational angle ϕi. If a site is rotated, the beams bend accordingly, and thus the local
momenta are taken into account. Consider, for example, a square network. For a horizontal
beam that connects sites i and j one has a longitudinal force Flj acting at j given by
Flj = α1(uix −ujx) ,
(2072)
a shear force
Fsj = α2(uiy −ujy) + 1
2α2l(ϕi + ϕj) ,
(2073)
and a ﬂexural torque
τj = 1
2α2l(uiy −ujy + lϕj) + α3l2(ϕi −ϕj) ,
(2074)
where α1 = 1/a1, α2 = 1/(a2 + a3/12), and α3 = α2(a2/a3 + 1/3). In a similar way, analogus
equations for the vertical direction can be written down. In mechanical equilibrium the sum of
all forces and torques acting on a site must be zero, giving rise, in the continuum limit, to the
classical Cosserat equations (Cosserat and Cosserat, 1909; Toupin, 1964; Mindlin, 1964).
Elastic properties of lattices of beams were studied extensively several decades ago (Kaliski,
1963; Askar and Cakmak, 1968; Klemm and Wozniak, 1970) and also more recently (Lewinski,
1988, 1989), but these studies did not include disorder in the model. In the context of disordered
lattices, and in particular elastic percolation networks, Roux and Guyon (1985) were the ﬁrst
to study this model. The percolation threshold of this model is of course the same as that of
616

scalar percolation. Numerical simulations of Roux and Guyon (1985) also indicated that the
scaling properties of the beam model are identical with those of the BB model. We will come
back to the beam model in Chapter 8 of Volume II where we describe lattice models of brittle
fracture of materials under compression.
8.14 The Granular Model
Another elastic percolation model is the so-called granular or the disk model, which was ﬁrst
introduced by Schwartz et al. (1984) for studying vibrational properties of granular materials.
In this model, the elastic energy of the system is given by
H = 1
2

⟨ij⟩
eij

α[(ui −uj) · Rij]2 + γ{Rij × [Rij × (ui −uj)]
+a(ϕi + ϕj)z × Rij}2 + δ(ϕi −ϕj)2
,
(2075)
where a is the radius of the disks, δ is the elastic constant associated with the restoring torque
that is necessary when two disks counterrotate, and z is a unit vector normal to the plane of
the disks. The rest of the notations is the same as before. Figure 8.10 illustrates the physical
meanings of α, γ and δ. With such couplings, any relative displacement or rotation of two
neighboring disks is done at a cost to the energy H of the system. Therefore, the percolation
threshold of this model is the same as that of scalar percolation. In terms of a lattice model,
the granular model is essentially equivalent to the beam model described above. This model
was studied by Feng (1985a), Schwartz et al. (1985), and Limat (1988a), who reported that
the scaling properties of the elastic moduli of the model are similar to those of the BB model.
8.15 Entropic Networks
All the network models of elastic moduli of disordered materials that have been described so
far in this chapter are enthalpic models in that, the expressions for the energy of the networks
are due to the enthalpy, or the potential energy, of the system. In practice, however, entropic
networks - those in which the entropic part of the free energy of the system plays the leading
role - are also very important. This is particularly true for polymers and gels, and also biological
materials described in Section 8.1. Therefore, it is important to consider entropic networks,
and the diﬀerences between them and enthalpic networks studied so far.
To construct an entropic network, ﬂexible chains of sites (or atoms) are packed together with
suﬃcient density that a given chain is close to its neighbors at many points along its contour
617

length. To give the network rigidity, diﬀerent chains are welded to one another at points where
they are close to each other. After welding, there are n chain segments, each a disordered chain
in its own right, having been cut from a larger chain, with end-to-end displacement ree with
a probability distribution which is a generalization of Gaussian distribution, as the chains are
not ideal formed by a random walk, but are in fact self-avoiding walks. Although the positions
of the chains during the network formations are frozen, the network nodes are not ﬁxed in
space at non-zero temperatures, and therefore the instantaneous end-to-end displacement of a
segment may change, even though the contour length is ﬁxed. When the network deforms in
response to an external stress, the average ⟨ree⟩changes as well.
If each segment is considered as an entropic spring, then its eﬀective spring constant can
be computed.
A Hookean spring has an energy Hs =
1
2αx2, where x is the displacement
from equilibrium.
To compute the spring constant of a segment, we need two probability
distributions P(x), one for the spring displacement x, and a second one for the displacement
of a chain. The probability distribution for the spring displacement is the Boltzmann factor,
exp(−Hs/kBT). Assuming for simplicity that the chains are ideal, the probability distribution
for their displacement is the Gaussian distribution. Thus, ignoring a normalization factor, we
have
P(x) ∼
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
exp[−αx2/(2kBT)] ,
for the spring,
exp(−x2/2σ2) ,
for the ideal chain,
(2076)
where σ2 = ⟨r2
ee⟩/d is the variance of the distribution in d dimensions. Therefore, since the two
probability distributions must be the same, we obtain
α = dkBT
⟨r2
ee⟩.
(2077)
Having obtained an approximate expression for the eﬀective spring constant of the chain
segments, we can now derive an approximate expression for the elastic moduli of entropic
networks. Suppose, for example, that a triangular network is made of segments of the ideal
chains described above. As discussed earlier in this chapter, the area per node Sn of the network
is given by, Sn ∼
√
3
2 ⟨r2
ee⟩, and therefore the spring constant of the chain segments can be written
as, α ∼3
√
3kBT/(2Sn) (in 3D). The 2D density ρ of the chains is given by ρ = 3/Sn, as we
have three chains per node, and therefore, α =
√
3ρkBT/2. In Section 8.1 we showed that, in an
enthalpic triangular network, the bulk and shear moduli are related by, Ke = 2µe. Assuming
618

that the same relation roughly holds for the present entropic triangular network, we obtain
Ke ∼2µe = 3ρkBT/4. Similar results (but with diﬀerent numerical factors) can be derived for
3D entropic networks.
This estimate for the elastic moduli of entropic networks is, of course, only an approximation
because, (1) the chains are not ideal, formed by simple random walks, but are, as is well-known,
self-avoiding walks, and therefore the probability distribution for the end-to-end displacements
of the chains (or chain segments) is not Gaussian; (2) the repulsive interaction between the
chains has been ignored, and (3) the eﬀect of chain entanglement has been neglected. Never-
theless, computer simulations of Plischke and Jo´os (1998) conﬁrmed the density-dependence of
the elastic moduli of the entropic networks. Therefore,
µe ∼ρkBT .
(2078)
We may expect Eq.
(123) to be accurate if the chain density is not too large.
At large
chain densities, the second and third assumptions listed above break down completely, and
therefore Eq. (123) loses its accuracy. We will come back to entropic networks in Chapter 9,
where we describe the application of elastic and superelastic percolation networks to describing
viscoelastic properties of polymers and gels.
Summary
The geometrical and elastic properties of vector percolation models are now well-understood.
An important result that has emerged is that, at least at zero temperature, the scaling properties
of the elastic moduli of such models near the percolation thresholds are not identical with those
of their eﬀective conductivity. This diﬀerence has important practical implications that will
be discussed in Chapter 9, where we describe applications of vector percolation models to
modelling of mechanical properties of disordered materials and compare their predictions with
the relevant experimental data.
It has also become clear that elastic percolation networks with stretching and bond-bending
forces are the simplest vector percolation models that possess two fundamental properties that
any reasonable model of heterogeneous materials must have: A rotationally-invariant elastic
energy, and a percolation threshold that is identical with that of scalar percolation.
The contribution of enthalpy and entropy to the elastic properties of a network depends on
the ﬂexibility of its elements or bonds. If the bonds are connected to each other over distances
619

that are much smaller than the persistence length of the corresponding material for which the
elastic network is intended, then enthalpy may dominate the elasticity. In this case, the shear
resistance is not much smaller than that of conventional materials. However, if the distance
between the nodes of the elastic network is much larger than the persistence length of the
network, then entropic eﬀects dominate the elastic properties of the network, in which case an
equation such as Eq. (123) may provide reasonable estimates of the shear modulus.
620

Captions
Figure 8.1 Dependence of the ratio M(2)/M(1) of the moments of the force distribution in
rigidity percolation on the linear size L of the triangular lattice at pB
ce ≃0.641 (after Arbabi
and Sahimi, 1993).
Figure 8.2 A rigid conﬁguration with two bodies and three bars (after Moukarzel and
Duxbury, 1995).
Figure 8.3 The pebble game in 2D. Redundant (independent) bonds are shown with dashed
(solid) lines that are not (are) covered by a pebble.
Large (ﬁlled, open) particles indicate
(anchored, free) pebbles on (bonds, sites), while the small (ﬁlled, open) particles indicate sites
belonging to (one, more than one) rigid cluster. Shaded areas are 2D rigid bodies. Left: Five
free pebbles indicate ﬁve ﬂoppy modes until as new bond is added and tested for independence,
while a 4th free pebble is found via the path traced by arrows. Right: The added bond is
independent and hence covered (after Jacob and Thorpe, 1995).
Figure 8.4 The structure of a generic diluted triangular network in rigidity percolation.
Heavy lines are the overconstrained bonds, while open circles indicate the pivot between two
or more rigid bodies (after Jacob and Thorpe, 1995).
Figure 8.5 Dependence of the moments M(q) of the force distribution in rigidity percolation
on the linear size L of the triangular network at pB
ce ≃0.641. The results, from top to bottom,
are for q = 1, 2, 3, and 4 (after Sahimi and Arbabi, 1989).
Figure 8.6 Dependence of the shear modulus of a triangular network, in rigidity percolation,
on the fraction of p of the intact bonds. Shown are the results for several network linear sizes
L, as well as the predictions of the EMA.
Figure 8.7 Dependence of the Young’s modulus Y and shear modulus µ of the simple-cubic
lattice, in the bond-bending model, on the fraction of p of the intact bonds in bond percolation,
with γ/α = 1/4.
Figure 8.8 Distribution of the forces F in the bond-bending model in the square network
at the bond percolation threshold pc = 1/2, for several values of the ratio of the bending and
stretching force constants (after Arbabi and Sahimi, 1993).
Figure 8.9 Ratio of bulk and shear moduli of the simple-cubic lattice versus the fraction p
of the intact bonds, indicating a universal value of K/µ at pc. Numbers on the curves indicate
the initial value (at p = 1) of K1/µ1 = K2/µ2 which are 0.025 (1), 0.75 (2) and 5 (3) (after
621

Novikov et al., 2001).
Figure 8.10 The physical meanings of the three elastic constants of the granular model [see
Eq. (120)].
622

9
Rigidity and Elastic Properties of Network Glasses, Polymers, and
Composite Solids: The Discrete Approach
9.0 Introduction
In Chapter 8 we described and analyzed discrete vector percolation models. These models,
together with the continuum models of elastic properties described in Chapter 7, provide a faily
complete understanding of rigidity and linear elastic properties of disordered materials. At the
same time, although certain properties of disordered materials, such as their vibrational density
of states that was described and discussed in Section 6.6, may be approximately modelled by
the discrete scalar models, such as the random resistor percolation networks, modelling and
predicting their mechanical properties require, in most cases, taking into account the eﬀect of
their true vectorial nature. To predict such properties, elastic percolation networks (EPNs)
and superelastic percolation networks (SEPNs), are powerful tools. The purpose of the present
chapter is to describe and discuss applications of these models to predicting the rigidity and
linear elastic properties of several important classes of disordered materials, and compare their
predictions with the relevant experimental data.
The materials that we consider in this chapter are characterized either by the existence
of a percolation threshold, at which their eﬀective properties either vanish or diverge, or a
percolation-type transition point (such as the gel point during polymerization; see Section 9.2).
Our discussions in Chapter 7 should have made it clear that the rigidity and linear elastic prop-
erties of two-phase materials that are far from their percolation threshold, or those in which the
contrast between the properties of the two phases is not large, are well-described and predicted
by various mean-ﬁeld theories, such as the eﬀective-medium approximations (EMAs), the rigor-
ous upper and lower bounds and other analytical approximations that were derived in Chapter
7. However, the eﬀective properties of two-phase materials in which the contrast between the
properties of the two phases is large, particularly those in which one or both phases form large
clusters and is therefore near its percolation threshold, deviate greatly from the predictions of
mean-ﬁeld theories and other analytical approximations. It is the description of this type of
two-phase materials that is best done by vector percolation, and in particular models that are
based on EPNs and SEPNs. Thus, in this chapter we focus our attention mainly on this type
623

of disordered, two-phase materials, particularly those in which one or both phases are near
their percolation threshold. The region near the percolation threshold is often referred to as
the critical region. It is the region in which the rigidity and linear elastic properties (as well
as other eﬀective properties of disordered materials studied in Chapters 4-6) follow universal
scaling and power laws, independent of the materials’ morphology. As pointed out in Chapter
5, in many materials the critical region is quite extended, in which case vector percolation and
the associated universal scaling and power laws are powerful tools for describing and quantita-
tively predicting materials’ properties over much of the range of the volume fractions of their
phases. At the same time, whenever necessary and/or possible, we also describe materials’
properties outside the critical region in order to gain a better understanding of the strengths
and weaknesses of such models. For convenience, and as a basis for comparison with the experi-
mental data, we summarize in Table 9.1 the currently-accepted estimates of the various critical
exponents for scalar and vector transport properties of materials with percolation disorder,
including the central force and the bond-bending (BB) models described in Chapter 8.
Table 9.1
Estimates of the critical exponents of transport properties in scalar and vector percolation
in d−dimensions. Values of f and χ, the exponents for the elastic moduli, for the central-
force model refer to bond percolation, while those of µ and s, the conductivity exponents, are
independent of the model. ν is the critical exponent of the percolation correlation length. For
the central-force model νe, the value of which (given in Chapter 8) is diﬀerent from ν, should
be used.
d
µ/ν
s/ν
f/ν
χ/ν
Model
0.9745 ± 0.0015
0.9745 ± 0.0015
2.97 ± 0.03
0.92 ± 0.03
bond bending
2
—
—
2.95 ± 0.25
0.92 ± 0.02
central force
2.27 ± 0.01
0.835 ± 0.005
4.3 ± 0.1
0.74 ± 0.04
bond bending
3
—
—
2.1 ± 0.1
0.80 ± 0.03
central force
624

Let us emphasize that our description and discussion of application of the discrete models of
rigidity and elastic properties of heterogeneous materials, and in particular vector percolation,
is by no means exhaustive, as the number and variety of materials to which such models may
be applicable is too large. For example, many concepts that are directly or indirectly related to
vector percolation and the discrete models of rigidity properties of materials, have been utilized
to explain seemingly unrelated phenomena. Hammonds et al. (1997) showed, for example, that
the existence of adsorption sites in zeolites, an important class of nanoporous catalytic materials
that are used heavily in the chemical industry, is related to the existence of ﬂoppy modes that
were described in Chapter 8. They demonstrated that zeolite frameworks can support large
bands of rigid unit modes in the k (wave vector) space. Localized rigid unit modes are formed
within such frameworks that do not distort the constituent tehrahedra to any signiﬁcant degree.
These localized modes enable cations at certain sites to pull the framework - with essentially
zero cost in elastic energy - in such a way that oxygen-cation bonding distances become exactly
optimal for the cation of interest. Several other such application of vector percolation and
rigidity transitions are described by Thorpe and Duxbury (1999).
9.1 Network Glasses
In a pioneering work, Zachariasen (1932) introduced the notion of continuous random net-
works for studying network glasses, and proposed that the structure of a glass consists of an
“extended three dimensional network lacking periodicity with an energy content comparable
with that of the corresponding crystal.” He argued that for the energy of the glass to be com-
parable with that of the crystal, the coordination number of the polyhedra and the manner by
which they are connected must be the same in a glass and in the corresponding crystal. How-
ever, he stated that, unlike crystals, the relative orientations of adjacent polyhedra “vary within
rather wide limits,” leading to a lack of long-range order in glasses. Zachariasen (1932) envis-
aged these networks maintaining local chemical order but, by incorporating small structural
disorder, having a non-crystalline topology. Warren (1934) coined the term random networks
for such disordered materials, while Gupta and Cooper (1990) proposed the term topologically
disordered for describing the structure of glasses as it conveys the essence of the Zachariasen’s
view of a glass structure. Careful diﬀraction experiments, from which the radial distribution
function (see Chapter 3) can be determined, have conﬁrmed the correctness of this model, and
625

therefore it is now widely accepted.
If one examines the amorphous structure of covalent glasses, one may classify their building
blocks into two groups: In one group is the bonding structure that consists of covalent bonds
with densities that are of the order of 1022 −1023 cm−3, and can be speciﬁed by their chemical
and topological structures. In the second group are defects, such as impurities, dangling bonds,
and “wrong” bonds (for example, homopolar bonds in stoichiometric alloys). The density of the
defects is typically two orders of magnitude less than that of the covalent bonds. Therefore, the
covalent bonds are primarily responsible for such electronic properties as the band-gap energy,
in contrast to gap states that are caused by the defects. Hence, topological properties play the
most important role in the glassy characters, and therefore the application of the concept of
percolation theory to characterizing many important properties of network glasses is natural.
However, the idea of a relation between network glasses and percolation, particularly vector
percolation, was not developed for a long time after Zachariasen’s early work.
The reason
was that, whereas the liquid-glass phase transition is the result of the system going out of a
complete metastable equilibrium, most percolation models, as we have emphasized in this book,
are equilibrium models [dynamical percolation models, such as the one suggested by Sahimi
(1986b), are not considered in this book], and therefore it was thought for a long time that there
can be no connection between the liquid-glass phase transition and the percolation model. The
connection between the two transitions was ﬁnally suggested by Cohen and Grest (1979) via the
concept of free volume. Fox and Flory (1951) and others [for a review of the older literature on
this subject see Grest and Cohen (1983)] had proposed earlier that the liquid-glass transition
resulted from disappearance of the free volume of the amorphous phase at some temperature.
The basic assumptions of the Cohen-Grest model were as follows.
(1) With each molecule one can associate a local volume v of molecular scale.
(2) When the local volume reaches a critical value vc, the excess value is the free volume.
(3) Molecular transport takes place only when the total free volume, having a volume
greater than some critical value, is approximately equal to the molecular volume formed by the
redistribution of the free volume. The redistribution of the free volume requires no local free
energy.
These assumptions are valid if each molecule is restricted to move mainly within a cell or
cage deﬁned by its nearest neighbors. There is considerable experimental evidence, in dense
626

liquids, that indicates that this is indeed the case. If the temperature T of the system is near
or above the glass transition temperature Tg, then the local free energy Ei of a cell depends
only on its volume vi. Near Tg, the function Ei(v) can be approximated by (Cohen and Grest,
1979)
Ei(v) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
E0 + 1
2a1(v −v0)2 ,
v ≤vc
E0 + a2(v −v0) + 1
2a1(v −v0)2 ,
v ≥vc ,
(2079)
where a1 and a2 are two constants, and vc is a critical volume. The existence of vc enables one
to classify the cells into two groups. Those with v > vc are liquid-like and have a free volume
vf = v −vc, whereas cells with v < vc are solid-like. In eﬀect, the free volume is the diﬀerence
between the glass and crystalline volumes. If f(v) is the probability distribution of having a
cell with volume v, then the fraction p of the liquid-like cells is obviously
p =
 ∞
vc
f(v)dv ,
However, a free exchange of free volume can take place only between liquid-like cells that
are nearest neighbors and have a suﬃciently large number of nearest neighbor liquid-like cells,
and therefore this is a correlated site percolation (Stanley, 1979). Moreover, there is a critical
value pc(Z) of the probability p (where Z is the coordination number) such that, for p > pc
one has a sample-spanning cluster of liquid-like cells, whereas for p < pc the liquid-like cells
form only isolated clusters, and therefore the system as a whole is solid and in glassy state.
This connection between percolation and liquid-glass transition made it possible to calculate
the thermodynamic properties of the system. This aspect of the problem was reviewed in detail
by Grest and Cohen (1983), to whose paper we refer the interested reader.
Free volume in alloy glasses is a scalar quantity that can be measured rather easily but is
diﬃcult to precisely deﬁne theoretically. It is now clear that the percolation model of Cohen
and Grest (1979), which is a scalar model, is applicable to metallic glasses. What we are mainly
interested in this chapter is the mechanical properties of network glasses, which we now describe
and discuss.
9.1.1 Rigidity transition
The question, “why is a glass rigid and has mechanical properties,” is interesting, because
we know that while in a rigid system a local disturbance results in a bulk response, the same
is not true of liquids.
For example, if we apply a small force to a crystal, it will lead to
627

its collective motion, as it is energetically favorable for the crystal’s atoms to maintain their
relative positions. The same force, when applied to a liquid, generates local rearrangements of
the atoms, and after a short time the liquid “forgets” its structure before the force was applied.
Unlike a liquid though, the low-temperature state of a glass depends on its history, which
implies that its response to a shear deformation is not simple. If the glass contains N atoms,
then the number of its possible initial low-temperature conﬁgurations grows exponentially with
N. Furthermore, on short time scales, a glass exhibits complete memory of its initial conﬁgu-
ration, when it is exposed to an applied force, whereas at much longer times, the glass “ﬂows”
and hence forgets its past, a phenomenon that is usually referred to as ageing. Thus, a glass
has certain properties that distinguishes it from a liquid.
The next question, which is important to predicting the mechanical properties of a glass, is,
what distinguishes a glass from a crystal? In addition to the fact that, if a network glass and
a crystal each has N atoms, their number of states is, respectively, exp(N) and O(1), a crystal
breaks translational symmetry and possesses long-range spatial ordering, whereas there exists
no such simple long length scale associated with a glass. Moreover, the response of a crystal to
a shearing force is invariant under time-translation, whereas for long measurement times a glass
loses its rigidity, and therefore does not exhibit the time-invariance that the crystal possesses.
Thus, how does one characterize the rigidity transition and the existence of non-vanishing
elastic moduli in a network glass? Phillips (1979,1981), in an attempt to explain the strong
glass-forming propensity of some chalcogenide materials, proposed that covalent bonding in
glasses can be optimized when the average coordination number ⟨Z⟩of the three-dimensional
(3D) covalent network in mechanical equilibrium is about 2.4. However, in order to provide a
ﬁrm theoretical foundation for his proposal, Phillips invoked the scalar percolation model, but
since, as discussed in Chapter 2, the average coordination number of random scalar percolation
at the percolation threshold pc is about 1.5 and not 2.4, Phillips himself rejected this idea! His
idea was signiﬁcantly reﬁned by Thorpe (1983) who established the connection between this
phenomenon and a vector percolation model. According to the Phillips-Thorpe (PT) idea, in
covalent networks with stretching and Keating-type (BB) forces described in Section 8.11.1,
for average coordination numbers ⟨Z⟩< 2.4, the number Nc of interatomic forces per atom
that act as constraints is less than the network dimensionality d = 3, which is the same as the
number of degrees of freedom Nd per atom. Under a shearing force such networks deform easily
628

and possess a ﬁnite number N0 of zero-frequency modes, N0 = Nd −Nc. When ⟨Z⟩> 2.4, Nc
is larger than Nd, and thus such networks are macroscopically rigid and possess non-vanishing
elastic moduli. Hence, when ⟨Z⟩= 2.4, one has Nc = Nd and therefore N0 = 0 represents the
vector percolation threshold of the system.
Two crucial points must, however, be noted here. First, the analysis that lead to ⟨Z⟩≃2.4
is of mean-ﬁeld type. However, as mentioned in Section 8.11.3, computer simulations of He and
Thorpe (1985) conﬁrmed the accuracy of this mean-ﬁeld analysis. Secondly, ⟨Z⟩≃2.4 agrees
with the predictions of Eqs. (8.101) and (8.103), and thus represents the average coordination
number of 3D Kirkwood-Keating models at their percolation threshold.
9.1.2 Comparison with the experimental data
Over the past several years, there have been many experimental tests of the Phillips-Thorpe
(PT) proposal, using a wide variety of techniques and measuring several distinct properties of
network glasses. What follows is a brief description and discussion of some these tests. The
list of the papers and the data that they reported, that we discuss below, is by no means
exhaustive, but presents what we view as the most illuminating tests of the PT proposal for
applicability of vector percolation to rigidity transition in network glasses.
The ﬁrst of such evidence was probably provided by Ota et al. (1978), although no mention
was made of vector percolation.
They reported measurements, among other things, of the
bulk, shear and Young’s moduli of GexSe1−x glasses, which are perhaps the simplest of such
materials, over a wide range of the composition x. Over the composition range 0 < x < 1/3, the
coordination number of Ge and Se are 4 and 2, respectively, and thus the average coordination
number of the network glass is ⟨Z⟩= 2(x + 1). Therefore, an average coordination number
⟨Z⟩≃2.4 corresponds to a critical composition xc ≃0.2. Measurements of Ota et al. (1978)
indicated that at around x ≃0.2 −0.25, the three elastic moduli increase signiﬁcantly, thus
signaling a rigidity transition.
The same type of glass was used by Bresser et al. (1986), who carried out experiments
using such binary glasses in the composition range 0 < x < 1/3 and 129I M¨ossbauer emission
spectroscopy, and presented strong evidence that at xc ≃0.23±0.02 the M¨ossbauer-site intensity
ratio IB/IA exhibits dramatic threshold behavior.
At x = 0 (i.e., g−Se) only B sites are
observed, and thus IB/IA is inﬁnite. For 0 < x < 0.15 the ratio IB/IA decreases with increasing
629

x, reaching a minimum around x ≃0.15, but as x →xc ≃0.23 this ratio increases and reaches
a maximum. Beyond xc the ratio IB/IA decreases monotonically with x again. The molar
volume Vm of GexSe1−x also exhibits a threshold behavior. For 0 < x < 1/3 the molar volume
decreases monotonically with x, reaching its minimum at xc ≃0.23 ± 0.02, beyond which it
increases again monotonically as x does. Note that xc ≃0.23±0.02 agrees reasonably well with
the PT estimate, xc = 0.2, which corresponds to an average coordination number of about 2.4.
Similar threshold behavior for the molar volume was also reported by Sreeram et al. (1991)
who measured Vm for several chalcogenide glasses incorporating Ge, Sb, Se, As, and Te, and
observed the threshold behavior at ⟨Z⟩≃2.4.
Further experimental evidence of the applicability of vector percolation to network glasses
was provided by Halfpap and Lindsay (1986), who measured the elastic moduli C11 and C44 of
the Ge-As-Se glasses over a wide range of composition. The coordination number of As is 3,
and therefore if the glass has the composition GexAsySe1−x−y, its average coordination number
is ⟨Z⟩= 4x + 3y + 2(1 −x −y) = 2x + y + 2. Thus, varying x and y allows one to obtain
glasses over a wide range of compositions and to test the applicability of vector percolation to
glass formation. Despite diﬀerent local structures of the glasses that are obtained when x and
y are varied, measurements of Halfpap and Lindsay (1986) indicated that at ⟨Z⟩≃2.4 there
is a dramatic increase in the elastic moduli C11 and C44; an example is shown in Figure 9.1.
More evidence for applicability of vector percolation to network glasses was provided by the
experimental data of Mahadevan and Giridhar (1989), who also measured the elastic moduli
C11 and C44 of various glasses formed with As, Ge, S, Sb, Se, and Te, and found essentially the
same behavior that had been reported by Halfpap and Lindsay (1986).
Experiments of Tatsumisago et al. (1990) shed further light on this problem. They showed
that the relevance of vector percolation to glass formation can be better understood by studying
the liquid-state behavior of glass-forming systems.
They measured the elastic moduli, the
viscosity, the thermal-expansivity, heat capacity, and the glass-transition temperature Tg for
various glasses formed with As, Ge, and Se and showed that Tg is a universal function of ⟨Z⟩,
i.e., independent of the composition of the glass, up to ⟨Z⟩≃2.4 −2.5.
It is only above
this point that the eﬀect of the composition appears; see Figure 9.2. There is, however, no
sudden upturn in the ⟨Z⟩−dependence of Tg, but the diﬀerence between the shapes of the heat
capacity curves below and above the critical value ⟨Z⟩≃2.4 is quite pronounced; this is also
630

shown in Figure 9.2. Other interesting features included a minimum in the activation energy
at ⟨Z⟩≃2.4 for the viscosity data, and a minimum in the heat capacity jump at ⟨Z⟩≃2.4
and Tg. These data all indicated a structural transition at ⟨Z⟩≃2.4. Similar data were also
presented by B¨ohmer and Angell (1992) and by Wagner and Kasap (1996).
Further evidence for the PT transition is provided by the fact that the very small mass of
H causes vibrational modes of H or H2O to split oﬀfrom the main vibrational bands of Ge-
As-Se chalcogenide glasses and induces such excitations to have long lifetimes, which can then
be measured with infrared hole-burning methods (see for example, Uebbing and Sievers, 1996,
and references therein). Such experiments indicate linear dependence of the relaxation rates
on the average coordination number ⟨Z⟩, with a clear change in the slope at ⟨Z⟩≃2.4 ± 0.1,
accompanied by a small but unambiguous cusp.
Most recently, Wang et al. (2000) also investigated the Raman spectra described in Sections
6.6.9 and 6.7 in chalcogenide glasses, GeS1−x and GexSe1−x with 0 ≤x ≤0.42, resulting in
an average coordination number 2 ≤⟨Z⟩≤2.84. Their experimental data indicated that the
relative degree of fragility, representing the structural relaxation of the network, is larger for
⟨Z⟩< 2.4 than for ⟨Z⟩> 2.4, thus signaling a rigidity transition at ⟨Z⟩≃2.4.
9.1.3 Rigidity transition at high coordination numbers
Although the above experimental data seem to provide strong evidence for the applicability
of vector percolation to describing elastic properties of network glasses, they are not free of
ambiguities. For example, Yun et al. (1989) reported absence of any threshold behavior at
⟨Z⟩≃2.4 in the elastic properties GexSe1−x, contradicting the earlier data of Bresser et al.
(1986) described above. Some other glasses (see below) exhibit an onset of vector percolation
at values higher than ⟨Z⟩≃2.4. Some of such diﬀerences may be attributed to the oxide
contamination eﬀects that adversely aﬀect the chemical structure of the glasses. One may also
argue that in real materials the van der Waals forces between unbounded neighbors can smear
out the percolation transition. Let us now discuss these issues in more detail.
Feng et al. (1997) presented Raman scattering data for GexX1−x glasses (X = S or Se)
that indicated that there is a stiﬀness threshold, at a mean coordination number ⟨Z⟩≃2.46 ±
0.01, for the shear (transverse) optic mode.
Although their reported average coordination
number is only slightly larger than the predicted value of 2.4, Phillips (1999) suggested that
631

the critical connectivity for the hydrostatic is 2.4, but is about 2.45 for the shear value, which
is in agreement with the data of Feng et al. (1997).
Srinivasan et al. (1992) measured the thermal diﬀusivity of two sets of GexSbySe1−x−y,
GexAsyTe1−x−y and SixAsyTe1−x−y glasses, using a photoacoustic (PA) technique. In these
experiments, the sample with appropriate thickness (about 150µm), in the form of a thin disc,
is glued to the PA cell with silver paste which acts as a good thermal backing medium. The
sample is then irradiated with intensity modulated light. The amplitude A of the PA signal
is then recorded as a function of the modulation frequency ω. The thermal diﬀusion length in
the sample varies with ω. From a plot of log ω versus log A, a characteristic frequency ωc is
determined as the frequency at which the slope of the plot changes. The thermal diﬀusivity DT
is then given by, DT = ωcℓ2, where ℓis the thickness of the sample. Measurements of Srinivasan
et al. (1992) indicated that the thermal diﬀusivity of the three glasses increases monotonically
with the average coordination number ⟨Z⟩, reaching a maximum at ⟨Z⟩≃2.6, beyond which
it decreases again.
The data of Srinivasan et al. and similar ones may be explained based on a modiﬁed picture
of network glasses proposed by Tanaka (1989), who studied network glasses Ge(Si)xAsyS(Se)1−x−y
and proposed, following Zallen (1983), that the dimensionality d of the network plays an impor-
tant role in glasses’ properties. Zallen suggested that d = 1, 2 and 3, respectively, for amorphous
Se, As2S(Se)3, and Si(Ge). For example, d = 1 for Se implies a chain-like morphology in which
entangled chain molecules are held together by (weak) van der Waals intermolecular forces,
whereas d = 3 implies 3D continuous-random networks. Tanaka (1989) found that the molar
volumes for various glasses exhibit two extrema: They reach their minimum at an average
coordination number ⟨Z⟩≃2.4, which is in agreement with the data of Bresser et al. (1986)
and Sreeram et al. (1991) described above, while their maximum is reached at ⟨Z⟩≃2.67. The
optical band-gap energies of the glasses also exhibited a maximum at ⟨Z⟩≃2.67, while their
elastic moduli indicate two upturns, one at ⟨Z⟩≃2.4 and another one at ⟨Z⟩≃2.67. Similar
data had earlier been reported by Tanaka et al. (1986). To explain such data, the following
scenario was proposed by Tanaka (1989).
(1) In glassy Se(S) with coordination number Z = 2, the network is roughly one dimensional.
(2) When As and/or Fe atoms are introduced into these chalcogen glasses, the 1D molecules
are crosslinked, so that the structure gradually transforms for d = 1 to d = 2. At ⟨Z⟩≃2.67
632

layer structures are fully evolved, and hence d = 2. The layer structures are segmental.
(3) With further increase in the local connectivity, the structures undergo the transition to
3D networks.
The prediction, ⟨Z⟩≃2.67, may be explained based on a constraint-counting argument
developed by Tanaka (1989). To derive his prediction by this method, let us ﬁrst recall the
Phillips-Thorpe (PT) constraint-counting method. The number of constraints Nc in 3D covalent
glasses is Nc =
1
2Z + (2Z −3), where 1
2Z represents the stretching (radial) constraints and
(2Z −3) the number of BB valence-force constraints, with 2 corresponding to the two degrees
of freedom in a spherical representation (r, θ, ϕ) of an atom bonded to another atom located at
the origin, and the 3 being related to the system rotation around the three main axes. Since
the total number Nd of degrees of freedom in 3D is 3, and because at the rigidity transition we
must have Nc = Nd, we obtain the PT estimate Z = ⟨Z⟩= 2.4. Using a simple modiﬁcation
of this analysis, the value of the average coordination number, ⟨Z⟩≃2.67, for the glasses that
were studied by Tanaka (1989) and Srinivasan et al. (1992) can be predicted. In this case,
the number of constraints is given by, Nc = 1
2Z + (Z −1), so that the number of the angular
constraints is reduced from (2Z −3) for fully 3D glasses to (Z −1), due to the assumption of
having network glass conﬁgurations that are planar. As the number of degrees of freedom is
still Nd = 3, and at the transition one must have, Nc = Nd, one obtains Z = ⟨Z⟩= 8/3 ≃2.67,
in agreement with Tanaka’s and Srinivasan et al.’s data. Therefore, it appears that in these
experiments a glass is ﬁxed stably in a 3D space, if ⟨Z⟩≃2.67.
Liu and L¨ohneysen (1993) measured the low-temperature speciﬁc heat Cp of g-AsxSe1−x and
ﬁtted their data to Cp = a(x)T + b(x, T)T 3. They found that both the PT rigidity transition
at ⟨Z⟩≃2.4 and the Tanaka transition at ⟨Z⟩≃2.7 contribute to the ﬁtted functional form,
with a double maximum in a(x). They also found that if they subtract the contribution of the
second term of the ﬁtted equation, then a(x), which is a measure of the two-level point defects,
vanishes at ⟨Z⟩≃2.4, hence proving that, in the absence of interlayer cross-linking, one would
have a crystal. One may also explain these data by the fact that the defects are all associated
with chemical disorder (for example, homopolar bonds), and that the concentration of these is
minimized at x = 0.4.
9.1.4 Eﬀect of onefold-coordinated atoms
633

The idea that network glasses must become rigid when their average coordination number
is about 2.4 was reﬁned by Boolchand and Thorpe (1994) in order to treat networks that have
onefold-coordinated (OFC) atoms. Since such atoms represent, in the language of percolation
theory, dangling ends, one might believe that they can be removed as in, for example, H in a−Si,
a−C, and a−Ge-Si networks [see, for example, Mousseau and Thorpe (1993) and references
therein]. However, it is known that the presence of H in a−Si network degrades the network’s
elastic moduli. Therefore, it is instructive to explicitly consider the eﬀect of OFC atoms. This
was undertaken by Boolchand and Thorpe (1994) who used a constraint-counting method of
the type described above. Consider a 3D covalent network with N atoms with NZ of them
having a coordination number of Z. Following exactly the same argument that was utilized
for deriving Eqs. (8.100), for Z ≥2, one has Nα = Z/2 constraints (corresponding to the
stretching force of the Kirkwood-Keating model) and Nγ = 2Z −3 constraints (corresponding
to the bond-bending term of the KK model). For an atom with Z = 1, one has Nα = 1/2 and
Nγ = 0. Therefore, the total number of constraints is given by
Nc = 1
N
⎡
⎣N1 × 1
2 +

Z≥2
NZ
1
2Z + 2Z −3
⎤
⎦,
(2080)
and the number N0 of the zero-frequency modes per atom is
N0 = Nd −Nc = 3 −
⎛
⎝1
2
N1
N +

Z≥2
5
2Z NZ
N −

Z≥2
3NZ
N
⎞
⎠
= 3 −
⎛
⎝1
2
N1
N +

Z≥1
5
2
ZNZ
N
−5
2
N1
N −

Z≥1
3N1
N + 3NZ
N
⎞
⎠
(2081)
= 6 −5
2⟨Z⟩−N1
N ,
where ⟨Z⟩= 
Z≥1 ZNZ/N. As the general condition for the onset of rigidity is N0 = 0, we
obtain
⟨Z⟩= 2.4 −0.4N1
N .
(2082)
Equation (4) implies that the critical average coordination number at the onset of rigidity
depends on the fraction of the OFC atoms, and that their presence reduces the critical value.
An example of a glass to which this model may be applicable is ternary system GexS1−x−yIy
which is formed by a fast quench over a wide range of compositions. The Ge, Se, and I atoms
possess a coordination number of 4, 2, and 1, respectively, and bond in comformity to the 8−N
634

rule. For a given x, one can determine the critical value yc of iodine concentration y at which
Eq. (4) is satisﬁed. Since for this glass, ⟨Z⟩= 4x + 2(1 −x −yc) + yc = 2(x −yc + 1), one
obtains,
yc = 1
3(10x −2) .
(2083)
Experimental data of Dembovskii et al. (1971) indicated that the maximum iodine concentra-
tion at which a glass can form is yc ≃0.55 at x = 0.386, whereas, given this value of x, Eq. (5)
predicts that yc ≃0.62, slightly higher than the experimental value. On the other hand, had
one ignored the eﬀect of OFC atoms, the predicted critical concentration (i.e., at ⟨Z⟩= 2.4)
would have been completely wrong.
9.1.5 Stress-free versus stressed transition
On the other hand, studies of Georgiev et al. (2000) on bulk AsxSe1−x indicated that a
stress-free rigidity transition occurs at ⟨Z⟩= 2.29 ± 0.01 and another transition to a stressed
phase occurs at ⟨Z⟩= 2.37±0.01, both of which are below the value of 2.4. One possible way of
explaining such data is provided by the work of Thorpe et al. (2000) who considered two types
of models. In one, they constructed random bond networks by randomly positioning points in
a plane. When such networks are very large, they contain no closed loops, and therefore are
similar to the Bethe lattices (see Chapter 2). Thorpe et al. found that the rigidity transition in
such networks is ﬁrst-order, which is similar to the central-force percolation transition on the
Bethe lattices which, as discussed in Section 8.6.6, is also ﬁrst-order. The rigidity transition
on this network occured at ⟨Z⟩= 2.3893. In the second model, Thorpe et al. began with
a smaller coordinated ﬂoppy network and added bonds to it. The additional bonds lead to
rigid regions, and so long as they are unstressed, i.e., can have their natural length (angle)
without being forced to change by the their surroundings, they are retained in the network. If
addition of a bond results in its being reduntant and creating a stressed region, it is removed.
If only central forces operate in the system, one can continue building up this network until it
is entirely unstressed, in which case the percolation transition occurs at ⟨Z⟩= 2.375 ± 0.001.
The transition at this point is second-order. However, because of the presence of bond-bending
forces, it may happen that while one part of the set of constraints associated with a given
bond removes ﬂoppy modes, the other part introduces strain, and therefore there is a stress
transition at which a single additional bond causes a large stressed region to appear, so that
635

the associated stress percolation transition is expected to be ﬁrst-order. In Thorpe et al.’s
simulations this type of transition occured at ⟨Z⟩≃2.392. Although these values are not in
numerical agreement with the data of Georgiev et al. (2000), they do point out the possibility
of developing an appropriate vector percolation model for explaining their data.
Summarizing, there is little, if any, doubt that a percolation model can explain many prop-
erties of of glasses. While scalar percolation can be used for explaining the behavior of metallic
glasses (via the percolation of free volume) and computing their thermodynamic properties,
vector percolation explains the rigidity transition that takes place in network glasses at an av-
erage coordination number ⟨Z⟩. Above this transition point, the elastic moduli of the material
are predicted well by the EPNs based on the Kirkwood-Keating model described in Chapter 8.
9.2 Branched Polymers and Gels
Polymeric materials have wide applications in many branches of science and technology.
In addition, they have many interesting, and in many cases unusual, properties that justify
their study. Moreover, two key works in the early 1970s demonstrated clearly how polymers
can be studied both theoretically and experimentally. de Gennes (1972) showed that there is
a close connection between linear polymers (i.e., those with monomers that have functionality
or coordination number Z = 2) and a statistical mechanical model, namely, the n−vector
model. If no two polymer parts occupy the same point in space, the resulting linear polymer
corresponds to the limit n →0, and the most suitable model for such polymers is the path of a
self-avoiding walk in which a particle performs a random walk in space with the restriction that
it never visits any point more than once. If this restriction is lifted, the polymer conformation
corresponds to the path of an ordinary random walk [see Hughes (1995) for a comprehensive
discussion] or the n = −2 limit of the n−vector model. de Gennes’ discovery made it possible
to apply modern methods of statistical mechanics, such as the renormalization group theory,
to the study of linear polymers. On the experimental side, Cotton (1974) used small-angle
neutron scattering and a labelling technique in which the hydrogen atoms along the polymer
chain were replaced by deuterium, to demonstrate that it is possible to detect one polymer
chain among many others in a solution. Thus, one can analyze a single polymer chain and
compare the experimental results with the theoretical predictions. In fact, Cotton’s data were
in excellent agreement with the theoretical predictions based on the self-avoiding walk model.
636

The works of de Gennes and Cotton were restricted to linear polymers, i.e., those in which
each monomer is connected to two neighboring monomers. However, if one uses monomers with
functionality Z > 2, so that each monomer can be connected with more than two neighboring
monomers, then at least two other classes of polymers can be obtained. If the reaction time t
is relatively short and below, but close to, a characteristic time tg, then one obtains branched
polymers in the solution, usually called sol, that form a viscous solution.
Such branched
polymers are large but ﬁnite clusters of monomers. On the other hand, if the reaction time is
larger than tg, a very large solid network of connected monomers appears that is usually called
a chemical gel, or simply a gel. The gel network has interesting structural, mechanical, and
rheological properties which are described in this chapter. The characteristic time tg is called
the gelation time, and the point at which the gel network appears for the ﬁrst time is called the
gel point (GP). An example is shown in Figure 9.3. Most of us are already familiar with such
sol-gel transformations in our daily lives, since we all know about milk-to-cheese transition,
pudding, gelatine, etc. However, materials that contain gels, or use their speciﬁc properties,
are numerous. An important example is eye humor. In addition, gels play an important role
in laboratory technology (e.g., gel chromatography), in the fabrication of a wide variety of
products, such as glues, cosmetics, contact lenses, etc., and in food technology. In addition,
the sol-gel transition is a general phenomenon that has been utilized for producing a variety of
ceramic materials (Brinker and Scherer, 1990).
Chemical reactions are responsible for the interconnectivity of the monomers in chemical
gels. In general, there are three types of chemical gelation:
(1) Polycondensation: In this type of polymerization one begins with either bifunctional
units A-A or trifunctional ones B3, or more generally Z−functional units BZ. In polyconden-
sation reaction the A units are linked with the B units, with each elementary reaction being
accompanied by the elimination of a molecule between units of A and B. Thus, a polymer
network of the type shown in Figure 9.4 is formed in which the polymer chains are terminated
by either A or B. No two units of the same class can participate in a reaction with each other,
and therefore there is always exactly one bifunctional unit between polyfunctional units in the
polymer network.
(2) Vulcanization: This process starts with long linear polymer chains in a solution. The
chains are then crosslinked by small units. An example is rubber, the elasticity of which is due
637

to the introduction of S-S bonds between polyisoprene chains. One needs only a small number
of bonds to crosslink the chains and form an interconnected polymer network.
(3) Additive polymerization: Similar to polycondensation, the initial solution contains two
types of units which are A=A units that are bifunctional when the double bond opens, and
B=D=B units that are quadrifunctional when the two double bonds open independently of
each other. If the reaction polymerizes A=A units, one obtains A-A-A-A-· · · chains, whereas
reaction between the A units and the B=D=B units reticulates the network. The length of
the chains between two reticulation points is not ﬁxed, but depends crucially on the initiation
process and on the relative concentrations of the bi-and quadrifunctional units.
In addition to such chemical gels, one may also have physical gels in which the monomers
or particles are attached to each other by relatively weak and reversible association, or such
physical processes as entanglement.
A well-known example is silica aerogel, the dynamical
properties of which were described and discussed in Section 6.6.9, and will further be considered
below. Another example is a solution of gelatin in water below a certain critical temperature
where a coil to helix transition takes place, and bonds appear to form by winding of helixes of
two adjacent chains. Such physical gels can be made and also destroyed by thermal treatment.
In this section we describe modelling of morphological, mechanical and viscoelastic proper-
ties of the sol and gel phases, especially near the gel point GP. There is clearly a phase transition
as one passes from the sol phase to the gel phase, and this phase transition, called gelation,
has been described by a percolation model. As discussed in Chapter 2, modelling gel network
formation was pioneered by Flory (1941) and Stockmayer (1943) whose theory is essentially
equivalent to percolation on Bethe lattices. Stauﬀer (1976) and de Gennes (1976a) emphasized
the importance of the deviations from the Bethe lattice solution of Flory and Stockmayer, and
proposed to replace it by percolation on 3D lattices. This aspect of the problem, which can
be described by the random scalar percolation or a variant of it, is now well-understood. de
Gennes (1976a) also proposed that the elastic and viscoelastic properties of the gel and sol
phases can be described by appropriate random resistor network models. His suggestion was
widely accepted for a long time, and was utilized for interpreting experimental data. It was
recognized in the 1980s that, while de Gennes’ suggestion may be applicable to certain classes
of materials, more general models are needed for at least several other important classes of
polymeric materials. This realization gave rise to the development of vector percolation models
638

that were described in Chapter 8, which are used in this section for describing mechanical and
viscoelastic properties of polymers and gels.
9.2.1 Percolation model of polymerization and gelation
Consider a solution of molecules or monomers with functionality Z ≥3. To understand the
connection with percolation, suppose that the monomers occupy the sites of a periodic lattice.
With probability p, two nearest-neighbor monomers (sites) can react and form a chemical bond
between them. If p is small, only small polymers are formed. As p increases, larger and larger
polymers (clusters of connected monomers) with a broad size distribution are formed. This
mixture of clusters of reacted monomers and the isolated unreacted monomers represents the
sol phase. For p > pc, where pc is a characteristic value that depends on Z (or, the number
of nearest-neighbors of a monomer of the lattice), an “inﬁnite” cluster of reacted monomers is
formed which represents the gel network described above. Near the GP the gel usually coexists
with a sol such that the ﬁnite polymers are trapped in the interior of the gel. As p →1, almost
all monomers react, and the sol phase disappears completely. Thus, pc signals a connectivity
transition: For p > pc, an inﬁnite cluster, together (possibly) with a few ﬁnite-size clusters,
exist and thus the system is mainly a solid gel. The fraction of chemical bonds formed at the
GP (which is related to the fraction of reacted monomers at the GP) is obviously the analogue
of the bond percolation threshold pcb. Thus, it should be clear that formation of branched
polymers and gels is very similar to a percolation process. In reality, the monomers do not
react randomly; there are usually some correlations between reaction of the monomers with
one another, but such correlations do not change the essence of the main results, obtained
based on the random percolation model, that are described in this chapter.
9.2.2 Morphological properties of branched polymers and gels
What is the signature of the sol-gel phase transition? Experimental studies of sol-gel transi-
tions usually proceed by measuring the time evolution of the rheological (e.g., the viscosity) or
mechanical properties (e.g., the elastic moduli) during the chemical reaction leading to gelation,
assuming that the experimental parameter - time or frequency - and the theoretical one - the
number of crosslinks - are linearly related in the vicinity of the GP. Rheological measurements
are usually performed by using a cone and plate rheometer or by the more accurate magnetic
sphere rheometer. The ranges of shear rates, deformations, and times of measurements of these
639

devices allow the determination of the steady-state zero-shear viscosity and the steady-state
linear elastic moduli up to the vicinity of the phase transition at the GP, but it has proven to
be almost impossible to do such measurements at the GP (see below).
The correlation or connectivity length ξ of branched polymers diverges as pc is approached
according to the power law
ξ ∼|p −pc|−ν ,
(2084)
which is the analogue of Eq. (2.32). Above the GP the correlation length of polymers can be
interpreted as the mesh size of the gel network. For any length scale greater than ξ the gel
network is essentially homogeneous. Below the GP the correlation length is the typical radius
of the ﬁnite polymers in the sol phase. However, in this case, those polymers with radii much
larger than ξ have completely diﬀerent characteristics. Therefore, we discuss such polymers
separately, and we refer to them as the branched polymers.
9.2.2.1 Gel polymers
There are several important structural properties of branched polymers and gel networks
that can be measured directly or indirectly.
The gel fraction Pg(p) is the fraction of the
monomers that belong to the gel network. It can be measured by simply weighing the solid gel
at diﬀerent times during polymerization. It is obvious that Pg(p) > 0 only if p > pc, and that
Pg is the analogue of percolation fraction or percolation probability P(p) deﬁned in Section
2.6.1. Of particular interest to us is the behavior of Pg(p) near pc. It has been shown that in
this region
Pg(p) ∼(p −pc)β ,
(2085)
which is completely similar to Eq. (2.29).
At the GP the gel network is not homogeneous but is a self-similar fractal object with a
fractal dimension Dp that in d−dimensions is given by
Dp = d −β/ν ,
(2086)
the same as Eq. (2.47). The number distribution of the polymers, i.e., the probability Q(s, ϵ)
that a polymer of the sol phase contains s monomers at a distance ϵ = |p −pc| from the GP,
is clearly the analogue of ns deﬁned in Section 2.7. Thus, in analogy with Eq. (2.35) we can
write
Q(s, ϵ) ∼s−τh1(ϵsσ) ,
(2087)
640

where h1 is a universal scaling function. Using this distribution, we deﬁne two distinct mass
averages. One, the weight-average molecular weight, is deﬁned by
Mw =
 s2Q(s, ϵ)ds
 sQ(s, ϵ)ds ∼ϵ−γp ∼|p −pc|−γp ,
(2088)
where γp + 2β = νd, with d being the dimensionality of the material. In the polymer literature
Mw is also called the degree of polymerization. The second mass average is deﬁned by
Mz =
 s3Q(s, ϵ)ds
 s2Q(s, ϵ)ds ∼ϵ−1/σ ∼|p −pc|−1/σ ,
(2089)
where σ = (τ −2)/β, as in percolation (see Chapter 2).
Note, however, that the average
⟨M⟩=
 sQ(s, ϵ)ds/
 Q(s, ϵ)ds does not diverge at the GP.
9.2.2.2 Comparison with the experimental data
We are now in a position to compare measurements of various polymer properties with
the predictions of percolation theory. Since one of the main predictions of percolation is the
existence of universal critical exponents and fractal dimensions, and because the numerical value
of any polymer property, such as it average molecular weight or the location of the gel point, is
not universal and depends on the morphology of the polymer, we focus here on a comparison
between the measured universal exponents, such as β, γp and σ, and the predictions of the
percolation model.
In their experiments with irradiated polystyrene solution in cyclopentane, Leibler and Schos-
seler (1985) coupled gel permeation chromatography and light scattering to deduce the polymer
size distribution which provides a direct means of measuring the exponent τ. Figure 9.5 presents
their measurements from which one obtains, τ ≃2.3 ± 0.1, consistent with the percolation pre-
diction of 2.18 (see Table 2.3). Lapp et al. (1989) further checked this result by carrying out
similar experiments in a system made by chemical end-linking of polydimethylsiloxane, and
Patton et al. (1989) carried out experiments in a system in which polyester was made by bulk
condensation polymerization. The measurements of both of these groups were consistent with
the percolation prediction for the exponent τ. Note that since the polymer fractal dimension
Dp is related to τ by
Dp =
d
τ −1 ,
(2090)
these data also imply that Dp ≃2.5, in agreement with the percolation prediction, Df ≃2.53
(see Table 2.3).
641

Equation (10) was tested by Adam et al. (1987), who carried out static light scattering
measurements on a polyurethane sol, and by Candau et al. (1985) who performed their exper-
iments on polystyrene systems crosslinked with divinylbenzene. Figure 9.6 depicts the results
of Adam et al. (1987) from which one obtains γp ≃1.71 ± 0.06, only 5% smaller than the
percolation prediction of 1.82. A similar estimate was reported by Candau et al. (1985). On
the other hand, Eqs. (7) and (10) can be combined to yield Mw ∼P −γp/β
g
, and thus a plot of
log(Mw) versus log(Pg) should yield an estimate of γp/β. Schmidt and Burchard (1981) carried
out anionic copolymerization of divinylbenzene with styrene and obtained both branched poly-
mers and gels. Light scattering was used to measure various properties of interest. When they
plotted log(Mw) versus log(Pg), as shown in Figure 9.7, they obtained a straight line with the
slope γp/β ≃4.5, in good agreement with the percolation prediction, γp/β ≃4.44. For more
recent experiments regarding these exponents see Trappe et al. (1992). We conclude that 3D
percolation provides a very good description of the universal morphological properties of gel
polymer networks, whereas the predictions of the Flory-Stockmayer theory of polymerization,
Dp = 4, γp = β = 1, do not agree with the experimental data described above.
9.2.2.3 Branched polymers
After a polymer is formed by a chemical reaction, the experimentalist usually analyzes its
structure by diluting it in a good solvent. Such branched polymers in a dilute solution of a
good solvent may swell and have a radius larger than their extent at the end of the chemical
reaction. Thus, it is important to consider both typical polymers and the swollen ones. Let us
now discuss the experimental evidence for the applicability of a percolation model for describing
the structural properties of branched polymers, in a dilute solution of a good solvent.
Consider a swollen branched polymer in a good solvent with a radius larger than the polymer
correlation length ξ. The structural properties of such branched polymers are described by
lattice animals, which are percolation clusters below the percolation threshold with radii that
are larger than the percolation correlation length ξp. However, although lattice animals are
very large percolation cluster below pc, their statistics are completely diﬀerent from those of
percolation clusters. To see this, let us ﬁrst deﬁne a few key properties of lattice animals. Let
As(p) be the average number (per lattice site) of the clusters and asm be the total number of
geometrically diﬀerent conﬁgurations for a cluster of s sites and perimeter m. Thus, As(p) =
642


m asmps(1 −p)m. For large s the asymptotic behavior of As(p) is described by the power law
As(p) ∼λs
gs−θ ,
(2091)
where θ is a universal exponents, independent of the coordination number of the lattice, whereas
the growth parameter λg is not universal. Moreover, for large values of s a fractal dimension
Da, deﬁned by
s ∼RDa ,
(2092)
describes the structure of the animals or the branched polymers, where R is the radius of the
lattice animal. Lubensky and Isaacson (1978) and Family and Coniglio (1980) showed that the
exponents θ and Da are not related to any of the percolation exponents deﬁned in Chapter 2.
Moreover, Parisi and Sourlas (1981) showed that
θ = d −2
Da
+ 1 ,
(2093)
and that
Da = 2 ,
d = 3 .
(2094)
Two other key diﬀerences distinguish lattice animals from percolation clusters. One is that the
exponents θ and Da deﬁned above are applicable for any p < pc (recall that the percolation
exponents are deﬁned for p ≃pc), so long as R ≫ξp. The other diﬀerence is that the upper
critical dimension for lattice animals or branched polymers, i.e., the dimension at which the
mean-ﬁeld approximation to the critical exponents becomes exact, is 8, two more than that of
percolation.
We may also deﬁne a pair correlation function C(r), i.e., the probability that two monomers
or sites, separated by a distance r, belong to the same polymer or cluster. As disscused in
Section 2.3.1, for a d−dimensional branched polymer and large r, we expect the correlation
function to decay as
C(r) ∼rDa−d .
(2095)
As explained in Section 2.3.2, the Fourier transform of C(r) is proportional to the scattered
intensity I(q) in an x-ray or a neutron scattering experiment, where q is the magnitude of the
scattering vector given by Eq. (2.11). By Fourier transforming of Eq. (17), one obtains Eq.
643

(2.13) for the scattering intensity of self-similar materials, including branched polymers (lattice
animals), which we quote here again,
I(q) ∼q−Da .
(2096)
In real applications, however, polymer solutions are almost always polydispersed and contain
polymers of all sizes with radii that are smaller or larger than the correlation length ξ. Thus, one
must deﬁne average properties, where the averaging is taken over the polymer size distribution.
An average polymer radius is deﬁned by,
⟨R⟩=

s s2R(s)Q(s, ϵ)

s s2Q(s, ϵ)
,
(2097)
which, when combined with Eqs. (9) and (14), yields a relation between s and ⟨R⟩(Daoud et
al., 1984):
s ∼⟨R⟩Da(3−τ) ,
(2098)
so that, in analogy with Eq. (14), an eﬀective fractal dimension, De
a = Da(3 −τ), may be
deﬁned. In eﬀect, Eq. (20) mixes the branched polymer exponent Da with the percolation
or gel polymer exponent τ. If a percolation description of polymerization is applicable (which
the experiments described above conﬁrm it to be the case), we should have (see Table 2.3)
τ(d = 3) ≃2.18, implying that
De
a ≃1.64 ,
d = 3 ,
(2099)
indicating that the eﬀective fractal dimension is smaller than that of a single branched polymer.
Since we have deﬁned an eﬀective fractal dimension for a dilute polydisperse polymer solution,
the scattering intensity for a solution of a polydisperse polymer should also be modiﬁed to
I(q) ∼q−Da(3−τ) .
(2100)
In practice, Eq. (22) is used in a scattering experiment for estimating De.
9.2.2.4 Comparison with the experimental data
Experimental evidence for Eq. (16) is actually provided through Eq. (18). Bouchaud et al.
(1986) carried out small-angle neutron scattering experiments on a monodisperse polyurethane
sample and measured the scattered intensity as a function of q. Figure 9.8 presents such data
for this polymer from which one obtains, Da = 1.98 ± 0.03, in excellent agreement with Eq.
644

(16). Bouchaud et al. also (1986) synthesized a natural polydisperse polyurethane sample and
carried out small-angle neutron scattering on a dilute solution of it. Figure 9.8 also presents
these data from which one obtains, De
a ≃1.6 ± 0.05, in good agreement with the theoretical
prediction given by (21). Adam et al. (1987) carried out static light scattering experiments in
dilute polydisperse polyurethane solutions and reported that, De
a ≃1.62 ± 0.08, again in good
agreement with (21). Leibler and Schosseler (1985) measured the average radius of polystyrene,
crosslinked by irradiation by elastic light scattering and found that, De
a ≃1.72±0.09, consistent
with Eq. (21). Patton et al. (1989) performed both quasi-elastic and elastic light scattering
experiments on branched polyesters and reported that, De
a ≃1.52 ± 0.1, somewhat lower than
the prediction, but still consistent with it. A diﬀerent experiment was carried out by Dubois
and Cabane (1989) on a silica gel, a physical gel that has a morphology more complex than the
chemical gels used in the experiments described above (see Chapter 6, and also the discussion
below). Despite signiﬁcant diﬀerences, Dubois and Cabane reported that, De
a ≃1.58, quite
close to the theoretical prediction, Eq. (21).
9.2.3 Rheology of critical gels: Dynamic-mechanical experiments
The evolution of a polymer molecular structure during the gelation process has a profound
eﬀect on molecular mobility which can be easily monitored by probing the change in viscosity
and the elastic moduli. This is shown schematically in Figure 9.9. The initial (p = 0) liquid
system has a steady shear viscosity η which increases with the extent of the reaction as the
average molecular weight Mw increases. At the gel point (GP), the viscosity and the longest
relaxation time tmax diverge. Beyond pc, the equilibrium elastic moduli increase until they
attain their highest values when the reaction is brought to completion, i.e., when p →1. All
the experimental data for the elastic moduli of gel networks above, but close to, the GP indicate
that they follow a power law given by
elastic moduli ∼(p −pc)z ,
p > pc .
(2101)
On the other hand, the viscosity of the sol phase diverges as
η ∼(pc −p)−k ,
p < pc ,
(2102)
while, as shown below, the longest relaxation time diverges as
tmax ∼|p −pc|−k−z ,
|p −pc| ≪1 .
(2103)
645

In practice, it is precisely the divergence of η that signals the formation of a gel network. Due to
divergence of tmax measurements of the viscosity and elastic moduli fail at pc, since steady-state
conditions cannot be reached in a ﬁnite time. Another problem is that precise measurement of
the GP is often very diﬃcult.
These problems have been partially overcome by performing dynamic-mechanical experi-
ments, in which the sample is exposed to a periodically varying stress ﬁeld. For example, a
tensile stress is used which, at time t, is given by
σzz(t) = σ0
zz exp(iωt) .
(2104)
This tensile stress results in a time-dependent longitudinal strain ϵzz(t) which varies with the
frequency of the stress, but shows, in general, a phase-lag ϕ, so that
ϵzz(t) = ϵ0
zz exp[−i(ωt −ϕ)] .
(2105)
We may then employ a dynamic tensile modulus E∗(ω), deﬁned as
E∗(ω) = σzz(t)
ϵzz(t) = E′ + iE′′ .
(2106)
Analogous experiments can of course be carried out for other types of mechanical loading. Of
partricular interest are measurements for simple shear which determine the relation between
the shear strain ϵzx, yielding the displacement along x per unit distance normal to the shear
plane z = constant, and the shear stress σzx that acts on the shear plane along x.
In any case, such dynamic-mechanical experiments measure the small amplitude oscillatory
shear behavior of evolving gels. Under this condition, the gel evolution is continuous (no sin-
gularity). Even such experiments cannot entirely overcome the diﬃculties in the determination
of the exponent k since the measurements cannot be carried out at the GP and in the limit of
zero frequency. To estimate k one usually measures the frequency-dependent complex modulus
G∗(ω) = G′(ω) + iG′′(ω) at frequency ω. At the GP and for low frequencies, one has
G′ ∼G′′ ∼ωu ,
p = pc ,
(2107)
with
u =
z
z + k ,
(2108)
646

where G′ (storage modulus) and G′′ (loss modulus) describe storage and dissipation in an
oscillating strain ﬁeld of constant amplitude. Typical variations of G′ and G′′ with ω are shown
in Figure 9.10 for a polycondensed gel very close to the GP.
The complex modulus G∗(ω) is sometimes written as G∗= G + iωη, for which Durand et
al. (1987) proposed that
G∗(ω, ϵ) ∼ϵzh2(iωϵz+k) ,
(2109)
where ϵ = |p−pc|, and h2(x) is a universal scaling function. The signiﬁcance of scaling equation
(31) is that it enables one to collapse the data for all values of ϵ and ω onto a single curve,
usually called the master curve by polymer researchers. In the low-frequency regime, we do
not expect G∗to depend on ϵ, but only on ω, in which case one ﬁnds that G∗∼(iω)u, which
is equivalent to Eq. (29). Moreover, there is a loss angle δ deﬁned by tan δ = G′/G′′. The
remarkable property of δ is that at the GP it takes on a value δc given by
δc = π
2 (1 −u) = π
2
k
z + k .
(2110)
so that, if the critical exponents z and k are universal, so will also be the loss angle δc.
As already mentioned above, an important problem in polymerization and gelation is ac-
curate determination of the GP, either for avoiding it in order to prevent gelation (so that
a branched polymer with speciﬁc properties can be prepared), or for making materials very
close to GP, since they have unusual properties. The GP, which is the analogue of a perco-
lation threshold, depends on the functionality of the polymer, and as we learned in Chapter
2, percolation thresholds decrease with increasing coordination numbers. Thus, polymers with
crosslinks of high functionality gel very early. Holly et al. (1988) proposed using the loss angle
δ for locating the GP. They argued that since as the GP is reached tan δ becomes independent
of the frequency [see Eq. (32)], then, if one plots tan δ versus time at diﬀerent frequencies,
the intersection of the various curves should be at the GP. Figure 9.11, taken from Lin et al.
(1991), demonstrates how this method is used for locating the GP for a physical gel.
9.2.4 The relaxation time spectrum
Since the time dependence of a macroscopic relaxation process is always indicative of the
underlying microscopic dynamics, one may look for kinetic equations that correctly describe
the time-dependence of the observed responses of a material. In the simplest case, there is only
647

a single characteristic time τ, the origin of which goes back to Debye who proposed it in his
seminal work on the dielectric response of polar liquids. If we deﬁne a shear compliance J(t)
by
J(t) = ϵzx
σ0
zx
,
then, applying an oscillatory shear stress
σzx(t) = σ0
zx exp(iωt) ,
on a polymer means imposing on the sample an oscillatory variation for the strain ϵzx(t) =
∆Jσzx(t). Here, ∆J is called the relaxation strength of the material. The governing equation
for ϵzx(t) is then given by
dϵzx(t)
dt
= −1
τ

ϵzx(t) −∆Jσ0
zx exp(iωt)

.
(2111)
Assuming a solution, ϵzx(t) = σ0
zxJ∗(ω) exp(iωt), where J∗(ω) is the complex shear compliance,
substituting it into Eq. (33) and solving it, yield
J∗(ω) =
∆J
1 + iωτ ,
(2112)
which is usually referred to as a Debye process.
In general, however, the dynamics of polymers and gels in the reaction bath cannot be
described by a single relaxation time, rather by a statistical distribution of such characteristics
times. For example, for the shear properties, we write the dynamic compliance J∗(ω) as a sum
of Debye processes with relaxation times τi and relaxation strengths ∆Ji, so that
J∗(ω) = Ju +

i
∆Ji
1 + iωτi
,
(2113)
which is usually represented by an integral,
J∗(ω) = Ju +

R(τ)
1 + iωτ dτ ,
(2114)
where R(τ) is called the retardation time spectrum of the shear compliance J∗. One may also
write these results in terms of the complex modulus G∗(ω) = 1/J∗(ω), which then yields
G∗(ω) = Gu −

H(τ)
1 + iωτ dτ ,
(2115)
648

where H(t) is called the relaxation time spectrum of the complex modulus G∗(ω) [or G(t)] (see,
for example, Ferry, 1980).
An important point is that, the observed power-law behavior of G′ and G′′, Eq. (29), implies
a relaxation time spectrum which is self-similar (in time):
H(t) = G0
Γ(u)
 t
t0
−u
,
(2116)
where G0 is the characteristic modulus, t0 is the characteristic shortest relaxation time, and
Γ(x) is the gamma function. The modulus of a fully cross-linked polymer network is typically
106 −107Pa, while the relaxation time of network strand is about 10−7 −10−4 sec.
This
spectrum extends from the shortest time, at which strands are beginning to be probed, to the
inﬁnite relaxation time of the diverging largest polymer cluster. The parameters G0 and t0 are
material characteristics of the gel system. Most gel systems seem to possess the same value of
u the universality of which can, as explained below, be explained based on vector percolation.
However, there are also gel systems which exhibit no apparent universality in the value of u.
Viscosity and elastic moduli are rheological and mechanical properties of branched polymers
and gels which characterize the dynamics of the polymerization, since we may measure, directly
or indirectly, the distribution of the relaxation times H(t) in the reaction bath. The moments
of H(t) are directly related to the viscosity and the elastic moduli. Using Eq. (31), we can
back-calculate H(t) (Daoud, 1988):
H(t) ∼t−uh3(tϵz+k) ,
(2117)
where h3 is another universal scaling function.
Equation (39), which indicates that in the
scaling regime near the GP the relaxation time distribution is a slowly decaying power law,
generalizes Eq. (38) to any value of p, the extent of the polymerization. As pointed out by
Daoud (1988), two distinct average or characteristic times can now be deﬁned. One is
t1 =
 H(t)dt
 [H(t)/t]dt ∼ϵ−k ∼η ,
(2118)
while the second one is given by
t2 =
 tH(t)dt
 H(t)dt ∼ϵ−z−k .
(2119)
Note that t2 is in fact identical with tmax, the longest relaxation time of the gel system; see
Eq. (25). Because of the existence of the distribution of relaxation times and its scaling form
649

given by Eq. (39), any relaxation property in the intermediate time or frequency range is not
exponential, but follows a power law.
9.2.5 Comparison with the experimental data
To compare the experimental data for the scaling properties of the elasticity of gels with
the predictions of vector percolation, we ﬁrst divide the gels into two groups, and what follows
is a brief description of each.
9.2.5.1 Physical gels
In the ﬁrst group are what we earlier called physical gels. Two examples are gelation of
silica particles in NaCl solutions and in pure water (Gauthier-Manuel et al., 1987), and silica
aerogels (Woignier et al., 1988). As discussed earlier, the attachment of the particles in such
gels is by relatively weak association. The bond-bending (BB) forces are important in such
gels since touching particles that form long chains, when deformed, roll on top of one another
and this motion and the displacement of the centers of any 3 mutually-touching particles create
forces that are equivalent to the BB forces. Experimental measurements (Gauthier-Manuel et
al., 1987; Woignier et al., 1988) of the elastic moduli of such gels conﬁrm this: The exponent
z was found to be about 3.8, in excellent agreement with the critical exponent f of the 3D BB
model (see Table 9.1).
More recent measurements by Devreux et al. (1993) indicate a crossover between the pre-
diction of the BB model and another regime with a much smaller value of z. They measured
the complex modulus G∗of silica gels formed by hydrolysis-condensation of a silicon alkoxide.
For a restricted region near the gelation time, they reported z ≃2.0±0.1, close to the exponent
f of the central-force percolation, whereas beyond this region they found z ≃3.6 ± 0.1, which
is close to the elasticity exponent of 3D BB model. Devreux et al. themselves interpreted the
data for the region near the gelation time in terms of an analogy between the EPNs and random
resistor networks. We will come back to this point shortly.
9.2.5.2 Chemical gels
There are numerous experimental measurements of the elastic moduli of chemical gel net-
works and the associated exponent z.
Examples include the measurements for hydrolyzed
polyacrylamide (Allain and Salom´e, 1987b,1990), tetraethylorthosilicate reactions (Hodgson
650

and Amis, 1990; Takahashi et al., 1994), gelatin solutions (Djabourov et al., 1988), polycon-
densation of polyoxypropylated trimethylolpropane with hexamethylenediisocyanate (Durand
et al., 1987), and several other measurements (Gauthier-Manuel and Guyon, 1980, Adam et al.,
1981; Gordon and Torkington, 1981; Tokita et al., 1984; Fadda et al., 2001). These measure-
ments yielded values of z in the range 1.9−2.4, which do not agree with the value of the critical
exponent f for the 3D BB model (see Table 9.1). In fact, if the size of a chemical gel network is
large enough, the BB forces do not play an important role in determining the elastic properties
of the near critical gels, and therefore the only important forces between the monomers are the
central (stretching) forces. Therefore, these experimental data may be explained based on the
elasticity exponent of the 3D central-force percolation, f ≃2.1 ± 0.2.
However, a value of z in the range 1.9 −2.4 may also be interpreted in terms of two other
models.
As mentioned earlier, de Gennes (1976a) suggested that the scaling properties of
the elastic moduli of (chemical) gels are in the universality class of the conductivity of scalar
percolation, implying that z = µ ≃2.0, where µ is the critical exponent of the eﬀective
conductivity of random resistor networks. On the other hand, Alexander (1984) argued that
there are terms in the elastic energy of some gels and rubbers, which are under internal or
external stresses, that are similar to the Born model described in Chapter 8 [see Eq. (8.25)
or (8.26)]. As discussed there, the critical exponent of the elastic moduli of the Born model is
equal to the conductivity exponent µ, and in particular in 3D, f = µ ≃2.0, because near the
percolation threshold pc the contribution of the second term of the right hand side of Eq. (8.25)
or (8.26), which is a purely scalar term, dominates that of the ﬁrst term which is contributed
by the central forces. While the data mentioned above are more or less consistent with de
Gennes’ hypothesis, most of them are not precise enough to distinguish between µ ≃2.0 for 3D
percolation conductivity and f ≃2.1 for the central-force percolation. However, there are also
a few relatively precise sets of experimental data that seem to support de Gennes’ conjecture.
For example, Axelos and Kolb (1990) measured the rheological properties of pectin biopolymers
that consist of randomly connected α(1−4) D−galacturonic acid units and their methyl esters.
If the methyl ester content is low, pectin forms thermoreversible gels upon addition of cations,
such as calcium. Axelos and Kolb measured the frequency dependence of the storage modulus
G′(ω) and loss modulus G′′(ω) [see Eq. (29)] and reported that, z ≃1.93, k ≃0.82, and
u ≃0.71. Their elasticity exponent is close to the conductivity exponent µ ≃2.0 for 3D resistor
651

networks. Less precise data, but still supportive of de Gennes’ proposal, were reported by Adam
et al. (1997) for complex modulus of end-linked poly(dimethylsiloxane) pregel polymer clusters,
quenched at diﬀerent distances from the gelation threshold. They reported that z ≃1.9±0.15,
consistent with the 3D value of the conductivity exponent. However, the estimated error is large
enough that one can easily interpret this value of z in terms of the central-force percolation
model.
At ﬁrst glance, de Gennes’ proposal that the critical exponent of the eﬀective moduli of
gels, a vector transport property, is equal to that of a scalar property, the eﬀective electrical
conductivity of a resistor network, may seem incorrect. However, to justify his proposal, de
Gennes introduced the notion of an elastic chain between neighboring nodes or monomers,
which are the analogue of quasi-one-dimensional strands that percolation clusters possess near
the percolation threshold. He then argued that if such chains are elongated, then their nodes
carry an extra amount of energy. If we assume that the blobs (i.e., the multiply-connected
parts) in the large cluster of monomers do not contribute signiﬁcantly to the elastic moduli,
then one must only consider the energetics of the links or the chains. If the extra energy of
such chains is larger than kBT, then, as Daoud (2000) argued, one obtains de Gennes’ proposal,
µ = z, although Daoud’s analysis was a mean-ﬁeld approximation, and therefore it is not clear
that it would also be valid if one carries out a more general, non-mean-ﬁeld, analysis.
As for Alexander’s proposal, rubbers and gels diﬀer from the Born model in several impor-
tant ways, such as the presence of non-linear terms in their elastic energy, and the possibility of
negative as well as positive Born coeﬃcients α1 and α2 [see Eq. (8.26)]. Therefore, as discussed
in Chapter 8, while one may use the Born model to ﬁt the experimental data, it is not clear
that, at a fundamental level, the Born model can actually describe the elastic properties of such
gels, since its elastic energy is not rotationally invariant, even though the numerical value of the
critical exponent of its elastic moduli might to be close to measured values for some chemical
gels.
9.2.5.3 Enthalpic versus entropic elasticity
There is yet another way of rationalizing the experimental data for the scaling properties
of chemical gels near the gel point. To describe this, we mention that several measurements of
the elastic moduli of chemical gel networks and the associated exponent z deviate signiﬁcantly
652

from all the data described above. Examples include the measurements of Adam et al. (1985)
for polycondensation, z ≃3.3 ± 0.5, those of Martin et al. (1988) and Adolf et al. (1990) for
gels made from 89% (by weight) of the diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A cured with 11% (by
weight) of diethanolamine which yielded z ≃3.3 ± 0.3, and the data reported by Colby et al.
(1993) for polyester gels, which have been argued to lie in the middle of the static crossover
between the Flory-Stockmayer theory and the percolation model. Colby et al. reported a value
of z ≃3.0 ± 0.7, which is inconsistent with both the central-force percolation and the bond-
bending model, although one might argue that their reported estimate of z is agreement with
µ = 3, the mean-ﬁeld value of the eﬀective conductivity exponent (see Table 2.3). More recent
measurements of the shear modulus of an end-linking polymer gel network by Takahashi et al.
(1994) yielded z ≃2.7, which is again in the range of the above data.
One possible explanation for such data is that the elasticity of such gels is entropic rather
than enthalpic (or energetic). Plischke and Jo´os (1998), Plischke et al. (1999), and Farago
and Kantor (2000) argued that the central-force and the BB models are applicable to gels at
temperature T = 0, and that for T ̸= 0 there is a contribution to the shear modulus that is
entropic in nature. In analogy with the physics of rubber elasticity, and as described in Section
8.15, Plischke et al. (1999) argued that near the percolation threshold or the gel point, the
polymer network consists essentially of long chains of singly-connected particles (monomers or
sites), linked to each other at various junction point. Such chains are similar to the polymer
chains that are crosslinked in rubber in order to produce a rigid amorphous material. Defor-
mation of the sample changes the distance between junctions points or crosslinks, as a result
of which the entropy is generically decreased, resulting in an increase of free energy and hence
a restoring force. When a sample-spanning cluster (or a large polymer network) is formed,
there is a net shear restoring force, implying that the connecting chain of particles acts as a
stretched spring. Molecular dynamics simulations [for description of this method see Chapter
9 of Volume II; see also Kremer (1998)] of Plischke and co-workers, and computer simulations
of Farago and Kantor (2000), who used a model consisting of hard spheres in which a fraction
p of the neighbors are tethered by inextensible bonds, both yielded z ≃µ.
On the other hand, del Gado et al. (1999) proposed a diﬀerent model, also purported to
be appropriate for entropic gels, in which one begins with a random collection of monomers
with concentration p. Each pair of the monomers are then linked with a probability pb to
653

form permanent bonds. Varying pb produces a distribution of clusters of the linked monomers,
and hence gives rise to the possibility of forming a sample-spanning cluster. Monomers and
the clusters then diﬀuse according to the bond ﬂuctuation algorithm of Carmesin and Kremer
(1988).
In this algorithm, the monomers diﬀuse in the solution randomly but obeying the
excluded-volume interaction (i.e., no two monomers can occupy the same point in space). Due
to this random motion, the bonds may have to change their length in a set of allowed values,
and thus they may have to bend and take on many diﬀerent values of the angles between the
bonds, which then gives rise to a wide variety of conformations of the polymers. The mean
square displacement ⟨R2(t)⟩of the system’s center of mass is then calculated which, due to the
elastic potential that reduces the ﬂuctuations proportionally to the eﬀective elastic constant
αe, is given by
⟨R2(t)⟩∝α−1
e
,
(2120)
and therefore the elastic constant and its power-law behavior near the percolation threshold
pc, and hence the exponent z, can be computed. Two-dimensional simulations of del Gado et
al. (1999) yielded a value z ≃2.7 ± 0.1, hence disagreeing with the results of Plischke and
co-workers and Farago and Kantor.
How can one interpret these results? If the elasticity of these gels is due to entropic eﬀects,
then, as Daoud and Coniglio (1981) argued (see also Martin et al., 1988), the elastic free energy
per unit volume H must be given by
H ∼ξ−d
p αℓξ2
p ,
(2121)
where ξp is the correlation length of percolation, and αℓis the eﬀective elastic constant of a
long chain of length ξp connecting two nodes. Since αℓ∼ξ−2
p , we obtain
z = νd .
(2122)
In 2D, Eq. (44) predicts that, z ≃2.66, quite diﬀerent from the exponents f of the central-force
and the BB models, and also the conductivity exponent µ ≃1.3 (see Table 2.3). However, it is
in agreement with the numerical simulations of del Gado et al. (1999). Daoud (2000) argued
that Eq. (44) is valid when the energy of the chains is of the same order of magnitude as the
thermal energy kBT.
654

Equation (44) also predicts that in 3D, z ≃2.64. This value of the elasticity exponent
is consistent with the experimental data of Adam et al. (1985), Martin et al. (1988), Adolf
et al.
(1990), Colby et al.
(1993) and Takahashi et al.
(1994) mentioned above, who all
reported values of the elasticity exponent z in the range 2.7 −3.3 ± 0.5.
Therefore, while
these experimental data may be explained by the entropic eﬀects and Eq. (44), the numerical
results of Plischke and co-workers, and those of Farago and Kantor (2000) do not agree with
the prediction of Eq. (44). Indeed, while the main argument of Plischke et al. (1999) was that
the entropic eﬀects are important at temperatures T ̸= 0 where one should see a crossover to
the value of the conductivity exponent, all of the above experiments were carried out at ﬁnite
temperatures, yet they did not yield z ≃µ.
Summarizing, the scaling properties of elastic moduli of (physical or chemical) gels may
belong to three distinct universality classes, two of which are described by vector percolation
models described and analyzed in Chapter 8, while the third class seems to be described by
entropic network models, also described in Section 8.15.
However, in addition to what we
described above, alternative models and explanations for the experimental data for the elas-
tic moduli of gel polymers do exist, and therefore the question of an appropriate model for
describing and predicting the elastic properties of such materials is not completely solved.
9.2.5.4 Viscosity of near critical gelling solutions
How can one explain the extensive experimental data for the scaling behavior of the viscosity
η of the sol phase near the GP? To begin with, it has been proposed by Sahimi and Goddard
(1985) [see also Arbabi and Sahimi (1990c) and Sahimi and Arbabi (1993)] that the scaling
properties of η near the gel point is analogous to that of the shear modulus of a superelastic
percolation network (SEPN) near pc. To proceed further, we must ﬁrst establish a rigorous
relationship between the linear elasticity and the theory of viscous ﬂuids, thus conﬁrming the
proposal of Sahimi and Goddard (1985).
We consider a general time-dependent system, and write down the equation of motion for a
macroscopically-homogeneous material in terms of the displacement ﬁeld u which, as described
in Section 7.1, is given by
(λ + µ)∇(∇· u) + µ∇2u + F = ρ∂2u
∂t2 ,
(2123)
where ρ is the mass density and t is the time. The rest of the notation is the same as in
655

Chapter 7. For an incompressible material, i.e., one for which the bulk modulus K and the
Lam´e constant λ are divergent, one has the solenoidal condition,
∇· u = 0 .
(2124)
Due to the incompressibility condition, the ﬁrst term of Eq. (45) is indeterminate, and can be
written in terms of the reactive hydrostatic pressure P, yielding
−∇P + µ∇2u + F = ρ∂2u
∂t2 .
(2125)
On the other hand, let us write down the Navier-Stokes equations of motion for an incom-
pressible and Newtonian viscous ﬂuid,
−∇P + η∇2u + F = ρ
∂v
∂t + v · ∇v

,
(2126)
where v is the ﬂuid velocity ﬁeld, F is an external (body) force, and η is the ﬂuid’s dynamic
viscosity. For an incompressible ﬂuid, the continuity equation is given by
∇· v = 0 .
(2127)
For slow ﬂuid ﬂow, i.e., when the Reynolds number Re≪1, the non-linear inertial term, v·∇v,
is very small and can be neglected, which means that the Navier-Stokes equations reduce to
−∇P + η∇2v + F = ρ∂v
∂t .
(2128)
Thus, we see that, under steady-state conditions, and when the ﬂow of the ﬂuid is slow, the
governing equations for the displacement ﬁeld u and the velocity ﬁeld v are exactly identical,
provided that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the shear modulus µ and the
dynamic viscocity η.
In addition, under certain conditions, the eﬀective viscosity ηe of a suspension of completely
rigid spheres in an incompressible ﬂuid of viscosity η1, under creeping (very slow) ﬂow condi-
tions, is related to the steady-state eﬀective shear modulus µe of a two-phase material composed
of the same completely rigid spheres in an incompressible matrix with shear modulus µ1. In
this case, the working equation is given by
ηe
η1
= µe
µ1
.
(2129)
656

Equation (51) is exact when, regardless of the conﬁguration of the particles, hydrodynamic
interactions between the particles can be neglected, which is the case when the system is
inﬁnitely dilute so that the volume fraction φ2 of the particles approaches zero. If the system
is non-dilute, Eq. (51) would still be exact if the conﬁgurations of the particles in the ﬂow and
elasticity problems are identical.
Having established a theoretical connection between the viscosity η of a solution and the
shear modulus of an appropriate two-phase material, the one-to-one correspondence between η
and the shear modulus of a SEPN should be clear because, (1) η and µ both diverge at pc (the
gel point), and (2) percolation models predict accurately the morphology and elastic moduli
of gel polymer networks. On the other hand, de Gennes (1979) [see also Allain et al. (1990)]
suggested an analogy between η and the eﬀective conductivity of a conductor-superconductor
percolation networks, the eﬀective conductivity of which diverges at pc according to the power
law, ge ∼(pc −p)−s, so that k = s.
However, even a one-to-one correspondence between η and the shear modulus of a SEPN is
not nearly enough to explain the scaling of η of the gelling solution near the gel point, because
most of the experimental data indicate that the value of k is either in the range 0.6-0.9 (see,
for example, Adam et al., 1979, 1985; Allain and Salom´e, 1987a; Durand et al., 1987), or in
the range 1.3-1.5 (see, for example, Djabourov et al., 1988; Martin et al., 1988, Martin and
Wilcoxon, 1988), whereas the power-law behavior of the shear modulus of a 3D SEPN near
pc is characterized by a unique value of the exponent χ deﬁned by Eq. (8.5). The reason
for having two distinct values of k is (Arbabi and Sahimi, 1990c; Sahimi and Arbabi, 1993)
that the dynamics of the sol solutions that yield the two distinct values of k are completely
diﬀerent. In one case, the solution is close to the Zimm limit in which there is little or no
polymer diﬀusion in the reaction bath, because there are strong hydrodynamic interactions
between the monomers, and also between polymers of various sizes. Hence, a SEPN, a static
system with ﬁxed rigid clusters, may be suitable for simulating the Zimm regime. Indeed, the
estimate χ = ν −1
2β ≃0.65 for 3D SEPNs [where ν and β are the usual percolation exponents;
see Eq. (8.112)] supports the proposal that those gelling solutions that yield a value of k is in
the range 0.6-0.9, are in fact close to the Zimm regime and can be described by a static SEPN.
On the other hand, the gelling solution can also be near the Rouse regime in which there are
no hydrodynamic interactions between the polymers of various sizes, and therefore the polymers
657

can diﬀuse essentially freely in the reaction bath. To simulate this regime the following model
was proposed (Arbabi and Sahimi, 1990c; Sahimi and Arbabi, 1993). We consider a dynamic
SEPN in which each cluster of the totally rigid bonds represents a ﬁnite polymer. Due to
randomness of percolation networks, there is of course a wide distribution of such polymers or
clusters in the network. The soft bonds (those with a ﬁnite elastic constant) represent the liquid
solution in which the rigid clusters move randomly, with equal probability, in any direction of
the network. This simulates the diﬀusion of the polymers in the reaction bath. Two rigid
clusters cannot overlap, but they can temporarily join and form a larger cluster, which can
also be broken up again at a later time. It was shown (Arbabi and Sahimi, 1990c; Sahimi and
Arbabi, 1993) that the shear modulus of this dynamic SEPN diverges with an exponent χ′
given by
χ′ = 2ν −β .
(2130)
Equation (52) predicts that in 3D, χ′ ≃1.35, supporting the proposal that the gelling solutions
that yield a value of k in the range 1.3-1.5 are close to the Rouse limit, and can be described
by the dynamic SEPN described above. Daoud (2000) argued that, similar to the case of the
elastic moduli described above, one must have two regimes. If the elastic chains carry an energy
which is of the same order of magnitude as the thermal energy kBT, then the exponent χ is
given by Eq. (8.112). On the other hand, if the elastic chains are stretched and have an extra
energy larger than kBT, then one recovers Eq. (52), which had also been conjectured by de
Gennes (1979), based on the analogy between the viscosity and the eﬀective conductivity of
conductor-superconductor percolation networks.
We should point out that, as in the case of the elastic moduli discussed earlier, there are
some experimental data that indicate some deviations of k from χ or χ′. However, as pointed
out earlier, experimental determination of k (and the elasticity exponent z) involves (see, for
example, Durand et al., 1987) measuring the complex modulus G∗(ω) at a series of frequencies
ω. On the other hand, strictly speaking, the scaling laws for the elastic moduli of EPNs and
the SEPNs are valid only in the limit of ω →0, whereas in practice it is very diﬃcult to reach
such a limit, and therefore the measured values of k may exhibit some deviations from χ or χ′.
However, we believe that such deviations are transient eﬀects which should diminish as very
low frequencies are accessed.
658

9.3 Mechanical Properties of Foams
Foams are a special type of material that consist of a random distribution of gas bubbles in
a much smaller volume of liquid (see, for example, Weaire and Hutzler, 1999). If this mixture
contains enough stabilizing surfactants, then the morphology of the material will be essentially
stable and constant over time scales that can be as long as hours. Under these conditions, and
due to their practical importance, understanding the rheology and mechanical properties of
foams are important issues to be addressed. Consider, for example, the response of foams to an
applied force. Although foams are mostly made of gas bubbles, they can support deformation
and shear forces, much like a solid material. This behavior is due to the increase in the gas-
liquid interface surface area, which is the result of defoming the tightly-packed gas bubbles,
and the corresponding energy cost by the surface tension. If the applied force is small, then the
mechanical response of foams is linear, and their shear modulus is simply the stress per unit
strain, regardless of whether the experiment is carried out under controlled stress or controlled
strain conditions. If the applied stress increases, the response of the system crosses over to a
non-linear regime. At higher stresses, the response becomes irreversible as topological changes
are induced under which a few bubbles in a ﬁnite region suddenly change their neighbors.
At still higher applied stresses, the rearrangement of the bubbles becomes more frequent, but
the resulting strain remains ﬁnite. Eventually, when a critical yield stress is reached, the foam
starts to ﬂow indeﬁnitely at a non-zero strain rate by a never-ending series of neighbor-switching
rearrangements. If the strain rate is low, the rearrangements are discrete avalanche-like events,
but if the strain rate is high, the deformation is continuous and resembles a viscous liquid.
Clearly, the transition from a non-ﬂowing system to a ﬂowing one is a non-linear phenomenon,
characterized by the yield stress threshold (Sahimi, 1993a). In Chapter 3 of Volume II, we
will describe modelling of this transition and its many interesting features. In this section, we
are mainly interested in the mechanical response of foams before they start to ﬂow, and the
relation between this phenomenon and vector percolation.
Durian (1997) developed a realistic model of foams in order to study their deformation
and mechanical response. To understand his model, consider ﬁrst two gas bubbles in a sea
of background liquid that are brought into contact with each other. Since the ranges of van
der Waals force (which is attractive and originates from the dielectric mismatch between the
gas and the liquid) and of the electric double-layer force (which is repulsive and is due to the
659

adsorbed surfactants) are typically small - less than 100 nm - compared with typical size of
gas bubbles which is about 20 µm, the two bubbles experience no force until they actually
touch each other. When pushed into each other, the shape of the two bubbles is distorted, and
the region of their contact ﬂattens out into a soap ﬁlm with a thickness that depends on the
combination of the applied, van der Waals, and double-layer forces. The formation of the soap
ﬁlm and the increase in the total surface area give rise to a mutually-repulsive force which is
proportional to the liquid-gas surface tension, and is nearly harmonic (i.e., central-force type).
Thus, Durian assumed this force to be harmonic. Then, the eﬀective central force for bubble i
is proportional to σ/Ri, where σ is the surface tension at the liquid-gas interface, and Ri is the
bubble’s radius. For two mutually-repulsing bubbles with their centers at ri and rj, one has
|ri −rj| < Ri + Rj, and the individual springs are added in series, so that the eﬀective spring
constant is F0/(Ri + Rj), where F0 is the force constant which is of the order of, F0 ≃σ⟨R⟩,
with ⟨R⟩being the average bubble size. Therefore, the repulsive force Fr
ij acting on the center
of bubble i due to bubble j is given by
Fr
ij = F0

1
|ri −rj| −
1
Ri + Rj

(ri −rj) .
(2131)
One must also take into account the dissipation eﬀect, since when a foam is strained at non-
zero rate, energy is dissipated due to shear ﬂow of the viscous liquid within the soap ﬁlm, by
ﬂow within the adsorbed surfactant ﬁlms, and by other mechanisms. The drag force generated
by the dissipation is then assumed to be given by
Fd
ij = −b(vi −vj) ,
(2132)
where b is a proportionality constant, assumed to be the same for all the bubbles. Thus, writing
a force balance for (the center of) each bubble and setting the result to zero, one obtains
vi = ⟨vj⟩+ F0
b

j

1
|ri −rj| −
1
Ri + Rj

(ri −rj) + 1
bFa
i ,
(2133)
where Fa
i is the applied force. The only relevant time scale in the system is td = b⟨R⟩/F0,
which is set by the average bubble size and the competition between dissipation and storage of
energy; the numerical values of b and F0 are irrelevant.
By placing the bubbles on a grid, e.g., a square lattice, and solving the equation of motion
(the coupled force-balance equations for all the bubbles), one can study the evolution of the
660

system. Durian (1997) provides technical details of such simulations. Figure 9.12 presents
snapshots of two diﬀerent systems at two gas volume fractions φ2. One has a broad bubble
size distribution, while the other system has a narrow distribution. Figure 9.13 presents the
shear modulus of the system as a function of the gas volume fraction. The general trends in
the ﬁgure are, on one hand, entirely similar to central-force percolation and, on the other hand,
to the experimental data of Mason et al. (1995). The percolation threshold, i.e., the critical
gas volume fraction at which the shear modulus vanishes, depends weakly on the broadness of
the bubble size distribution, but is around a value of 0.84, which is identical with the dense
random packing of hard disks (see Chapter 3). Bolton and Weaire (1990) were in fact the ﬁrst
to point out the relevance of vector percolation to modelling mechanical properties of foams.
9.4 Mechanical Properties of Composite Solids
Let us now describe the application of vector percolation to modelling and predicting me-
chanical properties of disordered solid materials. As usual, we focus mostly on the behavior
of materials in the vicinity of their percolation threshold, and in particular the power-law be-
havior of the elastic moduli, since the critical exponents that characterize such power laws are
largely independent of many details of the materials’ morphology, whereas the numerical value
of the elastic properties, and also the percolation thresholds of materials at which an elastic
modulus vanishes or diverges, are non-universal and vary greatly from one material to another.
Indeed, the agreement between the measured critical exponents and the predictions of vector
percolation models is the most stringent test of the applicability of such models.
9.4.1 Porous materials
Deptuck et al. (1985) measured the Young’s modulus of a sintered, submicrometer silver
powder, commonly used for millikelvin and submillikelvin cryostats. The sinter remains elastic
and percolating even if the volume fraction φ of the silver particles is as low as 0.1. They also
used submicrometer copperoxide-silver powder, routinely used in heat exchangers for optimizing
heat transfer to dilute 3He - 4He mixtures. In these composites, the silver component acts as
the percolating phase with a percolation threshold φc less than 0.1. Measurements of Deptuck
et al. (1985) indicated that, over a broad range of the volume fraction φ, the Young’s modulus
of the powder follows the power law, Y ∼(φ −φc)f with f ≃3.8, in excellent agreement
with the critical exponent f of the 3D bond-bending model (see Table 9.1). Moreover, their
661

measurements indicated that the critical region in which this power law is valid is quite broad,
and hence the power law is quite useful even for quantitative estimation of the elastic moduli.
Other experimental data on sintered powder samples of copper and silver were presented by
Maliepaard et al. (1985), who reported that f ≃3.6.
Measurements of the elastic moduli of 2D porous composites were also carried out by Ben-
guigui (1984,1986), Lobb and Forrster (1987), Sofo et al. (1987), and Craciun et al. (1998).
Benguigui’s ﬁrst experiments (1984) were done with sheets of metal in which holes had been
punched; his measured exponent was, f ≃3.5 ± 0.5, which, although consistent with the value
of f for the 2D BB models, was criticized because his composite represented a continuum equiv-
alent to the Swiss-cheese model described in Section 2.11, as opposed to a lattice model, and,
according to Halperin et al. (1985) and Feng et al. (1987), the critical exponent f for such
continua should be larger than the corresponding value for lattice systems by about 3/2 [see Eq.
(2.74)]. More careful measurements by Benguigui (1986) then yielded f ≃5.0 ± 0.5, consistent
with the prediction of Halperin et al. (1985), f ≃5.5. Measurements of Lobb and Forrester
(1987) were also carried out with metal sheets into which holes had been punched. They re-
ported f ≃4.95 ± 1.1, again consistent with Halperin et al.’s prediction. Sofo et al. (1987)
used randomly-holed metalized Mylar and reported, f ≃5.3 ± 0.7, in even better agreement
with the prediction of Halperin et al. (1985).
On the other hand, Craciun et al. (1998) measured the elastic moduli of porous ceramics,
an important class of materials that have wide applications. Their estimated exponent of the
elastic moduli was, f ≃2.0, which they attributed it to the predominance of central forces in
their composites. Indeed, their reported value of f agrees with that of the 3D central-force
model (see Table 9.1).
Another interesting set of experiments was carried out by Allen et al. (1988) who measured
dynamical (frequency-dependent) shear modulus of a model 2D percolation lattice, which can
be thought of as the lattice analogue of a porous material, with the cut bonds representing the
pore space of the material. Their measurements were made by exciting small torsional linear
oscillations on a cylindrical screen as links were cut to approach pc. Their measurements yielded
f ≃3.6 ± 0.2, relatively close to the corresponding exponent of the 2D BB model, f ≃3.96.
An interesting study of mechanical properties of two types of compressed expanded graphite
was reported by Celzrd et al. (2001). These matereials are prepared from natural graphite
662

platelets that are inserted into sulfuric acids, which results in an intercalated compound. The
resulting material is then submitted to a thermal shock by passing it through a ﬂame which
induces swelling of the platelets. The samples are then compressed by uniaxial compaction.
Celzrd et al. (2001) measaured the electrical conductivity and elastic moduli of two samples
of these materials. Figure 9.14 presents their data in logarithmic scales, as functions of the
apparent density of the conducting material. The electrical conductivity and the elastic moduli
of the samples vanish at diﬀerent percolation thresholds. From Eq. (8.101) and (8.102) we ﬁnd
that,
(pB
c )kk
pB
c
= d2 −1
2d −1 ,
where (pB
c )kk is the percolation threshold of the BB Kirkwood-Keating model at which the
elastic moduli vanish, pB
c is the threshold of the scalar percolation at which the electrical
conductivity vanishes, and d is the dimensionality of the sample material. Thus, for d = 3 one
obtains, (pB
c )kk/pB
c = 8/5, which was indeed conﬁrmed by the experiments of Celzard et al.
(2001), hence conﬁrming the validity of vector percolation for predicting the elastic properties of
composite materials, even as far as their percolation threshold for various transport properties
is concerned.
9.4.2 Superrigid materials
Benguigui and Ron (1993) constructed a composite of a very soft material - in their case a gel
- and a very rigid material which was alumina and zirconia, and measured the Young’s modulus
of the material, as the volume fraction of the rigid component approached φc, the percolation
threshold, or the critical volume fraction, for formation of a sample-spanning cluster of the rigid
material. Their measurements indicated that the Young’s modulus Y diverges at φc, and that
near the percolation threshold it follows the power law, Y ∼(φc −φ)−χ, with χ ≃0.66 ± 0.04,
in excellent agreement with the value of superelasticity exponent for the 3D BB model (see
Table 9.1). Thus, there remains little, if any, doubt that the linear mechanical properties of
disordered solids are described by vector percolation models.
9.5 Wave Speeds in Porous Materials
Elastic percolation models can also be used for calculating compressional and shear wave
velocities in a porous medium, and their dependence on the porosity of the medium. The shear
663

wave velocity Vp is given by
Vp =
6
7
7
7
8K + 4
3µ
ρ
,
(2134)
while the compressional wave velocity is given by
Vs =
!µ
ρ ,
(2135)
where ρ is the total density, and K and µ are the usual bulk and shear modulus of the porous
medium. Therefore, if we compute K and µ based on a vector percolation model of a porous
medium, then the results will yield estimates of the wave speeds in the porous medium.
9.6 Elastic Properties of Composite Materials with Length Mismatch
In the absence of an induced external stress, a solid elastic material relaxes to a state of
zero macroscopic stress which, however, does not necessarily imply a state of zero strain energy.
The latter state is possible only if there is a single natural length throughout the solid, as in,
for example, a perfectly crystalline solid. However, diﬀerent regions of a material can have
a mismatch between their natural lengths. An example is boron- and/or germanium-doped
silicon in which the dopant atoms ﬁll silicon-sized holes in the silicon lattice. Since boron is
smaller than silicon, it induces lattice shrinkage, while germanium, which is larger than silicon,
induces lattice expansion. In boron-doped silicon, hydrogen passivation of the boron acceptors
causes the eﬀective natural length of the material to increase, which is due to natural length
increases at the boron sites that are caused by the formation of B-H complexes. There are
many other examples of such mismatches in a wide variety of materials.
The mismatch in the natural lengths is exploited to strengthen glass using the process of
chemical tempering by which larger ions are exchanged for smaller ones in the glass network,
thereby inducing stored strain energy associated with compressive stress on the surface, which in
turn is balanced by tensile stress in the interior, so that the macroscopic stress is still zero. The
surface compression tends to deactivate the surface cracks, thereby increasing the overall tensile
strength of the material by an amount roughly proportional to the surface compressive stress.
Another important example is concrete, the durability of which is controlled by natural length
mismatch. Concrete is produced by mixing an aggregate with portland cement and water.
The aggregate can react with alkaline element constituents, leading to products that have a
664

larger natural length than the original aggregates, hence inducing intense local compressive and
tensile stresses which can cause cracking.
A simple model of a material with natural length mismatch was developed by Thorpe
and Garboczi (1990), based on the central-force percolation networks, which captures all the
essential features of the phenomenon. Consider a lattice in which each bond has a natural
(unstretched) length L0
ij with spring constant αij. In particular, consider a two-phase composite
in which a bond either has a natural length L0
A and a spring constant αA with probability 1−p,
or a natural length L0
B with spring constant αB with probability p. The elastic energy of the
system is then given by
H = 1
2

ij
αij
+
Ri −Rj −L0
ij
,2 ,
(2136)
where Ri goes to site i at the end of bond ij from some arbitrary origin. Minimizing the elastic
energy yields,

ij
αij

(Ri −Rj) −L0
ij ˆRij

= 0 ,
(2137)
where Ri is now the relaxed vector, and ˆRij is a unit vector along the relaxed bond direction.
One may now use the Feynman-Hellman theorem (Hellman, 1937; Feynman, 1939; see also
Chapter 9 of Volume II) according to which
∂⟨Hn⟩
∂P
=
)∂Hn
∂P
*
,
(2138)
where P is any parameter of the system, and Hn = H/N, with N being the total number of
the sites (or atoms) in the lattice. If we set P = L0
A or L0
B, then Eq. (60) yields a set of two
equations,
αA(1 −p)(⟨LA⟩−L0
A)
=
−∂Hn
∂L0
A
,
(2139)
αBp(⟨LB⟩−L0
B)
=
−∂Hn
∂L0
B
,
(2140)
which involve no assumption about small displacements, but are not also very useful. If one
then assumes that the displacements from a perfect lattice are small, one obtains
αA(1 −p)(⟨LA⟩−L0
A) + pαB(⟨LB⟩−L0
B) = 0 .
(2141)
If one now combines Eqs. (61)-(64), one obtains ∂Hn/∂L0
A + ∂Hn/∂L0
B = 0, implying that Hn
depends only on the diﬀerence L0
A −L0
B. Dimensional arguments then lead one to Hn actually
665

being proportional to (L0
A −L0
B)2, and therefore
Hn = 1
2(αAαB)1/2p(1 −p)(L0
A −L0
B)2h(p, αA, αB) .
(2142)
Equation (64) is valid only in the limit of small displacements. Because of the symmetry of
the model in terms of exchanging A with B and p with 1 −p, we must have, h(p, αB/αA) =
h(1−p, αA/αB). From Eqs. (61)-(64) and the deﬁnition ⟨L⟩= (1−p)⟨LA⟩+p⟨LB⟩, one obtains
⟨L⟩= (1 −p)L0
A + pL0
B + 2Hn(αB −αA)
αAαB(L0
B −L0
A) ,
(2143)
⟨LA⟩= L0
A +
2Hn
αA(1 −p)(L0
B −L0
A) ,
(2144)
⟨LB⟩= L0
B −
2Hn
pαB(L0
B −L0
A) .
(2145)
The relation
⟨L⟩= (1 −p)L0
A + pL0
B ,
(2146)
is known as the Vegard’s law, and therefore Eqs. (65)-(67) indicate how the deviations arises
from the inequality of the spring constants. Only when one has complete phase separation,
i.e., when Hn = 0, one recovers Vegard’s law. The above results were all derived by Thorpe
and Garboczi (1990). One may also deﬁne a dimensionless length dij such that, Lij = L0
A +
dij(L0
B −L0
A), in terms of which Eqs. (58)-(60) can be rewritten as
⟨d⟩= p ,
⟨dA⟩= p[1 −a∗(p)] ,
(2147)
⟨dB⟩= 1 −(1 −p)[1 −a∗(p)] ,
where a∗(p) = ⟨dB⟩−⟨dA⟩= 1−h(p, 1), so that αA = αB. Figure 9.15 copmares the theoretical
predictions with the computer simulation results using a triangular lattice; the agreement is
excellent. In these simulations, L0
A = 1.0 and L0
B = 1.01.
One can also develop an eﬀective-medium approximation (EMA) for this problem (Thorpe
and Garboczi, 1990). As described in Section 8.7, in the EMA approach, a central-force network
is characterized by an eﬀective spring constant αe. If αe = α/IW, where IW is a Watson integral
[see Eqs. (6.130)-(6.132) for 3D examples of the Watson integral] for the lattice, then, one has
the standard EMA equation for a 2D system:
p α −αB
α′
e + αB
+ (1 −p) α −αA
α′
e + αA
= 0 ,
(2148)
666

where α′
e = αe −α. Thorpe and Garboczi (1990) showed that the EMA equations for the three
main quantities are given by
⟨d⟩=
pαB/(α′
e + αB)
pαB/(α′
e + αB) + αA(1 −p)/(α′
e + αA) ,
⟨dA⟩=
pαeα′
eαB
α(α′
e + αA)(α′
e + αB) ,
(2149)
⟨dB⟩= 1 −(1 −p)
αeα′
eαA
α(α′
e + αA)(α′
e + αB) .
Figure 9.16 compares the EMA predictions with the results of computer simulations on the
triangular lattice for the case αA = 2αB, and L0
A = 1.0 and L0
B = 1.01. The agreement is
excellent, demonstrating the accuracy of the EMA for predicting a wide variety of materials’
properties.
We thus conclude that vector percolation models provide very useful tools for modelling
mechanical properties of materials with natural length mismatch. Of course, in addition to the
central-force networks, one may develop more sophisticated models for this phenomenon based
on, for example, the bond-bending model, but the general features of the results presented here
should hold for more advanced models as well.
9.7 Materials with Negative Poisson’s Ratio
The Poisson’s ratio νp is a measure of the strain in a transverse direction which results from
a stress applied longitudinally. In most known materials the experimentally-measured Pois-
son’s ratio is positive, which corresponds to materials that shrink transversely when stretched
longitudinally. The deﬁnition of νp for an anisotropic solid is arbitrary. As mentioned in Chap-
ter 7, theoretically (Landau and Lifshitz, 1986) one may have highly compressible isotropic
materials with Poisson’s ratios as low as −1, and more generally, −1 ≤νp ≤(d −1)−1 for a
d−dimensional material. Elastically isotropic materials that possess a negative Poisson’s ratio
are usually called auxetic materials. For anisotropic materials one has the general bound
|νp| ≤
!
YM
Ym
,
where YM and Ym are the major and minor orthotropic Young’s moduli. Despite such rigorous
theoretical bounds, it was thought for a long time that no isotropic material with a negative
Poisson’s ratio exists.
667

However, it was observed in many theoretical studies of models of membranes and polymers
that one may obtain negative Poisson’s ratios, implying that such materials expand transversely
under a tensile load applied longitudinally. For example, in a renormalization group study of a
tethered membrane (Aronovitz and Lubensky, 1988) which was ﬂuctuating about a planar mean
conformation, a negative Poisson’s ratio was obtained. Subsequently, Nelson and Radzihovsky
(1991) showed that the negative Poisson’s ratio in the model of Aronovitz and Nelson persists
even if weak quenched disorder is included in the model. Boal et al. (1993) showed that,
even for a membrane, ﬂuctuations in the third dimension are not required for the existence
of a negative Poisson’s ratio, thus generalizing the result of Aronovitz and Lubensky (1988).
Their simulations indicated that a 2D system subject to a square-well potential and an entropic
tension can possess a negative Poisson’s ratio. In these models the negative Poisson’s ratio is
due to entropic properties of the system. Evans (1989) constructed models by a combination of
anisotropic or isotropic particles, tensile springs, and topologically-constraining rods or strings.
His models all had negative Poisson’s ratios. Likewise, Milton (1992) constructed a family of
2D, two-phase, composite materials with hexagonal symmetry and a Poisson’s ratio arbitrarily
close to −1. These composites are hierarchical laminates that were studied in Chapters 4 and
7 as relatively simple models of composite materials, and can exhibit extremal Poisson’s ratio
approaching −1.
Elastic percolation networks also possess negative values of the Poisson’s ratio. Figure 9.17
presents νp for both elastic and superelastic triangular networks in the bond-bending model.
While νp remains more or less constant in the elastic network as p, the fraction of the intact
bonds, is varied, it has a rather peculiar behavior in the superelastic (randomly-reinforced)
network as the fraction p of the completely rigid bonds approaches pc: It reaches a minimum
at about p ≃0.05, and then increases and achieves its maximum at about p = 0.1, beyond
which it decreases monotonically and approaches νp ≃−0.6 at pc. This peculiar behavior of νp
has not found any explanation, since p = 0.05 and 0.1 are not associated with any particular
topological changes in the structure of the rigid clusters in a SEPN. Note that in the EPNs
considered here, all the contributions to the energy of the system are enthalpic, and there is no
entropic eﬀect contributing to the energy H. In a diﬀerent model, Boal et al. (1992) used a
triangular network of Hookean springs under tension, similar to what we described in Section
8.9, and showed that such a model also exhibits negative values of the Poisson’s ratio.
668

Since these models can possess negative values of the Poisson’s ratio, and their applications
encompass a large class of materials of practical importance, ranging from linear polymers
to gel networks, it should be interesting to see whether real materials can also exhibit this
property. Indeed, there are some manufactured foams (Lakes, 1987) which are isotropic and
their Poisson’s ratio is as low as −0.5, which is attributed to their microstructural geometry
(see, for example, Friis et al., 1988; Warren, 1990). These foams have reentrant (that is, non-
convex) cell strucures. Analogous 2D auxetic cellular materials have also been designed and
fabricated (Sigmund, 1994; Larsen et al., 1997; Xu et al., 1999). In addition, one may achieve
a Poisson’s ratio of −1 by a 2D chiral honeycomb structure (Prall and Lakes, 1997).
Evans and Caddock (1989) and Caddock and Evans (1989) demonstrated that microporous,
anisotropic polytetraﬂuoroethylene has a large negative Poisson’s ratio, regardless of how it is
deﬁned. Alderson and Evans (1992) manufactured microporous ultra high molecular weight
polyethylene, which is an anisotropic material that possesses negative Poisson’s ratio as low as
−1.2. Other materials with negative values of the Poisson’s ratio include iron pyrites, pyrolitic
graphite, hexagonal metals, and ﬁbre-reinforced composites (Herakovich, 1984). Data from
the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation indicate that there are some rocks that have slightly negative
values of νp, such as a sample of Schist (sercite) with νp = −0.02, Phyllite (quatoze) with
νp = −0.03, and samples of granite with νp = −0.04 and −0.10. However, all of these materials
are anisotropic for which the deﬁnition of νp is not unique. For such materials one can deﬁne
an average or eﬀective Poisson’s ratio (Sahimi and Arbabi, 1993), where the averaging is taken
with respect to all orientations in the solid. In general, however, all sensible deﬁnitions of νp
would result in a behavior similar to Figure 9.17.
Thus, negative Poisson’s ratios, as demonstrated by the EPNs, by the various models of
membranes and surfaces, and by the real materials mentioned above, should not be considered
as unphysical and, in fact, they point towards the possibility of designing a new class of materials
with interesting, unusual, and useful properties.
For example, they would have enhanced
ﬂexural rigidity and plane strain-fracture toughness, but lower bulk modulus.
9.8 Vibrational Density of States: Vector Percolation Model
An important property of materials is their vibrational density of states (DOS) N(ω), which
is important to obtaining their speciﬁc heat and thermal conductivity. We already described
669

in Section 6.6 computation of the DOS within the scalar approximation, i.e., when one uses
a random resistor network for computing the DOS. In this section, we describe and discuss
the DOS in terms of the true vectorial nature of the vibrations. We consider heterogeneous
materials with percolation-type disorder and focus our attention on the behavior of the DOS
at the percolation threshold pc, or above the threshold but at length scales L ≪ξp, where ξp is
the correlation length of percolation. For length scales L ≫ξp, a material is macroscopically
homogeneous, and thus its vibrational DOS is described by the classical laws in the phonon
regime (see also below).
9.8.1 Scaling theory
Recall from Chapter 6 (see Section 6.6) that vibrational states in materials with fractal
morphology, such as one at its percolation threshold pc (or above its pc but for length scales
L ≪ξp) are called fractons (meaning phonons on fractals!). For homogeneous materials, on
the other hand, the vibrational DOS is given by the well-known relation,
N(ω) ∼ωd−1 ,
(2150)
where d is the Eulidean dimensionality of the system. Equation (72) is valid at low frequencies
(i.e., long wavelengths or large length scales over which the system is homogeneous) such that
ω < ωco, where ωco is a cutoﬀor crossover frequency. Recall also from Chapter 6 that, according
to the scaling theory of Alexander and Orbach (1982), for materials with a fractal morphology
(or fractal networks in the context of the discrete models), the vibrational DOS within the
scalar approximation is described by
N(ω) ∼ωDs−1 ,
(2151)
where Ds = 2Df/Dw is called the spectral (or fracton) dimension, Df is the fractal dimension
of the material, and Dw is the fractal dimension of a random walker diﬀusing in the fractal
substrate. As we learned earlier in this book, in the context of percolation models of disordered
materials, Df = d −β/ν and Dw = 2 + (µ −β)/ν, where β, µ and ν are the usual percolation
and conductivity exponents, so that
Ds = 2
νd −β
2ν + µ −β .
(2152)
670

Equations (73) and (74) are valid as long as the scalar contributions to the elastic energy of
the material dominate the vectorial contributions. As discussed in Section 8.4.1, an example
of such a material is one that can be described by the Born model (regardless of the model’s
shortcomings that we already discussed there). However, we now know that the nature of the
forces that are exerted on a material, or the sites and bonds of the network that represents it,
and their contributions to the elastic energy are most important. Hence, if we wish to take
into account the true vectorial nature of the vibrational DOS, we are forced to introduce a new
quantity De
s, which is called the elastic or ﬂexural spectral dimension De
s, which is deﬁned by
replacing in Eq. (74) the conductivity exponent µ by f, the critical exponent of the elastic
moduli, so that (Webman and Grest, 1985)
De
s = 2
νd −β
2ν + f −β .
(2153)
Accordingly, we are also forced to deﬁne two diﬀerent types of DOS for vibrations of hetero-
geneous materials with fractal morphology. One is N(ω), which is the DOS when the scalar
contributions to the elastic energy of the material dominate all other types of contributions,
for which Eq. (73) is valid. The second type is what we call the vectorial or elastic DOS
Ne(ω) which is appropriate when the vectorial contributions, such as those of the central and
bond-bending (BB) forces, dominate the elastic energy. In this case, in analogy with Eq. (73),
the vibrational DOS is given by
Ne(ω) ∼ωDe
s−1 .
(2154)
Equations (73) and (76) are both valid for high frequencies (i.e., short wavelengths or length
scales) such that ω > ωco. Such vibrational states are localized as long as Ds or De
s is less
than 2 (Rammal and Toulouse, 1983). As explained in Chapter 6, Ds ≃4/3 for all d ≥2. In
contrast, De
s varies continuously with d. Clearly, since f > µ, one must have De
s < Ds, and in
fact De
s can be less than one (see below).
The diﬀerence between Eqs. (73) and (76) is striking. Since Ds ≃4/3, one has
N(ω) ∼ω1/3 ,
scalar approximation .
(2155)
If N(ω) decreases with decreasing ω, then the material is mechanically stable. To understand
this, recall that small frequencies imply large length scales, and if over such length scales N(ω)
decreases, the implication would be that there are fewer and fewer vibrational modes, i.e., the
671

system is mechanically stable. Thus, materials (with a fractal morphology) in which the scalar
contributions to their elastic energy dominate all other contributions, for which Eq. (77) is
valid, are mechanically stable. On the other hand, if we use in Eq. (75), f ≃3.75 for 3D BB
models (see Table 9.1), we obtain
De
s ≃0.87 ,
d = 3 ,
(2156)
so that Eq. (76) becomes
Ne(ω) ∼ω−0.13 ,
bond-bending elasticity ,
(2157)
That is, as ω decreases there are larger and larger number of vibrating modes, implying that
such materials cannot become too large, because if they do, they will lose their mechanical
stability, and therefore must rearrange themselves into more stable structures. This type of
DOS should be observed in materials (with a fractal morphology) in which the contributions
of the BB forces dominate the elastic energy. Since for materials in which the central forces
dominate, f ≃2.1 (see Table 9.1), then, the corresponding De
s ≃Ds.
On other hand, as
discussed earlier in this chapter, if for entropic gels, f ≃νd, then,
De
s = 2
νd −β
2ν + νd −β ≃1.12 ,
(2158)
so that
Ne ∼ω0.12 ,
entropic elasticity ,
(2159)
and therefore materials with entropic elasticity are also mechanically stable.
In analogy with the limit in which the scalar contributions to the elastic energy dominate
all other types of contributions, one can use Eq. (69) to deﬁne a “dispersion relation” [see Eqs.
(6.346), (6.348), and (6.349)]:
ω ∼[L(ω)]−Df/De
s .
(2160)
To derive this equation, consider the vibrations of a material of linear size L. Although high-
frequency modes of the vibrations are not aﬀected by a change in the boundary conditions, the
low-frequency modes will disappear from the spectrum. The crossover between the two regimes
occurs at a frequency ωL, such that
L ∼Λ(ωL) ,
(2161)
672

where Λ(ω) is the wavelength. Following the same arguments that were used in Section 6.4.5.2,
we consider the integrated spectral weight of the missing low-frequency modes which are lumped
together in the center-of-mass degrees of freedom of the material. Since this quantity cannot
depend on L and ωL, one must have
[Λ(ωL)]Df
 ωL
0
ωDe
s−1dω ∼ΛDfωDe
s
L
= constant ,
(2162)
and thus the dispersion relation for an arbitrary frequency is given by
Λ(ω) ∼ω−De
s/Df ,
(2163)
which is the analogue of Eq. (6.354) for scalar approximation to the DOS.
9.8.2 Crossover between scalar approximation and vector density of states
Is there a crossover between the DOS described by Eqs. (73) and (75)? Feng (1985b) argued
that in material with percolation disorder in which both the central and BB forces are present,
another length scale Lbb, in addition to the percolation correlation length ξp, is important. If
Lbb ≫ξp, then, at low frequencies Eq. (72) and at higher frequencies Eq. (73) govern the
vibrational DOS, with a crossover at ωco. However, if Lbb ≪ξp, then at low frequencies one is
in the phonon regime until a characteristic frequency ωbb is reached at which there is a crossover
from Eq. (72) to Eq. (76). When the higher frequency ωco is reached, there is a second crossover
from Eq. (76) to (73). It is not diﬃcult to guess that [see Eq. (82)]
ωbb ∼ξ−Df/De
s
p
.
(2164)
According to Feng (1985b), the characteristic length scale Lbb is given by
Lbb ∼
9γ
α ,
(2165)
where α and γ are, respectively, the usual central and BB force constants. In eﬀect, Lbb is
the length scale below which the motion due to central forces is energetically more favorable
and above which the BB forces dominate.
Large scale computer simulations of Yakubo et
al. (1990b), to be described below, conﬁrmed such crossover behavior. Other eﬀorts in this
direction includes those of Day et al. (1985), Cai and Thorpe (1989), and Monceau and Levy
(1994).
673

9.8.3 Large-scale computer simulation
Webman and Grest (1985) were apparently the ﬁrst to calculate the vibrational DOS using
vector percolation and the BB model, analyzing a system with N ∼103 sites. They found,
in agreement with Eq. (79), that the DOS was weakly divergent at low frequencies. Lam
and Bao (1985) calculated the vibrational DOS of a triangular network with central forces in
site percolation, and found the DOS in the fracton regime to be proportional to ωDe
s−1 with
De
s ≃0.625. Their estimate of De
s should, however, be regarded with caution because of the
very narrow frequency interval in the fracton regime in which they carried out their calculations.
Day et al. (1985) calculated the vibrational DOS of the same network but with central forces
and 60% BB forces. They estimated values of the percolation threshold pce and the spectral
dimension De
s in the ranges 0.4 ≤pce ≤0.405 and 1.25 ≤De
s ≤1.3, which suggest that the
60%-BB model does not belong to the universality class of a full BB model. Other eﬀorts in this
direction were reviewed by Nakayama et al. (1994), to whom the interested reader is referred
to.
Large-scale simulations of the vibrational DOS of the BB model were carried out by Yakubo
et al.
(1990b) who studied the crossover behavior of the DOS from bending to stretching
fractons at the percolation threshold of a 500 × 500 square network. They considered the case
in which the BB force constant γ was larger than the stretching one α. The calculated DOS
is shown in Figure 9.18 in which γ = 10α = 0.133. The network had a cutoﬀDebye frequency
ωD = 2.0784. The steplike decrease of the states in the high-frequency regime in Figure 9.18
indicates that the stretching motions are not excited above some frequency ω0, the value of
which is determined by the stretching force constants α. For α = 0.0133, ω0 is estimated to be
0.2309 from the relation ω0 = 2√α, coinciding with the observed value in Figure 9.18.
To clarify the individual contributions from the bending and stretching forces, the ratio of
the contribution of each to the elastic energy was calculated as a function of the frequency. The
solid curve in Figure 9.18 shows the ratio between the energy Hα attributed to the stretching
motion and the total energy H. A crossover frequency ωco is deﬁned based on the condition,
Hα(ωco)/H(ωco) = 1/2, leading to ωco ∼0.005. The DOS in the vicinity of ωco is independent
of ω. The crossover region from bending to stretching fractons extends over at least two orders
of magnitude in frequency, due to the fact that the ratio Hα(ω)/H(ω) of the energies increases
logarithmically, as shown in Figure 9.18. This is in contrast with the sharp crossover from
674

phonons to fractons for the scalar approximation described in Section 6.6. The straight line
through the solid circles in Figure 9.18 has been drawn according to Eq. (77). Based on the
data of Figure 9.18 in the frequency region between N(ω) ∼ωco and ω0, it is not clear that the
ω1/3 law holds.
To clarify the contribution of bending fractons, the DOS were calculated for γ/α = 0.01
and 1.0, which allow examination of the DOS for the bending-fracton regime, because the
stretching-fracton regime is shifted into the high-frequency region. Figures 9.19(a) and 9.19(b)
show the results for the DOS and the integrated DOS, respectively, for the same network as that
used for obtaining the results shown in Figure 9.18. The DOS, given by solid circles in Figure
9.19(a), weakly diverges as ω →0, in agreement with Eq. (79). The value of De
s obtained by a
least square ﬁtting of the data shown in Figure 9.19 is De
s ≃0.79, reasonably close to (78). The
straight lines on the left-hand side of the ﬁgure through the solid and open circles in Figure
9.19(a) [Figure 9.19(b)] are drawn according to ωDe
s−1 (ωDe
s) with De
s ≃0.79.
In the case of γ/α = 0.01 (solid circles in Figure 9.19), the frequency ωco becomes too
large to distinguish the crossover frequency region, whereas for γ/α = 1.0 (open circles in
Figure 9.19) the crossover frequency can be estimated from evaluation of Hα/H, as in the case
of Figure 9.18. The frequency ωco for crossover from bending to stretching fractons is close
to ωbb ∼
$
γ/α ∼0.1. Note that these results do not exhibit any noticeable change in the
frequency dependence of the DOS around the crossover, as shown by the open circles in the
vicinity of ω ∼0.1. For comparison, the lines on the right-hand side of the ﬁgure are drawn
according to the ω1/3(ω4/3) law, indicating disagreement with the numerical data. Furthermore,
it should be emphasized that the magnitudes of the DOS in the bending-fracton regimes are
diﬀerent for the two sets of force constants (see the diﬀerence between solid and open circles in
Figure 9.19), implying that the missing modes tend to accumulate in the high-frequency region
(ω > ω0).
9.8.4 Comparison with the experimental data
Most of the experimental studies of vibrational DOS have involved aerogels which are highly
porous solid materials with a very tenuous structure. Their porosity can be as high as 99%,
and for this reason they often have very unusual and unique properties. For examples, they can
be made in transparent form, they have very small thermal conductivity, and because of their
675

large porosity they possess large internal surface area. Due to such properties, they also have a
wide range of applications, ranging from catalyst supports to thermal insulators and radiators.
They can be prepared by a variety of methods using diﬀerent materials, but silica aerogels
have received the widest attention. There has been some speculation that the morphology of
silica aerogels is similar to percolation networks. Evidence for this comes from two diﬀerent
directions. On one hand, Woignier et al. (1988) measured the Young’s modulus Y of silica
aerogels as a function of density and volume fraction. Their data, which were already discussed
in Section 9.2.3.1, indicated that the power-law behavior of the Young’s modulus near the
percolation threshold agrees with that of 3D BB model. Evidence has also been provided by
measurement of the fractal dimension of the gel through small-angle neutorn scattering (SANS)
measurements. For a fractal system with a fractal dimension Df, the scattering intensity I(q)
is given by an equation similar to (18). Vacher et al. (1988) presented extensive SANS data,
from which the fractal dimension of silica aerogels was found to be, Df ≃2.45, very close to
that of 3D sample-spanning percolation clusters, Df ≃2.53 (see Table 2.3). However, it is not
yet clear whether silica aerogels do actually represent some type of a percolation structure.
The next step is to verify the scaling law for the density of states, Eq. (73) or (76). One
way of doing this is by plotting the crossover or cutoﬀfrequency ωco as a function of q. Since
q is inversely proportional to the length scale L, one must have
ωco ∼qDf/Ds ,
(2166)
so that such a plot should yield, ωco ∼q1.88, if silica aerogels are percolation fractals and
Ds ≃4/3. Figure 6.31 presents such a plot for a series of aerogels with various densities. The
data were obtained by Brillouin scattering of visible light and indicate that, ωco ∼q1.9, which
is in very good agreement with the theoretical prediction. The vibrational density of states
itself can be measured directly by incoherent neutron scattering. Vacher et al. (1989) used
this technique to measure, N(ω) ∼ω0.85±0.15, which does not agree with either Eq. (73) or
(76). This diﬀerence may be explained in various ways. One is that the material used in this
study was not simply a sample-spanning percolation cluster, rather, in addition to the main gel
network, many other smaller clusters (small branched polymers) could have been present, and
when the solvent was removed a distribution of clusters (rather than a single cluster) had been
obtained. Thus, the incoherent scattering was not measured from just one percolation cluster,
676

rather from a collection of them, and hence the DOS should be written as
N(ω) ∼ω2d/Dw−1 ,
(2167)
rather than Eq.
(73), because, as discussed in Chapter 2, the collection of all percolation
clusters is not fractal, only the individual clusters at length scales L ≪ξp are. Equation (89)
then predicts that N(ω) ∼ω0.6, which is reasonably close to the experimental measurements.
Vacher et al. (1989) gave a rather diﬀerent reason for this diﬀerence. They argued that the
ﬁnite clusters attach themselves to the sample-spanning cluster, making it denser, thereby
increasing the eﬀective value of Ds from its theoretical value of about 4/3 to a larger value of
1.85. However, this reasoning cannot give any information about the structure of the dense
network, and therefore cannot be checked directly. One may also argue that energy resolution
in the experiment was not suﬃcient to yield enough accuracy.
Indeed, the experiments of
Schaefer et al. (1990), using more accurate techniques, yielded Ds ≃1.22±0.14, which is again
consistent with the theoretical expectation.
The crossover between Eqs. (73) and (76) was also studied in the experiments of Vacher
et al. (1990), using silica aerogels. They measured the DOS of the gels, and found that at
low frequencies their data can be ﬁtted with De
s ≃0.9, in good agreement with the theoretical
expectation (71), while at higher frequencies the data can be ﬁtted with Ds ≃1.7 ± 0.2, again
larger than Ds ≃4/3; see Figure 9.20. Whether this discrepancy can be explained with the
same type of reasoning discussed above is not clear yet.
Some other experimental studies of vibrational DOS of materials should be mentioned here.
Boolchand et al. (1990) carried out experiments including M¨ossbauer-Debye-Waller factores,
inelastic neutron scattering, Ramam scattering, and ultrasonic elastic moduli, using chalco-
genide glasses that were of the general form AxB1−x. As discussed earlier in this chapter, the
average coordination number of such glasses is ⟨Z⟩= 2(x + 1), and according to the Phillips-
Thorpe theory and the vector percolation model, one should see a drastic diﬀerence in the
vibrational DOS at ⟨Z⟩≃2.4, corresponding to xc ≃0.2. Indeed, Boolchand et al.’s experi-
ments did indicate a threshold behavior at this composition. The same type of behavior was
observed in the experiments of Kamitakahara et al. (1991), and Walter et al. (1988), although
the threshold behavior in these experiments was not as strong as that in the experiments of
Boolchand et al.
677

Summary
Vector percolation models explain qualitatively, and in many cases quantitatively, the me-
chanical behavior of disordered materials, ranging from branched polymers, gel polymers, and
glasses, to composite solids and porous materials. In particular, such models provide a ratio-
nal explanation for the power-law behavior of the mechanical properties near the percolation
threshold, which mean-ﬁeld theories, eﬀective-medium approximations, and rigorous bounds of
the type described in Chapter 7, fail to predict.
678

Captions
Figure 9.1 Threshold behavior of the elastic moduli (in kbar) of glasses versus their average
coordination number ⟨Z⟩. Circles and squares correspond, respectively, to high- and low-As
series of glasses. The theoretical curves on the left are for amorphous Ge, while those on the
right are for crystalline Ge (after Hafpap and Lindsay, 1986).
Figure 9.2 Glass temperature Tg versus the average coordination number ⟨Z⟩of Se1−x(GeyAs1−y)x.
Symbols are the data for various values of y. The inset shows the speciﬁc heat capacity of the
glasses, with the numbers on the curves giving the value of ⟨Z⟩(after Tatsumisago et al., 1990).
Figure 9.3 Threshold behavior of the viscosity of a gelling solution, and the elastic moduli
of the gel polymer above the gel point, as a function of gelling time.
Figure 9.4 A polymer network formed by polycondensation.
Figure 9.5 Normalized polymer size distribution as a function of polymer size s. Percolation
theory predicts the slope to be 1 −τ ≃−1.3 ± 0.1 (after Leibler and Schossler, 1985).
Figure 9.6 Dependence of degree of polymerization Mw on pc −p for a polyurethane sol.
The slope of the curve is −γp (after Adam et al., 1987).
Figure 9.7 Dependence of degree of polymerization Mw on the gel fraction Pg during anionic
copolymerization of divinylbenzene with styrene. The slope of the curve is −γp/β (after Schmidt
and Burchard, 1981).
Figure 9.8 Small-angle neutron scattering data for branched polymers. The upper curve is
for a polydisperse polymer solution with a slope −1.6. The lower curve is for a single polymer
in a good dilute solvent with a slope −1.98 (after Bouchaud et al., 1986).
Figure 9.9 Typical variations of viscosity η below the gel point, and of the elastic moduli
above the gel point, with the fraction of the reacted monomers.
Figure 9.10 Frequency-dependence of the storage modulus G′ and loss modulus G′′ for a
polycondensed gel close to the gel point (after Durand et al., 1987).
Figure 9.11 Determination of gel point from data for loss angle δ. Time is in minutes. The
data are for frequencies 31.6 rad s−1 (diamonds), 1.0 rad s−1 (+) and 0.0316 rad s−1 (squares)
(after Lin et al., 1991).
Figure 9.12 Equilibrium bubble conﬁgurations for four diﬀerent systems. The top two and
bottom two have gas fractions φ2 = 1.0 and 0.84, respectively. In the left two and right two
systems the uniform bubble size distributions have widths of 0.75 and 0.1, respectively. The top
679

and bottom edge bubbles are ﬁxed to the horizontal plate, while periodic boundary conditions
have been imposed on the left and right sides. A solid line shows a spring between the centers
of two overlapping bubbles (after Durian, 1997).
Figure 9.13 The shear modulus of the foam versus the gas fraction φ2. The modulus vanishes
at the rigidity percolation threshold. Circles and + signs denote the results for uniform bubble
size distributions with widths 0.75 and 0.1, respectively (after Durian, 1997).
Figure 9.14 Electrical conductivity and elastic moduli of four cubic samples of expanded
graphite (after Celzard et al., 2001). The lines show the ﬁt of the data to power laws.
Figure 9.15 Average lengths ⟨d⟩, ⟨dA⟩and ⟨dB⟩(top) and energy per bond in units of
α(L0
A −L0
B)2 for the random triangular network with αA = αB. Solid curves are the theoretical
predictions, while symbols are simulation results (after Thorpe and Garboczi, 1990).
Figure 9.16 Same as in Figure 9.15 but with αA = 2αB (after Thorpe and Garboczi, 1990).
Figure 9.17 Poisson’s ratio of the triangular network in the bond-bending model. Below
pc ≃0.347 p is the fraction of the superrigid bonds, while above pc it is the fraction of the
intact bonds with a ﬁnite elastic constant (after Arbabi and Sahimi, 1993).
Figure 9.18 Calculated density of states (solid circles) at the bond percolation threshold of
a square network with stretching and bond-bending forces and the force constants γ = 10α =
0.133. The straight line is guide to the eye for N(ω) ∼ω1/3, while solid curve shows the energy
ratio Hα/H and its frequency dependence (after Yakubo et al., 1990b).
Figure 9.19 Density of states (a) and integrated density of states (b) at the bond percolation
threshold of a square network with stretching and bond-bending forces. Filled and open circles
show, respectively, the results for α = 100γ = 1.0 and α = γ = 0.12. The straight lines on
the left sides of the ﬁgures indicate the ωDe
s−1 and ωDe
s laws for the DOS and integrated DOS,
while those on the right sides show the ω1/3 and ω4/3 laws for the scalar approximation (after
Yakubo et al., 1990b).
Figure 9.20 Crossover in the scaling of the density of states of silica aerogels. Arrows indicate
the locations of the crossover frequencies (after Vacher et al., 1990).
680

References
Abeles, B., H.L. Pinch, and J.I. Gittleman, “Percolation conductivity in W-Al2O3 granular
metal ﬁlms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 247 (1975).
Aboav, D.A., “The arrangement of grains in a polycrystal,” Metallography 3, 383 (1970).
Abrahams, E., P.W. Anderson, D.C. Licciardello, and T.V. Ramakrishnan, “Scaling theory of
localization: Absence of quantum diﬀusion in two dimensions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 673
(1979).
Acrivos, A., and E. Chang, “A model for estimating transport quantities in two-phase mate-
rials,” Phys. Fluids 29, 3 (1986).
Adam, M., M. Delsanti and D. Durand, “Mechanical measurements in a reaction bath during
the polycondensation reaction near the gelation threshold,” Macromolecules 18, 2285
(1985).
Adam, M., M. Delsanti, D. Durand, G. Hild, and J.P. Munch, “Mechanical properties near
gelation threshold, comparison with classical and 3d percolation theories,” Pure Appl.
Chem. 53, 1489 (1981).
Adam, M., M. Delsanti, J.P. Munch, and D. Durand, “Size and mass determination of clusters
obtained by polycondensation near the gelation threshold,” J. Physique 48, 1809 (1987).
Adam, M., M. Delsanti, R. Okasha, and G. Hild, “Viscosity study in the reaction bath of the
radical copolymerisation of styrene divinylbenzene,” J. Physique Lett.40, L539 (1979).
Adam, M., D. Lairez, M. Karpasas, and M. Gottlieb, “Static and dynamic properties of cross-
linked
poly(dimethylsiloxane) pregel clusters,” Macromolecules 30, 5920 (1997).
Adams, D.F., and D.R. Doner, J. Compos. Mater. 1, 152 (1967).
Adler, J., “Bootstrap percolation,” Physica A 171, 453 (1991).
Adler, J., R.G. Palmer, and M.H. Meyer, “Transmission of order in some unusual dilute
systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 882 (1987).
681

Adler, J., and D. Stauﬀer, “Evidence for non-universal exponents in bootstrap percolation,”
J. Phys. A 23, L1119 (1990).
Adolf, D., J.E. Martin, and J.P. Wilcoxon, “Evolution of structure and viscoelasticity in an
epoxy near the sol-gel transition,” Macromolecules 23, 527 (1990).
Aharony, A., “Universal critical amplitude ratios for percolation,” Phys. Rev. B 22, 400
(1980).
Aharony, A., S. Alexander, O. Entin-Wohlman, and R. Orbach, “Scaling approach to phonon-
fracton crossover,” Phys. Rev. B 31, 2565 (1985).
Aharony, A., S. Alexander, O. Entin-Wohlman, and R. Orbach, “Scattering of fractons, the
Ioﬀe-Regel criterion, and the 4
3 conjecture,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 132 (1987).
Aharony, A., O. Entin-Wohlman, and R. Orbach, in Time Dependent Eﬀects in Disordered
Materials, edited by T. Riste and R. Pynn (Plenum, New York, 1988), p. 233.
Aharony, A., and A.B. Harris, “Superlocalization, correlations and random walks on fractals,”
Physica A 163, 38 (1990).
Aharony, A., A.B. Harris, and O. Entin-Wohlman, “Was superlocalization observed in carbonblack-
polymer composites,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 4160 (1993).
Aharony, A., Y. Zhang, and M.P. Sarachik, “Universal crossover in variable range hopping
with Coulomb interactions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 3900 (1992).
Ahmed, G., and J.A. Blackman, “On theories of transport in disordered media,” J. Phys. C
12, 837 (1979).
Alderson, K.L., and K.E. Evans, “The fabrication of microporous polyethylene having a neg-
ative Poisson’s ratio,” Polymer 33, 4435 (1992).
Alexander, S., “Is the elastic energy of amorphous materials rotationally invariant?”
J.
Physique 45, 1939 (1984).
Alexander, S., “Vibrations of fractals and scattering of light from aerogels,” Phys. Rev. B 40,
7953 (1989).
682

Alexander, S., “Amorphous solids: Their structure, lattice dynamics and elasticity,” Phys.
Rep. 296, 65 (1998).
Alexander, S., Bernasconi, J., and Orbach, R., “Low energy density of states for disordered
chains,” J. Physique Colloq. 39(C6), 706 (1978).
Alexander, S., J. Bernasconi, W.R. Schneider, and R. Orbach, “Excitation dynamics in random
one-dimensional systems,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 53, 175 (1981).
Alexander, S., E. Courtens, and R. Vacher, “Vibrations of fractals: dynamic scaling, correla-
tion functions and inelastic light scattering,” Physica A 195, 286 (1993).
Alexander, S., O., Entin-Wohlman, and R. Orbach, “Relaxation and nonradiative decay in
disordered systems. II. Two-fracton inelastic scattering,” Phys. Rev. B 33, 3935 (1986a).
Alexander, S., O. Entin-Wohlman, and R. Orbach, “Phonon-fracton anharmonic interactions:
the thermal conductivity of amorphous materials,” Phys. Rev. B 34, 2726 (1986b).
Alexander, S., C. Laermans, R. Orbach, and H.M. Rosenberg, “Fracton interpretation of
vibrational properties of cross-linked polymers, glasses, and irradiated quartz,” Phys.
Rev. B 28, 4615 (1983).
Alexander, S. and Orbach, R., “Density of states of fractals: ’fractons’,” J. Physique Lett. 43,
L625 (1982).
Alexandrowicz, Z., “Critically branched chains and percolation clusters,” Phys. Lett. A80,
284 (1980).
Allain, C., L. Limat and L. Salom´e, “Description of the mechanical properties of gelling poly-
mer solutions far from gelation threshold: generalized eﬀective-medium calculations of
the superconductor-conductor site percolation problem,” Phys. Rev. A 43, 5412 (1991).
Allain, C., and L. Salom´e, “Sol-gel transition of hydrolyzed polyacrylamide + chromium III:
Rheological behavior versus cross-link concentration,” Macromolecules 20, 2957 (1987a).
Allain, C., and L. Salom´e, “Hydrolysed polyacrylamide/Cr3 gelation: Critical behaviour of
the rheological properties at the sol-gel transition,” Polym. Commun. 28, 109 (1987b).
683

Allain, C., and L. Salom´e, “Gelation of semidilute polymer solutions by ion complexation:
Critical behavior of the rheological properties versus cross-link concentration,” Macro-
molecules 23, 981 (1990).
Allen, L.C., B. Golding, and W.H. Haemmerle, “Dynamic shear modulus for two-dimensional
bond percolation,” Phys. Rev. B 37, 913 (1988).
Ambegaokar, V., B.I. Halperin, and J.S. Langer, “Hopping conductivity in disordered sys-
tems,” Phys. Rev. B 4, 2612 (1971).
Anderson., P.W., “Absence of diﬀusion in certain random lattices,” Phys. Rev. 109, 1492
(1958).
Andrade, J.S., A.M. Auto, Y. Kobayashi, Y. Shibusa, and K. Shirane, “Percolation conduction
in vapour grown carbon ﬁbre,” Physica A 248, 227 (1998).
Arbabi, S., and M. Sahimi, “Absence of universality in percolation models of disordered elastic
media with central forces,” J. Phys. A 21, L863 (1988a).
Arbabi, S., and M. Sahimi, “Elastic properties of three-dimensional percolation networks with
stretching and bond-bending forces,” Phys. Rev. B 38, 7173 (1988b).
Arbabi, S., and M. Sahimi, “On three-dimensional elastic percolation networks with bond-
bending forces,” J. Phys. A 23, 2211 (1990a).
Arbabi, S., and M. Sahimi, “Critical properties of viscoelasticity of gels and elastic percolation
networks,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 725 (1990b).
Arbabi, S., and M. Sahimi, “Mechanics of disordered solids. I. Percolation on elastic networks
with central forces,” Phys. Rev. B 47, 695 (1993).
Aronovitz, J.A., and T.C. Lubensky, “Fluctuations of solid membranes,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
60, 2634 (1988).
Askar, A., and A.S. Cakmak, “A structural model of a micropolar continuum,” Int. J. Eng.
Sci. 6, 583 (1968).
684

Axelos, M.A.V., and M. Kolb, “Crosslinked biopolymers: Experimental evidence for scalar
percolation theory,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 1457 (1990).
Baker, G.A., Essentials of Pad´e Approximants (Academic Press, New York, 1975).
Balberg, I., “Recent developments in continuum percolation,” Philos. Mag. B 55, 991 (1987).
Balberg, I., and N. Bienbaum, “Cluster structure and conductivity of three-dimensional con-
tinuum systems,” Phys. Rev. A 31, 1222 (1985).
Balberg, I., N. Binenbaum, and S. Bozowski, “Anisotropic percolation in carbon black-polyvinylchlorid
composites,” Solid State Commun. 47, 989 (1983).
Bale, H.D., and P.W. Schmidt, “Small-angle X-ray scattering investigation of submicroscopic
porosity with fractal properties,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 596 (1984).
Barton, J.L., “La relaxation di´electrique de quelques verres ternaires silice oxyde alcalin oxyde
alcalin-terreux,” Verres et Refr. 20, 328 (1966).
Batchelor, G.K., “Transport properties of two-phase materials with random structure,” Annul.
Rev. Fluid Mech. 6, 227 (1974).
Batchelor, G.K., and R.W. O’Brien, “Thermal or electrical conduction through a granular
material,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 355, 313 (1977).
Beck, A., O. Gelsen, P. Wang, and J. Fricke, Rev. Phys. Appl. C 4, 203 (1989).
Becker, A.A., The Boundary Element Method in Engineering (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1992).
Bendler, J.T., and M.F. Shlesinger, “Dielectric relaxation via the Montroll-Weiss random walks
of defects,” in The Wonderful World of Stochastics: A Tribute to Elliot W. Montroll,
edited by M.F. Shlesinger and G.H. Weiss (Noth Holland, Amsterdam, 1985), p. 31.
Benguigui, L., “Experimental study of the elastic properties of a percolating system,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 53, 2028 (1984).
Benguigui, L., “Lattice and continuum percolation transport exponents: experiments in two-
dimensions,” Phys. Rev. B 34, 8176 (1986).
685

Benguigui, L., and D.J. Bergman, “On the ratio of the elastic constants near the percolation
threshold of a two-dimensional perforated solid,” Europhys. Lett. 4, 823 (1987).
Benguigui, L., and P. Ron, “Experimental realization of superelasticity near the percolation
threshold,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2423 (1993).
Beniot, C., E. Royer, and G. Poussigue, “The spectral moments method,” J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 4, 3125 (1992).
Benveniste, Y., “On the eﬀective thermal conductivity of multiphase composites,” Z. Ang.
Math. Phys. 37, 696 (1986).
Beran, M.J., “Use of the variational approach to determine bounds for the eﬀective permit-
tivity of random media,” Nuovo Cimento 38, 771 (1965).
Beran, M.J., Statistical Continuum Theories (Wiley, New York, 1968).
Beran, M.J., and J. Molyneux, “Use of classical variational principles to determine bounds for
the eﬀective bulk modulus in heterogenous media,” Q. Appl. Math. 24, 107 (1966).
Beran, M.J., and N. Silnutzer, “eﬀective electrical, thermal and magnetic properties of ﬁber-
reinforced materials,” J. Composite Mater. 5, 246 (1971).
Berdichevsky, Eﬀective Electrical, Thermal and Magnetic Properties of Fiber-Reinforced Ma-
terials (Nauka, Moscow, The Soviet Union, 1983)
Bergman, D.J., “The dielectric constant of a composite material-a problem in classical physics,”
Phys. Rep. 43, 377 (1978).
Bergman, D.J., “Elastic moduli near percolation: universal ratio and critical exponent,” Phys.
Rev. B 31, 1696 (1985).
Bergman, D.J., “Elastic moduli near percolation in a two-dimensional random network od
rigid and nonrigid bonds,” Phys. Rev. B 33, 2013 (1986b).
Bergman, D.J., and E. Duering, “Universal Poisson’s ratio in a two-dimensional random net-
work of rigid and nonrigid bonds,” Phys. Rev. B 34, 8199 (1986).
686

Bergman, D.J., E. Duering, and M. Murat, “Discrete network models for the low-ﬁeld Hall
eﬀect near a percolation threshold: Theory and simulations,” J. Stat. Phys. 58, 1 (1990).
Bergman, and Y. Imry, “Critical behaviour of the complex dielectric constant near the perco-
lation threshold of a heterogeneous material”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 1222 (1977).
Bergman, D.J., and Y. Kantor, “Critical properties of an elastic fractal,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
53, 511 (1984).
Bergman, D.J., and D. Stroud, “Scaling theory of the low-ﬁeld Hall eﬀect near the percolation
threshold,” Phys. Rev. B 32, 6097 (1985).
Berk, N.F., “Scattering properties of a model bicontinuous structure with a well-deﬁned length
scale,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2718 (1987).
Berk, N.F., “Scattering properties of the leveled-wave model of random morphologies,” Phys.
Rev. A 44, 5069 (1991).
Berman, D., B.G. Orr, H.M. Jaeger, and A.M. Goldman, “Conductances of ﬁlled two-dimensional
networks,” Phys. Rev. B 33, 4301 (1986).
Bernasconi, A., T. Sleator, D. Posselt, J.K. Kjems, and H.R. Ott, “Dynamic properties of
silica aerogels as deduced from speciﬁc-heat and thermal-conductivity measurements,”
Phys. Rev. B 45, 10363 (1992).
Bernasconi, J., “Conduction in anisotropic disordered systems: Eﬀective-medium theory,”
Phys. Rev. B 9, 4575 (1974).
Bernasconi, J., “Real-space renormalization of bond-disordered conductance lattices,” Phys.
Rev. B 18, 2185 (1978).
Bernasconi, J., W.R. Schneider, and H.J. Wiesmann, “Some rigorous results for random planar
conductance networks,” Phys. Rev. B 16, 5250 (1977).
Bernasconi, J., and H.J. Wiesmann, “Eﬀective-medium theories for site-disordered resistance
networks,” Phys. Rev. B 13, 1131 (1976).
687

Berryman, J.G., “Long-wavelength propagation in composite elastic media I. Spherical inclu-
sions,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 68, 1809 (1980a).
Berryman, J.G., “Long-wavelength propagation in composite elastic media II. Ellipsoidal in-
clusions,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 68, 1820 (1980b).
Berryman, J.G., “Measurement of spatial correlation function using image processing tech-
nique,” J. Appl. Phys. 57, 2374 (1985).
Berryman, J.G., and G.W. Milton, “Micrometry of random composites and porous media,”
J. Phys. D 21, 87 (1988).
Bhattacharya, S., J.P. Stokes, M.W. Kim, and J.S. Huang, “Percolation in an oil-continuous
microemulsion,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 1884 (1985).
Bianchi, R.F., H.P. Souza, T.J. Bonagamba, H.C. Panepucci, and R.M. Faria, “Ionic conduc-
tion and structural properties of organic-inorganic composite based on poly(propileneglycol),”
Synth. Met. 102, 1186 (1999).
Black, R.D., M.B. Weissman, and F.M. Fliegel, “1/f noise in metal ﬁlms lacks spatial corre-
lation,” Phys. Rev. B 24, 7454 (1981).
Blackman, J.A., “A theory of conductivity in disordered resistor networks,” J. Phys. C 9,
2049 (1976).
Bleibaum, O., H. B¨ottger, and V.V. Bryksin, “Eﬀective medium theory of hopping transport,”
Phys. Rev. B 54, 5444 (1996).
Blumenfeld, R., Y. Meir, A. Aharony, and A.B. Harris, “Resistance ﬂuctuations in randomly
diluted networks,” Phys. Rev. B 35, 3524 (1987).
Boal, D.H., U. Seifert, and J.C. Shillcock, “Negative Poisson ratio in two-dimensional networks
under tension,” Phys. Rev. E 48, 4274 (1993).
Boal, D.H., U. Seifert, and A. Zilker, “Dual network model for red blood cell membranes,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 3405 (1992).
688

B¨ohmer, R., and C.A. Angell, “Correlations of the nonexponentiality and state dependence of
mechanical relaxations with bond connectivity in Ge-As-Se supercooled liquids,” Phys.
Rev. B 45, 10091 (1992).
Bolton, F., and D. Weaire, “Rigidity loss transition in a disordered 2D froth,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 65, 3449 (1990).
Boolchand, P., R.N. Enzweiler, R.L. Cappelletti, W.A. Kamitakahara, Y. Cai, and M.F.
Thorpe, “Vibrational thresholds in covalent networks,” Solid State Ionics 39, 81 (1990).
Boolchand, P., and M.F. Thorpe, “Glass-forming tendency, percolation of rigidity, and onefold-
coordinated atoms in covalent networks,” Phys. Rev. B 50, 10366 (1994).
Born, M., and K. Huang, Dynamical Theory of Crystal Lattices (Clarendom Press, Oxford,
1954).
B¨ottger, H., and V.V. Bryksin, Hopping Conduction in Solids (VCH, Weinheim, Germany,
1985).
B¨ottger, H., T. Damker, and A. Freyberg, “Replica-trick approach to percolation networks
with central and bond-bending forces,” Physica A 199, 219 (1993).
Bouchaud, E., M. Delsanti, M. Adam, M. Daoud, and D. Durand, ”Gelation and percolation:
swelling eﬀect”, J. Physique Lett. 47, 539 (1986).
Boucher, S., “On the eﬀective moduli of isotropic two-phase elastic composites,” J. Compos.
Mater. 8, 82 (1974).
Bourret, A., “Low-density silica aerogels observed by high-resolution electron microscopy,”
Europhys. Lett. 6, 731 (1988).
Brandt, W.W., “Use of percolation theory to estimate eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcients of particles
migrating on various disordered lattices and in a random network structure,” J. Chem.
Phys. 63, 5162 (1975).
Brenig, W., G. D¨ohler, and W¨olﬂe, “Theory of thermally assisted electron hopping in amor-
phous solids,” Z. Phys. 246, 1 (1971).
689

Bresser, W., P. Boolchand, and P. Suranyi, “Rigidity percolation and molecular clustering in
network glasses,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 2493 (1986).
Brinker, C.J., and G.W. Scherer, The Physics and Chemistry of Sol-Gel Processing (Academic,
San Diego, 1990).
Broadbent, S.R., and J.M. Hammersley, “Percolation processes. Crystals and mazes,” Proc.
Camb. Philos. Soc. 53, 629 (1957).
Brown, R., and B. Esser, “Kinetic networks and order-statistics for hopping in disordered
systems,” Philos. Mag. B 72, 125 (1995).
Brown, W.F., ”Solid mixture permittivities,” J. Chem. Phys. 23, 1514 (1955).
Bruggeman, D.A.G., “Berechnung verscheidener physikalischer konstanten von heterogenen
substanzen. I. Dielektrizit¨atskonstanten und leitf¨ahigkeiten der mischk¨orper aus isotropen
substanzen,” Ann. Phys. 24, 636 (1935).
Bruggeman, D.A.G., “Die elastischen constanten der quasiisotropen mischk¨orper aus isotropen
substanzen,” Ann. Phys. 29 160 (1937).
Bryksin, V.V., “Frequency dependence of the hopping conductivity for three-dimensional sys-
tems in the framework of the eﬀective-medium method,” Fix. Tverd. Tela (Lenningrad)
22, 2441 (1980) [Sov. Phys. Solid State 22, 1421 (1980)].
Buchenau, U., M. Morkenbusch, G. Reichenauer, and B. Frick, “Inelastic Neutron Scattering
from virgin and densiﬁed aerogels,” J. Non-Crystl. Solids 145, 121 (1992).
Budiansky, B., “On the elastic moduli of some heterogeneous materials,” J. Mech. Phys.
Solids 13, 223 (1965).
Bug, A.L.R., G.S. Grest, M.H. Cohen, and I. Webman, “AC response near the percolation
threshold: Transfer matrix calculation in 2D,” J. Phys. A 19, L323 (1986).
Bug, A.L.R., S.A. Safran, G.S. Grest, and I. Webman, “Do interactions raise or lower a
percolation threshold?” Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 1896 (1985).
690

Bunde, A., A. Coniglio, D.C. Hong, and H.E. Stanley, “Transport in a two-component ran-
domly composite material: scaling theory and computer simulation of termite diﬀusion
near the superconducting limit,” J. Phys. A 18, L137 (1985).
Bunde, A., and H.E. Roman, “Vibrations and random walks on random fractals: anomalous
behaviour and multifractality,” Philos. Mag. B 65, 191 (1992).
Burton, D., and C.J. Lambert, “Critical dynamics of a superelastic network,” Europhys. Lett.
5, 461 (1988).
Butcher, P.N., “Eﬀective medium treatments of random simple square and simple cubic con-
ductance networks,” J. Phys. C 8, L324 (1975).
Butcher, P.N., “Theory of hopping conductivity in disordered semiconductors,” in Linear and
Nonlinear Electron Transport in Solids, edited by J.T. Devreese and V.E. van Doren (New
York, Plenum, 1976), p. 341.
Butcher, P.N., “Calculation of hopping transport coeﬃcients (for impurity bands),” Philos.
Mag. B 42, 799 (1980).
Butcher, P.N., and J.A. McInnes, “Analytical formulae for DC hopping conductivity: r-
percolation in 3D,” Philos. Mag. 32, 249 (1978).
Caddock, B.D., and K.E. Evans, “Microporous materials with negative Poisson’s ratios. I.
Microstructure and mechanical properties,” J. Phys. D 22, 1877 (1989).
Cahn, J.W., “Phase separation by spinodal decomposition in isotropic systems,” J. Chem.
Phys. 42, 93 (1965).
Cai, Y., and M.F. Thorpe, “Floppy modes in network glasses,” Phys. Rev. B 40, 10535
(1989).
Calemczuk, R., A.M. de Goer, B. Salce, R. Maynard, and A. Zarembowitch, “Low-temperature
properties of silica aerogels,” Europhys. Lett. 3, 1205 (1987).
Candau, S.J., M. Ankrim, J.P. Munch, P. Rempp, G. Hild, and R. Osaka, R., in Physical
Optics of Dynamical Phenomena in Macromolecular Systems (Berlin, De Gruyter, 1985),
p. 145.
691

Carmesin, I., and K. Kremer, “The Bond ﬂuctuation method : A new eﬀective algorithm for
the dynamics of polymers in all spatial dimensions,” Macromolecules 21, 2819 (1988).
Carslaw, H.S., and J.C. Jaeger, Conduction of Heat in Solids, 2nd ed. (Oxford University
Press, London, 1959).
Castner, T.G., N.K. Lee, G.S. Cieloszyk, and G.L. Salinger, “Dielectric anomaly and the
metal-insulator transition,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 34, 1627 (1975).
Celzard, A., M. Krzesi˜nska, J.F. Marˆech´e, and S. Puricelli, “Scalar and vectorial percolation
in compressed expanded graphite,” Physica A 294, 283 (2001).
Chalupa, J., P.L. Leath, and G.R. Reich, “Bootstrap percolation on a Bethe lattice,” J. Phys.
C 12, L31 (1979).
Chandrasekhar, S., “Stochastic problems in physics and astronomy,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 15, 1
(1943).
Chayes, J.T., L. Chayes, and R. Durret, “Critical behavior of the two-dimensional ﬁrst passage
time,” J. Stat. Phys. 45, 933 (1986).
Chen, C.C., and Y.C. Chou, “Electrical-conductivity ﬂuctuations near the percolation thresh-
old,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 2529 (1985).
Chen, C.H., and S. Cheng, J. Compos. Mater. 1, 30 (1967).
Chen, H.-S., and A. Acrivos, “The solution of the equations of linear elasticity for an inﬁnite
region containing two spherical inclusions,” Int. J. Solids Structures 14, 331 (1978a).
Chen, H.-S. and A. Acrivos, “The eﬀective elastic moduli of composite materials contain-
ing spherical inclusions at non-dilute concentrations,” Int. J. Solids Structures 14, 349
(1978b).
Chen, I.-G., and W.B. Johnson, “Alternating-current electrical properties of random metal-
insulator composites,” J. Mater. Res. 26, 1565 (1991).
Chen, J., M.F. Thorpe, and L.C. Davis, “Elastic properties of rigid ﬁber-reinforced compos-
ites,” J. Appl. Phys. 77, 4349 (1995).
692

Chen, Z.-Y., P. Weakliem, W.M. Gelbart, and P. Meakin, “Second-order light scattering and
local anisotropy of diﬀusion-limited aggregates and bond-percolation clusters,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 58, 1996 (1987).
Cheng, H., and S. Torquato, “Efective conductivity of periodic arrays of spheres with interfa-
cial resistance,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 453, 145 (1997).
Cherkaev, A.V., and L.V. Gibiansky, Preprint 914, Phys.-Tech.
Inst.
Acad.
Sci.
USSR
Leningrad (1984) [English translation in Topics in the Mathematical Theory of Composite
Materials, edited by R.V. Kohn (Birkhauser, Boston, 1996)].
Cherkaev, A.V., and L.V. Gibiansky, Preprint 1115, Phys.-Tech. Inst. Acad. USSR Leningrad
(1987) [English translation in Topics in the Mathematical Theory of Composite Materials,
edited by R.V. Kohn (Birkhauser, Boston, 1996)].
Cherkaev, A.V., and L.V. Gibiansky, “The exact coupled bounds for eﬀective tensors of elec-
trical and magnetic properties of two-component two-dimensional composites,” Proc. R.
Soc. Edinb. 122A, 93 (1992).
Cherkaev, A.V., and L.V. Gibiansky, “Coupled estimates for the bulk and shear moduli of a
two-dimensional isotropic elastic composite,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids 41, 937 (1993).
Cherkaev, A.V., K.A. Lurie, and G.W. Milton, “Invariant properties of the stress in the plane
elasticity and equivalence classes of composites,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 438, 519 (1992).
Chiew, Y.C., and E.D. Glandt, “Interfacial surface area in dispersions and porous media,” J.
Colloid Interface Sci. 99, 86 (1984).
Choy, T.C., A. Alexopoulos, and M.F. Thorpe, “Dielectric function for a material containing
hyperspherical inclusions to O(c2). I. Multipole expansions,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A
454, 1973 (1998).
Christensen, R.M., Mechanics of Composite Materials (Wiley, New York, 1979).
Christensen, R.M., and K.H. Lo, “Solutions for the eﬀective shear properties in three phase
spheres and cylinder models,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids 27, 315 (1979).
693

Clarkson, M.T., “Electrical conductivity and permittivity measurements near the percolation
transition in a microemulsion. II. Interpretation,” Phys. Rev. A 37, 2079 (1988).
Clarkson, M.T., and S.I. Smedley, “Electrical conductivity and permittivity measurements
near the percolation transition in a microemulsion. I. Experiment,” Phys. Rev. A 37,
2070 (1988).
Clausius, R., Die mechanische Behandlung der Electricit¨at (Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1879), p.
62.
Clerc, J.P., G. Giraud, J.M. Laugier, J.M. and Luck, “The electrical conductivity of binary
disordered systems, percolation clusters, fractals and related models,” Adv. Phys. 39,
191 (1990).
Cohen, M.H., and G.S. Grest, “Liquid-glass transition, a free volume approach,” Phys. Rev.
B 20, 1077 (1979).
Cohen, M.H., and J. Jortner, “Eﬀective medium theory for the Hall eﬀect in disordered ma-
terials,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 30, 696 (1973).
Cohn, R.M., “The resistance of an electrical network,” Am. Math. Soc. Proc. 1, 316 (1950).
Colby, R.H., J.R. Gilmor, and M. Rubinstein, “Dynamics of near-critical polymer gels,” Phys.
Rev. E 48, 3712 (1993).
Cole, K.S., and R.J. Cole, “Dispersion and absorption in dielectrics. I. Alternating current
characteristics,” J. Chem. Phys. 9, 341 (1941).
Coniglio, A., “Thermal phase transition of the dilute s-state Potts and n-vector models at the
percolation threshold,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 46, 250 (1981).
Coniglio, A., U. De Angelis, and A. Forlani, “Pair connectedness and cluster size,” J. Phys.
A 10, 1123 (1977).
Conrad, H., U. Buchenau, R. Schatzler, G. Reichenauer, and J. Fricke, “Crossover in the vibra-
tional density of states of silica aerogels studied by high-resolution neutron spectroscopy,”
Phys. Rev. B 41, 2753 (1990).
694

Conwell, E.M., “Impurity band conduction in germanium and silicon,” Phys. Rev. 103, 51
(1956).
Cook, R.D., D.S. Malkus, and M.E. Plesha, Concepts and Applications of Finite Element
Analysis (Wiley, New York, 1989).
Cooper, D.W., “Random-sequential-packing simulations in three dimensions for spheres,”
Phys. Rev. A 38, 522 (1988).
Cornell, B.A., J. Middlehurst, and N.S. Parker, “Modelling the simplest form of order in
biological membranes,” J. Colloid Interface Sci. 81, 280 (1981).
Cosserat, E., and F. Cosserat, Th´eorie des Corps D´eformables (Hermann, Paris, 1909).
Cotton, J.P., Th´ese, Universit´e Paris, 6 (1974).
Courtens, E., J. Pelous, J. Phalippou, R. Vacher, and T. Woignier, “Fractal structure of base
catalyzed and densiﬁed silica aerogels,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 95 & 96, 1175 (1987).
Courtens, E., and R. Vacher, “Structure and dynamics of fractal aerogels,” Z. Phys. B 68,
355 (1987).
Courtens, E., R. Vacher, and J. Pelous, in Fractals: Physical Origin and Properties, edited by
L. Peitronero (Plenum, London, 1990), p. 285.
Courtens, E., Vacher, R., and Stoll, E., “Fractons observed,” Physica D 38, 41 (1989).
Craciun, F., C. Galassi, and E. Roncari, “Experimental evidence for similar critical behavior
of elastic modulus and electric conductivity in porous ceramic materials,” Europhys. Lett.
41, 55 (1998).
Cramer, C., and M. Buscher, “Complete conductivity spectra of fast ion conducting silver
iodide/silver selenate glasses,” Solid State Ionics 105, 109 (1998).
Cummings, K.D., J.C. Garland, and D.B. Tanner, “Optical propeties of a small-particle com-
posite,” Phys. Rev. B 30, 4170 (1984).
695

Dai, U., A. Palevski, and G. Deutscher, “Hall eﬀect in a three-dimensional percolation sys-
tems”, Phys. Rev. B 36, 790 (1987).
Daoud, M., “Distribution of relaxation times near the gelation threshold,” J. Phys. A 21,
L973 (1988).
Daoud, M., “Viscoelasticity near the sol-gel transition,” Macromolecules 33, 3019 (2000).
Daoud, M., and A. Coniglio, “Singular behaviour of the free energy in the sol-gel transition,”
J. Phys. A 14, L301 (1981).
Daoud, M., F. Family, and G. Jannik, “Dilution and polydispersity in branched polymers,”
J. Physique Lett. 45, 199 (1984).
Davis, V.A., and L. Schwartz, “Dielectric properties od silver-gelatin granular suspensions,”
Phys. Rev. B 33, 6627 (1986).
Day, A.R., K.A. Snyder, E.J. Garboczi, and M.F. Thorpe, “The elastic moduli of a sheet
containing circular holes,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids 40, 1031 (1992).
Day, A.R., R. Tremblay, and A.-M.S. Tremblay, “Spectral properties of percolating central
force elastic networks,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 75, 245 (1985).
Day, A.R., R.R. Tremblay, and A.-M.S. Tremblay, “Rigid backbone: A new geometry for
percolation,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 2501 (1986).
de Arcangelis, L., S. Redner, and A. Coniglio, “Anomalous voltage distribution of random
resistor networks and a new model for the backbone at the percolation threshold,” Phys.
Rev. B 31, 4725 (1985).
de Arcangelis, L., S. Redner, and A. Coniglio, “Multiscaling approach in random resistor and
random superconducting networks,” Phys. Rev. B 34, 4656 (1986).
Debye, P., H.R. Anderson, Jr., and H. Brumberger, “Scattering by an inhomogeneous solid.
II. The correlation function and its applications,” J. Appl. Phys. 28, 679 (1957).
Dederichs, P.H., and R. Zeller, “Variational treatment of the elastic constants of disordered
materials,” Z. Phys. 259, 103 (1973).
696

de Gennes, P.G., “Exponents for excluded volume problem as derived by the Wilson method,”
Phys. Lett. A 38, 339 (1972).
de Gennes, P.G., “On a relation between percolation theory and the elasticity of gels,” J.
Physique Lett. 37, L1 (1976a).
de Gennes, P.G., “La percolation: Un concept uniﬁcateur,” La Recherche 7, 919 (1976b).
de Gennes, P.G., “Incoherent scattering near a sol gel transition,” J. Physique Lett. 40, L197
(1979).
de Gennes, P.G., “Suspension collo¨idales dans un m´elange binaire critique,” C.R. Acad. Sci.
292, 701 (1981).
de Goer, A.M., R. Calemczuk, B. Slace, J. Bon, E. Bonjour, and R. Maynard, “Low-temperature
energy excitations and thermal properties of silica aerogels,” Phys. Rev. B 40, 8327
(1989).
Goodier, “Concentration of stress around spherical and cylindrical inclusions and ﬂaws,” J.
Appl. Mech. 5, 39 (1933).
del Gado, E., L. de Arcangelis, and A. Coniglio, “Elastic properties at the sol-gel transition,”
Europhys. Lett. 46, 288 (1999).
Dembovskii, S.A., V.V. Kirilenko, and Ju. A. Buslaev, Izv. Akad. Nauk USSR, Neorg, Mat.
7, 328 (1971).
Denteneer, P.J.H., and M.H. Ernst, “Exact results for diﬀusion on a disordered chain,” J.
Phys. C 16, L961 (1983).
Deprez, N., D.S. McLachlan, and I. Sigalas, “The measurement and comparative analysis of
the electrical and thermal conductivities and permeability of sintered nickel,” Physica A
157, 181 (1989).
Deptuck, D., J.P. Harrison, and P. Zawadzki, “Measurement of elasticity and conductivity of
a three-dimensional percolation system,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 913 (1985).
697

Derrida, B., R. Orbach, and K.W. Yu, “Percolation in the eﬀective-medium approximation:
Crossover between phonon and fracton excitations,” Phys. Rev. B 29, 6645 (1984).
Derrida, B., and Y. Pomeau, “Classical diﬀusion on a random chain,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 48,
627 (1982).
Derrida, B., and J. Vannimenus, “A transfer-matrix approach to random resistor networks,”
J. Phys. A 15, L557 (1982).
Derrida, B., J.G. Zabolitzky, J. Vannimenus, and D. Stauﬀer, “A transfer matrix program to
calculate the conductivity of random resistor networks,” J. Stat. Phys. 36, 31 (1984).
Deutscher, G., O. Entin-Wohlman, S. Fishman, and Y. Shapira, “Percolation description of
granular superconductors,” Phys. Rev. B 21, 5041 (1980).
Deutscher, G., and M.L. Rappaport, “Critical currents of superconducting aluminium-germanium
and lead-germanium thin ﬁlm alloys near the metal-insulator transition,” J. Physique Lett.
40, L219 (1979).
Devreux, F., J.P. Boilot, F. Chaput, L. Malier, and M.A.V. Axelos, “Crossover from scalar to
vectorial percolation in silica gelation,” Phys. Rev. E 47, 2689 (1993).
Diaz-Guilera, A., and A.-M.S. Tremblay, “Random mixtures with orientational order, and
the anisotropic resistivity tensors of high−Tc superconductors,” J. Appl. Phys. 69, 379
(1991).
Djabourov, M., J. Leblond, and P. Papon, “Gelation of aqueous gelatin solutions. II. Rheology
of the sol-gel transition,” J. Phys. France 49, 333 (1988).
Doi, H., Y. Fujiwara, K. Miyaka and Y. Oosawa, “A systematic investigation of elastic moduli
of Wc-Co alloys,” Metall. Trans. 1, 1417 (1970).
Doi, M., “A new variational approach to the diﬀusion and ﬂow problem in porous media,” J.
Phys. Soc. Japan 40, 567 (1976).
Doyen, P.M., “Permeability, conductivity, and pore geometry of sandstones,” J. Geophys. Res.
93B, 7729 (1988).
698

Doyle, W.T., “The Clausius-Mossotti problem for cubic arrays of spheres,” J. Appl. Phys.
49, 795 (1978).
Dubois, M. and B. Cabane, “Light-scattering study of the sol-gel transition in silicon tetraethox-
ide,” Macromolecules 22, 2526 (1989).
Dubrov, V.E., M.E. Levinshtein, and M.S. Shur, “Anomaly in the dielectric permeability in
metal-dielectric transitions. Theory and simulation,” Sov. Phys.-JETP 43, 2014 (1976).
Duering, E., and D.J. Bergman, “Scaling properties of the elastic stiﬀness moduli of a random
rigid-nonrigid network near the rigidity threshold: theory and simulations,” Phys. Rev.
B 37, 9460 (1988).
Duering, E., and D.J. Bergman, “Current distribution on a three-dimensional, bond-diluted,
random-resistor network at the percolation threshold,” J. Stat. Phys. 60, 363 (1990).
Dundurs, J., “Eﬀect of elastic constants on stress in a composite under plane deformation,”
J. Comp. Mater. 1, 310 (1967).
Durand, D., M. Delsanti, M. Adam, and J.M. Luck, “Frequency dependence of viscoelastic
properties of branched polymers near gelation threshold,” Europhys. Lett. 3, 297 (1987).
Durian, D.J., “Bubble-scale model of foam mechanics: Melting, nonlinear behavior, and
avalanche,” Phys. Rev. E 55, 1739 (1997).
Duval, E., A. Boukenter, T. Achibat, B. Champagnon, J. Serugetti, and J. Dumas, “Struc-
ture of silica aerogels and vibrational dynamics in fractal materials and glasses: electron
microscopy and low-frequency Raman scattering,” Philos. Mag. B 65, 181 (1992).
Dykhne, A.M., “Conductivity of a two-dimensional two-phase system,” Sov. Phys.-JETP 32,
63 (1971)].
Dyre, J.C., “The random free energy barrier model for ac conduction in disordered solids,” J.
Appl. Phys. 64, 2456 (1988).
Dyre, J.C., “Universal low-temperature ac conductivity of macroscopically disordered materi-
als,” Phys. Rev. B 48, 12511 (1993).
699

Dyre, J.C., “Studies of ac hopping conduction at low temperatures,” Phys. Rev. B 49, 11709
(1994); 50, 9692(E).
Dyre, J.C., and T.B. Schr⊘der, “Eﬀective one-dimensionality of universal ac hopping conduc-
tion in the extreme disorder limit,” Phys. Rev. B 54, 14884 (1996).
Dyre, J.C., and T.B. Schr⊘der, “Universality of ac conduction in disordered solids,” Rev.
Mod. Phys. 72, 873 (2000).
Ebrahimi, F., and M. Sahimi, “Multiresolution wavelet coarsening and analysis of transport
in heterogeneous media,” Physica A (2002).
Efros, A.L., and B.I. Shklovskii, “Coulomb gap and low temperature conductivity of disordered
systems,” J. Phys. C 8, L49 (1975).
Efros, A.L., and B.I. Shklovskii, “Critical behaviour of conductivity and dielectric constant
near the metal-non-metal transition threshold,” Phys. Status Solidi B 46, 475 (1976).
Eggarter, T.P., and M.H. Cohen, “Simple model for density of states and mobility of an
electron in a gas of hard-core scatterers,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 25, 807 (1970).
Eischen, J.W., and S. Torquato, “Determining elastic behaviour of composites by the boundary
element method,” J. Appl. Phys. 74, 159 (1993).
Elber, R., and M. Kaplus, “Low-frequency modes in proteins: Use of the eﬀective-medium
approximation to interpret the fractal dimension observed in electron-spin relaxation mea-
surements,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 394 (1986).
Elimes, A., R.A. Romer, and M. Schreiber, Eur. Phys. J. B 1, 29 (1998).
Elliot, R.J., J.A. Krumhansl, and P.L. Leath, “The theory and properties of randomly disor-
dered crystals and related physical systems,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 46, 465 (1974).
Elliot, S.R., “Frequency-dependent conductivity in ionically and electronically conducting
amorphous solids,” Solid State Ionics 70/71, 27 (1994).
Entin-Wohlman, O., S. Alexander, and R. Orbach, “Inelastic extended-electron-localized-
vibrational-state scattering rate,” Phys. Rev. B 32, 8007 (1985).
700

Entin-Wohlman, O., R. Orbach, and G. Polatsek, “Dynamics of tenuous structures,” in Dy-
namics of Disordered Materials, edited by D. Richter, A.J. Dianoux, W. Petry, and J.
Teixeira (Springer, Berlin, 1989a), p. 288.
Entin-Wohlman, O., U. Sivan, R. Blumenfeld, and Y. Meir, “Dynamic structure fractor of
fractals,” Physica D 38, 93 (1989b).
Ertel, W., K. Frobose, and J. Jackle, “Constrained diﬀusion dynamics in the hard-square
lattice gas at high density,” J. Chem. Phys. 88, 5027 (1988).
Eshelby, J.D., “The continuum theory of lattice defects,” in Progress in Solid State Physics,
edited by F. Seitz and D. Turnbull (Academic, New York, 1956), p. 79.
Eshelby, J.D., “The determination of the elastic ﬁeld of an ellipsoidal inclusion and related
problems,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 241, 376 (1957).
Eshelby, J.D., “Elastic inclusions and inhomogeneities,” in Progress in Solid Mechanics, edited
by I.N. Sneddon and R. Hill (Interscience, New York, 1961), 2, p. 89.
Essam, J.W., “Percolation and cluster size,” in Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena,
edited by C. Domb and M.S. Green, Volume II (Academic Press, London, 1972), p. 197.
Essam, J.W., and F.M. Bhatti, “Series expansion evidence supporting the Alexander-Orbach
conjecture in two dimensions,” J. Phys. A 18, 3577 (1985).
Essam, J.W., C.M. Place, and E.H. Sondheimer, “Self consistent calculation of the conduc-
tivity in a disordered branching network,” J. Phys. C 7, L258 (1974).
Eubanks, R.A., and E. Sternberg, “On the completeness of the Boussinesq-Papkovich stress
functions,” J. Rational Mech. Anal. 5, 735 (1956).
Evans, K.E., “Tensile network microstructures exhibiting negative Poisson’s ratios,” J. Phys.
D 22, 1870 (1989).
Evans, K.E., and B.D. Caddock, “Microporous materials with negative Poisson’s ratios. II.
Mechanisms and interpretation,” J. Phys. D 22, 1883 (1989).
701

Every, A.G., Y. Tzou, D.P.H. Hasselman, and R. Raj, “The eﬀect of particle size on the
thermal conductivity of ZnS/diamond composites,” Acta Metall. Mater. 40, 123 (1992).
Eyre, D.J., and G.W. Milton, “A fast numerical scheme for computing the response of com-
posites using grid reﬁnement,” Euro. Phys. J. 6, 41 (1997).
Fadda, G.C., D. Lairez, and J. Pelta, “Critical behavior of gelation probed by the dynamics
of latex spheres,” Phys. Rev. E 63, 061405-1 (2001).
Family, F., “Polymer statistics and universality: Principles and applications of cluster renor-
malization,” in Random Walks and Their Applications in the Physical and Biological
Sciences, edited by M.F. Shlesinger and B.J. West, AIP Conference Proceedings 109
(AIP, New York, 1984), p. 33.
Family, F., and A. Coniglio, “Cross over from percolation to random animals and compact
clusters,” J. Phys. A 13, L403 (1980).
Family, F., and T. Vicsek (eds.), Dynamics of Fractal Surfaces (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore,
1991).
Farago, O., and Y. Kantor, “Entropic elasticity of two-dimensional self-avoiding percolation
systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2533 (2000).
Fatt, I., “The network model of porous media I. Capillary pressure characteristics,” Trans.
AIME 207, 144 (1956).
Feder, J., “Random sequential adsorption,” J. Theor. Biol. 87, 237 (1980).
Felderhof, B.U., “Bounds for the eﬀective dielectric constant of disordered two-phase materi-
als,” J. Phys. C 15, 1731 (1982).
Felderhof, B.U., and R.B. Jones, “Eﬀective dielectric constant of dilute suspensions of sphers,”
Phys. Rev. B 39, 5669 (1989).
Feng, S., “Percolation properties of granular elastic networks in two dimensions,” Phys. Rev.
B 32, 510 (1985a).
702

Feng, S., “Crossover in spectral dimensionality of elastic percolation systems,” Phys. Rev. B
32, 5793 (1985b).
Feng, S., B.I. Halperin, and P.N. Sen, “Transport properties of continuum systems near the
percolation threshold,” Phys. Rev. B 35, 197 (1987).
Feng, S., and M. Sahimi, “Position-space renormalization for elastic percolation networks with
bond-bending forces,” Phys. Rev. B 31, 1671 (1985).
Feng, S., and P.N. Sen, “Percolation on elastic networks: new exponent and threshold,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 52, 216 (1984).
Feng, S., P.N. Sen, B.I. Halperin and C.J. Lobb, “Percolation on two-dimensional elastic
networks with rotationally invariant bond-bending forces,” Phys. Rev. B 30, 5386 (1984).
Feng, S., M.F. Thorpe, and E. Garboczi, “Eﬀective-medium theory of percolation on central-
force elastic networks,” Phys. Rev. B 31, 276 (1985).
Feng, X., W.J. Bresser, and P. Boolchand, “Direct evidence for stiﬀness threshold in chalco-
genide glasses,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4422 (1997).
Ferri, B., J. Frisken, and D.S. Cannell, “Structure of silica gels,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3626
(1991).
Ferry, J.D., Viscoelastic Properties of Polymers (New York, Wiley, 1980).
Feynman, R.P., “Forces in molecules,” Phys. Rev. 56, 340 (1939).
Fiegl, B., R. Kuhnert, M. Ben-Chorin, and F. Koch, “Evidence for grain boundary hopping
transport in polycrystalline diamond ﬁlms,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 65, 371 (1994).
Fisch, R., and A.B. Harris, “Critical behavior of random resistor networks near the percolation
threshold,” Phys. Rev. B 18, 416 (1978).
Fischer, U., C. von Borczyskowski, and N. Schwentner, “Singlet-exciton transport and spatial
and energetic disorder in dibenzofuran crystals,” Phys. Rev. B 41, 9126 (1990).
703

Fishchuk, I.I., “The AC conductivity and Hall eﬀect in inhomogeneous semiconductors,” Phys.
Status Solidi A 93, 675 (1986).
Fisher, M.E., “The theory of critical point singularities,” in Critical Phenomena, edited by
M.S. Green (Academic Press, New York, 1971), p. 1.
Fisher, M.E., and J.W. Essam, “Some cluster size and percolation problems,” J. Math. Phys.
2, 609 (1961).
Fitzpatrick, J.P., R.B. Malt, and F. Spaepen, “Percolation theory and the conductivity of
random close packed mixtures of hard spheres,” Phys. Lett. A 47, 207 (1974).
Flaherty, J.E., and J.B. Keller, “Elastic Behaviour of composite media,” Commun. Pure Appl.
Math. 26, 565 (1973).
Flory, P.J., Molecular size distribution in three dimensional polymers. I. Gelation,” J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 63, 3083 (1941).
Fogelholm, R., “The conductivity of large percolation network samples,” J. Phys. C 13, L571
(1980).
Fontana, A., F. Tocca, M.P. Fontana, B. Rosi, and A.J. Dianoux, “Low-frequency dynamics
in superionic borate glasses by coupled Raman and inelastic neutron scattering,” Phys.
Rev. B 41, 3778 (1990).
Fox, T.G., and P.J. Flory, “Further studies on the melt viscosity of polyisobutylene,” J. Phys.
Chem. 55, 221 (1951).
Francfort, G.A., and F. Murat, “Homogeneization and optimal bounds in linear elasticity,”
Arch. Rat. Mech. Analy. 94, 307 (1986).
Frank, D.J., and C.J. Lobb, “Highly eﬃcient algorithm for percolative transport studies in
two dimensions,” Phys. Rev. B 37, 302 (1988).
Freltoft, T., J.K. Kjems, and D. Richter, “Density of states in fractal silica smoke-particle
aggregates,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1212 (1987).
Fricke, J., “Aerogels,” Sci. Amer. 258 (No. 5), 68 (1988).
704

Friis, E.A., R.S. Lakes, and J.B. Park, “Negative Poisson’s ratio polymeric and metallic
foams,” J. Mater. Sci. 23, 4406 (1988).
Garboczi, E.J., “Eﬀective force constant for a central-force random network,” Phys. Rev. B
37, 318 (1988a).
Garboczi, E.J., and M.F. Thorpe, “Eﬀective-medium theory of percolation on central force
elastic networks. II. Further results,” Phys. Rev. B 31 7276, (1985).
Garboczi, E.J., and M.F. Thorpe, “Eﬀective-medium theory of percolation on central-force
elastic networks. III. The superelastic problem,” Phys. Rev. B 33, 3289 (1986a).
Garboczi, E.J., and M.F. Thorpe, “Density of states for random-central-force elastic net-
works,” Phys. Rev. B 32, 4513 (1986b).
Garfunkel, G.A., and M.B. Weissman, “Noise scaling in continuum percolating ﬁlms,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 55, 296 (1985).
Garland, J.C., “Granular properties of high Tc superconductors,” Physica A 157, 111 (1989).
Gauthier-Manuel, B., and E. Guyon, “Critical elasticity of Polyacrylamide above its gel point,”
J. Physique Lett. 41, L503 (1980).
Gauthier-Manuel, B., E. Guyon, S. Roux, S. Gits, and F. Lefaucheux, “Critical viscoelastic
study of the gelation of silica particles,” J. Physique 48, 869 (1987).
Gazis, D.C., R. Herman, and R.F. Wallis, “Surface elastic waves in cubic crystals,” Phys. Rev.
119, 533 (1960).
Gefen, Y., A. Aharony, and S. Alexander, “Anomalous diﬀusion on percolation clusters,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 50, 77 (1983).
Georgiev, D.G., P. Boolchand, and M. Micoulaut, “Rigidity transition and molecular structure
of AsxSE1−x glasses,” Phys. Rev. B 62, R9228 (2000).
Gerber, A., and G. Deutscher, “Upper critical ﬁeld of superconducting Pb ﬁlms above and
below the percolation threshold,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1184 (1989).
705

Gibiansky, L.V., and G.W. Milton, “On the eﬀective viscoelastic moduli of two-phase media.
I. Rigorous bounds on the complex bulk modulus,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 440, 163
(1993).
Gibiansky, L.V., and S. Torquato, “Geometrical-parameter bounds on the eﬀective moduli of
composites,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids 43, 1587 (1995a).
Gibiansky, L.V., and S. Torquato, “Rigorous link between the conductivity and elastic moduli
of ﬁber-reinforced composite materials,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 343, 243 (1995b).
Gibiansky, L.V., and S. Torquato, “Connection between the conductivity and elastic moduli
of isotroppic composites,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, 452, 253 (1996).
Gibson, L.J., and M.F. Ashby, Cellular Solids, 2nd ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1997).
Gilbert, E.N., “Random subdivisions of space into crystals,” Ann. Math. Stat. 33, 958 (1962).
Gingold, D.B., and C.J. Lobb, “Percolative conduction in three dimensions,” Phys. Rev. B
42, 8220 (1990).
Good, I.J., “The number of individuals in a cascade process,” Proc. Camb. Philos. Soc. 45,
360 (1949).
Gordon, M., and J.A. Torkington, Pure Appl. Chem. 53, 1461 (1981).
Grabovsky, Y., G.W. Milton, and D.S. Sage, “Exact relations for eﬀective tensors of compos-
ites: Necessary conditions and suﬃcient conditions,” Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 53,
300 (2000).
Grannan, D.M., J.C. Garland, and D.B. Tanner, “Critical behavior of the dielectric constant
of a random composite near the percolation threshold,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 46, 375 (1981).
Granqvist, C.G., and O. Hunderi, “Conductivity of inhomogeneous materials:
Eﬀective-
medium theory with dipole-dipole interaction,” Phys. Rev. B 18, 1554 (1978).
Greenberg, R., and W.F. Brace, “Archie’s law for rocks modeled by simple networks,” J.
Geophys. Res. 74, 2099 (1969).
706

Grest, G.S., and M.H. Cohen, “Percolation and the glass transition,” in Percolation Structures
and Processes, edited by G. Deutscher, R. Zallen and J. Adler, Annals of the Israel
Physical Society 5 (Adam Hilger, Bristol, 1983), p. 187.
Grest, G.S., and I. Webman, “Vibration properties of a percolating cluster,” J. Phys. (Paris)
Lett. 45, L1155 (1984).
Grest, G.S., I. Webman, S.A. Safran, and A.L.R. Bug, “Dynamic percolation in microemul-
sions,” Phys. Rev. A 33, 2842 (1986).
Gubernatis, T., and J.A. Krumhansl, “Macroscopic engineering preoperties of polycrystalline
materials: Elastic properties,’ J. Appl. Phys. 46, 1875 (1975).
Gupta, P.K., and A.R. Cooper, “Topologically disordered networks of rigid polytopes,” J.
Non-Cryst. Solids 123, 14 (1990).
Haan, S.W., and R. Zwanzig, “Series expansion in a continuum percolation problem,” J. Phys.
A 10, 1547 (1977).
Haji-Sheikh, A., and E.M. Sparrow, “The solution of heat conduction problem by probability
methods,” J. Heat Trans., 121 (May 1967).
Halfpap, B.L., and S.M. Lindsay, “Rigidity percolation in the germanium-arsenic-selenium
alloy system,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 847 (1986).
Halperin, B.I., S. Feng, and P.N. Sen, “Dﬀerences between lattice and continuum percolation
transport exponents,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 2391 (1985).
Hamilton, E.M., “Variable range hopping in a non uniform density of states,” Philos. Mag.
26, 1043 (1972).
Hammonds, K.D., H. Deng, V. Heine, and M.T. Dove, “How ﬂoppy modes give rise to ad-
sorption sites in zeolites,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3701 (1997).
Hansen, A., and S. Roux, “Multifractality in elastic percolation,” J. Stat. Phys. 53, 759
(1988).
707

Hansen, A., and S. Roux, “Universality class of central-force percolation,” Phys. Rev. B 40,
749 (1989).
Hansen, J.P., and McDonald, I.R., Theory of Simple Liquids (Academic Press, New York,
1986).
Harris, A.B., and A. Aharony, “Anomalous diﬀusion, superlocalization and hopping conduc-
tivity on fractal media,” Europhys. Lett. 4, 1355 (1987).
Harris, A.B., and R. Fisch, “Critical behavior of random resistor networks,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
38, 796 (1977).
Harris, A.B., S. Kim, and T.C. Lubensky, “Epsilon expansion for the conductivity of a random
resistor network,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 743 (1984).
Harris, A.B., and S. Kirkpatrick, “Low-frequency response functions of random magnetic
systems,” Phys. Rev. B 16, 542 (1977).
Hashin, Z., “On elastic behaviour of ﬁber-reinforced materials of arbitrary transverse phase
geometry,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 13, 119 (1965).
Hashin, Z., “Theory of composite materials,” in Mechanics of Composite Materials (Pergamon
Press, New York, 1970), p. 126.
Hashin, Z. “Failure criteria for unidirectional ﬁber composites,” J. Appl.
Mech.
47, 329
(1980).
Hashin, Z., and B.W. Rosen, “The elastic moduli of ﬁber-reinforced materials,” J. Apply.
Mech. 31, 223 (1964).
Hashin, Z., and S. Shtrikman, “On some variational principles in anisotropic and nonhomo-
geneous elasticity,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids 10, 335 (1962a).
Hashin, Z., and S. Shtrikman, “A variational approach to the theory of the elastic behavior
of polycrystals,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids 10, 343 (1962b).
Hashin, Z., and S. Shtrikman, “A variational approach to the theory of the elastic behavior
of multiphase materials,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids 11, 127 (1963).
708

Haus, J.W., and K.W. Kehr, “Diﬀusion in regular and disordered lattices,” Phys. Rep. 150,
263 (1987).
Havlin, S., and D. Ben-Avraham, “Diﬀusion in disordered media,” Adv. Phys. 36, 695 (1987).
He, H., and M.F. Thorpe, “Elastic properties of glasses,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 2107 (1985).
Heiba, A.A., M. Sahimi, L.E. Scriven, and H.T. Davis, “Percolation theory of two-phase ﬂow
in porous media,” Society of Petroleum Engineers paper 11015, New Orleans, LA (1982).
Heiba, A.A., M. Sahimi, L. E. Scriven, and H. T. Davis, “Percolation theory of two-phase
relative permeability,” SPE Reservoir Engineering 7, 123 (1992).
Heinrichs, J., and N. Kumar, “Simple exact treatment of conductance in a random Bethe
lattice,” J. Phys. C 8, L510 (1975).
Hellmann, H., Einf¨uhrung in die Quantumchemie (Deuticke, Leipzig, 1937).
Helsing, J., “Third-order bounds on the conductivity of a random stacking of cubes,” J. Math.
Phys. 35, 1688 (1994).
Helsing, J., G.W. Milton, and A.B. Movchan, “Duality relations, correspondences, and nu-
merical results for planar elastic composites,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids 45, 565 (1997).
Helte, A. “Fourth-order bounds on the eﬀective conductivity for a system of fully penetrable
spheres,” Proc. R. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 445, 247 (1994).
Henderson, S.I., T.C. Mortensen, S.M. Underwood, and W. van Megen, “Eﬀect of particle size
distribution on crystallisation and the glass transition of hard sphere colloids,” Physica
A 233, 102 (1996).
Hendrickson, B., “Conditions for unique graph realizations,” SIAM J. Comput. 21, 65 (1992).
Herakovich, C.T., “Composite laminates with negative through-the-thickness Poisson’s ra-
tios,” J. Comp. Mater. 18, 447 (1984).
Herrmann, H.J., B. Derrida, and J. Vannimenus, “Superconductivity exponents in two- and
three-dimensional percolation,” Phys. Rev. B 30, 4080 (1984).
709

Hershey, A.V., “The elasticity of an isotropic aggregate of anisotropic cubic crystals,” J. Appl.
Mech. 21, 236 (1954).
Hetherington, J.H., and M.F. Thorpe, “The conductivity of a sheet containing inclusions with
sharp corners,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 438, 591 (1992).
Hill, R., “Elastic preoperties of reinforced solids: Some theoretical principles,” J. Mech. Phys.
Solids 11, 357 (1963).
Hill, R., “Theory of mechanical properties of ﬁber-strengththened materials: I. Elastic behav-
ior,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids 12, 199 (1964).
Hill, R., “Theory of mechanical properties of ﬁber-strenghthened materials: III. Self-consistent
models,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids 13, 189 (1965).
Hill, R.M., “On the observation of variable range hopping,” Phys. Stat. Sol. A35, K29
(1976).
Hinsen, K., and B.U. Felderhof, “Dielectric constant of a suspension of uniform spheres,”
Phys. Rev. B 46, 12955 (1992).
Ho, F.G., and W. Strieder, “Asymptotic expansion of the porous medium, eﬀective diﬀusion
coeﬃcient in the Knudsen number,” J. Chem. Phys. 70, 5635 (1979).
Hobson, E.W., The Theory of the Spherical and Ellipsoidal Harmonics (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1931).
Hodgson, D.F., and E.J. Amis, “Dynamic viscoelastic characterization of sol-gel reactions,”
Macromolecules 23, 2512 (1990).
Holly, E.E., S.K. Venkataraman, F. Chambon, and H.H. Winter, H.H., “Fourier transform
mechanical spectroscopy of viscoelastic materials with transient structures,” J. Non-
Newtonian Fluid Mech. 27, 17 (1988).
Hoover, W.G., and F.H. Ree, “Melting transition and communal entropy for hard spheres,”
J. Chem. Phys. 49, 3609 (1968).
710

Hori, M., and F. Yonezawa, “Theoretical approaches to inhomogeneous transport in disordered
media,” J. Phys. C 10, 229 (1977).
Horiguchi, T., “Lattice Green’s functions for the triangular and honeycomb lattices,” J. Math.
Phys. 13, 1411 (1972).
Hoshen, J., and R. Kopelman, “Percolation and cluster distribution.
I. Cluster multiple
labelling technique,” Phys. Rev. B 14, 3438 (1976).
Howell, F.S., R.A. Bose, P.B. Macedo, and C.T. Moynihan, “Electrical relaxation in a glass-
forming molten salt,” J. Phys. Chem. 78, 639 (1974).
Hsu, W.Y., and T. Berzins, “Percolation and eﬀective-medium theories for perﬂuorinated
ionomers and polymer composites,” J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Phys. Ed. 23, 933 (1985).
Hughes, B.D., Random Walks and Random Environments, Vol. 1 (Oxford University Press,
London, 1995).
Hughes, B.D., Random Walks and Random Environments, Vol. 2 (Oxford University Press,
London, 1996), Chapter 6.
Hughes, B.D., and M. Sahimi, “Random walks on the Bethe lattices,” J. Stat. Phys. 29, 781
(1982).
Hui, P.M., and D. Stroud, “Theory of Faraday rotation by dilute suspension of small particles,”
Appl. Phys. Lett. 50, 950 (1987).
Hundley, M.F. and A. Zettl, “Temperature-dependent ac conductivity of thin percolation
ﬁlms,” Phys. Rev. B 38, 10290 (1988).
Hung, C.S., and J.R. Gliessman, “The resistivity and Hall eﬀect of Germanium at low tem-
peratures,” Phys. Rev. 79, 726 (1950).
Isard, J.O., “A study of the migration loss in glass and a generalized method of calculating
the rise of dielectric loss with remperature,” Proc. Inst. Electr. Eng. 109B (Suppl. No.
22), 440 (1961).
711

Ishioka, S., and M. Koiwa, “Random walks on diamond and hexagonal close packed lattices,”
Philos. Mag. A 37, 517 (1978).
Jaccarino, V., and L.R. Walker, “Discontinuous occurence of localized moments in metals,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 15, 258 (1965).
Jackson, J.D., Classical Electrodynamics, 3rd Ed. (John Wiley & Sons, 1998).
Jacobs, D.J., and M.F. Thorpe, “Generic rigidity percolation: The pebble game,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 75, 4051 (1995).
Jacobs, D.J., and M.F. Thorpe, “Generic rigidity percolation in two dimensions,” Phys. Rev.
E 53, 3682 (1996).
Jagannathan, A., and R. Orbach, “Temperature and frequency dependence of the sound ve-
locity in vitreous silica due to scattering oﬀlocalized modes,” Phys. Rev. B 41, 3153
(1990).
Jagannathan, A., R. Orbach, and O. Entin-Wohlman, “Thermal conductivity of amorphous
materials above the plateau,” Phys. Rev. B 39, 13465 (1989).
Jastrzebska, M.M., S. Jussila, and H. Isotalo, “Dielectric response and a.c. conductivity of
synthetic dopa-melanin polymer,” J. Mater. Sci. 33, 4023 (1998).
Jeﬀrey, D.J., “Conduction through a random suspension of spheres,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A
335, 355 (1973).
Jeﬀrey, D.J., “Group expansion for the bulk properties of a statistically homogeneous random
suspensions,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 338, 503 (1974).
Jerauld, G.R., Flow and Transport in Chaotic Media: Four Case Studies, Ph.D. Thesis, Uni-
versity of Minnesota (1985).
Jerauld, G.R., J.C. Hatﬁeld, L.E. Scriven, and H.T. Davis, “Percolation and conduction on
Voronoi and triangular networks: a case study in topological disorder,” J. Phys. C 17,
1519 (1984a).
712

Jerauld, G.R., L.E. Scriven, and H.T. Davis, “Percolation and conduction on the 3D Voronoi
and regular networks: a second case study in topological disorder,” J. Phys. C 17, 3429
(1984b).
John, S., H. Sompolinsky, and M.J. Stephen, “Localisation in a disordered elastic medium
near two dimensions,” Phys. Rev. B 27, 5592 (1983).
Joy, T., and W. Strieder, “Eﬀective medium theory of site percolation in a random simple
triangular conductance network,” J. Phys. C 11, L867 (1978) [Corringendum 12, L53
(1979)].
Joy, T., and W. Strieder, “Eﬀective-medium theory of the conductivity for a random-site
honeycomb lattice,” J. Phys. C 12, L279 (1979).
Ju, J.W., and T.M. Chen, Acta Mech. 103, 123 (1994).
Juretchke, H.J., R. Landauer, and J.A. Swanson, “Hall eﬀect and conductivity in porous
media,” J. Appl. Phys. 27, 838 (1956).
Kaliski, S., Arch. Mech. Stosow 19, 33 (1963).
Kamitakahara, W.A., R.L. Cappelletti, P. Boolchand, B. Halfpap, F. Gompf, D.A. Neu-
mann, and H. Mutka, “Vibrational densities of states and network rigidity in chalcogenide
glasses,” Phys. Rev. B 44, 94 (1991).
Kantelhardt, J.W., and A. Bunde, “Electrons and fractons on percolation structures at itical-
ity: Sublocalization and superlocalization,” Phys. Rev. E 56, 6693 (1997).
Kantor, Y., and I. Webman, “Elastic properties of random percolating systems,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 52, 1891 (1984).
Kapitulnik, A., and G. Deutscher, “Percolation characteristics in discontinuous thin ﬁlms of
Pb,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1444 (1982).
Kapitulnik, A., and G. Deutscher, “2D to 3D percolation crossover in the resistivity of co-
evaporated Al-Ge mixture ﬁlms,” J. Phys. A 16, L255 (1983).
713

Kapitulnik, A., J.W.P. Hsu, and M.R. Hahn, “Percolative properties of Al-Ge composite thin
ﬁlms,” in Physical Phenomena in Granular Materials, edited by G.D. Cody, T.H. Geballe,
and P. Sheng (Pittsburgh, Materials Research Society, 1990), p. 153.
Katz, A.J., and A.H. Thompson, “Quantitative prediction of permeability in porous media,”
Phys. Rev. B 34, 8179 (1986).
Katz, A.J., and A.H. Thompson, “Prediction of rock electrical conductivity from mercury
injection measurements,” J. Geophys. Res. B 92, 599 (1987).
Keating, P.N., “Relationship between the macroscopic and microscopic theory of crystal elas-
ticity. I. Primitive Crystals,” Phys. Rev. 152, 774 (1966).
Keller, H.B., and D. Sachs, “Calculations of the conductivity of a medium containing cylin-
drical inclusions,” J. Appl. Phys. 35, 537 (1964).
Keller, J.B., “Conductivity of a medium containing a dense array of perfectly conducting
spheres or cylinders or nonconducting cylinders,” J. Appl. Phys. 34, 991 (1963).
Keller, J.B., “A theorem on the conductivity of a composite medium,” J. Math. Phys. 5, 548
(1964).
Kellom¨aki, M., J. ˚Astr¨om, and J. Timonen, “Rigidity and dynamics of random spring net-
works,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2730 (1996).
Kenkre, V.M., E.W. Montroll, and M.F. Shlesinger, “Generalized master equations for continuous-
time random walks,” J. Stat. Phys. 9, 45 (1973).
Kerstein, A.R., “Equivalence of the void percolation problem for overlapping spheres and a
network problem,” J. Phys. A 16, 3071 (1983).
Kharadly, M.M.Z., and W. Jackson, Proc. Elect. Eng. 100, 199 (1952).
Kim, I.C., and S. Torquato, “Determination of the eﬀective conductivity of heterogenous
media by Brownian motion simulation,” J. Appl. Phys. 68, 3892 (1990).
Kim, I.C., and S. Torquato, “Eﬀective conductivity of suspensions of overlapping spheres,” J.
Appl. Phys. 71, 2727 (1992).
714

Kim, I.C., and S. Torquato, “Eﬀective conductivity of composites containing spheroidal inclu-
sions: Comparison of simulation with theory,” J. Appl. Phys. 74, 1844 (1993).
Kimball, J.C., and L.W. Adams, Jr., “Hopping conduction and superionic conductors,” Phys.
Rev. B 18, 5851 (1978).
Kirkpatrick, S., “Classical transport in disordered media: Scaling and eﬀective-medium theo-
ries,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 27, 1722 (1971).
Kirkpatrick, S., “Percolation and conduction,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 45, 574 (1973).
Kirkpatrick, S., in Proceedings of 5th International Conference on Amorphous and Liquid
Semiconductor (Taylor and Francis, London, 1974), p. 183.
Kirkpatrick, S., “Percolation thresholds in granular ﬁlms - non-universality and critical cur-
rent,” in Inhomogeneous superconductors - 1979, edited by D.U. Gubser, T.L. Francavilla,
J.R. Leibowitz, and S.A. Wolf, AIP Conference Proc. 58 (1979a), p. 79.
Kirkpatrick, S., “Models of disordered materials,” in Ill-Condensed Matter, edited by R.
Balian, R. Maynard, and G. Toulouse (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1979b), p. 321.
Kirkpatrick, S., C.D. Gellat, Jr., and M.P. Vecchi, “Optimization by simulated annealing,”
Science 220, 671 (1983).
Kirkwood, J.G., “The skeletal modes of vibration of long chain molecules,” J. Chem. Phys.
7, 506 (1939).
Kjems, J.K., “Thermal transport in fractal systems,” Physica A 191, 328 (1993).
Klemm, P., and Cz. Wozniak, “Dense elastic lattices of hexagonal type,” Mech. Teor. Stosow
8, 277 (1970).
Knackstedt, M.A., B.W. Ninham, and M. Monduzzi, “Diﬀusion in model disordered media,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 653 (1995).
Knackstedt, M.A., and M. Sahimi, “On the universality of geometrical and transport expo-
nents of rigidity percolation,” J. Stat. Phys. 69, 887 (1992).
715

Knackstedt, M.A., M. Sahimi, and A.P. Sheppard, “Invasion percolation with long-range
correlations: First-order phase transitions and nonuniversal scaling properties,” Phys.
Rev. E 61, 4920 (2000).
Knotek, M.L., M. Pollak, T.M. Donovan, and H. Kurtzman, “Thickness dependence of hopping
transport in amorphous-Ge ﬁlms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 30, 853 (1973).
Koch, R.H., R.B. Laibowitz, E.I. Alessandrini, and J.M. Viggiano, “Resistivity-noise mea-
surements in thin gold ﬁlms near the percolation threshold,” Phys. Rev. B 32, 6932
(1985).
Koelman, J.M.V.A., and A. de Kuijper, “An eﬀective medium model for the electric conduc-
tivity of an N−component anisotropic percolating mixture,” Physica A 247, 10 (1997).
Kogut, P.M., and P.L. Leath, ”Bootstrap percolation transitions on real lattices”, J. Phys. C
14, 3187 (1981).
Kogut, P.M., and J.P. Straley, “Distribution-induced non-universality of the percolation con-
ductivity exponents,” J. Phys. C 12, 2151 (1979).
Kopelman, R., S. Parus, and J. Prasad, “Fractal-like exciton kinetics in porous glasses, organic
membranes, and ﬁlter papers,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 1742 (1986).
Koplik, J., “On the eﬀective medium theory of random linear networks,” J. Phys. C 14, 4821
(1981).
Koplik, J., C. Lin, and M. Vermette, “Conductivity and permeability from microgeometry,”
J. Appl. Phys. 56, 3127 (1984).
Korringa, J., “Theory of elastic constants of heterogeneous media,” J. Meth. Phys. 14, 509
(1973).
Korzhenevskii, A.L., and A.A. Luzhkov “Density of phonon-fracton states of disordered solids
in the vicinity of percolation phase transition,” Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 99, 530 (1991)
[Sov. Phys. JETP 72, 295 (1991)].
716

Koss, R.S., and D. Stroud, “Scaling behavior and surface-plasmon modes in metal-insulator
composites,” Phys. Rev. B 35, 9004 (1987).
Kremer, K., “Numerical studies of polymer networks and gels,” Philos. Mag. B 77, 569
(1998).
Krohn, C.E., and A.H. Thompson, “Fractal sandstone pores: automated measurements using
scanning-electron-microscope images,” Phys. Rev. B 33, 6366 (1986).
Kr¨oner, E., “Berechnung der elastischen konstanten des vielkristalle aus dem konstanten des
einkristalls,” Z. Phys. 151, 504 (1958).
Kr¨oner, E., “Bounds for eﬀective elastic moduli of disordered materials,” J. Mech. Phys.
Solids 25, 137 (1977).
Kubo, R., “Statistical-mechanical theory of irreversible processes. I. General theory and simple
application to magnetic and conduction problems,” J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 12, 570 (1957).
Kunar, B.K., and G.P. Srivastava, “Dispersion observed in electrical properties of titanium-
substituted lithium ferrites,” J. Appl. Phys. 75, 6115 (1994).
Kurkij¨arvi, J., “Conductivity in random systems. II. Finite-size-system percolation,” Phys.
Rev. B 9, 770 (1974).
Kusy, R.P., “Inﬂuence of particle size ratio on the continuity of aggregates,” J. Appl. Phys.
48, 5301 (1977).
Lado, F., and S. Torquato, “Two-point probability function for distributions of oriented hard
ellipsoids,” J. Chem. Phys. 93, 5912 (1990).
Lagar’kov, A.N., L.V. Panina, and A.K. Sarychev, “Eﬀective magnetic permeability of com-
posite materials near the percolation threshold,” Sov. Phys. JETP 66, 123 (1987) [Zh.
Eskp. Teor. Fiz. 93, 215 (1987)].
Laibowitz, R.B., and Y. Gefen, “Dynamic scaling near the percolation threshold in thin Au
ﬁlms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 380 (1984).
Lakes, R., “Foam structures with a negative Poisson’s ratio,” Science 235, 1038 (1987).
717

Lam, P.M., and W. Bao, “Recursion method for the density of states and spectral dimension
of percolation networks,” Z. Phys. B 59, 63 (1985).
Laman, G., “On graphs and rigidity of plane skeletal structures,” J. Eng. Math. 4, 331 (1970).
Lamb, W., D.M. Wood, and N.W. Aschcroft, “Long-wavelength electromagnetic propagation
in heterogeneous media,” Phys. Rev. B 21, 2248 (1980).
Lambert, C.J., and G.D. Hughes, “Localization properties of fractons in percolating struc-
tures,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 1074 (1991).
Landauer, R., “The electrical resistance of binary metallic mixtures,” J. Appl. Phys. 23, 779
(1952).
Landauer, R., “Electrical conductivity in inhomogeneous media,” in Electrical Transport and
Optical Properties of Inhomogeneous Media, edited by J.C. Garland, and D.B. Tanner,
AIP Conference Proceedings 40 (AIP, New York, 1978), p. 2.
Lapp, A., L. Leibler, F. Schosseler, and C. Strazielle, “Scaling Behaviour of pregel sols obtained
by end-linking if linear chains,” Macromolecules 22, 2871 (1989).
Larsen, U.D., O. Sigmund, and S. Bouwstra, “Design and fabrication of compliant micromech-
anisms and structures with negative Poisson’s ratio,” J. Microelectromech. Sys. 6, 99
(1997).
Last, B.J., and D.J. Thouless, “Percolation theory and electrical conductivity,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 27, 1719 (1971).
Laugier, J.M., J.P. Clerc, and G. Giraud, Proceedings of International AMSE Conference,
edited by G. Mesnard (Lyon, AMSE, 1986a).
Laugier, J.M., J.P. Clerc, G. Giraud, and J.M. Luck, “AC properties of 2D percolation net-
works: A transfer matrix approach,” J. Phys. A 19, 3153 (1986b).
Lax, M., “Molecular ﬁeld in spherical mode,” Phys. Rev. 97, 629 (1955).
Leath, P.L., “Cluster size and boundary distribution near percolation threshold,” Phys. Rev.
B 14, 5046 (1976).
718

Lee, S.B., and S. Torquato, “Porosity for the penetrable-concentric-shell model of two-phase
disordered media: Computer simulation results,” J. Chem. Phys. 89, 3258 (1988).
Lee, S.B., and S. Torquato, “Measure of clustering in continuum percolation: Computer-
simulation of the two-point cluster function,” J. Chem. Phys. 91, 1173 (1989).
Lee, S.-I., Y. Song, T.W. Noh, X.-D. Chen, and J.R. Gaines, J.R., “Experimental observation
of nonuniversal behavior of the conductivity exponent for three-dimensional continuum
percolation systems,” Phys. Rev. B 34, 6719 (1986).
Leibler, L., and F. Schosseler, “Gelation of polymer solutions: an experimental veriﬁcation of
the scaling behavior of the size distribution function,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 1110 (1985).
Lemieux, M.A., P. Breton, and A.-M.S. Tremblay, “Uniﬁed approach to numerical transfer
matrix methods for disordered systems: application to mixed crystals and to elasticity
percolation,” J. Physique Lett. 46, L1 (1985).
L´eon, C., A. Rivera, A. V´arez, J. Sanz, J. Santamaria, and K.L. Ngai, “Origin of constant
loss in ionic conductors,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1279 (12001).
Levin, V.M., “Thermal expansion coeﬃcients of heterogeneous materials,” Mekh. Tverd. Tela
2, 83 (1967).
Levinshtein, M.E., M.S. Shur, and E.L. Efros, “On the relation between critical indices and
percolation theory,” Sov. Phys.-JETP 41, 386 (1975).
Levinshtein, M.E., M.S. Shur, and E.L. Efros, “Galvanomagnetic phenomena in disordered
systems. Theory and simulation,” Sov. Phys.-JETP 42, 1120 (1976).
Levitz, P., “Oﬀ-lattice reconstruction of porous media: critical evaluation, geometrical con-
ﬁnement and molecular transport,” Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 76-77, 71 (1998).
L´evy, Y.-E., and B. Souillard, “Superlocalization of electrons and waves in fractal media,”
Europhys. Lett. 4, 233 (1987).
Lewinski, T., “Dynamical tests of accuracy of Cosserat models for honeycomb gridworks,” Z.
Angew. Math. Mech. 68, T210 (1988).
719

Lewinski, T., Mech. Teor. Stosow 22, 389 (1989).
Lewis, F.T., “The shape of cells as a mathematical problem,” Amer. Scientist 34, 359 (1946).
Li, Q., C.M. Soukoulis, and E.N. Economou, “Universal behavior near the band edges for
disordered systems: numerical and coherent-potential-approximation studies,” Phys. Rev.
B 37, 8289 (1988).
Li, Q., C.M. Soukoulis, and G.S. Grest, “Vibrational properties of percolating clusters: Lo-
calization and density of states,” Phys. Rev. B 41, ll713 (1990).
Liang, N.T., Y. Shan, and S.-Y. Wang, “Electronic conductivity and percolation theory in
aggregated ﬁlms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 526 (1976).
Liao, K.H., and A.E. Scheidegger, “brancing-type models of ﬂow through poroys media,” Int.
Assoc. Sci. Hydr. Bull. 14, 137 (1969).
Limat, L., “Percolation and Cosserat elasticity: exact results on a deterministic fractal,” Phys.
Rev. B 37, 672 (1988a).
Limat, L., “Rotationally invariant elasticity in a planar fractal network,” Phys. Rev. B 38,
512 (1988b).
Limat, L., “Micropolar elastic percolation: the superelastic problem,” Phys. Rev. B 38, 7219
(1988c).
Limat, L., “Elastic and superelastic percolation networks: imperfect duality, critical Poisson
ratios, and relations between microscopic models,” Phys. Rev. B 40, 9253 (1989).
Lin, C., and M.H. Cohen, “Quantitative methods for microgeometric modeling,” J. Appl.
Phys. 53, 4152 (192).
Lin, S.L., J. Mellor-Crumney, B.M. Pettitt, and G.N. Phillips, Jr., “Molecular dynamics on a
distributed-memory multiprocessor,” J. Comput. Phys. 13, 1022 (1992).
Lin, Y.G., D.T. Mallin, J.C.W. Chien, and H.H. Winter, “Dynamical mechanical measure-
ment of crystallization-induced gelation in thermpplastic elastomeric poly(propylene),”
Macromolecules 24, 850 (1991).
720

Liu, X., and H.v. L¨ohneysen, “Low-temperature thermal properties of amorphous ASxSe1−x,”
Phys. Rev. B 48, 13486 (1993).
Lobb, C.J., and M.G. Forrester, “Measurement of nonuniversal critical behavior in a two-
dimensional continuum percolating system,” Phys. Rev. B 35, 1899 (1987).
Lobb, C.J., and D.J. Frank, “Percolation critical exponents for conductance and critical cur-
rent in two dimensions,” AIP Conference Proc. 58, 308 (1979).
Lobb, C.J., and D.J. Frank, “Percolative conduction and the Alexander-Orbach conjecture in
two dimensions,” Phys. Rev. B 30, 4090 (1984).
Long, A.R., “Hopping conductivity in the intermediate frequency regimes,” in Hopping Trans-
port in Solids, edited by M. Pollak and B. Shklovskii (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1991), p. 207.
Lorenz, B., I. Orgzall, and H.O. Heuer, “Universality and cluster structures in continuum
models of percolation with two diﬀerent radius distributions,” J. Phys.
A 26, 4711
(1993).
Loring, R.F., and S. Mukamel, “Phonon and fracton vibrational modes in disordered harmonic
structures: a self-consistent theory,” Phys. Rev. B 34, 6582 (1986).
Lovasz, L., and Y. Yemini, SIAM J. Alg. Disc. Meth. 3, 91 (1982).
Lu, B., and S. Torquato, “n−point probability functions for a lattice model of heterogeneous
media,” Phys. Rev. B 42, 4453 (1990).
Lu, B., and S. Torquato, “General formalism to characterize the microstructure of polydis-
persed random media,” Phys. Rev. A 43, 2078 (1991).
Lu, B., and S. Torquato, “Lineal-path function for random heterogeneous materials,” Phys.
Rev. A 45, 922 (1992a).
Lu, B., and S. Torquato, “Lineal-path function for random heterogeneous materials. II. Eﬀect
of polydispersivity,” Phys. Rev. A 45, 7292 (1992b).
Lu, B., and S. Torquato, “Chord-length and free-path distribution functions for many-body
systems,” J. Chem. Phys. 98, 6472 (1993a).
721

Lu, B., and S. Torquato, “Chord-length distribution function for two-phase random media,”
Phys. Rev. E 47, 2950 (1993b).
Lubachevsky, B.D., and F.H. Stillinger, “Geometric properties of random disk packings,” J.
Stat. Phys. 60, 561 (1990).
Lubensky, T.C., and J. Isaacson, “Field Theory for the statistics of branched polymers, gela-
tion and vulcanization,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 829 (1978).
Lubensky, T.C., and J. Wang, “Percolation conductivity exponent t to second order in ϵ =
6 −d,” Phys. Rev. B 33, 4998 (1986).
Luck, J.M., “Conductivity of random resistor networks: An investigation of the accuracy of
the eﬀective-medium approximation,” Phys. Rev. B 43, 3933 (1991).
Macdonald, J.R., “Possible universalities in the ac frequency response of dispersed, disordered
materials,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 210, 70 (1997).
Mahadevan, S., and A. Giridhar, “On the chemical and mechanical thresholds of some chalco-
genide glasses,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 110, 118 (1989).
Mahan, G.D., “Long-wavelength absorption of cermets,” Phys. Rev. B 38, 9500 (1988).
Maliepaard, M.C., J.H. Page, J.P. Harrison, and R.J. Stubbs, “Ultrasonic study of the vibra-
tional modes of sintered metal powders,” Phys. Rev. B 32, 6261 (1985).
Mall, S., and W.B. Russel, “Eﬀective medium approximation for an elastic network model of
ﬂocculated suspensions,” J. Rheol. 31, 651 (1987).
Malliaris, A. and Turner, D.T., 1971, “Inﬂuence of particle size on the electrical resistivity of
compacted mixtures of polymeric and metallic powders,” J. Appl. Phys. 42, 614.
Malouﬁ, N., A. Audouard, M. Piecuch, M. Vergant, G. Marchal, and M. Gerl, “Experimental
study of the dc conductivity mechanism in amorphous SixSn1−x alloys,” Phys. Rev. B
37, 8867 (1988).
722

Mandal, P., A. Neumann, A.G. Jansen, P. Wyder, and R. Deltour, “Temperature and magnetic-
ﬁeld dependence of the resistivity of carbon-black polymer composites,” Phys. Rev. B
55, 452 (1997).
Mandelbrot, B.B., The Fractal Geometry of Nature (W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1982).
Mandelbrot, B.B., “Self-aﬃne fractals and fractal dimension,” Physica Scripta 32, 257 (1985).
Mondelbrot, B.B., “Self-aﬃne fractal sets,” in Fractals in Physics, edited by L. Pietronero and
E. Tosatti (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1986), pp. 3-28.
Maradudin, A.A., E.W. Montroll, G.H. Weiss, and I.P. Ipatova, Theory of Lattice Dynamics
in Harmonic Approximation, 2nd ed. (Academic, New York, 1971).
Marshall, E.W., and A.B. Harris, “Scaling of splay and total rigidity for elastic percolation on
the triangular lattice,” Phys. Rev. B 38, 4929 (1988).
Martin, J.E., D. Adolf, and J.P. Wilcoxon, “Viscoelasticity of near-critical gels,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 61, 2620 (1988).
Martin, J.E., and J.P. Wilcoxon, “Critical dynamics of the sol-gel transition,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 61, 373 (1988).
Martins, J.L., and A. Zunger, “Bond lengths around isovalent impurities and in semiconductor
solid solutions,” Phys. Rev. B 30, 6217 (1984).
Mason, T.G., J. Bibette, and D.A. Weitz, “Elasticity of compressed emulsions,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 75, 2051 (1995).
Mattis, C.D., and J. Bardeen, “Theory of anomalous skin eﬀect in normal and superconducting
metals,” Phys. Rev. 111, 412 (1958).
Maxwell, J.C., Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (Claredon, Oxford, 1873), p. 194.
Maxwell-Garnett, J.C., “Colours in metal glasses, in metallic ﬁlms and in metallic solutions -
II,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 203, 385 (1904).
723

Mazzacurati, V., M. Montagna, P. Pilla, G. Viliani, G. Ruocco, and G. Signorelli, “Vibrational
dynamics and Raman scattering in fractals: a numerical study,” Phys. Rev. B 45, 2126
(1992).
McCoy, J.J., Recent Advances in Engineering Sciences, Vol. 5 (Gordon and Breach, New York,
1970).
McKenzie, D.R., R.C. McPhedran, and G.H. Derrick, “The conductivity of lattices of spheres
II. The body centred and face centred lattices,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 362, 211 (1978).
McLachlan, D.S., “Measurement and analysis of a model dual-conductivity medium using a
generalised eﬀective-medium theory,” J. Phys. C 21, 1521 (1988).
McLachlan, D.S., I.I. Oblakova, and A.B. Pakhomov, “Dielectric-constant measurements in a
system of NbC grains near the percolation threshold,” Physica A 207, 234 (1994).
McPhedran, R.C., and D.R. McKenzie, “The conductivity of lattices of spheres I. The simple
cubic lattice,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 359, 45 (1978).
McPhedran, R.C., and G.W. Milton, “Bounds and exact theories for the transport properties
of inhomogenous media,” Appl. Phys. A 26, 207 (1981).
Meakin, P., Fractals, Scaling and Growth far from Equilibrium (Combridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1998).
Meester, R., R. Roy, and A. Sarkar, “Nonuniversality and continuity of of the critical covered
volume fraction in continuum percolation,” J. Stat. Phys. 75, 123 (1994).
Mehbod, M., P. Wyder, R. Deltour, C. Pierre, and G. Geuskens, “Temperature dependence of
the resistivity in polymer-conducting-carbon-black composites,” Phys. Rev. B 36, 7627
(1987).
Mehrabi, A.R., and M. Sahimi, “Coarsening of heterogeneous media: Application of wavelets,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4385 (1997).
Meijering, J.L., “Interface area, edge length and number of verticies in crystal aggregates with
random nucleation,” Phillips Res. Rep. 8, 270 (1953).
724

Meir, Y., “Universal crossover between Efros-Shklovskii and Mott variable-range-hopping
regimes,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 5265 (1996).
Mendelson, K.S., “Eﬀective conductivity of two-phase material with cylindrical phase bound-
aries,” J. Appl. Phys. 46, 917 (1975a).
Mendelson, K.S., “A theorem on the eﬀective conductivity of a two-dimensional heterogeneous
medium,” J. Appl. Phys. 46, 4740 (1975b).
Mendelson, K.S., and M.H. Cohen, “The eﬀect of grain anisotropy on the electrical properties
of sedimentary rocks,” Geophysics 47, 257 (1982).
Meredith, R.E., and C.W. Tobias, “Resistance to potential ﬂow through a cubical array of
spheres,” J. Appl. Phys. 31, 1270 (1960).
Metzler, R., W.G. Glckle, and T.F. Nonnenmacher, “Fractional model equation for anomalous
diﬀusion,” Physica A 211, 13 (1994).
Michels, M.A.J., “Scaling relations and the general eﬀective-medium equation for isolator-
conductor mixtures,” J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 4, 3961 (1992).
Michels, M.A.J., J.C.M. Brokken-Zijp, W.M. Groenewoud, and A. Knoester, “Systematic
study of percolative network formation and eﬀective electric response in low-concentration-
carbon-black/polymer composites,” Physica A 157, 529 (1989).
Miller, A., and E. Abrahams, “Electro-optic kerr eﬀect and polarization reversal in Deuterium
doped Rochelle salt,” Phys. Rev. 120, 745 (1960).
Miller, C.A., and S. Torquato, “Eﬀective conductivity of hard-sphere dispersions,” J. Appl.
Phys. 68, 5486 (1990).
Miller, J., “Bounds for eﬀective electrical, thermal, and magnetic properties of heterogeneous
materials,” J. Math. Phys. 10, 1988 (1969).
Milton, G.W., “Bounds on the electromagnetic, elastic, and other properties of two-component
composites,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 46, 542 (1981a).
725

Milton, G.W., “Concerning bounds on the transport and mechanical properties of multi-
component composite materials,” Appl. Phys. A26, 125 (1981b).
Milton, G.W., “Bounds on the elastic and transport properties of two-component composites,”
J. Mech. Phys. Solids 30, 177 (1981c).
Milton, G.W., “Bounds on the complex permittivity of a two-component composite material,”
J. Apply. Phys. 52, 5286 (1981d).
Milton, G.W., “Bounds on the elastic and transport properties of two-component composites,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 46, 542 (1982a).
Milton, G.W., “Bounds on the elastic and transport properties of two-component composites,”
J. Mech. Phys. Solids 30, 177 (1982b).
Milton, G.W., “Correlation of the electromagnetic and elastic properties of the composites
and microgeometries corresponding with eﬀective medium approximations,” in Physics
and Chemistry of Porous Media, edited by D.L. Johnson and P.N. Sen, AIP Conference
Proceedings 107, 66 (1984).
Milton, G.W., “The coherent potential approximation is a realizable eﬀective medium scheme,”
Commun. Math. Phys. 99, 463 (1985).
Milton, G.W., “Multicomponent composites, electrical networks, and new types of continued
fractions, parts I and II,” Commun. Math. Phys. 111, 281 (1987).
Milton, G.W., “Classical Hall eﬀect in two-dimensional composites: a characterization of the
set of realizable eﬀective conductivity tensors,” Phys. Rev. B 38, 11296 (1988).
Milton, G.W., “On characterizing the set of possible eﬀective tensors of composites: the
variational method and the translation method,” Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 43, 63
(1990a).
Milton, G.W., in Continuum Models and Discrete Systems, edited by G.A. Maugin (1990b),
p. 60.
726

Milton, G.W., “Composite materials with Poisson’s ratio close to -1,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids
40, 1105 (1992).
Milton, G.W., R.C. McPhedran, and D.R. McKenzie, “Transport properties of arrays of in-
tersecting cylinders,” Appl. Phys. 25, 23 (1981).
Milton, G.W., and N. Phan-Thien, “New bounds on the eﬀective moduli of two-component
materials,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 380, 305 (1982).
Mindlin, R.D., “Micro-structure in linear elasticity,” Arch. Rat. Mech. Analy. 16, 51 (1964).
Mitchell, J.H., “On the direct determination of stress in an elastic solid, with application to
the theory of plates,” Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. 31, 100 (1899).
Mitescu, C., M. Allain, E. Guyon, and J.P. Clerc, “Electrical conductivity of ﬁnite-size per-
colation networks,” J. Phys. A 15, 2523 (1982).
Mitescu, C., and J. Roussenq, “Une Fourmi dans labyrinthe: diﬀusion dans un systeme de
percolation,” C. R. Acad. Sc. Paris 283, 999 (1976).
Mohanty, K.K., Fluids in Porous Media: Two-Phase Distribution and Flow, Ph.D. Thesis,
University of Minnesota (1981).
Moha-Ouchane, M., J. Peyrelasse, and C. Boned, “Percolation transition in microemulsions:
eﬀect of water-surfactant ratio, temperature, and salinity,” Phys. Rev. A 35, 3027 (1987).
Molyneux, J.E., “Eﬀective permittivity of a polycrystalline dielectric,” J. Math. Phys. 11,
1172 (1970).
Monceau, P.J.-M., and J.-C.S. Levy, “Monodimensional eﬀects on elastic and vibrational
properties of lacunary networks,” Phys. Rev. B 49, 1026 (1994).
Mondescu, R.P., and M. Muthukumar, “Eﬀective elastic moduli of a composite containing
rigid spheres at nondilute concentrations: A multiple scattering approach,” J. Chem.
Phys. 1123 (1999).
Montagna, M., O. Pilla, G. Viliani, V. Mazzcurati, G. Ruocco, and G. Signorelli, “Numerical
study of Raman scattering from fractals,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1136 (1990).
727

Montroll, E.W., and G.H. Weiss, “Random walks on lattices. II,” J. Math. Phys. 6, 167
(1965).
Mossotti, O.F., Memorie di Matematica e di Fisica della Societ˙a Italiana delle Scienze Resi-
dente in Modena, Vol. 24, pt. 2 (1850), p. 49.
Mott, N.F., “On the transition to metallic conduction in semiconductors,” Can. J. Phys. 34,
1356 (1956).
Mott, N.F., “Conduction in glasses containing transition metal ions,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 1,
1 (1968).
Mott, N.F., “Conduction in non-crystalline materials. III. Localized states in a pseudogap
and near extremities of conduction and valence bands,” Philos. Mag. 19, 835 (1969).
Moukarzel, C., and P.M. Duxbury, “Stressed backbone and elasticity of random central-force
systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 4055 (1995).
Moukarzel, C., and P.M. Duxbury, “Comparison of rigidity and connectivity percolation in
two dimensions,” Phys. Rev. E 59, 2614 (1999).
Moukarzel, C., P.M. Duxbury, and P.L. Leath, “First-order rigidity on Cayley trees” Phys.
Rev. E 55, 5800 (1997a).
Moukarzel, C., P.M. Duxbury, and P.L. Leath, “Inﬁnite-cluster geometry in central-force net-
works,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 1480 (1997b).
Mousseau, N., and M.F. Thorpe, “Structural model for crystalline and amorphous Si-Ge
alloys,” Phys. Rev. B 48, 5172 (1993).
Movaghar, B., B. Pohlmann, and W. Schirmacher, “Theory of AC and DC conductivity in
disordered hopping systems,” Phys. Stat. Sol. (b) 97, 533 (1980a).
Movaghar, B., B. Pohlmann, and W. Schirmacher, “Random walk in disordered hopping
systems,” Solid State Commun. 34, 451 (1980b).
Movaghar, B., and W. Schirmacher, “On the theory of hopping conductivity in disordered
systems,” J. Phys. C 14, 859 (1981).
728

Movaghar, B., D. W¨urtz, and B. Pohlmann, “Carrier drift and trapping in one dimensional
systems,” Z. Phys. B 66, 523 (1987).
Mukhopadhyay, S., and M. Sahimi, “Scaling behavior of permeability and conductivity anisotropy
near the percolation threshold,” J. Stat. Phys. 74, 1301 (1994).
Mukhopadhyay, S., and M. Sahimi, “Calculation of the eﬀective permeabilities of ﬁeld-scale
porous media,” Chem. Eng. Sci. 55, 4495 (2000).
Mura, T., Micromechanics of Defects in Solids (Martinus Nijhoﬀ, Dordrecht, 1987).
Muskhelishvili, N.I., Some Basic Problems of the Mathematical Theory of Elasticity (P. No-
ordhoﬀ, Groningen, Holland, 1953).
Nagatani, T., “Multi-bond expansion for the eﬀective conductivity in bond-disordered resistor
networks,” J. Phys. C 14, 4839 (1981).
Naghdi, P.M., and C.S. Hsu, “On a representation of displacements in linear elasticity in terms
of three stress functions,” J. Math. Mech. 10, 233 (1961).
Nakajima, T., “Correlation between electrical conduction and dielectric polarization in inor-
ganic glasses,” in Conference on Electrical Insulation and Dielectric Phenomena (National
Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC, 1972), p. 168.
Nakayama, T., Physica A 191, 386 (1992).
Nakayama, T., and K. Yakubo, “Dynamic structure factor and single-length scaling for random
fractals,” J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 61, 2601 (1992).
Nakayama, T., K. Yakubo, and R. Orbach, “Characteristics of fractons: from speciﬁc realiza-
tions to ensemble averages,” J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 58, 1891 (1989).
Nakayama, T., K. Yakubo, and R. Orbach, “Dynamical properties of fractal networks: Scaling,
numerical simulations, and physical realizations,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 381 (1994).
Namikawa, H., “Characterization of the diﬀusion process in oxide glasses based on the cor-
relation between electric conduction and dielectric relaxation,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 18,
173 (1975).
729

Nelson, D.R., and L. Radzihovsky, “Polymerized membranes with quenched random internal
disorder,” Europhys. Lett. 16, 79 (1991).
Nemat-Nasser, S., and M. Hori, Micromechanics: Overall Properties of Heterogeneous Mate-
rials (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1993).
Newman, M.E.J., and R.M. Ziﬀ, “Eﬃcient Monte Carlo algorithm and high-precision results
for percolation,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4104 (2000).
Ngai, K.L., and C.T. Moynihan, “The dynamics of mobile ions in ionically conducting glasses
and other materials,” Mater. Res. Soc. Bull. 23 (11), 51 (1998).
Nicholson, D., “Capillary models for porous media. Part 2.-Sorption desorption hysteresis in
three dimensional networks,” Trans. Faraday Soc. 64, 3416 (1968).
Nickel, B., and W.H. Butler, “Problems in strong-scattering binary alloys,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
30, 373 (1973).
Niklasson, G.A., “Comparison of dielectric response functions for conducting materials,” J.
Appl. Phys. 66, 4350 (1989).
Niklasson, G.A., and C.G. Granqvist, “Optical properties and solar selectivity of coevaporated
Co-Al2O3 composite ﬁlms,” J. Appl. Phys. 55, 3382 (1984).
Ninham, B.W., and R.A. Sammut, “Refraction index of arrays of spheres and cylinders,” J.
Theor. Biol. 56, 125 (1976).
Nishimatsu, C., and J. Gurland, Trans. Am. Soc. Met. 52, 469 (1960).
Nitsche, L.C., and H. Brenner, “Eulerian kinematics of ﬂow through periodic models of porous
media,” Arch. Rat. Mech. Analy. 107, 225 (1989).
Noble, B., and J.W. Daniel, Applied Linear Algebra, 2nd ed.
(Prentice-Hall, New Jersey,
1977).
Noh, T.W., S.G. Kaplan, and A.J. Sievers, “Observation of a far-induced sphere resonance in
superconducting La2−xSrxCuO4−y particles,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 599 (1989).
730

Normand, J.-M., and H.J. Herrmann, “Precise numerical determination of the superconducting
exponent of percolation in three dimensions,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 1, 207 (1990).
Normand, J.-M., H.J. Herrmann, and M. Hajjar, “Precise calculation of the dynamical expo-
nent of two-dimensional percolation,” J. Stat. Phys. 52, 441 (1988).
Norris, A.N., P. Sheng, and A.J. Callegari, “Eﬀective-medium theories for two-phase dielectric
media,” J. Appl. Phys. 57, 1990 (1985).
Novikov, V.V., K.W. Wojciechowsky, D.V. Belov, and V.P. Privalko, “Elastic properties of
inhomogeneous media with chaotic structure,” Phys. Rev. E 63, 036120 (February 2001).
Nunan, K.C., and J.B. Keller, “Eﬀective elasticity tensor of a periodic composite,” J. Mech.
Phys. Solids 32, 259 (1984).
Obukhov, S.P., “First order rigidity transition in random rod networks,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 74,
4472 (1995).
Odagaki, T., and M. Lax, “ac Hopping conductivity of a one-dimensional bond-percolation
model,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 847 (1980).
Odagaki, T., and M. Lax, “Coherent-potential approximation in the stochastic transport
theory of random media,” Phys. Rev. B 24, 5284 (1981).
Odagaki, T., M. Lax, and A. Puri, “Hopping conduction in the d-dimensional lattice bond-
percolation problem,” Phys. Rev. B 28, 2755 (1983).
O’Brien, R.W., “A method for the calculation of the eﬀective transport properties of suspen-
sions of interacting particles,” J. Fluid Mech. 91, 17 (1979).
Ornstein, L.S., and F. Zernike, “Accidental deviations of density and opalescence at the critical
point of a single substance,” Proc. Akad. Sci. (Amsterdam) 17, 793 (1914).
Ortuno, M., and M. Pollak, “Hopping transport in a-Ge and a-Si,” Philos. Mag. 47, L93
(1983).
Ota, R., T. Yamate, N. Soga, and M. Kunugi, “Elastic properties of Ge-Se glass under pres-
sure,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 29, 67 (1978).
731

Ottavi, H., J.P. Clerc, G. Giraud, J. Roussenq, E. Guyon, and C.D. Mitescu, “Electrical
conductivity of a mixture of conducting and insulating spheres: an application of some
percolation concepts,” J. Phys. C 11, 1311 (1978).
Page, J.H., W.J.L. Buyers, G. Dolling, P. Gerlach, and J.P. Harrison, “Neutron inelastic
scattering from fumed silica,” Phys. Rev. B 39, 6180 (1989).
Palevski, A., M.L. Rappaport, A. Kapitulnik, A. Fried, and G. Deutscher, “Hall coeﬃcient
and conduction in a 2D percolation system,” J. Physique Lett. 45, L367 (1984).
Panina, L.V., A.N. Lagarkov, A.K. Sarychev, Y.R. Smychkovich, and A.P. Vinogradov, “Ef-
fective medium theory of dielectric constant of granular materials in the presence of skin
eﬀect,” in Physical Phenomena in Granular Materials, edited by G.D. Coby, T.H. Geballe,
and P. Sheng, MRS Symposium Proc. 195 (1990), p. 275.
Papandreou, N., and P. N´edellec, “Interplay between microscopic and macroscopic disorder in
percolating Pd ﬁlms,” J. Physique. I France 2, 707 (1992).
Parisi, G., and N. Sourlas, “Critical behavior of branched polymers in the Lee-Yang edge
singularity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 46, 891 (1981).
Park, Y., A.B. Harris, and T.C. Lubensky, “Noise exponents of the random resistor network,”
Phys. Rev. B 35, 5048 (1987).
Patton, E., J.A. Wesson, M. Rubinstein, J.E. Wilson, and L.E. Oppenheimer, “Scaling prop-
erties of branched polyesters,” Macromolecules 22, 1946 (1989).
Payandeh, B., “A block cluster approach to percolation,” Rivista del Nuovo Cimento 3, 1
(1980).
Pelous, J. R. Vacher, T. Woignier, J.L. Sauvajol, and E. Courtens, “Scaling phonon-fracton
dispersion laws in fractal aerogels,” Philos. Mag. B 59, 65 (1989).
Percus, J.K., and G.Y. Yevick, “Analysis of classical statistical mechanics by means of collec-
tive coordinates,” Phys. Rev. 110, 1 (1958).
732

Perrins, W.T., D.R. McKenzie, and R.C. McPhedran, “Transport properties of regular arrays
of cylinders,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 369, 207 (1979a).
Perrins, W.T., R.C. McPhedran, and D.R. McKenzie, “Optical properties of dense regular
cermets with relevance to selective solar absorbers,” Thin Solid Films 57, 321 (1979b).
Peterson, J.M., and J.J. Hermans, “The dielectric constants of nonconducting suspensions,”
J. Composite Mater. 3, 338 (1969).
Peyrelasse, J., M. Moha-Ouchane, and C. Boned, “Dielectric relaxation and percolation phe-
nomena in ternary microemulsions,” Phys. Rev. A 38, 904 (1988).
Phan-Thein, N., and S. Kim, Microstructures in Elastic Media: Principles and Computational
Methods (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1994).
Phillips, J.C., “Topology of covalent non-crystalline solids I: short-range order in chalcogenide
alloys,” J. Non-Crystalline Solids 34, 153 (1979).
Phillips, J.C., “Topology of covalent non-crystalline solids II: medium-range order in chalco-
genide alloys and A-Si(Ge),” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 43, 37 (1981).
Philips, J.C., “Constraint theory, stiﬀness percolation and the rigidity transition in network
glasses,” in Rigidity Theory and Applications, edited by M.F. Thorpe and P.M. Duxbury
(Kluwer Academic, New York, 1999), p. 155.
Phillips, J.C., and M.F. Thorpe, “Constraint theory, vector percolation, and glass formation,”
Solid State Commun. 53, 699 (1985).
Pike, G.E., and C.H. Seager, “Percolation and conductivity: A computer study,” Phys. Rev.
B 10, 1421 (1974).
Pilla, P., G. Vilani, M. Montagna, V. Mazzucurati, G. Ruocco, and G. Signorelli, “Vibrational
dynamics of percolating clusters: fracton wavefunctions and Raman coupling coeﬃcients,”
Philos. Mag. B 65, 243 (1992).
Pla, O., R. Garcia-Molina, F. Guinea, and E. Louis, “Properties of elastic percolating networks
in isotropic media with arbitrary elastic constants,” Phys. Rev. B 41, 11449 (1990).
733

Plischke, M., and B. Jo´os, “Entropic elasticity of diluted central force networks,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 80, 4907 (1998).
Plischke, M., D.C. Vernon, B. Jo´os, and Z. Zhou, “Entropic rigidity of randomly diluted two-
and three-dimensional networks,” Phys. Rev. E 60, 3129 (1999).
Polatsek, G., and O. Entin-Wohlman, “Eﬀective-medium approximation for a percolation
network: The structure factor and the Ioﬀe-Regel criterion,” Phys. Rev. B 37, 7726
(1988).
Polatsek, G., O. Entin-Wohlman, and R. Orbach, “Eﬀective-medium approximation for the
dynamical excitations of percolating antiferromagnets,” Phys. Rev. B 39, 9353 (1989).
Ploder, D., and J.H. Van Santen, “The eﬀective permeability of mixture of solids,” Physica
12, 257 (1946).
Pollak, M., “A percolation treatment of dc hopping conduction,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 11, 1
(1972).
Pollak, M., “Percolation and hopping transport,” in The Metal-Non-metal Transition in Dis-
ordered Systems, edited by L.R. Friedman and D.P. Tunstall (University of Edinburgh,
1978), p. 95.
Pollak, M., and T.H. Geballe, “Low-frequency conductivity due to hopping processes in sili-
con,” Phys. Rev. 122, 1742 (1961).
Pollak, M., and I. Riess, “Application of percolation theory to 2D-3D Heisenberg ferromag-
nets,” Phys. Status Solidi (b) 69, K15 (1975).
Posselt, D., J.K. Kjems, A. Bernasconi, T. Sleator, and H.R. Ott, “The thermal conductivity
of silica aerogel in the phonon, the fracton and the particle-mode regime,” Europhys.
Lett. 16, 59 (1991).
Postma, G.W., “Wave propagation in a stratiﬁed medium,” Geophysics 20, 780 (1955).
Pouliquen, O., M. Nicolas, and P.D. Weidman, “Crystallization of non-Brownian spheres under
horizontal shaking,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 3640 (1997).
734

Powell, M.J.D., “The volume internal to three intersecting hard spheres,” Mol. Phys. 7, 591
(1964).
Prager, S., “Diﬀusion and viscous ﬂow in concentrated suspensions,” Physica 29, 129 (1963).
Prager, S., “Improved variational bounds on some bulk properties of a two-phase random
medium,” J. Chem. Phys. 50, 4305 (1969).
Prakash, S., S. Havlin, M. Schwartz, and H.E. Stanley, “Structural and dynamical properties
of long-range correlated percolation,” Phys. Rev. A 46, R1724 (1992).
Prall, D., and R.S. Lakes, “Properties of a chiral honeycomb with a Poisson’s ratio of −1,”
Int. J. Mech. Sci. 39, 305 (1997).
Press, W.H., S.A. Teukolsky, W.T. Vetterling, and B.H. Flannery, Numerical Recipes, 2nd ed.
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1992).
Prunet, V., and R. Blanc, “Rigid clusters enumeration,” J. Phys. A 19, L1197 (1986).
Pusey, P.N., and W. van Megan, “Phase behaviour of concentrated suspensions of nearly hard
colloidal spheres,” Nature 320, 340 (1986).
Quickenden, T.I., and G.K. Tan, “Random packing in two dimensions and the structure of
monolayers,” J. Colloid Interface Sci. 48, 382 (1974).
Quintanilla, J., and S. Torquato, “New bounds on the elastic moduli of suspensions of spheres,”
J. Appl. Phys. 77, 4361 (1995).
Quintanilla, J., and S. Torquato, “Lineal measures of clustering in overlapping particle sys-
tems,” Phys. Rev. E 54, 4027 (1996).
Quintanilla, J., S. Torquato, and R.M. Ziﬀ, “Eﬃcient measurement of the percolation thresh-
old for fully penetrable disks,” J. Phys. A 33, L399 (2000).
Rammal, R., T.C. Lubensky, and G. Toulouse, “Superconducting networks in a magnetic
ﬁeld,” Phys. Rev. B 27, 2820 (1983).
735

Rammal, R., C. Tannous, and A.-M.S. Tremblay, “1/f noise in random resistor networks:
Fractals and percolating systems,” Phys. Rev. A 31, 2662 (1985a).
Rammal, R., C. Tannous, P. Breton, and A.-M.S. Tremblay, “Flicker (1/f) noise in percolation
networks: A new hierarchy of exponents,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 1718 (1985b).
Rammal, R., and G. Toulouse, “Random walks on fractal structures and percolation clusters,”
J. Physique Lett. 44, L13 (1983).
Rayleigh, Lord (John William Strutt), “On the inﬂuence of obstacles arranged in rectangular
order upon the properties of the medium,” Philos. Mag. 34, 481 (1872).
Recski, A., “Application of combinatorics to statics - a second survery,” Disc. Math. 108,
183 (1992).
Redﬁeld, D., “Observation of log σ ∼T −1/2 in three-dimensional energy-band tails,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 30, 1319 (1973).
Rehwald, W., H. Kiess, and B. Binggeli, “Frequency dependent conductivity in polymers and
other disordered materials,” Z. Phys. B 68, 143 (1987).
Reichenauer, G., J. Fricke, and U. Buchenau, “Neutron scattering study of low-frequency
vibrations in silica aerogels,” Europhys. Lett. 8, 415 (1989).
Reiss, H., and A.D. Hammerich, “Hard spheres: Scaled particle theory and exact relations on
the existence and structure of the ﬂuid/solid phase transition,” J. Phys. Chem. 90, 6252
(1986).
Reiss, H., H.L. Frisch, and J.L. Lebowitz, “Statistical mechanics of rigid spheres,” J. Chem.
Phys. 31, 369 (1959).
Re´nyi, A., “On a one-dimensional problem concerning random space ﬁlling,” Trans. Math.
Stat. Prob. 4, 203 (1963).
Resnick, D.J., J.C. Garland, and R. Newrock, “Galvanomagnetic properties of randomly in-
homogeneous superconductors,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1192 (1979).
736

Reynolds, P.J., H.E. Stanley, and W. Klein, “Large-cell Monte Carlo renormalization group
for percolation,” Phys. Rev. B 21, 1223 (1980).
Richard, T.G., “The mechanical behavior of a solid microsphere ﬁlled composite,” J. Compos.
Mater 9, 108 (1975).
Richter, D., and L. Passell, “Neutron scattering as a probe of small-particle dynamics in
hydroxylated amorphous silica,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 44, 1593 (1980).
Rikvold, P.A., and G. Stell, “Porosity and speciﬁc surface for interpenetrable-sphere models
of two-phase random media,” J. Chem. Phys. 82, 1014 (1985).
Rink, M., and J.R. Schopper, “Computations of network models of porous media,” Geophys.
Prospect. 16, 277 (1968).
Rintoul, M.D., and H. Nakanishi, “A precise determination of the backbone fractal dimension
on two-dimensional percolation clusters,” J. Phys. A 25, 945 (1992).
Rintoul, M.D., and S. Torquato, “Metastability and crystallization in hard-sphere systems,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 4198 (1996).
Rintoul, M.D., and S. Torquato, “Precise determination of the critical threshold and exponents
in a three-dimensional continuum percolation model,” J. Phys. A 30, L585 (1997).
Rivier, N., “Recent results on the ideal structure of glasses,” J. Physique 43, C9-91 (1982).
Rivier, N., and A. Lissowski, “on the correlation between sizes and shapes of cells in epithelial
mosaics,” J. Phys. A 15, L143 (1982).
Roberts, A.P., and M.A. Knackstedt, “Structure-property correlations in model composite
materials,” Phys. Rev. E 54, 2313 (1996).
Roberts, A.P., and M. Teubner, “Transport properties of heterogeneous materials derived from
Gaussian random ﬁelds: Bounds and simulation,” Phys. Rev. E 51, 4141 (1995).
Rohde, M., and H. Micklitz, “Critical behavior of the Hall conductivity near the percolation
threshold in granular Sn:Ar mixtures,” Phys. Rev. B 36, 7289 (1987).
737

Roling, B., “Scaling properties of the conductivity spectra of glasses and supercooled melts,”
Solid State Ionics 105, 185 (1998).
Roman, H.E., S. Russ, and A. Bunde, “Localization and typical spatial behavior of fractons,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 1643 (1991).
Rosen, B.W., and Z. Hashin, “Eﬀective thermal expansion coeﬃcients and speciﬁc heats of
composite materials,” Int. J. Eng. Sci. 8, 157 (1970).
Roth, L.M., “Eﬀective-medium approximation for liquid metals,” Phys.
Rev.
B 9, 2476
(1974).
Roux, S., “Relation between elastic and scalar transport exponent in percolation,” J. Phys.
A 19, L351 (1986).
Roux, S., and E. Guyon, “Mechanical percolation: a small beam lattice study,” J. Physique
Lett. 46, L999 (1985).
Roux, S., and E. Guyon, “Transport exponents in percolation,” in On Growth and Form,
edited by H.E. Stanley and N. Ostrowsky (Martin Nijhoﬀ, Dordrecht, 1986), p. 273.
Roux, S., and A. Hansen, “Critical behavior of anisotropic ’superelastic’ central-force perco-
lation,” J. Phys. A 20, L879 (1987).
Roux, S., and A. Hansen, “Transfer-matrix study of the elastic properties of central-force
percolation,” Europhys. Lett. 6, 301 (1988).
Royer, E., C. Beniot, and G. Poussigue, “Dynamics of percolating networks,” J. Phys.: Con-
dens. Matter 4, 561 (1992).
Rozanski, S.A., G. Kermer, P. K¨oberle, and A. Laschewsky, “Relaxation and charge transport
in mixtures of zwitterionic polymers and inorganic salts,” Macromol. Chem. Phys. 196,
877 (1995).
Rudman, D.A., J.J. Calabrese, and J.C. Garland, “Noise spectra of three-dimensional random
metal-insulator composites,” Phys. Rev. B 32, 1456 (1986).
738

Runge, I., “On the electrical conductivity of metallic aggregates,” Z. Tech.
Physik 6, 61
(1925).
Russel, W.B., and A. Acrivos, “On the eﬀective moduli of composite materials: Slender rigid
inclusions at dilute concentrations,” Z. Angw. Math. Phys. 23, 434 (1972).
Russel, W.B., D.A. Saville, and W.R. Schowalter, Colloidal Dispersions (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1989).
Rutgers, M.A., J.H. Dunsmuir, J.Z. Xue, W.B. Russel, and P. Chaikin, “Measurement of the
hard-sphere equation of state using screened charged polystyrene collids,” Phys. Rev. B
53, 5043 (19996).
Sahimi, M., “On the relationship between the critical exponent of percolation conductivity
and the static exponents of percolation,” J. Phys. A 17, L601 (1984a).
Sahimi, M., “Eﬀective-medium approximation for density of states and the spectral dimension
of percolation networks,” J. Phys. C 17, 3957 (1984b).
Sahimi, M., “Relation between the critical exponent of elastic percolation networks and the
dynamical and geometrical exponents,” J. Phys. C 19, L79 (1986a).
Sahimi, M., “Dynamic percolation and diﬀusion in disordered systems,” J. Phys. C 19, 1311
(1986b).
Sahimi, M., “On the determination of transport properties of disordered systems,” Chem.
Eng. Commun.. 64, 179 (1988).
Sahimi, M., “Nonlinear transport processes in disordered media,” AIChE J. 39, 369 (1993a).
Sahimi, M., “Flow phenomena in rocks: From continuum models to fractals, percolation,
cellular automata and simulated annealing,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 65, 1395 (1993b).
Sahimi, M., Applications of Percolation Theory (Taylor and Francis, London, 1994a).
Sahimi, M., “Long-range correlated percolation and ﬂow and transport in heterogeneous
porous media,” J. Physique I France 4, 1263 (1994b).
739

Sahimi, M., “Eﬀect of long-range correlations on transport phenomena in disordered media,”
AIChE J. 41, 229 (1995a).
Sahimi, M., Flow and Transport in Porous Media and Fractured Rock (VCH, Weinheim, Ger-
many, 1995b).
Sahimi, M., “Non-linear and non-local transport processes in heterogeneous media: From
long-range correlated percolation to fracture and materials breakdown,” Phys. Rep. 306,
295 (1998).
Sahimi, M., and S. Arbabi, “Force distribution, multiscaling, and ﬂuctuations in disordered
elastic media,” Phys. Rev. B 40, 4975 (1989).
Sahimi, M., and S. Arbabi, “On correction to scaling for two- and three-dimensional scalar
and vector percolation,” J. Stat. Phys. 62, 453 (1991).
Sahimi, M., and S. Arbabi, “Mechanics of disordered solids. II. Percolation on elastic networks
with bond-bending forces,” Phys. Rev. B 47, 703 (1993).
Sahimi, M., G.R. Gavalas, and T.T. Tsotsis, “Statistical and continuum models of ﬂuid-solid
reactions in porous media,” Chem. Eng. Sci. 45, 1443 (1990).
Sahimi, M., and J.D. Goddard, “Superelastic percolation networks and the viscosity of gels,”
Phys. Rev. B 32, 1869 (1985).
Sahimi, M., A.A. Heiba, B.D. Hughes, L.E. Scriven, and H.T. Davis, “dispersion in ﬂow
through porous media,” Society of Petroleum Engineers Paper 10969, New Orleans,
Louisiana (1982).
Sahimi, M., B.D. Hughes, L.E. Scriven, and H.T. Davis, “Stochastic transport in disordered
systems,” J. Chem. Phys. 78, 6849 (1983a).
Sahimi, M., B.D. Hughes, L.E. Scriven, and H.T. Davis, “Critical exponents of percolation
conductivity by ﬁnite-size scaling,” J. Phys. C 16, L521 (1983b).
Sahimi, M., B.D. Hughes, L.E. Scriven, and H.T. Davis, “Real-space renormalization and
eﬀective-medium approximation to the percolation conduction problem,” Phys. Rev. B
28, 307 (1983c).
740

Sahimi, M., B.D. Hughes, L.E. Scriven, and H.T. Davis, “Dispersion in ﬂow through porous
media. I. One-phase ﬂow,” Chem. Eng. Sci. 41, 2103 (1986).
Sahimi, M., and S. Mukhopadhyay, “Scaling properties of a percolation model with long-range
correlations,” Phys. Rev. E 54, 3870 (1996).
Sahimi, M., and H. Rassamdana, “On position-space renormalization group approach to per-
colation,” J. Stat. Phys. 78, 1157 (1995).
Sahimi, M., and T.S. Ray, “Transport through bootstrap percolation clusters,” J. Phys. I 1,
685 (1991).
Sahimi, M., L.E. Scriven, and H.T. Davis, “On the improvement of the eﬀective-medium
approximation to the percolation conductivity problem,” J. Phys. C 17, 1941 (1984).
Sahimi, M., and D. Stauﬀer, “Eﬃcient simulation of ﬂow and transport in porous media,”
Chem. Eng. Sci. 46, 2225 (1991).
Sahimi, M., and T.T. Tsotsis, “Transient diﬀusion and conduction in heterogeneous media:
Beyond the classical eﬀective-medium approximation,” Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 36, 3043
(1997).
Sangani, A.S., and A. Acrivos, “The eﬀective conductivity of a periodic array of spheres,”
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 386, 263 (1983).
Sarychev, A.K., and F. Brouers, “New scaling for ac properties of percolating composite
materials,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 2895 (1994).
Sarychev, A.K., and A.P. Vinogradoﬀ, “Drop model of inﬁnite cluster for 2D percolation,” J.
Phys. C 14, L487 (1981).
Schaefer, D.W., C.J. Brinker, D. Richter, B. Farago, and B. Frick, “Dynamics of weakly
connected solids: silica aerogels,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2316 (1990).
Schaefer, D.W., and K.D. Keefer, “Structure of random porous materials: silica aerogel,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 2199 (1986).
741

Schaefer, D.W., J.E. Martin, P. Wiltzius, and D.S. Cannell, “Fractal geometry of colloidal
aggregates,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 2371 (1984).
Schaefer, D.W., D. Richter, B. Farago, C.J. Brinker, C.S. Ashley, B.J. Olivier, and P. Seeger,
in Neutron Scattering for Materials Science, edited by S.M. Shapiro, S.C. Moss, and J.D.
J⊘rgensen (Materials Research Society, Pittsburgh, 1990), p. 355.
Scher, H., and M. Lax, “Stochastic transport in a disordered solid. I. Theory,” Phys. Rev. B
7, 4491 (1973a).
Scher, H., and M. Lax, “Stochastic transport in a disordered solid. II. Impurity conduction,”
Phys. Rev. B 7, 4502 (1973b).
Scher, H., M.F. Shlesinger, and J.T. Bendler, “Time-scale invariance in transport and relax-
ation,” Physics Today 44 (N0. 1), 26 (1991).
Scher, H., and R. Zallen, “Critical density in percolation processes,” J. Chem. Phys. 53, 3759
(1970).
Schmidt, M., and W. Burchard, “Critical exponents in polymers: A sol-gel study of anionically
prepared styrene-divinilbenzene copolymers,” Macromolecules 14, 370 (1981).
Schr⊘der, T.B., and J.C. Dyre, “Scaling and universality of ac conduction in disordered
solids,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 310 (2000).
Schulgasser, K., “Relationship between single-crystal and polycrystal electrical conductivity,”
J. Appl. Phys. 47, 1880 (1976).
Schwartz, L.M., S. Feng, M.F. Thorpe, and P.N. Sen, “Behavior of depleted elastic networks:
Comparison of eﬀective-medium and numerical calculations,” Phys. Rev. B 32, 4607
(1985).
Schwartz, L.M., D.L. Johnson, and S. Feng, “Vibrational modes in granular materials,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 52, 831 (1984).
Scott, G.D., and D.M. Kilgour, “The density of random close packing of spheres,” Brit. J.
Appl. Phys. 2, 863 (1969).
742

Seaton, N.A., and E.D. Glandt, “Spatial correlation functions from computer simulations,” J.
Chem. Phys. 85, 5262 (1986).
Sen, A.K., and S. Torquato, “Eﬀective conductivity of anisotropic two-phase composite me-
dia,” Phys. Rev. B 39, 4504 (1989).
Sen, P.N., C. Scala, and M.H. Cohen, “A self-similar model for sedimentary rocks with appli-
cation to the dielectric constant of fused glass beads,” Geophysics 46, 781 (1981).
Shahinpoor, M., Powder Technol. 25, 163 (1980).
Shante, V.K.S., “Hopping conduction in quasi-one-dimensional disordered compounds,” Phys.
Rev. B 16, 2597 (1977).
Shante, V.K.S., and S. Kirkpatrick, “An introduction to percolation theory,” Adv. Phys. 20,
325 (1971).
Sheng, P., “Pair-cluster theory for the dielectric constant of composite media,” Phys. Rev. B
22, 6364 (1980).
Sheng, P., and J. Klafter, “Hopping conductivity in granular disordered systems,” Phys. Rev.
B 27, 2583 (1983).
Sheppard, A.P., M.A. Knackstedt, W.V. Piczzewski, and M. Sahimi, “Invasion percolation:
New algorithms and universality classes,” J. Phys. A 32, L521 (1999).
Shklovskii, B.I., “Critical behavior of the Hall coeﬃcient near the percolation threshold,” Sov.
Phys.-JETP 45, 152 (1977).
Shklovskii, B.I., “Anisotropy of percolation conduction,” Phys. Stat. Sol. B 85, K111 (1978).
Shklovskii, B.I., and A.L. Efros, “Transition from metallic to activation conductivity in com-
pensated semiconductors,” Sov. Phys.-JETP 33, 468 (1971).
Shklovskii, B.I., and A.L. Efros, Sov. Phys.-Tech. Phys. Lett. 1, 83 (1975).
Shklovskii, B.I., and A.L. Efros, Electronic Properties of Doped Semiconductors (Springer,
Berlin, 1984).
743

Shlesinger, M.F., “William-Watts dielectric relaxation: A fractal time stochstic process,” J.
Stat. Phys. 36, 639 (1984).
Shlesinger, M.F., and E.W. Montroll, “Williams-Watts function of dielectric relaxation,” Proc.
National Acad. Sci. USA 81, 1280 (1984).
Sichel, E.K., and J.I. Gittleman, “The Hall eﬀect in granular metal ﬁlms near the percolation
threshold,” Solid State Commun. 42, 75 (1982).
Sidebottom, D.L., “Universal approach for scaling the ac conductivity in ionic glasses,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 82, 3653 (1999).
Siegel, R.A., and R. Langer, “A new Monte Carlo approach to diﬀusion in constricted porous
geometries,” J. Colloid Interface Sci. 109, 426 (1986).
Sigmund, O., Design of Material Structures Using Topology Optimization, Ph.D. Thesis, De-
partment of Solid Mechanics, Technical University of Denmark (1994).
Silnutzer, N., Eﬀective Constants of Statistically Homogeneous Materials, Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (1972).
Sinai, Ya.G., “The limiting behavior of a one-dimensional random walk in a random environ-
ment,” Theory Prob. Appl. 27, 256 (1982).
Sinha, S.K., T. Freltoft, and J. Kjems, “Observation of power-law correlations in silica-particle
aggregates by small angle neutron scattering,” in Kinetics of Aggregation and Gelation,
edited by F. Family and D.P. Landau (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1984), p. 87.
Sleator, T., A. Bernasconi, S. Posselt, J.K. Kjems, and H.R. Ott, “Low-temperature speciﬁc
heat and thermal conductivity of silica aerogels,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 1070 (1991).
Smith, J.C., J. Res. Natl. Bur. Stand. 80A, 45 (1976).
Smith, L.N., and C.J. Lobb, “Percolation in two-dimensional conductor-insulator networks
with controllable anisotropy,” Phys. Rev. B 20, 3653 (1979).
Smith, P.A., and S. Torquato, “Computer simulation results for bounds on the eﬀective con-
ductivity of composite media,” J. Appl. Phys. 65, 893 (1989).
744

S¨oderberg, M., P.-O. Jansson, and G. Grimvall, “Eﬀective medium theory for resistor networks
in checkerboard geometries,” J. Phys. A 18, L633 (1985).
Sofo, J., J. Lorenzana, and E.N. Martinez, “Critical behavior of Young’s modulus for two-
dimensional randomly holed metallized Mylar,” Phys. Rev. B 36, 3960 (1987).
Song, Y., T.W. Noh, S.-I. Lee, and J.R. Gaines, “Experimental study of the three dimen-
sional ac conductivity and dielectric constant of a conductor-insulator composite near the
percolation threshold,” Phys. Rev. B 33, 904 (1986).
Song, Y., R.M. Stratt, and E.A. Mason, “The equation of state of hard spheres and the
approach to random closest packing,” J. Chem. Phys. 88, 1126 (1988).
Soven, P., “Coherent-potential model of substitutional disordered alloys,” Phys. Rev. 156,
809 (1967).
Spence, R., Linear Active Networks (Wiley, New York, 1970).
Sreeram, A.N., A.K. Varshneya, and D.R. Swiler, “Molar volume and elastic properties of
multicomponent chalcogenide glasses,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 128, 294 (1991).
Srinivasan, A., K.N. Madhusoodanan, and E.S.R. Gopal, “Thermal diﬀusivity of IV-V-VI
glasses - An evidence for the existence of a mechanical threshold,” Solid State Commun.
83, 163 (1992).
Stachowiak, H., “Eﬀective electric conductivity tensor of polycrystalline metals in high mag-
netic ﬁelds,” Physica 45, 481 (1970).
Stanley, H.E., “A polychromatic correlated-site percolation problem with possible relevance
to the unusual behaviour of supercooled H2O and D2O,” J. Phys. A 12, L329 (1979).
Stanley, H.E., P.J. Reynolds, S. Redner, and F. Family, “Position-space renormalization for
models of linear polymers, branched polymers, and gels,” in Real-Space Renormalization,
edited by T.W. Burkhardt and J.M.J. van Leeuwen (Springer, Berlin, 1982), p. 169.
Stauﬀer, D., “Gelation in concentrated critically branched polymer solutions.
Percolation
scaling theory of intramolecular bond cycles,” J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. II 72, 1354
(1976).
745

Stauﬀer, D., J. Adler, and A. Aharony, “Universality at the three-dimensional percolation
threshold,” J. Phys. A 27, L475 (1994).
Stauﬀer, D., and A. Aharony, Introduction to Percolation Theory, 2nd ed. (Taylor and Francis,
London, 1992).
Stauﬀer, D., A. Coniglio, and M. Adam, “Gelation and critical phenomena,” Adv. Polymer
Sci. 44, 103 (1982).
Stauﬀer, D., and L. de Arcangelis, “Dynamics and strong size eﬀects of a bootstrap percolation
problem,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 7, 739 (1996).
Stell, G., and P.A. Rikvold, “Polydispersivity in ﬂuids and composites: Some theoretical
results,” Chem. Eng. Commun. 51, 233 (1987).
Stinchcombe, R.B., “The branching model for percolation theory and electrical conductivity,”
J. Phys. C 6, L1 (1973).
Stinchcombe, R.B., “Conductivity and spin-wave stiﬀness in disordered systems-an exactly
soluble model,” J. Phys. C 7, 179 (1974).
Stinchcombe, R.B., and B.P. Watson, “Renormalization group approach for percolation con-
ductivity,” J. Phys. C 9, 3221 (1976).
Stockmayer, W.H., “Theory of molecular size distribution and gel formation in branched-chain
polymers,” J. Chem. Phys. 11, 45 (1943).
Stoll, E., M. Kolb, and E. Courtens, “Numerical veriﬁcation of scaling for scattering from
fractons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 2472 (1992).
Stoyan, D., W.S. Kendall, and J. Mecke, Stochastic Geometry and its Applications, 2nd ed.
(Wiley, New York, 1995).
Straley, J.P., “Critical phenomena in resistor networks,” J. Phys. C 9, 783 (1976).
Straley, J.P., “Random resistor tree in an applied ﬁeld,” J. Phys. C 10, 3009 (1977a).
746

Straley, J.P., “Critical exponents for the conductivity of random resistor lattices,” Phys. Rev.
B 15, 5733 (1977b).
Straley, J.P., “Exponent theory of the Hall eﬀect and conductivity anisotropy near the perco-
lation threshold,” J. Phys. C 13, L773 (1980a).
Straley, J.P., “Conductivity anisotropy and the Hall eﬀect in inhomogeneous conductors near
the percolation threshold,” J. Phys. C 13, 4335 (1980b).
Straley, J.P., “Non-universal threshold behaviour of random resistor networks with anomalous
distribution of conductances,” J. Phys. C 15, 2343 (1982).
Strang, G., and G.J. Fix, An Analysis of the Finite Element Method (Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliﬀs, 1973).
Stroud, D., “Generalized eﬀective-medium approach to the conductivity of an inhomogeneous
material,” Phys. Rev. B 12, 3368 (1975).
Stroud, D., “Percolation eﬀects and sum rules in the optical properties of composites,” Phys.
Rev. B 19, 1783 (1979).
Stroud, D., “Classical theory of the magnetoresistance and Hall coeﬃcient of normal-superconducting
composites,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 44, 1708 (1980).
Stroud, D., and F.P. Pan, “Self-consistent approach to electromagnetic wave propagation in
composite media: Application to model granular metals,” Phys. Rev. B 17, 1602 (1978).
Summerﬁeld, S., “Eﬀective medium theory of A.C. hopping conductivity for random-bond
lattice models,” Solid State Commun. 39, 401 (1981).
Summerﬁeld, S., “Universal low-frequency behaviour in the a.c.
hopping conductivity of
disordered systems,” Philos. Mag. B 52, 9 (1985).
Summerﬁeld, S., and P.N. Butcher, “A uniﬁed equivalent-circuit approach to the theory of
AC and DC hopping conductivity in disordered systems,” J. Phys. C 15, 7003 (1982).
Suzuki, M., “A.c. hopping conductivity in Mn-Co-Ni-Cu complex oxide semiconductors with
spinel structure,” J. Phys. Chem. Solids 41, 1253 (1980).
747

Szpilka, A.M., and P. Visˇcor, “D.c. electrical conductivity of evaporated amorphous germa-
nium - the low temperature limit,” Philos. Mag. 45, 485 (1982).
Takahashi, M., K. Yokoyama, and T. Masuda, “Dynamic viscoelasticity and critical exponents
in sol-gel transition of an end-linking polymer,” J. Chem. Phys. 101, 798 (1994).
Tanaka, K., “Structural phase transitions in chalcogenide glasses,” Phys. Rev. B 39, 1270
(1989).
Tanaka, K., T. Nakagawa, and A. Odajima, “Photodarkening in glassy chalcogenide systems,”
Philos. Mag. Lett. B 54, L3 (1986).
Tang, W., and M.F. Thorpe, “Mapping between random central-force networks and random
resistor networks,” Phys. Rev. B 36, 3798 (1987).
Tang, W., and M.F. Thorpe, “Percolation of elastic networks under tension,” Phys. Rev. B
37, 5539 (1988).
Tartar, L., “Estimations ﬁnes des coeﬃcients homog´en´eis´es,” in Ennio De Giorgi Colloquim,
edited by P. Kr´ee (Pitman, Boston, 1985), p. 175.
Tassopoulos, M., and D.E. Rosner, “Simulation of vapor diﬀusion in anisotropic particulate
deposits,” Chem. Eng. Sci. 47, 421 (1992).
Tatsumisago, M., B.L. Halfpap, J.L. Green, S.M. Lindsay, and C.A. Angell, “Fragility of
Ge-As-Se glass-forming liquids in relations to rigidity percolation, and the Kauzmann
paradox,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 1549 (1990).
Taylor, D.W., “Vibrational properties of imperfect crystals with large defects concentration,”
Phys. Rev. 156, 1017 (1967).
Taylor, H.E., “The dielectric relaxation spectrum of glass,” Trans. Faraday Soc. 52, 873
(1956).
Tessler, L.R., and G. Deutscher, “Experimental investigation of two-dimensional In-Ge thin
ﬁlms,” Physica A 157, 154 (1989).
748

Thorpe, M.F., “Continuous deformation in random networks,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 57, 355
(1983).
Thorpe, M.F., and P.M. Duxbury (eds.), Rigidity Theory and Applications (Kluwer Academic,
New York, 1999).
Thorpe, M.F., and E.J. Garboczi, “Site percolation on central-force elastic networks,” Phys.
Rev. B 35, 8579 (1987).
Thorpe, M.F., and E.J. Garboczi, “Elastic properties of central-force networks with bonde-
length mismatch,” Phys. Rev. B 42, 8405 (1990).
Thorpe, M.F., D.J. Jacobs, M.V. Chubynsky, and J.C. Phillips, “Self-organization in network
glases,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 266-269, 859 (2000).
Thorpe, M.F., and I. Jasuik, “New results in the theory of elasticity for two-dimensional
composites,” Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 438, 531 (1992).
Thorpe, M.F., and P.N. Sen, “Elastic moduli of two-dimensional composite continua with
elliptical inclusions,” J. Accoust. Soc. Am. 77, 1674 (1985).
Thovert, J.F., I.C. Kim, S. Torquato, and A. Acrivos, “Bounds on the eﬀective properties
of polydispersed suspensions of spheres: An evaluation of two relevant morphological
parameters,” J. Appl. Phys. 67, 6088 (1990).
Tielb¨urger, D., R. Merz, R. Ehrenfels, and S. Hunklinger, “Thermally-activated relaxation
processes in vitreous silica: An investigation by Brillouin scattering at high pressures,”
Phys. Rev. B 45, 2750 (1992).
Timoshenko, S.P., and J.N. Goodier, Theory of Elasticity, 3rd ed. (McGraw-Hill, New York,
1970).
Tobochnik, J., and P.M. Chapin, “Monte Carlo simulation of hard spheres near random closest
packing using spherical boundary conditions,” J. Chem. Phys. 88, 5824 (1988).
Tokita, M., R. Niki, and K. Hikichi, ”Percolation theory and elastic modulus of gel”, J. Phys.
Soc. Jpn. 53, 480 (1984).
749

Torelli, L., and A.E. Scheidegger, “Three-dimensional branching-type models of ﬂow through
porous media,” J. Hydr. 15, 23 (1972).
Torquato, S., “Bulk properties of two-phase disordered media. I. Cluster expansion for the
eﬀective dielectric constant of dispersions of penetrable spheres,” J. Chem. Phys. 81,
5079 (1984).
Torquato, S., “Electrical conductivity of two-phase disordered composite media,” J. Appl.
Phys. 58, 3790 (1985a).
Torquato, S., “Bulk properties of two-phase disordered media. II. Eﬀective conductivity of a
dilute suspension of penetrable spheres,” J. Chem. Phys. 83, 4776 (1985b).
Torquato, S., “Bulk properties of two-phase disordered media. III. New bounds on the eﬀective
conductivity of dispersions of penetrable spheres,” J. Chem. Phys. 84, 6345 (1986a).
Torquato, S., “Microstructure characterization and bulk properties of disordered two-phase
media,” J. Stat. Phys. 45, 843 (1986b).
Torquato, S., “Relationship between permeability and diﬀusion-controlled trapping constant
of porous media,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2644 (1990).
Torquato, S., in Macroscopic Behaviour of Heterogeneous Materials from the Microstructure,
Vol.
147, edited by S. Torquato and D. Krajcinovic (Ameican Society of Mechanical
Engineers, New York, 1992), p. 53.
Torquato, S., “Mean nearest-neighbour distance in random packings of D-Dimensional hard
spheres,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2156 (1995).
Torquato, S., “Eﬀective stiﬀness tensor of composite media I. Exact series expansions,” J.
Mech. Phys. Solids 45, 1421 (1997).
Torquato, S. “Eﬀective stiﬀness tensor of composite media: II. Applications to isotropic dis-
persions,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids 46, 1411 (1998).
Torquato, S., Random Heterogeneous Materials (Springer-Verlag, New York, 2002).
750

Torquato, S., and S. Hyun, “Eﬀective-medium approximation for composite media: Realizable
single-scale dispersions,” J. Appl. Phys. 89, 1725 (2001).
Torquato, S., I.C. Kim, and D. Cule, “Eﬀective conductivity, dielectric constant, and diﬀusion
coeﬃcients of digitized media via ﬁrst-passage time equations,” J. Appl. Phys. 85, 1560
(1999).
Torquato, S., and F. Lado, “Characterisation of the microstructure of distributions of rigid
rods and discs in a matrix,” J. Phys. A 18, 141 (1985).
Torquato, S., and F. Lado, “Bounds on the conductivity of a random array of cylinders,” Proc.
R. Soc. Lond. A 417, 59 (1988).
Torquato, S., and F. Lado, “Improved bounds on the eﬀective elastic moduli of random arrays
of cylinders,” J. Appl. Mech. 59, 1 (1992).
Torquato, S., F. Lado, and P.A. Smith, “Bulk properties of two-phase media. IV. Mechanical
properties of suspensions of penetrable spheres at nondilute concentrations,” J. Chem.
Phys. 86, 6388 (1987).
Torquato, S., and B. Lu, “Rigorous bounds on the ﬂuid permeability: Eﬀect of polydispersivity
in grain size,” Phys. Fluids A 2, 487 (1990).
Torquato, S., and B. Lu, “Chord-length distribution function for two-phase random media,”
Phys. Rev. E 47, 2950 (1993).
Torquato, S., B. Lu, and J. Rubinstein, “Nearest-neighbour distribution functions in many-
body systems,” Phys. Rev. A 41, 2059 (1990).
Torquato, S., and M.D. Rintoul, “Eﬀect of the interface on the properties of composite media,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 4067 (1995).
Torquato, S., and A.K. Sen, “Conductivity tensor of anisotropic composite media from the
microstructure,” J. Appl. Phys. 67, 1145 (1990).
Torquato, S., and G. Stell, “Microstructure of two-phase random media.
V. The n-point
matrix probability functions for impenetrable spheres,” J. Chem. Phys. 82, 980 (1985).
751

Torquato, S., T.M. Truskett, and P.G. Debenedetti, “Is random close packing of spheres well
deﬁned?” Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2064 (2000).
Toupin, R.A., “Theories of elasticity with couple-stress,” Arch. Rat. Mech. Analy. 16, 87
(1964).
Trappe, V., W. Richtering, and W. Burchard, “Critical behavior of anhydride cured expoxies,”
J. Physique II 2, 1453 (1992).
Tremblay, A.-M.S., S. Feng, and P. Breton, “Exponents for 1/f noise near a continuum per-
colation threshold,” Phys. Rev. B 33, 2077 (1986).
Tremblay, R.R., G. Albinet, and A.-M.S. Tremblay, “Noise and crossover exponent in conductor-
insulator mixtures and superconductor-conductor mixtures,” Phys.
Rev.
B 45, 755
(1992).
Troadec, J.P., D., Bideau, and E. Guyon, “Transport properties of conducting and semicon-
ducting anisotropic mixtures,” J. Phys. C 14, 4807 (1981).
Truskett, T.M., S. Torquato, and P.G. Debenedetti, “Towards a quantiﬁcation of disorder in
materials: Distinguishing equilibrium and glassy sphere packings,” Phys. Rev. E 62, 993
(2000).
Tsallis, C., A. Coniglio, and S. Redner, “Break-collapse method for resistor networks and a
renormalization-group application,” J. Phys. C 16, 4339 (1983).
Turban, L., “On the eﬀective-medium approximation for bond-percolation conductivity,” J.
Phys. C11, 449 (1978).
Turley, J., and G. Sines, “The anisotropy of Young’s modulus, shear modulus and Poisson’s
ratio in cubic materials,” J. Phys. D 4, 264 (1971).
Tyc, S., and B.I. Halperin, “Random resistor network with an exponentially wide distribution
of bond conductances,” Phys. Rev. B 39, 877 (1989).
Uebbing, B., and A.J. Sievers, “Inﬂuence of the glass network on the vibrational energy
transfer from H2O inpurities in the Ge-As-Se glass series,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 203, 159
(1996).
752

Underwood, E.E., Quantitative Stereology (Addison Wesley, New York, 1970).
Vacher, R., T. Woignier, J. Pelous, and E. Courtens, “Structure and self-similarity of silica
aerogels,” Phys. Rev. B 37, 6500 (1988).
Vacher, R., T. Woignier, J. Pelous, G. Coddens, and E. Courtens, “The density of vibrational
states of silica aerogels,” Europhys. Lett. 8, 161 (1989).
Vacher, R., E. Courtens, G. Coddens, A. Heidemann, Y. Tsujimi, J. Pelous, and M. Foret,
“Crossovers in the density of states of fractal silica aerogels,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1008
(1990).
van der Marck, S.C., “Network approach to void percolation in a pack of unequal spheres,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1785 (1996).
van der Putten, D., J.T., Moonen, H.B. Brom, J.C.M. Brokken-Zijp, and M.A.J. Michels,
“Evidence for superlocalization on a fractal network in conductive carbon-black-polymer
composites,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 494 (1992).
van Dijk, M.A., “Dielectric study of percolation phenomena in a microemulsion,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 55, 1003 (1985).
van Dijk, M.A., G. Castelejin, J.G.H. Joosten, and Y.K. Levine, “Percolation in oil-continuous
microemulsions. A dielectric study of aerosol OT/water/isooctane,” J. Chem. Phys. 85,
626 (1986).
Van Siclen, C. DeW., “Walker diﬀusion method for calculation of transport properties of ﬁnite
composite systems,” Phys. Rev. E 65, 026144-1 (2002).
van Staveren, M.P.J., H.B. Brom, and L.J. de Jongh, “Metal-cluster compounds and universal
features of the hopping conductivity of solids,” Phys. Rep. 208, 1 (1991).
Viot, P., G. Tarjus, and J. Talbot, “Exact solution of a generalized ballistic-deposition model,”
Phys. Rev. E 48, 480 (1993).
Visˇcor, P., and A.D. Yoﬀe, “Amorphous germanium prepared in ultra high vacuum and mea-
sured in situ: The DC electrical conductivity,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 35/36, 409 (1982).
753

Visscher, W.M., and M. Bolsterli, “Random packing of equal and unequal spheres in two and
three dimensions,” Nature 239, 504 (1972).
Viswanathan, R., and M.B. Heaney, “Direct imaging of the percolation network in a three-
dimensional disordered conductor-insulator composite,” Phys.
Rev.
Lett.
75, 4433
(1995).
Volger, J., “Note on the Hall potential across an inhomogeneous conductor,” Phys. Rev. 79,
1023 (1950).
Voronoi, G., “Nouvelles appillications des param´eteres continus ´a la th´eorie des formes quadra-
tiques,” J. Reine Angew. Math. 134, 198 (1908).
Voss, R.F., and J. Clarke, “Flicker (1/f) noise: Equilibrium temperature and resistance ﬂuc-
tuations,” Phys. Rev. B 13, 556 (1976).
Voss, R.F., R.B. Laibowitz, and E.I. Allessandrini, “Fractal (scaling) clusters in thin gold ﬁlms
near the percolation threshold,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 44, 1441 (1982).
Wagner, T., and S.O. Kasap, “Glass transformation, heat capacity and structure of AsxSe1−x
glasses studied by modulated temperature diﬀerential scanning calorimetry experiments,”
Philos. Mag. B 74, 667 (1996).
Walker, D., and K. Scharnberg, “Electromagnetic response of high−Tc superconductors,”
Phys. Rev. B 42, 2211 (1990).
Walpole, L.J., “On the bounds for the overall elastic moduli of inhomogenous systems-I.,” J.
Mech Phys. Solids. 14, 151 (1966).
Walpole, L.J., “On the overall elastic moduli of composite materials,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids
17, 235 (1969).
Walter, U., D.L. Price, S. Susman, and K.J. Volin, “Network dynamics of chalcogenide glasses.
I. Germanium diselenide,” Phys. Rev. B 37, 4232 (1988).
Wang, J., “Bond-diluted rigid animals for central force model,” J. Phys. A 21, L353 (1988).
Wang, J., “The bond-bending model in three dimensions,” J. Phys. A 22, L291 (1989).
754

Wang, J., and A.B. Harris, “Bond orientational order in the randomly diluted elastic network,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2459 (1985).
Wang, J., and A.B. Harris, “Splay rigidity in the anisotropic superelastic network,” Europhys.
Lett. 6, 157 (1988).
Wang, J., A.B. Harris, and J. Adler, “Series approach to the randomly diluted elastic network,”
Phys. Rev. B 45, 7084 (1992).
Wang, Y., M. Nakamura, O. Matsuda, and K. Murase, “Raman-spectroscopy studies on rigid-
ity percolation and fragility on Ge-(S,Se) glasses,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 266-269, 872
(2000).
Warren, B.E., “X-ray diﬀraction of vireous silica,” J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 17, 249 (1934).
Warren, T.L., “Negative Poisson’s ratio in a transversely isotropic foam structure,” J. Appl.
Phys. 67, 7591 (1990).
Watson, B.P., and P.L. Leath, “Conductivity in the two-dimensional-site percolation prob-
lem,” Phys. Rev. B9, 4893 (1974).
Watt, J.P., G.F. Davies, and R.J. O’Connell, “The elastic properties of composite materials,”
Rev. Geophys. Space Phys. 14, 541 (1976).
Weaire, D., “Some remarks on the arrangement of grains in a polycrystal,” Metallography 7,
157 (1974).
Weaire, D., and S. Hutzler, The Physics of Foams (Oxford University Press, New York, 1999).
Weaire, D., and R. Phelan, “A counter-example to Kelvin’s conjecture on minimal surfaces,”
Philos. Mag. Lett. 69, 107 (1994).
Webman, I., “Eﬀective-medium approximation for diﬀusion on a random lattice,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 47, 1496 (1981).
Webman, I., and G. Grest, “Dynamical behavior of fractal structures,” Phys. Rev. B 31, 1689
(1985).
755

Weinrib, A., “Long-range correlated percolation,” Phys. Rev. B 29, 387 (1984).
Weinrib, A., and B.I. Halperin, “Critical phenomena in systems with long-range-correlated
quenched disorder,” Phys. Rev. B 27, 413 (1983).
Weissberg, H.L., “Eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient in porous media,” J. Appl. Phys. 34, 2636
(1963).
Weissman, M.B., “1/f noise and other slow, nonexponential kinetics in condensed matter,”
Rev. Mod. Phys. 60, 537 (1988).
Widom, B., “Random squential addition of hard spheres to a volume,” J. Chem. Phys. 44,
3888 (1966).
Wiener, O., “Die theorie des mischk´’orpers f¨r das feld des station¨aren str¨omung,” Math.-
Physichen Klasse der K¨onigl. S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften 32, 509 (1912).
Wilkinson, D., J.S. Langer, and P.N. Sen, “Enhancement of the dielectric constant near a
percolation threshold,” Phys. Rev. B 28, 1081 (1983).
Williams, G., and D.C. Watts, “Non-symmetrical dielectric relaxation behavior arising from
a simple empirical decay function,” Trans. Faraday Soc. 66, 80 (1970).
Williams, G., D.C. Watts, S.B. Dev, and A.M. North, “Further considerations of non-symmetrical
dielectric relaxation behavior arising from a simple empirical decay potential,” Trans.
Faraday Soc. 67, 1323 (1971).
Williams, M.L., and H.J. Maris, “Numerical study of phonon localization in disordered sys-
tems,” Phys. Rev. B 31, 4508 (1985).
Willis, J.R., “Bounds and self-consistent estimates for the overall moduli of anisotropic com-
posites,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids 25, 185 (1977).
Willis, J.R., “Variational and related methods for the overall properties of composites,” Adv.
Appl. Mech. 21, l (1981).
Winterfeld, P.H., L.E. Scriven, and H.T. Davis, “Percolation and conductivity of random
two-dimensional composites,” J. Phys. C 14, 2361 (1981).
756

Witten, T.A., and L.M. Sander, “Diﬀusion-limited aggregation, a kinetic critical phenomenon,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 1400 (1981).
Woignier, T., J. Phalippou, R. Sempere, and J. Pelons, “Analysis of the elastic behaviour of
silica aerogel taken as a percolating system,” J. Phys. France 49, 289 (1988).
Woignier, T., J. Phalippou, R. Vacher, J. Pelous, and E. Courtens, “Diﬀerent kind of fractal
strucures in silica aerogels,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids 121, 198 (1990).
Wright, D.C., D.J. Bergman, and Y. Kantor, “Resistance ﬂuctuations in random resistor
networks above and below the percolation threshold,” Phys. Rev. B 33, 396 (1986).
Wu, J., and D.S. McLachlan, “Percolation exponents and thresholds obtained from the nearly
ideal continuum percolation system graphite-boron nitride,” Phys.
Rev.
B 56, 1236
(1997).
Wu, T.T., “The eﬀect of inclusions shape on the elastic moduli of a two-phase material,” Int.
J. Solids Struct. 2, 1 (1966).
Xia, T.K., P.M. Hui, and D. Stroud, “Theory of Faraday rotation in granular magnetic mate-
rials,” J. Appl. Phys. 67, 2736 (1990).
Xu, B., F. Arias, S.T. Brittain, X.-M. Zhao, B. Gryzbowski, S. Torquato, and G.M. White-
sides, “Making negative Poisson’s ratio microstructures by soft lithography,” Advanced
Materials 11, 1186 (1999).
Yagil, Y., M. Yoseﬁn, D.J. Bergman, G. Deutscher, and P. Gadanne, “Scaling theory for the
optical properties of semicontinuous metal ﬁlms,” Phys. Rev. B 43, 11342 (1991).
Yakubo, K., E. Courtens, and T. Nakayama, “Missing modes in the density of states of fractal
networks,” Phys. Rev. B 42, 1078 (1990a).
Yakubo, K., and T. Nakayama, “Fracton dynamics of percolating elastic networks: energy
spectrum and localized nature,” Phys. Rev. B 40, 517 (1989).
Yakubo, K., T. Nakayama, and H.J. Maris, “Analysis of a new method for ﬁnding eigenmodes
of very large lattice systems,” J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 60, 3249 (1991).
757

Yakubo, K., K. Takasugi, and T. Nakayama, “Crossover behavior from vector to scalar fractons
in the density of states of percolating networks,” J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 59, 1909 (1990b).
Yonezawa, F., in The Structure and Properties of Matter, edited by T. Matsubara (Springer,
Berlin, 1982), p. 43.
Yonezawa, F., and M.H. Cohen, “Granular eﬀective medium approximation,” J. Appl. Phys.
54, 2985 (1983).
Young, A.P., and R.B. Stinchcombe, “A renormalization group theory for percolation prob-
lems,” J. Phys. C 8, L535 (1975).
Yoon, C.S., and S.-I. Lee, “Measurements of the ac conductivity and dielectric constant in a
two-dimensional lattice percolation system,” Phys. Rev. B 42, 4594 (1990).
Yuge, Y., “Three-dimensional site percolation problem and eﬀective-medium theory: A com-
puter study,” J. Stat. Phys. 16, 339 (1977).
Yun, S.S., H. Li, R.L. Cappelletti, R.N. Enzweiler, and P. Boolchand, “Onset of rigidity in
Se1−xGex glasses: Ultrasonic elastic moduli,” Phys. Rev. B 39, 8702 (1989).
Zabolitzky, J.G., D.J. Bergman, and D. Stauﬀer, “Precision calculation of elasticity for per-
colation,” J. Stat. Phys. 44, 211 (1986).
Zachariasen, W.H., “The atomic arrangement in glass,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 54, 3841 (1932).
Zallen, R., “Introduction to percolation: A model for all seasons,” in Percolation Structures
and Processes, edited by G. Deutscher, R. Zallen and J. Adler, Annals of Israel Physical
Society 5 (Adam Hilger, Bristol, 1983), p. 3.
Zemlyanov, M.G., V.K. Malinovskii, V.N. Novikov, P.P. Parshin, and A.P. Sokolov, “A study
of fractons in polymers,” Zh. Eskp. Teor. Fix. 101, 284 (1992) [Sov. Phys. JETP 74,
151 (1992)].
Zeng, Q., and H. Li, “Diﬀusion equation for disordered fractal media,” Fractals 8, 117 (2000).
Zeng, X.C., P.M. Hui, and D. Stroud, “Numerical study of optical absorption in two-dimensional
metal-insulator and normal-superconductor composites,” Phys. Rev. B 39, 1063 (1989).
758

Zhang, L., and N.A. Seaton, “Prediction of the eﬀective diﬀusivity in pore networks near the
percolation threshold,” AIChE J. 38, 1816 (1992).
Zhang, Y., P. Dai, M. Levy, and M.P. Sarachik, “Probing the Coulomb gap in insulating
n-type CdSe,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2687 (1990).
Ziﬀ, R.M., “Spanning probability in 2D percolation,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2670 (1992).
Ziman, J.M., “The localization of electrons in ordered and disordered systems. I. Percolation
of classical particles,” J. Phys. C 1, 1532 (1968).
Zuzovsky, M., and H. Brenner, “Eﬀective conductivities of composite materials composed
of cubic arrangements of spherical particles embedded in an isotropic matrix,” J. Appl.
Math. Phys. (ZAMP) 28, 979 (1977).
759

INDEX
Aboav-Weaire rule
Absorption coeﬃcient
AC conductivity
eﬀect of percolation
eﬀective-medium approximation
scaling properties of
universality
AC ﬁeld
Activation energy
Additive polymerization
Aerogels
Alexander-Orbach conjecture
Anderson localization
Anharmonicity
Animals
Anisotropic materials
Anisotropic percolation
Annealing schedule
Anomalous diﬀusion
Ant in a labyrinth
Archie’s law
Asymmetric eﬀective-medium approxima-
tion
Asymmetric hopping model
Auxetic materials
Average molecular weight
Average t−matrix approximation
Backbone fractal dimension
Ballistic deposition
Beam model
Beran bounds
Besquin law
Bethe lattice
Blobs of percolation clusters
Body-centered cubic array of spheres
Bohr radius
Boltzmann’s distribution
Boltzmann’s equation
Bond-bending forces
Bond-bending models
comparison with central-force
percolation
ﬁxed points
force distribution
Kirkwood-Keating model
percolation threshold
relation to scalar percolation
scaling properties
Bond-bond Green function
Bond percolation
Bootstrap percolation
Born model
Bose-Einstein distribution
Boundary-element method
Bounds
cluster bounds
to eﬀective conductivity
to dielectric constant
760

to elastic moduli
one-point bounds
two-point bounds
three- and four-point bounds
Box-counting method
Branched polymers
fractal dimension
in good solvent
in swollen state
Parisi-Sourlas-Family relation
scaling properties
size distribution
small-angle neutron scattering
Carbon black materials
Cavity strain ﬁeld
Cayley tree
Central forces
Central-force percolation (see Rigidity per-
colation)
Ceramic materials
Chemical dimension
Chemical gels
Chemical path
Cherkaev-Lurie-Milton theorem
transformation
Cherry-pit model
Chord-length distribution
deﬁnition of
identical hard spheres
identical overlapping spheres
link to lineal-path function
mean chord length
polydisperse hard spheres
polydisperse overlapping spheres
Cluster eﬀective-medium approximation
for eﬀective conductivity
for vibrational density of states
Coherent-potential approximation
Cohn’s theorem
Cole-Cole representation
Compatibility equations
Compliance tensor
Composite materials
bounds to conductivity (see Bounds)
bounds to elastic properties (see Bounds)
dilute limit
exact analysis of anisotropic materials
exact series expansions
non-dilute systems
two spherical inclusions
with equal shear moduli
with length mismatch
Concentric-shell model
Conduction
expansion of electric ﬁeld
Green function
polarizability
polarization in an ellipsoid
Conduction symmetry
Conductivity (see also Random resistor net-
works)
761

anisotropy near percolation
coated-spheres models
eﬀective-medium approximation
link with elastic moduli
perturbation expansion
upper and lower bounds (see Bounds)
Conjugate-gradient method
minimization of total energy
Connectivity
Constant-gap scaling
Constitutive non-linearity
Constraint-counting method
for Kirkwood-Keating model
for rigidity percolation
Continuous-time random walks
Continuum percolation
Contrast expansion
Coordination number
Corrections to scaling
Correlation function
Covalent bonding
Critical exponents (see percolation)
Critical-path method
for electrical conductivity
for hopping conductivity
for rigidity percolation
Critical point
Critical subnetwork
Critical volume fraction
Crossover frequency
Crossover length
Crossover time
Cross-property relations
Cumulant approximation
Current distribution
Dead-end bonds
Degree of polymerization
Density-density correlation
Depolarization coeﬃcient
Deviatoric components of stress tensor
Debye process
Dielectric constant
Debye model
eﬀective-medium approximation
perturbation expansion
random walk model
resistor-capacitor model
scaling properties near percolation
spectral representation
upper and lower bounds (see Bounds)
Williams-Watts formula
Delaunay tessellation
Dielectric loss
Diﬀusivity
one-dimensional systems
scaling properties
two- and three-dimensional systems
Diﬀusion-limited aggregates
Direct correlation function
Directed percolation
Distribution of relaxation times
762

Drude dielectric function
Duality relation
for continuum composites
for resistor networks
Dundurs constants
Dynamic-mechanical experiments
Dynamic stress
Dynamic superelastic network
Dynamic scaling
Dynamical eﬀective-medium approximation
Dynamical exponent
Dynamical ﬂoppiness
Dynamical matrix
Dynamical structure factor
eﬀective-medium approximation
numerical computation
scaling analysis
Einstein problem
Eﬀective-medium approximation
for anisotropic materials
for bond-bending models
for conductor-insulator composites
for conductor-superconductor compos-
ites
for conductivity of continuous compos-
ites
for correlated composites
for continuum elasticity
for dielectric constant
for Hall conductivity
for materials with length mismatch
for multiple-coordinated networks
for rigidity percolation
for site percolation
for the Born model
for vibrational density of states
with energy dependence
Elastic constant tensor
symmetry properties of
Elastic density of states
Elastic energy
Elastic moduli
cluster expansions
coated-inclusion models
deﬁnition of
equal phase shear moduli
link to conductivity
link to thermoelstic constants
Maxwell-Garnett approximation
minimum energy principles
one-point bounds
periodic arrays of spheres
self-consisten approximations
sheets with holes
strong-constrast expansions
three-point bounds
Elastic network
see Rigidity percolation; Bond-bending
models
Elastic spectral dimension
Elastic symmetry
763

Elasticity
Eshelby tensor
expansion of strain ﬁeld
Green function
polarizabilities
polarization in an ellipsoid
Electrical conductivity (see Conductivity;
Random resistor networks; Bounds)
Electromagnetic properties
eﬀective-medium approximation
Entropic elasticity
Entropic networks
Equilibrium hard-spheres
Erythrocyte cytoskeleton
Eshelby tensor
Euler’s law
Exclusion probability
Extinction coeﬃcient
Extreme disorder
Face-centered cubic array of spheres
Faraday eﬀect
Faraday’s law
Fermi distribution
Fiber
Fiber bundle
Fibrous materials
computer simulation
Field-theoretic approach
Filling factor of a lattice
Finite-diﬀerence methods
Finite-element simulation
conductivity
fracture
Finite-size scaling
First-passage time method
Fixed point
Flexural rigidity
Flicker noise
Floppy state
dynamical
geometrical
macroscopic
microscopic
Fluctuation-dissipation theorem
Foams
mechanical properties of
relation to rigidity percolation
Fractals
Fractal diﬀusion
Fractal dimension
Fractional equation
Fractons
crossover to phonons
dispersion relation
eﬀect on sound velocity
eﬀect on thermal transport
ensemble-averaged properties
fracton dimension
large-scale computer simulation
localization of
mode patterns of
764

phonon assisted hopping
Frequency-dependent conductivity
Fully-impenetrable sphere model
Fully-penetrable sphere model
Gaussian random ﬁeld model
Gelation
Debye process
determination of transition point
dynamic-mechanical experiments
dynamic superelastic network model
elastic moduli
gel fraction
percolation models
relaxation time spectrum
retardation time spectrum
Rouse regime
scaling properties
viscosity
Zimm regime
Gels
chemical
complex shear compliance
dynamic shear compliance
dynamic tensile modulus
enthalpic
entropic
ﬂuctuation algorithm for
loss modulus
physical gels
relaxation strength
storage modulus
Generalized master equation
Geometrical models
Glass
ageing
Cohen-Grest model for metallic glasses
constraint-counting argument
eﬀect of high coordination number
eﬀect of onefold-coordinated atoms
free volume
mean-coordination number
Phillips-Thorpe theory
Raman spectra
stress-free versus stressed
structure of network
transition temperature
Granular materials
Grain boundaries
Granular model
Granular superconductors
Green functions
for conduction
for continuum elasticity
for diﬀusion
for fracture
for the Born model
Green theorem
Growth exponent
Hall conductivity
Hard spheres
765

chord-length density function
conductivity bounds
elastic moduli bounds
lineal-path function
maximally random jamming
point/q−particle correlations
pore-size distribution
radial distribution function
random sequential addition of
Hashin-Shtrikman bounds (see Bounds)
Hashin-Shtrikman variational principles
Height correlation function
Hellmann-Feynman theorem
Hexagonal arrays of cylinders
Hopping conductivity
Impedance
Incoherent inelastic scattering
Indicator function
Interface conductivity
Intersection volume
Inverted Swiss-cheese model
Kosolov constant
Lam´e coeﬃcient
Laminates
Laplace equation
Lattice animal
Lattice structure factor
Legendre functions
Legendre transformation
Lineal-path function
deﬁnition of
identical hard spheres
identical overlapping spheres
polydisperse overlapping spheres
Linear chain
Links-nodes-blobs model
double-cantilever beam
inﬁnite strip
single-edge notched
Localization
Localization correlation length
London penetration depth
Lorentz electric ﬁeld
Loss angle
Loss modulus
Lower bound
Magnetoconductivity
Markov random ﬁeld
Master equation
Maximally random jammed state
Maxwell equations
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution
Maxwell-Garnett approximation
Mean chord length
Mean-ﬁeld approximation
Metal-insulator ﬁlms
Metal-insulator transition
Microemulsions
Mie scattering
766

Miller-Abrahams network
Minimum complementary energy criterion
Minimum energy crietrion
Minimum path
Minimum gap
Molecular weight
Morphology
Mott hopping model
Multifractals
Multiple coordination number
Multiple-scattering approach
for elastic moduli
for optical properties
n−particle probability density
n−point correlation function
n−point distribution function
n−point matrix probability function
n−vector model
Nearest-neighbor distribution function
Network reduction (hopping conductivity)
Noise (1/f)
Non-self-consistent approximation
One-level cut model
Ornstein-Zernike equation
Packing fraction
Pad´e approximation
Pair-connectedness function
Pair correlation function
Penetrable-concentric shell model
Percolation (deﬁnition)
accessible fraction
backbone
backbone fraction
clusters
cluster number
conductor-insulator composites
conductor-superconductor composites
correlation length
critical exponents
fractal dimensions
mean cluster size
percolation probability
rigid-soft composites
rigid-superrigid composites
thresholds
scaling properties
Percolation path approximation
Percus-Yevick approximation
Persistence length
Phase transition
Phonons
Phonon-assisted hopping
Physical gels
Point/n−particle distribution function
Poisson’s ratio
negative values of
universality of
Polycondensation
Polycrystalline materials
Polydispersed spheres
767

Polymeric materials
Polymer chains
Polymerization
Pore-size functions
Position-space renormalization
Power laws
Power spectrum
Porod law of scattering
Quasi-static approximation
Quenched disorder
Radial distribution function
Ornstein-Zernike formulation
Percus-Yevick approximation
Raman scattering
Random-close packing fraction
Random resistor network (see also Eﬀective-
medium approximation; Percolation)
exact result for the square lattice
exact solution for Bethe lattices
ﬁeld-theoretic method
Green function formulation
Lobb-Frank-Fogelholm methods
perturbation expansion
series expansion
transfer-matrix method
Random sequantial addition
Random walk simulation
Reconstruction models
Red bonds
Reduced network (hopping conductivity)
Relaxation time spectrum
Renormalization-group transformation
for conductivity
for dielectric constant
for percolation
for bond-bending model
Renormalized eﬀective-medium approxima-
tion
Resistance ﬂuctuations
Resistor-capacitor model
Resistor-capacitor-inductor model
Retardation time spectrum
Reuss-Voigt bounds
Rigidity
geometrical
local
Rigidity percolation
correlation length
ﬂoppy state
force distribution
mapping to resistor networks
nature of phase transition
pebble game
percolation threshold
scaling properties
shortcomings of
superelasticity
Rotational invariance
Sample-spanning cluster
Scaling function
768

Scaling theory
Scattering intensity
Second-order light scattering
Self-avoiding walks
Self-aﬃne fractals
Self-consistent approximation
Self-similarity
Semiconductors
Series expansion
Shear deformation
Shear modulus
Sierpinsky gasket
Silica aerogels
Simulated annealing
Singly-connected bonds
Site percolation
Site-site Green function
Size distribution
Small-angle scattering
Sol
Sol-gel transition
Sound velocity
Spatially-periodic models
Speciﬁc heat of supercondoctors
Spectral density
Spectral dimension
for diﬀusion/conduction
for elastic systems (ﬂexural dimension)
Spectral representation of dielectric func-
tion
Spherical harmonics
Square arrayss of cylinders
Statistical self-similarity
Stress transition
Stresslet
Strum sequence method
Superconducting materials
Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieﬀer theory
coherence length
critical current
diﬀerential magnetic susceptibility
speciﬁc heat
Type I
Type II
upper critical ﬁeld
Superelastic percolation networks
Superlocalization
Superrigid composites
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering
Surface fractal dimension
Surface-matrix correlation function
Surface-particle correlation function
Surface plasmon resonance
Surface-surface correlation function
Swiss-cheese model
Symmetric eﬀective-medium approximation
Symmetric hopping model
Taylor-Isard scaling constant
Tellegen’s theorems
Tessellation models
Tetrakaidecahedron lattice
769

Thin metal ﬁlms
Thin solid ﬁlms
Threshold non-linearity
Total correlation function
Transfer-matrix method
for resistor networks
for bond-bending model
for rigidity percolation
Transition rates
Two-level cut model
Two-site eﬀective-medium approximation
Two-site self-consistent approximation
Universality class
Universal scaling laws
Upper critical dimension
Variable-range hopping
Variational principles
Vegard’s law
Vibrational density of states
crossover between scalar and vector mod-
els
eﬀective-medium approximation
fracton regime
missing modes
numerical computations
phonon regime
scalar approximation
scaling properties
Strum sequence method
vector percolation model
Viscoelasticity (see Gelation; Gels)
Visscher-Bolsterli algorithm
Voronoi network
Vulcanization
Wigner-Seitz cell
William-Watts law
X-ray scattering
770

