
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars

For a complete listing of titles in the 
Artech House Radar Series,
turn to the back of this book.

Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars
Sergio Saponara
Maria Greco
Egidio Ragonese
Giuseppe Palmisano
Bruno Neri

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Cover design by Igor Valdman
ISBN 13: 978-1-60807-665-9
© 2014 ARTECH HOUSE
685 Canton Street
Norwood, MA 02062
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of this book 
may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from the publisher.
  All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have been 
appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this information. Use of 
a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service 
mark.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

v
Contents
	
Preface	
ix
	
Acknowledgments	
xiii
1	
Scenarios, Applications, and Requirements for 
	
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radar 	
1
	
References	
8
2	
Radar Integration Levels, Technology Trends, 
	
and Transceivers	
11
2.1	
Radar Integration Levels 	
11
2.1.1	
System-on-a-Single-Chip	
11
2.1.2	
System-in-a-Package	
12
2.1.3	
Single-Board Radar	
13
2.2	
Next Steps in Radar Miniaturization 	
14
2.3	
Integrated Antennas 	
15
2.4	
Semiconductor Technology and Devices for Integrated 
	
Radar 	
18
2.5	
Trends in IC Radar Design 	
21
2.5.1	
MIC and MMIC Technology	
21
2.5.2	
Si-Based Technology	
22

vi 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
2.6	
Radar Transceivers 	
25
	
References	
28
3	
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms for 
	
Radar Digital Signal Processing	
31
3.1	
Implementing Platforms and Performance Metrics for 
	
Radar Signal Processing 	
31
3.1.1	
Implementing Platforms for Radar Digital Signal 
	
Processing	
31
3.1.2	
Main Performance Metrics for Radar Implementing 
	
Platforms 	
34
3.2	
Hardware-Software Architecture for a Cost-Effective 
	
Radar	
38
3.3	
DSP and GPU for Radar Signal Processing	
40
3.3.1	
Vector DSP and the CELL Many-Core Computing 
	
Engine	
42
3.3.2	
GPU	
44
3.3.3	
VLIW DSP for Space Applications (DSPace) Processor	
48
3.4	
FPGA for Radar Signal Processing	
57
3.4.1	
Overview of FPGAs	
57
3.4.2	
High-End FPGA for Radar Signal Processing	
59
3.4.3	
Cost-Effective FPGA for Radar Signal Processing	
61
3.5	
Conclusions	
66
	
References	
68
4	
Radar for E-Health Applications: Signal Processing 
	
Perspective	
71
4.1	
General Characteristic of the Sensor and Its Functions	
71
4.2	
CW Doppler Radar for Health Care Monitoring	
72
4.3	
Choice of Carrier Frequency	
78
4.4	
Phase Noise and Range-Correlation	
78
4.5	
Front-End Architectures	
79
4.5.1	
Homodyne	
80

 
Contents 
 vii
4.5.2	
Double-Sideband Heterodyne	
80
4.6	
UWB Radar for Health Care Monitoring	
81
4.7	
UWB Radar with Correlator	
83
4.8	
Conclusions	
85
	
References	
86
5	
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing
	
Perspective	
89
5.1	
General Characteristic of the Sensor and Its Functions	
89
5.2	
Signal Processing for the Single Sensor	
91
5.2.1	
Range and Frequency Estimation	
93
5.2.2	
CFAR Processing	
97
5.2.3	
Azimuth Direction of Arrival Estimation	
100
5.2.4	
Target Tracking	
104
5.3	
SRR Radar	
108
5.4	
Conclusions	
111
	
References	
111
6	
Low-Power Radar Front-End for E-Health and Harbor 
	
Surveillance: Implementation Examples	
115
6.1	
Summary	
115
6.2	
Miniaturized Radar for E-Health	
116
6.3	
Microwave Integrated Circuit	
122
6.3.1	
The Substrates 	
124
6.3.2	
Design, Simulation, and Realization of Microwave 
	
Integrated Circuits 	
125
6.4	
Low-Cost Radar Prototype for Harbor Surveillance 	
126
6.4.1	
Feasibility Study and Dimensioning	
127
6.4.2	
Realization	
130
6.4.3	
Data Processing	
132
	
References	
134

viii 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
7	
Automotive Radar IC Design: 24-GHz UWB and 77-GHz
	
FMCW Implementation Examples	
137
7.1	
Silicon Technologies for Automotive Radar  	
138
7.2	
A Fully Integrated 24-GHz UWB SRR Sensor	
139
7.2.1	
Sensor Architecture	
140
7.2.2	
PLL Circuit Design	
143
7.2.3	
RX Circuit Design 	
146
7.2.4	
TX Circuit Design 	
152
7.2.5	
On-Chip Inductive Component Design	
155
7.2.6	
Radar Sensor Implementation	
159
7.3	
Transmitter Chipset for 24-/77-GHz Automotive 
	
Radar Sensors	
159
7.3.1	
Design of the 77-GHz TX Front-End	
162
7.3.2	
Experimental Results of the 77-GHz TX Front-End	
165
7.4	
W-Band TX Front-End for FMCW Automotive Radar	 167
7.4.1	
Design of the W-Band TX Front-End	
167
7.4.2	
Experimental Results of the W-Band TX Front-End	
174
7.5	
W-Band RX Front-End for FMCW Automotive Radar	 175
7.5.1	
Design of the W-Band RX Front-End	
178
7.5.2	
Experimental Results of the W-Band RX Front-End	
180
	
References	
183
8	
Conclusions 	
187
	
List of Acronyms	
191
	
About the Authors	
203
	
Index	
209

ix
Preface
The main idea behind this book is that radar, properly designed to minimize 
its power consumption, size, and cost, has the potential to become in the near 
future a ubiquitous contactless sensor for large market applications.
The large amount of business that can be derived from ubiquitous radar 
sensing justifies research from industry and academia in this direction.
The origin of this book was the plenary talk entitled “Advances in Tech­
nologies and Architectures for Low-Power and Highly-Integrated Ubiquitous 
Radars” that I was invited to give at the IEEE Radar Conference (Radarcon 
2012) in Atlanta, GA, in May 2012 and the tutorial entitled “RF and Digital 
Components for Radar” that was held at the same conference with my col­
league, IEEE Fellow Prof. Maria Greco.
According to the main theme of Radarcon 2012, “Ubiquitous Radar: Op­
portunity, Needs, and Solutions for Innovative Radar,” the plenary talk and the 
tutorial presented recent advances in silicon technologies, integrated hardware-
software architectures, and radar signal processing techniques enabling the real­
ization of highly integrated ubiquitous radars with low cost, compact size, and 
low power consumption.
Since then, accepting the invitation of Mark Walsh from Artech, the team 
of authors for the book has been enlarged to benefit of the experience acquired 
in several R&D laboratories in academia and industry: the signal processing and 
remote sensing lab, the RF and microwave IC lab, and the electronic systems 
lab at the University of Pisa (Professors Maria Greco, Bruno Neri, and Sergio 
Saponara, respectively) and the Radio Frequency Advanced Design Center (RF-
ADC), a joint research center of University of Catania and STMicroelectronics 
(Dr. Egidio Ragonese and Prof. Giuseppe Palmisano).
As discussed in the book, radar has some key characteristics that make it a 
unique contactless sensor solution with respect to other competing technologies 

x 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
for large market applications (laser, lidar, visible or infrared cameras, ultra­
sound, capacitive sensors, etc.). Radar is a sensor capable of operating in all 
weather conditions and gives to the user a multitude of information and data 
about the sensed target: if there is a target or not, its distance, its relative speed, 
and its direction of arrival. Moreover, radar works with nonionizing radiation 
and hence can be used for vital sign contactless monitoring in biomedical ap­
plications, and often it can operate in harsh environmental conditions (extreme 
temperatures, humidity, radiation levels, etc.).
To reach this goal, the approach to radar design and the performance 
required of radar should be different than traditional approaches.
The development of a conventional radar technique was mainly pushed 
by military applications during the Second World War with high-power, large-
sized, and long-distance radars. As well, when adopted for civil applications, 
radar is typically a complex system where the design driver is the optimization 
of its performance rather than the minimization of its cost, size, weight, and 
power consumption.
As a consequence, radar is a niche market technology for professional 
applications at the state of the art. To maximize the achievable performance, 
a “traditional” radar is typically implemented as the interconnection of a set 
of multiple circuit boards, using high-performance devices, often custom-
designed, by mixing different technologies since for each radar subsystem the 
most suitable technology has to be used.
In this book, we discuss how a different approach can be followed for 
highly integrated low-power radar design: similarly to other large market elec­
tronic design solutions, standard and commercial devices/technologies can be 
used for radar. The trend should be toward using the same technology for all 
radar subsystems with the intent of a system-on-chip or system-in-package inte­
gration. The aim of the radar designer should not be to maximize radar perfor­
mance but to optimize the trade-off between the achievable performance and 
the relevant cost, size, and power consumption.
Obviously, an integrated low-power radar aims at a system-level perfor­
mance that is quite different from that of conventional radars. Indeed, the 
maximum operating distance can range from 1m (e.g., in the case of contactless 
measure of heart rate or breath rate) to maximum 100m to 200m (long-range 
automotive radar for automatic cruise control). The transmitted power is often 
below 20 dBm (100 mW). The cross section of the targets (that can be small 
yachts, cars, pedestrians, bicycles, or parts of the body in the case of biomedical 
applications) can be from some cm2 to a few m2. The size of the radar should 
be less than 10 cm per side so that the radar can easily be mounted behind the 
front cover of a car in automotive applications or can be a handheld device for 
other applications. Short wavelengths should be adopted to ease the miniatur­
ization process.

 
Preface 
xi
As analyzed in the book at the algorithmic level, the reader is not required 
to have state-of-the-art radar signal processing know-how. Rather, selection and 
optimization of known pulsed or continuous-wave techniques for application 
scenarios is required where the final aim is not the maximum achievable per­
formance but providing a service with low cost, low power consumption, and 
low size. 
Implementation examples proposed in the book will show that what is 
discussed is not limited to theory but practical implementations are already 
possible for a lot of medium- or large-volume market applications: automotive 
short-range radars for car parking, side-crash warning, collision warning, blind-
spot detection and stop and go control in urban scenarios; automotive long-
range radar for adaptive cruise control; short-range radars for contactless heart 
and pulmonary monitoring in e-health applications; and networks of low-cost 
radars in a harbor for small yachts.
In conclusion, the authors hope that the content of the eight chapters of 
the book will provide the readers with interesting samples of present research 
and implementation activities on emerging ubiquitous radar applications. 

Prof. Sergio Saponara
May 2014


xiii
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the contribution of Riccardo Massini and of the 
research group of Professors Fabrizio Berizzi and Enzo Dalle Mese, all from 
University of Pisa, Italy, for the work on the radar for traffic harbor control 
discussed in Chapter 6.
For the 24- to 77-GHz radar implementation examples discussed in 
Chapter 7, the authors acknowledge the contribution of the millimeter-wave 
research team of the RF-ADC, especially of Dr. Angelo Scuderi (now with 
STMicroelectronics, Catania), Dr. Giuseppina Sapone (now with Infineon 
Technologies, Munich), and Dr. Vittorio Giammello (now with STMicroelec­
tronics, Catania).
The authors are very grateful to the reviewers who provided valuable com­
ments and suggestions to improve the quality of the book.
They also acknowledge the Artech team, particularly Mark Walsh and 
Aileen Storry, for their careful support.


1
1
Scenarios, Applications, and 
Requirements for Highly Integrated Low-
Power Radar 
The basis of radio detection and ranging (radar) theory and techniques dates 
back to the beginning of the twentieth century. The development of such tech­
nology was mainly pushed by military applications during the Second World 
War with high-power (up to several kilowatts and more), large-size, and long-
distance radars. 
The radar technique has been adopted also for civil applications (e.g., 
long-range radar (LRR) for obstacle detection on-board airplanes and ships, 
traffic control in airports, long-distance measurements, and remote sensing). 
These examples of civil radar applications still refer to cumbersome systems, 
where the design drivers are typically the optimization of radar performances 
while its cost, size, weight, and power consumption are not the key issues. 
As a matter of fact traditional radar technology is not a “consumer” tech­
nology with a large volume market where devices are available at low cost and 
low power consumption and entire systems are embedded in a single electronic 
board or chip. Rather, radar technology is a niche market technology for profes­
sional applications. 
At the state of the art, a radar is typically realized as the interconnection of 
a set of multiple circuit boards [1], each dedicated to a specific subsystem: RF 
or microwave front-end with antenna, passives, and switch, often with different 
boards for transmitter and receiver; analog to digital (A/D) and digital to analog 
(D/A) converter boards; baseband signal processing board; power supply board; 
and user interface board.

2 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
To optimize the achievable performances, a radar typically relies on high-
performance devices, often custom designed, mixing different implementation 
technologies since for each radar subsystem the most suited technology is used.
This approach is completely different from large-market electronic de­
signs, where standard and commercial devices are used and the trend is us­
ing the same technology for all subsystems, and where the aim is optimizing 
the trade-off between achievable performances and the relevant cost, size, and 
power. 
For example, analog front-end electronics for traditional radar relies 
on high-performance III-V devices such as high electron mobility transistors 
(HEMT) in GaAs or InP materials [2, 3]. These technologies allow for high-fre­
quency applications, maximizing circuit metrics such as noise figure, amplifier 
gain, and linearity transmitter power; as a consequence, high-end performances 
at the device/circuit level allow for optimal radar performance at the system 
level (target distance, sensitivity, false alarm rate, and so on). However the cost 
and design time for III-V–based technologies is much higher than standard 
silicon transistor solutions such as complementary metal-oxide semiconductor 
(CMOS) and can be sustained only for professional markets (e.g., defense).
Similarly, the baseband digital signal processing of radar high-perfor­
mance computing platforms such as GPUs or application-specific integrated 
circuits (ASIC) are often adopted at the state of the art; unfortunately, their 
cost and power consumption is much higher than embedded platforms used in 
consumer electronics.
Recent advances in silicon technologies and electronic design methods 
make possible the realization of highly integrated radars with low cost, compact 
size, and low power consumption with achievable performances that can be 
enough for a large set of applications [4–45] such as automotive short-range 
radars (SRRs) for car parking, side-crash warning, collision warning, blind-
spot detection and “stop and go” control in urban scenarios; automotive LRR 
for adaptive cruise control (ACC); SRR for contactless heart and pulmonary 
monitoring in e-health applications; SRR for vital signs detection in case of 
natural disasters or war scenarios; distance measurements in industrial automa­
tion; millimeter-wave body scanner for security (e.g., in airports and banks); 
networks of low-cost radars for traffic control in railway crossing or in a small 
harbor for small yachts. 
So, the aim of the book is presenting emerging technologies, new circuits 
solutions, and platform implementations (Chapters 2 and 3) that can enable 
the widespread adoption of radar for new civil and defense applications. Some 
example applications for contactless vital signs detection (heart rate and breath 
rate), harbor traffic control, and automotive driver assistance will be discussed 
as case studies in Chapters 6 and 7.

 
Scenarios, Applications, and Requirements 
3
As will be further discussed in the book (Chapters 4 and 5) the selection 
and optimization of known pulsed or continuous-wave techniques for applica­
tion scenarios at the alogrithmic level is required where the final aim is not 
achieving the maximum possible performances but reaching sufficient perfor­
mances to provide a service with low cost, low power consumption, and small 
size. 
The question of whether there is a large volume market for radars in 
the future arises. Similarly, is important to highlight which are the key char­
acteristics that make radar a unique solution with respect to other competing 
technologies. 
Some answers can be derived by analyzing one of the possible large-vol­
ume target applications of low-power radar: the automotive scenario.
According to forecast market analysis [46, 47], in 2014, 7% of all vehicles 
sold worldwide, particularly in Europe, Japan, and the United States, will be 
equipped with radar systems with a market value of several billions of U.S. 
dollars. In a few years, this value can grow to the order of 10% to 20% of new 
cars with at least two different radar devices (one SRR covering the rear and 
one LRR covering the front) mounted on each car. This market forecast can 
become real if the cost for the customer of an automotive radar will be less than 
$1,000; thus, radars will be mounted not only on top models of premiums car 
brands but also for medium-range cars. The size of the radar should be less than 
10 cm for each side so that a radar can be easily mounted behind the front cover 
of a car. 
As will be discussed in subsequent chapters, for such a radar, the modula­
tion schemes can be pulsed ultrawideband (UWB) for SRR applications within 
10m, and frequency modulated continuous wave (FMCW) for mid- and long-
range applications as high as several hundreds of meters. 
SRRs operate below 10 GHz or around 24 GHz, while LRRs operate at 
higher frequencies, such as 77 to 81 GHz, where there are less strict limitations 
in terms of output power spectral density (PSD) [46, 48]. 
Figure 1.1 reports that for European Telecommunications Standards In­
stitute (ETSI) and Federal Communications Commission (FCC) standards, 
the equivalent isotropically radiated power (EIRP) spectral density expressed in 
dBm/MHz [46, 47]. Note that at 77 GHz there is a path loss of roughly 150 dB 
at 100m distance, and hence high-gain antennas and high-sensitivity receivers 
are required for LRR applications. 
The output transmitted power of integrated radars typically amounts to 
few dBm. For power levels on the order of watts, or higher, off-chip power 
amplifiers are needed. 
Figure 1.2 shows the main characteristics of SRR and LRR automotive 
systems: modulation used (Mod.), center frequency (Freq.) and bandwidth 
(BW), antenna aperture angle (θ), ranging distance (Range) and resolution 

4 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
(Resol.), peak power, and PSD. The values of peak power and PSD refer to the 
limits adopted in Germany [46].
The success of such applications in large-volume markets requires at least 
the single board integration of mm-wave radar transceiver integrated circuit 
(IC) and the baseband digital signal processor IC.
The characteristics highlighted for automotive radar can be applied also 
for other ubiquitous low-power applications. Hence for the target of this book:
Figure 1.2  Automotive radar specifications.
Figure 1.1  EIRP power spectral density in dBm/MHz in ETSI and FCC.

 
Scenarios, Applications, and Requirements 
5
• The maximum distance to reach can be less than 1m (e.g., in case of 
contactless measure of heart rate or breath rate) to a maximum of 100 to 
200m (long range automotive radar for automatic cruise control);
• The transmitted power is below 20 dB, often in the range of 10 to 15 
dBm;
• The cross section of the targets (small yachts, cars, pedestrians, bicycles, 
etc.)  can be from some cm2 to few m2;
• Multiple channels can be useful for diversity channel gain or to extract 
angle information;
• Short wavelength should be adopted to ease the miniaturization process 
(e.g., the wavelength is only 2.9 mm at 77 GHz).
At wavelengths of few millimeters, there is potential for high miniaturiza­
tion, even for antenna integration.
The trend is designing radar system in the following spectrum portions 
(see Figures 1.3 and 1.4):
• 77–81 GHz suited for LRR and SRR;
• 60 GHz reserved for short-range radio.
Figure 1.3  Typical radar frequencies within the electromagnetic spectrum.

6 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Today, thanks to technology scaling, silicon (Si)-based technologies are 
offering good characteristics at microwaves and mm-waves. Due to high at­
tenuation, the 60-GHz band (V band), available worldwide for free, is reserved 
for short communication. At 77–81 GHz (W band), the attenuation is lower; 
hence, a higher distance can be reached, and there are good opportunities for 
both LRR and SRR in mm-wave.
It is worth noting that, with respect to other technologies that can be used 
for contactless sensing, a radar has several advantages: 
• A radar can operate in all weather conditions, in bad light conditions, 
during night and day, while, for example, camera-based systems for ob­
stacle detection have poor performance in bad light conditions or must 
use a complex multispectral array of sensors (a camera operating in the 
visible spectrum, plus a camera operating in the near infrared spectrum, 
and finally a camera operating in the far infrared spectrum portion).
• A radar allows for contactless sensing and no separate line-of-sight sens­
ing, unlike optical or photonic techniques that need a line-of-sight cou­
pling.
• A radar is a nonionizing radiation and hence can be used also for bio­
medical applications, such as heart rate and breath rate contactless mea­
surement.
• A radar has ground-penetrating capabilities.
• A radar allows for multiparameter sensing, since it can detect whether or 
not there is a target and can reveal the distance, the relative speed, and 
the direction of arrival (many sensors give only one form of information). 
Figure 1.4  Opportunities of radar at mm-waves (60 GHz and 77–81 GHz).

 
Scenarios, Applications, and Requirements 
7
In this book, the state of the art of design techniques, implementing plat­
forms, and applications of highly integrated low-power radar will be described. 
Particularly, Chapter 2, “Radar Integration Levels, Technology Trends, and 
Transceivers,” will discuss the possible radar integration levels; the evolution 
in semiconductor technologies, active devices (e.g., transistors), and passive 
devices (e.g., antennas, waveguide, filters); and integrated transceivers (high-
frequency analog radar front-end at both receiver and transmitter sides) toward 
a deep miniaturization of radar. 
Chapter 3, “Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms for Radar Digi­
tal Signal Processing,” deals with implementing platforms and performance 
metrics for radar signal processing. A hardware-software architecture for a 
cost-effective radar baseband digital signal processing (DSP) will be presented 
after analyzing and comparing different competing solutions such as DSP pro­
cessors, graphics processing unit (GPU), multicore general purpose processor 
(GPP), ASICs, and field programmable gate array (FPGAs).
Chapter 4, “Radar for E-Health Applications: Signal Processing Perspec­
tive,” provides an algorithmic and system view of an integrated radar but for 
vital signs monitoring applications, particularly the contactless monitoring of 
heart rate and breath rate.
Chapter 5, “Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Per­
spective,” gives a system and algorithmic view of radar sensors for automotive 
systems, their characteristics, and their functions. The signal processing chain 
for a single 77-GHz FMCW radar sensor will be analyzed in detail: general 
scheme, equations for range and frequency estimation, constant false alarm rate 
(CFAR) processing, directions on arrival estimation, and target tracking.
Chapter 6, “Low-Power Radar Front End for E-Health and Harbor Sur­
veillance: Implementation Examples,” presents some circuital solutions for two 
application case studies of a low power integrated radar device. The first is a 
wearable radar—noninvasive continuous hearth monitoring (NIHM)—for vi­
tal function monitoring based on a pulsed radar device integrated in a single-
chip in standard CMOS silicon technology.
The second is a frequency modulated continuous wave (FMCW) radar 
for harbor surveillance integrated at board level, which is realized using micro­
wave integrated circuit (MIC) technology. 
Chapter 7, “Automotive Radar IC Design: 24-GHz UWB and 77-GHz 
FMCW Implementation Examples,” presents integrated circuits solutions for 
UWB 24-GHz radar for short-range automotive applications and 77-GHz 
FMCW radar for long range applications. All the circuits presented in this 
chapter are integrated in a silicon-germanium (SiGe) BiCMOS technology.
Finally, conclusions are drawn in Chapter 8.

8 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
References
[1]	 Skolnik, M., Radar Handbook, 3d Ed, New York: McGraw Hill, 2008. 
[2]	 Cooke, M., “Technology Focus: Indium Phosphide Semiconductor,” Today Compounds & 
Advanced Silicon, Vol. 1, No. 3, 2006, pp. 28–31.
[3]	 Kang, Dong Min, et al., “A 77-GHz Automotive Radar MMIC Chip Set Fabricated by a 
0.15-μm MHEMT Technology,” IEEE IMWS, pp. 2111–2114.
[4]	 Lee, J., Y.-A. Li, M.-H. Hung, and S.-J. Huang, “A Fully-Integrated 77-GHz FMCW 
Radar Transceiver in 65-nm CMOS Technology,” IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, Vol. 45, No. 
12, 2010, pp. 2746–2756.
[5]	 Li, M., R. Evans, E. Skafidas, and B. Moran, “Radar-on-a-Chip (ROACH),” IEEE Radar 
Conference, 2010, pp. 1224–1228.
[6]	 Jahn, M., A. Stelzer, and A. Hamidipour, “Highly Integrated 79, 94, and 120-GHz SiGe 
Radar Frontends,” IEEE MTT-S Inter. Microwave Symp., 2010, pp. 1324–1327.
[7]	 Mitomo, T., et al., “A 77-GHz 90-nm CMOS Transceiver for FMCW Radar Applica­
tions,” IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, Vol. 45, No. 4, pp. 928–937, 2010.
[8]	 Ragonese, E., et al., “A Fully Integrated 24GHz UWB Radar Sensor for Automotive Ap­
plications,” IEEE ISSCC 2009, pp. 306–307.
[9]	 Moquillon, L., et al., “Low-Cost Fully Integrated BiCMOS Transceiver for Pulsed 24-
GHz Automotive Radar Sensors,” IEEE CICC 2008, pp. 475–478.
[10]	 Winker, V., et al., “79GHz Automotive Short Range Radar Sensor Based on Single-Chip 
SiGe-Transceivers,” EuRAD 2008, pp. 459–462.
[11]	 Richter, M. D., et al., “77 GHz Automotive Digital Beamforming Radar with SiGe 
Chipset,” German Microwave Conf. 2010, pp. 210–213.
[12]	 Jain, V., et al., “A Single-Chip Dual-Band 22-to-29GHz/77-to-81GHz BiCMOS 
Transceiver for Automotive Radars,” IEEE ISSCC 2009, pp. 308–309, 309a.
[13]	 Nagasaku, T., et al., “77GHz Low-Cost Single-Chip Radar Sensor for Automotive Ground 
Speed Detection,” IEEE CISC’08, pp. 1–4.
[14]	 Huyn, E., et al., “Design and Implementation of Automotive 77GHz FMCW Radar 
System Based on DSP and FPGA,” IEEE ICCE 2011, pp. 517–518.
[15]	 Kim, Sang-Dong, et al., “Design and Implementation of a Full-Digital Pulse-Doppler 
Radar System for Automotive Applications,” IEEE ICCE 2011, pp. 563–564.
[16]	 Zito, D., D. Pepe, B. Neri, and D. De Rossi, et al., “Wearable System-on-a-Chip UWB 
Radar for Health Care and Its Application to the Safety Improvement of Emergency 
Operators,” IEEE EMBS 2007, pp. 2651–2654.
[17]	 Li, Changzhi, Xiaogang Yu, Chien-Ming Lee, and Dong Li, et al., “High-Sensitivity 
Software-Configurable 5.8-GHz Radar Sensor Receiver Chip in 0.13-μm CMOS for 
Noncontact Vital Sign Detection,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 58, 
No. 5, 2010, pp. 1410–1419.

 
Scenarios, Applications, and Requirements 
9
[18]	 Li, Changzhi, Xiaogang Yu, Dong Li, and Lixin Ran, et al., “Software Configurable 
5.8-GHz Radar Sensor Receiver Chip in 0.13 µm CMOS for Non-Contact Vital Sign 
Detection,” IEEE RFIC 2009, pp. 97–100.
[19]	 Yoon, Yeo-Sun, et al., “MVDR Beamforming for Through-the-Wall Radar Imaging,” 
IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems, Vol. 47, No. 1, 2011, pp. 347–366.
[20]	 Dallinger, A., et al., “Coherent Millimeter-Wave Imaging for Security Applications,” IEEE 
Radar Conference, 2007, pp. 28–31.
[21]	 Zito, D., D. Pepe, B. Neri, and D. De Rossi, et al., “Wearable System-on-a-Chip Pulse 
Radar Sensors for the Health Care: System Overview,” IEEE AINAW, 2007, pp. 766–769.
[22]	 Montusclat, S., F. Gianesello, and D. Gloria, “Silicon Integrated Antenna Substrate 
Benchmarking for MMW Wireless Applications in Advanced CMOS Technologies,” 
EuCAP, 2006, p. 680.
[23]	 Fishler, E., et al, “MIMO Radar: An Idea Whose Time Has Come,” IEEE Radar Conference, 
2004, pp. 71–78.
[24]	 Gogineni, S., et al., “Monopulse MIMO Radar for Target Tracking,” IEEE Trans. Aerospace 
and Electronic Systems, Vol. 47, No. 1, 2011, pp. 755–768.
[25]	 Pratt, G. T., “Subspace Optimization in Centralized Noncoherent MIMO Radar,” IEEE 
Trans. on Aerospace and Electr. Syst., Vol. 47, No. 2, 2011, pp. 1230–1240.
[26]	 Grossi, E., et al., “Robust Waveform Design for MIMO Radars,” IEEE Trans. on Signal 
Processing, 2011.
[27]	 Maoz, B., L. Reynolds, and A. Oki, “FM-CW Radar on a Single GaAs/AlGaAs HBT 
MMIC Chip,” Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp., 1991, pp. 3–6.
[28]	 Hafez, et al., “12.5 nm Base Pseudomorphic Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors Achieving 
fT = 710 GHz and fMAX = 340 GHz,” Appl. Phys. Lett., Vol. 87, 2005.
[29]	 Komijani, A., et al., “A 24-GHz, 14.5-dBm Fully-Integrated Power Amplifier in 0.18 μm 
CMOS,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 40, No.. 9, Sept. 2005, pp. 1901–1908.
[30]	 La Rocca, T., et al., “60 GHz CMOS Amplifiers Using Transformer-Coupling and 
Artificial Dielectric Differential Transmission Lines for Compact Design,” IEEE J. Solid-
State Circuits, Vol. 44, No. 5, May 2009, pp. 1425–1435.
[31]	 Yao, T., et al., “Algorithmic Design of CMOS LNAs and PAs for 60-GHz Radio,” IEEE J. 
Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 42, No. 5, 2007, pp. 1044–1057.
[32]	 Suzuki, T., et al., “60 and 77 GHz Power Amplifiers in Standard 90 nm CMOS,” IEEE 
ISSCC, Feb. 2008, pp. 562–563.
[33]	 Seo, M., et al., “A 1.1 V 150 GHz Amplifier with 8 dB Gain and 6 dBm Saturated Output 
Power in Standard Digital 65 nm CMOS Using Dummy Pre-Filled Microstrip Lines,” 
IEEE ISSCC 2009, pp. 484–485.
[34]	 Shaeffer, D., et al., “A 1.5-V, 1.5-GHz CMOS Low Noise Amplifier,” IEEE J. Solid-State 
Circuits, Vol. 32, No. 5, May 1997, pp. 745–759.
[35]	 Ismail, A., et al., “A 3–10-GHz Low-Noise Amplifier with Wideband LC-Ladder Matching 
Network,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 39, No. 12, Dec. 2004, pp. 2269–2277.

10 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
[36]	 Adabi, E., et al., “30 GHz CMOS Low Noise Amplifier,” in RFIC Symp. Dig., Jun. 2007, 
pp. 625–628.
[37]	 Ashfar, B., et al., “A Robust 24 mW 60 GHz Receiver in 90nm Standard CMOS,” IEEE 
ISSCC, 2008, pp. 182–183.
[38]	 Berenguer, R., et al., “A 43.5 mW 77 GHz Receiver Front-End in 65 nm CMOS Suitable 
for FMCW Automotive Radar,” IEEE CICC 2010, pp. 1–4.
[39]	 Chowdhury, D., et al., “A Single-Chip Highly Linear 2.4 GHz 30 dBm Power Amplifier 
in 90 nm CMOS,” IEEE ISSCC 2009, pp. 378–379.
[40]	 Haldi, P., et al., “A 5.8 GHz 1 V Linear Power Amplifier Using a Novel On-Chip 
Transformer Power Combiner in Standard 90 nm CMOS,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, 
Vol. 43, No. 5, 2008, pp. 1054–1063.
[41]	 Alam, S. K., “A Novel 2.4 GHz CMOS Variable Gain Low Noise Amplifier Design for 
Bluetooth and Wireless LAN Applications,” IEEE ICCE’07, pp.1–2.
[42]	 Wang, S., and B. Z. Huang, “A High Gain CMOS LNA fro 2.4/5.2 GHz WLAN 
Applications,” Progress in Electromagnetic Res., Vol. 21, 2011, pp. 155–167.
[43]	 Zito, D., et al., “Feasibility Study of a Low-Cost System-on-a-Chip UWB Pulse Radar on 
Silicon for the Heart Monitoring,” IEEE IWDDDC, 2007, pp. 32–36.
[44]	 Chew, K. W., et al., “Impact of Device Scaling on the 1/f Noise Performance of Deep 
Sub-Micrometer Thin Gate Oxide CMOS Devices,” Solid State Electronics, 2006, pp. 
1219–1226.
[45]	 Zito, D., et al., “A 90nm CMOS SoC UWB Pulse Radar for Respiratory Rate Monitoring,” 
IEEE ISSCC, Feb. 2011, pp. 40–41.
[46]	 Goppelt, M., H.-L. Blocher, and W. Menze, “Automotive Radar—Investigation of Mutual 
Interference Mechanisms,” Adv. Radio Sci., Vol. 8, 2010, pp. 55–60.
[47]	 Hoetzer, D., et al., “Automotive Radar and Vision Systems—Ready for the Mass Volume 
Market,” Vehicle Dynamics Expo, Oct. 2008.
[48]	 Australian Communications Authority, RF Planning Group, “A Review of Automotive 
Radar Systems—Devices and Regulatory Frameworks,” Doc. SP4/01, 2001.

11
2
Radar Integration Levels, Technology 
Trends, and Transceivers
2.1  Radar Integration Levels 
Different levels of integration are possible for a low-power radar, overcoming 
state-of-the-art solutions where a radar is typically realized as the interconnec­
tion of a set of multiple circuit boards [1], each dedicated to a specific subsys­
tem (RF or microwave front-end with antenna, passives, switch, often with 
different boards for transmitter and receiver; A/D and D/A board; baseband 
signal processing board; power supply board; user interface board).
Radar integration can be from single-board level to single-chip level with 
increasing miniaturization but also increased technology complexity [2, 3] (see 
Figure 2.1). As a matter of fact, the three following solutions can be addressed, 
with different trade-offs between performance and implementation cost.
2.1.1  System-on-a-Single-Chip
System-on-a-single-chip (SoC) is where the radar is completely contained in a 
single chip. This solution can allow for the minimum size and weight but also 
is the most complex to be realized since a radar requires different types of elec­
tronic devices (active and passive devices, analog and digital components, low-
noise receivers but also a power transmitter) that usually have different optimal 
target technology [4–7]. 
This approach would require huge investments and high nonrecurring 
engineering costs and hence is suitable only for large-volume productions, as 

12 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
in consumer electronics (e.g., tablets, smart phones, game consoles). However 
radar is not a large-volume consumer application. 
Moreover, having all radar devices on the same chip can cause problems 
of interference and noise coupling between power and low-noise circuitry, be­
tween analog and digital signal domains. The whole radar system performance 
can be seriously reduced.
2.1.2  System-in-a-Package
System-in-a-package (SiP) is where the radar is realized using multiple chips but 
embedded in a single package. With respect to the previous SoC solution, with 
the SiP approach active (analog and digital) devices can be realized as integrated 
circuits on multiple cores, each of them optimized for a specific radar subsystem 
and assembled on the same substrate within the single package; passive devices 
and antenna can be realized exploiting packaging technology.
Different SIP technology options are available or are under research for 
mm-wave low-power radar or radio applications such as integrated substrate 
and/or multichip module (MCM), even 3D, or low-temperature cofired ce­
ramic (LTCC) [8–11].
Thanks to the SiP approach, interference and noise coupling problems 
among the radar subsystems in SoC can be reduced; the achievable performance 
in terms of miniaturization level is still good compared to state-of-the-art 
Figure 2.1  Integration domains for system-on-a-single-chip and system-in-a-package radar.

 
Radar Integration Levels, Technology Trends, and Transceivers 
13
multiboard radar. The production volume required for a SIP solution to be 
economically convenient is lower than with fully integrated SoC. 
Obviously, low size and low power consumption entail low transmit pow­
er; this limits the achievable target distance. Therefore, a highly miniaturized 
radar is de facto a short-range radar. Unless very low power and low antenna 
gain are required, the SiP approach is a more viable solution for radar than fully 
integrated SoC approach.
2.1.3  Single-Board Radar
Single-board radar is where the system is realized using multiple integrated cir­
cuits mounted on a single board. Compared to SoC and SiP, this approach is 
the easiest to achieve and the investment required is not so high; hence, it is 
possible for low-medium production volume as we can expect for radar market.
With a single-board radar approach, all subsystems can be realized using a 
dedicated integrated circuit with its own package (e.g., CMOS silicon technol­
ogy can be used for A/D and D/A conversion and baseband digital signal pro­
cessing), monolithic microwave integrated circuits (MMIC) can be dedicated 
to the analog RF and microwave parts of the transceivers to reach the desired 
targets in terms of noise, gain, and linearity. 
All the integrated circuits are then assembled on a single board where pas­
sive devices can also be added as discrete devices or as integrated device (e.g., 
using the microstrip/strip-line approach). 
Summarizing, increasing integration levels has some advantages and other 
disadvantages:
• Advantages of highly integrated radar:
• Component assembly minimized;
• Increasing reliability;
• Increased operating lifetime;
• Small size, small weight, low power consumption;
• Increased reproducibility and lower cost for large volume production.
• Disadvantages of highly integrated radar:
• IC design has high nonrecurring costs (CAD tools and foundry cost, 
design time, and team design cost) and hence cost is minimized only 
for large volume production;
• A single technology cannot offer optimal performance for all radar 
subsystems (e.g., CMOS technology is optimal for baseband DSP, 
not for antenna or RF circuits);
• Low transmit power limits possible applications to short range ones.

14 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
2.2  Next Steps in Radar Miniaturization 
Following the analysis in Section 2.1, today radars with high transmit pow­
er and large aperture antenna are realized by assembling multiple electronic 
boards, each optimized for a specific subsystem (antenna subsystem with feed, 
reflectors, and scanning modules; traveling wave tubes or Klystron as power 
amplifier modules; MMIC for TX/RX module; multiple boards for digitization 
and radar signal processing; user interface and networking) while the next step, 
for low-power ubiquitous radar, is assembling all subsystems on the same single 
printed circuit board (PCB) realizing a radar-system-on-a board.
A radar-system-on-a-board will assemble on the same board at least the 
following components [3]:
• A single chip of a fraction of 1 cm2 (an integrated radar transceiver 
occupying roughly 9 mm2 will be shown in Chapter 7) integrating the 
whole transmit (TX) and receive (RX) chains operating in the RF or 
mm-wave domain. CMOS or SiGe or MMIC in III-V technologies can 
be used for this purpose.
• Solid-state power amplifier (depending on the transmit power needed). 
• A single chip for baseband digital signal processing that can be a digital 
signal processor (DSP), an FPGA, or a custom IC in CMOS technology 
supporting the following main tasks: waveform generation, matched-
filtered, pulse compression, range/speed ambiguities resolution, CFAR 
technique, and so on.
• Memory modules, both random access memory (RAM) for data stor­
age while the radar system is on and nonvolatile memories (e.g., flash 
devices) to store instruction code and data to be reused when the radar 
is switched off.
• Analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog (ADC/DAC) converters (if not 
already integrated in the custom IC, CMOS technology).
• Antenna (printed on the PCB board if gain, bandwidth, efficiency are 
enough).
For a midterm evolution of low-power radar we have to consider that 
thanks to huge investments from telecom businesses and the consequent sub­
micron technology scaling, CMOS technology is providing good performance 
for RF and mm-wave low-power transceivers. 
The silicon on insulator version, CMOS silicon on insulator (SOI), of­
fers further improved performance at high frequencies and can be suitable for 

 
Radar Integration Levels, Technology Trends, and Transceivers 
15
the realization of passive components (inductors, capacitors, even antennas op­
erating at V/W bands if few dB gain are enough) [12–14]. 
The trend for the midterm future is hence further increasing the min­
iaturization level with respect to the radar-system-on-a-board integrating the 
single-chip radar transceiver plus the A/D and D/A converters and part of the 
DSP chain, such as a fast Fouier transfer (FFT) processor. Only the power am­
plifier and the antenna will be off-chip. 
Next, we address a review of the technology trends for the integration of 
the most challenging blocks, like antenna and RF transceivers. A detailed analy­
sis of the implementing platforms for digital radar baseband is then detailed in 
Chapter 3.
2.3  Integrated Antennas 
One of the main challenges in the move toward high-miniaturized radar sys­
tems is integrating the antenna. At the state of the art radar antennas are typi­
cally realized off-chip. 
Long-range radar (LRR) automotive applications require antennas with 
high gain and high directivity, which cannot be realized on-chip. To reach a 
target distance of several hundred meters, a LRR would require an antenna gain 
up to 20–25 dB, achieved with a patch or horn or dish antenna in literature 
[15]. 
Pulsed radars can use the same antenna in time-division as the TX side 
and RX side. FMCW radars, such those analyzed from a theoretical and experi­
mental perspective in Chapters 5, 6, and 7, use separate TX and RX antennas. 
By using an antenna array, a radar scanning effect can be obtained by 
realizing beam-forming in the analog domain, through phase shifters, or in 
the digital domain through digital beam-forming. Unlike beam-forming, which 
presumes a high correlation between signals either transmitted or received by 
an array, the multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) concept exploits the in­
dependence between signals at the antenna array elements to improve detection 
performance.
For radars operating at few GHz frequencies, the wavelength amounts to 
several cm; hence, it is not convenient to integrate the antenna.
The higher the frequency, the lower the wavelength and hence realizing an 
integrated antenna, even on chip, becomes feasible: as an example, for 77-GHz 
radar or 60-GHz radio λ is few mm.
The antenna can be integrated at different levels:
• At board level [printed antenna on printed circuit boards (PCB)]. In 
the last generation of 77-GHz automotive LRR by Bosch, using INFI­

16 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
NEON chipset, as described by J. Hasch et al. in a special issue of IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Technique 2012 [4], based on the 
FMCW principle, four single microstrip patch antennas are combined 
with parasitic elements to adjust bandwidth and beamwidth. The four 
antenna elements are tilted by 45 degrees to reduce interference from 
coming cars. The antenna elements in the Bosch solutions serve as feeds 
for a further dielectric lens resulting in four narrow beams.
• At package level (e.g., using low-temperature cofired ceramic (LTCC) 
technology to realize multilayer circuits with integrated passive compo­
nents, including the antenna). An LTCC-integrated example of a CW-
radar antenna plus transceiver for near-field high accuracy measures in 
industrial scenarios has been proposed by C. Rusch et al. at IEEE Eu­
CAP’11.
• At chip level using MMIC or silicon on insulator technologies. Lots 
of on-chip antenna designs at 60 GHz for short-range consumer radio 
have already been proposed in the past years by academia and industry: 
as an example, a double-slot antenna at 60 GHz by Huei Wang et al. at 
IEEE SIRF 2010 [16] or complete V-band transmitter with integrated 
antenna in a special issue in IEEE Microwave magazine in 2009 [17].
However there is lot of work still to do to achieve the high antenna gain 
required by radar systems on a small, easily fabricated chip.
The antenna conceived for 60-GHz consumer radio applications have 
much less stringent performance than for typical radar systems. The 60-GHz 
short-range radio applications for consumer applications are typically charac­
terized by low gain antenna with broad beamwidth. 
Better performance can be achieved using SOI technology; antennas inte­
grated in SOI devices have been recently proposed in literature for 60 GHz and 
77 GHz with a gain still limited to few dB [11, 12].
In SOI technology, the high resistivity of the substrate on which n- and 
p- metal-oxide-semidconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) are created 
allows dielectric isolation of circuit elements. Therefore, junction capacitances 
are reduced, increasing maximum operating frequency, and there is a reduced 
noise coupling between digital and analog parts integrated in the same chip. 
The performances of coplanar stripline (CPS), coplanar waveguide 
(CPW), or antennas in SOI CMOS are improved due to a reduced amount of 
energy loss in the supporting substrate.
For example, some works by STMicroelectronics (F. Gianesello et al. 
in IEEE SOI 2010 conference) show the incidence of substrate resistivity on 
achievable radiation efficiency and gain of an integrated antenna: moving from 
bulk semiconductor to SOI technology (substrate resistivity of bulk 20 Ω/cm 

 
Radar Integration Levels, Technology Trends, and Transceivers 
17
to substrate resistivity of SOI 1000 Ω/cm) the radiation efficiency of a designed 
antenna grows from a poor level of 6% to roughly 25%. The antenna gain 
grows from –8 dBi to almost 0 dBi when increasing the substrate resistivity 
from bulk CMOS to SOI CMOS.
At the University of Pisa, we have recently designed integrated antennas 
in 65-nm CMOS bulk and 65-nm CMOS SOI technology: an inverted-F an­
tenna, a double-slot antenna, and a bow-tie antenna. The double-slot antenna 
in 65-nm CMOS SOI technology with coplanar waveguide feed achieves a gain 
of 4.4 dBi at 60 GHz and has an area occupation of few mm2. The CMOS bulk 
technology has lower cost, but the achievable antenna performance is lower. 
With respect to the double slot, the inverted-F antenna has lower area occupa­
tion but lower gain while the bow-tie antenna has large bandwidth. 
Figure 2.2 shows the achievable radiation pattern and gain for the double-
slot integrated antenna designed at the University of Pisa in CMOS 65-nm SOI 
technology (HFSS 3D electromagnetic simulator).
Figure 2.3 shows the achievable S11 performance and the input imped­
ance as a function of frequency for the double-slot integrated antenna designed 
at the University of Pisa in CMOS 65-nm SOI technology (HFSS 3D electro­
magnetic simulator). 
Therefore, integrated antennas are useful only for short-range applica­
tions. Their performance can be increased using a special dielectric lens an­
tenna or smart resonator. For example, J. Hash et al. [4] for a new genera­
tion of automotive radar proposed on-chip antenna elements based on shorted 
λ/4 micro-strip lines, formed by the top and bottom metal layers of the chip 
back-end. However most of the radiation is dissipated due to conductor and 
dielectric losses, resulting in a low antenna efficiency (<10%). To improve the 
antenna performance, quartz glass resonators are positioned above the on-chip 
Figure 2.2  Radiation pattern and gain at 60 GHz of a double-slot integrated antenna in CMOS 
65-nm SOI-achievable technology.

18 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
patch antenna elements to improve efficiency and bandwidth. The antennas are 
spaced at a distance to allow direction of arrival (DOA) estimation of a target or 
provide separate beams illuminating a dielectric lens. 
Table 2.1 summarizes the main data (antenna type, central working fre­
quency, target implementing technology, performance in terms of gain and 
bandwidth, type of feeder, and input impedance) for integrated antenna designs 
recently proposed in literature.
2.4  Semiconductor Technology and Devices for Integrated Radar 
Different semiconductor technologies are today available, each suited for the 
optimal design of a specific radar subsystem.
Table 2.2 shows the key characteristics (energy gap, breakdown voltage, 
carrier mobility, carrier speed saturation, thermal conductivity) of some semi­
conductor technologies, silicon, and heterojunction devices.
From reported data is clear that III-V high-mobility devices (GaAs, InP, 
and so on) are the most suited for high performance at high frequencies (elec­
trons rather than hole carrier–based devices).
Figure 2.3  S11 performance and input impedance as a function of frequency for a double-
slot integrated antenna in CMOS 65-nm SOI technology. 

 
Radar Integration Levels, Technology Trends, and Transceivers 
19
Devices realized in GaN technology, due to wide energy-bandgap and 
breakdown voltage, are the most suited for the high voltage and high power 
levels required in radar transmitter (e.g., they can allow for vacuum tube re­
placement in high transmitter power radar).
Si-based devices are suited for large-volume, low-cost applications since 
they already dominate baseband analog and digital processing for telecommu­
nications, computers, and consumer electronics.
At the device level, the possible choices are as follows:
• Field effect transistors (FETs) as metal oxide semiconductors (MOS) or 
HEMTs, which are unipolar devices (single-carrier: electrons in HEMT 
and NMOS, holes in PMOS);
• Heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT), which is a bipolar devices 
(holes and electrons).
Table 2.1
Performance of Integrated Antenna Designs Recently Proposed in Literature 
Antenna Type 
F (GHz) Tech 
Gain 
BW(GHz) Feeder 
Imped. 
4 array dipole 
77 
SiGe 
2 
2 
Differential 
45Ω 
Slot dipole 
24 
GaAs 
2 
1.4 
CPW 
50 Ω 
Zig zag 
24 
CMOS 
1.5 
N/A 
N/A 
30 Ω 
Aperture coupled patch 
60 
CMOS 
7 
7.8 
Balanced 
100 Ω 
Dipole 
60 
SiGe 
2.35 
7 
CPS 
30 Ω 
Slot antenna 
60 
CMOS 
10 
5 
N/A 
N/A 
Cavity backed folded dipole 
60 
SiGe 
7 
18 
CPS 
50 Ω 
Folded dipole 
60 
SiGe 
8 
8 
CPW 
100 Ω 
Yagi 
60 
SiGe 
7 
9.4 
N/A 
50 Ω 
Spiral 
60 
CMOS SOI 
4.2 
15 
CPW 
50 Ω 
Table 2.2
Key Characteristics of Main Semiconductor Materials
Material
Eg
Vbreak
Mobility 
Electrons
Vsat 
Electrons
Mobility 
Holes
Vsat 
Holes
K
(eV)
(105 V/cm)
(103cm2/V*s)
(107 cm/s)
(103cm2/V*s)
(107 cm/s)
(W/K*cm)
Si
1,12
3
1,5
1
0,6
0,7
1,5
GaAs
1,42
4
8
0,8
0,4
0,9
0,5
InP
1,35
5
5
0,7
0,2
0,5
0,67
GaN
3,4
30
1,2
1,5
0,05
1,3
InAs
0,36
0,4
25
0,9
0,5
0,5
0,28

20 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
HBT and FET can act both as digital devices (on/off) or analog devices 
(current generator controlled by an input current in HBT or current generator 
controlled by an input voltage in a FET).
However, some performance metrics are different between bipolar and 
FET devices:
• HBT has an exponential drive characteristic, while for FET it is qua­
dratic; HBT has typically higher transconductance (gain) than FET.
• HBT has a resistive input impedance, while for FET it is capacitive; as 
consequence, FET has lower power consumption in standby mode.
• FET has lower noise at high frequency, but it suffers of 1/f noise at low 
frequency.
• HBTs are vertical integrated devices (high current density), while low-
power FETs are planar devices (higher integration density and easier 
scaling).
In highly integrated low-power radar, the vacuum-tube technologies 
(traveling wave tube, klystron, or magnetron) adopted for high-power high-
performance radar transmitters are completely avoided.
Competing technologies for integrated radars are solid state ones:
• MMICs in compound III-V semiconductors such as GaAs, In-P using 
high electron mobility FET HEMTs;
• For power amplifiers, interest in GaN and SiC is increasing;
• SiGe HBT or bipolar-MOS (BiCMOS) ICs;
• Si CMOS (N- and P- MOS) technologies ICs;
• CMOS SOI ICs.
Table 2.3 summarizes for the competing technologies some key circuit 
figures of merit: 
Table 2.3
Performance of Competing Technologies 
FT
Gain/NF 
Ratio
Cost
Power 
Consumption
Suited for 
BJT 
High 
High 
Medium
High 
Analog, RF 
CMOS 
Medium 
Medium 
Low
Low 
Digital 
BiCMOS 
High 
High 
Medium
Medium 
Analog, RF, mixed-signal 
HEMT 
Very high 
High 
High
Medium 
mm-wave 

 
Radar Integration Levels, Technology Trends, and Transceivers 
21
• Maximum working frequency represented by Ft, the frequency at which 
the current gain with short-circuit output is 1;
• The ratio between the achievable gain and the noise figure (NF);
• The achievable power consumption;
• The implementation cost;
• The most suited application domain.
2.5  Trends in IC Radar Design 
2.5.1  MIC and MMIC Technology
RF and microwave integrated circuits entirely realized (interconnections and 
matching networks, active and passive devices) on a single chip (Si, GaAs, or 
other) are called monolithic microwave integrated circuits (MMIC). They are 
suited just for large-scale production, in that the unitary cost of the masks and 
the access to the technological plants necessary for their realization would make 
the final product too expensive. 
III-V MMIC for radio and radar applications have been developed at high 
frequencies since 1970s and 1980s, thanks to dedicated U.S. funding programs 
for MMIC technology. 
MMIC is now a mature technology, offering for analog circuitry (active 
and passive components) at microwaves and mm-waves best in class perfor­
mances in terms of maximum achievable Ft (the frequencies at which the short-
circuit current gain is 1), NF, gain of low-noise amplifier (LNA), and gain and 
saturation power of the power amplifier.
MMIC dominates high-end transceivers from tens of GHz to THz.
Most of MMIC are in GaAs technology (automotive radar front-end at 
77-/79-GHz, 60-GHz applications, 94-GHz imaging, Ka-, V-, and W-band 
radars).
Since 2005, III-V HEMT devices with Ft and Fmax (the frequencies at 
which the power gain is 1) higher than 700 GHz are available; therefore, III-V 
devices are allowing for THz domain applications.
However, due to niche market applications, and higher device size, the 
cost of ICs with III-V technologies is higher than that of silicon technologies. 
While such cost is affordable in military or space applications, for low-cost and 
low-power civil radar applications silicon technologies must be used for IC. 
An alternative to MMIC for small and medium production scale and 
for prototype realization and testing is planar monolithic integrated circuits 
(MICs). In this case, passive elements can be directly realized on the substrate, 
whereas active ones have to be purchased on the electron device market and 
bonded on the substrate. The substrate is a “sandwich” made by a dielectric 

22 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
sheet, several hundred microns thick, with two conductive layers (Cu, Au) de­
posited on the upper and down surfaces. The realization of MICs does not 
require specific technological plants or expensive processes in that the only nec­
essary technological steps are (1) a photo-lithographic process for conductive 
layer etching, and (2) a bonding work station for discrete devices mounting on 
the substrate. 
In planar MIC circuits, in addition to single passive or small-signal ac­
tive devices, more complex devices can be mounted, such as integrated LNA—
available on the market in surface-mounting device (SMD) packages or directly 
on chips—integrated switches, SMD filters, as well as power transistors for out­
put power in the range of tens of Watts. Therefore, MICs are well suited for the 
realization of complete microwave systems up to 100 GHz in the power range 
up to tens of Watts. These characteristics make MIC technology eligible for the 
realization of prototypes, or small- and medium-scale production, which can be 
the case of low-power, low-cost radar for specific applications. A more detailed 
description of MIC technology is contained in Chapter 5 together with a case 
study (implementation and full experimental characterization) consisting of the 
realization of a radar for specific applications.
Like MMIC, MIC devices suffer the limit of poor digital and mixed-
signal integration capability and hence are not suited to low-cost, large-volume, 
digital-based applications.
2.5.2  Si-Based Technology
Si-based technology dominates electronic industry for baseband (BB) signal 
processing and intermediate frequency (IF) allowing BB and IF circuitry to be 
integrated in the same SoC. Since 2000 Si-based technologies (SiGe bipolar or 
CMOS) are used also for telecom RF ICs (cellular phone transceivers, wireless 
local area networks (WLANs), Bluetooth, UHF wireless sensors).
Recent technology scaling allows for the use of CMOS, CMOS SOI, or 
BICMOS also for mm-waves. Si-based mm-wave SoC have been developed in 
recent years with commercial technologies for automotive radar (24 GHz and 
now 77/79 GHz) or telecommunication high-bandwidth radio (60-GHz short-
range radio).
A rich set of technologies is available from different vendors: 
• SiGe BiCMOS 130 nm and 180 nm; 
• CMOS or CMOS SOI 130 nm, 90 nm, 65 nm, 45 nm, 32 nm, 28 nm, 
and 20 nm; 
• Full depleted (FD)-SOI at 28 nm and smaller.

 
Radar Integration Levels, Technology Trends, and Transceivers 
23
For radar applications SiGe BiCMOS 130-nm and 180-nm technology 
nodes or CMOS 90-nm and 65-nm technology nodes have been already used 
in literature by academia and industry. The last chapter of this book will present 
two case studies of radar implementation for 24-GHz and 77-GHz automotive 
radar in Si-based technologies from STMicroelectronics. 
In radar design, HBT are more suited for high-frequency analog circuitry 
ensuring higher gain and cut-off frequency and lower NF.
MOSFETs are more suited for the baseband DSP due to lower power 
consumption, easier device scaling, higher integration levels, and lower cost.
MOS technology is the dominating one for processors, memories, and 
mixed-signal circuitry in the baseband frequency domain.
SiGe bipolar complementary MOS (BiCMOS) allows the cointegration 
of BJT for high-frequency applications and MOS devices for digital circuits, 
although at higher cost.
At the state of the art, the SiGe BiCMOS technology, with 130-nm tran­
sistors channel length and an Ft of 230 GHz, offers a good trade-off between 
cost and performance for single-chip mm-wave radar transceivers. Several trans­
ceivers at 24, 77, 90, and 120 GHz have been proposed in the literature using 
SiGe BiCMOS technology.
For the future, for large-volume applications of systems operating at mm-
waves (e.g., 60-GHz radio and perhaps automotive radar), the trend will be 
using CMOS also for mm-wave circuits. 
As an effect of device scaling, an Ft higher than 150–200 GHz can be ob­
tained today with MOS devices. Using a rule of thumb that we can safely work 
at one-third of Ft this means that frequencies up to 60–70 GHz can become 
also a domain of MOS devices.
It should be noted that technology evolution allows for higher Ft at a 
given current or the same Ft for lower current: this reduces power consump­
tion, power supply, and thermal issues reducing size and cost and increasing 
reliability in harsh environments 
A mm-wave transceiver in scaled CMOS technology, as baseband DSP, 
entails a lower area, higher integration, and lower cost for large-volume markets 
but also lower performance versus 130-nm BiCMOS SiGe technology.
Technology benchmarks realized by A. Scavennec et al., in a special issue 
of IEEE Microwave magazine in 2009 [18], by comparing the phase noise and 
the output power of a voltage controller oscillator in the range 60–400 GHz 
found in different technologies (CMOS, HBT SiGe, HBT GaAs) show that 
CMOS allows for competing performance versus SiGe and GaAs HBT up to 
60–70 GHz. 
A similar analysis has been carried out in the RF laboratories of the Uni­
versity of Pisa. Considering as a benchmark a low noise amplifier and its achiev­
able performance in terms of gain (dB) and NF (dB) from Figure 2.4, we can 

24 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
see that state-of-the-art designs up to 10–20 GHz in have good performances: 
gain higher than 20 dB. At higher frequencies, the performances start decreas­
ing. Around 77 GHz (W-band), acceptable but nonoptimal performance is 
achieved (gain lower than 20 dB).
State-of-the-art designs up to 10–20 GHz in CMOS technology have op­
timal NF performances, lower than 4 dB (see Figure 2.5). At higher frequencies 
the performances start decreasing. Around 77 GHz (W band), acceptable but 
nonoptimal performance is achieved (NF higher than 4 dB).
At the University of Pisa, we also analyzed the achievable saturation power 
for a transmitting power amplifier (PA) realized at mm-wave in CMOS tech­
nology (see Figure 2.6). At frequencies of a few GHz, an integrated PA up to 
1W peak power is possible, but the peak power of integrated PA decreases with 
frequency.
Figure 2.4  Achievable LNA gain in CMOS technology as a function of frequency (1- to 
100-GHz range). 
Figure 2.5  Achievable LNA noise figure in CMOS technology as a function of frequency (1- to 
100-GHz range).

 
Radar Integration Levels, Technology Trends, and Transceivers 
25
At high frequencies (77 GHz or higher, W band), the peak power is less 
than 10 dBm (10 mW). Therefore, only short-range applications are possible; 
external off-chip PAs are needed.
The real issue still limiting a full CMOS realization of an automotive 
LRR application is the on-chip mm-wave power amplifier. This a big issue con­
sidering that from a radar equation the range capability heavily depends on 
transmitted power levels.
From the analysis of Scavennec et al. [18] the maximum saturation power 
at the transmitter side achievable with MOS technology is on the order of 10 
dBm (10 mW) at 60–70 GHz, while with SiGe this value grows up to 20 dBm 
(100 mW) and for the HBT GaAs it is even higher. This is why today’s chipsets 
for LRR automotive applications for the mm-wave part are mainly based on 
SiGe technology (HBT or BiCMOS) [4, 19]. This will be also the case of the 
implementation case studies from industry presented in Chapter 7 of this book.
Table 2.4 summarizes the characteristics (process name, technology node, 
value of Ft and Fmax for a NPN-bipolar transistor, and available metal layers for 
interconnection) of HBT or BiCMOS SiGe technology adopted by the main 
Silicon Foundries (IBM, TowerJazz, Freescale, STMicroelectronics, NXP).
As an example, for the IHP foundry, the SG13S SiGe technology is a 
high-performance 0.13-µm BiCMOS with npn- hetrojunction bipolar transis­
tors (HBTs) up to fT/fmax= 250/300 GHz, with 3.3 V I/O CMOS and 1.2 V 
logic CMOS. The SG13G2 version has the same device portfolio but bipolar 
performance with fT/fmax = 300/500 GHz.
2.6  Radar Transceivers 
In the previous paragraphs, the focus has been mainly on the analog subsystems 
of a radar and the relevant RF or millimeter-wave components [low noise am­
Figure 2.6  Achievable saturate power for the PA (dBm) in CMOS technology as a function of 
frequency (1- to 100-GHz range). 

26 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
plifier (LNA) power amplifier, oscillator, and antenna]. However, radar is no 
more a simple analog system, but is becoming a mixed-signal system.
Some key blocks remain in the analog domain such as LNA, antenna 
switch in case the same antenna is multiplexed in time domain between trans­
mitter and receiver (e.g. in pulsed radars), power amplifier, mixer, oscillators 
(phase locked loop, voltage controlled oscillator, quartz oscillator, phase detec­
tors, phase shifter, frequency dividers), some IF or baseband analog blocks such 
as adaptive gain control (AGC) amplifier, baseband amplifiers, and filters or 
integrators. 
However, in literature from academia but also in industry lots of ADCs 
with pipeline, or time-interleaved architectures that allow for power-efficient 
conversion with high effective number of bits (ENOB) and high sampling fre­
quency performance are already available [20–24].
Therefore, the radar signal can be digitized directly at IF minimizing the 
daunting tasks to be carried out in the analog domain at radio frequency. The 
mixer and the local oscillator (LO) still remain in the analog domain but all the 
signal processing moves in the digital domain as reported in Figure 2.7.
The requirements on the ADC for a good radar design are as follows:
• ADC operating at intermediate frequency and not only at baseband fre­
quency: sampling rates up to tens, or even hundreds, of MS/s.
• The number of ADC channels depends on the system architecture (1 or 
2 for I-Q signal components for each of the K radar channels).
• The bit resolution is typically higher than 10 bit (e.g., a nominal 14–16 
bit is required for 12–14 bit ENOB—at least 70 dB dynamic range).
• Specification on nonlinearity and aperture uncertainty of the ADC de­
pends, together with ENOB bits N, also on the required signal-to-noise 
ratio (SNR).
Table 2.4
Performance of SiGe Technologies (HBT and BiCMOS)
Parameter
Unit
IBM
TowerJazz
IHP
STM
Freescale
NXP
Process
8HP
SBC18H3
SG13
B9CMW
HiP6MW
QUBiC4Xi
Node
Nm
130
180
130
130
180
250
NPN Ft
GHz
200
240
250
230
185
216
NON Fmax
GHz
265
260
300
290
260
177
NPN gain
450
-
900
950
425
-
NPN BVce0
V
1,7
1,2
1,7
1,5
2
1,4
Metal Layers
N.
4Cu, 2 Al
Al
6 Al
6 Cu
5 Cu
6 Al
MIM capacitor/
Varactor
Y/Y
Y/Y
Y/N
Y/Y
Y/Y
Y/Y

 
Radar Integration Levels, Technology Trends, and Transceivers 
27
So in the digital or mixed domain we found the following blocks:
• A/D and D/A converters;
• FFT and its inverse (IFFT) processors;
• Timed-domain and frequency-domain digital filters;
• Pulse compression (PC);
• Digital down- and up-conversion (DDC and DUC);
• Beam-forming and more in general waveform generation by direct digi­
tal synthesis (DDS) exploiting numerical controlled oscillator (NCO), 
digital delay locked loop (DLL), or digital clock manager (DCM);
• CFAR;
• Space time adaptive processing (STAP);
• DOA estimation;
• All data processing tasks related to tracking, detection, classification, 
and data analysis/mining;
• All control and interface tasks since the radar is often a node of a more 
complex networked system. 
It should be noted that the block diagram vision of the radar in Figure 2.7 
is generic and is still valid for different radar architectures that have been pro­
posed in literature and that will be analyzed and discussed in the next chapters 
such as the following:
Figure 2.7  Radar as a mixed analog-digital system.

28 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
• Pulsed or continuous-wave (CW) radar;
• Homodyne or heterodyne receiver or correlator-type receiver;
• Down-conversion in the analog domain (the ADC works in baseband) 
or digital domain (the ADC works at intermediate frequency and an 
NCO is also used);
• Single antenna or multiple antennas.
With reference to the radar as a mixed-signal system, the analysis of the 
digital implementing platform is further detailed in Chapter 3. 
References
[1]	 Skolnik, M., Radar Handbook, 3rd Ed., New York, McGraw Hill, 2008.
[2]	 Bhor, M., “The New Era of Scaling in an SoC World,” Proc. 2009 IEEE International 
Solid State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), San Francisco, CA, Feb. 8–12, 2009, pp. 23–28.
[3]	 Neri, B., and S. Saponara, “Advances in Technologies, Architectures and Applications of 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems, Vol. 27, No. 
1, 2012, pp. 25–36.
[4]	 Hasch, J., et al., “Millimeter-Wave Technology for Automotive Radar Sensors in the 77 
GHz Frequency Band,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 60, 
No. 3, 2012, pp. 845–860.
[5]	 Li, C., et al., “High-Sensitivity Software-Configurable 5.8-GHz Radar Sensor Receiver 
Chip in 0.13um CMOS for Noncontact Vital Sign Detection,” IEEE Transactions on Mi­
crowave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 58, No. 5, 2010, pp. 1410–1419. 
[6]	 Lee, J., et al., “A Fully Integrated 77 GHz FMCW Radar Transciever in 65 nm CMOS 
Technology,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 45, No. 12, 2010, pp. 2746–2756.
[7]	 Mitomo, T. et al., “A 77 GHz 90 nm CMOS Transceiver for FMCW Radar Applications,” 
IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 45, No. 4, 2010, pp. 928–937.
[8]	 Liu, D., and Y. P. Zhang, “Integration of Array Antennas in Chip Package for 60-GHz 
Radios,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 7, 2012, pp. 2364–2371.
[9]	 Person, C., “Antennas on Silicon for Millimeter-Wave Applications—Status and Trends,” 
Proc. 2010 IEEE Bipolar/BiCMOS Circuits and Technology Meeting (BCTM), Austin, TX, 
Oct. 4–6, 2010, pp. 180–183.
[10]	 Rusch, C., et al., “W-Band Vivaldi Antenna in LTCC for CW Radar Near Field Distance 
Measurements,” Proc. 5th IEEE European Conference on Antennas and Propagation 
(EuCAP), Rome, Italy, Apr. 11–15, 2011, pp. 2124–2128. 
[11]	 Fonte, A., et al., “Feasibility Study and On-Chip Antenna for Fully Integrated μRFID Tag 
at 60 GHz in 65 nm CMOS SOI,” Proc. 2011 IEEE International Conference on RFID 
Technologies and Applications (RFID-TA), Sitges, Spain, Sept. 15–16, 2011, pp. 457–462. 

 
Radar Integration Levels, Technology Trends, and Transceivers 
29
[12]	 Gianesello, F., et al., “SOI CMOS Technology for Wireless Applications: Current Trends 
and Perspectives,” Proc. 2010 IEEE International SOI Conference, San Diego, CA, Oct. 
11–14, 2010, pp. 1–2.
[13]	 Saponara, S., and B. Neri, “Integrated 60 GHz Antenna, LNA and Fast ADC Architecture 
for Embedded Systems with Wireless Gbit Connectivity,” Journal of Circuits, Systems and 
Computers, Vol. 21, No. 5, 2012, pp. 1–24.
[14]	 Simonen, P., et al., “Comparison of Bulk and SOI CMOS Technologies in a DSP Processor 
Circuit Implementation,” Proc. 13th IEEE International Conference on Microelectronics 
(ICM), Rabat, Morocco, Oct. 29–31, 2001, pp. 107–110.
[15]	 Menzel, W., and A. Moebius, “Antenna Concepts for Millimeter-Wave Automotive Radar 
Sensors, Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 7, 2012, pp. 2372–2379.
[16]	 Wang, H., “Current Status and Future Trends for Si and Compound MMICs in Millimeter 
Wave Regime and Related Issues for System on Chip (SoC) and System in Package (SiP),” 
Proc. 2010 IEEE Topical Meeting on Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in RF Systems 
(SIRF), New Orleans, LA, Jan. 11–13, 2010, pp. 16–17.
[17]	 Wang, H. et al., “MMICs in the Millimiter-Wave Regime,” IEEE Microwave, Vol. 10, No. 
1, 2009, pp. 99–117.
[18]	 Scavennec, A., M. Sokolich, and Y. Baeyens, “Semiconductor Technologies for Higher 
Frequencies,” IEEE Microwave, Vol. 10, No. 2, 2009, pp. 77–87. 
[19]	 Giammello, V., E. Ragonese, and G. Palmisano, “A Transformer-Coupling Current-
Reuse SiGe HBT Power Amplifier for 77-GHz Automotive Radar,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 60, No. 6, 2012, pp. 1676–1683.
[20]	 Bin, L., et al., “Analog-to-Digital Converters,” IEEE Signal Processing, Vol. 22, No. 6, 
2005, pp. 69–77.
[21]	 Greshishchev, Y. M., et al., “A 40GS/s 6b ADC in 65nm CMOS,” Proc. 2010 IEEE 
International Solid State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), San Francisco, CA, Feb. 7–11, 2010, 
pp. 390–391.
[22]	 Harpe, P., et al., “A 7-to-10b 0-to-4MS/s Flexible SAR ADC with 6.5-to-16fJ/conversion-
step,” Proc. 2012 IEEE International Solid State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), San Francisco, 
CA, Feb. 19–23, 2012, pp. 472–474.
[23]	 Mishali, M, et al., “Sub-Nyquist Sampling,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, Vol. 28, No. 
6, 2011, pp. 98–124.
[24] 	 Yu, B., et al, “A 14-bit 200-MS/s Time-Interleaved ADC with Sample-Time Error 
Detection and Cancelation,” Proc. 2011 IEEE Asian Solid State Circuits Conference 
(A-SSCC), Jeju, South Korea, Nov. 14–16, 2011, pp. 349–352.


31
3
Hardware-Software Implementing 
Platforms for Radar Digital Signal 
Processing
3.1  Implementing Platforms and Performance Metrics for Radar 
Signal Processing 
3.1.1  Implementing Platforms for Radar Digital Signal Processing
As discussed in Chapters 1 and 2, ubiquitous integrated radar applications for 
civil applications such as automotive driver assistance or vital signs detection 
need low power consumption [1–4]. Reducing the power consumption allows 
for the reduction of the voltage supply, of the battery size in portable devices, 
and of the thermal issues, thus saving cost, size, and weight of the cooling and 
power supply subsystems. 
Beside the requirement for increased portability, the previously cited ap­
plications typically require high computational capabilities, a large data transfer 
rate, and large memory storage size to manage high-performance radar algo­
rithms and techniques such those presented in Chapters 4 and 5. 
As a matter of fact, radar R&D activities are characterized by the increase 
of signal processing tasks in the digital domain.
Recent research results on ADCs allow for power-efficient ADCs with 
high-end performance in terms of effective numbers of bits and sampling fre­
quency. Therefore, the radar signal can be digitized directly at intermediate fre­
quency, minimizing the daunting tasks to be carried out in the analog domain 
at radio frequency.

32 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
FFT and its inverse IFFT, time domain and frequency domain filtering 
[5], PC, digital down- and up-conversion, beam-forming, waveform genera­
tion by DDS, CFAR, tracking, space time adaptive processing (STAP) [6], and 
DOA estimation [7, 8] are some examples of common radar signal and data 
processing algorithms [9] to be realized in the digital domain.
Beside processing functions, the radar digital domain should be in charge 
of control and interface tasks, since the radar is often a node of a more complex 
networked system. 
For example, in the automotive domain the radar subsystem should be 
connected to the main control vehicle network through a controller area net­
work (CAN) or FlexRay bus interface. 
Summarizing, while in the origin radar was mainly an analog system, now 
it is becoming a mixed-signal system [10], following the scheme reported in 
Figure 3.1. 
This evolution from analog to mixed-signal domain is similar to what 
happened to the radio that now is entering the era of “software-defined radio” 
and “cognitive radio.”
This is why some radar research projects are focusing on future digital 
defined architectures where the ADC moves close to the antenna and the digiti­
zation is done at higher frequencies (see Figure 3.2). The dream is that all signal 
processing, apart antenna impedance matching and first low-noise amplifica­
tion, is done in the digital domain and the radar becomes a fully program­
mable/configurable device. 
However, for the next years, and for the target applications of this book 
(automotive and health care applications of radar), the authors believe that the 
most suited transceiver architecture still needs a good mixer design in MMIC 
technology [11]. 
The limit for direct digitization of the signal at radio frequency is that 
high-speed and low-power ADC have low dynamic range (less than 8–10 effec­
tive number of bits), posing a limit to radar systems that need a wider bit range 
to face clutter problems. 
Figure 3.1  Radar as a mixed analog-digital system.

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
33
Moreover, very high speed DSP at radio frequency would need very high 
data transfer rates and storage (large memory size), as well as high clock fre­
quency, thus increasing power consumption.
Beside the requirements of low power and high computational/memory 
performance for the radar digital signal processing platform, there are market 
requirements such as reduced time to market, product reconfigurability, and 
sharing of research and design costs among several products. 
This leads to stringent requirements also in terms of flexibility for imple­
menting the radar platform. Therefore, a trade-off has to be found between the 
multiple requirements.
Among the possible target platforms, an increased flexibility is typical­
ly allowed by software-oriented solutions such as general-purpose processors 
(GPPs), DSP processors, or microcontrollers (MCUs) although at an increased 
power consumption versus custom hardware solutions must be taken into 
account. 
Minimization of power consumption is the main feature of hardware-ori­
ented solutions such as application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) [12–14] 
and FPGA. 
The scenario of the possible radar implementing platforms is even more 
complex since new software-oriented or embedded hardware-software plat­
forms are emerging on the market such as:
• The GPU, which is used more and more as high-performance massively 
parallel computing units for DSP and not only for imaging applications.
• The field programmable system-on-chip (FPSoC), merging the hard­
ware capability of FPGA with the software flexibility of soft or hard 
programmable cores integrated in the same chip. 
• The multiprocessor system on chip (MPSoC), where multiple low-pow­
er programmable cores can ensure the required computational capability 
for real-time radar processing although at a better power efficiency than 
GPPs.
Figure 3.2  A radar with a full digital architecture will lead to an excessive power consump­
tion for the required high sampling frequency of analog-digital and digital-analog converters 
and for a very high speed DSP. 

34 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
It is worth noting that typically external analog to digital converters and 
digital to analog converters are required for the intermediate-frequency parts of 
a radar transceiver, since GPP, GPU, DSP, and FPGA platforms are equipped 
only with digital interfaces. 
The only solutions that generally integrate the ADC, and in some case 
also the DAC, are custom IC designs or microcontrollers.
3.1.2  Main Performance Metrics for Radar Implementing Platforms 
There are several performance metrics to be considered to compare different 
possible implementing platforms. A fully detailed analysis will require the con­
sideration of hundreds of parameters. 
To enable a fast comparison of different competing platforms, we suggest 
the extraction of few “key” parameters to characterize each candidate solution 
for radar implementation. In most cases a trade-off is to be found since a single 
platform optimizing all parameters does not exist. However, when the number 
of different parameters to be considered is reduced to few “key” values, the 
comparison can be easily realized adopting classic multiobjective analysis tools 
such as the Pareto plots or the spidermaps. 
Hereafter, we briefly review the list of suggested key parameters to be 
considered when analyzing an implementing platform for radar digital signal 
processing.
3.1.2.1  Computational Capability
In the literature, computational capability is typically measured in terms of giga 
operations per second (GOPS). However, it is not easy comparing platforms 
with different instruction set and architectures, just in terms of GOPS: as an 
example, reduced instruction set computer (RISC) computing platforms typi­
cally need multiple instructions to execute a complex operation that a complex 
instruction set computer (CISC) processor can execute in few cycles, or even in 
just one machine cycle. 
Hence, using only the GOPS figure of merit to compare different radar 
implementing platforms has the risk of overestimating the performance of a 
RISC computing core versus that of a more complex CISC one. To avoid this 
risk, in the literature the computing platforms are typically characterized with 
reference to common benchmarks. 
The most used benchmark is the Dhrystone. It is a synthetic comput­
ing benchmark program, first developed in 1984 by R. P. Weicker intended 
to be representative of system (integer) programming. The Dhrystone grew 
to become representative of general processor performance, and currently the 
Dhrystone v 2.1 is the most used one. This is why most of processors are to­

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
35
day characterized in terms of DMIPS (Dhrystone millions of instructions per 
second) or DMIPS/MHz.
The DMIPS figure for a given computing core represents its relative speed 
versus a VAX 11/780 (a particular “1 MIPS” machine) computing core selected 
as reference. For example, if a given processor completes the Dhrystone bench­
mark 200 times faster than the VAX 11/780 does, then it would be considered 
a 200 DMIPS machine. For processors that can be run at various clock frequen­
cies, often the value is divided by MHz (e.g., if the 200 DMPIS processor runs 
at 100 MHz, the value is 2 DMIPS/MHz).
For example, the StrongARM SA-110 processor at 214 MHz has a 240 
DMIPS capability (i.e., roughly 1 DMIPS/MHz). The StrongArm family was 
firstly developed from DEC, then sold to Intel, which replaced it with the 
xScale family of processors that recently passed to Marvell.
The DMIPS scores of the PJ1 and PJ4 processors from Marvell are 
1.46 DMIPS/MHz and 2.41 DMIPS/MHz, respectively. 
The famous ARM Cortex A9 core has a capability of 2.5 DMPIS/MHz 
(in the market this core is implemented in many products of the main semi­
conductor industry leaders with clock frequencies in the order of 1–2 GHz) 
whereas the Cortex-A8 achieves 2.0 DMIPS/MHz and the Qualcomm’s Snap­
dragon reaches 2.1 DMIPS/MHz. 
On the contrary, microcontrollers have much lower absolute performance. 
For example, those of the Micron PIC family are limited to few tens of DMIPS: 
10 DMPIS for a PIUC18F8, 40 DMIPS for a dsPIC33FJ.
Although largely used in the literature, the authors of this book believe 
that the DMIPS figure is not enough for a fair comparison of different comput­
ing platforms for radar applications. Indeed DMIPS is a good benchmark for 
general purpose computing applications, mainly based on integer arithmetic, 
while radar computing involves application-specific operations with floating-
point operands and with a frequent use of specific arithmetic functions such as 
matrix calculation, Fourier transform, FIR/IIR filtering, and so on.
This is why we suggest considering, beside the DMIPS or DMIPS/MHz 
figure, also specific benchmarks in terms of DSP-dedicated instructions, at least 
the giga multiply and accumulate operations per seconds (GMACs) or the time 
needed to execute a well-known DSP algorithms like the fast Fourier transform.
3.2.1.2  Operand Bit-Width and Arithmetic Type
Beside the number of operations executed per second, when comparing dif­
ferent radar computing platforms, the supported operand bit-width and the 
arithmetic type must be considered, too. 
The authors believe that for a good processing core, at least 32-bit width 
is mandatory, and that having a floating-point coprocessor is useful to face the 
large dynamic range of radar signals including clutter. 

36 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
3.2.1.3  Memory
Radar signal processing is a typical data-dominated application involving a large 
amount of data transfers between the processing core and the memory subsys­
tem with large operand size. Some emerging radar techniques such as space 
time adaptive processing are particularly heavy in terms of required load/store 
operations and size of the operands requiring high memory access frequency 
and high memory storage size. 
High access speed and high density storage are often conflicting require­
ments; therefore, the proper design of a memory hierarchy between the com­
puting core and the large off-chip background data memories is mandatory for 
the success of radar applications. 
Fast static RAM memories operating on-chip close to the processor have 
lower storage density than dynamic RAMs operating off-chip as modules 
mounted on board or integrated on-chip in modern system-on-chip technolo­
gies, or than hard disks (realized with solid state or still with classic magnetic 
technologies). 
Therefore, multiple levels of on-chip SRAM-based caches are envisaged 
to exploit the capabilities of the DSP computing core. The storage capabili­
ties of on-chip SRAM caches are usually limited on the order of megabytes. 
For larger storage requirements, up to gigabytes, further levels of synchronous 
DRAM modules are needed. Recent advances in semiconductor technology 
allow the integration of embedded DRAM modules in the same chip with the 
processing core and the SRAM, so that multiple layers can be envisaged also for 
the DRAM (e.g., a first DRAM layer integrated on chip, faster, and a second 
DRAM layer of chip, characterized by a large storage density). Terabytes storage 
applications need off-chip hard disk capabilities that can be realized today with 
solid-state technologies (EEPROM memories) instead of using magnetic hard 
disks. The use of EEPROM devices for terabyte storage minimizes access delay, 
size and weight of the memory subsystems.
The new frontier in memory technology is represented by the research of 
memories allowing for nonvolatile capabilities like PROM but fast access like 
in RAM. 
3.2.1.4  I/O Interfaces
Since radar transceivers are parts of more complex systems (e.g., driver assis­
tance and collision avoidance in automotive applications), usually involving 
networking with other units, the richness in terms of input-output (I/O) in­
terfaces is another important aspect when evaluating and selecting radar imple­
menting platforms. 
When selecting a platform the designer should consider the data rate, data 
type, and protocol supported by the I/O interfaces and the user interface avail­
able on the host unit that remotely controls the sensing node. 

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
37
Typically a low rate serial interface (RS-232, I2C, or SPI) is useful as a 
configuration link between the radar unit and a host central processor. For 
transfers of larger data size, higher throughputs are needed: the trend for civil 
applications is exploiting USB or Ethernet connections, although in automo­
tive applications CAN, with data rates up to 1 Mbps below 40m, is the most 
used backbone connection protocol. 
In measurement applications where the radar sensing unit can be seen as 
a node connected to a host control, the serial link RS-485 can be used (as an 
extension of RS-232, offering data transmission speeds of tens of Mbps at 10m, 
with a rule of thumb that the speed in bits per second multiplied by the length 
in meters should be in the order of 108) with a Labview GUI at host side.
3.2.1.5  Power/Area Efficiency
For military applications, power consumption and size of the computing plat­
form are not key issues, but for civil applications, the power and area costs of 
the radar computing kernel are main performance metrics. 
For example, in automotive applications the radar driver assistance plat­
form has to be mounted on board, without reducing space for passengers or 
reducing aerodynamic car performance, and it must be supplied by the car 
electrical system with minimal overhead. 
This is why, beside the already cited MIPS/MHz cost figure, the MIPS/
mW and MIPS/mm2 cost metrics should be considered when selecting the 
target implementing platform (or, similarly, GOPS/MHz, GOPS/mW, and 
GOPS/mm2 values). 
3.2.1.6  Flexibility
Unlike the other metrics, it is difficult to summarize the flexibility level of a 
platform with a single numerical value. With the term flexibility we refer to the 
capability of the program of a platform to change (software reprogrammability) 
and/or change the configuration of the hardware resources of the platforms, 
(e.g., hardware reconfigurability typical in FPGA devices of FPSOC platforms). 
Hardware reconfigurability involves the reconfiguration of logic blocks or 
connections between logic blocks and memories and I/O interfaces or connec­
tions between several logic blocks to enable new and different capabilities in the 
platform. As we will further discuss in the rest of the chapter, since flexibility 
(programmability or reconfigurability) comes with an increased cost in terms 
of power or area overhead, and considering that radar systems involve applica­
tion-specific tasks, the authors believe that the most suited platforms for radar 
computing should be searched between those allowing for programmability or 
reconfigurability in a class of algorithms (GPU, DSP, FPGA) and the non-gen­
eral-purpose ones (GPPs, microcontrollers). Similarly, those approaches with 
poor flexibility (ASIC) are not suitable.

38 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
3.2  Hardware-Software Architecture for a Cost-Effective Radar
The approach when designing a custom IC for radar signal processing can 
provide the best in terms of performance for a given technology at minimum 
area occupation and power consumption. Moreover, digital and mixed analog-
digital (such as analog-digital and digital-analog converters) functions can be 
integrated together in the same chip using CMOS technology. To increase the 
flexibility of the ASIC approach in the same chip, programmable cores can be 
integrated realizing a complete SoC.
However, design and validation time and costs of a custom IC are high. 
Since the ASIC design approach is characterized by high nonrecurrent costs, the 
cost per produced chip can be minimized only for large volume markets. Today, 
the radar system concept for bio, automotive, or other ubiquitous applications 
is still changing from one platform generation to the next. Automotive radar is 
not yet a commodity application with accepted and frozen standards, and hence 
the market is still not a large-volume one.
Considering that the number of radar units for specific civil applications 
is still limited, if compared to other large-volume markets as smart phones, 
tablets, or networking devices, in next years an architecture based on MCU 
plus DSP or FPGA is considered more suited than designing custom IC for 
radar. The MCU core will act as low-complex controller while the DSP or 
FPGA will act as a coprocessor for computing intensive radar signal processing 
applications.
Thanks to the availability of a library of reusable intellectual property (IP) 
cores, a radar platform design, based on MCU and FPGA mounted on a single-
board, can be seen as a prototyping step toward a future migration to SoC if and 
when radar becomes a commodity and its market becomes a large-volume one. 
It should be noted that IP cores are predesigned macrocells for processors, 
memories, custom DSP functions, and I/O interfaces that can be configured 
and synthesized in a given silicon technology. As an example, most vendors of 
FPGA and FPSoC devices such as Xilinx, Altera, Microsemi, Cypress, and oth­
ers offer (directly or through partner companies specialized in the design of IP 
reusable cores) a rich library of reusable macrocells for most functions required 
in a radar platform developments: controller cores, specialized DSP functions 
for FFT evaluation, digital signal filtering, digital beam-forming, and so on.
With reference to automotive radar applications, Figure 3.3 presents a 
possible scheme for a radar computing platform realized as a single board sys­
tem. The figure highlights the following key units, realized as discrete compo­
nents mounted on the same board: an antenna array with radio frequency trans­
ceiver (power amplifier at transmitter side and multichannel receiver chain) 
realized with MMIC technology [15]; power supply unit; ADC operating at 
intermediate-frequency; and radar digital signal processing tasks implemented 

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
39
on FPGA while the main controller functions and interfacing, based on CAN, 
with the main vehicle network are implemented on a MCU. The antenna is 
conceived as an antenna array since for estimating the direction of arrival at 
least two antennas for each direction are needed; four antennas are needed for 
the estimation in both azimuth and elevation planes. 
The MCUs available in the market, differently from GPPs, are low-cost 
devices with reduced power consumption. MCUs are typically characterized by 
low computational capabilities, in the order of MIPS rather than GOPS. 
Moreover, they support integer operations only and are equipped with 
low data rate digital I/O. As far as memory hierarchy is concerned, MCUs inte­
grate on-chip different types of memories (both volatile and nonvolatile storage 
units such as SRAM and EEPROM), but the total amount of on-chip memory 
is small (few to tens of kilobytes). 
Being limited both in data and instruction memory, a MCU has limited 
capability of handling complex programs and large set of data.
The MCUs for their reduced cost, size, and power consumption, and 
their software programmability, are the core of ubiquitous electronic systems 
(automotive ECUs); however, for radar applications MCUs are suitable only for 
tasks such as control of data/operation flow but not for DSP operations. 
This is why in the envisaged automotive radar platform (see Figure 3.3), 
the MCU acts as a baseband control unit and manages the telemetry/telecon­
trol on vehicle network (CAN or FlexRay bus), but a DSP or FPGA co-pro­
cessor is required for computing intensive signal processing operators like pulse 
compression, filtering, FFT, and CFAR.
Figure 3.3  Automotive radar main blocks.

40 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
An example of a commercial realization of a radar platform following the 
concepts we envisage in Figure 3.3 is the third generation of long-range auto­
motive radar recently realized by BOSCH (called LRR3) [16] and reported in 
Figure 3.4.
In the solution proposed by BOSCH for long-range automotive appli­
cations, the whole radar platform is implemented as a main board, hosting 
the power supply unit, the interface toward the CAN vehicle networks, and 
the processing unit (controller tasks and digital signal processing tasks). In the 
LRR3 solution the radio-frequency and the intermediate-frequency interfaces 
and the printed antenna array (four antennas) are realized with monolithic mil­
limeter wave components mounted on a dedicated daughter board.
The next paragraph will discuss why the authors do not consider general-
purpose processors a suitable implementing platform for radar in ubiquitous 
civil applications and the alternative solutions for digital signal processing using 
DSP (SIMD architectures or massively parallel computing platforms such as 
GPU) or FPGA, high-end devices, or cost-effective ones.
3.3  DSP and GPU for Radar Signal Processing
In the last years, GPPs are evolving as software-programmable computing ar­
chitecture with multiple cores, large operand size (64 bit or higher), and tens of 
GOPS of computational capabilities.
Figure 3.4  FMCW long-range automotive radar from BOSCH—third generation.

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
41
The memory subsystem of modern GPPs is characterized by multiple 
cache levels with at least several megabytes of on-chip storage capabilities: in 
multicore systems at least two levels are dedicated to each core (L1 and L2 
caches), while the L3 cache is shared among the multiple cores. 
Fast connections toward off-chip DDR dynamic RAM memories and fast 
I/O interfaces are also present in modern GPPs. Notwithstanding that GPPs 
can substitute MCU + FPGA, managing both control tasks and computing 
intensive signal processing operators, the energy efficiency of general-purpose 
processors (usually << 1 GFLOPS/Watt) and the absolute level of power con­
sumption, in the order of tens of Watts, are far from the specification of highly 
integrated low-power radar applications.
Better energy efficiency, but still achieving real-time processing of radar 
computing-intensive tasks, can be achieved with digital signal processors. They 
are software-programmable processors with instruction set optimized for signal 
processing rather than general-purpose computing. 
As an example, the arithmetic logic unit (ALU) of a digital signal pro­
cessor is typically equipped with hardware resources for fast multiply and ac­
cumulate (MAC) implementations and automatic address generation (AGU), 
with both fixed or floating-point versions available. Data sizes are at least 32 
bits, and different architectural approaches are available, with the most diffused 
being single instruction multiple data (SIMD), executing the same instruction 
in parallel on multiple data, or very long instruction word (VLIW) capable of 
executing in parallel multiple instructions on multiple data. 
Digital signal processors can be single core or multiple cores platforms; an 
evolution of this class of processors as massively parallel computing platforms 
is the GPU.
Digital signal processors allow for high-end computing performance, up 
to tera floating-point operations per second in case of GPU, a value much high­
er than multicore GPP, and with a better energy efficiency than GPP in case of 
the execution of signal processing tasks. 
Digital signal processors for consumer, automotive, and biomedical mar­
kets are already available from different vendors such as Texas Instruments and 
Analog Devices.
The software development environment of a digital signal processor typi­
cally allows the design of programs with high-level languages such as C and 
provides a rich set of libraries and all the CAD tools needed for debugging, 
compiling, linking, assembling, and the final programming. 
Some digital signal processor architectures are equipped also with em­
bedded operating systems, often with real-time capabilities such as a real-time 
operating system (RTOS) (e.g., the DSP-BIOS RTOS for the DaVinci family 
of Texas Instruments, µC/OS-II™ Real-Time Kernel for the Blackfin processor 
family of AnalogDevices). Lots of digital signal processors today integrate an 

42 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
ARM core and support embedded linux or windows CE or android operating 
systems.
Digital signal processors are often available as reusable IP cores to be inte­
grated in custom SoC: soft macrocells for which a parametric HDL description 
exists, which can be modified and configured by the core user and then syn­
thesized in the target technology, or hard macrocells, already synthesized in the 
target technology by the IP vendor, and not customizable by the IP user; that is, 
integrated as a black box in the back-end phase of the IC design. 
As an example of possible digital signal processors to be adopted for ra­
dar signal processing, in the rest of this chapter we will analyze three different 
architectures: 
• Multicore cell DSP from IBM using as a basic core a synergistic vector 
processor representative of a SIMD architecture;
• The Fermi family from NVIDIA, as an example of massively parallel 
GPU architectures and their use for computing intensive DSP tasks;
• DSPace core developed by an European consortium (Universities of Pisa 
and Aachen and industries like Intecs, Sitael, and SpaceApp), which is 
an example of a VLIW design, targeting avionic/space signal processing 
applications, but usable also for ground applications.
3.3.1  Vector DSP and the CELL Many-Core Computing Engine
The synergistic processor of CELL from IBM is a vector processor (i.e., it has 
a SIMD architectures operating a single instruction each time on vector of 
data). It is a 128-bit processor with 128 special registers each 128 bits wide. 
The synergistic processor can operate with floating-point or integer data with a 
computational capability of 25.6 GFLOPS when operated with a single preci­
sion on floating-point data. When integer arithmetic is used, the computational 
capability of a synergistic vector DSP increases to 51 GOPS. This processor has 
also 256 KB of local SRAM memory and has direct memory access (DMA) 
instructions for moving data between local store memory and main memory.
The synergistic processor is integrated as a signal processing core in the 
multiprocessor of IBM called cell broadband engine (BE) [17, 18]. The CELL 
BE integrates one 64-bit power processor element (PPE) core in charge of op­
eration scheduling and data flow control, and eight synergistic processors (SPs) 
dedicated to DSP computing and working according to a SIMD scheme. The 
nine processors are interconnected through a common on-chip communication 
link with ring topology. The on-chip network has a communication capability 
of roughly 200 GBps sustained bandwidth. The CELL BE has also dedicated 

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
43
resources for off-chip DRAM memory interfacing and for fast I/O off-chip 
communication; the relative driving unit is also connected to the ring high-
bandwidth network.
The Cell BE has 256 KB of local memory for each SP, 32 KB of L1 data 
and instruction caches for the PPE, and 512 KB L2 shared cache. 
Each SP core has a transistor count of 21 millions, an area of 14.77 mm2, 
and a power cost of 5W in 90-nm CMOS technology. Each SP has an area of 
11.08 mm2 and 6.47 mm2 in 65-nm and 45-nm technology, respectively. The 
multicore CELL BE has an area of 235 mm2 in 90-nm CMOS technology, 174 
mm2 in 65-nm CMOS, and 115 mm2 in 45-nm CMOS SOI [19, 20]. There­
fore, in submicron CMOS technology, by scaling the same architecture from 
90-nm to 65-nm and then to 45-nm technology node, the overall processor 
area scales with a factor roughly λ2/λ1 with λ2 and λ1 being the channel lengths 
of the MOS devices in the two technologies. In the past, with larger technol­
ogy nodes above 100 nm, such a ratio was (λ2/λ1)θ with θ a fitting parameter 
between 1 and 2. 
The power consumption of the CELL BE at 3.2 GHz is up to 80W in 
90-nm CMOS technology, while at the same clock frequency in 45-nm CMOS 
technology is up to 40W [19, 20]. 
The overall computational capability of the CELL BE computing plat­
form at 3.2 GHz is 205 GFLOPS (floating-point arithmetic) or 410 GOPS 
(fixed-point arithmetic) when realized in 90-nm CMOS silicon-on-insulator 
(SOI) technology. Therefore, the computational capability per clock frequency 
is on the order of 128 MIPS/MHz in fixed-mode and half in the floating-point 
mode. With respect to the similar performance figures discussed earlier for Cor­
texA9, the CELL BE is at least 50 times faster and is 100 times faster than the 
StrongARM. This performance enhancement is the result of the combined use 
of multiple processors (9: 8 vector DSP + 1 power PC core) and the fact that 
each of the eight synergistic processors is optimized for SIMD signal processing 
functions.
In 65-nm and in 45-nm CMOS SOI, the clock frequency of the CELL 
BE can rise up to 6 GHz and the peak computational throughput is roughly 
380 GFLOPS. 
The computational capability enhancement of the CELL is paid in terms 
of area and power consumption overhead versus less powerful ARM cores; tens 
of watts for the CELL BE versus few watts or even less than 1W for ARM-based 
computing platforms.
At the University of Pisa, we benchmarked the CELL BE at 3.2 GHz 
versus different general purpose processors, considering a function that is often 
used in signal processing applications, and particularly in radar imaging, such 
as fast Fourier transform (FFT). For the FFT benchmarking, we considered dif­
ferent length size from 1 K to 64 K.

44 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
The target reference processors for the comparison with the CELL BE are 
an INTEL Pentium at 3.6 GHz with 2 MB of L2 cache, an AMD Opteron at 
2.4 GHz, and a Freescale 744 MX processor at roughly 1 GHz.
The results of the benchmark are reported in Table 3.1, with a relative 
performance of 1 being that of the Freescale 744Mx processor. The results of 
the table clearly show that CELL BE is at least one order of magnitude faster 
when implementing digital signal processing functionalities. 
3.3.2  GPU
GPUs are now evolving as massively parallel platforms for graphics but also for 
computing-intensive signal processing algorithms with a high degree of paral­
lelism [21–23]. For example, the Fermi architecture of NVIDIA is composed 
of 512 compute unified device architecture (CUDA) processing cores hierarchi­
cally organized in 16 streaming multiprocessors, each with 64-KB L1 cache and 
128-KB local register file, and sharing a common 768-KB L2 cache. The total 
amount of on-chip memory is roughly 4 MB. 
The Fermi GPU architecture also has a PCIe host interface and six 64-bit 
double data rate (DDR) DRAM interfaces. Each CUDA core is capable of both 
integer and floating-point operations with 64-bit results. 
Each of the 16 streaming processors also has four 40-bit special function 
units for fast approximation of nonlinear operators (square root, sin, cos, exp, 
log functions) and 16 load/store units. The Fermi NVIDIA GPU leads to high 
computational power, up to 1500 GFLOPS in single-precision, orders of mag­
nitude higher than general purpose processors such as Core 2 or Atom. 
Table 3.2 reports a complete comparison between some GPU models 
(ATI Radeon or NVIDIA Fermi) and some GPPs platforms in terms of com­
putational capabilities (measured in GFLOPS); power consumption (measured 
in watts), sustained off-chip communication bandwidth (GBps) and some ef­
ficiency metrics as GFLOPS/watt. 
Although real-time processing is not an issue for such GPUs, their area and 
power consumption is suited only for desktop applications and workstations, 
not for handheld or mobile devices. Hence GPU-based radar signal processing 
Table 3.1
Speed-Up Factor of the CELL BE Versus Reference Processors 
When Executing FFT with Different Lengths
1 K-point FFT
8 K-point FFT
64 K point FFT
CELL BE
32
56
30
Pentium
1.5
2.1
1.9
Opteron
0.9
1.3
1
Freescale 1
1
1

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
45
can be used for airborne or naval applications, or for surveillance applications 
from a remote control room but not for on-board automotive applications or 
handheld vital sign detection devices.
For example, the GTX480 Fermi NVIDIA, realized in 45-nm CMOS 
technology, has a transistor count of 3 billions, an area occupation for the core 
of 422 mm2, and power consumption higher than 150W when implement­
ing algorithms with a computational workload higher than 500 GFLOPs. This 
power consumption requires the use of active cooling systems to keep under 
control the operating temperature of the GPU chip. 
Scaled versions of CUDA-based GPU exist (e.g., the NVIDIA Quadro 
4000 GPU has 256 CUDA cores, four 64-bit DDR DRAM interfaces and a 
maximum power consumption of 100W).
The massively parallel approach has been followed also by other designs 
available in literature (e.g., the TILERA architecture). The Tile 64 processor 
realizes in CMOS 90 nm an array of 64 basic processors with a 64-bit instruc­
tion set and 32-bit integer ALU communicating through a 2D mesh on-chip 
interconnect. The Tile 64 reaches a computational throughput of 144 integer 
GOPS (32-bit operations) and 384 integer GOPS (8-bit operations) with a 
750-MHz clock. Its complexity amounts to 615 millions of transistors; the area 
is 433 mm2, 215 mm2 in 45 nm, and the power consumption at full load is 
roughly 11W. 
Although a comparison of hardware/software platforms with different ar­
chitectures, instruction sets, and computing performances is difficult to imple­
ment, Figure 3.5 provides a visual representation of the trade-off between die 
Table 3.2
Comparison of Some GPU Models Based on NVIDIA Fermi or ATI Radeon 
Architecture and Some GPPs from INTEL
GPP
GFLOPS
Bandwidth 
(GB/s)
Watt
GFLOPS/
Watt
GFLOPS/
Bandwidth
Intel Core2Duo E8600
27
10.4
65
0.4
2.6
Intel Core2Duo SP9600
20
8.33
25
0.8
2.4
Intel Core i7-870
47
22.89
95
0.5
2.1
Intel Core i7-820QM
28
21
45
0.6
1.3
GeForce GT 240M
174
25.6
23
7.6
6.7
GeForce GTS 250M
360
51.2
28
12.9
7.0
GeForce GTX 260
875
112
171
5.1
7.8
AMD/ATI 5870
2720
153.6
188
14.5
17.7
AMD 5750
1008
73.6
86
11.8
13.7
AMD 5770
520
51.2
30
17.3
10.2
AMD 5830
800
25.6
24
33.3
31.3
AMD 5870
1120
64
50
22.4
17.5

46 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
size (due to circuit complexity spent for increased parallelism and hence in­
creased performance), power consumption, and computational capabilities in 
state-of-the-art single-core and multicore systems. 
Reported data refer to platforms realized in 45-nm silicon technology nodes 
and to operations on 32-bit data (integer or single-precision floating-point).
Figure 3.5 highlights that when considering as performance metric 
the ratio GOPS/mm2, there are two different trend-lines: one for platforms 
Figure 3.5  Area, number of transistors, computational power (GOPS), and power consump­
tion of state-of-the-art single-core, ATOM 230, and 1 synergistic processor (SP) of the CELL BE 
and multicore systems, ATOM330, Fermi GPU GTX480, Core2, CELL BE, and Tile64.

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
47
optimized for general purpose computing applications (e.g., Atom, Core2) and 
one for platforms optimized for DSP applications. When the level of parallel­
ism increases (e.g., from 1 in the SP_CELL to many cores in the CELL-BE or 
Tile64 or GTX480), the difference between the two trend-lines is reduced since 
at high parallelization levels the performance bottleneck is represented by com­
munication and the computational power increases slowly versus the number 
of cores.
At the University of Pisa, we implemented a benchmarking of a GPU 
computing platform versus a general purpose processing platform considering 
some key algorithms for radar signal processing. The considered GPU proces­
sor is a NVIDIA GTX260, which has been tested against a Core2Duo GPP 
E8600. The considered radar DSP algorithms are as follows:
• FFT and IFFT;
• Timed domain FIR (TDFIR) and frequency domain FIR (FDFIR) fil­
ters, the latter realized according the following chain: FFT cascaded to a 
TDFIR cascaded to a IFFT;
• Single value decomposition and QR-decomposition on a complex large 
size matrix;
• CFAR.
Similar benchmarking activities have been done in the literature by other 
academic and industrial R&D group such as SAAB [24]. The results achieved 
by SAAB and reported in the literature are similar to those reached in Pisa 
and reported hereafter. SAAB also considers in its benchmarking analysis STAP 
techniques. STAP has been not considered in our benchmarking activity since 
this technique is too computationally complex for the target low-power ubiq­
uitous civil radar system. 
Considering the different types of radar algorithms, the GPU resulted in 
a speed-up factor from 10 percent up to two orders of magnitude versus GPP, 
depending mainly on the size of the input array data, on the regularity and par­
allelization degree of the data flow, and on the bottleneck caused by memory 
transfers. Indeed in most cases the whole GPU computing platform including 
the memory system has much worse performance than those achievable by the 
GPU kernel alone. 
From our benchmarks for linear filtering in time domain, the GPU kernel 
has a speed-up up to 70 times versus the considered GPP unit; the higher the 
length of the input array data, the higher the GPU speed-up.
Considering the whole computing platform, including the memory trans­
fers between the computing kernel and the large off-chip memories, the speed-
up factor is reduced. 

48 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Considering a CFAR algorithm, the GPU kernel has a speed-up versus 
the GPP platform from a factor 3 times to a factor 30 times, depending on the 
data set used for the benchmark. When also considering memory transfers, the 
speed-up factor is halved. 
Finally, considering FFT (the results for IFFT are similar), the speed-up 
factor of the GPU versus the GPP is up to 40 times. The higher the number of 
the input vector length, the higher the gain. When also considering the memo­
ry subsystem, the gain factor is reduced by a factor 4 times.
3.3.3  VLIW DSP for Space Applications (DSPace) Processor
In the context of the European project DSPace, a VLIW architecture has been 
recently released targeting low power consumption and a signal processing ca­
pability of around 1 GFLOPS peak. The core is released with intellectual prop­
erty macrocells that can be fitted in FPGA or integrated in SoC deigns, together 
with a correlated a high-quality software development environment (SDE). 
With respect to the previously analyzed DSP platforms (vector DSP and 
many core CELL architectures), the DSPace design is characterized by a lower 
computational capability and lower power consumption, being more suited for 
the ubiquitous civil radar applications of this book, although it cannot support 
complex radar algorithms like STAP. Although the main DSPace target is aero­
space application, the processor can be used also for ground DSP applications.
The cardinal set of system requirements for the DSPace processor de­
sign was the new generation of space-qualified DSP identified by the European 
Space Agency [25]. Hereafter we list the main ESA requirements: 
• Processing power ≥ 1000 mega instructions per second (MIPS);
• Radiation hardness, total ionization dose ≥ 100 krad;
• Memory protection with error detection and correction (EDAC);
• Support for aerospace standard I/O interfaces;
• High-quality software development environment;
• No access restrictions for European users (i.e., no ITAR restrictions);
• Reduced power consumption.
To achieve a significant DSP performance increase, while maintaining 
a moderate clock frequency and a hence a moderate power consumption, the 
processing core is based on a parallel architecture. Second, to maintain the func­
tionality in radiation environment, the DSP implements by design radiation 
hardening techniques: triple modular redundancy (TMR) with voting logic to 

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
49
protect internal registers as well as EDAC protection for on-chip memories to 
correct single error and to detect double error events (SEC/DED). 
The processor offers also general purpose capabilities, and hence it can 
act as main control unit, but at the same time it provides a lot of specific and 
optimized instructions to speed up the recurrent operations in signal and image 
radar processing (i.e., jump with decrement of a register, bit reversal, circular 
addressing mode). 
Finally, the DSPace design has a complete SDE, with C compilers, opti­
mizer, assembler, linker, and instruction-level simulator, to enable the software 
architects to easily program the device. All the development tools, except the C 
compiler, come from a concurrent hardware/software design approach. Indeed, 
the compiler is based on the reuse of a mature open-source GCC-based tool-
chain for ground DSP, ensuring binary compatibility through the translation 
and optimization of GCC assembly into DSPace assembly code. 
As far as the DSPace architecture is concerned, a minimal and complete 
set of building blocks are arranged in order to supply the data processing unit 
(DPU) with the program instructions and the data to be elaborated, allowing 
also the possibility to communicate with the hosting environment. The DPU 
represents the computational element of the chip. Moreover, there are some on-
chip peripherals able to provide I/O capabilities for operative and control pur­
poses. The system works with cache memories both for instructions and data, 
aiming to improve its performance. All the communications with the external 
main memory (i.e., in case of cache miss) are driven by the direct memory 
Table 3.3
Speed-Up Factor of GTX260 GPU Versus Core2Duo GPP for a 
Time Domain FIR Implementation, Computing Kernel Alone
Length of the Input Vector
1K
4K
16K
64K
256K
1M
FIR filter 
length
32
7
18
34
48
72
77
64
8
24
43
49
65
74
128
10
28
44
52
61
74
Table 3.4
Speed-Up Factor of GTX260 GPU Versus Core2Duo GPP 
for a Time Domain FIR Implementation, Computing Kernel 
Plus Memory System
Length of the Input Vector
1K
4K
16K
64K
256K
1M
Filter 
length
32
1,5
3
5
4
11
17
64
2
4
7
12
19
26
128
2
5
10
19
26
37

50 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
access (DMA) controller through the generic memory controller able to deal 
with double data rate (DDR2) RAM memories. The two SpaceWire interfaces, 
which are the natural choice in the space field, allow for the information ex­
change between the DSPace chip and the hosting system (i.e., read the status of 
a sensor, actuate a control, or output a result). SpaceWire can be also used for 
high data rate ground communications where high reliable links are required 
as demonstrated in [26] for the automotive, defense, or physics experiment 
application fields. AMBA standard busses are finally involved within the chip 
to connect the building elements. The high-level DSPace [27] SoC blocks dia­
gram is shown in Figure 3.6. 
The DPU is based on a VLIW architecture featuring eight computational 
units organized in parallel, allowing the performance of up to 8 RISC instruc­
tions at every clock cycle. Assuming an operational frequency of 125 MHz, it 
ensures near 1000 MIPS peak performance as expected. 
Figure 3.7 shows in detail the internal structure of the DPU. This is the 
processing block of the DSPCE SoC, in charge of fetching, decoding, and ex­
ecuting the program instructions coming from the instruction cache (I-cache) 
elaborating the data provided by the data cache (D-cache) or by the SpaceWire 
ports. 
The DPU data path consists of the following: 
• A register file with 64 general purpose 32-bit locations;
• Four instances of arithmetical-logical unit (FP_ALU) capable of all the 
logic, arithmetic (with the exclusion of multiplying), conversion, and 
I/O operations;
• Two multiplier unit (FP_MUL) dedicated to multiplying operations;
• Two address generation unit (AGU) for accessing the memory;
• Two 64-bit ports (LD) to load data from the memory to the register file;
• Two 32-bit ports (ST) to store data contained in the register file to the 
memory.
All the functional units work with immediate operands or values provided 
from the register. Supported operands are compliant with the 32-bit 2s comple­
ment fixed-point and IEEE 745 single precision floating-point formats. Indeed 
the HW support for extended fixed-point (40 bit) or double-precision floating-
point (64 bit) have not been considered in this version. Table 3.5 summarizes 
the capabilities of each kind of computational unit.
The DPU is designed with a single-cycle throughput, and it implements 
a seven-stage pipeline architecture. The fetch phases contains three stages of the 
pipeline. It is in charge of retrieve instructions from the I-cache according to the 

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
51
Figure 3.6  DSPace complete block diagram.

52 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Figure 3.7  Block diagram of the internal structure of the DPU of the DSPace processor.

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
53
program flow. The following two stages of the pipeline (decode phase) provide 
the source operands decoding and the dispatching of the instructions to the 
right execution unit. During the execution stage, the units perform the assigned 
instructions and then provide the results of the computation in the register file 
in the final write-back stage. The pipeline is stalled in case of cache misses, both 
for instructions and data, until the entire block the missing data belong to has 
been transferred from the external main memory to the involved cache via the 
DMA controller.
The DPU works with instruction packets (IPs) composed of eight in­
structions. The instructions within each IP that can be executed in parallel in 
the DSPace pipeline are grouped at compilation time exploiting a specific bit in 
the opcodes. In this way, each IP may generate from one to eight sets of instruc­
tions executed in parallel, called execution packets (EPs). NOP instructions are 
automatically dispatched in the decode phase to the idle computational units 
during the current EP, reducing the memory occupation of the program. At 
every cycle, if the previous IP has been completely dispatched, a new one is 
addressed to enter in the pipeline; otherwise, the fetching is stalled. The assign­
ment among instructions and execution units is made explicit into opcode at 
compile time; thus, the hardware for the dispatch function is minimal while the 
compiler is rather complex.
The instruction set contains 150 instructions: 92 assigned to the FP_
ALUs, 24 to the FP_MUL, and 34 to the AGU. All the instructions can be 
Table 3.5
DSPace Computational Units Capabilities
FP_ALU
FP_MUL
AGU
32-bit logical op
32-bit arithmetic op
32-bit compare op
32-bit bit-field op
32-bit shifts
Min/max op
Normalization
Bit reversal
Trailing bit count
Single-precision floating-point 
compare op
Single-precision floating-point 
arithmetic op
Min/max floating-point op
Integer/floating-point conversions
Branch
Branch with register decrement
Interrupt handling
Control register transfers to/from 
register file
Input/output transfers 
32- x 32-bit multiply op
Single-precision floating-
point multiplication
16- x 16-bit multiply op
32-bit addition and subtract 
in linear or circular address 
calculation
Load and store with 5-bit and 
15-bit constant offset using 18 
different addressing op
Load and store nonaligned bytes, 
half-words, words, and double-
words

54 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
executed conditionally, depending on the content of some registers in the regis­
ter files for a reduction of the pipeline hazard. 
Three kinds of interrupts are supported in the DPU architecture, served 
with different levels of priority: reset, nonmaskerable, and seven maskerable 
interrupts. The source of interrupts may be on-chip or off-chip. The I/O space 
of the DPU consists of 32 virtual registers that map the peripherals present in 
the SoC. Accessing these registers with two specific instructions in charge of 
the FP_ALU results, respectively, in output or input operations involving the 
mapped peripheral. 
Finally, the DPU includes 20 control and status registers grouped in a 
dedicated register file. There are three main classes of registers: related to the 
status of the computation of arithmetical, logical, and field operations (i.e., 
carry, saturation, overflow, and so on); related to the interrupts management 
(i.e., masking flag, address of handlers table, and so on); and for the configura­
tion of the addressing mode and other DPU settings. FP_ALU can access these 
registers with a specific instruction. 
To improve the system performance while keeping the design simple, 
two separated single level caches are used for instructions (I-cache) and data 
(D-cache). High bandwidth and low latency are crucial for these elements. To 
make these memories space ready, EDAC protection to correct SEC/DED is 
implemented. Because the cache miss condition stops the DPU fetching until 
the end of a DMA transfer, the caches are large enough to accommodate entire 
program functions and data sets typical of matrix-based processing algorithms. 
For example, 2D elaboration of radar images, where all pixels are iterated in 
loop way, benefits from caches. 
The D-cache is a direct-mapped memory (64 KB, 32 bytes of block size) 
with copy-back strategy for the cache miss condition. It provides to the AGU 
units two read ports and two write ports working in parallel for read-read, read-
write, write-read, and write-write operations: 64-bit reading without any mask­
ing signal (i.e., always 64 bits are returned from the cache) and 32-bit writing 
operations with byte enable signal are supported. 
The actual size of the I-cache is 32 KB, and the block size is 256 bytes. 
It is implemented in direct-mapped fashion and contains up to eight kilo-in­
structions of the program. A single 256-bit port enables the DPU to fetch the 
instruction-packets. 
A multichannel DMA engine allows the transfer of data between the 
caches and the memory controller (off-chip memory). Moving the control of 
this data path outside the caches gives the programmer the ability to directly 
manage the local data prefetch/save according to a cacheless paradigm. In fact 
the DMA controller is mapped in the I/O space of the DPU, and the program­
mer has the ability to start DMA transfers activating the controller via software 
instructions. 

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
55
The memory controller module is the DSPace interface toward the off-
chip main memory containing the overall program and the complete set of data 
to be processed. This is a general module interfacing the DPU with its memory 
space, enabling transfers from and to the external memory (i.e., EEPROM/
SRAM/DRAM/DDRAM). 
Finally, the SoC provides two SpaceWire interfaces for high-speed com­
munication with the external hosting system. Using these ports, the DPU can 
interact with the operative environment receiving data (i.e., samples acquisition 
from a system sensor) or sending the results of a computation toward other part 
of the system.
The on-chip bus hierarchy is an AMBA AHB one. The AMBA AHB 
multimaster bus allows for high-performance communication among the host 
system, the memory controller, and the control logic. It connects the SpaceWire 
interfaces (the external environment) with the control logic and memory con­
troller to perform programming and control actions.
The AMBA APB bus enables the DPU (master) to interact directly with 
the on-chip peripherals (slaves) that represent its own I/O space: DMA, control 
logic, SpaceWire interfaces. All the peripherals present some memory-mapped 
registers accessible via the APB bus and dedicated to the configuration and the 
I/O operations. 
The internal memory bus is in charge of moving data between the DMA 
controller, and the memory controller toward the external main memory. Both 
instructions and data extracted from the main memory travel on this bus. In­
deed, the instruction bus and the data bus are connected, respectively, with 
the I-cache and D-cache controllers to move instructions and data among the 
caches and the DMA in case of miss or programmatic transfers. 
The DSPace development activity is characterized also by innovation at 
the methodology design level. Indeed the design and implementation of a new 
hardware architecture is a challenging task. It takes a long period of develop­
ment as well as requiring a complex testing phase. The development time be­
comes longer considering also the tools for the code generation and the sys­
tem simulator. In fact the SDE design effort is often larger than the hardware 
design, and it is an error-prone task. A mixed design flow was applied in the 
DSPace project. The realization of the DPU module went through a method­
ology of concurrent design of the hardware platform and the related software 
tools, while the rest of the SoC building blocks were developed following the 
traditional hardware design flow (i.e., VHDL). Indeed, the DPU was mod­
eled using language for instruction set architectures (LISA) and the associated 
Processor Designer by Synopsys. LISA is an architecture description language 
(ADL) that allows the describing of a processor’s behavior as well as its structure 
and instruction set on a very high abstraction level. Using the LISA model, is 
possible to automatically obtain both the synthesizable VHDL description of 

56 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
the processor and the software development tools (assembler, linker, simulator, 
debugger). The VHDL model generated by Processor Designer was refined at 
RTL level to optimize circuit complexity and speed performance of the hard­
ware implementation. Finally all the peripheral blocks were added to the op­
timized model of the DPU to form the complete model of DSPace SoC. This 
methodology allows for consistency between the generated software tools and 
generated hardware, and dramatically improves the quality of the developed 
processor, reducing the design time. 
To complete the SDE, avoiding the cost of the C compiler development, 
a large reuse of an already existing and stable SDE was adopted. A specific soft­
ware layer performs code translation and architecture-specific optimizations of 
the code produced by the reused tool-chain to adapt it to the DSPace architec­
ture and to leverage its parallelism. 
The set of software benchmarks representative of typical DSP applications 
in aerospace, most of them common to radar signal processing, established by 
the ESA provides a concrete set of criteria for the evaluation of the processor. 
During the design phase, they contributed to critical decisions while the final 
validation will provide the results of the DSP performance assessment. 
Preliminary synthesis and fitting steps were executed to evaluate the effec­
tive resource demand and the operating frequency of the SoC design from the 
FPGA and ASIC point of view. Also, the demonstration board was addressed.
Targeting as space reference the qualified Virtex5-XQR5VFX130, due to 
the large demand of silicon and because the SoC saturates the resources of the 
correspondent ground Virtex5-XC5VLX110, to realize the demonstrator board 
for the validation, a larger Kintex7-XC7K325T is involved. The complete SoC 
occupies 30% of the resource budget on this device, operating at 60 MHz of 
clock frequency. The PCB of the demonstrator has Compact PCI 3U size and 
includes a DDR2 SODIMM connector with 2 GB of onboard memory. The 
board was designed in order to be housed in a Compact PCI crate or alterna­
tively in a stand-alone box. Additional SpaceWire, CAN, and MIL1553 com­
munication interfaces are included.
First synthesis results obtained using Synopsys Design Compiler with a 
CMOS standard cell 180-nm library show an area of around 380 kgates and a 
peak performance of 1000 MIPS (750 MFLOPS) at 125 MHz. The ATMEL 
ATC18RHA (standard cell 180 nm) is the target European ASIC technology, 
but also the ST DSM65 65nm technology will be considered to reach multi-
GFLOPS capability.
Preliminary and encouraging results on FIR filtering benchmark, evalu­
ated for different filter lengths (nh = 16, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024 bit) and vari­
ous output lengths (nr = 128, 256, 512, 1024 bit), show a performance similar 
to the fast ground DSP TMSC67XX by Texas Instrument in terms of number 
of cycles to obtain the result.

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
57
3.4  FPGA for Radar Signal Processing
3.4.1  Overview of FPGAs
FPGAs are evolving from reconfigurable hardware devices to complex field 
programmable systems on chip (FPSoC) with integrated reconfigurable logic 
blocks (based on FlipFlop and look up tables for the combinatorial logic), I/O 
blocks with high-speed transceivers (with sustained bandwidth up to Gbps), 
memory blocks, DSP-dedicated units (multiply, accumulator, adder/subtrac­
tor), soft or hard programmable cores (Microblaze, Nios, ARM Cortex) for 
software programmability. 
Therefore, an FPGA can be both software programmable and hardware 
reconfigurable.
The design of an electronic system on FPGA will require knowledge of 
both hardware-oriented languages and tools (e.g., hardware description lan­
guages like VHDL or Verilog) and of software-oriented languages and tools 
(e.g., C or assembly for programmable core programming, operating systems).
Therefore, managing an FPGA technology can be a bit harder than man­
aging a pure software programmable platform, although there are several tools, 
libraries of predesigned components, and languages whose aim is allowing the 
design of FPGA-based systems from high abstraction levels in C or Matlab 
Simulink or in graphic environments (CatapulC, DSPbuilder, System Genera­
tor for DSP)
Different FPGA technologies exist from many vendors, the leaders be­
ing Altera, Xilinx, Actel (now Microsemi). For example, flash technology is 
adopted in the ProAsic family, antifuse technology in AX and RTAX families, 
SRAM in Virtex, Kintex, Spartan, Arria, Cyclone, and Stratix devices. 
For computing-intensive applications like radar signal processing and 
considering that the target of this book is civil applications, SRAM-based FP­
GAs are typically preferred.
Mixed-signal FPGAs also exist, like the fusion family integrating in the 
FPGA digital hardware configurable blocks, software programmable core (e.g., 
a Cortex-M1 from ARM), and analog blocks like an ADC and analog quads to 
scale up or down signals.
Some FPGA families are already qualified for automotive or space/mili­
tary applications. Some vendors, like Altera or Xilinx, have dedicated develop­
ments for radar signal processing application. With respect to an ASIC design, 
an FPGA design allows for short time to market, fewer design risks, increased 
flexibility, and lower costs for markets that are still not entered in a large-vol­
ume production, which is the case of low-power radar for civil applications.
To be noted that the FPGA design can be seen as a first step toward an 
ASIC. Indeed, most vendors enable an easy way to migrate from FPGA sys­
tem design to prototyping and then into volume production. By using one 

58 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
methodology, one tool environment, one set of intellectual property (IP) cores, 
the designer can design and prototype FPGAs and then ramp production when 
it makes sense for the market, and the design no longer requires the full pro­
grammability of standard FPGAs. This is the case of the hardcopy products of 
Altera or Easy Path from Xilinx. 
The scope of the chapter is not reviewing all recent advances in the field 
of FPGA from all vendors but showing the capabilities of these devices for radar 
signal processing applications. This is why, for example, Table 3.6 we sum­
marize the main performance of the FPGA families of just one vendor, Xilinx. 
Other vendors have product lines with comparable performances. 
Current Xilinx FPGA devices include SRAM-based families realized in 
different technology nodes and addressing different trade-offs between perfor­
mance and cost/complexity: from the Spartan family realized in 45-nm tech­
nology node, then there are the Artix, Kintex, and Virtex families in 28-nm 
technology node, and the emerging ultrascale Virtex and Kintex devices in 20-
nm technology and lower. The lower the technology node scale, the higher the 
complexity and functionality of the FPGA but also the cost.
As we can see from the Table 3.6, today FPGA devices integrate RAM 
storage resources on the order of a few to several tens of Mb, with high-speed 
dedicated interfaces toward off-chip DRAM. 
Modern FPGAs also integrate from few hundred to several thousands 
of DSP blocks with multiply and accumulate (MAC) capabilities. The overall 
GMAC/s performances are up to tera multiply and accumulate operations per 
second, and hence FPGA can compete with the most complex GPU platforms.
Table 3.6
Xilinx FPGA Comparison Table
 
Spartan-6
Artix-7
Kintex-7
Virtex-7
Logic cells
150,000
215,000
480,000
2,000,000
BlockRAM
4.8 Mb
13 Mb
34 Mb
68 Mb
DSP slices
180
740
1,920
3,600
DSP performance 
(symmetric FIR)
140 GMACs
930 GMACs
2845 GMACs
5335 GMACs
Transceiver count
8
16
32
96
Transceiver speed
3.2 Gbps
6.6 Gbps
12.5 Gbps
28.05 Gbps
Total transceiver bandwidth 
(full duplex)
50 Gbps
211 Gbps
800 Gbps
2,784 Gbps
Memory interface (DDR3)
800 Mbps
1066 Mbps
1866 Mbps
1866 Mbps
PCI Express® interface
x1 Gen1
x4 Gen2
x8 Gen2
x8 Gen3
I/O pins
576
500
500
1,200
I/O voltage
1.2V, 1.5V, 
1.8V, 2.5V, 
3.3V
1.2V, 1.35V, 
1.5V, 1.8V, 
2.5V, 3.3V
1.2V, 1.35V, 
1.5V, 1.8V, 
2.5V, 3.3V
1.2V, 1.35V, 
1.5V, 1.8V, 
2.5V, 3.3V

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
59
Multiple I/O transceivers, running from few to tens of Gbps, are also 
available in FPGA devices. Even PCI express interfaces can be available.
3.4.2  High-End FPGA for Radar Signal Processing
The overall complexity of high-end FPGAs is on the order of billions of transis­
tors, occupying an area of several hundreds of mm2, and the power consump­
tion is up to tens of Watts. 
For example, a device like the Virtex6 LX760 FPGA, belonging to the 
previous Virtex generation (realized like the Spartan family in 45-nm technol­
ogy), offers a DSP computational capability of roughly 380 GFLOPS when 
implementing a FFT algorithm but for a power cost higher than 50W. 
If we compare the performance and power cost of this FPGA to an ASIC 
realization of the same FFT algorithm or to a software implementation on a 
general purpose processor like an INTEL CoreI7 or a GPU, (see Figure 3.8), 
like the GTX285 and GTX480 platforms, the following considerations can be 
done:
• The LX760 FPGA has worse performances, measured as the ratio be­
tween computational capability and power consumption (GFLOPS/W) 
or area (GFLOPS/mm2), by one order of magnitude versus a dedicated 
ASIC design.
• The LX760 FPGA has similar performances to a GPU (GTX480 from 
NVidia) realized in the same 45-nm CMOS technology and one order 
of magnitude better performance than the general purpose processor.
It should be noted that in Figure 3.8, the area is normalized versus a single 
technology node at 40 nm taken as reference with a factor λ2/λ1 being λ2 the 
channel length of the MOS devices in the original technology and λ1 = 40 nm. 
Moreover, for the FFT different lengths are considered. For FFTs, the 
computation load increases as N log2 N, whereas the data I/O increases as N. 
It is worth noting that the shorter FFT lengths are prevalent in radar sig­
nal processing, where FFT lengths of 512 to 8192 are the norm.
Therefore, high-end FPGAs for intensive radar signal processing are 
available but their cost (> US$1000) and power consumption are too high for 
ubiquitous low-power applications. Rather, these FPGAs are more suited for 
defense, avionic, or marine radar applications.
For example, a synthetic aperture beam forming radar design for defense 
applications has been proposed by Xilinx based on Kinetx-7 devices. The de­
vice has two 10G Ethernet and eight PCIe interfaces versus DRAM and a host 
CPU. The following radar signal processing tasks for 48 TX and RX channels 

60 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
are integrated in the FPGA resources: digital-down conversion, RX phase shift­
er, RX adaptive beamformer, digital up-conversion, TX waveform generation, 
TX direct digital synthesis, and pulse compression. 
Although with respect to a previous radar generation, still for defense ap­
plications, this FPGA approach claims for the realization of a single-board radar 
with a reduction of 50% in device use, 30% in bill of material cost, and 50% in 
power consumption, the power consumption and cost are still prohibitive for 
low-power/low-cost civil applications.
Similar considerations can be done for a single board design with three 
Virtex™-7 980T FPGAs proposed by Xilinx and implementing a 64-channel 
beam-former radar.
High-end FPGA designs for radar signal processing have also been pro­
posed by Altera.
For example, in [6] a Stratix Altera FPGA design in 28 nm allows for vari­
able precision DSP blocks (multipliers 18×18 or 27×27or 18×36, and so on, 
plus 64-bit accumulation) with a capability of tera multiply and accumulate 
operations per second. Several radar DSP functions have been implemented 
Figure 3.8  Comparison of a Virtex6 LX760 FPGA versus GPP, GPU, and ASIC for FFT process­
ing. The analysis confirms results that are known in the literature (e.g., [38]).

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
61
using Stratix FPGAs such as STAP, digital beam-forming, and pulse compres­
sion [28–31].
In a recent Altera white paper [29] dated May 2013, “Radar Processing: 
FPGAs or GPUs?” Altera’s next-generation high-performance FPGAs was an­
nounced to support a minimum of 5 TFLOPs performance by leveraging Intel’s 
14-nm Tri-Gate process. Up to 100 GFLOPs/W can be expected in the future 
using this advanced semiconductor process.
The current state of the art is represented by devices like the 28-nm Stratix 
V 5SGSD8 FPGA that in the same white paper is demonstrated having the ca­
pability to support in real time 4096-point Radix2 FFT.
The GFLOPS performance of such a device is from 81 to more than 
500 depending on the level of optimization of the design; in terms of power 
efficiency, a figure of 10 GFLOPS/W can be achieved with StratixV FPGA. 
Obviously such performance figures depend also on the adopted algorithms for 
the benchmarks. For example, using a more complex algorithm like STAP with 
Cholesky decomposition, the achieved efficiency is about 5 GFLOPs/W [32].
3.4.3  Cost-Effective FPGA for Radar Signal Processing
The analysis reported in the previous paragraph clearly demonstrates the signal 
processing capabilities of FPGAs [33–40], which can compete with the best-
performing GPU with computational capabilities on the order of tera floating-
point operations per second. 
However, our target applications of a portable radar for vital sign detec­
tion or a radar unit for automotive market require fitting the DSP radar re­
quirements on lower-cost lower-power platforms [30, 33–35]. 
Recent results in the literature, from both academia and industry, prove 
that this can be achieved through an optimized algorithmic-architecture co-
design on less complex FPGA families with hardware-software capabilities.
For example, in the works by Lal [34, 35], the microcontroller and DSP 
functionalities for a 77-GHz FMCW automotive radar are realized using a 
Xilinx Virtex5 SX50T device.
The radar front-end at radio frequency and intermediate frequency has 
been realized with GaAs MMIC technology.
Control and baseband DSP functionalities are carried out by a Virtex-5 
SX50T, which manages switch control, TX sweep generation, Hamming filter­
ing, FFT (radix-2 2048-point), CA-CFAR, and peak pairing. The ADC and 
DAC are sized with 11b and 10b resolution, respectively. 
The Virtex5 SX50T devices has 8160 slices (4 LUT + 4FF), 5 Mb RAM, 
288 DSP48 unit (25x18 multiply plus accumulate plus adder), 12 digital clock 
management, and fast I/O. The clock frequency is sized at 100 MHz.

62 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
A characteristic of this radar is that through a microelectro mechanical 
system (MEMS) controllable switch, the antenna array can be configured so 
that the devices can work as SRR, medium-range radar (MRR), or long-range 
radar (LRR).
In the context of this book (see also Table 3.7), the term SRR refers to a 
radar with a detection range in the order of few meters, with a maximum 30m; 
the term MRR refers to a radar with a detection range in the order of tens of 
meters, with a maximum 100m; and the term LRR refers to a radar with a de­
tection range in the order of hundreds of meters, with maximum 200–250m. 
In Table 3.7, the achieved performance of this FPGA-based automotive radar 
is compared to those of a commercial product: the third generation long-range 
radar from BOSCH (LRR3).
Other designs reported in the literature for FMCW radar proposed the 
integration on a Virtex2PRO FPGA of a Microblaze programmable core plus, 
fitted on the logic resources of the FPGA, a coprocessor realizing a 2048-point 
radix-2 FFT with 14-bit resolution.
Industrial examples of automotive radars whose signal processing chain is 
realized on a low-cost FPGA family, the Cyclone, for which automotive qualifi­
cation is available, have been recently proposed by Altera [30].
The proposed designs are based on a family of devices we called FPSoC. 
Indeed, the digital device embeds two 600-MHz ARM Cortex-A9 processors 
beside the standard FPGA resources. Automotive-grade versions of these de­
vices are also available and capable of 600-MHz CPU clock rates.
The designs from Altera include both a pulse-Doppler radar and an 
FMCW radar.
The pulse-Doppler radar sends successive pulses at specific intervals or 
a pulse repetition interval (PRI). As the radar returns, the reflections are pro­
cessed coherently to extract range and relative motion of detected objects.
Table 3.7
Performance of the FMCW Automotive Radar Based on Virtex 5 FPGA from 
[34] versus Commercial LRR3 Product from Bosch
MEMS Tri-Mode (Xilinx Virtex 5 
HDL Simulation)
Parameter
Bosch LLR3
SRR
MRR
LRR
Range (m)
0.5–250
0.4–30
30–100
100–200
Velocity (km/h)
–100 to +200
±300
±300
±300
Range accuracy (m)
±0.10
±0.10
±0.14
±0.28
Velocity accuracy (m/s)
±0.12
±0.14
±0.42
±0.83
Processing latency
N/A
106 µs
212 µs
212 µs
Cycle time
80 ms
62 ms for three modes combined

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
63
In automotive applications, the range can be as short as a few meters to as 
much as a few hundred meters. For a range of 2m, the round-trip transit time 
of the radar pulse is 13 ns. Achieving a 2m range resolution requires a sample 
rate in the order of 100 mega samples per second (MS/s) or more. 
Table 3.8 reports the implementation complexity results of a DSP chain 
for pulse-Doppler radar with PRI of 250 KHz, 64 range bins, and 65 Doppler 
bins realized on a Cyclone V FPGA, 5CSEA5 device.
The design occupies 42% of the available FPGA resources (Logic Ele­
ments LE), 76% of the available dedicated DSP blocks, and 40% of the avail­
able memory resources. The maximum achievable frequency for the FPGA 
clock rate is roughly 200 MHz.
It should be noted that in the Altera realization the DSP units are ca­
pable of variable precision computation de facto emulating a floating-point 
arithmetic.
Altera has also reported an example of the implementation with a Cyclone 
V FPGA of the processing chain of a 77-GHz FMCW automotive radar.
Figures 3.9 and 3.10 report, respectively, the analog section and the base­
band digital section of the implemented 77-GHz FMCW automotive radar. 
On the analog side, the transmitter waveform can be implemented using 
a direct digital synthesizer (DDS) with a standard reference crystal. The DDS 
generates an analog frequency ramp reference for the phased-locked loop (PLL) 
to generate the desired transmit frequency modulation. For example, if the PLL 
has a divider of 1000, then the reference would be centered at 77 MHz. This 
analog ramp signal drives the reference of a PLL, which disciplines a 77-GHz 
oscillator. The oscillator output of the circuit is amplified and produces the 
continuous wave (CW) signal ramping up and down over 500 MHz with a 
center frequency of 77 GHz. Filtering and matching circuits at 77 GHz are 
accomplished using passive components etched into high-epsilon dielectric cir­
cuit cards, minimizing the components required.
In the receiver, the front end requires filtering and a low-noise amplifier 
(LNA), followed by an analog mixer. The mixer down-converts the 77-GHz re­
ceiver signal with the ramping transmit signal, outputting a baseband signal that 
Table 3.8
Complexity of a DSP Vhain of a Pulse-Doppler Radar Implemented on a Cyclone V FPGA 
5CSEA25 Device (64 Ranges Bins, 64 Doppler Bins, 100-Mhz Sample Rate, PRI 250 kHz)
Logic 
Elements
Variable-
Precisions 
DSP Blocks
Memory 
Blocks
Max Clock 
Frequency
Cyclone5 5CSEA5 
available resources
85K
87
397
197 MHz at 1.1V 
and 85C
Percent FPGA occupation
42%
76%
39% 

64 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Figure 3.9  FMCW Automotive radar scheme similar to that proposed by Altera on Cyclone V—analog section [30].

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
65
contains the difference between the transmitter and receiver waveforms at any 
given instant. The baseband analog content has a bandwidth up to few MHz. 
The high-frequency filtering at 77 GHz can be implemented using etched pas­
sive components. The output of the mixer will be at low frequency (around 
2 MHz). Therefore, traditional passive components and operational amplifiers 
can be used to provide antialiasing low-pass filtering prior to the ADC.
The baseband signal is composed of frequencies, either all positive (dur­
ing negative frequency ramp) or all negative (during positive frequency ramp), 
so a mixer followed by a single low-pass filter and ADC is sufficient.
The ADC for baseband input must operate at a minimum of 5 mega 
sample per second (MSPS) to meet the Nyquist criterion. If, instead, an 8x 
sampling frequency of 40 MSPS is used, followed by an 8:1 digital decimation 
filter, then approximately three bits of additional resolution can be achieved. 
This decimation allows a 16-bit ADC to effectively operate in the range of 18 
to19 bits, achieving well over 100 dB of dynamic range.
The next step of signal processing is to perform frequency discrimination 
using an FFT, followed by an interpolation circuit.
The solution proposed by Altera implements a 2048-point FFT, in 
single-precision floating-point processing, and is claimed to support the 
100-dB dynamic of the target returns. Distant and weak target returns will not 
be obscured by nearby, strong returns, therefore avoiding the radar system being 
“blinded” by strong, nearby reflections. The floating-point processing will also 
prevent weak returns from being “buried” in the digital noise floor of the FFT. 
The floating-point FFT circuit in the Altera solution is also clocked at 
160 MHz, though only processing complex data at 10 MSPS. All this chain is 
fitted on the low-cost Cyclone V SoC FPGAs, which feature DSP blocks that 
support both 18 × 19 and 27 × 27 multiplier sizes. The larger 27 × 27 multi­
plier size is ideal for use in floating-point designs.
An interpolation of the FFT output will help with precise frequency dis­
crimination. If their energy is between frequency bins, the interpolation will 
prevent weak targets from being missed by aliasing the FFT energy into other 
bins. Detection processing will likely be done using one of the on-chip ARM 
Figure 3.10  FMCW automotive radar scheme similar to that proposed by Altera on Cyclone 
V—digital section [30].

66 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Cortex-A9 microprocessors. Algorithms from simple threshold to more so­
phisticated CFAR can be used. The interpolation of the FFT results can be 
implemented either in logic or in software, depending on the system designer’s 
choices.
Table 3.9 reports the implementation complexity results of an FMCW 
automotive radar on the Cyclone V FPGA, 5CSEA2 device.
The design occupies 24% of the available FPGA resources (Logic Ele­
ments LE), 22% of the available dedicated DSP blocks, and 21% of the avail­
able memory resources. The maximum achievable frequency is roughly 190 
MHz.
In comparing Tables 3.8 and 3.9, it is clear that the FMCW design uses 
much fewer resources than the pulse Doppler design, and hence the FMCW 
radar can be implemented in cost-effective FPGA for automotive market such 
as the Cyclone5 SEA2. 
Table 3.10 summarizes the main characteristics of CycloneV devices.
3.5  Conclusions
The aim of this chapter was reviewing possible implementing platforms for 
radar digital signal processing, with a particular focus on those meeting the 
requirements in terms of computational capability, flexibility, and low power 
consumption of the target ubiquitous civil radar applications.
While in the origin, a radar was mainly an analog system; now it is be­
coming a mixed-signal system. Radar signal can be digitized directly at interme­
diate frequency, minimizing the daunting tasks to be carried out in the analog 
domain at radio frequency. Fast Fourier transform and its inverse, time do­
main and frequency domain filtering, pulse compression, digital down- and 
up-conversion, beam-forming, waveform generation by direct digital synthesis, 
Table 3.9
Implementation Results of a FMCW Radar in Cyclone V FPGA 5CSEA2 Device
Logic 
Elements
Variable-
Precisions 
DSP Blocks
Memory 
Blocks
Max Frequency
Fixed-point decimation 
filter
1 K
4
0
190 MHz,
At 1.1 V, 85 C
Floating-point 2K FFT
5 K
4
29
Total resources
6 K
8
29
Cyclone5 5CSEA2 
available resources
25 K
36
140
Percent FPGA 
occupation
24%
22%
21% 

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
67
and CFAR are some examples of common radar signal and data processing 
algorithms to be realized in the digital domain. Beside processing functions, 
the radar digital domain should be in charge of control and interface tasks. For 
example, in the automotive domain the radar subsystem should be connected 
to the main control vehicle network through a CAN bus interface. 
Lots of possible implementation platforms are available in the literature 
with different trade-offs between computational and memory capabilities, pow­
er consumption and area, development time and costs, and flexibility: from 
hardware-oriented solutions (ASIC, FPGA) to software-based ones (MCU, 
DSP, GPU, GPP) to mixed hardware-software platforms (FPSoC, MPSoC).
The market of ubiquitous radar for civil applications is still not a ma­
ture large-volume market, with frozen standards and reference architecture, and 
hence an ASIC approach is not suitable. GPP can offer the required computa­
tional capabilities for radar signal processing and maximize system flexibility, 
but its power consumption is too high. Higher efficiency in terms of compu­
tational capability provided versus the power consumption, while still keep­
ing a software-oriented approach, can be offered by high performance DSP, 
like many-core DSP processors (e.g., CELL) or GPU. However, the absolute 
values of computational power, up to TFLOPS, and power, much higher than 
1W, can be suited for radar applications in defense or surveillance applications 
(avionic, marine) but not for portable ubiquitous civil radar as those discussed 
in the next chapters. Similar considerations are still valid for high-end FPGA 
devices with too-high computational capabilities, power, and device cost. 
Table 3.10
Cyclone V SE FPSoC for Cost-Effective Radar Signal Processing 
Implementation
Device
5CSEA2
5CSEA4
5CSEA5
5CSEA6
LEs (K)
25
40
85
110
M10K memory blocks
140
224
397
514
M10K memory (Kb)
1400
2240
3972
5140
18-bit x 19-bit multipliers
72
116
174
224
Variable-precision DSP 
blocks
36
58
87
112
FPGA PLLs
4
5
6
6
Package
U484,
U 672
U484,
U 672
U484,
U 672, 
F896
U484 , 
U 672, 
F896
Maximum FPGA user I/Os
145
145
288
288
FPGA hard memory 
controllers
1
1
1
1
Processor cores (ARM 
CortexTM-A9 MPCoreTM) 
Single or 
dual
Single or 
dual
Single or 
dual
Single or 
dual

68 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
For the target application of this book, the most suited platform imple­
mentation for the baseband digital domain is represented by a MCU core, in 
charge of basic control and networking functions, plus a low-power/low-cost 
FPGA or DSP coprocessors for computing intensive signal processing opera­
tors. The functionalities of the MCU core and the FPGA or DSP coprocessors 
can be now integrated in a single device class of the FPSoC device that are 
FPGAs with embedded hard or soft programmable cores. This approach can 
provide a cost-effective single-board solution with reduced development time 
and cost. Moreover, in case of future market success, an easy migration for an 
ASIC implementation, with reduced cost in a large volume market, is available.
As discussed, this proposed approach is not only a vision but, since 2013 
the market has already been offering components to implement it. 
References
[1]	 Fleming, B., “Recent Advancement in Automotive Radar Systems,” IEEE Vehicular Tech­
nology, Vol. 7, No. 1, 2012, pp. 4–9.
[2]	 Menxel, W., et al., “Antenna Concepts for Millimeter-Wave Automotive Radar Sensors,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 7, 2012, pp. 2372–2379. 
[3]	 Neri, B., and S. Saponara, “Advances in Technologies, Architectures and Applications of 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars,” IEEE Aerosp. Eelectr. Syst., Vol. 27, No. 1, 2012, 
pp. 25–36.
[4]	 Stevenson, R., “A Driver’s Sixth Sense,” IEEE Spectrum 2011, Vol. 48, No. 10, pp. 50–55.
[5]	 Winkler, V., “Range Doppler Detection for Automotive FMCW Radars,” Proc. European 
Radar Conference, 2007, pp. 166–169.
[6]	 Mauer, V., and M. Parker, “Floating-point STAP Implementation on FPGAs,” Proc. IEEE 
Radar Conference, Kansas City, KS, 2011, pp. 901–904.
[7]	  Schoor, M., and B. Yang, “High-Resolution Angle Estimation for an Automotive FMCW 
Radar Sensor,” in Proc. IEEE International Radar Symposium (IRS), Cologne, Germany, 
Sept. 2007.
[8]	 Wenig, P., et al., “System Design of a 77-GHz Automotive Radar Sensor with Super Reso­
lution DOA Estimation,” Proc. International Symposium on Signals, Systems and Electronics, 
2007, pp. 537–540. 
[9]	  Kok, D., and J. S. Fu, “Signal Processing for Automotive Radar,” Proc. IEEE International 
Radar Conference, Arlington, VA, May 9–12, 2005, pp. 842–846.
[10]	 Whil, R., et al., “Fast Growing, Diversified Automotive Radar Market Presents Chip 
Vendors with New Challenges,” Proc. of IWPC (International Wireless Packaging 
Consortium) workshop, 2011, p. 1–20, http://automotive.analog.com/static/imported-
files/tech_docs/adi-2011.pdf. 

 
Hardware-Software Implementing Platforms 
69
[11]	 Trotta, S., et al., “An RCP Packaged Transceiver Chipset for Automotive LRR and SRR 
Systems in SiGe BiCMOS Technology,” IEEE Transaction on Microwave Theory and 
Technique, Vol. 60, No. 3, 2012, pp. 778–794.
[12]	 Kawano, Y., et al., “A 77-GHz Transceiver in 90-nm CMOS,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on 
Solid State Circuits (ISSCC), San Francisco, CA, Feb. 8–12, 2009, pp. 310–311.
[13]	 Li, Y. A., et al., “A Fully Integrated 77-GHz FMCW Radar Transciever in 65-nm CMOS, 
Technology,” IEEE Journal Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 45, No. 12, 2010, pp. 2746–2756. 
[14]	 Mitomo, T., et al., “A 77-GHz 90-nm CMOS Transceiver for FMCW Radar Applications,” 
IEEE Journal Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 45, No. 4, 2010, pp. 928–937. 
[15]	  Richter, M. D. et al., “77-GHz Automotive Digital Beam-Forming Radar with SiGe 
chipset,” Proc. German Microwave Conference, 2010, pp. 210–213. 
[16]	 Hasch, J., et al., “Millimeter-Wave Technology for Automotive Radar Sensors in the 77-
GHz Frequency Band,” IEEE Transaction on Microwave Theory and Technique, Vol. 60, 
No. 3, 2012, pp. 845–860. 
[17]	 Pam, D. C., et al., “Overview of the Architecture, Circuit Design, and Physical 
Implementation of a First-Generation Cell Processor,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, 
Vol. 41, No. 1, 2006, pp. 179–193. 
[18]	 Parakh, N., A. Mittal, and R. Niyogi, “Optimization of MPEG 2 Encoder on Cell B. E. 
Processor,” IEEE Int. Advanced Computing Conference, 2009, pp. 423–427.
[19]	 Pille, J., et al., “Implementation of the Cell Broadband Engine™ in 65-nm SOI 
Technology Featuring Dual Power Supply SRAM Arrays Supporting 6 GHz at 1.3 V,” 
IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, Vol. 43, No. 1, 2008, pp. 163–171.
[20]	 Takahashi, O., et al., “Migration of Cell Broadband Engine from 65 nm SOI to 45 nm 
SOI,” Proc. IEEE Int. Solid State Circuit Conf. (ISSCC), Feb. 2008, San Francisco, CA, pp. 
85–87. 
[21]	 Chung, E., et al., “Single-Chip Heterogeneous Computing: Does the Future Include 
Custom Logic, FPGAs, and GPGPUs?,” Proc. IEEE/ACM 43rd Micro Conference, 2010, 
pp. 223–225.
[22]	 Ma, X., et al., “Statistical Power Consumption Analysis and Modeling for GPU-Based 
Computing,” Proc. Workshop on Power Aware Computing and Systems, Big Sky, MT, Oct. 
2009, pp. 1–5.
[23]	 Nickolls, J., et al., “The GPU Computing Era,” IEEE Micro, Vol. 30, No. 2, 2010, pp. 
56–69.
[24]	 Pettersson, J., and I. Wainwright, “Radar Signal Processing with GPU,” SAAB Doc. n. 
5/0363-FCP1041180 en, 2010, p. 127.
[25]	 Trautner, R., “ESA’s Roadmap for Next Generation Payload Data Processors,” Proc. of 
DASIA Conference, Malta, May 2011, pp. 1–5.
[26]	 Baronti, F., et al., “Design and Verification of Hardware Building Blocks for High-Speed 
and Fault-Tolerant In-Vehicle Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, Vol. 
58, No. 3, 2011, pp. 792–801.

70 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
[27]	 Errico, W., et al., “DSPace: A New Space DSP Development,” Proc. of DASIA Conference, 
Dubrovnik, Croatia, May 14–16, 2012, pp. 706–711.
[28]	 Parker, M., “Achieving One TeraFLOPS with 28-nm FPGAs,” Electronic Engineering 
Journal, doc. n. WP-01142, Sept. 2010, pp. 1–13. 
[29]	 Parker, M., “Radar Processing: FPGAs or GPUs?” Electronic Engineering Journal, doc. n. 
WP-01197, rev. 2.0, 2013, pp. 1–11. 
[30]	 Parker, M., “Implementing Digital Processing for Automotive Radar Using SoC FPGAs,” 
EEtimes, Nov. 2012, http://www.eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id=1280099. 
[31]	 Land, I., “Floating-Point FPGAs for DSP Bring High Precision to Radar and EW 
Systems,” ECN (Electronic Components News), No. 4, 2011, http://www.ecnmag.com/
articles/2011/04/floating-point-fpgas-dsp-bring-high-precision-radar-and-ew-systems.
[32]	 Yang, D., et al., “Performance Comparison of Cholesky Decomposition on GPUs and 
FPGAs,” Proc. Symposium on Application Accelerators in High Performance Computing 
(SAAHPC), Knoxville, TN, 2010, pp. 1–3. 
[33]	 Saad, J., et al., “FPGA-Based Radar Signal Processing for Automotive Driver Assistance 
System,” Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Rapid System Prototyping (RSP), Paris, France, 2009, pp. 
196–199.
[34]	 Lal, S., “An FPGA-Based Signal Processing System for a 77-GHz MEMS Tri-Mode 
Automotive Radar,” Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Rapid System Prototyping 
(RSP) 2011, Karlsruhe, Germany, pp. 2–8.
[35]	 Lal, S., et al., “An FPGA-Based 77 GHZ MEMS Radar Signal Processing System for 
Automotive Collision Avoidance,” Proc. IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical and 
Computer Engineering (CCECE), 2011, Niagara Falls, NY, pp. 1351–1356.
[36]	 Parker, M., “Radar Basics Tutorial Part 1,” EEtimes, May 2011, http://www.eetimes.com/
document.asp?doc_id=1278779.
[37]	  Parker, M., “Radar Basics Part 2: Pulse-Doppler Radar,” EEtimes, May 2011, http://www.
eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id=1278808.
[38]	 Parker, M., “Radar Basics Part 3: Beamforming and Radar Digital Processing,” EEtimes, 
June 2011, http://www.eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id=1278838.
[39]	 Parker, M., “Radar Basics Part 4: Space-Time Adaptive Processing,” EEtimes, June 2011, 
http://www.eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id=1278878.
[40]	 Parker, M., “Radar Basics Part 5: Synthetic Apature Radar,” EEtimes, July 2011, http://
www.eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id=1278931.

71
4
Radar for E-Health Applications: Signal 
Processing Perspective
4.1  General Characteristic of the Sensor and Its Functions
Medical technology has improved remarkably over the past 30 years, becoming 
less invasive and more sophisticated as the years progress. Until recently, howev­
er, completely noncontact health monitors have existed only in science fiction. 
Now, with new technologies, noncontact respiration and heartbeat monitoring 
offer a real, attractive alternative to commonly prescribed cheststrap monitors. 
The noncontact remote detection of vital signs leads to several potential 
applications, such as monitoring sleeping infants or adults to detect abnormal 
breathing conditions and searching survivors after earthquakes. Or, very impor­
tant in aging populations, home monitoring of vital signs, which can decrease 
the cost of health care by moving some patients from hospital to home. 
While the concept of noncontact detection of vital signs has been suc­
cessfully demonstrated by pioneers in this field before 2000 [1–3], research ef­
forts in the last decade have boosted the technology development toward lower 
power, lighter weight, longer detection range, with better accuracy and greater 
robustness for portable and handheld applications. There are several advantages 
to a noncontact measurement method. It does not inhibit the subject under test 
or cause discomfort or skin irritation. And this is particularly important over 
long terms of continuous monitoring. 
As for the automotive applications (see Chapter 5), two different types of 
radar are used for detecting vital signs, in particular for heartbeat and respira­

72 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
tion monitoring: CW Doppler radars and UWB radars, which use different 
principles for detection. 
4.2  CW Doppler Radar for Health Care Monitoring
According to Doppler theory, a target with a time-varying position, but an aver­
age zero velocity, will reflect the signal with its phase modulated proportionally 
to the time-varying target position. A stationary person’s chest has a periodic 
movement with an average zero velocity, and, therefore, a CW radar with the 
chest as the target will receive a signal similar to the transmitted signal with its 
phase modulated by the time-varying chest position [4].
Then, in CW radar systems, an unmodulated signal sT(t) = cos(2πf0t + 
φ(t)) with carrier frequency f0 and phase φ(t) is transmitted toward a human 
body at a nominal distance of R0, where it is phase modulated by the physi­
ological movement (heartbeat and respiration) represented by the signal x(t). 
The fundamental mechanism used for detection in CW Doppler radar is 
illustrated in Figure 4.1.
Neglecting amplitude variation and assuming that x(t) << R0, the reflected 
signal recorded by the radar receiver, after the round-trip time t0 = 2R0/c, is 
given by 
	
( )
( )
0
0
0
4
4
2
cos 2
R
x t
R
R
s
t
f t
t
c
π
π
π
φ
λ
λ




=
-
-
+
-







	
(4.1)
where c is the speed of light and l is the radar wavelength. So the received signal 
is similar to the transmitted one, with a time delay t0 and a phase modulated 
by the periodic body movement. The aim of the CW radar is to detect and 
analyze the signal x(t) that bears the information on the heartbeat and respira­
tion rhythm. 
Using the transmitted signal sT(t) as LO signal, the radar down-converts 
sR(t) into the baseband signal
Figure 4.1  Fundamental mechanism of CW Doppler radar vital sign detection.

 
Radar for E-Health Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
73
	
( )
( )
( )
4
cos
x t
s t
t
π
φ
θ
λ


=
+ ∆
+




	
(4.2)
where θ = θ0 + 4πR0/λ is determined by the nominal distance R0 and θ0 is a 
phase shift and 
0
2
( )
( )
R
t
t
t
c
φ
φ
φ

∆
=
-
-



 is the residual phase. Several factors 
affect the value of θ0 such as the phase shift at the reflection surface and any 
distance between the mixer and the antenna. Phase θ0 is a fixed or an adjustable 
shift that is assumed to remain constant during the period of signal processing.
When the movement amplitude is much smaller than the radar wave­
length λ, a linear approximation can be applied to (4.2). If θ is an odd multiple 
of π/2, the baseband output can be approximate as
	
( )
( )
( )
4 x t
s t
t
π
φ
λ
+ ∆

	
(4.3)
In this case, it is evident that s(t) is proportional to the motion displace­
ment signal x(t) summed to the residual phase noise, and the optimum phase-
demodulation sensitivity is achieved. 
If, conversely, θ is an even multiple of π/2, the baseband output can be 
approximate as
	
( )
( )
( )
2
4
1
x t
s t
t
π
φ
λ


-
+ ∆





	
(4.4)
In this case, s(t) is no longer linearly proportional to x(t); the sensitivity is 
decreased, and null-points detection can occur. A null point occurs when the LO 
and received signal are either in-phase or 180 degrees out of phase. Since the 
variable part of θ is dependent only on the distance to the target R0, this null 
point occurs with a target distance every λ/4 from the radar. At a frequency of 
2.4 GHz, typical of this kind of radar, these null points occur every 3 cm and 
therefore it can be difficult to avoid them solely by adjusting the position of the 
transceiver. 
In [4, 5] the authors proposed to avoid these null detection points with a 
quadrature receiver, where two receiver chains with LO phases 90 degrees apart 
insure that there is always at least one output not in the null detection point. 
The two in-phase (I) and quadrature (Q) output channels of a quadrature re­
ceiver will then be  

74 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
	
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
4
cos
4
sin
I
Q
x t
s
t
t
x t
s
t
t
π
φ
θ
λ
π
φ
θ
λ


=
+ ∆
+






=
+ ∆
+




	
 (4.5)
When q is an even/odd multiple of π/2, the I channel signal will be at the 
null/optimum detection point while the Q channel signal will be at the opti­
mum/null detection point. In these cases, there will always be one channel at 
the optimum detection point to guarantee good detection accuracy. 
The signal x(t) is due to the movement of the chest caused by both heart­
beat and breathing. 
Breathing is an involuntary periodic activity in which each period consists 
of three main parts: inhalation takes about 1s, exhalation takes about 1s, and 
relaxation takes about 2s. The total amount of air transferred during one pe­
riod, which is called tidal volume, is 500–600 ml. The respiratory rate is 12–20 
breaths per minute for adults [6]. 
The heart drives blood through the lungs and to tissues throughout the 
body. When the heart contracts to generate the pressure that drives blood flow, 
it moves within the chest cavity, hitting the chest wall and creating a measurable 
displacement at the skin surface. The contraction and relaxation of the left ven­
tricle cause a larger chest motion than do other heart actions in healthy subjects. 
In many papers, maximum displacement of chest wall due to heart mo­
tion has been reported to be less than 1 mm. Heart rate is the number of heart­
beats per unit of time, typically expressed as beats per minute (bpm). The typi­
cal resting heart rate in adults is 60–80 bpm [6]. 
Based on these physical considerations, we can express the signal x(t) as
	
( )
( )
( )
(
)
(
)
sin 2
sin 2
h
r
h
h
r
r
x t
x
t
x
t
m
f t
m
f t
π
π
=
+
+

	
(4.6)
where xh(t) and xr(t) represent the body movement caused by the heartbeat and 
by the respiration, respectively. 
These two signals can be approximated by two sinusoidal signals with 
amplitudes mh and mr, respectively, and frequencies fh and fr.
If we replace (4.6) in (4.5) we have 
	
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
4
4
cos
4
4
sin
h
r
I
h
r
Q
x
t
x
t
s
t
x
t
x
t
s
t
π
π
α
λ
λ
π
π
α
λ
λ


=
+
+






=
+
+




	
 (4.7)

 
Radar for E-Health Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
75
where α = ∆φ(t) + θ From (4.7) as in [7] we can write
( )
(
)
(
)
,
,
4
4
cos 2
2
cos 2
r
h
I
r
h
p
q
p
q
p q
p q
p
q
m
m
s
t
p f t
q f t
J
J
C
f
t
π
π
π
π
α
λ
λ
π
α
+∞
∞
=-∞=-∞
+∞
∞
=-∞=-∞




=
+
+








=
+
∑∑
∑∑
    (4.8)
and 
( )
(
)
(
)
,
,
4
4
sin 2
2
sin 2
r
h
Q
r
h
p
q
p
q
p q
p q
p
q
m
m
s
t
p f t
q f t
J
J
C
f
t
π
π
π
π
α
λ
λ
π
α
+∞
∞
=-∞=-∞
+∞
∞
=-∞=-∞




=
+
+








=
+
∑∑
∑∑
   (4.9)
where 
,
4
4
r
h
p q
p
q
m
m
C
J
J
π
π
λ
λ




=







 represents the amplitude of the cosinu­
soinal/sinusoidal component with frequency fp,q = pfr + qfh and Jp is the Bessel 
function of the third kind of order p.
We can combine the two I and Q signals into the complex signal z(t) such 
that 
	
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
,
2
,
p q
j
f
t
j
I
Q
p q
p
q
z t
s
t
js
t
w t
C
e
e
w t
π
α
+∞
∞
=-∞=-∞
=
+
+
=
+
∑∑
	(4.10)
where w(t) represents the noise. It is evident that, since the modulus of the term 
e jα is always unitary, the problem of the null point detection due to the effect 
of a does not exist anymore.
This technique is also robust against dc offset, caused by circuit imperfec­
tion and the reflections from stationary clutter (objects) surrounding the hu­
man body, because it can be estimated in each time window as average of the 
complex signal and easily removed.
The dc offset, if not cancelled, may sometimes saturate the dynamic range 
of the baseband filters/amplifiers [8].
But how can the radar estimate the rhythm of physiological movement of 
the human body from the output signal z(t)?
The signal z(t) is sampled and converted into a digital signal z(n) through 
an ADC device, then processed to get the information on fr and fh. 
The sampled version z(n) can be written as:

76 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
	
( )
(
)
(
)
( )
,
,
2
,
2
,
p q
p q
j
f
nT
j
p q
p
q
j
f
n
p q
p
q
z t
z nT
C
e
e
w nT
B
e
w n
π
α
π
+∞
∞
=-∞=-∞
+∞
∞
=-∞=-∞
=
=
+
=
+
∑∑
∑∑
	
 (4.11)
where T is the sampling interval, n = 0, … N – 1, Bp,q = Cp,qe jα, and fp,q = fp,qT 
is the normalized frequency. 
The N-length sequence of samples z(n) theoretically contains an infinite 
number of complex exponential components whose parameters (frequency and 
complex amplitude) are unknown. Actually, fortunately, the number of non­
negligible components is low, since the power of the harmonics decays very 
quickly, so we can assume that the sequence 
( )
{
}
1
0
N
n
z n
-
=  contains a finite num­
ber K of strong components with K<<N. From experimental tests [5], it results 
that K=5 when detecting from the front of the subject, whereas K=4 when 
detecting from the back. With this approximation the signal z(n) is given by
	
( )
( )
2
1
k
K
j
n
k
k
z n
A e
v n
πβ
=
=
+
∑
	
(4.12)
where Ak and βk are the amplitudes and phases of the strongest components and 
v(n) is due to the contribution of the noise w(n) and of the weakest components 
of the signal.
The easiest way to estimate the set of unknown parameters {
}
1
,
K
k
k
k
A
β
=
from 
( )
{
}
1
0
N
n
z n
-
=  is to calculate through the FFT the periodogram of the data. 
Ideally, with an infinite length (
)
N →∞ the spectrum of the signal z(n) 
would be a sequence of K lines at frequencies βk, but, as known, the finiteness 
of N causes smearing and leakage in the calculated periodogram, as shown in 
Figure 4.2, and frequencies closer than the limit ∆f = 1/N cannot be resolved 
since they merge in only one mainlobe. As a matter of fact in Figure 4.2 the two 
lines around 0.1 Hz are merged in only one lobe, and the weak line at 0.4 Hz is 
covered by the sidelobes of the strong line at 0.35 Hz.
This means that in some cases the mainlobe of harmonics due to the 
heartbeat can merge with the mainlobe of components due to the respiration 
body displacement, or some sidelobes of strong components can cover a weaker 
mainlobe of weaker components. For example, the third- and fourth-order har­
monics of the respiration signal are very close to the fundamental frequency of 

 
Radar for E-Health Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
77
the heartbeat, complicating the estimation. That’s why other high-resolution 
spectral estimation methods have been proposed for the heartbeat and respira­
tion frequencies estimation: the RELAX algorithm, for instance, whose effec­
tiveness for the problem at hand has been proved in [7]. Some results of this 
experiment are summarized in Figure 4.3.
The RELAX algorithm in this figure shows that the respiration consists of 
two closely located sinusoids at 19.1 and 23.5 beats/min due to the variation of 
respiration rate during the measurement. The heartbeat signal has a frequency 
of 65.9 beats/min. The other two strong components near 40 beats/min are 
due to the harmonics of the respiration signal and the intermodulation between 
respiration and heartbeat signals.
Figure 4.2  Example of periodogram [7].
Figure 4.3  Comparison between periodogram and RELAX results on heartbeat and respira­
tion rhythm estimation [7].

78 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
4.3  Choice of Carrier Frequency
A general observation on microwave Doppler radar is that the higher the carrier 
frequency, the shorter the wavelength and the higher the detection sensitivity 
to small movement. That’s why most of the Doppler radar for monitoring vital 
signs have been designed to work from 450 MHz to 1.8 GHz and 2.5 GHz [8] 
and recently at 24 GHz [9], 35 GHz [10], and 60 GHz [11]. 
Unfortunately, the radar detection sensitivity is heavily affected by the 
nonlinear relation between the received signal s(t) and the useful signal x(t), as 
shown in (4.8–4.9). As a matter of fact, due to the simultaneous presence of 
heartbeat and respiration movements, in the complex demodulated signal y(t) 
many intermodulation components are present as shown in (4.6–4.8). More­
over, even the amplitude of the fundamental term of heartbeat at frequency fh 
= f0,1 or respiration at frequency fr = f1,0 depends on both indexes mr and mh 
0,1
0
1
1,0
1
0
4
4
4
4
(
 and 
)
r
h
r
h
m
m
m
m
C
J
J
C
J
J
π
π
π
π
λ
λ
λ
λ








=
=















. 
Typically for relaxed human beings, mh is on the order of 0.01 mm and 
mr from the order of 0.1 mm to several millimeters. Then, depending on the 
values of fh and fr, mh and mr in the analyzed subject, depending on the radar 
wavelength λ, some of the intermodulation terms can be quite close to the fun­
damental terms (heartbeat and respiration) that we want to monitor and their 
amplitude nonnegligible with respect to the useful signal. 
In [8], the authors performed a detailed simulated study on the impact of 
the carrier frequency on the amplitudes of fundamental and intermodulation 
terms for different values of of fh and fr, mh and mr. The results show that the 
best choice for the carrier frequency is not to increase it boundless, but only up 
to the lower region of Ka-band (between 27 and 30 GHz).
4.4  Phase Noise and Range-Correlation
We have seen in (4.5–4.12) that in the recorded signal a residual phase noise  is 
always present and represents the difference between the phase of the transmit­
ted signal and the received one after demodulation by using a LO signal that is 
derived by the same source as the transmitted signal. This means that the phase 
of transmitted and demodulated signals are correlated with the level of correla­
tion dependent on the time delay between the two signals. This correlation ef­
fect, known as range-correlation effect, greatly reduces the impact of the phase 
noise on the received signal. As a matter of fact, if two different oscillators with 
uncorrelated phase noise were used for transmitting and receiving, it would be 

 
Radar for E-Health Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
79
impossible to detect the small phase variations created by heart and respiration 
motion.
Range-correlation theory describes how the residual phase noise affects 
the baseband noise spectrum. According to [4], w ith the target at a given range, 
the baseband noise spectral density is given by 
	
( )
( )
2
2
4
sin
Rf
S
f
S
f
c
φ
φ
π
∆


=



	
(4.13)
where Sφ(f  ) is the RF phase-noise power spectral density and the sinusoidal 
term is due to the range-correlation effect.
At values relevant for radar monitoring of heartbeat and respiration, Rf /c 
will be very small, on the order of 10-9, so the small-angle approximation is val­
id and the baseband noise spectrum will increase proportionally to the square 
of the target range and the square of the offset frequency as shown in (4.14).
	
( )
( )
2
2
4
Rf
S
f
S
f
c
φ
φ
π
∆


=



	
(4.14)
The effect of this phase-noise has been analyzed in [4], showing that, for 
instance, at a 50-cm range and a frequency of 10 Hz, it is 134 dB below the RF 
phase noise power. 
Range correlation effect is then particularly important in measuring the 
chest-wall movement, since it is encoded in a signal x(t) with frequencies in the 
range of 0.1–10 Hz where the RF phase noise is very high.
More considerations on noise sources and limitations in CW radar for 
vital signs monitoring are presented in [12].
4.5  Front-End Architectures
The front-end architecture plays an important role in maximizing the sensi­
tivity, extending the detection range, and rejecting interferences. Various RF 
front-end architectures have been proposed over the years. Historically, the first 
architecture for noncontact vital sign monitoring has been the heterodyne, and 
it was the only one until the homodyne detector was proved effective at the be­
ginning of last decade. Other very recent architectures are the double-sideband, 
direct IF sampling, and self-injection locking. The properties of some of these 
front-end architectures are discussed in this section.

80 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
4.5.1  Homodyne
A simplified block diagram of homodyne detector is illustrated in Figure 4.4. 
There are the two I and Q baseband outputs to solve the problem of the null 
detection point. The two output narrowband channels are then combined to 
perform complex signal processing, as shown in Section 4.2, or arctg (AT) de­
modulation [4].
4.5.2  Double-Sideband Heterodyne
Compared with the homodyne architecture, the heterodyne architecture has 
the advantage of robustness against dc offset. However, single-channel hetero­
dyne radar has the null detection point problem [13]. In order to overcome 
the null detection point problem, double sideband heterodyne architecture is 
generally used. The block diagram of the double-sideband heterodyne detector 
is shown in Figure 4.5.
As shown in Figure 4.5, the upper sideband and the lower sideband 
frequency tones are generated and transmitted by mixing signals from two 
voltage-controlled oscillators at RF (LO1) and IF (LO2). At the receiver, the 
two sidebands are combined automatically by two-stage down-converters. The 
signal detected by either the upper sideband or the lower sideband has null 
detection and optimal detection points separated by λ/8. When the two side­
bands are combined, the distance between optimal and null detection points 
becomes λIF/16, where λIF is the wavelength corresponding to the IF, thus re­
sulting in a much longer separation. Moreover, the location of optimal/null 
detection points can be changed based on the IF [13], and the double-sideband 
transceiver architecture can always avoid the null detection point problem by 
IF tuning. This is at the same time an advantage and a disadvantage of the 
Figure 4.4  Block diagram of a homodyne detector.

 
Radar for E-Health Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
81
double-sideband architecture, since each time the detection distance changes, a 
sophisticated procedure to operate the system or automatic calibration function 
is required, increasing the cost of the device. 
The double-sideband architecture provides an advantage when it comes 
to monolithic integration. Without the need for image rejection filters and 
quadrature generation, the radar transceiver can be easily designed and inte­
grated on a semiconductor chip. 
4.6  UWB Radar for Health Care Monitoring
Applying UWB technology in medical applications is an emerging research 
trend in recent years.
The first attempt at using UWB radar in medical applications was in 
1993 for human body monitoring and imaging. In 1996, the biomedical use 
of UWB radars was better described and in the same year, the first US patent 
was awarded. By 2000, many projects around the word focused on UWB medi­
cal applications in cardiology, obstetrics, breath pathways, and arteries. This 
section of the chapter is dedicated to the applications of UWB radars for the 
monitoring of heartbeat and respiration rhythm.
In the ultrawideband radars, the transmitted signal bandwidth exceeds 
“the lesser of 500 MHz or 20% of the center frequency,” according to the Fed­
eral Communication Commission (FCC) definition [14]. This transmit wide­
band can be obtained in different ways, either using nonsinusoidal pulses of a 
Figure 4.5  Double-sideband detector.

82 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
typical width of less than 1.5 ns, and thus a bandwidth over 1 GHz, or using 
longer, phase-coded pulses and pulse compression. Among pulses with definite 
mathematical expressions, typically used pulses include Gaussian monocycles, 
Gaussian doublet, Rayleigh monocycles, and Manchester monocycles. A gen­
eral discussion on UWB pulses can be found in [15] and in Chapter 5.
Currently, the only available emission masks for UWB radio are those is­
sued by the FCC in the United States [14] (as shown in Figure 4.6). The FCC’s 
regulation established three types of UWB devices based on their potential to 
cause interference: (1) imaging systems including ground penetrating radars, 
wall-through-wall surveillance, and medical imaging devices; (2) vehicular ra­
dar systems; and (3) communications and measurement systems. 
The regulation mentions that medical systems must be operated in the 
frequency band 3.1–10.6 GHz. and describes it as a system that “may be used 
for a variety of health applications to ‘see’ inside the body of a person or ani­
mal.” And, it specifically says, “Operation must be at the direction of, or under 
the supervision of, a licensed care practitioner.”
In a UWB pulse radar, the transmitter sends very short electromagnetic 
pulses toward the target. The typical pulse duration for vital sign detection is 
Figure 4.6  UWB mask. Emission limits for ground penetrating radar, wall imaging and medi­
cal imaging systems [14].

 
Radar for E-Health Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
83
around 200–300 ps, and the pulse repetition frequency is in the range of 1–10 
MHz.
When the transmitted pulse reaches the chest wall, part of the energy is 
reflected and captured by the receiver. If a local replica of the transmitted pulse 
with a delay close to the nominal round-trip traveling time t0 = 2R0/c is corre­
lated with the received echo, the output correlation function will have the same 
frequency as the physiological movement.
By controlling the delay between the two inputs of the correlation func­
tion block, the detection range of UWB radar can be changed since the delay 
corresponds to the signal round-trip traveling time. This mechanism makes 
it possible for UWB radar to eliminate interference caused by reflection from 
other objects (clutter) and multipath reflection. This is actually the main ad­
vantage of UWB vital sign detection radar. However, the disadvantage of UWB 
radar is that the delay needs to be calibrated each time the detection distance 
changes, with an increased system complexity and cost. 
4.7  UWB Radar with Correlator
Figure 4.7 shows the block diagram of the UWB pulse radar sensor [6] with a 
correlator. The pulse generator transmits short pulses toward the human body 
with a pulse repetition frequency (PRF) fR. The signals reflected by the target 
are captured by the RX antenna, amplified by the LNA and correlated (i.e., 
multiplied and integrated) with a delayed replica of the transmitted pulses gen­
erated on-chip by the shaper. The signal at the output of the integrator is cap­
tured to recover the information on the movement rate. Since vital signs vary 
within a few Hertz, an integrator with a 3-dB band (B3dB) of 100 Hz can allow 
an accurate detection. In practice, the integrator (Int, in Figure 4.7) is imple­
mented by means of a low-pass filter with bandwidth B3dB. 
The operating principle can be explained intuitively as follows. For sim­
plicity, let us assume that the delay generator provides a delay equal to the 
entire round trip time of the transmitted and received pulses. If the target is not 
Figure 4.7  Block diagram of the UWB pulse radar sensor.

84 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
static, the local replica and the amplified echo are aligned, and the multiplier 
provides the same output pulse with pulse repetition frequency fR, as shown in 
Figure 4.8(a) where v0(t) is the multiplier output and vout(t) is the integrator 
output. Therefore, the signal at the output of the integrator is almost constant. 
It is worth noting that, if the target is still, the integrator will provide an almost 
constant output voltage (positive, negative, or even zero), regardless of the rela­
tive shift between the local replica and amplified echo [16] since the result of 
the product between received signal and generated one by the shaper is the 
same. Conversely, if the target is moving, the movement causes a time-varying 
delay between the local replica and the eco amplified by the LNA. The signal 
v0(t) is not always the same since its shape depends on the relative shift between 
received and shaper signal. Therefore, the output of the integrator vout(t) is no 
longer constant, and its variations are related to the frequency of heartbeat and 
respiration—that is, to the signal x(t) as in (4.6). As a matter of fact, if the po­
sition of the maximum of the correlation function for each pulse corresponds 
to the actual target distance, then the output amplitude of the integrator is 
proportional to the signal x(t) [17], and then the frequencies of heartbeat and 
breath can be estimated through the Fourier transform of the signal at the out­
put of the integrator. Before any processing, the signal v0(t) is sampled and con­
verted into a digital signal vout(n) through an ADC device and then processed 
to get the information on fr and fh. 
An example of this signal is plotted in Figure 4.9 taken from [17], where 
the breathing of a person with a breath hold of 12s at 35s can be clearly seen. 
The heartbeat ripples are evident particularly during the time in which the 
breath is held. 
A different method to measure movements would be to use the UWB ra­
dar in tracking mode where the target can be, for instance, the heart. Since the 
transmitted radar signal penetrates into the human body and the boundary be­
tween the heart muscle, and since the surrounding fat tissue has a significantly 
different permittivity, the heart could be detected and its movements moni­
tored. Currently, however the monitoring of the heart muscle seems to be still 
Figure 4.8  Output of UWB pulse radar sensor [16].

 
Radar for E-Health Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
85
unfeasible, as the signal is strongly attenuated and therefore disappears within 
the ringing signal of the main target, the skin-air boundary.
A model for the signal power attenuation through the body tissues has 
been proposed by Staderini in [18] and is summarized in Figure 4.10 This 
model shows, for instance, a 20-dB round trip loss for the signal to reach the 
heart and come back with a continuous wave at 1.5 GHz.
4.8  Conclusions
The aim of this chapter was to introduce the main statistical signal processing 
techniques used in vital signs monitoring performed by both CW and UWB 
radars. The working principles of both systems is very easy, but still several chal­
lenges need to be solved.
Figure 4.9  Measured sensor output for a breathing person and a breath hold of about 12s 
[17].
Figure 4.10  Model predicted attenuation of pulse-echo intensity traveling from the transmit­
ting antenna to the receiving antenna [18].

86 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
One significant challenge is, for instance, the random body motion ar­
tifact cancellation. While the radar sensor is sensitive enough to pick up tiny 
physiological movements due to breathing and heartbeat, it can also pick up 
any physical body movement. The use of multiple sensors or MIMO radars has 
been proposed to mitigate the problem [19]. 
Another issue can be the presence of scattering due to steady objects that 
translates to a strong DC component that can saturate the radar detector.
In the UWB radars based on correlator device, conventional coherent de­
tection may sometimes be unsuitable since the UWB pulses traveling through 
the tissues are deformed. Then, with these signals, unless adaptive template 
signals could be constructed and updated in real time, the correlation procedure 
does not provide the expected results.
Anyway, although the technology is still in the development phase, the 
nonintrusivity, high accuracy, and attractive features of both CW and UWB 
radar noncontact vital sign detection indicate that it will soon become a part of 
daily life for many people.
References
[1]	 Lin, J. C., “Noninvasive Microwave Measurement of Respiration,” Proc IEEE, Vol. 63, 
No. 10, Oct. 1975, p. 1530.
[2]	 Lin, J. C., “Microwave Sensing of Physiological Movement and Volume Change: A Re­
view,” Bioelectromagnetics, Vol. 13, No. 6, 1992, pp.557–565.
[3]	 Chen, K. M., D. Misra, H. Wang, H. R. Chuang, and E. Postow, “An X-Band Microwave 
Life-Detection System,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.Eng., Vol. 33, July 1986, pp. 697–702.
[4]	 Droitcour, A. D., O. Boric-Lubecke, V. M. Lubecke, and J. Lin, et al., “Range Correlation 
and I/Q Performance Benefits in Single-Chip Silicon Doppler Radars for Noncontact 
Cardiopulmonary Monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., Vol. 52, No. 3, Mar. 
2004, pp. 838–848.
[6]	 Fouladi, R. F., and A. Oncu, “Vital Signs Modeling for Doppler Radar Cardiorespiratoty 
Monitoring,” 2013 36th International Conference on Telecommunications and Signal Pro­
cessing, 2013, pp. 363–366.
[7]	 Li, C., J. Ling, J. Li, and J. Lin, “Accurate Doppler Radar Noncontact Vital Sign Detec­
tion Using the RELAX Algorithm,” IEEE Trans. on Instrumentations and Measurement, 
Vol. 59, No. 3, March 2010, pp. 687–695.
[8]	 Li, C., and J. Lin, “Optimal Carrier Frequency of Non-Contact Vital Sign Detectors,” 
Proc. IEEE Radio Wireless Symp., 2007, pp. 281–284.
[9]	 Vinci, G., S. Lindner, F. Barbon, and S. Mann, et al., “Six-Port Radar Sensor for Re­
mote Respiration Rate and Heartbeat Vital-Sign Monitoring,” IEEE Trans. on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, Vol. 61, No. 5, Pt. 2, 2013, pp. 2093–2100.

 
Radar for E-Health Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
87
[10]	 Chioukh, L., H. Boutayeb, L. Lin, and L. Yahia, et al., “Integrated Radar Systems for 
Precision Monitoring of Heartbeat and Respiratory Status,” Proc. of 2009 Asia Pacific 
Microwave Conference, 2009, pp. 405–408.
[11]	 Kao, T.-Y. J., and J. Lin, “Vital Sign Detection Using 60-GHz Doppler Radar System,” 
Proc. of 2013 IEEE International Wireless Symposium, 2013.
[12]	 Jensen, B. S., T. Jensen, V. Zhurbenko, and T. K. Johansen, “Noise Considerations for Vital 
Signs CW Radar Sensors,” Proc. of 5th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation, 
2011, pp. 2805–2809.
[13]	 Jensen, B. S., T. K. Johansen, and L. Yan, “An Experimental Vital Signs Detection Radar 
Using Low-IF Heterodyne Architecture and Single-Sideband Transmission,” Proc. of  2013 
IEEE International Wireless Symposium, 2013.
[14]	  Federal Communications Commission, “Revision of Part 15 of the Commission’s Rules 
Regarding Ultra-Wideband Transmission Systems,” ET Docket 98-153, Washington, 
DC, April 22, 2002.
[15]	 Kissik, W. (ed.), The Temporal and Spectral Characteristics of Ultrawideband Signals. NTIA 
Report 01-383, US Department of Commerce, 2001.
[16]	  Zito, D., D. Pepe, M. Mincica, and F. Zito, “A 90nm CMOS SoC UWB Pulse Radar 
for Respiratory Rate Monitoring,” 2011 IEEE Solid-State Circuits Conference Digest of 
Technical Papers, 2011, pp. 40–41.
[17]	 Leib, M., W. Menzel, B. Schleicher, and H. Schumacher, “Vital Signs Monitoring with 
a UWB Radar Based on a Correlation Receiver,” 2010 Proceedings of the 4th European 
Conference on Antennas and Propagation, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[18]	  Staderini, E.M., “UWB Radars in Medicine,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems 
Magazine, Vol. 17, No. 1, Jan. 2002, pp. 13–18.
[19]	 Li, C., and J. Lin, “Random Body Movement Cancellation in Doppler Radar Vital Sign 
Detection,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 56, No. 12, Dec. 2008, pp. 3143–
3152.


89
5
Radar for Automotive Applications: 
Signal Processing Perspective
5.1  General Characteristic of the Sensor and Its Functions
Radar is a key technology for automotive driver assistance applications due to 
its inherent advantages like weather independence and direct acquisition of 
range and velocity, especially when compared to alternative sensors like video, 
laser, and ultrasonic. In addition radar offers the advantage of being invisibly 
mounted behind electromagnetic transparent materials (e.g., plastic bumpers). 
In 1999 Mercedes Benz was the first car manufacturer to introduce a 
radar-based autonomous cruise control (ACC) system in its S-class. Nowa­
days, the global auto industries are extensively pursuing radar-based proximity 
detection systems for applications including ACC, collision avoidance (CA), 
precrash warning, mitigation of collision damage, and “stop and go” function­
alities and parking aid (forward and reverse) with rear-crash collision warning, 
as shown in Figure 5.1. 
Then, automotive radar systems need to have the capability to measure 
range, velocity, and azimuth angle simultaneously for all points and extend­
ed targets inside the observation area with short measurement time (for ACC 
about 100 ms, for CA much shorter), even in dense target situations, with high 
range accuracy and resolution in all environments, ranging from scorching heat 
to snowstorms. They must be small, lightweight, and low cost. 
There are many constraints for an automotive radar system. Styling is a 
critical parameter and a radar sensor, even if very efficient, will be unacceptable 
if it cannot be styled into the vehicle package. The front and back grille area 

90 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
has been the traditional placement area, but also the area around the rear view 
mirror is used. 
The choice of the antenna has a significant impact on packaging, cost, 
and performance of the sensor. A wide range of solutions has been used over the 
past 15 years: single narrow-beam antennas, horn antennas, static planar anten­
nas, mechanically and electronically scanned planar arrays, twist polarization 
Cassegrain reflectors, staring beam antennas, and switched beam antennas [1]. 
Mechanical scanning systems offer the benefit of optimizing the beam shape, 
which does not change as the beam is scanned. Electronic scanning offers the 
possibility of moving the antenna beam without physical movement; however, 
since the apparent aperture width changes as the beam is scanned, the beam 
performance also changes. 
The choice of operating frequency is dictated by national and interna­
tional bodies. In radar engineering terms, the choice of operating frequency is 
linked with the antenna beamwidth and the antenna size [1]: the higher the 
frequency, the smaller the antenna for the same beamwidth. This logic made 
the use of high frequencies very attractive. As a matter of fact, the modern 
automotive radar works at 24 and 76–77 GHz. But, although it seems futur­
istic today, the area between 152–154 GHz or even around 228 GHz is under 
consideration for future automotive applications, resulting in either dramatic 
package shrinking or largely enhanced angular resolution using either digital 
beam forming or holographic principles [2].
Based on the maximum distance covered by the radar, the automotive 
radar systems are generally divided in long-range radar (LRR) and short-range 
radar (SRR), as shown in Figure 5.2.
At present in more than 70 countries the frequency 76–77 GHz is al­
located for LRR. Most of them are frequency linearly modulated continuous 
Figure 5.1  Automotive radar functionalities.

 
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
91
waveform (FLMCW) radar, but there are also other solutions using classical 
pulse waveform with ultra short pulse length (10 ns) [3]. In addition, there is 
continuing research on using spread spectrum transceivers that have a com­
bined use of intervehicle communications as well as radar ranging [4].
The main functionality of a LRR is the ACC. It must detect targets of 
varying size (small children, trucks, and so on), and it covers a maximum dis­
tance of 80–200 m with an angle of 8–10 degrees. This range and azimuth 
coverage is needed to track the targets in the lanes ahead in order to anticipate 
vehicles cutting in front of the car and in order to distinguish between targets. 
For example, when driving toward a curve, the ACC system must distinguish 
between the target vehicle, sign posts, guard rails, and stopped vehicles [3]. The 
typical specifications of ACC radar sensor are summarized in Table 5.1.
The SRR covers a maximum distance of 30m, with an angle of about 70 
degrees and is used for parking assistance, precrashing sensing, and stop and 
go. The frequency of 24 GHz is allocated for SRR sensors and, because of the 
necessity to achieve high local resolution to distinguish between objects that are 
close to each other with an accuracy of centimeters, they often use the UWB 
technology.
The general characteristics of LRR and SRR are summarized in Table 5.2. 
5.2  Signal Processing for the Single Sensor
The main blocks of a LRR radar are summarized in Figure 5.3. 
Figure 5.2  SRR and MRR radars.

92 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
A 77-GHz voltage controlled oscillator (VCO) generates the required 
transmitted FMCW signals to the transmit antenna. Part of the transmitted 
signal is coupled back to the LO input of a millimeter wave mixer. The echoes 
from potential targets are received by the receiving antenna and inputted into 
the millimeter wave mixer. The mixer produces both the in-phase (I) and 
quadrature-phase (Q) IF components. These signals are then digitized by the 
digitizer (ADC) and inputted into DSP board. The DSP board also controls the 
operation of the VCO by feeding the DAC circuit commands to produce the 
modulating voltage.
The design of the modulation waveform is very important, as it is one of 
the factors that determine the performance of the radar. A detailed analysis of 
many waveforms is performed in [5]. In this chapter, we report the results for 
only the most common one, the triangular chirp. 
Table 5.1
Typical Performance Specification for 
ACC Radar Sensor
Transmit frequency
76–77 GHz
Transmit power
>10 dBm
Target detection distance (m)
Range
2-150
Accuracy
< 1 or 
Relative velocity (Km/h)
Range 
-250 +250
Accuracy
> 1
Angular coverage (°)
Azimuth
-8 +8
Elevation
3–4 single beam
Update rate
> 10Hz
Table 5.2
Automotive Radar Specifications
Modul.
Freq. 
(GHz)
Bandwidth 
(GHz)
Max 
Range 
(m)
Resol. 
(m)
View Angle 
(Degrees)
SRR
Pulsed
24
7
30
<0.1
70
SRR
Pulsed
79
4
30
<0.1
70
LRR
FMCW
76-77
1
200
1
10

 
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
93
5.2.1  Range and Frequency Estimation
In an FMCW radar using triangular modulation, the continuously transmitted 
waveform is a modulated sinusoidal signal
	
( )
2
cos 2
2
sw
T
T
CPI
B t
s
t
f t
T
π




=
±










	
(5.1)
where fT is the carrier frequency, Bsw is the sweep bandwidth, and TCPI is the 
chirp time duration. The positive slope of the signal indicates an up-chirp sig­
nal and the instantaneous frequency is given by 
( )
sw
u
T
CPI
B t
f
t
f
T
=
+
 while the 
negative slope a down-chirp signal with the same bandwidth Bsw, and the in­
stantaneous frequency is given by 
( )
sw
d
T
CPI
B t
f
t
f
T
=
-
. In the first TCPI the up-
chirp is transmitted, followed in the second TCPI by a down-chirp, as shown 
in Figure 5.4. 
If in the illuminated area a target is present, moving with a radial velocity 
vr constant during the time-on-target (ToT), the time-dependent range R(t) 
changes such that 
	
( )
0
r
R t
R
v t
=
+
	
(5.2)
and the signal propagation delay is 
	
( )
( )
(
)
0
2
2
r
t
R t
R
v t
c
c
τ
=
=
+
	
(5.3)
Figure 5.3  Block diagram of LRR.

94 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
where c is the light speed (3 · 108 m/s), and R0 the starting position of the 
target. Then, the time-delayed received target signal sR(t) is proportional to sT(t 
– τ (t)) and is directly down-converted into the baseband by the instantaneous 
transmit frequency f (t). The frequency difference between the receive signal 
sR(t) and the transmit signal sT(t) is denoted as beat frequency fB. 
In the case of triangular chirp, two beat frequencies will be measured in 
the up- and down-chirp complex valued baseband signals, as shown in Figure 
5.4.
	
,
,
2
2
2
2
sw
B u
r
D
R
CPI
sw
B d
r
D
R
CPI
B
f
v
R
f
f
cT
B
f
v
R
f
f
cT
λ
λ

= -
-
=
+


= -
+
=
-

	
(5.4)
where we used the relation fT = c/λ, and we supposed that during the up- and 
down-CPI the target is still, then R(t) = R; fD is the target Doppler frequency, 
due to its velocity, and fR is the contribution from the target range. Solving 
Figure 5.4  Triangular chirp.

 
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
95
these two equations the target range R and the velocity vr can be calculated in 
an unambiguous way as follows: 
	
(
)
(
)
,
,
,
,
4
2
2
2
B d
B u
CPI
sw
B u
B d
r
f
f
cT
R
B
f
f
v
λ

-
=

+

= -

	
(5.5)
For any beat frequency measurement, the beat frequency resolution is 
inversely proportional to the CPI; that is, 
1
B
CPI
f
T
∆
=
. Conversely, the range 
resolution is defined as 
	
2
2
2
B CPI
sw
sw
f T
c
c
c
R
B
B
τ
∆
∆
=
∆=
=
	
(5.6)
Then, the sweep bandwidth Bsw is determined by the desired range resolu­
tion ∆R, and the TCPI by the frequency resolution ∆fB. A typical range resolu­
tion of 1m implies a sweep bandwidth of 150 MHz, and a velocity resolution 
of 1km/h at 77 GHz implies a frequency resolution of 71 Hz and TCPI ≈ 14 ms. 
It is clear that the solution in (5.5) 	 is unambiguous when only a single 
target is present. In a multiple targets scenario, the triangular chirp provides 
an up- and down-beat frequency equation for each target; then for two targets 
there are four different ambiguous solutions. In this case, alternative waveforms 
have been proposed as explained in [5]. 
5.2.1.1  How to Measure fB,u and fB,d
After the down-conversion in baseband, the received signal is passed through a 
low pass filter (LPF) to remove the noise and then sampled by the A/D converter. 
The resulting discrete time signal, that we denote with sD(n), n = 0, 1 …, 
N – 1, is weighted with windows (Hamming [6] and Blackman [7]) to limit the 
frequency content, zero-padded, and then an  FFT is applied to it for each CPI. 
The temporal signal is therefore transformed in to a frequency signal as
	
( )
( )
( )
1
0
1
0
2
( )
exp
( )
with
0,1,
,
1
N
D
n
N
nk
D
N
n
nk
S k
w n s
n
j
N
w n s
n W
k
N
π
-
=
-
=


=
-




=
=
-
∑
∑

	
(5.7)

96 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
where  are the window samples and 
2
exp
nk
N
nk
W
j
N
π


=
-




If there was no disturbance or interference, the frequency signal S(k) 
would present a neat peak corresponding to the beat frequency for each CPI 
(up- and down-beat frequency) from which it would be possible to derive R and 
vr.. Unfortunately, the disturbance is unavoidable, and some peak detection/
estimation algorithm must be applied.
An example of the absolute value of S(k) is reported in Figure 5.5 (in ar­
bitrary scale) for the up ( U
S
) and down (
D
S
) chirp. The two beat frequencies 
are evident. 
5.2.1.2  Some Remarks on the Fast Fourier Transform
The FFT algorithms are based on the fundamental principle of decompos­
ing the computation of the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) of a sequence of 
length N into successive smaller DFTs. There are many algorithms to imple­
ment it, the most popular of which are the decimation-in-time and the decima­
tion-in-frequency [8].
The flow graph of the decimation-in-time decomposition of an eight-
point DFT is plotted in Figure 5.6 with the typical butterfly computation. 
In this figure, x(n) represent the time samples, and X(k) the DFT frequency 
samples. 
The coefficients 
nk
N
W
 are the key elements of the FFT computation, since 
they are symmetric and periodic. These properties allow the re-use of the coef­
ficients in different stages of the algorithm, as shown in Figure 5.6. The num­
ber of complex multiplications and additions for this FFT is of the order of 
N log2N, while for the classical DFT algorithm they are N2.
Figure 5.5  Plot of the absolute value of S(k) for up- and down-chirp.

 
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
97
5.2.2  CFAR Processing
The algorithm that is often applied to detect and estimate the peak in the 
Fourier transformed signal S(k) is the cell averaging constant false alarm rate 
(CA-CFAR) algorithm. Other alternatives are the greatest of (GO)-CFAR, the 
smallest of (SO)-CFAR, the ordered statistic (OS)-CFAR, and the trimmed 
mean (TM)-CFAR. The general scheme of these CFAR algorithms is shown in 
Figure 5.7.
This scheme can be applied both on the range and frequency samples of 
the radar received signal. In the radar at hand, it is applied on the frequency 
samples to detect the presence of the peak and to estimate its position. 
The samples S(k) are first squared providing 
( )
( )
2
X k
S k
=
 and then 
processed. 
Since the power of the disturbance frequency samples is unknown, the 
fixed-threshold Neyman-Pearson type detector is not applicable here. A com­
mon approach is to employ a detector that sets thresholds based on local esti­
mates of the total disturbance power ([9] and references therein). As shown in 
Figure 5.7, the threshold is computed on a sample-by-sample basis forming a 
finite reference window of size K surrounding the CUT and using the K refer­
ence cells to estimate the unknown power. A certain number NG of guard cells 
is avoided in the power calculation in order to reduce target masking. 
Then, the square amplitude of the cell under test (CUT) echo Y is com­
pared with a threshold, such that 
Figure 5.6  Flow graph of the decimation-in-time decomposition of an eight-point DFT.

98 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
	
1
0
H
H
Y
T Z
><
	
(5.8)
where T is a deterministic constant scale factor that depends on the desired 
constant probability of false alarm (PFA) and Z is a threshold that depends on 
the data surrounding the CUT.
In the case of the CA-CFAR processor with NG = 0, the threshold Z is 
given by:
	
( )
( )
/2 1
0
/2 1
1
K
K
k
k K
Z
X k
X k
K
-
=
=
+


=
+




∑
∑
	
(5.9)
that is, by the mean level estimate in the K reference cells (or power estimate of 
the sample S(k) in the reference window). A target (the peak of the spectrum) is 
declared to be present if Y exceeds the threshold TZ. 
The CA-CFAR processor is the optimum CFAR processor [9], since it 
maximizes the detection probability (PD) in a homogeneous background where 
the samples X(k) are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) with an 
exponential distribution. Under these hypotheses, the probability of false alarm 
is given by
	
(
)
1
K
FA
P
T
-
=
-
	
(5.10)
and, as the size of reference cells K increases, the PD approaches that of the op­
timum detector with a fixed threshold. Unfortunately these hypotheses are not 
always true. For instance, there can be an abrupt change of noise power in the 
Figure 5.7  General scheme for a CFAR detector.

 
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
99
reference cells, or there can be some outliers. The presence of such phenomena 
may result in severe performance degradation of the CA-CFAR, leading to an 
excessive false alarm rate or target masking [9, 10]. 
Modifications of the CA-CFAR detector have been proposed to overcome 
the problems of nonhomogeneous background. In [11], the author proposed 
a CFAR procedure to regulate false alarms in the region of clutter transition. 
In this processor, the noise power is estimated by the greatest of the sum in the 
leading and lagging windows as:
	
( )
( )
/2 1
0
/2 1
2 max
,
K
K
k
k K
Z
X k
X k
K
-
=
=
+


=




∑
∑
	
(5.11)
leading to the so called GO-CFAR. This detector exhibits a loss with respect to 
the CA-CFAR of 0.1 up to 0.3 dB in homogeneous exponential background. 
The probability of false alarm in this case, under the same hypothesis of i.i.d 
exponential samples, is given by 
	
(
)
(
) (
)
/2 1
/2
/2
0
/ 2
1
2 1
2
2
K
K
K
k
FA
k
K
k
P
T
T
k
-
-
-
+
=
+
-


=
+
-
+




∑
	
(5.12)
To prevent the suppression of closely spaced targets (peaks in the fre­
quency domain), Trunk [12] proposed a CFAR detector in which the threshold 
is calculated as the smallest of the sum in the leading and lagging windows 
	
( )
( )
/2 1
0
/2 1
2 min
,
K
K
k
k K
Z
X k
X k
K
-
=
=
+


=




∑
∑
	
(5.13)
leading to the so called SO-CFAR. This detector performs very well in resolving 
two closely spaced targets but in some conditions exhibits great losses in homo­
geneous background, up to 11 dB for K=4 and PFA=10-6.
The probability of false alarm in this case, under the same hypothesis of 
i.i.d exponential samples, is given by 
	
(
)
(
)
/2 1
/2
0
/ 2
1
2 1
2
K
K
k
FA
k
K
k
P
T
T
k
-
-
-
=
+
-


=
+
+




∑
	
(5.14)
A more complex alternative, called OS-CFAR, has been proposed in [13]. 
The OS-CFAR detector estimates the noise power simply selecting the kth larg­
er sample in the reference window, such that

100 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
	
( )
( )
( )
(
)
1
2
where
k
K
Z
X
X
X
X
=
≤
≤
≤

	
(5.15)
The probability of false alarm in this case, under the same hypothesis of 
i.i.d exponentiallly distributed samples, is given by
	
(
) (
)
(
)
1 !
!
!
FA
K
k
T
K
k
P
k
k
T
K
-
+
-


=




+
	
(5.16)
where k is the order of the selected sample. The OS-CFAR suffers only minor 
degradation of the PD in homogeneous noise and resolves closely spaced targets 
[9]. 
For a detailed analysis of CFAR detectors, interested readers can refer to 
[9] and reference therein or to [14] and Chapter 16 in [15].
After detection of the frequency peak in down- and up-sweep spectrum, 
(5.5) is solved for computing target range and velocity.
5.2.3  Azimuth Direction of Arrival Estimation
The estimation of target DOA is not new in radar literature. The estimation 
problem, when only a single target is present, is well understood and approached 
in many books (see, for instance, [15] and references therein). 
Traditionally, in automotive ACC radar, the azimuth DOA is estimated 
by the monopulse technique (or simultaneous lobing) [16]. Even if estimators 
that are more sophisticated have been proposed [17–21], real radar systems still 
use this simple technique.
The monopulse tracker is defined [16] as one in which information con­
cerning the angular location of a target is obtained by comparison of the signal 
received in two or more simultaneous beams. In principle, it can work with just 
a single pulse (hence the name monopulse), but quite often multiple pulses are 
used to increase the angular resolution. 
There are several methods by which a monopulse angle estimate can 
be made. The most popular and used in automotive radar is the amplitude-
comparison monopulse, which compares the amplitudes of the signals received 
in two squinted fixed beams, taking both the sum Σ and the difference ∆ of 
the two antenna patterns, as shown in Figures 5.8 and 5.9. In Figure 5.8 the 
two squinted antennas are plotted and the angular position θTG of the target 
is shown. In Figure 5.9 the two sum Σ and difference ∆ antenna patterns are 
highlighted. In this figure, the two-way sum beamwidth is 3 degrees.
The sum channel is employed on transmission (with an approximate typi­
cal beamwidth of 12 degrees), while both sum and difference are used on recep­
tion. The estimate ˆ
TG
θ
 of the target DOA is a function of the ratio of the ∆ and 

 
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
101
Σ channel outputs z∆ and zΣ. In detail, if a target has been detected, the ampli­
tude of the two received signals will be used for the azimuth angle estimation. 
The signal processor forms the monopulse ratio defined by 
{
}
r
z
z
∆
Σ
= Re
, 
where 
{ }
Re
 denotes the “real part.” In absence of disturbance and in presence 
of a single target, the monopulse ratio reduces to
	
(
)
(
)
TG
TG
g
r
g
θ
θ
∆
Σ


=




Re
	
(5.17)
where g∆(⋅) is the difference pattern and gΣ(⋅) is the sum pattern. Assuming 
that the ratio r is monotonic in off-boresight angle, the angular location of the 
Figure 5.8  Squinted antenna beampatterns for monopulse technique.
Figure 5.9  Example of normalized two-way antenna patter for ∆ and Σ channels.

102 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
target may be uniquely determined. It is evident from (5.17) that r does not de­
pend on the amplitude of the target, so the monopulse estimate is not affected 
by the target fluctuations. 
When the radar can use N samples 
[
(0)
(
1)]T
z
z
N
∆
∆
∆
=
-
z

 and 
[
(0)
(
1)]T
z
z
N
Σ
Σ
Σ
=
-
z

, the monopulse ratio and the estimate of the 
target DOA can be calculated for each sample, and finally, obtain an estimate as
	
1
( )
0
1
ˆ
ˆ
N
n
TG
TG
n
N
θ
θ
-
=
=
∑
	
(5.18)
where ( )
ˆ n
TG
θ
 is the single-pulse target DOA estimate. 
There are also more complex monopulse techniques that use more than 
two beams for increasing the field of view and the angular resolution and ac­
curacy [22].
Another technique often used in automotive radar for angle estimation is 
the sequential lobing (SL). The measurement principle of the SL is similar to 
that of the monopulse technique.
In SL a single beam is switched between two (or more) squinted angular 
position (see Figure 5.10) to obtain an angle measurement. The difference in 
amplitude between the voltages in the two switched positions is a measure of 
the angular displacement of the target from the switching axis [16]. The advan­
tage of the SL with respect to the monopulse is that only a receiver and signal 
Figure 5.10  Sequential lobing.

 
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
103
processing unit is necessary (in the monopulse there are two, one per antenna); 
the disadvantage is that the angle estimation is sensitive to target fluctuations 
occurred during the switching.
The mechanical beam switching could be avoided by choosing a phased 
array antenna performing digital beamforming (DBF), where the beam scan­
ning is induced by controlling the electrical phase difference between adjacent 
receiving (Rx) or transmission (Tx) antenna elements. Actually the DBF is able 
to form multiple receive beams by means of a digital processor, and it is more 
often considered when these multiple, simultaneous, and directive beams are 
necessary. Naturally, this involves complex antenna and millimeter-wave circuit 
configurations [17]. 
A typical circuit configuration of a phased array antenna is shown in 
Figure 5.11.
For use with a phased array antenna to detect the azimuth direction of 
the receiving signal, there are many methods with high azimuth resolution, 
such as the maximum likelihood (ML), multiple signal classification (MUSIC), 
and ESPRIT [23]. All these algorithms are computationally much heavier than 
monopulse or sequential lobing, but they can resolve more than one target at a 
time, with very high angular resolution [24] and without requiring very large 
antennas [25]. 
So, digital beam steering coupled with high-resolution DOA estima­
tion algorithms can have a potential to overcome most limitations of today’s 
Figure 5.11  Phased array and digital beamforming.

104 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
automotive radar. However, with technology available today, the digital beam 
forming approach is still some years away from deployment on the mass mar­
ket. Limiting factors are—among others—A/D converter resolution, A/D con­
verter frequency bandwidth, and DSP computational power. 
While for the azimuth angle the required resolution can be sometimes 
<2 degrees with wide field-of-view (>40 degrees), in the elevation (vertical) 
plane, there is usually no requirement for a wide angular coverage. A single 
beam antenna is typically used with sufficiently narrow beamwidth (4 degrees, 
for example) to differentiate between the vehicle ahead and the ground or the 
overhead bridges [3]. 
5.2.4  Target Tracking
After detecting the presence of a target, and after estimating its motion parame­
ters, the radar must track the target itself in order to input the collision warning 
system whose ultimate goal is to reduce the risk of the vehicle accident. There­
fore, tracking is one of the most important function of an automotive radar.
For the successful tracking of a moving target, it is essential to extract as 
much information as possible about the target state from the available observa­
tions. Therefore, good models describing the target dynamics and the sensor 
itself are necessary. As the information on the target’s kinematics and sensor 
characteristics are generally known, most of the tracking algorithms base their 
performance on the a priori defined mathematical model of the target, which 
are assumed to be sufficiently accurate.
Since the target parameters measured by the radar are in polar coordi­
nates (range, azimuth, range rate, or radial velocity) it may seem natural to 
perform the tracking in this coordinate system. Actually, most of the target mo­
tion models are much easier in Cartesian coordinates, so the tracking is done 
in the Cartesian system. The relations between Cartesian and polar coordinate 
systems are highly nonlinear, and the automotive radar tracking is a nonlinear 
filtering problem.
5.2.4.1  Nearly Constant Velocity Target Model
The nearly constant velocity target model is one of the most common dynamic 
target models used in automotive tracking. In this case the discrete-time equa­
tion of target motion in Cartesian coordinate system is as follows:
	
1
k
k
k
+ =
+
x
Fx
w 	
(5.19)
where 

 
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
105
	
[
]
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
,
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
s
T
k
k
k
k
k
s
T
x
x
y
y
T






=
= 





x
F


	
(5.20)
Ts is the sampling time, and the state vector xk consists of the position and the 
velocity of target. The process noise wk is assumed to be zero mean Gaussian 
distributed with covariance matrix
	
{
}
3
2
2
3
2
2
3
2
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
3
2
0
0
2
s
s
s
s
T
k
k
s
s
s
s
T
T
T
T
E
q
T
T
T
T






=
=








Q
w w
	
(5.21)
and q is the process noise variance. This model is said to be “nearly constant 
velocity” since the acceleration along x and y axes are modeled as small white 
noise. 
The tracking with much more complex target models is analyzed in 
[26–28].
Suppose that our measurement is linear in the target state; that is:
	
k
k
k
=
+
z
Hx
v 	
(5.22)
where 
T
m
m
k
k
k
x
y


= 

z
 (the measured coordinates), 
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0


= 



H
 
and 
k
x
y
v
v


= 

v
. In (5.22), the observation noise vk is assumed to be 
zero mean normally distributed with a known diagonal covariance matrix 
{
}
2
2
0
0
x
T
k
k
y
E
σ
σ




=
=




R
v v
. 
With a linear model of the state equation and of the observation, with 
Gaussian process and observation noise, mutually independent, the optimum 
tracking filter is the Kalman one [29].
The prediction equation of the Kalman tracking algorithm provides the 
predicted target state xk+1 based on the observation until the previous instant k.

106 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Prediction
	
1
ˆ
ˆ
k
k
k k
+
=
x
Fx
	
(5.23)
The update equation provides the estimated target state at the instant 
k+1, based upon all the measurements until the instant k+1.
Update
	
(
)
1
1
1
1
1
1
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
+
-
x
x
K
z
Hx
	
(5.24)
The predicted state covariance is 
	
1
T
k
k
k k
+
=
+
P
Q
FP F 	
(5.25)
The updated state covariance is 
	
1
1
1
1
1
1
T
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
-
P
P
K
S
K
	
(5.26)
where Sk+1 is the predicted measurement covariance:
	
1
1
T
k
k
k
+
+
=
-
S
R
HP
H 	
(5.27)
and Kk+1 is the gain of the Kalman filter
	
1
1
1
1
T
k
k
k
k
-
+
+
+
=
K
P
H S
	
(5.28)
The Kalman filter is linear, and the matrices Pk+1|k, Pk+1|k+1, Sk+1|k, and 
Kk+1, can be calculated offline. 
The steps of the Kalman filter are shown in Figure 5.12.
Figure 5.12  Kalman filter scheme.

 
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
107
Unfortunately, usually an automotive radar does not provide linear mea­
sures of the target state in Cartesian coordinates, but range r, azimuth angle θ, 
and range-rate r measurements, and the observation model is 
	
(
)
k
k
k
=
+
z
h x
v 	
(5.29)
where 
(
)
[
]
,
, and
.
T
m
m
m
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
r
r
r
r
r
r
v
v
v
θ
θ
θ




=
=
=




z
h x
v



In (5.29), the observation noise  is now assumed to be zero mean Gaussian 
distributed with diagonal covariance matrix 
{
}
{
}
2
2
2
,
,
.
T
k
k
r
r
E
diag
θ
σ
σ
σ
=
=
R
v v

 
We can observe that
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
1
2
2
,
tan
and
k
k
r
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
r
k
k
k
y
r
h
x
y
h
x
x x
y y
r
h
x
y
θ
θ
- 

=
=
+
=
=




+
=
=
+
x
x
x




	
(5.30)
Since these measurement are a nonlinear function of the state, the Kal­
man filter cannot be used in the previous formulation. The extended Kalman 
filter (EKF) [30] is often used in its place. The EKF consists of the local linear­
ization of the nonlinear measurement functions h(xk), such that 
	
(
)
1
ˆ
k
k
k k
T
T
k
k
-
=


= ∇


x
x
x
H
h
x
	
(5.31)
where 
(
)
k
T
T
k


∇


x h
x
 is the Jacobian of h(xk). 
In the EKF the two main equations are
Prediction
	
1
ˆ
ˆ
k
k
k k
+
=
x
Fx
	
(5.32)
Update
	
(
)
(
)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
+
-
x
x
K
z
h
x
	
(5.33)
The predicted state covariance is 
1
T
k
k
k k
+
=
+
P
Q
FP F ; the updated state 
covariance is 
1
1
1
1
1
1
T
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
-
P
P
K
S
K
, where Sk+1 is the predicted 

108 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
measurement covariance 
1
1
1
T
k
k
k
k
k
+
+
+
=
-
S
R
H
P
H  and Kk+1 is the gain of the 
EKF 
1
1
1
1
1
T
k
k
k
k
k
-
+
+
+
+
=
K
P
H
S
.
The use of the Jacobian, the first order approximation of h(xk), sometimes 
can cause inconsistency of the covariance Sk+1 when the linearization is poor, 
which results in improper filter gains Kk+1 and then inconsistency of the filter 
estimates. 
To overcome this problem, much more complex tracking filters have been 
proposed, such as the unscented Kalman filter (UKF) and the particle filter 
(PF) [31]. An excellent survey on the tracking techniques can be found in [30, 
32].
5.3  SRR Radar
The main functionalities of the SSR are the parking aid, precrashing sensing, 
stop and go, and blind spot surveillance. 
For the parking aid, the radar is intended to warn the driver if the distance 
between the vehicle and an obstacle or human being is below a critical value. 
Due to the very low speed of the car in parking, the radar need low update rates 
(100 ms), but a wide angular range in azimuth and a very accurate measure of 
the distance to the nearest object. 
For stop and go functionality, the radar should warn for cut-in collisions 
in order to enable reduction of speed in time to avoid contact. In very dense 
traffic situations, this application reduces a large amount of accidents. The 
update rate must be high (50–100 Hz). Distance measurement parameters 
are similar to those of an ACC system. For correct distance control, a wide 
range in velocity has to be covered with good precision, as well as a wide area 
in azimuth angle.
For precrashing sensing, the radar is intended to help the driver to react 
very quickly and to activate all necessary components (brakes or steering) in the 
car to avoid an accident or at least minimize consequences of an impact with 
reduction of the vehicle velocity. Due to this reason, the update rate must be 
very high (200 Hz).
The requirements for the different SRR functions are summarized in 
Table 5.3.
Since the required range resolution is generally very high (on the order 
of cm), the SRR uses ultrawideband technology; that is, the transmitted signal 
bandwidth exceeds “the lesser of 500 MHz or 20% of the center frequency,” ac­
cording to the FCC definition [33]. This transmit wideband can be obtained in 
different ways: either using nonsinusoidal pulses of a typical width of less than 

 
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
109
1.5 ns, and thus a bandwidth over 1 GHz, or using longer but phase-coded 
pulses and pulse compression.
In the first case, different type of signals  respect this band requirement as 
Gaussian monocycle pulse, Gaussian doublet pulse (plotted in Figure 5.13), or 
Gegenbauer functions and Hermite functions [33].
The drawback of these waveforms is that, for increasing the probability 
of detecting the obstacles, the transmitted peak power can be very high, while, 
for complying with the FCC rules, the average equivalent isotropically radiated 
power (EIRP) emitted by the SRR UWB sensor must stay below –41.3dBm/
MHz in the 22-GHz to 29-GHz band, and peak EIRP should be below 0 
dBm/50 MHz in the same frequency band. 
Table 5.3
Requirements for the Different SRR Functions
Parking Aid
Stop and Go
Precrash
Cycle time (ms)
100
10-20
5
Distance (m)
Range 0.05-5
0.5-20
0.5-20
Accuracy
0.05
0.5
0.5
Resolution
—
1
1
Relative velocity (km/h)
Range
—
–180 +180
–180 +180
Accuracy
—
1
1
Resolution
—
5
5
Azimuth angle (°)
Angle of view
–90 +90
–60 +60
–60 + 60
Accuracy
5
2
2
Resolution
—
5
5
Figure 5.13  Waveform of UWB SRR, Gaussian pulse, and Gaussian doublet.

110 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Often to meet these stringent requirements on the EIRP and peak EIRP, 
coded pulses are used. They are longer pulses, phase modulated with M-bits 
code that reach the resolution requirements after pulse compression (or matched 
filtering). This is a traditional technique for enhancing radar performance and 
may be used to improve sensitivity for detecting targets at short and long range. 
If the transmit pulse with pulse width T and M-bits code is selected at a certain 
range, the compression gain associated with the binary phase codes is equal to 
M, and the peak value is M times larger than the peak power of the long pulse 
itself [34].
The general expression of the complex envelop of a phase-coded pulse is 
given by
	
(
)
1
1
1
( )
M
b
m
b
m
t
m
T
u t
u rect
T
T
=


-
-
=




∑
	
(5.34)
where Tb is the duration of each subpulse or bit, um = exp(j φm) and the set of 
M phases {φ1, φ2, …, φM} in the phase code. Flexibility exists with the choice 
of the code, allowing designers to trade various performance parameters, with 
the limitation that dynamic range is often restricted by code auto-correlation 
properties (see Chapter 20 in [15], as well as [34]. In UWB radar the most com­
mon waveform is the binary phase modulated Barker code, whose maximum 
known length is M=13.
The received signal (autocorrelation), after pulse compression, is plotted 
in Figure 5.14 for M=13.
As for the pulsed radar, the distance between the radar (on the car) and 
the obstacle is measured based upon the delay of the received pulse with respect 
to the transmitted one. CFAR techniques can be used in both range and fre­
quency domain for increasing the probability of detection and improving the 
range and frequency estimation as already shown for the LRR. 
Unlike the LRR, the SRR has a very wide field of view, and, in this case, 
the monopulse azimuth estimation with only two beams can have some prob­
lems. For example, when driving down a narrow street with infrastructure ob­
jects symmetrically present on both sides of the street, the objects fall in the 
same range and frequency bins, and thus the wide angle monopulse radar can­
not resolve them as separate objects. The result is that these targets are inaccu­
rately placed by the radar directly in the path of the car. 
One more difference between LRR and SRR is that, while LRR does not 
need precise information on target elevation, SRR does because it must distin­
guish, for instance, between lower-lying objects (soda cans, water bottles, or 
other road debris) over which a vehicle could safely drive and taller obstacles of 
interest (vehicles, humans, or chain link fences) over which a vehicle must not 

 
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
111
drive. To solve this problem, a possible approach could be to use the monopulse 
technique in elevation as well that is able to characterize low-profile targets on 
the road surface as obstacles not of interest, while still correctly reporting the 
average height for vertically distributed objects that must be avoided.
5.4  Conclusions
The aim of this chapter was to introduce the main statistical signal processing 
techniques used by a single automotive radar for detection and tracking of a 
target at long and short distances. 
The research activity on this topic is far from being definitive and final. 
There is an increasing interest in mounting more precise and less costly radars 
even on low-class cars, possibly networked with other sensors like cameras and 
lidars. Moreover, the idea of using multiple radars on the same vehicle is becom­
ing real [35], and more work is needed to optimize network performance and 
cost.
References
[1]	 Hoare, E. G., and R. Hill, System Requirements for Automotive Radar Antennas, London, 
UK: Institution of Electrical Engineers.
Figure 5.14  Autocorrelation function of phase-coded radar pulse with 13-element Barker 
code.

112 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
[2]	 Corredoura, P., Z. Baharav, B. Tabwe, and G. Lee, “Millimeter-Wave Imaging System for 
Personnel Screening: Scanning 107 Points a Second and Using No Moving Parts,” SPIE 
Conf. on Passive Millimeter Wave Imaging Technology IX, Vol. 6211, 2006. 
[3]	 Abou-Jaoude, R., “ACC Radar Sensor Technology, Test Requirements, and Test Solu­
tions,” IEEE Trans. on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Vol. 4, No. 3, September 2003, 
pp. 115–122.
[4]	 Mizutani, K., and R. Kohno, “Inter-Vehicle Spread Spectrum Communication and Rang­
ing System with Concatenated EOE Sequence,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transport. Syst., Vol. 2, 
No. 4, Dec. 2001, pp. 180–191.
[5]	 Rohling, H., and M. Kronauge, “Continuos Waveforms for Automotive Radar Systems,” 
Ch. 7 in Waveform Design and Diversity for Advanced Radar Systems, edited by F. Gini, A. 
De Maio, and L. Patton, IET Radar, Sonar and Navigation Series, Vol. 22, 2012.
[6]	 Kok, D., and J. S. Fu, “Signal Processing for Automotive Radar,” 2005 IEEE International 
Radar Conference, pp. 842–846.
[7]	 Winkler, V., “Range Doppler Detection for Automotive FMCW Radars,” 2007 European 
Radar Conference, pp. 166–169.
[8]	 Oppenheim, A. V., and R. W. Schafer, Discrete-Time Signal Processing, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall International, 1989.
[9]	 Gandhi, P. P., and S. A. Kassam, “Analysis of CFAR Processors in Nonhomogeneous Back­
ground,” IEEE Trans. on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, Vol. 24, No. 4, July 1988, pp. 
427–445.
[10]	 Ozgunes, L., P. P. Gandhi, and S. A. Kassam, “A Variably Trimmed Mean CFAR Radar 
Detector,” IEEE Trans. on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, Vol. 28, No. 4, October 1992, 
pp. 1002–1014.
[11]	 Hansen, V. G., and J. H. Sawyers, “Detectability Loss Due to Greatest of Selection in a 
Cell-Averaging CFAR,” IEEE Trans. on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, AES-16, January 
1980, pp. 115–118.
[12]	 Trunk, G. V., “Range Resolution of Targets Using Automatic Detectors,” IEEE Trans. on 
Aerospace and Electronic Systems, AES14, September 1978, pp. 750–755.
[13]	 Rohling, H., “Radar CFAR Thresholding in Clutter and Multiple Target Situations,” 
IEEE Trans. on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, AES-19, July 1983, pp. 608–621.
[14]	 Richards, M. A., Fundamentals of Radar Signal Processing, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005.
[15]	 Richards, M. A., J. A. Scheer, and W. A. Holm, Principles of Modern Radar: Basic Principles, 
Vol. I, Raleigh, NC: Scitech Publishing, 2010.
[17]	 Tokoro, S., K. Kuroda, A. Kawakubo, and K. Fujita, et al., “Electronically Scanned 
Millimiter-Wave Radar for Pre-Crash Safety and Adaptive Cruise Control System,” in 
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, Jun. 2003, pp. 304–309.
[18]	 Wenig, P., M. Schoor, O. Gunther, and Y. Bin, et al., “System Design of a 77 GHz 
Automotive Radar Sensor with Superresolution DOA Estimation,” 2007 International 
Symposium on Signals, Systems and Electronics, pp. 537–540.

 
Radar for Automotive Applications: Signal Processing Perspective 
113
[19]	 Farina, A., F. Gini and M. Greco, “Multiple Target DOA Estimation by Exploiting the 
Amplitude Modulation Induced by Antenna Scanning,” IEEE Transaction on Aerospace 
and Electronic Systems, Vol. 38, No. 4, October 2002, pp. 1275–1286.
[20]	 Greco, M., F. Gini, and A. Farina, “Asymptotic Maximum Likelihood DOA Estimation 
of Multiple Radar Targets,” Signal Processing Elsevier, Vol. 84, No. 6, June 2004, pp. 969–
979.
[21]	 Greco, M., F. Gini, A. Farina, and L. Timmoneri, “Direction-of-Arrival Estimation in 
Radar Systems: Moving Window and Approximate Maximum Likelihood Estimator,” 
IET Radar, Sonar and Navigation, Vol.3, No. 5, 2009, p. 552–557.
[22]	 Alland, S. W., “Antenna Requirements and Architecture Tradeoffs for an Automotive 
Forward Looking Radar,” 1998 IEEE Radar Conference, pp. 367–372.
[23]	 Schoor, M., et al., “High-Resolution Angle Estimation for an Automotive FMCW Radar 
Sensor,” in IRS, Cologne, Germany, Sep. 2007.
[24]	 Stoica, P., and R. Moses, Introduction to Spectral Analysis, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1997.
[25]	 Richter, M. D., M. Schneider, P. Wenig, and R. Weigel, “77 GHz Automotive Digital 
Beamforming Radar with SiGe Chipset,” 2010 German Microwave Conference, pp. 210–
213.
[26]	 Altendorfer, R., “Observable Dynamics and Coordinate Systems for Automotive Target 
Tracking,” 2009 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 2009, pp. 741–746.
[27]	 Eidehall, A., and F. Gustafsson, “Combined Road Prediction and Target Tracking in 
Collision Avoidance,” 2004 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, pp. 619–624.
[28]	 Li, X. R., “Survey of Maneuvering Target Tracking. Part I: Dynamic Models,” IEEE Trans. 
on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, Vol. 36, No. 4, October 2003, pp. 1333–-1348.
[29]	 Kay, S. M., Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Estimation Theory, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR, 1993.
[30]	 Bar-Shalom, Y., X. Rong Li, and T. Kirubarayan, Estimation with Applications to Tracking 
and Navigation, New York: John Willey & Sons, 2001.
[31]	 Gustafsson, F., F. Gunnarsson, N. Bergman, and U. Forssell, et al., “Particle Filters for 
Positioning, Navigation and Tracking,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, Special 
Issue on Monte Carlo Methods for Statistical Signal Processing, Vol. 50, No. 2, pp. 425–
437.
[32]	 Ristic, B., S. Arulampalam, and N. Gordon, Beyond the Kalman Filter: Particle Filters for 
Tracking Applications, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2004.
[33]	 See http://www.fcc.gov.
[34]	 N. Levanon, E. Mozeson, Radar Signals, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Interscience, 2004.
[35]	 F. Folster, H. Rohling, “Data Association and Tracking for Automotive Radar Networks,” 
IEEE Trans. on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Vol. 6, No.4, 2005, pp. 370–377.


115
6
Low-Power Radar Front-End for E-Health 
and Harbor Surveillance: Implementation 
Examples
6.1  Summary
In this chapter, two case studies of low-power/low-cost radar front-end for spe­
cific applications are presented, starting from the problem description up to 
the design, simulation, and realization of the prototypes. The emphasis is on 
the radio front-end circuits whose design and simulation has become much 
easier than in the past thanks to modern simulation tools and accurate high-
frequency device modeling. At the same time, the unitary cost of new genera­
tion integrated radar sensors has been reduced by orders of magnitude thanks 
to the utilization of modern integrated circuit technologies. The front-end con­
tains all of the radiofrequency circuits and subsystems necessary to generate the 
waveform to be transmitted, together with the output and input RF filters, low 
noise amplifier, mixer, and so on. The output of the radar receiver can be AD 
converted, and digital elaboration can be accomplished by purposely designed 
integrated digital signal processor or by traditional elaboration tools running on 
an external elaboration system, typically a PC. Although the emphasis is mainly 
on circuits and subsystems, some basic information will be given about the an­
tennas and the digital signal processing used to test the prototypes. 
The first case we present is a miniaturized pulsed E-health (EH) radar for 
noninvasive continuous monitoring of heart and breath activities, which does 
not require digital elaboration. The second one is a low-power radar front-end 

116 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
for harbor surveillance (HS). In this second case, the output of the radio front-
end receiver is sampled and elaborated by an external system even if, in the 
future, a dedicated DSP could be embedded in a multichip module together 
with the radio interface for a more compact, cheaper, and less power consuming 
solution.
For the design and realization of EH radar, an entirely integrated solution 
was chosen. It was possible to foresee a large-scale production of the device, 
whose main utilization could be the monitoring of cardiopathic patients during 
normal daily activities or the monitoring of breathing activity of sleeping adults 
or infants affected by recurrent apneas. It is well known that, for large produc­
tion scales, more suited solutions consist of a fully integrated system on a single 
chip: a feasibility study and design are presented in this chapter, whereas related 
technologies have been described and discussed in Chapter 2.
For the design and realization of HS radar, instead, a small-scale pro­
duction has been foreseen: some tens of devices for each harbor, thousands of 
pieces in total. For this reason, a hybrid solution was chosen—discrete devices 
mounted on a substrate in which passive devices (matching networks, filters, 
power divider and combiners, and so on) are integrated. This solution does 
not require the utilization of sophisticated technological processes and, conse­
quently, access to a silicon foundry. It can be realized in any electronic labora­
tory equipped with a photolithographic etching process and a work station for 
bonding. Hybrid circuits for RF and microwave applications, commonly called 
microwave integrated circuits (MICs), represent the best solution for small- 
and medium-scale production and for prototype realization. Section 6.3 of this 
chapter is dedicated to a concise description of the hybrid technology for MIC 
design and realization.
6.2  Miniaturized Radar for E-Health
A portable radar system can allow the monitoring in a contactless way of some 
vital functions such as the heart activity and the respiratory one. In fact, the 
movement of the heart walls, as well as the slower one of the chest due to 
breathing, interact with the transmitted electromagnetic wave and modulate 
the back scattered one. Both CW radar, using the Doppler effect, and pulsed 
radar, measuring the change of distance between the radar sensor and the target, 
can be used. In the case of respiratory activity, which is characterized by slow 
movements in a frequency range about five times lower than cardiac frequency, 
the pulsed radar is more effective. In fact, the shift Doppler ∆f depends on the 
target velocity VR, on the frequency f0, and on the propagation velocity c of the 
transmitted wave through the relationship: 

 
Low-Power Radar Front-End for E-Health and Harbor Surveillance 
117
	
0
2
R
v
f =
f
c
∆
	
(6.1)
Equation (6.1), for f0 = 10 GHz, an estimated chest velocity vR of a few 
centimeters per second, gives a value of ∆f in the range of a few hertz (for c the 
value of the EM wave phase velocity in vacuum/air has been used). An output 
signal in this frequency range is very difficult to be monitored mainly due to 
(1) the low frequency fluctuations of the amplifier offset, and (2) the flicker 
noise affecting the operations of any electronic devices at low frequencies. These 
causes of disturbances cannot be eliminated by using a low pass filter in that 
they are located in the same frequency range of the signal. For this reason, a 
pulsed radar solution has been preferred. 
In the past, several realizations have been presented of single chip (or 
chipset) implementing the radar for biomedical applications [1–8]: we will refer 
here to that described in [6, 7].
The block scheme of the system is described in Figure 6.1 in which a 
UWB pulsed radar solution is presented [6, 7]. 
The term UWB applies in case the frequency band occupied by the signal 
is at least 500 MHz or more than 20% of the central frequency. To this kind of 
application (UWB modulation), a frequency range starting from 3.1 up to 10.6 
GHz has been dedicated by international organizations (FCC for the United 
States, and ETSI for Europe). This frequency range can be utilized without any 
authorization (unlicensed band) provided that the effective isotropic radiated 
power spectral density of the transmitted signal is lower than -41.3 dBm/MHz. 
The transmitted pulse is partially reflected at each interface it passes 
through: air/skin, muscle/bone, bone/abdominal cavity, abdominal cavity/heart 
wall, and so on. In this way, an echo is generated at each interface: for each 
transmitted pulse several echoes with different delays are back scattered to the 
Figure 6.1  Block diagram of a pulsed radar for biomedical applications [7].

118 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
receiving antenna. By choosing a suited value of the delay introduced by the 
delay block in Figure 6.1, the replica of the transmitted pulse generated by the 
shaper arrives at the multiplier input together with the echo coming from the 
selected interface. The output of the multiplier is different from zero just during 
the time interval in which delayed and reflected pulses are superimposed at the 
multiplier input. So the output of the integrator (a low-pass filter) attains its 
maximum when the pulses perfectly coincide, whereas it goes to zero when they 
do not superimpose at all. The small cyclic movement of the interface causes a 
cyclic variation of the reciprocal delay between the replica of the pulse gener­
ated by the shaper and the echo received by the receiving antenna, causing a 
cyclic variation of the output of the integrator. For a continuous monitoring of 
the instantaneous displacement ∆x(t) of the interface from a reference position, 
the pulse duration ∆T should be equal to twice the time the EM wave takes to 
cover a distance equal to the maximum (∆xMAX) of ∆x (i.e., ∆T = 2 ∆xMAX/c). 
In fact, if the delay time is set in such a way that when ∆x=0, delayed and re­
flected pulses completely superimpose each other at the multiplier input, then 
when ∆x= ∆xMAX, their reciprocal delay at the multiplier input will be ∆Τ, and 
the time interval in which they superimpose will be nulled. However, ∆T values 
larger than 2∆xMAX/c can be used, provided that a reduction of the dynamic of 
the signal at the output of the integrator can be tolerated. In fact, in this case 
a partial superimposition between reflected and delayed pulses is present even 
when ∆x= ∆xMAX . For instance, if ∆T=4∆xMAX/c, when ∆x=0 the two pulses are 
completely coincident at the multiplier input, whereas when ∆x= ∆xMAX they 
are superimposed for a time equal to 2∆xMAX/c (i.e., ∆Τ/2). In this case, the 
output of the integrator will change between VMAX (∆x=0) and VMAX /2 (∆x= 
∆xMAX) instead of between VMAX and zero. This discussion shows that values 
of the pulse duration slightly larger than twice the time the EM wave takes to 
cover a distance equal to the maximum (∆xMAX) of ∆x can be used without a 
drastic lack of sensitivity of the radar sensor. With reference to the breath moni­
toring, we can suppose ∆xMAX = 3 cm at which a value of ∆T=2 ∆xMAX/c = 200 
ps would correspond. For the calculus, the light velocity in air has been used for 
c: this fact implies that the interface to be monitored moves in air (breath moni­
toring); otherwise, the proper phase velocity in the medium should be used. In 
[9] the relative permittivity of some biological tissues are reported: the typical 
values at 10 GHz are around 10, corresponding to a propagation velocity three 
times (or more) slower than in air. A value of ∆T slightly higher than 200 ps is 
obtained in the case of heart monitoring; in fact, the cardiac walls displacement 
is around 1.5 cm, but the propagation velocity is reduced by about 1/3. In the 
prototype of the EH radar, which has been realized and tested, variable ∆T 
between 200 and 400 ps has been chosen in order to relax the specifications on 
the pulse generator (PG) design. 

 
Low-Power Radar Front-End for E-Health and Harbor Surveillance 
119
A preliminary feasibility study has demonstrated the possibility of real­
izing the entire transmitter/receiver section in a single chip. By supposing a 
power supply voltage of 1.2V, a differential output voltage of 900 mV at the 
transmitter output, a differential signal of 650 mV at the transmitting antenna 
input (a voltage drop of 0.25V due to the cables has been considered), and 
a differential antenna impedance of 100Ω, the transmitted power during the 
pulse, having a sinusoidal shape, is 0.528 mW. In order to estimate the available 
power at the input of the receiving antenna, the attenuation between transmit­
ted and received pulse must be calculated. A rough estimation, confirmed also 
by other similar cases presented in the literature ([6, 7] and references therein), 
indicates, for heart monitoring, a value of the attenuation of about 80 dB due 
to path loss, to the reflection coefficient smaller than 1 at the interfaces and to 
the attenuation inside the biological tissues. It must be noted that, in the case of 
heart monitoring, the transmitting antenna is put in contact with the chest, so 
that far field equations for propagation and attenuation of EM wave cannot be 
used and near field equations have to be used. Details about this modeling are 
given in [6]. The attenuation is much smaller in the case of breath monitoring 
in that the antennas are put a few tens of centimeters from the chest and the 
interface to be monitored (i.e., between air and skin), so that no attenuation in­
side the biological tissues has to be considered. In the worst case (80 dB attenu­
ation), a value of the reflected available power at the receiving antenna input 
PAIN=5.28×10-12 W can be hypothesized. This value corresponds, at T0=290K, 
to a signal-to-noise ratio (SNROUT) at the output of the LNA, for a single pulse, 
given by the following relationship: 
	
0
AIN
OUT
F
P
SNR
= kT BN
	
(6.2)
where NF is the LNA noise figure, B=7.5 GHz (from 3.1 to 10.5 GHz) is the 
LNA band for UWB signal, and k is the Boltzmann constant. The denomina­
tor of (6.2) should be substituted by 
(
)
0
1
F
i
kB T
N
T


-
+

 if the absolute tem­
perature at which the input of the amplifier is terminated was Ti. By using a 
prudential value of 10 dB for NF , Ti = 298 K (25°C) (breath monitoring), (6.2) 
gives a value of SNROUT of about -18 dB. The situation would appear just a bit 
worse for heart monitoring: in this case Ti = 37°C, which is the mean tempera­
ture of human body. This value of SNROUT could appear too small for a correct 
detection of the back-scattered pulse at the receiver output. At this point, it 
must be considered that the pulses are repeated with a pulse rate PR between 1 
and 40 MHz and that the output of the multiplier can be integrated for a given 
time TINT. The choice of the integration time  must be done by taking into ac­
count two different limitations. In fact, TINT has to be quite long to maximize 

120 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
the signal-to-noise ratio without infringing upon the conditions for time reso­
lution required for monitoring the phenomenon under observation. The period 
of the phenomena under observation is between 0.5s (heart) and 10s (breath). 
So an integration time of about 1/100 of the period of the fastest phenomenon 
under observation can be considered suited for a continuous monitoring with 
a sufficient time resolution. By using TINT =5ms (both the heart and the chest 
displacement can be considered negligible in 5 ms) and PR=2 MHz, 10,000 
quite identical and fully correlated pulses occur in TINT . By integrating the 
output of the multiplier with a time constant equal to TINT , an improvement 
of 40 dB (10Log10,000) of SNROUT is obtained. Consequently, the resultant 
value of SNROUT rises up from -18 to +22 dB, which can be considered well 
suited for a detailed analysis of the phenomenon under observation. This quite 
rough estimation demonstrates, at a first approach, the possibility to realize in a 
fully integrated way the radar sensor. In fact, the pulse duration (200–400 ps), 
the output power (0.528 mW with a power supply voltage of 1.2V), and the 
receiver noise figure (less than 10 dB) can be obtained by using any well-con­
solidated technology available on the market. The fully integrated radar sensor 
has been designed, simulated, and realized by using the 90 nm CMOS technol­
ogy by STMicroelectronics. After the chip realization, the single blocks of the 
prototype have been characterized by means of a purposely designed test bench. 
The schematics of the building blocks of the front-end [7] are shown in 
Figure 6.2. A differential topology has been chosen starting from pulse genera­
tor output up to antennas and, in the receiving section, for LNA, multiplier and 
integrator. A square wave generator with a maximum frequency PR= 10 MHz 
is integrated in order to generate a triangular wave which, in turn, is shaped by 
a shaping network (SN in Figure 6.2) whose output is a bipolar Gaussian-like 
pulse. This shape of the pulse has been chosen to comply with the regulation 
requirement for UWB communication in terms of power spectral density mask. 
The output of the shaper is connected by a short differential cable to the trans­
mitting antenna. 
The receiving antenna, with the same characteristics of the transmitting 
one, receives the back scattered echoes that are pulses similar to the transmitted 
ones, even if a given level of linear distortions has to be taken into account due 
to the effect of the crossing of biological tissues and the reflection at the inter­
faces. The antenna gain used for testing was a slotted antenna with a gain of 
10 dB realized on a soft substrate [10], whereas a purposely designed antenna, 
for use in respiratory activity monitoring, realized in FR4 has been described 
in [11]. 
The LNA topology is in three stages: common gate followed by two com­
mon source differential stages. The main characteristics of LNA are: gain = 22.7 
dB @ 5 GHz, return loss S11<-10.5 dB, NF = 6.5 dB, 1dB compression point 
1dBCP= -19.7 dBm, and dissipated power PD= 34.8 mW. A P-MOS Gilbert 

 
Low-Power Radar Front-End for E-Health and Harbor Surveillance 
121
Figure 6.2  Schematic of the building blocks of EH radar front-end [7]: (a) pulse generator, (b) LNA, (c) multiplier, (d) integrator, and (e) delay generator; 
VDD=1.2V.

122 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
cell implements the multiplier whose power consumption is 3.7 mW. The mul­
tiplier output is sent to the differential integrator, which is implemented by 
means of a simple RC low pass filter preceded and followed by two stages that 
introduce a total voltage gain of 58 dB. 
In Figure 6.3 the micrograph of the radar test chip is shown: the occupied 
area on silicon die is 1.5 × 1.3 mm2. For testing, the die has been mounted on a 
QFN32 package whose external dimensions are 5 × 5 mm2, whereas the anten­
nas, whose dimensions are in the range of some centimeters depending on the 
required gain, could be realized in the future on a polymeric flexible substrate 
and “embedded” together with the radar microchip in a T-shirt, realizing the 
first prototype of a “wearable radar.” The characteristic of the integrated EH 
radar front-end, together with the small value of the total power consumption 
(only 73.2 mW), makes the EH radar well suited to be “worn” by cardiopathic 
patients who could be equipped with an RF interface (e.g., Bluetooth or Zig­
bee) for data transmission to a base station or to a storage device for continuous, 
noninvasive monitoring during their normal activities.
A prototype of EH radar front-end has been successfully tested for the 
contactless monitoring of breathing activity in patients affected by nocturnal 
apneas and for the monitoring of babies during their sleep in order to prevent 
the phenomenon of crib deaths [7].
6.3  Microwave Integrated Circuit
The term MIC refers to RF and microwave circuits realized by integrating both 
passive and active devices in the same planar substrate. For passive devices (re­
sistances, capacitors, and inductors), two possibilities are available: (1) they can 
be realized directly on the substrate, and (2) they can be purchased in packaged 
or in chip version and bonded on the substrate. For active devices, just the sec­
ond possibility is available since it is not possible to realize them directly on the 
Figure 6.3  (a) Micrograph of the EH radar front-end chip and (b) of the QFN32 in which it has 
been mounted [7]. The die size is 1.5 × 1.3 mm2.

 
Low-Power Radar Front-End for E-Health and Harbor Surveillance 
123
substrate. For this reason, it would be more appropriate to use the term hybrid 
circuits for MIC, since this technology makes use of devices directly realized on 
the substrate together with discrete devices previously realized elsewhere and 
then bonded on the substrate. 
MICs are composed of (1) the substrate, (2) the passive devices, and (3) 
the active devices. To these three components, both the connectors and the case 
must be added, which are essential to realize the link with other blocks of the 
system and to give a suitable shielding effect. The latter functionality is very 
important in order to avoid cross talk between different blocks, to reduce the 
effect of interferences and external noise, and to guarantee the stability of the 
active stages.
In Figure 6.4, a typical MIC realization is shown: the upper case has been 
removed to show the planar substrate with active and passive devices. In the fig­
ure, some typical distributed passive devices realized with a photolithographic 
process are also shown. A detailed analysis of theory and application of planar 
technology can be found, for instance, in [12].
Unlike MICs, MMIC are the true integrated circuits for RF and micro­
wave applications in that they are entirely realized by specialized silicon foundry 
on the same substrate (active, passive, and interconnections). MMIC are real­
ized on Si, GaAs, or other suited substrates by using modern technologies for 
integrated circuits that allow the realization of entire cells, blocks, and some­
times entire systems on the same chip. With respect to MIC, MMIC allow 
better performances in terms of maximum operating frequency, dimensions, 
reliability, and power efficiency, but their utilization can be considered just 
for large-scale production. In fact, it must be taken into account the fact that 
Figure 6.4  A hybrid circuit realized by using a soft substrate and enclosed in a purposely 
designed case with input, output, and test connectors.

124 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
an integrated circuit requires the preliminary realization of the masks and the 
availability of a suited technological process. The cost of the masks and the ac­
cess to the technological facilities makes advantageous the utilization of MMIC 
technology just in case of a large-scale production (hundreds of thousand of 
pieces or more). Moreover, it must be considered that the possibility of realizing 
distributed elements on MMIC (transmission lines, matching networks, filters, 
and power combiners and dividers) is restricted to the higher frequency range of 
interest for microwave. In fact, the dimensions of distributed devices are com­
parable with the wavelength so that their realization on a chip is made possible 
just above a few tens of GHz, (i.e., for wavelength in the range of millimeters).
6.3.1  The Substrates 
Two types of substrates are normally used for MIC: soft and hard. Soft sub­
strates make use of materials similar to Teflon (Diclad, Duroid, and so on). The 
relative permittivity is between 2 and 3, and they are light, quite flexible, and 
cheaper than hard substrates. Soft substrates are mainly used in the frequency 
range between a few GHz and a few tens of GHz, up to the millimeter-wave 
range. Above this limit, hard substrates have to be used because the dielectric 
losses in soft substrates increase together with parasitic and spurious effects, 
which cause a performance degradation in terms of gain and power dissipation. 
Hard substrates make use of high permittivity material, such as alumina 
(AL2O3) or berillium oxide. The relative permittivity is around 10 or more: this 
fact has a positive effect on the dimensions of distributed elements in that the 
wavelength is reduced by a factor of 3 or more, with respect to air; therefore, 
the dimensions of transmission lines, matching networks, filters, and so on are 
reduced by the same factor. By using hard substrates, it is possible to realize 
MIC in the frequency range up to 100 GHz or more. 
Both soft and hard substrates are constituted by a dielectric sheet with a 
double metallization, in the top and down surface. The down surface metal­
lization is used as ground plane, whereas in the upper metallization layer suited 
geometries can be realized by using standard photolithographic process. In this 
way, different passive devices, such as power combiners and dividers, directional 
couplers, spiral inductors, planar transformer and balun, interdigitized capaci­
tors, and so on, can be realized [12].
Furthermore, by using a little more complex technological processes than 
the lithographic one, the deposition of thin metal film, ceramic pastes, and 
insulating layers is made possible, thus allowing the realization on the substrate 
of passive devices, such as resistors, metal-insulator-metal (MIM) capacitors, 
and multilayer inductors and transformers. Finally, it must be pointed out that 
in planar MIC (regardless of the substrate type) different typologies of planar 
antennas (dipole, patch, slotted, and so on, both active and passive) can be 

 
Low-Power Radar Front-End for E-Health and Harbor Surveillance 
125
realized, as well as high directivity antenna arrays with or without electron beam 
forming. In other words, with MIC technology an entire microwave transmit­
ter-receiver system, included antennas, LNA, and power amplifiers can be de­
signed, simulated, and realized in house by using quite low-cost instrumentation 
and facilities.
6.3.2  Design, Simulation, and Realization of Microwave Integrated Circuits 
Several CAD tools are available for the design and simulation of MIC, but the 
most complete and widespread one is the Advanced Design System (ADS) by 
Agilent Technologies. ADS makes available a very complete integrated simula­
tion tool starting from the bottom level of the electromagnetic simulation of 
circuits, antennas, and case, up to the top level of the entire communication 
system simulation. 
Furthermore, a specific ADS module makes available integration with 
Cadence, the most widespread CAD tool for integrated circuits design. In this 
way, the design kit of a particular technological process for integrated circuits 
production (e.g., 65 nm CMOS by STMicroelectronics) can be used in an ADS 
environment for design and simulation, and then the final circuit design can be 
transferred to the silicon foundry for large-scale production. In other words, by 
using ADS, both MIC and MMIC can be designed and simulated. In Figure 
6.5 a typical screenshot of ADS is shown.
After the simulation, when the results comply with the initial specifica­
tions, the layout of the circuits is extracted, and the board with passive distrib­
uted devices and the slots for passive and active discrete devices is realized. 
Figure 6.5  ADS screenshot of the receiver section of a radar Doppler.

126 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
6.4  Low-Cost Radar Prototype for Harbor Surveillance 
The target of this project was the design, simulation, realization, and testing of 
a low-power (a few watts), low-cost (less than $1,000 for radio front-end) radar, 
capable of monitoring the presence and tracking the movements of any kind 
of ship inside and in the neighborhood of a harbor. The radar sensor should be 
able to make 3D images of ships and vessels with a resolution of about 0.5m. To 
this end, a single transmitting antenna and three receiving channels connected 
to three antennas in spatial diversity, in order to allow interferometric analy­
sis, will be used. The way in which 3D reconstruction can be accomplished is 
beyond the scope of this book, so we will examine in the following the single 
channel radar front-end (i.e., a radar with only one receiving antenna). The 
overall design of the harbor surveillance system is based on a wireless sensor 
network whose nodes are single radar sensors distributed in the harbor area, 
allowing the data fusion at network level of the image coming from all of the 
nodes. The entire network could be constituted by some tens of radar sensors, 
which should be characterized by low dissipated power, small dimensions, and, 
most of all, a low level of EM pollution.
An FMCW solution is the most suited for such an application, as it is 
capable of giving information both on the distance R and on the radial velocity 
VR of the target by using quite low values of the output power (a few watts) for 
some kilometers of coverage range.
The typical block diagram of an FMCW radar front-end is shown in 
Figure 6.6.
Figure 6.6  Block diagram of a FMCW radar front-end.

 
Low-Power Radar Front-End for E-Health and Harbor Surveillance 
127
6.4.1  Feasibility Study and Dimensioning
The principle of operation of the HS radar can be summarized as follows. The 
instantaneous frequency transmitted by the output antenna is fT(t) = fMIN + At. 
When a target at a distance d reflects the transmitted wave, the back-scattered 
wave arrives at the receiving antenna with a delay τ = 2d/c. The received fre­
quency at instant t is fR(t) = fMIN + A(t – τ). At the output of the mixer at time 
t, and we have a frequency fIF equal to the difference between fT and fR. That is, 
	
2
IF
f
A
A d dc
τ
=
=
	
(6.3)
By measuring fIF the value of d can be evaluated provided that A is known. 
The specifications are shown in Table 6.1.
The FM band depends on the required resolution through the well-
known relationship:
	
2 R
c
B = d
	
(6.4)
where B = fMAX – fMIN is the difference between the maximum (fMAX) and 
minimum (fMIN) instantaneous value of the frequency, c is the light velocity in 
air, and dR is the distance (or range) resolution. Equation (6.4) for the required 
resolution of 0.5m gives a value of 300 MHz; therefore, the values of fMIN and 
fMAX have been chosen equal to 10.5 and 10.8 GHz.
The behavior of the instantaneous frequency of the transmitted constant 
wave is shown in Figure 6.7, where TSW is the rise time (i.e., the time required 
for the instantaneous frequency to rise from its minimum value fMIN to its 
maximum value fMAX). During a time interval TSW the instantaneous frequency 
f rises up with a velocity A, where A is measured in s –2. The instantaneous fre­
quency is generated by a voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO) and inserted in a 
Table 6.1
Frequency
X band (8–12.5 GHz)
Waveform
FMCW
Antenna
60° azimuth 
Range
> 1.5 km
Range resolution
0.5m
Receiver dynamics
> 96 dB
SNR at the receiver output
SNR ≥ 20 dB
Channel number
3 (for 3D imaging)
Maximum Output power
10W

128 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
phase locked loop (PLL), which can be digitally controlled by a microcontroller 
(µC). The µC send a trigger signal at the beginning of each new frequency 
ramp to the DSP in order to allow synchronization. It is worth emphasizing 
that the frequency reference of the PLL is a crystal oscillator that continuously 
oscillates at its resonance frequency, so that the phase coherence of the gener­
ated FMCW over different ramps is guaranteed by the synchronization with the 
same reference oscillation. The coherence accuracy depends only on the phase 
noise of the reference source. Maximum values of A for commercial PLL, for 
frequencies around 10 GHz, are in the range of 1012 s –2 (e.g., see [13]). For 
higher values of A, the VCO linearity is no longer guaranteed, and the gener­
ated instantaneous frequency shows a more complicated dependence on time t: 
this has to be avoided for a correct and simple application of FMCW principles 
of operation. 
As far as the SNR at the receiver output is concerned, it depends on the 
following quantities: the output power PCW of the transmitter , the noise figure 
NF of the receiver, the cross radar section σ of the target, the transmitting and 
receiving antenna gain (GTX and GRX, respectively), the total losses L in air and 
inside the system, the maximum distance RP of the target, the equivalent avail­
able total noise power spectral density N0=KTNF , at the input of the receiver 
(for T=290K), and the bandwidth BF of the filter at the output of the mixer 
receiver.
	
(
)
2
2
3
4
1
1
4
CW
RX
F
F
F
F
P
P
G
P
SNR
kTB N
L
kTB N
R
λ
σ
π
=
=
	
(6.5)
Figure 6.7  Instantaneous frequency versus time. 

 
Low-Power Radar Front-End for E-Health and Harbor Surveillance 
129
In (6.5) PRX represents the received power, whereas GTX and GRX are both 
supposed to be equal to G.
The output signal of the mixer, after amplification and filtering, is sam­
pled and transferred to the digital domain for digital signal processing (DSP). 
A discrete Fourier transform (DFT) is calculated on the sampled data, whose 
frequency resolution ∆f is equal to the inverse of the time record length ∆T: 
∆f =1/∆T. In the digital domain, the equivalent of the filter bandwidth BF is 
the frequency resolution of the DFT, so that BF has to be substituted by ∆f in 
(6.5). In our case the time record length ∆T coincides with TSW (see Figure 
6.7). Some details about the processing of the beat signal will be given in Sec­
tion 6.4.2. 
As in the case of EH radar presented in Section 6.2, for the HS radar the 
SNR can be improved by a factor N, where N is the number of identical repeti­
tions of the received signal, by integrating the output for a time TINT = N TSW 
= N/∆f (i.e., N= TINT ∆f ). The coherence, as already stated, is guaranteed by the 
reference oscillator of the PLL. 
The resulting value of the SNR after DSP with an integration time equal 
to TINT , SNROUT, is given by
	
2
2
3
4
1
(4 )
CW
INT
OUT
F
P
P
G
T
SNR
L
kTN
R
λ
σ
π
=
	
(6.6)
SNROUT is shown in Figure 6.8 for different values of Tint. The value of 
the different parameters used for the evaluation is represented in the inset in the 
bottom of the figure, whereas the total loss L is the combined effect of air loss 
(Lam) and system loss (Lsys). 
A commercial horn antenna with 13 dBi gain has been used for the pro­
totype testing, but a low-cost patch antenna array (patent pending) realized 
by using a soft substrate will be used for the final version of HS radar. Due to 
the low values of the target velocity (less than 50 km/h), in a time interval of 
40 ms, the target displacement is less than 0.55m, very similar to the required 
range resolution. Therefore, an integration time of 40 ms does not impair in 
a significant way the accuracy in the target movement’s reconstruction. This 
means that a value of SNROUT of 20 dB can be obtained with an output power 
equal to 2W (see Figure 6.8). Obviously, the positive effect of integration on  is 
effective just in the case in which the coherence can be guaranteed (see Section 
6.4.2 for this aspect).
Until now, the effect of the relative velocity of the target with respect to 
the radar sensor (i.e., the Doppler effect) has been neglected. Due to this ef­
fect, in the case of a target moving toward the radar at a radial velocity vR, the 

130 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
received frequency is shifted by a quantity ∆f given by (6.1). It is worth noting 
that ∆f is lower than 1 kHz for vR ≤ 50 km/h.
It is possible to show that, due to Doppler effect, in case of moving tar­
gets, the frequency fIF at the mixer output is shifted by –∆f in the half period 
in which the instantaneous frequency increases and by +∆f in the other half 
period; see (6.3). This means that the information on the velocity and on the 
distance of the target are both contained in the beat signal (see Figure 6.7) at 
the output of the radar front-end. An example of the way in which they can 
be extracted by means of DSP is presented in Section 5.2.1 of Chapter 5 for 
automotive FMCW radar. For HS radar a different choice has been made: some 
details will be given in Section 6.4.3. 
6.4.2  Realization
By taking into account the results of the feasibility study in Section 6.4.1 and 
the availability of discrete and integrated devices on the market, the specifica­
tions shown in Table 6.2 have been carried out for the circuit blocks shown in 
Figure 6.7.
Figure 6.8  Signal-to-noise ratio after DSP for different values of integration time TINT. 

 
Low-Power Radar Front-End for E-Health and Harbor Surveillance 
131
A maximum output power of 2W is obtained due to the stage marked as 
a high-power amplifier (HPA) in Figure 6.7. A hybrid PLL has been utilized 
with a VCO in the range of 10–12 GHz, capable of generating a FMCW with 
a maximum value of A in the required range of 1012s-2 (a value of 6×1011s-2 has 
been chosen corresponding to TSW =500 µs in order to obtained the required 
value of B=300 MHz). 
The frequency range of the beat signal depends on the maximum distance 
that has to be covered. For harbor surveillance, by considering also the fact that 
the complete coverage is obtained by installing a wireless radar sensor network, 
a suited coverage range for each sensor is 1.5 km. For d=1.5 km, (6.3) gives fIF= 
6 MHz. A sixth-order low pass Chebyshev filter, with 6-MHz bandwidth, has 
been used as an antialiasing filter before sampling the beat signal at a sampling 
rate of 12.5 MSa/s.
The prototype of the system has been realized by using the hybrid tech­
nology described in Section 6.3. With reference to Figure 6.6, the dotted lines 
circumscribe the part of the system contained in a single board; each board has 
been mounted in a custom designed case with microwave connectors in order 
to allow individual testing before proceeding to a more compact single board 
realization of the prototype. 
Several simulations have been carried out at both the circuit and system 
levels by using ADS (see Section 6.3); an example regarding the results of the 
simulation of the receiver stage (LNA + input filter) is presented in Figure 6.9, 
where the parameters S21 (insertion gain) and S11 (return loss) are shown.
In Figure 6.10 the receiver section board is shown. Receiver and transmit­
ter sections have been realized in separated boards to make easier the prototype 
test: they will be contained in the same compact shielded case in the final real­
ization. The case will be connected to the antennas (receiving and transmitting) 
and to the power supply, whereas the low frequency output of the mixer, after 
low pass filtering and amplification (test port in Figure 6.10), will be made 
available for sampling and DSP. 
Table 6.2
Specifications for the Circuit Blocks in Figure 6.7
Receiver NF (included ADC)
≤ 5 dB
LNA gain
29 dB
Mixer conversion loss
8 dB
Minimum beat frequency (d=50m) 
200 KHz
Maximum beat frequency (d=1250m)
5 MHz
IF band
100 KHz–5 MHz
IF gain
43 dB

132 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
For a single sample of the radar front-end shown in Figure 6.10, the cost 
of the devices (active, passive, discrete, and integrated) as well as the realization 
of the board and of the case can be estimated around US$500 (€370). It is 
evident that in the case of series production of several hundreds or thousands of 
samples, the unit cost would drop in a significant way (at least 50%). 
6.4.3  Data Processing
In this section, some information will be given about the processing of the sig­
nal at the output of the radar front-end receiver. 
After AD conversion at 12.5 MS/s with 14-bit resolution, the signal is 
ready for digital signal processing. For SH radar prototype testing, DSP has 
been implemented in a Matlab platform running on a PC. In the final version 
of the radar, DSP will be performed on a dedicated board, but the processing 
steps will be unchanged and the final result will be the identification of targets 
inside the operating range of the radar in terms of distance and radial velocity. 
The processing algorithm is different from that described in Section 5.2.1 
of Chapter 5 for automotive FMCW radar. In fact, in order to detect radial 
velocities as low as 1 kn (1 nautical mile per hour), according to (6.1), the 
frequency resolution of FFT should be less than 36 Hz, and, consequently, the 
time record length should be greater than 27.7 ms. This means that the number 
of samples for the FFT, at 12.5 MHz of sampling rate, should be greater than 
Figure 6.9  Insertion gain (S21) and return loss (S11) of the receiver section of the HS radar 
front-end.

 
Low-Power Radar Front-End for E-Health and Harbor Surveillance 
133
347,222 (i.e., 524,288), which is the closest power of 2. This would require the 
utilization of purposely designed and very expensive DSP for real-time elabora­
tion. For this reason, the processing algorithm, that has been implemented is 
different: it consists of a two-dimensional (2D) FFT, shortly described in the 
following paragraph. 
First of all, the coherent period of integration (CPI) has to be determined. 
CPI corresponds to the TINT in (6.6). The serial flux of samples in a CPI, taken 
at a sampling period equal to 80 ns (the inverse of the sampling rate) is or­
ganized in a matrix with L rows and N columns. Each column contains the 
samples corresponding to a single up or down frequency ramp whose duration 
is TSW (see Figure 6.7). The number of columns N is equal to CPI/TSW, whereas 
the number of rows L is equal to the number of samples in TSW. For instance, 
using TSW = 500 µs and CPI = 50 ms results in N=100 and L=6250. In this 
way, two adjacent positions in the same column correspond to consecutive 
samples of the beat signal (i.e., two samples taken at 80 ns each other), whereas 
two adjacent positions in the same row correspond to samples of the beat signal 
taken at TSW seconds of each other. At this point, after suited correction, to take 
into account the fact that the range component of the beat frequency reverses 
sign when the direction of sweep is reversed, windowing and zero padding, a 
2D FFT is performed on the matrix. A complete discussion about this topic is 
beyond the aim of this book and can be found, for instance, in [14]. Here, it 
is worth just to say that the result of 2D FFT, after proper elaboration, can be 
organized in a 3D map in which the radial velocity and the distance of a given 
target are represented in the X and Y axes, respectively, and the “intensity” of 
the corresponding echo is represented in Z axis (or in a 2D graph, by using a 
false color map). 
The laboratory preliminary tests, hardware, and data processing showed 
that the performances of the HS radar match the required characteristics for 
Figure 6.10  The prototype of the receiver of the HS radar.

134 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
radio front-end, but to verify the true resolution and sensitivity of the whole 
radar sensor network, a campaign of on-field measurements has to be carried 
out in the future. 
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to thank Dr. R. Massini, who designed, realized, and tested 
the complete prototype of HS radar front-end, and Dr. S. Lischi (Ph.D., Uni­
versity of Pisa) who implemented DSP algorithms.
References
[1]	 Fanucci, L., S. Saponara, T. Bacchillone, and M. Donati, et al., “Sensing Devices and 
Sensor Signal Processing for Remote Monitoring of Vital Signs in CHF Patients,” IEEE 
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurements, 2013
[2]	 Staderini, E. M., “UWB RADAR in Medicine,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic System 
Magazine, Vol. 17, Jan. 2002, pp. 13–18.
[3]	 Lin, J. C., “Microwave Sensing and Physiological Movement and Volume Change: A Re­
view,” Bioelectromagnetics, Vol. 13, 1992, pp. 557–565.
[4]	 McEwan, T. E., “Body Monitoring and Imaging Apparatus Method,” US Patent 5 573 
012, Nov. 12, 1996.
[5]	 I. J. Immoreev and S. V. Samkov, “Ultra-Wideband RADAR for Remote Measuring of 
Main Parameters of Patient’s Vital Activity,” Radio Physic and Radio Astronomy, Vol. 7, 
2002, pp. 404–407.
[6]	 Zito, D., D. Pepe, B. Neri, and D. De Rossi, “Feasibility Study of a Low-Cost System-on-
a-Chip UWB Pulse RADAR on Silicon for Heart Monitoring,” IEEE Waveform Diversity 
and Design Conference, 2007, pp. 32–36.
[7]	 Zito, D., et al. “SoC CMOS UWB Pulse RADAR Sensor for contactless Respiratory Rate 
Monitoring” , IEEE Trans. Biomedical System and Circuits, Vol. 5, 2011.
[8]	 Neri, B., and S. Saponara, “Advances in Technologies, Architectures and Applications of 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine, 
Vol. 27, No. 1, 2012, p. 25.
[9]	 Gabriel, C., and S. Gabriel, “Compilation of the Dielectric Properties of Body Tissues 
at RF and Microwave Frequencies,” 2000, http://www.brooks.af.mil/AFRL/HED/hedr/
reports/dielectric/home.html. 
[10]	 Zito, D., D. Pepe, M. Mincica, and F. Zito, et al., “Wearable System-on-a-Chip UWB 
Radar for Contact-Less Cardiopulmonary Monitoring: Present Status,” Proc. 30th Annual 
International IEEE EMBS Conference, Vancouver, BC, August 20–24, 2008, pp. 5274–
5277.
[11]	 Pepe,  D., and D.  Zito, “Planar Differential Antenna for UWB Pulse Radar Sensor,” 
COMCAS 2013, IEEE Conference Publications, pp. 1–4.
[12]	 Pozar, D. M., Microwave Engineering, 4th edition, Wiley, 2013.

 
Low-Power Radar Front-End for E-Health and Harbor Surveillance 
135
[13]	 Hittite, IC PLL HMC70xxxxx series, www.hittite.com.
[14]	 Jankiraman, M., “Design of Multi-Frequency CW Radars,” SciTech Pub., 2007.


137
7
Automotive Radar IC Design: 24-GHz 
UWB and 77-GHz FMCW Implementation 
Examples
This chapter presents meaningful examples of automotive radar IC design. The 
aim is to provide the reader with a circuit-level focus and a better knowledge 
of millimeter-wave design issues addressed to an important application such 
as the automotive radar. For the sake of completeness, both 24-GHz SRR and 
77-GHz LRR applications are considered in Sections 7.2 to 7.5. Special at­
tention will be given to the description of the selected architectures, circuit 
topologies of key building blocks, design procedures, and experimental results. 
The focus is put on the circuit-level design, as signal processing for radar was 
discussed in Chapter 5. All the circuits presented in this chapter are integrated 
in a SiGe HBT BiCMOS technologies by STMicroelectronics [1, 2], featuring 
high-speed npn transistors and optimized back-end-of-line (BEOL) for high-
quality passives. 
Section 7.1 is fully dedicated to a brief description of adopted BiCMOS 
technology platforms that are among the best silicon processes for millimeter-
wave applications and thus well represent the state of the art.
Section 7.2 describes the design and the experimental performance of the 
first reported fully integrated UWB SRR sensor for automotive applications at 
24 GHz. Sections 7.3 to 7.5 put the focus on the implementation of millime­
ter-wave transceivers for 77-GHz LRR.

138 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
7.1  Silicon Technologies for Automotive Radar  
The main challenge for a widespread and pervasive use of automotive driver 
assistance systems (ADASs) even in low-end cars is a drastic reduction of radar 
sensor cost, which may enable a mass-market production. A crucial step has 
been replacing bulky and expensive discrete electronics with MMICs, includ­
ing millimeter-wave, analog, and digital blocks in a chip-set implementation 
or better in a fully integrated solution. Although millimeter-wave circuits have 
traditionally been exclusive domain of GaAs, InP, and pHEMT technologies, 
research and industrial efforts in the past decade demonstrated the full matu­
rity of low-cost silicon‑based technologies that nowadays are well suited for 
millimeter-wave radar. In this scenario, silicon manufacturers addressed their 
effort toward the development of HBT SiGe bipolar technologies with fmax 
around 200 GHz [2–5], often including sub-μm CMOS transistors to enable 
digital circuitry integration [2–4]. Another important feature of such milli­
meter-wave advanced platforms is a high-performance BEOL, which provides 
top copper metals and thick intermetal oxides to lower parallel/series ohmic 
losses and parasitic capacitance of passive components [6] (i.e., capacitors, in­
ductors, transformers, and microstrips). At the present time, SiGe-based pro­
cesses represent the optimum choice for both 24-GHz [7–10] and 77-GHz 
radar [11–18], thanks to the high level of transmitted power, the good lin­
earity/noise performance, the wide operative temperature range (i.e., –40 to 
+125° C), and the high reliability. Indeed, all these requirements are manda­
tory to meet automotive radar applications. As far as pure CMOS is concerned, 
several implementations of 24-GHz and 77-GHz radar front-ends have been 
reported in past years [19–25]. A fully integrated CMOS automotive radar is 
expected for the near future [26], especially for short-range applications at 24 
GHz that require less aggressive output power levels. Nevertheless, SiGe BiC­
MOS technologies still have a significant advantage over their radio frequency 
(RF) CMOS counterpart.
The implementation examples described in Sections 7.2 to 7.5 are de­
veloped by making use of two successive generations of a 0.13-μm SiGe HBT 
BiCMOS platform by STMicroelectronics. The first technology, namely BiC­
MOS9 [1], features 166-/175-GHz fT/fmax npn transistors, dual-VT dual-gate-
oxide CMOS devices, MIM and metal-oxide-metal (MOM) capacitors, accu­
mulation MOS (A-MOS) varactors, and a 6-level metal copper back-end. This 
technology is well suited to implement K-band ICs. It was profitably used for 
the 24-GHz radar sensor described in Section 7.2. Moreover, despite the rela­
tively low fT/fmax, the adoption of proper circuit arrangements and optimized 
passive design allowed pushing the technology up to W-band implementations 
[12, 14, 27], as described in Section 7.3.

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
139
An advanced SiGe BiCMOS platform, namely BiCMOS9MW [2], was 
instead exploited to implement the 77-GHz transmitter and receiver (TX/RX) 
radar front-ends described in Sections 7.4 and 7.5, respectively. This technology 
features very-high-speed SiGe HBTs (i.e., 230-/280-GHz fT/fmax), along with 
a millimeter-wave optimized BEOL for high-quality integrated passives. Pres­
ently, it is among the few silicon-based technologies capable of implementing 
W-band ICs with fully complied performance. For the sake of completeness, a 
comparison between BiCMOS9 and BiCMOS9MW is provided in Figure 7.1.
Besides the speed of the bipolar transistors, the main differences between 
the two BiCMOS technologies are in the thickness of the Cu top metals (i.e., 
3 μm) and oxide between metals. Important is also the distance of the metals 
from the substrate that sets the value of bulk parasitic capacitances. Figure 7.1 
shows how a technology advance has to improve all these aspects to enhance 
performance, which means higher operating frequency, higher linearity, lower 
noise, better isolation, and so on.
7.2  A Fully Integrated 24-GHz UWB SRR Sensor
The implementation of a complete radar sensor on a single chip is still very 
challenging and involves many issues such as proper system architecture, 
efficient detection methodology, robust radio front-end structure, and custom­
ized local digital signal processing (DSP). In this scenario, UWB sensors based 
on RX analog correlation represent an attractive solution for a cost-effective 
automotive SRR [28]. This section describes the first published fully integrated 
24-GHz UWB radar sensor, which was implemented in a 0.13-μm SiGe BiC­
MOS process [1, 7]. The sensor integrates on the same die as the RX/TX front-
Figure 7.1  Comparison between BiCMO9 and BiCMOS9MW technologies.

140 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
end, along with both baseband analog and digital sections. It operates with 
standard supply voltages (i.e., 2.5V and 1.2V for the RF/analog and digital 
sections, respectively).
7.2.1  Sensor Architecture
Pulsed correlation radar architecture shows some advantages in comparison 
with FMCW radars. Indeed, pulsed radar allows detection of both target dis­
tance and its relative velocity with better accuracy, higher resolution, and less 
average power consumption. Moreover, circuit complexity due to the frequency 
modulation is avoided. The operating principle of a UWB radar sensor based 
on RX analog correlation scheme is depicted in the simplified block diagram 
in Figure 7.2.
A CW source is pulsed by switch SW_TX and driven by the baseband 
pulse generator PG, thus producing the UWB transmitted signal (a). This is a 
pulse train with a proper pulse width, Tpulse, and pulse repetition period, TPR, 
which is received back by the sensor after the time of flight (TOF). At the RX 
section, an on-chip delayed replica of the transmitted pulse is generated by 
switch SW_RX and used as LO for the homodyne down-conversion, whereas 
the RX input is the echo signal reflected by the target. Correlation occurs when 
reflected pulses and delayed pulses overlap, which means that the applied delay 
nearly equals the TOF. Target detection requires that a threshold is crossed by 
the sensor output. Of course, analog integration of the down-converted signal 
Figure 7.2  Operating principle of UWB radar sensor based on RX analog correlation: (a) 
transmitted/reflected pulses, and (b) output waveform for target detection.

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
141
at the RX output allows improving the sensor output level. The accumulation 
time, TINT, and hence the number of integrations (n), are set according to 
the optimum threshold and probabilities of detection and false alarm (typi­
cally around 0.9 and 10–9, respectively). The achievement of such probabilities 
highly depends on the SNR of the RX chain. Indeed, the noise level in the re­
ceiver may be orders of magnitude higher than the voltage level of the received 
pulse; thus, coherent collection of several hundred pulses may be needed before 
a decision threshold is reached. A detailed block diagram of the proposed SRR 
sensor is shown in Figure 7.3.
It consists of a RX/TX front-end and a customized local DSP (namely a 
control unit (CU)), which are integrated on the same IC. In the TX section, 
the carrier generation is implemented by means of a 24.125-GHz voltage-con­
trolled oscillator (VCO) within a phase-locked loop (PLL). To improve the in­
terference rejection and thus guarantee safe operation in multisensor networks, 
Figure 7.3  Block diagram of the UWB SRR sensor. (© 2009 IEEE. Reprinted with permission, 
from [7].)

142 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
the CW carrier is first BSPK modulated and then pulsed using switch SW_TX 
driven by pulse generator PG. The resulting 24-GHz UWB signal is properly 
amplified by the PA to comply with the emission mask regulations [29, 30]. 
The pulse generator produces the baseband rectangular pulses, whose Tpulse, 
and TPR can be varied thanks to the digital control signal, CTRL_Pulse. Con­
trol signal, TRG, triggers the rectangular pulse, thus performing a time hopping 
(TH) modulation (i.e., pulse position modulation).
The RX performs a time correlation between the echo signal and a de­
layed replica of the TX pulse by means of the I/Q mixers, which are driven 
by switch SW_RX. The UWB correlation signal is high-pass filtered against 
interferences around the 24-GHz band (e.g., ISM, radio astronomy, and re­
mote sensing applications) and then amplified by the variable-gain amplifier 
(VGA). Finally, it is accumulated into the offset-compensated I/Q integrators. 
The integration-and-dumping stage increases SNR by a factor n. After several 
integration periods, a reset signal discharges the integrator. For this system, the 
probability of target detection at a specific range increases as the number of 
collected pulses increases, provided that a particular time delay of the TX signal 
replica is maintained. At the design level, the RX trigger has to be kept in the 
same swept delay value for the number of needed accumulations. The in-phase 
(I) and quadrature (Q) outputs are then processed to extract the Doppler in­
formation (i.e., relative velocity), according to common radar signal processing 
methods discussed in Chapter 5. 
The CU produces all the control signals required for pulse transmission 
and echo detection. Specifically, CU triggers the pulse generation and the BPSK 
modulation, controls the RX window timing, and sets the pulse width (Tpulse) 
and repetition (TPR) as well as the RX gain. It also adjusts the integration (TINT) 
and dumping (TDUMP) times to integrate multiple signal replicas. 
Tpulse and TPR values are set according to FCC/ETSI regulations and SR 
requirements reported in Table 7.1.
The limitations on the equivalent isotropic radiated power density (EIR­
PD) impose a duty cycle δ, according to the following relationship
Table 7.1 
Typical Automotive SR Requirements
Application
Rres
[m]
Rmax 
[m]
Relative 
Velocity [ms]
Parking aid
0.1–0.05
5
0–8
Blind spot
0.1
10
15­–25
Stop and go
0.5
30
10
Precrash
0.1
10
50
Collision avoidance
0.2
30
50

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
143
	
0.37%
pulse
avg
PR
peak
T
EIRPD
T
EIRPD
δ =
=
=
	
(7.1)
where EIRPDavg and EIRPDpeak are the maximum allowable values of average 
and peak EIRPD (i.e., 0 dBm/50 MHz and –41.3 dBm/MHz, respectively). 
Moreover, Tpulse and TPR depend on the maximum unambiguous range, Rmax, 
and target resolution, Rres, according to equations
	
2
pulse
res
cT
R
=
	
(7.2)
	
max
2
PR
cT
R
=
	
(7.3)
The most stringent values of Rres and Rmax (i.e., a resolution better than 
0.1m for parking aid and a maximum range of 30m for stop and go situations) 
correspond to a minimum Tpulse lower than 0.67 ns and a minimum TPR of 
200 ns, respectively. In this design Tpulse and TPR can be set to 0.5 ns or 1 ns and 
135 ns or 270 ns, respectively, by using control signal CTRL_Pulse produced 
by the CU.
7.2.2  PLL Circuit Design
In the proposed SRR sensor, the 24.125-GHz carrier is generated by a fully in­
tegrated PLL according to the simplified scheme shown in Figure 7.3. The PLL 
exploits a well-established architecture that is composed of a phase frequency 
detector (PFD), a charge pump (CP), a loop filter, a VCO, and an N-integer 
divider. An external reference at 11.78 MHz and a division ratio (N ) of 2,048 
are adopted to obtain the 24.125-GHz carrier. The PLL also generates a 3-GHz 
signal exploited in the pulse generation and the CU clock at 750 MHz. 
The most critical blocks in the design of the PLL are the CP and the 
VCO. Indeed, the noise contributions and linearity performance of the CP 
strongly affect the PLL in-band phase noise and spur level, whereas the VCO 
determines the PLL out-band phase noise. The simplified schematic of the CP 
and VCO are shown in Figures 7.4 and 7.5, respectively.
The CP that is driven by the UP/DW signals generated by the PFD ex­
ploits a symmetric differential topology that allows minimizing the in-band 
noise contributions and spurs of the PLL. Cascode MOS mirrors are included 

144 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
to improve the current matching and enhance the output impedance. As dem­
onstrated in [32], the overall in-band PLL phase noise due to MOS current 
mirrors, emitter resistances, and bipolar transistors reduces by increasing bias 
current ICP . At this purpose, ICP is set to 200 μA. The CP must also guarantee 
the output swing required to the VCO to maintain the frequency locked at 
24.125 GHz despite process tolerances, which impact the LC resonator.
Figure 7.5  Simplified schematic of the 24-GHz VCO. (© 2008 IEEE. Reprinted with permission 
from [31].)
Figure 7.4  Simplified schematic of the CP.

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
145
The VCO adopts a differential cross-coupled architecture. The oscillation 
frequency is set by the parallel LC resonator, which adopts A-MOS varactors 
and a single-turn multilayer inductor, LC. At these frequencies, A-MOS varac­
tors exhibit good Q-factor values and are preferable to diode varactors due to 
the higher tuning capability and simplicity of connection. Both the cross-cou­
pled pair and the bias scheme contribute to the VCO phase noise. The size of 
active devices should properly be optimized by minimizing the sensitivity func­
tion of the frequency with respect to the bias current. A proper bias circuit is ar­
ranged to reduce the active-stage noise contributions. Indeed, the VCO core is 
part of a current mirror with degeneration resistances, thus removing the need 
for current tail sources that are noisy. Actually, emitter degeneration resistors 
at 24 GHz instead of current sources provide both wider oscillation amplitude 
and comparable or even higher common mode rejection. A buffer made up of 
a differential stage with resistive load is used to connect the oscillator core with 
differential emitter followers. This allows the avoidance of load effects on the 
VCO and provides driving capability for the following blocks (i.e., prescaler 
and BPSK modulator).
The PLL division ratio N (i.e., 2,048) is implemented by means of 11 
divide-by-two stages. The most common architectures for a high-speed fre­
quency divider include static frequency divider, Miller frequency divider, in­
jection-locked frequency divider, and regenerative structures. In this design, a 
static frequency divider is preferred due to its wider frequency range and better 
robustness with respect to the other architectures. Each divider stage consists 
of ECL flip-flops (i.e., D-latches) in a closed-loop master-slave configuration 
and emitter-follower stages, as shown in Figure 7.6. Due to the large parasitic 
capacitance, especially for the first divider stages, accurate post-layout parasitic 
extraction has to be performed to guarantee reliability at 24 GHz. Design pa­
rameters such as bias currents and load resistances of high-frequency divider 
stages are included in Figure 7.6.
Finally, the loop filter is designed to give an acceptable compromise be­
tween the PLL bandwidth and noise. Specifically, a 200-kHz bandwidth is set 
in this implementation. The filter adopts a dominant-pole capacitor of 480 pF 
with a series resistor of 6.4 kΩ for the zero, and a parallel capacitor of 30 pF 
for the second pole. The 480-pF capacitance is implemented using both MOM 
and MIM capacitors, whereas the other one is a single MIM device.
The measured output spectrum of the PLL is shown in Figure 7.7. It is 
centered at 24.125 GHz and presents two spurious tones at a frequency offset 
of 11.78 MHz (i.e., the PLL reference frequency, f REF), whose levels are 50 dB 
lower. The VCO exhibits a tuning range of 4.7 GHz from 20.4 to 25.1 GHz. 
The PLL reports the same performance when fREF sweeps between 9.78 and 
12.2 MHz. The measured phase noise is –104.3 dBc/Hz at 1-MHz offset from 
the carrier at 24.125 GHz.

146 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
7.2.3  RX Circuit Design 
As previously shown in Figure 7.3, the RX section of the UWB radar sen­
sor consists of a variable-gain LNA followed by I/Q direct-conversion mixers, 
which are connected by means of high-pass filters to the IF VGAs and offset-
compensated integrator and dump stages. The LO port of mixers are driven by 
the I/Q generator with a rectangular pulse train generated by the TX_SW. The 
simplified schematic of the down-converter (i.e., LNA and I/Q mixers), along 
with the I/Q generator, is shown in Figure 7.8.
The circuit exploits a fully differential topology to avoid the detrimental 
effects of parasitic ground and power supply inductances, while providing high 
rejection to common-mode spurious signals and substrate noise. Single-ended-
to-differential conversion is provided by the on-chip RF input balun Tin. The 
three-stage LNA is coupled by an integrated transformer to a Gilbert quad pair 
using resistive loads (RL = 400 Ω). Each amplifier stage adopts a transformer-
loaded cascode topology to guarantee both high stable gain and reverse isolation. 
Simultaneous minimum noise and 50-Ω input impedance matching is obtained 
Figure 7.6  Schematic of divider-by-two stage and design parameters of high-frequency di­
vider stages (Source: [9]. Reprinted with kind permission from Springer Science and Business 
Media).

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
147
by properly sizing the bipolar input pair and inductors LE1 and capacitor Cin 
[33], respectively. In order to trade off both gain and linearity performance, the 
second and third stage of the LNA adopt inductive emitter degeneration, LE2 
and LE3. Transformers TL1, TL2, TL3, together with shunt MIM capacitors CP1, 
CP2, CP3, provide the maximization of both gain and power transfer between 
stages, while preserving the required bandwidth flatness. To avoid RX satura­
tion in case of high input power levels, gain-variation functionality (i.e., 20-dB 
gain variation) is implemented in the second and third stages by means of an 
effective current-steering topology. Indeed, the control voltage VCTRL_LNA sets 
low and high gain levels, respectively. This approach significantly increases the 
receiver linearity, still maintaining excellent noise figure performance. To fur­
ther optimize the linearity performance of the whole down-converter, the LNA 
is transformer-coupled to the Gilbert quad-pair that is directly driven by the 
secondary coil signal currents of TL3, thus avoiding the adoption of traditional 
voltage-to-current converters. It is worth noting that this circuit arrangement 
is largely exploited also in 77-GHz radar RXs, which highly suffers of linearity 
issues (see Section 7.5). Down-converter bias currents ILNA1, ILNA2, ILNA3, and 
IMIX are 13, 15, 18, and 14 mA, respectively.
The I/Q generator takes advantage of a second-order RC polyphase filter 
[34], whose time constant is properly sized for a 24.125-GHz operating fre­
quency. The filter uses poly resistors RF of 66 Ω and MIM capacitors CF as low 
as 100 fF. Amplifiers (GI, GQ) are included to compensate for the loss due to 
Figure 7.7  Measured output spectrum of the PLL. (© 2008 IEEE. Reprinted with permission 
from [31].)

148 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Figure 7.8  Simplified schematic of the down-converter with the I/Q generator. (© 2009 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, from [7].)

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
149
both the polyphase filter (about 3 dB) and the LO paths (about 0.5 dB) toward 
the Gilbert quads. To minimize the phase error between I and Q signals, the 
LO paths are laid out in close proximity and take advantage of an interlaced 
structure [9].
To mitigate the effects of FMCW radar interference at 24.125 GHz, a 
high-pass filtering is required before the IF amplification stages. To this aim, 
I/Q mixer outputs are ac-coupled to the IF VGAs. By setting the coupling 
capacitor to 1 pF, a cut-off frequency of around 330 MHz is achieved that is a 
trade-off between interferer/signal losses.
The down-converter achieves a conversion gain as high as 30 dB and a 
6-dB noise figure, as shown in Figure 7.9. The gain drop around 24.125 GHz 
is due to the adopted ac-coupling at the mixer outputs.
Thanks to the LNA gain-control functionality, the down-converter 
achieves an input 1-dB compression point (IP1dB) of –15 dBm. At low-gain 
setting, it exhibits a 10-dB power gain, while the noise figure increases up to 
10.5 dB.
The design of the baseband section is also crucial for the radar sensor 
implementation since it has to guarantee the largest part of the variable gain 
required by the application. To this aim, a two-stage VGA can be employed in 
both I/Q paths. A solution is shown in Figure 7.10. Each VGA consists of two 
differential cascode stages with digitally selectable load resistances. By means of 
control bits (b1 to b3), a dB-linear gain characteristic is achieved with around 
30 dB of gain variation (i.e., 6 to 36 dB) in a 2-GHz bandwidth. The switches 
are implemented by n-MOS transistors, whose widths are set for the best trad­
eoff between RON reduction and the fulfillment of the demanding bandwidth 
requirements. Degeneration resistor REE of 200 Ω and a biasing current IVGA of 
3.8 mA are set to trade off linearity performance and power consumption. To 
Figure 7.9  Down-converter power gain and noise figure at high-gain setting. (Source: [9]. 
Reprinted with kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media.)

150 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
ensure a stable biasing point at the output, a common mode feedback circuit 
(CMFB) with resistive sensing is also included.
The RX section is completed by two Gm-C integrate-and-dump stages 
that perform a coherent collection of the received pulses, thus producing the 
output detection signal at I/Q terminals. This properly increases SNR and im­
proves the detection probability with a low false-alarm factor. The integration is 
repeated n times while preserving the stored charge for the whole TPR without 
exhibiting any significant discharge phenomena. Due to the relatively high gain 
of the baseband amplifiers, the RX chain could suffer from dc offsets that can 
highly degrade the echo detection. Therefore, an offset compensation circuit is 
required to reduce the false alarm probability due to erroneous overcoming of 
the detection threshold.
Figure 7.11 shows the integrator with the proposed offset-compensation 
circuit.
As in the VGA, a CMFB circuit guarantees a stable bias point (C1 and C2 
are compensation capacitors). The input voltage pulses are integrated according 
to the well-known law
	
1,2
m
out
in
g
V
V dt
C
=
∫
	
(7.4)
Figure 7.10  Simplified schematic of a gain stage of the VGA. (© 2007 IEEE. Reprinted with 
permission from [35].)

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
151
Figure 7.11  Simplified schematic of the integrator. (© 2007 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [35].)

152 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
where gm1,2 is the transconductance of transistors M1-2 and C is the integrator 
capacitance (i.e., an MIM capacitor of about 3 pF). The on/off switches S1 and 
S2 are used to avoid discharge of capacitor C during the TPR. Control signals 
of S1 and S2 (i.e., 
ON
ON,
Φ
Φ
) are synchronous with the signal coming from the 
PG (through the SW_RX) toward mixer LO ports. On/off switches are neces­
sary because the system works with an extremely low duty cycle (i.e., 0.37%) 
and then the integrator has to maintain the charge accumulated during Tpulse 
for the whole TPR. After several integration periods, the reset signal, RESET, 
discharges the capacitor for a TDUMP time and a new cycle of integration can 
start. Transistor widths of the reset switches S3, S4, S5, and S6 should properly 
be reduced to limit the charge injection phenomena into the output capacitor. 
Both the integration and dump times (i.e., TINT and TDUMP) are properly set 
by the CU that also enables the RESET signal.
As far as the offset compensation is concerned, the technique in Fig­
ure 7.11 allows reducing the input-referred offset according to the following 
equation:
	
1,2
3,4
_
3,4
1,2
OS
OS
OS
IN
m
o
m
o
V
V
V
g
r
g
r
≈
+
	
(7.5)
where VOS1,2 (VOS3,4) and gm1,2 (gm3,4) are the offset and the transconductance 
of differential pair M1,2 (M3,4), respectively, and ro is the integrator output re­
sistance [35].
The output voltage of the integrators is a function of the overall RX gain, 
the Gm/C ratio, and the integration time TINT. Figure 7.12 shows the measure­
ment of the integrator output voltage at high gain setting, as a function of dif­
ferent VGA gain levels (i.e., six levels from 36 dB to 6 dB) for a 1-ns pulse. The 
input pulse energy (Epulse) is –143 dBmJ. TPR is set to 270 ns. TINT of 885 μs 
and a reset signal of 10 μs are adopted. The behavior of the integrator in a single 
integration period is visible in the inset of Figure 7.12, which demonstrates that 
the integrator is able to preserve the stored charge up to the next integration. 
Of course, the sensor output voltage is directly proportional to the correla­
tion percentage between the on-chip replica (at the LO port) and TX pulses, 
as shown in Figure 7.13. The sensor achieves a maximum output voltage of 
280 mV when pulses are completely overlapped.
7.2.4  TX Circuit Design 
The TX is designed to produce a 24-GHz modulated pulse train in compliance 
with both FCC (United States) and ETSI (EU) spectrum masks. Additionally, 
TX EIRP peak in a 50-MHz band centered at 24.125 GHz should be below 
0 dBm.

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
153
A crucial block in pulsed radars is the pulse generator, since it determines 
the specifications of the entire sensor in terms of Rmax and Rres, according to 
(7.2) and (7.3). The adopted solution for the PG allows the baseband pulse 
train to be provided with two different pulse widths (i.e., 1 ns and 0.5 ns, 
corresponding to Rres of 15 cm and 7.5 cm and TPR of 135 ns and 270 ns, 
respectively) that limit the maximum unambiguous range to 20m and 40m, 
Figure 7.12  Measured output voltage of integrators (Tpulse = 1 ns, Epulse= -143 dBmJ, 
TPR = 270 ns, TINT = 885 μs, TDUMP =10 μs, TX/RX correlation = 100%). (© 2009 IEEE. Reprinted 
with permission from [7].)
Figure 7.13  Measured output voltage of integrators at different RX/TX pulse correlation per­
centage (Tpulse = 1 ns, Epulse=-143 dBmJ, TPR = 270 ns, TINT = 885 μs, TDUMP =10 μs).

154 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
respectively. These settings fulfill typical requirements of SRR application, pre­
viously reported in Table 7.1. The architecture of PG is shown in Figure 7.14.
The baseband pulse is produced by means of a NAND operation between 
the TRG signal properly delayed (A/B) and the inverted TRG signal (C). All 
adopted latches use the 3-GHz clock coming from the PLL. Each latch pro­
duces a delay of 333 ps or 166 ps if the phase shift between its clock (Cp , Cn) 
and the one of the retimer is 0 or 180 degrees, respectively. Two different delay 
paths are available (i.e., 999 ns or 499 ns), which are selected by means of the 
CTRL_pulse of the multiplexer (MUX).
The simplified schematics of the TX blocks (i.e., the BPSK modulator, 
the SW, and the PA) are depicted in Figure 7.15.
The BPSK modulator is based on a differential pair, Q1-Q2, driven by the 
RF signal and a current-steering switch, Q3-Q6, driven by the CTRL_BPSK 
signal. The modulated RF signal drives the current-steering switch SW_TX 
that produces the 24-GHz modulated UWB pulse. Finally, the PA boosts the 
Figure 7.14  Simplified block diagram of PG and main signals. (© 2009 IEEE. Reprinted with 
permission from [7].) 

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
155
output signal level to be compliant with the regulation limits [29, 30]. To this 
aim, an antenna gain of 10 dB is considered. The PA adopts a differential cas­
code topology with transformer resonant load. The bias voltage of the com­
mon-base transistors is designed to provide a low base impedance (of about 
150 Ω), which boosts the effective breakdown voltage from 1.8V (BVCEO) to 
3.1V (BVCER). The PA delivers 0 dBm or 3 dBm output power by setting the 
bias current IPA for Tpulse of 1 ns and 0.5 ns, respectively. Transformer Tout pro­
vides differential-to-single-ended conversion of the output signal. Moreover, 
thanks to its inherent galvanic isolation, Tout also guarantees robustness, thus 
avoiding ESD protection structures that greatly affect the RF performance.
Figure 7.16 shows the measured power spectral density (PSD) and the 
simulated time-domain waveforms at the TX output considering an antenna 
gain of 10 dB for both Tpulse of 1 ns and 0.5 ns. The TPR is set to 270 ns 
and 135 ns, respectively. The spectra present the main lobe is centered at 
24.125 GHz and two nulls, whose frequency span is 2 GHz and 4 GHz for 1 
ns and 0.5 ns pulses, respectively. The PSD curves are compliant with the maxi­
mum allowed EIRP defined by the ETSI mask [30].
7.2.5  On-Chip Inductive Component Design
Low-loss inductive components are of paramount importance for a successful 
implementation of millimeter-wave ICs [6]. Of course, the availability of an 
optimized BEOL is crucial since top copper metals and thick intermetal oxides 
are mandatory to lower ohmic losses in the metals and reduce parasitic capaci­
tances toward the substrate, respectively. On the other hand, ad hoc design of 
both inductors and transformers instead of using library components is still a 
plus when performance has to be considerably pushed.
Figure 7.15  Simplified schematics the TX. (© 2009 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [7].)

156 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Three-dimensional (3D) views of inductive components used in the radar 
sensor, along with the BiCMOS technology metal stack, are shown in Figure 
7.17. Since an extensive exploitation of transformers is done in both TX and 
RX sections, it is useful to summarize geometrical and electrical features of the 
adopted transformers, as shown in Table 7.2.
In the K-/Ka-bands (i.e., up to 40 GHz), the adoption of a polysilicon 
patterned ground shield (PGS) beneath spirals still has considerable effects in 
the reduction of substrate losses [36, 37], without significantly affecting the 
Figure 7.16  (a) Measured PSD and (b) simulated time-domain waveforms of transmitted 
pulses. (© 2009 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [7].)
Figure 7.17  3D views and metal stack of inductive components used in the radar sensor.

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
157
operative frequency range (i.e., reduction of the self-resonance frequency (f SR)). 
In our process, the PGS is built using the available doped polysilicon layer 
under the metal 1, which is used for shield grounding. The PGS is profitably 
included in both inductors and transformers. Series losses are instead reduced 
by means of proper exploitation of multilayer spirals, thanks to the availability 
of six metallization layers. As far as the geometrical parameters are concerned, 
single-turn spirals and small inner diameters (din) are generally used, since at 
these frequencies sub-nH inductors are required [38]. Narrow metal width (w) 
is also preferred to reduce the capacitance toward the substrate, provided that 
electromigration limitations are fulfilled.
As far as integrated transformers are concerned, most suitable structures 
to optimize main design parameters are the traditional interleaved and stacked 
configurations. At millimeter-wave frequencies, interleaved configurations can 
be profitably used to implement symmetric windings with coupling factor (k) 
as high as 0.5 by taking advantage of the top metals available in the process. 
In such a way, both f SR and Q-factor are maximized at the expense of the area 
consumption. On the other hand, stacked transformers achieve higher k and 
a better area exploitation, but exhibit lower f SR due to the increased parasitic 
capacitances of bottom metals. The most important performance parameter 
for transformers in circuit applications is the capability to transfer power from 
the input to the output port with low loss. This power transfer is related not 
only to the transformer itself, but also to the impedances connected to its input 
and output, including matching networks. In the following, a more detailed 
description of the inductive components depicted in Figure 7.17 is provided 
to the reader.
In the RX section, transformer TIN is used for single-to-differential con­
version and 50-Ω impedance matching. The reference design parameter for 
TIN is the insertion loss (IL ) that is highly related to k, and it is affected by coil 
losses. Therefore, TIN takes advantage of a stacked configuration to maximize 
Table 7.2
Transformer Geometry and Electrical Data at 24 GHz
Transformer
TIN
TL1 , TL2, TL3
TOUT
Primary 
(P)
Secondary 
(S)
Primary 
(P)
Secondary 
(S)
Primary 
(P)
Secondary 
(S)
Metal layers
M4-M5
Al-M6
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6-M5
w [μm]
5
5
5
8
10.5
10.5
L [nH]
0.25
0.27
0.34
0.26
0.46
0.19
din [μm]
65
73
43
k
0.7
0.4
0.5
Structure
Stacked
Interleaved
Interleaved 2:1

158 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
k, while both primary and secondary windings exploit a two-layer structure to 
reduce the coil series resistance.
On the other hand, each LNA stage uses an interleaved transformer (i.e., 
TL1-3) whose coils exploit a three-layer structure consisting of two highest Cu 
metals (metal 6 and metal 5) plus a top alucap layer. The design of TL1-3 is based 
on the maximization of the transformer characteristic resistance (TCR) [39] as 
it is related to the achievable power gain of the LNA [31]. In a first approxima­
tion the TCR is given by
 
2
2
P
S
P
S
P
EQ
EQ
P
P
2
2
P
P
S
P
 
 
  
1
 
 
k
Q
Q
L
Q
L
TCR
Q
L
Q
L
k
Q
k
Q
Q
Q
ω
ω 


⋅
=
=
⋅
⋅
+
+



+




	 (7.6)
where LP, QP and LS, QS are the inductance and the Q-factors of primary and 
secondary coils, respectively. The use of a three-layer interleaved 1:1 configura­
tion allows achieving a TCR higher than 900 Ω at 24 GHz.
In the TX section, an interleaved configuration with 2:1 turn ratio is used 
for transformer Tout with the aim of attaining power matching and differential 
to single-ended conversion at the TX output. The adopted structure also allows 
improving the magnetic coupling that results higher than the one of TL1-3. 
Moreover, the use of a multilayer structure for both coils, along with a slightly 
higher metal width, allows reducing the coil series resistances.
Finally, the LC tank of the VCO adopts a single-turn inductor, LC, whose 
value at 24 GHz is as low as 230 pH. It uses the same three-layer structure of in­
terleaved transformers and achieves a Q-factor as high as 19 at 24 GHz, which 
is essential for the VCO phase-noise performance.
It is worth mentioning that geometrical parameters of inductive compo­
nents are first defined by using scalable lumped models [40] that allow the de­
signer to maintain a close contact to the physical effects. Then model validation 
is carried out by means of EM simulations, taking into account the coupling 
effects due surrounding structures (i.e., ground plane, connections, and so on).
7.2.6  Radar Sensor Implementation
The micrograph of the overall radar sensor IC is shown in Figure 7.18. The 
chip area is pad limited and the die size is 3 mm × 3 mm. Main circuit blocks 
discussed in the previous sections are highlighted in the picture.
The sensor has been conceived for a flip-chip assembly on a commercial 
dialectic substrate with εr of 2.33 (i.e., ARLON 25FR). The same substrate is 
also used to design the RX/TX antennas that exploit an aperture-coupled patch 
array structure. Figure 7.19 depicts the 3D view and cross-section of the as­
sembled radar sensor, along with the detail of the patch-array antenna geometry 

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
159
and its radiation pattern. The stacked structure allows very low sidelobes to 
be obtained, while the feed network is completely isolated from the radiating 
elements. Moreover, the aperture coupled patch-antenna configuration guar­
antees a broad frequency bandwidth. The number of patch elements and the 
current distribution should be set to comply with the ETSI radiation mask. As 
shown in the radiation diagram in Figure 7.19(d), a maximum gain of about 
10 dB is achieved with a sidelobe level of –30 dB. The frequency bandwidth is 
better than 2.4 GHz. Finally, the radar sensor performance is summarized in 
Table 7.3.
7.3  Transmitter Chipset for 24-/77-GHz Automotive Radar Sensors
For a long time ADASs addressed a very limited market, mainly focused on 
high-end cars. Indeed, the pervasive adoption of radar technology has to comply 
with a challenging trade-off between performance and cost, which is essential 
to engage the mass market of low-end cars. From this perspective, the adoption 
of dual-band millimeter-wave transceivers, implemented in a well-established 
silicon-based technology, can improve the cost-effectiveness of ADASs. 
This section is dedicated to the description of a dual-band TX chipset for 
24-/77-GHz automotive radar. The proposed solution enables the LR operation 
Figure 7.18  Radar sensor IC micrograph. (© 2009 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [7].)

160 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Figure 7.19  Sensor assembly: (a) 3D view, (b) cross-section, (c) antenna geometry, and (d) antenna radiation pattern.

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
161
at 77 GHz in a standard SiGe HBT BiCMOS technology (i.e., BiCMOS9 [1]) 
by taking advantage of building blocks developed for the 24-GHz SRR sensor 
[7, 8]. Although the adopted process is not suitable for W-band applications in 
terms of f T/f max and BEOL, ad hoc arrangements (i.e., proper current density 
for the PA devices, ground plane parasitic cancellation, and optimized trans­
former design) allow state-of-the-art millimeter-wave PA performance to be 
achieved, thus demonstrating low-cost dual-band radar TX.
Figure 7.20 shows the block diagram of a 24-/77-GHz TX chipset. The 
SRR TX generates an UWB signal by means of the 24-GHz PLL previously 
described in Section 7.2.2. The sub-ns switch is designed to produce a 24-GHz 
modulated pulse train with proper TPR and Tpulse to cover main sensor require­
ments for SRR applications, as detailed in Section 7.2.1. In the proposed archi­
tecture, the SRR TX is also used to drive the LRR TX by using the 25.5-GHz 
CW signal at the PA output. The LRR TX takes advantage of the millimeter-
wave mixer, which up-converts the IF signal from 25.5 GHz to 76.5 GHz 
using the 51-GHz LO signal produced by a frequency doubler. The adopted 
Table 7.3
Summarized Performance of the Radar Sensor
RF frequency 
22 to 26 GHz
IF frequency 
0.1 to 2 GHz
PLL reference frequency
11.78 MHz
RX input return loss (S11)
−20 dB
Down‑converter gain
30 / 10 dB
Down‑converter noise figure
6 dB
Down‑converter IIP1dB
−15 dBm
VGA gain
6 to 36 dB
VCO phase noise at 1-MHz offset
−104 dBc/Hz
VCO tuning range
20.4 to 25.1 GHz
PLL spur level
−50 dBc
PA power at 24 GHz
3 / 0 dBm
Sensor output voltage
8 to 280 mV (Epulse=−143 dBmJ)
UWB bandwidth
1.3 GHz
(Tpulse=1 ns, TPR=270 ns)
2.1 GHz
(Tpulse=0.5 ns, TPR=135 ns)
Current consumption
(Vcc = 2.5 V)
32 mA (frequency synthesizer)
25 mA (BPSK+PG+switches)
7 mA (PA)
65 mA (I/Q down‑converter)
19 mA (VGAs +Integrators)
Silicon area
9 mm2
Max antenna gain at 24 GHz
10 dB
Antenna frequency bandwidth
2.4 GHz

162 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
architecture and the selected frequency plan allow sharing the same PLL of the 
SRR section to produce both IF (directly) and LO (multiplying by two) sig­
nals. Finally, a two-stage millimeter-wave PA delivers the required output power 
level. On-chip transformers (TIN, TLO, and TOUT) are used at circuit block in­
terfaces to provide electrostatic discharge (ESD) protection, impedance/power 
matching, and single-ended-to-differential conversion.
7.3.1  Design of the 77-GHz TX Front-End
Figure 7.21 depicts the circuit schematic and the transformer structures of the 
LRR TX front-end. The up-conversion mixer is designed to properly drive the 
millimeter-wave PA in terms of both input impedance and power level. It adopts 
a fully differential topology consisting of a V-I converter (Q1-Q2) and a double-
balanced Gilbert quad (Q3-Q6). Degeneration inductors LE (implemented with 
folded microstrips) are used to improve mixer linearity and adjust its input 
impedance. A resonant load consisting of transformer, T1, and capacitors, CSM, 
is adopted to achieve the required conversion gain. Impedance matching be­
tween the up-converter and the PA is also guaranteed. Finally, at IF and LO 
ports center-tapped transformers, TIN and TLO, implement single-ended-to-
differential conversion and 50-Ω conjugate matching. The millimeter-wave PA 
is made up of a driver and a power stage. It adopts a transformer-based pseudo-
differential configuration that highly reduces the effect of parasitic inductances 
of power supply and ground, while avoiding the tail current voltage drop of 
a true differential structure. Each PA stage is based on a differential cascode 
(CAS) topology, which guarantees a higher stable gain, better reverse isolation, 
and enhanced robustness compared to the common-emitter (CE) topology. In 
particular, in a CAS topology, the use of the common-base (CB) in series to the 
CE increases breakdown voltage, thus improving the output power despite the 
Figure 7.20  Block diagram of the dual-band 24-/77-GHz TX chipset for automotive radar sen­
sors. (© 2010 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [12].)

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
163
additional voltage drop. Transformer T2, together with series capacitors CSM, 
provide optimum load for the first stage for better gain, whereas TOUT maxi­
mizes the power delivered to the output load.
Given the relative low f T/f MAX (i.e., 166/175 GHz) of the adopted tech­
nology, both driver (Q1–Q4) and power-stage transistors (Q5–Q8) are biased at 
the peak-fT current density (i.e., around 7 mA/μm2 in this process) to maximize 
both gain and output power. This approach differs from the traditional design 
procedure for millimeter-wave PAs [15, 41], which suggests setting the bias 
current density at the peak f T/f MAX only for the driver stage (to maximize the 
small-signal power gain), while using a reduced current density (i.e., 50% of 
peak f T/f MAX) for the power stage (to optimize efficiency and output power).
Another crucial issue, especially in this technology platform, is related 
to the parasitics of the connection between the output balun, TOUT, and the 
ground pads. Such a connection is typically implemented by means of a metal 
ground plane (GP) and is modeled by a lumped inductance, LGP , and a resis­
tance, RGP , placed at the secondary coil of TOUT (see Figure 7.21).
Actually, the value of LGP is related to the ground path length and is usu­
ally in the range of 25 to 50% (depending on the BEOL of the process and 
metal density rules) of the transformer inductances. Of course, the choice of 
a suitable structure for GP is highly related to the adopted BEOL. In general, 
Figure 7.21  Schematic of the LRR TX front-end and 3D views of on-chip transformers. 
(Source: [27]. Reprinted with permission.)

164 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
different and conflicting requirements have to be balanced. Multilayer stacked 
structures achieve low-resistance/low-inductance ground paths, thanks to the 
increased equivalent thickness. On the other hand, the use of lower metals pro­
duces a detrimental increment of the parasitic capacitances toward the sub­
strate. Moreover, due to the metal density rules, proper holed planes have to be 
used for each metal layer. Possible arrangements for a metal GP exploiting the 
highest Cu metals (metal 6, metal 5, and metal 4) are shown in Figure 7.22. 
From the top to the bottom, the structures differ for the number of metal layers 
and exhibit decreasing specific inductance/resistance values at the cost of higher 
parasitic capacitances. In the adopted technology, the three-layer structure gives 
better results and is used to cover all the unused chip area. The EM simulations 
of the GP path at the PA output returned LGP and RGP at 77 GHz of around 
30 pH and 0.9 Ω, respectively. Such values would cause a considerable reduc­
tion of both k and Q-factor of TOUT and thus a degradation of the PA per­
formance. This drawback is overcome by shunting the GP connection at the 
operating frequency through the resonant LC series network (LR, CR), which is 
used to cancel out the impedance toward ground at the secondary coil of balun 
TOUT (node X).
Compared with trivial inductance cancellation (e.g., by means of series 
capacitor or output matching networks), the adopted GP cancellation tech­
nique has the advantage of also removing the GP resistive contribution (RGP) 
that is highly detrimental for PA performance. Indeed, the residual parasitic 
effect of the LRCR networks (i.e., RR in Figure 7.21) can be properly minimized 
Figure 7.22  Examples of different metal GP structures.

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
165
by using a high-Q multilayer microstrip (LR = 65 pH, RR = 0.15 Ω at 77 GHz) 
directly connected to the ground pad. The resonance is easily set by means of a 
MIM capacitor of 65 fF.
Finally, some words should be said about integrated transformer design 
(TIN, TLO, T1, T2, and TOUT), whose structures are depicted in Figure 7.21. In 
the proposed LRR TX, transformers are designed to operate at IF, LO, and mil­
limeter-wave frequencies (i.e., 25.5 GHz, 51 GHz, and 76.6 GHz, respectively) 
and hence different inductance values (i.e., from 50 to 400 pH), configurations 
(i.e., stacked or interleaved), and coil geometries (i.e., single or multiturn coils, 
spiral or folded microtrip coils) are used. Table 7.4 summarizes geometrical and 
electrical features of adopted transformers. The BiCMOS9 metal stack is the 
same already reported in Figure 7.17.
Transformer TIN exploits an interleaved configuration with 1:2 turn ratio 
to implement the 50-Ω impedance matching at the IF port. The other trans­
formers take advantage of stacked two-layer configurations to maximize k. Coil 
widths are optimized to trade off series resistance and self-resonance frequency. 
It is worth noting that millimeter-wave transformers (i.e., T1, T2, and TOUT) 
do not exploit a PGS since the benefits at such high frequency are negligible, 
while it considerably increases the capacitive parasitic and hence reduces the 
resonance frequency.
7.3.2  Experimental Results of the 77-GHz TX Front-End
The die micrograph of the 77-GHz LRR TX front-end is shown in Figure 7.23. 
The die size is 800 μm × 725 μm, including on-chip interface baluns. All mea­
surements are performed at a standard 2.5V supply voltage.
Output power and power gain of the 77-GHz TX as a function of the 
input power at 25.5 GHz are reported in Figure 7.24(a). The TX power 
Table 7.4 
Transformer Geometry and Electrical Data
Transformer
TIN 
Freq = 25.5 GHz
TLO 
Freq = 51 GHz
T1 – T2 – TOUT
Freq = 76.5 GHz
Primary 
(P)
Secondary 
(S)
Primary 
(P)
Secondary 
(S)
Primary 
(P)
Secondary 
(S)
Metal layers
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6
M5-M4
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6-M5
Structure
Interleaved 1:2
Stacked
Stacked folded microstrip
PGS
YES
YES
NO
din [μm]
48
56
15 
w [μm]
6
6
5
5
5 - 5 - 8
5 - 5 - 8
L [pH]
150
390
140
140
71 - 82 - 55
71 - 82 - 55
Q-factor
21
20
22
19
21 - 20 - 18
21 - 20 - 18
k
0.7
0.75
0.76 - 0.79 - 0.76

166 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
conversion gain, the maximum output power, and the output-referred 1-dB 
compression point (OIP1dB) are 20 dB, 12 dBm, and 9.5 dBm, respectively. 
The 77-GHz TX draws an overall current of 158 mA from 2.5V supply voltage.
Large-signal measurements have also been performed for the stand-alone 
77-GHz PA, which exhibits a maximum gain of 18.5 dB and an output power 
of 12 dBm with a power-added efficiency (PAE) of 4.7% at 77 GHz. This 
achievement is mainly due to the adoption of the GP cancellation technique. 
Indeed, this approach allows a 10-dB improvement in the power gain. Figure 
7.24(b) compares the measured gain performance of stand-alone PA with and 
without the GP cancellation network. It is worth noting that no undesirable 
Figure 7.23  Die photo detail of the LRR TX. (© 2010 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from 
[12].)
Figure 7.24  Measured performance: (a) TX output power and power, and (b) comparison of 
measured gain of millimeter-wave PAs. (Source: [27]. Reprinted with permission.)

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
167
effects are produced in a wide frequency range, thus confirming the reliability 
of the proposed cancellation technique. 
Despite the relatively low f T/f max, the 77-GHz TX demonstrates state-
of-the-art performance in terms of both gain and output power. Moreover, the 
adoption of a single PLL for dual-band operation allows considerable saving of 
both current consumption and silicon area.
7.4  W-Band TX Front-End for FMCW Automotive Radar
A millimeter-wave optimized process [2] (i.e., BiCMOSMW) is here exploited 
to implement a W-band TX front-end for FMCW automotive radar comply­
ing with typical LR requirements. The most challenging specification for a ra­
dar transmitter is the output power level. A power level as high as 14 dBm is 
required to cover detection ranges higher than 100m. For instance, assuming 
a radar cross section of 30 m2 at 77 GHz (i.e., corresponding to a car), typical 
antenna gain and bumper loss of 18 dBi and 3 dB, respectively, the maximum 
detection range is about 120m, provided that the saturated output power is 
at least 14 dBm and the receiver sensitivity is better than –105 dBm. Another 
key specification of a radar transmitter is the phase noise coming from the LO 
since it considerably impacts on the IF noise density at the RX output (an in­
crease of 10 dB in phase noise worsens the IF noise density at the RX output by 
5 dB) [16]. This produces a degradation of radar sensor capability of detecting 
a small/far target hidden by a bigger/close one. Typical phase noise values re­
quested by the LR application are around –95 dBc at 1-MHz frequency offset. 
Finally, to account for process/voltage/temperature (PVT) variations, a wide 
tuning range for the VCO is highly recommended.
Based on these basic considerations, design efforts have to be mainly fo­
cused on the crucial blocks of a W-band transmitter for FMCW radar (i.e., the 
PA and the VCO).
Figure 7.25 depicts the block diagram of the TX front-end, which adopts 
a PLL-based scheme to drive the millimeter-wave PA. The W-band PLL ex­
ploits a well-established architecture composed of a PFD, a CP, an on-chip 
loop filter, a 77-GHz VCO, and N-integer divider. An external reference 
(17.70–18.55 MHz) provided by a digital direct synthesizer (DDS) along with 
the divider by 4096 allows a frequency sweep from the 76 to 77 GHz to be 
achieved. The PLL also generates a low frequency signal (f 0/16) for testing pur­
pose (e.g., VCO measurement).
7.4.1  Design of the W-Band TX Front-End
Innovative circuit/layout solutions are adopted for both VCO and PA to fulfill 
phase noise and output power specifications, respectively. Figure 7.26 shows 

168 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
the schematic of the W-band TX core, consisting of a differential Colpitts-
based VCO (closed in a PLL) that drives a two-stage PA by means of common-
collector buffers.
As far as the VCO is concerned, the attainment of low phase noise and 
wide tuning range, together with a high-power oscillation signal to properly 
drive the PA, is not trivial at W-band frequencies. Phase noise and tuning range 
progressively degrade at increasing operating frequencies due to lower quality 
factor of varactors and higher contribution of parasitic capacitances, respec­
tively. Usually, a design tradeoff between these two parameters is also required.
First-rate performance for a W-band VCO is achieved by taking advan­
tage of an effective solution to provide the oscillation signal to the output buffer 
[18, 42]. Specifically, the VCO signal, Vout, is drawn directly from the switch­
ing base terminals of transistors Q1, Q2 by means of an integrated transformer, 
TB, whose primary winding performs the resonant inductor while the second­
ary winding is used to deliver the oscillation signal to the output buffers. This 
topology differs from a traditional Colpitts VCO for millimeter-wave appli­
cations [43, 44], which typically includes load inductances in the switching 
collector terminals to provide the oscillation signal to an output buffer. Such 
a traditional approach is justified at RF due to the large base-to-collector cur­
rent gain (i.e., βac), but it becomes less convenient at W-band frequencies since 
oscillators operate close to f T, and βac can greatly be degraded depending on col­
lector load condition and voltage swing. The elimination of the load inductors 
produces a significant improvement of the oscillation signal swing. Specifically, 
the increase in the transistor swing out of the saturation region allows extend­
ing the currently limited regime in which the phase noise decreases with the 
increase of the oscillation amplitude that is proportional to the bias current.
In the adopted Colpitts-based VCO, the inductive component of the 
resonant network is implemented by the primary coil of transformer TB, as 
mentioned before, whereas the resonant capacitor, CVAR, is implemented by 
Figure 7.25  Block diagram of the W-band TX front-end for FMCW automotive radar.

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
169
Figure 7.26  Schematic of the W-band TX core.

170 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
varactors with a single-ended tuning voltage control (VTUNE) to simplify the 
design of the PFD/CP. To exploit the whole positive tuning characteristic of 
the varactors and reduce the effect of parasitic capacitances, they are biased 
by means of RBB and CBB (i.e., the oscillation signal is ac-coupled). Induc­
tors LE are included to provide a high-impedance path between the emitters. 
Common-mode resistor REE is adopted to prevent noise coming from addi­
tional active devices (i.e., tail current mirror), while setting the emitter voltage 
to avoid collector-emitter breakdown of Q1-Q2. Finally, the VCO bias current 
is accurately set by means of a pseudo-mirror scheme (not included in Figure 
7.26) through the center-tap of TB (i.e., VB).
It is worth noting that for a traditional Colpitts-based VCO, the oscilla­
tion frequency is given by the following expression:
	
(
)
0
1
2
1
BE
VAR
B
bc
BE
VAR
f
C
C
L
A
C
C
C
π
=


×
+
×
+


+


	
(7.7)
where CBE is the base-emitter capacitance and accounts for C1, Cbc is the base-
collector capacitance and is multiplied by the Miller effect factor, (1+A), as –A 
is the inverting gain from the base to the collector. It is apparent that the tuning 
action of CVAR on f 0 is reduced by the fixed term due to Cbc. For this reason, 
several circuit arrangements were proposed in the literature, such as cascode 
topologies [43] (that unfortunately require higher supply voltages) or Miller-ef­
fect cancellation networks [43] (that exhibit not negligible sensitivity). On the 
other hand, the solution in Figure 7.26 has the advantage of inherently elimi­
nating the Miller effect (i.e., A = 0) with consequent benefits in terms of tuning 
range performance. In turn, the increased tuning range can be exchanged with 
smaller (and hence higher-Q) varactors or with a larger inductance, thus reduc­
ing phase noise or current consumption, respectively.
Besides the increased oscillation signal swing and the elimination of the 
Miller effect on Cbc, another benefit of this VCO topology is the high isola­
tion provided by the transformer coupling. Indeed, TB provides high common-
mode isolation from the output buffers, which is not achievable by using either 
dc or capacitive coupling at the collectors.
Regardless of the arrangements of the VCO with respect to more tradi­
tional topologies, the implementation of a low-noise oscillator follows well-
known design guidelines [43, 44]. Especially at millimeter-wave frequencies, 
a crucial point is the maximization of the LC tank Q-factor, which is limited 
by the varactors. In this design, A-MOS varactors with minimum-length/min­
imum-width are used to take advantage of the better Q-factor of elementary 

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
171
devices. Unfortunately, the varactor Q-factor at 77 GHz is lower than 10 in 
the adopted technology, and the tank inductor design is constrained by both 
Q-factor and oscillation amplitude. According to Leeson’s formula, the mini­
mization of the phase noise requires a resonant tank with high capacitance and 
low inductance. On the other hand, high oscillation amplitude and low current 
consumption need high inductor values. Finally, the inductor value imposes the 
total varactor size and hence the tuning range performance. Therefore, all these 
aspects have to be taken into account to set the resonator components.
As far as the switching pair Q1-Q2 is concerned, transistors are biased at a 
current density just below the peak-fT. Moreover, base resistance is minimized 
by adopting multiple shunt devices. The reduction of both external base re­
sistance and parasitic capacitances is obtained by using as elementary device a 
simple double-base BJT instead of a multifinger transistor.
According to simulations, the estimated performance of phase noise and 
tuning range are –99 dBc/Hz at 1-MHz offset and 5 GHz, respectively. The 
estimated output power of the VCO is around 2 dBm, which is high enough to 
drive the PA into saturation.
Let’s now compare Figures 7.26 and 7.21.The comparison highlights that 
the 77-GHz PA adopts the same topology already exploited for the previous 
design in BiCMOS9 technology (i.e., a two-stage transformer-coupled pseudo-
differential topology). Of course, the amplifier in Figure 7.26 takes advantage 
of the higher f T/f max and the millimeter-wave optimized BEOL of the BiC­
MOSMW process (see Figure 7.1). Due to technology advancements, some 
design changes should be considered, as listed next:
1.	 Thanks to the improved f T/f MAX, the traditional design procedure for 
millimeter-wave two-stage PAs [15, 41] is adopted. Indeed, the bias 
current density is set at the peak f T/f MAX for the driver stage to maxi­
mize the small-signal power gain, whereas a reduced current density 
(i.e., 50% of peak f T/f MAX) is used for the power stage to optimize the 
PAE and the output power.
2.	 Thanks to the improved BEOL, there is no need to include any GP 
cancellation network at the output of the PA.
3.	 The increased thickness of both metal 6 and intermetal oxides allows 
a single-layer GP to be used (see Figure 7.22).
4.	 Spiral transformers are used in place of stacked folded microstrips ad­
opted in the previous design.
5.	 The layout floor plan/routing for the elementary CAS stage is aimed 
at the reduction of emitter parasitic inductances and hence gain losses 
[15].

172 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Thanks to the advanced technology platform and the consequent design 
changes, the PA is able to considerably improve the performance previously 
obtained in BiCMOS9 in terms of saturated output power, gain, and efficiency, 
achieving the simulated values of 15.8 dBm, 23 dB, and 8.4%, respectively.
Some words should be said for the design of the prescaler, which, after 
the VCO, is the most crucial block in the PLL. It is implemented by four 
divide-by-two stages. Static dividers are used to take advantage of their high 
robustness and larger operating frequency range at millimeter-wave frequencies. 
Each divider adopts ECL flip-flops (i.e., D-latches) in a master–slave configura­
tion, as already adopted in the 24-GHz SRR sensor (see Figure 7.6). Instead of 
traditional emitter followers, ac coupling is used to interconnect the dividers. 
Indeed, this solution saves current consumption and allows an optimum bias 
level for each divider cell to be achieved, without considerably affecting silicon 
area. Both load and current in the latch are set to provide an output voltage 
swing from 250 to 350 mV from the first to the last stage. The first divider is 
loaded with an R-L series impedance to extend bandwidth at a reduced current 
budget thanks to the inductive peaking technique, whereas following dividers 
adopt the traditional resistive load. The signal f 0/16 produced at the prescaler 
output is used to easily perform the VCO test at low frequency.
As already highlighted, an important role in the millimeter-wave design is 
played by integrated transformers (i.e., TB, T1, T2, and TOUT in Figure 7.26). 
Three-dimensional views of adopted transformers, along with the correspond­
ing metal stack, are shown in Figure 7.27, while their geometrical/electrical 
features are summarized in Table 7.5. Transformer TB is implemented by means 
Figure 7.27  Three-dimensional views and metal stack of transformers used in the W-band 
TX front-end.

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
173
of an interleaved topology. Both primary and secondary coils exploit a two-layer 
structure (i.e., metal 6 and metal 5), while lower metal 4 is used only as under­
pass. A spiral width of 5 μm is used to reduce the parasitic capacitances toward 
the substrate without affecting winding Q-factor. The coil spacing is set to the 
minimum value to improve the magnetic coupling that is involved in the oscil­
lation signal transfer. The layout of TB inherently helps the interconnections of 
the VCO core, thus minimizing RLC parasitics.
An interleaved structure is also adopted for the PA input and intermatch­
ing transformers (T1 and T2). For both T1 and T2, a three-layer structure allows 
spiral series losses to be decreased at the cost of a slight reduction of induc­
tance (due to the increased equivalent metal thickness). A stacked configuration 
is instead preferred for TOUT to obtain a slightly higher k (i.e., 0.55 against 
0.42). In this case, transformer windings consist of a two-layer structure (i.e., 
alucap/metal6 and metal5/metal4). By comparing Tables 7.4 and 7.5, stacked 
structures in BiCMOSMW exhibit lower magnetic coupling factors. This is a 
drawback due to the increased thickness of the oxide layer between metal 6 and 
metal 5 (see Figure 7.1) in the BiCMOSMW technology. It can be overcome by 
using advanced transformer structures that exploit mixed interleaved/stacked 
magnetic coupling factors [45]. Narrow coils of 5 μm are also used for T1, T2, 
and TOUT in order to reduce the parasitic capacitances, thus allowing self-reso­
nance frequency above 150 GHz. Finally, polysilicon or metal PGS structures 
are not adopted at such high frequencies, as already said.
For all the transformers, the distance between spirals and GP is set to 
30 μm to avoid the rising of loss effects due to magnetic couplings with the 
metal plane. This choice also allows density rules for chemical/mechanical 
planarization (CMP) integrity to be fulfilled since a 30-μm dummy-free zone 
around the spiral can be tolerated in the final IC.
Table 7.5
Transformer Geometry and Electrical Data at 77 GHz
Transformer
TB 
T1 – T2
TOUT
Primary
(P)
Secondary
(S)
Primary
(P)
Secondary
(S)
Primary
(P)
Secondary
(S)
Metal layers
M6-M5
M6-M5
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6
M5-M4
Structure
Interleaved
Interleaved
Stacked
PGS
NO
NO
NO
din [μm]
30
25–30
30
w [μm]
5
5
5
5
5
5
L [pH]
56
67
50–65 
75–80
65
65
Q-factor
20
19
17.5–18
16.5–20
16
16
k
0.45
0.42
0.55

174 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
7.4.2  Experimental Results of the W-Band TX Front-End
The die micrograph of the TX front-end is shown in Figure 7.28. The PLL 
frequency reference and the TX output are placed on the left- and the right-
hand side, respectively. The die size is 1240 μm × 1310 μm. Macroblocks are 
highlighted for the sake of clarity. All measurements are performed at a standard 
2.5V supply voltage.
The VCO oscillation frequency, f o, is shown as a function of the tuning 
voltage, Vtune, in Figure 7.29. With Vtune sweeping from 0 to 2.5V, the tuning 
range is of about 4.9 GHz (from 74.4 to 79.3 GHz), which is large enough to 
guarantee the 76–77 GHz operation in presence of PVT tolerances. The phase 
noise measurement at 4.75 GHz (i.e., at f o/16) is displayed in Figure 7.30. The 
VCO is compliant with the phase noise specification since it achieves a value of 
–99.3 dBc/Hz at 1-MHz offset from the 76-GHz carrier. The spectrum of the 
low-frequency divider output at f o/16 is also shown in Figure 7.31 to highlight 
the lack of significant spurs.
The millimeter-wave PA is also evaluated as a stand-alone block [15]. The 
measured large signal parameters PA are reported in Figure 7.32. The PA satu­
rated output power is 15 dBm with a peak PAE of 7.5%. The quiescent current 
is 130 mA. The OIP1dB is 12 dBm. The small-signal power gain at 77 GHz is 
higher than 22 dB. 
The TX power capability is demonstrated in Figure 7.33, which depicts 
the TX output spectrum. The measured power of –52 dBm has to be de-em­
bedded for the test bench loss (i.e., about 67 dB). Therefore, the transmit­
ter front-end is able to deliver an output power of 15 dBm, confirming that 
the PA is well driven into saturation by the VCO. The achieved output power 
Figure 7.28  Die photograph of the W-band TX front-end.

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
175
performance is among the best results achieved by 77-GHz SiGe bipolar inte­
grated circuits at that time [16, 46].
7.5  W-Band RX Front-End for FMCW Automotive Radar
The last section of the chapter is dedicated to the implementation of a W-band 
RX front-end for FMCW automotive radar in BiCMOSMW technology [2]. 
It can be useful spending some time to highlight how the performance of a 
Figure 7.29  VCO oscillation frequency (fo) versus tuning voltage Vtune.
Figure 7.30  VCO phase noise performance measured at fo/16 = 4.75 GHz. (© 2013 IEEE. Re­
printed with permission from [18].)

176 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
FMCW radar system is related to the RX characteristics. Assuming conjugate 
matching at the antenna, the SNR of a radar system in a first approximation is 
given by the well-known expression
Figure 7.32  Measured large-signal parameters of the PA.
Figure 7.31  Frequency spectrum measured at divider output (fo = 76 GHz).

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
177
	
( )
 [dB]
[dBm]
 [dB] 
174 [dBm Hz]
[dB] 10 log
TX
OUT
RX
SNR
P
L
NF
B
=
-
+
-
-
⋅
	
(7.8)
where 
TX
OUT
P
 is the output power of the transmitter, L is the loss term, 
–174 dBm/Hz is the thermal noise density (i.e., 10log(kT/1mW)), 
RX
NF
 is the 
noise figure of the receiver, and B is the bandwidth of the system. For the sake 
of completeness, term L summarily accounts various loss contributions besides 
the path loss (i.e., some parameters of the radar equation such as antenna gain, 
target radar cross-section, and so on), further terms due to the relative target 
position with respect to the beam axis, and finally contributions due to the 
baseband signal processing. It is worth noting that (7.8) does not depend on 
the conversion gain of the receiver, which is related to the noise floor at the IF 
output.
As clearly shown by (7.8), the RX key parameter is the noise figure, NRRX, 
whose minimization is mandatory to reduce the TX output power and conse­
quently the power consumption. This is even more important for radar systems, 
which are affected by high-power reflections of the FMCW signal due to the 
radome and/or the car bumper. Therefore, high output power turns out in very 
challenging linearity specifications for the RX chain, which can be mitigated 
provided that a better noise performance is guaranteed.
Figure 7.33  Measured output spectrum of the W-band TX. (© 2013 IEEE. Reprinted with per­
mission from [18].)

178 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Based on these considerations, the key RX block of a FMCW radar front-
end is the down-conversion mixer that should exhibit very demanding IIP1dB 
while maintaining low noise figure. For these reasons, significant efforts have 
been addressed in the last years toward the development of highly linear mixer 
topologies [47–50]. Moreover, several silicon radar implementations [11, 16, 
49] waive the LNA stage before the mixer to maximize the RX linearity per­
formance, thus achieving lower gain at millimeter-wave frequency and hence 
higher noise.
Figure 7.34 depicts a simplified block diagram of the proposed RX radar 
front-end. As with the TX front-end described in Section 7.4, it adopts a PLL-
based scheme driven by an external DDS. Since the W-band PLL was already 
described, here the attention will be mainly focused on the RX chain. It includes 
an LNA and a down-conversion mixer (i.e., LNA/mixer). Given a 
TX
OUT
P
 of 15 
dBm (as the one delivered by the W-band TX front-end described in Section 
7.4), the LNA/mixer should exhibit a noise figure lower than 12 dB. Moreover, 
an IIP1dB around –10 dBm should be provided to preserve sensitivity in pres­
ence of high-power reflections. Finally, to avoid noise figure degradation due to 
baseband circuitry, a conversion gain around 15–20 dB has to be guaranteed.
7.5.1  Design of the W-Band RX Front-End
The fulfillment of stringent linearity specifications along with low noise figure 
and adequate conversion gain requires the adoption of proper circuit topologies 
for the mixer stage. Traditionally, the problem has been faced using Gilbert-
Figure 7.34  Block diagram of the W-band RX front-end for FMCW automotive radar.

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
179
quad based mixer topologies operated at high supply voltages (i.e., 3.3V or even 
5V) and high currents to reduce the output voltage clipping and improve the 
linearity of the V/I converter, respectively [47, 48]. On the other hand, the use 
of high currents is detrimental for the noise contribution of the Gilbert quad 
(due to the increasing shot noise translated to the IF by the switching quad 
operation), thus affecting the overall noise figure. For these reasons, current-
steering solutions are usually adopted to properly bias the V/I converter and 
the quad.
An alternative yet effective approach to trade off mixer linearity and noise 
is to adopt inherently linear configurations based on a current-driven Gilbert 
quad. The proposed solution exploits a transformer-driven Gilbert quad, in a 
similar fashion of the one exploited for the 24-GHz mixer described in Section 
7.2 (see Figure 7.8). A similar solution has been recently adopted for a W-band 
radar receiver [16] demonstrating at 3.3V supply voltage an IIP1dB of –5 dBm 
with a noise figure and a conversion gain of 10 dB and 19 dB, respectively.
In our implementation, the key block is a highly linear mixer cell (i.e., 
IIP1dB better than 0 dBm) operating at a supply voltage as low as 2.5V. An 
input amplifier (LNA) is also profitably included to improve the overall RX 
conversion gain at the expense of an acceptable degradation of the IIP1dB, but 
guaranteeing better input/noise matching. 
The simplified schematic of the 77-GHz LNA/mixer is shown in Figure 
7.35. At the input, an integrated transformer, Tin, performs the single-ended-to 
differential conversion of the RF signal, while delivering it to the emitters of a 
differential CB amplifier, Q1-Q2. Tin is also used to achieve 50 Ω input match­
ing operating in resonant mode with capacitors CS1 and CP1 to reduce its IL. 
The current density of the CB pair is properly chosen to minimize noise, while 
the emitter area determines the noise optimum source impedance. Resistor REE 
is sized to guarantee that transistors work within the BVCE limit. The amplifier 
load is implemented by an integrated transformer, TLOAD, whose TCR—see 
(7.6)—has been sized to obtain a LNA gain of around 10 dB. TLOAD also per­
forms the V-I conversion of the output signal toward the Gilbert quad. The 
adopted transformer coupling between the amplifier and the mixer also allows 
noise reduction since the bias current used for the quad is lower than that used 
in the input stage (i.e., 6 mA and 14 mA, respectively). The Gilbert quad is 
driven by the LO signal coming from the VCO buffers by means of on-chip 
transformer TLO, whose central tap is exploited for biasing according to a mir­
ror-like scheme. Thanks to the biasing solution and the LO driving provided 
by TLO, the quad works at the maximum voltage swing (i.e., around 1.6V) and 
its noise performance at high input signal levels is improved. Finally, a resistive 
load is used, which guarantees a wideband matching on a 100 Ω differential 
load.

180 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
All on-chip transformers are implemented by means of an interleaved to­
pology. Both primary and secondary coils exploit a three-layer structure (i.e., 
alucap , metal 6, and metal 5), while lower metal 4 is used only as underpass. 
Transformer metal stack is the same as what was already shown in Figure 7.27. 
For the sake of completeness, transformer geometrical/electrical features are 
summarized in Table 7.6.
According to simulations, the LNA/mixer achieves a IIP1dB of about 
–10 dBm with a conversion gain of 17.5 dB and a noise figure of 10.5 dB at 
1-MHz IF, while drawing about 20 mA from a 2.5V supply voltage.
7.5.2  Experimental Results of the W-Band RX Front-End
The die micrograph of the RX front-end is shown in Figure 7.36. The 77-GHz 
input, the PLL frequency reference and the differential IF output are placed on 
the left-hand side, on the right-hand side, and on the top, respectively. The die 
size is 1175 μm × 1460 μm. Macroblocks are highlighted for the sake of clarity. 
Figure 7.35  Schematic of the W-band LNA/mixer.

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
181
All measurements are performed at a standard 2.5V supply voltage. The LO 
power, PLO, provided by the VCO buffers is around 2 dBm, which is suitable 
to properly drive the quad while avoiding degradation of both the noise figure 
and conversion gain.
Figure 7.37 depicts the conversion gain and the input matching versus 
frequency. In the operative frequency range, the LNA/mixer achieves an almost 
flat conversion gain of 17 dB while maintaining an S11 better than –14 dB. 
As shown in Figure 7.38, the LNA/mixer exhibits a noise figure of 11 dB at 
1-MHz IF. The figure also highlights the linearity performance of the RX front-
end, which achieves an IIP1dB of about –10 dBm. At the compression point, the 
Figure 7.36  Die photograph of the W-band RX front-end.
Table 7.6
Transformer Geometry and Electrical Data at 77 GHz
Transformer
TIN 
TLOAD
TLO
Primary
(P)
Secondary 
(S)
Primary
(P)
Secondary 
(S)
Primary 
(P)
Secondary 
(S)
Metal layers
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6-M5
Al-M6-M5
Structure
Interleaved
Interleaved
Interleaved
PGS
NO
NO
NO
din [μm]
44
44
35
w [μm]
5
5
5
5
5
5
L [pH]
117
113
124
104
98
116
Q-factor
21.4
18.4
19
18.7
12
18.7
k
0.46
0.52
0.47

182 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
noise figure still remains lower than 12 dB, and it increases up to 15 dB for an 
input power of –6 dBm. Such behavior confirms the robustness of the adopted 
topology against saturation effects due to high-power reflections (e.g., due to 
bumper or very close targets).
It is worth noting that by removing the CB input stage, better results in 
terms of linearity could be achieved at the expense of a reduction of the conver­
sion gain (of around 10 dB) and a consequent degradation of the noise figure 
performance.
Figure 7.38  Conversion gain and noise figure versus input power (RF = 77 GHz, IF = 1 MHz, 
PLO = 2 dBm).
Figure 7.37  Conversion gain and input matching versus frequency (IF = 1 MHz, PLO = 2 dBm).

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
183
References
[1]	 Laurens, M., et al. “A 150GHz fT/fmax 0.13 μm SiGe:C BiCMOS Technology,” Proceed­
ings of the IEEE Bipolar/BiCMOS Circuits Technology Meeting, Oct. 2003, pp. 199–202.
[2]	 Avenier, G., et al., “0.13 μm SiGe BiCMOS Technology Fully Dedicated to mm-Wave 
Applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 44, No. 9, Sep. 2009, pp. 2312–2321.
[3]	 Rieh, J.-S., et al. “SiGe HBTs with Cut-Off Frequency of 350 GHz,” Proc. Int. Electron 
Devices Meeting, Dec. 2002, pp. 771–774.
[4]	 Huang, W., et al., “SiGe 77 GHz automotive radar technology,” Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Circuits Syst., May 2007, pp. 1967–1970.
[5]	 Bock, J., et al. “SiGe Bipolar Technology for Automotive Radar Applications,” Proc. Bipo­
lar/BiCMOS Circuits Technol. Meeting, Sep. 2004, pp. 84–87.
[6]	 Scuderi, A., et al., Integrated Inductors and Transformers: Characterization, Design and Mod­
eling for RF and millimeter-wave Applications, Boca Raton, FL: CRC/Taylor & Francis, 
2010.
[7]	 Ragonese, E., et al., “A Fully Integrated 24GHz UWB Radar Sensor for Automotive Ap­
plications,” IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), San Francisco, CA, 
Feb. 2009, pp. 306–307.
[8]	 Scuderi, A., E. Ragonese, and G. Palmisano, “24-GHz UWB Transmitter for Vehicular 
Short-Range Radar Applications,” IET Circuits, Devices & Systems, Vol. 3, Dec. 2009, 
pp. 313–321.
[9]	 Ragonese, E., et al. “A SiGe BiCMOS 24-GHz Receiver Front-End for Automotive Short-
Range Radar,” Springer Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing, Vol. 67, May 2011, 
pp. 121–130.
[10]	 Bredendiek, C., et al., “A 24GHz Wideband Single-Channel SiGe Bipolar Transceiver 
Chip for Monostatic FMCW Radar Systems,” Microwave Integrated Circuits Conference 
(EuMIC), Oct. 2012, pp. 309–312.
[11]	 Forstner, H.-P., et al., “A 77GHz 4-Channel Automotive Radar Transceiver in SiGe,” 
IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symp. Dig. (RFIC), June 2008, pp. 233–236.
[12]	 Giammello, V., E. Ragonese, and G. Palmisano, “Transmitter Chipset for 24/77-GHz 
Automotive Radar Sensors,” IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symp. Dig. (RFIC), 
May 2010, pp. 75–78.
[13]	 Maurer, L., G. Haider, and G. H. Knapp, “77 GHz SiGe Based Bipolar Transceivers for 
Automotive Radar Applications: An Industrial Perspective,” IEEE Int. New Circuits and 
Systems Conference (NEWCAS), June 2011, pp. 257–260. 
[14]	 Giammello, V., E. Ragonese, and G. Palmisano, “A 77-GHz PA with Ground-Plane 
Parasitic Cancellation in a SiGe HBT BiCMOS Technology,” Wiley Microwave and 
Optical Technology Letters, Vol. 53, June 2011, pp. 1413–1416.
[15]	 Giammello, V., E. Ragonese, and G. Palmisano, “A 15-dBm SiGe BiCMOS PA for 77-
GHz Automotive Radar,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 59, No. 11, Nov. 
2011, pp. 2910–2918.

184 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
[16]	 Trotta, S., et al., “An RCP Packaged Transceiver Chipset for Automotive LRR and SRR 
Systems in SiGe BiCMOS Technology,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 60, 
No.3, Mar. 2012, pp. 778–794.
[17]	 Giammello, V., E. Ragonese, and G. Palmisano, “A Transformer-Coupling Current-Reuse 
SiGe HBT Power Amplifier for 77-GHz Automotive Radar,” IEEE Trans. Microwave 
Theory and Tech., Vol. 60, n. 6, June 2012, pp. 1676–1683. 
[18]	 Sapone, G., et al., “A 0.13-μm  SiGe BiCMOS Colpitts-Based VCO for  W-Band Radar 
Transmitters,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 61, No. 1, Jan. 2013. 
pp. 185–194.
[19]	 Issakov, V., et al., “A Compact Low-Power 24 GHz Transceiver for Radar Applications 
in 0.13μm CMOS,” IEEE International Conference on Microwaves, Communications, 
Antennas and Electronics Systems, (COMCAS), Nov. 2009, pp. 1–5.
[20]	 Jaemo, Y., et al., “A 24-GHz CMOS UWB Radar Transmitter with Compressed Pulses,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 60, No. 4, April 2012, pp. 1117–1125.
[21]	 Wei-Hsiu, H., et al., “An 18dBm Transmitter Frontend with 29% PAE for 24GHz 
FMCW Radar Applications,” IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symp., June 2012, 
pp. 137–140.
[22]	 Kawano, Y., et al., “A 77 GHz Transceiver in 90 nm CMOS,” Proc. IEEE Solid-State 
Circuits Conf., Feb. 2009, pp. 310–311.
[23]	 Mitomo, T., et al., “A 77 GHz 90 nm CMOS Transceiver for FMCW Radar Applications,” 
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 45, No. 4, Apr. 2010, pp. 928–937.
[24]	 Y.-A. Li,M.-H. Hung, S.-J. Huang, and J. Lee, “A Fully Integrated 77 GHz FMCW Radar 
System in 65 nm CMOS,” Proc. IEEE Solid-State Circuits Conf., Feb. 2010, pp. 216–217.
[25]	 Cheonsoo, K., et al., “A CMOS Centric 77GHz Automotive Radar Architecture,” IEEE 
Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symp. (RFIC), June 2012, pp. 131–134.
[26]	 Margomenos, A., “A Comparison of Si CMOS and SiGe BiCMOS Technologies for 
Automotive Radars,” Proc. IEEE Topical Meeting on Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits 
in RF Systems, (SiRF), Jan. 2009, pp. 1–4.
[27]	 Ragonese, E., V. Giammello, and G. Palmisano, “A 24/77-GHz SiGe BiCMOS Transmitter 
Chipset for Automotive Radar,” Wiley Microwave and Optical Technology Letters, Vol. 55, 
No. 4, April 2013, pp. 782–786.
[28]	 Gresham, I., et al., “Ultra-Wideband Radar Sensors for Short-Range Vehicular 
Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., Vol. 52, No. 9, Sep. 2004, pp. 2105–
2122.
[29]	 ETSI EN 302 288-1, “Electromagnetic Compatibility and Radio Spectrum Matters 
(ERM); Short Range Devices; Road Transport and Traffic Telematics (RTTT); Short-
Range Radar Equipment Operating in the 24 GHz Range; Part 1: Technical Requirements 
and Methods of Measurement.”
[30]	 Federal Communication Commission, First Report and Order, Revision of Part 15 of the 
Commission’s Rules Regarding Ultra Wideband Transmission Systems, ET Docket 98 
153, FCC, Washington, DC, 2002. 

 
Automotive Radar IC Design 
185
[31]	 Ragonese, A., E., and G. Palmisano, “0.13-mm SiGe BiCMOS Radio Front-End Circuits 
for 24-GHz Automotive Short-Range Radar Sensors,” Proc. IEEE European Solid-State 
Circuit Conference (ESSCIRC), Sep. 2008, pp. 494–497.
[32]	 Copani, T., et al. “12-GHz Silicon Bipolar Dual-Conversion Receiver for Digital Satellite 
Applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 40, No. 6, June 2005, pp. 1278–1287.
[33]	 Girlando, G., E. Ragonese, and G. Palmisano, “Silicon Bipolar LNAs in the X and Ku 
Bands,” Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing, Vol. 41, Dec. 2004, pp. 119–127.
[34]	 Kaukovuori, J., et al., “Analysis and Design of Passive Polyphase Filters,” IEEE Trans. 
Circuits Syst. I, Vol. 55, Nov. 2008, pp. 3023–3037.
[35]	 Giammello, V., et al., “An Offset Compensated Baseband Circuit for Automotive Radar 
Ultra-Wideband Applications,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Electronics, Circuits and Systems, 
Dec. 2007, pp. 931–934.
[36]	 Yue, C. P., and S. S. Wong, “On-Chip Spiral Inductors with Patterned Ground Shields 
for Si-Based RF ICs,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 33, No.5, May 1998, 
pp. 743–752.
[37]	 Dickson, T. O., M.-A. LaCroix, S. Boret, and D. Gloria, et al., “30-100-GHz Inductors 
and Transformers for Millimeter-Wave (Bi)CMOS Integrated Circuits,” IEEE Transactions 
on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 53, No.1, Jan. 2005, pp. 123–133.
[38]	 Biondi, T., et al., “Sub-nH Inductor Modeling for RF IC Design,” IEEE Microwave and 
Wireless Components Letters, Vol. 15, 2005, pp. 922–924.
[39]	 Italia, A., et al. “The Transformer Characteristic Resistance and Its Application to the 
Performance Analysis of Silicon Integrated Transformers,” in IEEE Radio Frequency 
Integrated Circuits Symp. Dig. (RFIC), Jun. 2005, pp. 597–600.
[40]	 Ragonese, E., et al. “Scalable Lumped Modeling of Single-Ended and Differential 
Inductors for RF IC Design,” Wiley International Journal of RF and Microwave Computer-
Aided Engineering, Vol. 19, Jan. 2009, pp. 110–119.
[41]	 Nicolson, S. T., et al. “A Low-Voltage SiGe BiCMOS 77-GHz Automotive Radar Chipset, 
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 56, No.5, May 2008, 
pp. 1092–1103.
[42]	 Sapone, G., A. Italia, E. Ragonese, and G. Palmisano, “Millimeter Wave Oscillator,” US 
patent US8489054 (B2), granted 16 July 2013.
[43]	 Li, H., and H.-M. Rein, “Millimeter-Wave VCOs with Wide Tuning Range and Low 
Phase Noise, Fully Integrated in a SiGe Bipolar Production Technology,” IEEE J. Solid-
State Circuits, Vol. 38, No. 2, Feb. 2003, pp. 184–191. 
[44]	 Nicolson, S. T., et al. “Design and Scaling of W-Band SiGe BiCMOS VCOs,” IEEE J. 
Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 42, No. 9, Sep. 2007, pp. 1821–1833.
[45]	 Ragonese, E., G. Sapone, V. Giammello, and G. Palmisano, “Analysis and Modeling of 
Interstacked Transformers for mm-Wave Applications,” Springer Analog Integrated Circuits 
and Signal Processing, Vol. 72, No. 6, June 2012, pp. 121–128.
[46]	 Li, H., H.-M. Rein, T. Suttorp, and J. Böck, “Fully Integrated SiGe VCOs with Powerful 
Output Buffer for 77-GHz Automotive Radar Systems and Applications Around 100 
GHz,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 39, No. 10, Oct. 2004, pp. 1650–1658.

186 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
[47]	 Dehlink, B., et al., “A Highly Linear SiGe Double-Balanced Mixer for 77 GHz Automotive 
Radar Applications,” in IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symp. Dig. (RFIC), June 
2006.
[48]	 Trotta, S., et al., “Design Considerations for Low-Noise, Highly Linear Millimeter-Wave 
Mixers in SiGe Bipolar Technology,” in Proc. IEEE European Solid-State Circuit Conference 
(ESSCIRC), Sep. 2007, pp. 356–359.
[49]	 Trotta, S., et al., “A Multi-Channel Rx for 76.5GHz Automotive Radar Applications with 
55dB IF Channel-to-Channel Isolation,” in Proc. IEEE European Microwave Integrated 
Circuits Conference (EuMIC), Sep. 2009, pp. 192–195.
[50]	 Yang, S. J., et al., “A Low Noise, High Gain, Highly Linear Mixer for 77 GHz Automotive 
Radar Applications in SiGe:C Bipolar Technology,” in Proc. IEEE European Solid-State 
Circuit Conference (ESSCIRC), Sep. 2009, pp. 312–315.

187
8
Conclusions 
Recent advances in technologies, circuits, and architectures of highly integrated 
low-power radars have been presented in the book. Single-chip or single-board 
implementations of the main radar subblocks have been also presented with ref­
erence to application case studies in the field of vital signs contactless monitor­
ing, harbor traffic control, and short-range and long-range automotive driving 
assistance. The main idea behind the book is that a radar, properly designed to 
minimize its power consumption, size, and cost, has the potentiality to become 
in the near future a ubiquitous contactless sensor for large-market applications.
The large business that can derive from ubiquitous radar sensing applica­
tions justifies research from industry and academia in this direction. According 
to forecast market analysis, 7% of all vehicles sold in 2014 worldwide, par­
ticularly in Europe, Japan, and the United States, will be equipped with radar 
systems with a market value of several billions of U.S. dollars. In a few years, 
this value can grow, becoming on the order of 10% to 20% of new cars having 
at least two different radar devices (one short range covering the rear part of 
the car and one long range covering the front part of the car) mounted on each 
vehicle. This market forecast can become real if the cost for the customer of an 
automotive radar will be less than US$1,000. Thus, radars will be mounted 
not only on top models of premium car brands; they can become one of the 
key components for medium cars. As has happened in the past for other safety 
systems like antilock braking systems, in the future a radar for active safety can 
become a mandatory component for all cars sold in Europe, the United States, 
or Japan. Similar or even higher business volumes can arise from the use of low-
power radars for biomedical applications (e.g., contactless vital signs monitor­
ing for heart and breath rates). 
Hereafter we review the key characteristics that make radars a unique sen­
sor solution with respect to other competing technologies. 

188 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Unlike other contactless sensing technology (e.g., lasers, visible or infrared 
cameras, or ultrasounds), a radar is a sensor capable of operating in all weather 
conditions and gives to the user multiple bits of information and data about 
the sensed target: whether or not there is a target, its distance, its relative speed, 
and its direction of arrival. Moreover a radar works with nonionizing radia­
tions and hence can be used for vital sign contactless monitoring in biomedical 
applications. Often, it can operate in harsh environment conditions (extreme 
temperatures, humidity, radiation levels, and so on).  
To reach this goal the approach to radar design and the performances 
required of the radar should be different than traditional ones. 
The development of conventional radar technique was mainly pushed by 
military applications during the Second World War with high-power, large size, 
and long-distance radars. Also when adopted for civil applications (e.g., long-
range airborne or maritime radar for obstacle detection), a radar is typically a 
complex system where the design driver is the optimization of its performance 
rather than the minimization of its cost, size, weight, and power consumption. 
As a consequence, at the state of the art, radar is a niche market tech­
nology for professional applications. Maximizing the achievable performance a 
“traditional” radar typically relies on high-performance devices, often custom 
designed, mixing different implementation technologies, since for each radar 
subsystem the most suited technology is used. This approach leads to high de­
sign and time costs.
At the state-of-the-art a radar is typically realized as the interconnection 
of a set of multiple circuit boards, each dedicated to a specific subsystem: RF 
or microwave front-ends with antennas, passives, switches, often with different 
boards for transmitters and receivers; analog to digital (A/D) and digital to ana­
log (D/A) converter boards; baseband signal processing boards; power supply 
boards; and user interface boards.
As discussed in Chapter 2, the analog front-end electronics for traditional 
radar relies on high-performance III-V devices such as HEMT or HBT in GaAs 
or InP materials. These technologies allow for high-frequency applications, 
maximizing circuit metrics such as noise figure, amplifier gain and linearity, 
and transmitter power. Adopting high-end performance devices and circuits 
allows for optimal radar performance at the system level (target distance, sensi­
tivity, false alarm rate, and so on). However, the cost and design time for III-V 
based technologies is much higher than for standard silicon transistor solutions 
such as CMOS and can be sustained only for professional niche markets (e.g., 
defense).
Similarly, as discussed in Chapter 3, for the baseband digital signal pro­
cessing of conventional radars, high-performance computing platforms such as 
GPUs or ASIC are often adopted at the state of the art. Unfortunately, their 

 
Conclusions  
189
costs and power consumption are much higher than embedded platforms used 
in consumer electronics.
In this book we have discussed how a different approach can be followed 
for radar design: similarly to other large-market electronic design solutions, 
standard and commercial devices can be used for a radar. The trend should 
be using the same technology for all radar subsystems, and the aim of the de­
signer should be not maximizing the radar performance but optimizing the 
tradeoff between achievable performances and the relevant cost, size, and power 
consumption.   
Obviously, an integrated low-power radar aims at system-level perfor­
mance that is quite different from that of conventional radars. The maximum 
distance to reach can be less than 1 meter (e.g., in the case of contactless mea­
sure of heart rate or breath rate) to a maximum of 100–200m (long-range au­
tomotive radar for automatic cruise control). 
The transmitted power is often below 20 dBm. Indeed, the power spectral 
density allowed by automotive radar standards is below -41 dBm/MHz around 
the 24-GHz portion of the spectrum and less than -9 dBm/MHz in the 77–81-
GHz portion of the spectrum. The cross section of the targets (that can be small 
yachts, cars, pedestrians, bicycles, or parts of the body in case of biomedical 
applications) can be from some cm2 to few m2.
The size of the radar should be much less than 10 cm per side so that a 
radar can be easily mounted behind the front cover of a car in automotive ap­
plications or can be an handheld device for other applications.   
Short wavelengths should be adopted to ease the miniaturization process 
(e.g., the wavelength is only 2.9 mm at 77 GHz). Indeed at wavelengths of few 
millimeters there is potential for high miniaturization, even for the antenna 
integration. The trend is designing radar systems in the following spectrum 
portions: The spectrum portion between 77 GHz and 81 GHz is suited for 
long-range and short-range radars. The 24-GHz spectrum is reserved mainly 
for short range radars. 
As seen in Chapters 4 and 5, an analysis at the algorithmic level is not 
required for a revolution of state-of-the-art radar signal processing; rather, what 
is required is a selection and optimization of known pulsed or continuous-wave 
techniques for application scenarios where the final aim is not achieving the 
maximum possible performances but the reaching sufficient performances to 
provide a service with low cost, low power consumption, and small size. Hence, 
at the system and algorithmic levels, what is mainly required is a change of the 
approach of the radar design team: designing radar signal processing algorithms 
that are complexity aware (i.e., their computational cost and memory require­
ments should be a tradeoff between the system radar performance and the hard­
ware and software capability of the implementing platform that has constrained 

190 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
budgets in terms of memory, number, and types of operation executable in real 
time, power consumption, and cost).  
Mixing this proper algorithmic radar design with recent advances in sili­
con technologies and electronic design methods make possible the realization of 
highly-integrated radars with low cost, compact size, and low power consump­
tion with achievable performances that can be enough for a large set of applica­
tions such as automotive short-range radars (SRR) for car parking, side-crash 
warning, collision warning, blind-spot detection, and stop and go control in 
urban scenarios; automotive LRR for adaptive cruise control (ACC); SRR for 
contactless heart and pulmonary monitoring in e-health applications; SRR for 
vital signs detection in case of natural disasters or war scenarios; distance mea­
surements in industrial automation; millimeter-wave body scanners for security 
(e.g., in airports and banks); and networks of low-cost radars for traffic control 
in railway crossing or in a small harbor for small yachts. 
As demonstrated by the circuital implementations discussed in Chapters 
6 and 7, a single-board radar implementation is already possible. 
Particularly Chapter 6 presented some circuital solutions for a wearable 
radar, called a noninvasive continuous heart monitoring (NIHM). The NIHM 
for vital function monitoring is based on a pulsed-radar device, working in the 
3–10-GHz UWB spectrum, with a correlator-type receiver avoiding the use of 
a dedicated DSP hardware unit. This radar is completely integrated in a single-
chip in standard CMOS silicon technology and has been tested for contactless 
measurements of heart rate and breath rate at distances in the order of 1m. 
Chapter 6 also discussed a single-board implementation of FMCW radar 
for harbor infomobility (HI), realized using MIC technology for passive devices 
(antennas, filters, and matching networks) and commercial off-the-shelf com­
ponents for active devices. 
Chapter 7 presented integrated circuits solutions for a UWB 24-GHz 
radar for short-range automotive applications and 77-GHz FMCW radar for 
long-range applications. All the circuits presented in this chapter are integrated 
in a silicon-germanium (SiGe) BiCMOS technology.
In the near future, the continuous evolution in semiconductor technolo­
gies will allow the low-cost and low-power integration of a millimeter-wave 
radar transceiver and DSP unit in the same CMOS chip. Therefore, we foresee 
the future migration of low-power integrated radar from single-board radar to 
single-package or even single-chip systems. For short-range radars operating 
at several tens of GHz, the on-chip integration of the antenna will become 
feasible.

191
List of Acronyms
2D	
two dimensional
3D	
three dimentional
ABS	
anti-lock braking system
A-MOS	
accumulation MOS
ACC	
adaptive or autonomous cruise control
AD	
analog digital
ADAS	
automotive driver assistance system
ADC	
analog digital converter
ADS	
Advanced Design System
AF	
amplifier and filter
AGC	
automatic gain control
AGU	
automatic address generation
ALU	
arithmetic logic unit
ASIC	
application-pecific integrated circuit

192 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
BB	
baseband
BE	
broadband engine
BEOL	
back-end-of-line
BPF	
band pass filter
bpm	
beats per minute
BPSK	
binary phase shift keying
BiCMOS	
bipolar complementary MOS
BJT	
bipolar junction transistor
BV	
breakdown voltage
CA	
collision avoidance
CA-CFAR	
cell averaging constant false alarm rate
CAD	
computer-aided design
CAN	
controller area network
CAS	
cascode
CB	
common base
CE	
common emitter
CFAR	
constant false alarm rate
CISC	
complex instruction set computer
CMFB	
common mode feedback circuit
CMP	
 chemical/mechanical planarization 
CMOS	
complementary MOS

 
List of Acronyms 
193
CP	
charge pump
CPI	
coherent period of integration (or clock per instruction 
	
in Chapter 3)
CPS	
coplanar stripline
CPW	
coplanar waveguide
CU	
control unit
CUDA	
compute unified device architecture
CUT	
cell under test
CW	
continuous wave
DA	
digital analog
DAC	
digital analog converter
DBF	
digital beamforming
DCM	
digital clock manager
DDC	
digital down conversion 
DDR	
double data rate
DDS	
digital direct synthesizer
DFT	
discrete Fourier transform
DLL	
delay locked loop
DMA	
direct memory access
DMIPS	
Dhrystone millions of instructions per second
DOA	
direction of arrival
DPU	
data processing unit

194 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
DRAM	
dynamic RAM
DSP	
digital signal processing
DUC	
digital up conversion 
ECL	
emitter coupled logic
EDAC	
error detection and correction
EEPROM	
electrical erasable programmable ROM
EH	
e-health
EIRP	
equivalent isotropic radiated power
EIRPD	
equivalent isotropic radiated power density 
EM	
electromagnetic
ENOB	
effective number of bits
EP	
execution packet
ESA	
European Space Agency
ESD	
electrostatic discharge
ETSI	
European Telecommunications Standards Institute
FCC	
Federal Communication Commission
FDFIr	
frequency domain FIR
FDSOI	
full-depleted silicon on insulator 
FET	
field-effect transistor
FIR	
finite impulse response
FFT	
fast Fourier transform

 
List of Acronyms 
195
FF	
flip flop
FLMCW	
frequency linearly modulated continuous waveform
FLOPS	
floating-point operation per second
FPGA	
field programmable gate array
FPSoC	
field programmable system-on-chip
FSR	
self-resonance frequency
GaAs	
gallium arsenide
GaN	
gallium nitride
GMACs	
giga multiply-and accumulate operations per seconds
GO-CFAR	
greatest of CFAR
GOPS	
giga operations per second
GP	
ground plane
GPP	
general-purpose processor
GPU	
graphics processing unit
GUI	
graphical user interface
HBT	
heterojunction bipolar transistor
HDL	
Hardware Description Language
HEMT	
high electron mobility transistor 
HI	
harbor infomobility 
HPA	
high-power amplifier
HPF	
high-pass filter

196 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
HS	
harbor surveillance
HW	
hardware
IC	
integrated circuit
IF	
intermediate frequency
IFFT	
inverse fast Fourier transform
iid	
independent and identically distributed
IIR	
infinite impulse response
InP	
indium phosphide
I/O	
input-output
IP	
intellectual property
IIP1dB	
input-returned 1-dB compression point
I/Q	
In-phase/quadrature
ISM	
industrial scientifical medical
ITAR	
International Traffic Army Regulation
LASER	
light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation
LE	
logic element
LIDAR	
light detection and ranging
LISA	
Language for Instruction Set Architectures
LNA	
low-noise amplifier
LP	
low-pass
LPF	
low-pass filter

 
List of Acronyms 
197
LO	
local oscillator
LRR	
long-range radar
LTCC	
low-temperature cofired ceramic
LUT	
look-up table
MBPS	
megabit per second
MAC	
multiply and accumulate
MCM	
multichip module
MCU	
microcontroller unit
MEMS	
microelectromechanical system
MIC	
microwave integrated circuit
MIM	
metal-insulator-metal  
MIMO	
multiple-input multiple-output
ML	
maximum likelihood 
MMIC	
monolithic microwave integrated circuit
mmW	
millimeter wave
MOM	
metal-oxide-metal
MOS	
metal-oxide semiconductor
MOSFET	
metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor
MPSOC	
multiprocessor system-on-chip
MRR	
medium-range radar
MSPS	
megasamples per second

198 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
MUSIC	
multiple signal classification
NIHM	
noninvasive continuous health monitoring
NF	
noise figure
NCO	
numerical controlled oscillator 
NOP	
no operation
OIP1dB	
output-referred 1-dB compression point
OS-CFAR	
ordered statistic, CFAR
PA	
power amplifier
PAE	
power-added efficiency
PC	
pulse compression
PCB	
printed circuit board
PCI	
peripheral computer interface 
Pd	
detection probability
PD	
power dissipation 
PFD	
phase frequency detector
PG	
pulse generation
PGA	
programmable gain amplifier
PGS	
polysilicon patterned ground shield
PLL	
phase-locked loop
PPE	
power processor element 
PR	
pulse repetition

 
List of Acronyms 
199
PRI	
pulse repetition interval
PRF	
pulse repetition frequency
PROM	
programmable ROM
PSD	
power spectral density
PVT	
process/voltage/temperature
QFN	
quad flat no-lead
RAM	
random access memory
RADAR	
radio detection and ranging
R&D	
research and development
RISC	
reduced instruction set computer
RF	
radio frequency
ROM	
read-only memory
RTL	
register transfer level
RTOS	
real-time operating system
RX	
receiver
SEC/DED	
single error correction/double error detection
SDE	
software development environment 
Si	
silicon
SiC	
silicon carbide
SiGe	
silicon germanium
SIMD	
single instruction multiple data

200 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
SIP	
system-in-package
SL	
sequential lobing 
SMD	
surface-mounting device
SNR	
signal-to-noise ratio
SoC	
system-on-chip
SO-CFAR	
smallest of CFAR
SOI	
silicon-on-insulator
SP	
synergistic processor
SR	
short-range
SRAM	
static RAM
SRR	
short-range radar
STAP	
space-time adaptive processing
SW	
software
TCR	
transformer characteristic resistance
TDFIR	
time domain FIR
TH	
time hopping
Tint	
integration time
TM-CFAR	
trimmed mean CFAR
TMR	
triple module redundancy
TOF	
time of flight
ToT	
time on target

 
List of Acronyms 
201
TPG	
triangular pulse generator
TRG	
trigger
TX	
transmitter
USD	
United States dollars
UWB	
ultrawideband
VCO	
voltage-controlled oscillator
VGA	
variable gain amplifier
VHDL	
Very-High-Speed Integrated Circuit Hardware Description 
	
Language
VLIW	
very long instruction word


203
About the Authors
Maria S. Greco graduated in electronic engineering in 1993 and received a 
Ph.D. degree in telecommunication engineering in 1998 from University of 
Pisa, Italy. From December 1997 to May 1998 she was with the Georgia Tech 
Research Institute, Atlanta, GA as a visiting research scholar, where she carried 
out research activity in the field of radar detection in non-Gaussian background. 
In 1993 she joined the Department of Information Engineering at the 
University of Pisa, where she has been an associate professor since December 
2011. She has been an IEEE fellow since January 2011 and she was corecipient 
of the 2001 IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Society’s Barry Carlton 
Award for Best Paper and recipient of the 2008 Fred Nathanson Young Engi­
neer of the Year award for contributions to signal processing, estimation, and 
detection theory. She has been cogeneral-chair of the 2007 International Wave­
form Diversity and Design Conference (WDD07), Pisa, Italy; on the Technical 
Committee of the 2006 EURASIP Signal and Image Processing Conference 
(EUSIPCO), Florence, Italy; on the Technical Committee of the 2008 IEEE 
Radar Conference, Rome, Italy; on the Organizing Committee of the CAM­
SAP09, technical cochair of CIP2010 (Elba Island, Italy) and general co-chair 
of CAMSAP2011 (San Juan, Puerto Rico). She was guest coeditor of the spe­
cial issue of the Journal of the IEEE Signal Processing Society on Special Topics in 
Signal Processing on “Adaptive Waveform Design for Agile Sensing and Com­
munication” published in June 2007 and lead guest editor of the special issue of 
International Journal of Navigation and Observation on “Modeling and Process­
ing of Radar Signals for Earth Observation” published in August 2008. She is 
the associate editor of both IET Proceedings—Sonar, Radar, and Navigation and 
the IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, associate editor-in-chief of the IEEE 
Aerospace and Electronic Systems magazine, a member of the editorial board of 
the Springer Journal of Advances in Signal Processing, and a member of the IEEE 

204 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Signal Processing Theory and Methods and Signal Array Processing Technical 
Committees. She is also a member of the IEEE AES Board of Governors and 
vice-chair of the IEEE AES Radar Panel.
She is a coauthor of the tutorials entitled “Radar Clutter Modeling” pre­
sented at the International Radar Conference (May 2005, Arlington, VA) and 
“Sea and Ground Radar Clutter Modeling” presented at the 2008 IEEE Radar 
Conference (May 2008, Rome, Italy) and at the 2012 IEEE Radar Conference 
(May 2012, Atlanta, GA), as well as coauthor of the tutorial “RF and Digital 
Components for Highly Integrated Low-Power Radar” presented at the same 
conference.
Her general interests are in the areas of statistical signal processing, esti­
mation, and detection theory. In particular, her research interests include clutter 
models, spectral analysis, coherent and incoherent detection in non-Gaussian 
clutter, CFAR techniques, radar waveform diversity, and bistatic/mustistatic ac­
tive and passive radar. She coauthored many book chapters and more than 140 
journal and conference papers.
Bruno Neri was born in 1956 and received his Laurea degree cum laude 
from the University of Pisa in 1980. In 1983 he joined the Department of In­
formation Engineering of the same university, where he has been professor of 
electronics since 2000. In recent years, his research activity has addressed the 
design of radio-frequency integrated circuits for mobile communications and 
for biomedical applications. From 2002 to 2010 he was director of the Depart­
ment of Information Engineering at the University of Pisa. Presently, he is a 
technical consultant in the lawsuit for the shipwreck of the Costa Concordia 
cruise ship.
Bruno Neri is coauthor of more than 100 papers published in peer-re­
viewed journals and proceedings of international conferences. 
Giuseppe Palmisano received a Laurea degree in electronic engineering 
from the University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, in 1982. From 1983 to 1991, he was 
a researcher in the Department of Electronics at the University of Pavia, where 
he was involved in CMOS and BiCMOS analog integrated circuit (IC) design. 
In 1992, he was visiting professor at Universidad Autonoma Metropolitana 
(UAM), Mexico City, Mexico, where he held a course on microelectronics for 
Ph.D. students. In 1993 and 2000, he joined the Faculty of Engineering at 
the University of Catania as associate professor and full professor, respectively, 
teaching analog electronics.
Since 1999, he has been leading the Radio Frequency Advanced Design 
Center (RF-ADC), a joint research center supported by University of Catania 
and STMicroelectronics (ST), Catania, Italy. The research group in RF-ADC is 
composed of University and ST researchers who are involved in design activity 
of RF and microwave ICs for data communications using modern silicon and 
nonsilicon emerging technologies.

 
About the Authors 
205
In the last decade, he worked on the implementation of several innovative 
ICs in silicon processes such as power amplifiers for mobile phone applications, 
satellite receivers for digital TV, RF front-ends for WLANs, ultralow-power 
transceivers for wireless sensor networks, microwave ICs for automotive radar 
sensors, and batteryless transceivers with RF energy harvesting. He was also 
responsible for two FP7 European research projects dealing with analog elec­
tronic design on plastic substrate with organic transistors.
In microwave design, he implemented several innovative ICs that include 
complete systems such as a 24-GHz UWB short-range radar sensor and a chip 
set solution for the radio front-ends of a 77-GHz long-range radar sensor, and 
several new topologies of 77-GHz power amplifiers and VCOs were also pro­
posed. His research achievements in all these topics have appeared in sever­
al publications of the most important international journals and conference 
proceedings.
Giuseppe Palmisano has also been conducting his research activity within 
the framework of Italian and European research projects, as well as within re­
search agreements with electronic industries, mainly STMicroelectronics. He 
has been using a wide variety of silicon technologies for VLSI design approaches 
that range from pure Si bipolar and SiGe BiCMOS to nanoscale CMOS pro­
cesses. Recently, he has been working with organic TFT technologies for flex­
ible electronics.
He is the coauthor of more than 250 papers in international journals and 
conference proceedings, 50 international patents, and two books.
His research interests lie in the area of analog integrated circuit design 
with special attention to RF and microwave applications. Recently, he has been 
working with ultralow-power sub-GHz RF front ends, RF remotely powered 
transceivers, and wireless power/data transfer with galvanic isolation.
Egidio Ragonese received a Laurea degree in electrical engineering (mag­
na cum laude) and a Ph.D. in electronics and automation engineering from 
the University of Catania, Italy, in 1999 and 2003, respectively. From 2003 
to 2011, he was with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica Elettronica e 
Informatica (DIEEI) of the University of Catania, holding the position first of 
research fellow and then research assistant professor. He also was adjunct pro­
fessor at the University Kore of Enna, Italy, as well as at the Scuola Superiore 
(Mediterranean University Center) of Catania, teaching electronics for gradu­
ate and postgraduate programs. Since 1999, while working in academia, he 
was deeply involved in industrial R&D programs within the Radio Frequency 
Advanced Design Center (RF-ADC), a joint research center supported by the 
University of Catania and STMicroelectronics, Catania, Italy. In October 2011, 
he joined STMicroelectronics, Catania, Italy, where he is RF senior designer/
project leader in the R&D department. 

206 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
The research of Egidio Ragonese was aimed at the conception, design, 
and experimental characterization of RF and mm-wave integrated circuits/sys­
tems for wireless applications (UMTS, W LAN, UWB, DVB-S, vehicular ra­
dar, mm-wave imaging, RF harvesting, RFID, wireless power transfer, etc.) in 
different platforms and technological process (CMOS, SiGe BiCMOS, organic 
TFTs, etc.). This activity was mainly developed within the framework of Ital­
ian or European research projects as well as joined academia-industrial R&D 
programs for which Dr. Ragonese was in charge of the technical/project man­
agement. From 2006 to 2011, he worked within the mm-wave research team 
of the RF-ADC to develop first 24-GHz and then 77-GHz radar sensors under 
joined research programs between the University of Catania and the Automo­
tive Product Group of STMicroelectronics. 
Since January 2012 Dr. Ragonese has been an IEEE senior member. He is 
also a member of the editorial board of Active and Passive Electronic Compo­
nents, Hindawi Publishing Corporation. He served as a member of the review­
ing board of several IEEE and IET journals and international conferences. 
Dr. Ragonese is the coauthor of more than 60 papers in international 
journals and conference proceedings, several patents, and a book on integrated 
inductors and transformers for RF/mm-wave applications.
Sergio Saponara, IEEE senior member, got his master’s and Ph.D. degrees 
in electronic engineering from the University of Pisa. Since 2002 he has been a 
Marie Curie Research Fellow at IMEC, Leuven, Belgium. 
He teaches courses in vehicular electronics, electronic systems for robot­
ics, and embedded systems at Pisa University. He also teaches fundamentals of 
electronics at the Italian Naval Academy in Livorno.
He is member of two IEEE standardization activities as well as the techni­
cal committees TC-7 and TC-19 of the IEEE Instrumentation and Measure­
ment Society, and he served in the organization of several IEEE and SPIE con­
ferences and as guest editor of special issues in several ISI journals. 
Saponara has served as a member of the reviewing board of several IEEE, 
IET, Elsevier, and Springer journals. He held plenary or invited talks and tuto­
rials at IEEE and SPIE conferences (e.g., the plenary talk at IEEE Radar Con­
ference 2012). He is also associate editor of the Springer Journal of Real-Time 
Image Processing. He is member of the engineering Ph.D. school “Leonardo da 
Vinci” at Pisa University. His research interests include embedded computing 
engineering, integrated electronics, and applied electronic system.. 
He has coauthored more than 200 scientific publications and 10 patents. 
He got best paper awards at PRIME 2007, StreamingDay2010, GE2007, and 
second prize at the Element-14 Medical Design Award 2011. An abstract of his 
Ph.D. thesis was awarded at the first EDAA Ph.D. forum in Munich, 2003, 
and he received the “premio giovane ricercatore” from the Senato Accademico-
University of Pisa.

 
About the Authors 
207
His technology transfer activity includes collaborations with STMicro­
electronics, Renesas, Selex, Ericsson, Piaggio, Magna, AustriaMicroSystems, 
CAEN, Sitael, Intecs, Rico, Flyby, and IDS. He served as project manager or 
WP manager on several national and international research projects (including 
PRIN, FIRB, POR-CREO, ESA, INFN, FP6, and FP7). 
He is an associate member of the Italian National Institutes for Nuclear 
Physics and of the National Inter-University Consortium for Telecommuni­
cations. He also joined the NEWCOM and HIPEAC European networks of 
excellence.


209
Index
Accumulation MOS (A-MOS) 
varactors, 138
Adaptive gain control (AGC) amplifier, 27
Altera Cyclone V FPGA, 63–66
	
ADC, 64
	
for cost-effective radar signal 
processing, 67
	
FFT, 64–66
	
FMCW automotive radar scheme, 65
	
implementation, 64
	
implementation results, 67
AMBA APB bus, 55
Analog to digital (A/D) conversion, 13
Analog to digital converters (ADC)
	
for baseband input, 64
	
boards, 1, 11
	
with pipeline architectures, 26
	
power-efficient, 31
	
radar-system-on-a-board, 14
	
requirements for, 26–27
Antennas
	
CPS, 16
	
CPW, 16
	
integrated, 15–18
	
squinted beampatterns, 103
Application-specific integrated circuits 
(ASICs), 2
Arithmetic logic unit (ALU), 41
Arrival estimation, 102–6
Automotive driver assistance systems 
(ADASs), 138
Automotive radar
	
ACC sensor, 94
	
autonomous cruise control (ACC) 
system, 91
	
azimuth direction and arrival 
estimation, 102–6
	
CFAR processing, 99–102
	
conclusions, 110–13
	
FFT, 98–99
	
FMCW, based on Virtex5 FPGA, 62
	
FMCW, from BOSCH, 40
	
functionalities, 92
	
IC design, 137–80
	
LRR, 15
	
main blocks, 39
	
MRR, 92
	
range and frequency estimation, 95–99
	
sensor and functionalities, 91–94
	
sensor transmitter chipset, 159–65
	
signal processing for single sensor, 
94–110
	
silicon technologies for, 138–39
	
specifications, 4, 94
	
SRR, 2, 92, 110–13
	
target characteristics, 4–5
	
target tracking, 106–10
	
W-band RX front-end, 173–80
	
W-band TX front-end, 166–73
Autonomous cruise control (ACC), 91, 94
Azimuth direction, 102–6
BiCMOS9, 139
BiCMOS9MW, 139
BiCMOSMW, 171

210 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
BOSCH long-range automotive 
application, 40
BPSK modulator, 153
Breathing, 76
Carrier frequency, e-health applications, 80
Cell averaging CFAR (CA-CFAR), 99, 
100–101
CELL broadband engine (BE), 43
Charge pump (CP)
	
in PLL circuit design, 143
	
schematic, 144
CMOS
	
LNA noise figure in, 25
	
realization of automotive LRR 
application, 24
	
SOI, 14, 16–17
	
technology, 14, 24
Colpitts-based VCO, 168
Complementary metal-oxide 
semiconductors (CMS), 2
Complex instruction set computer 
(CISC), 34
Compute unified device architecture 
(CUDA)
	
defined, 44
	
GPU, 45
Constant false alarm rate (CFAR) 
algorithm, 14, 27, 32
	
in automotive radar, 99–102
	
cell averaging (CA-CFAR), 99, 
100–101
	
detector analysis, 102
	
detector scheme, 100
	
in digital domain, 66, 67
	
greatest of (GO-CFAR), 99, 101
	
ordered statistic (OS-CFAR), 99
	
processing, 99–102
	
smallest of (SO-CFAR), 99, 101–2
	
trimmed mean (TM-CFAR), 99
Continuous wave (CW) Doppler radars
	
breathing and, 76
	
dc offet, 77
	
for healthcare applications, 74–79
	
heartbeat and, 78–79
	
N-length sequence, 78
	
null-points detection, 75
	
RELAX algorithm, 79
	
vital sign detection, 74
Controller area network (CAN), 32
Coplanar strip-line (CPS) antennas, 16
Coplanar waveguide (CPW) antennas, 16
Cost-effective FPGA, 61–66
Data processing unit (DPU)
	
control and status registers, 54
	
data path, 50
	
instruction packets (IPs), 53–54
	
internal structure block diagram, 52
	
single-cycle throughput, 53
	
VLIW architecture basis, 50
Digital beamforming (DBF), 105
Digital down-conversion (DDC), 32
Digital signal processors (DSPs)
	
arithmetic logic unit (ALU), 41
	
markets, 42
	
radar algorithms, 46
	
vector, 42–44
	
very high speed, 33
	
VLIW, 48–57
Digital to analog (D/A) conversion, 13
Digital to analog converters (DAC)
	
boards, 1, 11
	
radar-system-on-a-board, 14
Digital up-conversion (DUC), 32
Direct digital synthesis (DDS), 27, 32, 64
Direction of arrival (DOA) estimation, 16
	
azimuth, 102
	
digital beam steering with, 106
Discrete Fourier transform (DFT), 98–99, 
130
DMIPS (Dhrystone millions of instructions 
per second), 34
Doppler effect, 131, 132
Double-sideband heterodyne detectors, 
82–83
DRAM modules, 36
DSPace
	
AMBA APB bus, 55
	
architecture, 49–50
	
block diagram, 51
	
computational units capabilities, 53
	
D-cache, 54
	
defined, 48
	
development activity, 55–56
	
DPU data path, 50
	
DPU internal structure, 52
	
ESA requirements, 48–49
	
first synthesis results, 57
	
I-cache, 54–55

 
Index 
211
	
multichannel DMA engine, 55
	
SDE, 49–50
EEPROM memories, 36
E-health radar
	
biomedical, block diagram, 119
	
building block schematics, 122
	
carrier frequency, 80
	
conclusions, 87–88
	
CW Doppler radar, 74–79
	
feasibility study, 121
	
front-end architectures, 81–83
	
front-end chip micrograph, 123
	
front-end prototype, 124
	
low-power front end for, 117–27
	
miniaturized, 118–24
	
phase noise and range-correlation, 
80–81
	
radar for, 73–88
	
receiving antenna, 123
	
sensor and functions, 73–74
	
UWB radar, 83–87
Emitter-coupled logic (ECL) flip-flops, 145
Equivalent isotropically radiated power 
(EIRP)
	
peak, 111
	
power spectral density, 4
	
requirements, 111
	
spectral density, 3
ESPRIT, 105
Extended Kalman filter (EKF), 109–10
Fast four transform (FFT), 32, 44
	
automotive radar, 98–99
	
decomposition principle, 98
	
two-dimensional, 135
Fermi NVIDIA GPU, 45
Field effect transistors (FETs), 19–20
Field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs)
	
for automotive and space/military 
applications, 58
	
cost-effective, 61–66
	
in digital signal processing, 14
	
evolution of, 57
	
high-end, 59–61
	
overview of, 57–59
	
for radar digital signal processing, 
57–66
	
technology management, 57
	
vendors, 57
	
Xilinx, 58, 59
Field programmable system-on-chip 
(FPSoC), 33
Flexibility metric, 37–38
FlexRay bus interface, 32
Frequency domain filtering, 32
Frequency modulated continuous wave 
(FMCW) modulation, 3
Front-end architectures
	
double-sideband heterodyne, 82–83
	
e-health applications, 81–83
	
homodyne, 82
General-purpose processors (GPPs), 33
Graphic processing units (GPUs), 2
	
comparison, 45
	
CUDA-based, 45
	
evolution of, 44–48
	
Fermi architecture, 44–45
	
use of, 33
Greatest of CFAR (GO CFAR), 99, 101
Greco, Maria S., 189–90
Harbor infomobility (HI), 188
Harbor surveillance radar
	
coherent period of integration (CPI), 
135
	
data processing, 134–35
	
dimensioning, 128–32
	
discrete Fourier transform (DFT), 130
	
feasibility study, 128–32
	
FFT, 135
	
front-end block diagram, 127–28
	
high-power amplifier (HPA), 132
	
insertion gain and return loss, 133
	
instantaneous frequency versus time, 
129
	
low-cost prototype, 127–35
	
low-power front end for, 117–18, 
127–35
	
moving targets and, 132
	
phase locked loop (PLL), 129
	
realization, 132–34
	
signal-to-noise ratio, 131
	
simulations, 133
	
voltage controlled oscillator, 129
Hardware-software architecture, 38–41
Healthcare applications. See E-health radar

212 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
Heartbeat, 78–79
Heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs), 
20, 26
High electron mobility transistors (HEMTs), 
2, 19, 20
High-end FPGA, 59–61
Highly-integrated low-power radar
	
advantages of, 13
	
disadvantages of, 13
	
scenarios, applications, and 
requirements, 1–8
	
semiconductor technology and devices, 
18–21
High-power amplifier (HPA), 132
Homodyne detectors, 82–83
IC radar design
	
MIC and MMIC technology, 21–22
	
Si-based technology, 22
	
trends in, 21–26
Inductive components
	
on-chip design, 155–58
	
integrated transformers, 157
	
LC tank of VCO, 158
	
low-loss, 155
	
RX section, 157
	
three-dimensional views of, 156
	
transformer geometry and electrical 
data, 156
	
TX section, 157–58
	
voltage controlled oscillator (VCO), 
158
	
See also UWB sensor
Integrated antennas, 15–18
	
levels, 15–16
	
performance, 18–21
Integrated transformers, 157
Integrators
	
measured output voltage, 152, 153
	
offset-compensation circuit, 150
	
output voltage, 152
	
schematic, 151
	
See also RX circuit design
Inverse FFT (IFFT), 32
I/O interfaces, 36–37
Kalman filter scheme, 108, 109
Language for instruction set architectures 
(LISA), 56
Local oscillators (LO), 27
Long-range radar (LRR)
	
automotive, 15
	
block diagram, 95
	
defined, 62
	
for obstacle detection, 1
	
SRR comparison, 112–13
Loop filter, 143
Low-noise amplifiers (LNAs), 64, 146, 147
Low-pass filters (LPFs), 97
Low-temperature cofired ceramic (LTCC), 
12
Maximum likelihood (ML), 105
Medium-range radar (MRR)
	
automotive, 93
	
defined, 62
Memory, 36
Metal-insulator-metal (MIM) capacitors, 
126
Metal oxide semiconductors (MOS), 19–20
Microelectro mechanical system (MEMS), 
62
Microprocessor control units (MCUs), 
38–40
Microwave integrated circuits (MIC)
	
composition of, 124
	
defined, 124
	
design, 126
	
illustrated, 125
	
realization, 124, 126
	
simulation, 126
	
substrates, 125–26
Mixers, 27
Monolithic integrated circuits (MICs), 22
Monolithic microwave integrated circuits 
(MMIC), 13, 20
	
alternative, 22
	
defined, 21, 124
	
as mature technology, 21
	
technology, 32, 125
Monopulse, 102
Multichannel DMA engine, 55
Multichip module (MCM), 12
Multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO), 
15
Multiple signal classification (MUSIC), 105

 
Index 
213
Multiprocessor system-on-chip (MPSoC), 34
NAND operation, 153
Nearly constant velocity target model, 
106–10
	
extended Kalman filter (EKF), 109–10
	
Kalman filter scheme, 108, 109
	
prediction, 108, 109
	
update, 109–10
Neri, Bruno, 190
Neyman-Pearson detector, 99
Noninvasive continuous heart monitoring 
(NIHM), 188
Nonvolatile memories, 14
Null-points detection, 75
Offset-compensation circuit, 150
On-chip inductive component design, 
155–58
Operand bit-width, 35–36
Ordered statistic (OS CFAR), 99
Organization, this book, 7–8
Palmisano, Giuseppe, 190–91
Parking aid, 110
Performance metrics
	
computational capability, 34–35
	
I/O interfaces, 36–37
	
memory, 36
	
operand bit-width and arithmetic type, 
35–36
	
power/area efficiency, 37
Periodogram, 78
Phase frequency detector (PFD), 143
Phase locked loop (PLL)
	
circuit design, 143–46
	
divider stages, 145
	
division ratio, 145
	
fully integrated, 143
	
VCO inserted in, 129
Phase noise, 80
Platforms, for radar digital signal processing, 
31–34
Power/area efficiency, 37
Power spectral density (PSD), TX circuit, 
155
Precrash sensing, 110
Pulse-Doppler radar, 63
Pulse generators, 153
Pulse repetition frequency (PRF), 85
Radar
	
approach to design, 186
	
miniaturization, next steps in, 14–15
	
as mixed analog-digital system, 27, 32
	
as sensor, 186
	
size of, 187
	
at state-of-the-art, 186
	
See also Automotive radar; E-health 
radar
Radar frequencies, 5
Radar integration domains, 12
Radar integration levels
	
increasing, advantages/disadvantages, 
13
	
single-board radar, 13
	
system-in-a-package (SiP), 12–13
	
system-on-a-single-chip (SoC), 11–12
Radar signal processing
	
computational capability, 34–35
	
DSP and GPU for, 41–57
	
flexibility, 37–38
	
FPGA for, 57–66
	
hardware-software architecture, 38–41
	
implementing platforms for, 31–34
	
I/O interfaces, 36–37
	
memory, 36
	
operand bit-width and arithmetic type, 
35–36
	
performance metrics for, 34–38
	
platforms and performance metrics for, 
31–38
	
power/area efficiency, 37
Radar-system-on-a-board, 14–15
Radar transceivers
	
ADC, 26–27
	
digital or mixed domain blocks, 27–28
	
overview of, 23
Ragonese, Egidio, 191–92
Random access memory (RAM), 14, 36
Range and frequency estimation, automotive 
radar, 95–99
Range-correlation, 80
Real-time operating system (RTOS), 42
Reduced instruction set computer (RISC), 
34
RELAX algorithm, 79
Reusable intellectual property, 38

214 
Highly Integrated Low-Power Radars 
RX circuit design
	
down-converter, 146, 147
	
down-converter power gain and noise 
figure, 149
	
Gm-C integrate-and-dump stages, 150
	
high-pass filtering, 148
	
integrators, 150, 151, 152
	
I/Q generator, 148
	
low-noise amplifier (LNA), 146, 147
	
two-stage VGA, 149
	
See also UWB sensor
Saponara, Sergio, 192
Semiconductor technology and devices, 
18–21
Sequential lobing (SL), 104–5
Short-range radars (SRRs)
	
automotive, 2
	
for contactless sensing, 6–7
	
defined, 62
	
FMCW for, 3
	
long-range radar (LRR) versus, 112–13
	
UWB for, 3
Si-based technology, 22–26
SiGe BiCMOS
	
advantages over RF CMOS, 138
	
performance of, 26
	
technology, 23, 188
Silicon technologies, for automotive radar, 
138–39
Single-board radar, 13
Smallest of CFAR (SO CFAR), 99, 101–2
Space time adaptive processing (STAP), 32
SRR automotive radar
	
applications, 188
	
autocorrelation function, 112, 113
	
distance, 93
	
field of view, 112
	
functionalities, 110
	
Gaussian pulse and Gaussian doublet, 
111, 112
	
parking aid, 110
	
precrash sensing, 110
	
requirements for functions, 111
	
stop and go, 110
	
See also Automotive radar
State-of-the-art radar, 186
Stop and go, 110
Stratix Altera FPGA, 61
Substrates, 125–26
Surface mounted device (SMD), 22
System-in-a-package (SiP), 12–13
System-on-a-single-chip (SoC), 11–12
Target tracking
	
nearly constant velocity target model, 
106–10
	
successful, 106
Time domain filtering, 32
Transmitted power, 187
Transmitter chipset (automotive radar 
sensors), 159–65
Triangular chirp, 96
Trimmed mean CFAR (TM CFAR), 99
Triple modular redundancy (TMR), 49
TX circuit design
	
measured PSD, 155
	
PG block diagram, 154
	
pulse generator, 153
	
schematics, 154
	
See also UWB sensor
TX front-end
automotive radar sensors, 159–65
	
block diagram, 161
	
design of, 161–65
	
die photo detail, 165
	
experimental results, 164–65
	
integrated transformer design, 163–64
	
measured performance, 165
	
metal GP structures, 163
	
output power and power gain, 164
	
overview of, 159–61
	
schematic, 162
	
transformer geometry and electrical 
data, 164
	
W-band, 166–73
Ultrawideband (UWB) modulation, 3
Ultrawideband (UWB) radars
	
attenuation of pulse-echo intensity, 87
	
conclusions, 88
	
with correlator, 85
	
detection range, 85
	
for healthcare monitoring, 83–85
	
mask, 84
	
measured sensor output, 87
	
pulse repetition frequency (PRF), 85
	
pulses, 84
	
sensor block diagram, 85

 
Index 
215
	
sensor output, 86
	
technology, 83
	
in vital signal detection, 74
	
See also UWB sensor
UWB sensor
	
architecture, 140–43
	
assembly, 159
	
automotive requirements, 142
	
block diagram, 141
	
on-chip inductive component design, 
155–58
	
fully integrated 24-GHz, 139–59
	
implementation, 159
	
operating principle, 140
	
overview of, 139–40
	
PLL circuit design, 143–46
	
RX circuit design, 146–52
	
RX output, 141
	
RX time correlation, 142
	
summarized performance, 160
	
TX circuit design, 152–55
Vector DSP, 42–44
Virtex2PRO FPGA, 63
Virtex5 FPGA, 62
Virtex6 LX760 FPGA, 59, 60
VLIW DSP, for space applications (DSPace) 
processor, 48–57
Voltage controlled oscillators (VCOs), 94, 
129
	
Colpitts-based, 168
	
differential cross-coupled architecture, 
144
	
inductive component, 158
	
phase noise, 144
	
PLL circuit design, 143, 144
	
schematic, 167
	
W-band RX front-end, 177
	
W-band TX front-end, 167, 173
W-band RX front-end
	
block diagram, 176
	
design of, 177–78
	
for FMCW automotive radar, 173–80
	
linearity specifications, 177
	
noise figure, 175–76
	
overview of, 173–75
	
schematic, 177, 178
	
VCO, 177
W-band TX front-end
	
block diagram, 166
	
CB input stage, 180
	
on-chip transformers, 178
	
Colpitts-based VCO, 168
	
conversion gain, 179, 180
	
design changes, 169–70
	
design of, 167–72
	
die photograph, 172, 179
	
differential IF output, 178
	
experimental results of, 172–73, 
178–80
	
for FMCW automotive radar, 166–73
	
frequency spectrum measured at divider 
output, 174
	
input mismatching, 179, 180
	
integrated transformers, 170
	
interleaved structure, 170
	
large-signal parameters of PA, 174
	
measured output spectrum, 175
	
metal stack of transformers, 171
	
millimeter-wave PA, 172
	
noise figure, 180
	
overview of, 166
	
performance, 167
	
PLL frequency reference, 178
	
power capability, 172–73
	
switching pair, 169
	
transformer geometry and electrical 
data, 171, 179
	
VCO, 167
	
VCO oscillation frequency, 172, 173
	
VCO phase noise, 173
Xilinx FPGA devices, 58, 59


