Hypnotic Language Shortcut System - Transcript 
 
1 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System        ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Hypnotic Circle – One Card Draw 
 
 
Okay, the idea of comfort and relaxation is still the same and now we’re just going to do 
a little bit of a fun game. We’re all just going to do one card; it’s called the one card, if 
you like.  
 
I’ll start off by saying something like, you really should discover for yourself that you can 
relax. As soon as I’ve said my piece, then you’ll take over, you’ll turn over your card and 
you’ll try to fit whatever you’re saying onto my sentence, so we’re just making one 
continuous loop of ideas, okay? You get the idea? 
 
Just notice whatever comfort you feel right now – and a person can, you know, 
feel very comfortable and relaxed in many circumstances – realize comfort and 
relaxation are right in front of you – you must find comfort in whatever way 
seems right to you – and when you do that, every time you find comfort and 
relaxation you’ll get calmer and calmer – it’s as if comfort and relaxation is right 
in front of us – now I want you to really enjoy that comfort – and while you’re 
enjoying that comfort, just suppose that you are the most comfortable and 
relaxed you’ve ever been – while we’re on this, what’s it like when it is 
comfortable and relaxed for you – now, I know you want to relax – and I know 
you want to be as comfortable and relaxed as you have ever been – you really 
shouldn’t be in a tense state right now 
 
Okay, let’s pause right there, how do you feel right now? 
 
Janet:  That was a challenge. 
 
It gets a little bit more challenging because you’re now having to be a little more smooth 
with the ideas. 
 
Janet:   I can see that….. 
 
The flow is starting to come out a little bit. 
 
Donna:  I felt it, I felt the flow. 
 
Janet:    Yes, that was very enjoyable. 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System - Transcript 
 
2 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System        ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
So, it seems that something has brought you here to want to learn about this 
topic, we’re all here together and we have this opportunity and the time just feels 
right for us to learn this comfort and relaxation technique. 
 
Wonderful. 
 
You really should take a moment while we’re here together to find comfort and 
relaxation – just pretend that you’re feeling comfortable right now – I wonder if 
you realize how wonderfully your world will look  when you’re comfortable and 
relaxed – when you’re comfortable and relaxed, you can continue getting deeper 
and deeper relaxed – to the point where that comfort develops automatically – 
what would it be like for you if 24/7 you felt more comfort and relaxation – you 
really  could feel so deeply comfortable and relaxed, couldn’t you – you really 
don’t need to be aware of that comfort and relaxation that’s developing now – 
and remember that you have the tools in your hands to find this comfort and 
relaxation 
 
All right, let’s pause there, how did that feel? Did you enjoy that round? 
 
Janet:   Yes. 
 
Donna:  That was really good. 
 
Do you notice how there’s a difference to that round than the previous one? What 
would you say that difference was? 
 
Janet:   Probably the relaxation. 
 
Going First 
 
Donna:  For me though, it’s attaching a deepening meaning to comfort and relaxation, 
so I could actually feel myself being it and wanting to convey it in a deeper way. 
 
Janet:     Um, hm. 
 
So you guys have discovered a couple of very important principles here. The principle 
you (Donna) just discovered there is ‘Going First’. In other words, if you want someone 
to be relaxed and you’re telling them Relax! Relax NOW! Relax your shoulders! Let go of 
all attention! Breathe! Relax! It’s not a very relaxing way of communicating. I’m basically 
incongruous. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System - Transcript 
 
3 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System        ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
What I’m saying and the meaning I’m trying to convey – they’re clashing. Because of 
that, you pay more attention to my tone and my mannerisms, in other words the more 
unconscious part of my communication, than what I’m trying to convey. 
 
A lot of people do this. You see this particularly well in academia, in schools when a 
teacher really doesn’t know their subject; they’re just reading the textbook. Well, 
anyone can read a text book, you don’t really require a teacher to sit up there and read 
to you. 
 
If they don’t understand their subject it comes out because they can’t go beyond the 
confines of the text on the page. But those teachers who really know their thing, and 
more importantly those who really love their subject, ironically, have students who love 
their subject too, because they’re communicating, or rather sub-communicating that 
affection to it and so on. 
 
You experienced that ‘going first’ because you really meant it, you really wanted to 
convey the idea, you automatically switched into it. You (Janet) also did the same thing 
but from a different perspective, shall we say, because you felt comfortable and you felt 
more relaxed, so then it became more natural to speak about comfort and relaxation. 
 
Now, these are basically the same ideas. You (Donna) did it with intent, you (Janet) did it 
through experience, but really when the two meet together, you have a much more 
powerful style of communicating. You get the idea? 
 
Donna:  It’s wonderful. 
 
 

