Hypnotic Language Shortcut System - Transcript 
 
1 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System        ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Dueling Hypnotists 
 
 
So let’s play another hypnotic game here. The value of the hypnotic circle, in other 
words with more than two people in it, is that you get a lot of different kind of language 
to come out because the way you (Donna) communicate, and the way you (Janet) 
communicate, the way I communicate will be very different. And by hearing each other, 
it expands our reference points as well, you get the idea? 
 
So what I want to do now, you guys switch cards so you have a little bit more variety 
here and I’m going to step out for this next exercise. For this next exercise, I call this the 
Dueling Hypnotists. 
 
We’ll start off with the one card draw; it’s basically just the same exercise as the circle, 
only this time, we’re going to go right to the center of what you just talked about, the 
intention. So we’re going to amplify what we’re doing. I’d like you to stick to the themes 
of comfort and relaxation.  
 
You can, if you wish, include the idea of eye closure, and you’ll see why in a moment. 
And while you’re doing this, I’ll give you a quick example, if we’re doing the exercise 
together, I want you to lock eye contact in a friendly way, not in a sort of combative 
way, lock eye contact. And of course you have to briefly look away to see the card, 
otherwise peripheral reading is definitely not a skill that I have yet. 
 
You’ll see the card, you’ll lock eye contact again and you’ll present your suggestion. But 
you want to make it so meaningful that the idea you should have inside your mind is, 
you want your partner to melt into a puddle of bliss in front of you. 
 
Janet:   I think I’m going to like this part! 
 
This is a great version of the exercise. You want to keep that idea inside your mind. 
People often ask me, who’s the winner? The one left standing or the one’s that drooling 
on the floor and the answer is – yes! Because both have something from this one, right? 
 
Both:  Yes, yes. 
 
If you want me to give you a demonstration of what it will look like – what’s it like when 
you really relax comfortably, deeply inside – then you’ll wait for an awkward moment 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System - Transcript 
 
2 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System        ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
and then they’ll take their turn – what would it be like if you had a moment to close your 
eyes and relax? 
 
You see how my mind’s already going, yah, I want to close my eyes. [laughter] Can I 
keep myself out? It doesn’t take many rounds until you are literally drooling and 
disappearing. It’s a wonderful game. 
 
And remember to take those pauses so you have time to impact on each other. That’s 
why we’re just doing a one card draw for the moment, right? We’ll go for the more 
technical three card draw after this. So whenever you’re ready. 
 
Janet, realize how beautiful you are and your ability to feel comfort and relax will 
just make you a magical person in this world – Donna, take a deep breath and 
begin to relax – it’s as if you’ve gone to that place, that most beautiful, magical 
place that you know deep in your heart – I wonder if you realize that relaxation, 
that comfort yet – what I need to tell you is that every cell of your body deserves 
deep comfort and relaxation – sooner or later Donna, your eyes will get heavy and 
you can close them 
 
Donna:  Close to a puddle! [laughing] 
 
Okay, I will pause it there, we’ll declare Janet the winner of this one. I can see you 
hanging on by the fingernail there. Fun game? 
 
Janet:   Yes, a lot of fun. 
 
Donna:  Awesome!  
 
 
 

