 
 
 
 
Hypnotic Language 
Shortcut System 
Transcript Manual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By Igor Ledochowski 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
2 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Table of Contents 
How To Use the Hypnotic Language Shortcut System Deck .......................................... 4 
CD 1 ......................................................................................................................... 4 
Introduction ................................................................................................................ 4 
Overview ..................................................................................................................... 5 
Hypnosis 101 ............................................................................................................ 7 
Law Of Association ................................................................................................... 11 
Power Words ............................................................................................................ 11 
Hypnotic Themes ...................................................................................................... 12 
Using Power Words With Hypnotic Themes ............................................................ 13 
The Hypnosis Deck Suits ......................................................................................... 16 
Red Suit - Imagination .............................................................................................. 17 
Orange Suit – Need .................................................................................................. 17 
Yellow Suit - Awareness ........................................................................................... 18 
Green Suit – Linkage ................................................................................................. 19 
Blue Suit – Pseudo Logic ........................................................................................... 21 
Purple Suit - Negation .............................................................................................. 22 
Violet Suit - Assumption ........................................................................................... 25 
CD 2 ....................................................................................................................... 27 
The Red Suit – The Imagination Suit ........................................................................ 27 
The Orange Suit – The Needs Suit ............................................................................ 37 
CD 3 ....................................................................................................................... 46 
The Yellow Suit – The Awareness Suit ..................................................................... 46 
The Green Suit – The Linkage Suit ............................................................................ 52 
The Blue Suit – The Pseudo Logic Suit ...................................................................... 56 
CD 4 ....................................................................................................................... 63 
The Purple Suit – The Negation Suit ......................................................................... 63 
The Violet Suit – The Assumptions Suit.................................................................... 68 
Five Hypnotic Word Games .................................................................................... 69 
The 3 Black Suits – The Language Modifiers ............................................................ 74 
Using The Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ...................................................... 77 
 
 
 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
3 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
 
 
The Hypnotic Language Shortcut System  is the sole property of Hypnosis Training Academy 
(including, but not limited to text, content, graphics, video and audio) and is protected by copyright as 
a collective work or compilation under U.S. copyright and other laws. You must abide by all additional 
copyright notices or restrictions contained in this law. 
YOU MAY NOT POST ON A WEB SITE OR CREATE A WEB FRAME AROUND ANY PART OF THIS SERVISE 
(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, TEXT, CONTENT, PHOTOGRAPHS, VIDEO AND AUDIO). 
YOU MAY NOT COPY, REPRODUCE, DISTRIBUTE, PUBLISH, DISPLAY, PERFORM, MODIFY, CREATE 
DERIVATIVE WORKS, TRANSMIT, OR IN ANY WAY EXPLOIT ANY PART OF THIS SERVISE, EXCEPT 
THAT YOU MAY DOWNLOAD MATERIAL FROM THIS SERVISE FOR YOUR OWN PERSONAL, 
NONCOMMERCIAL USE AS FOLLOWS: YOU MAY MAKE ONE MACHINE READABLE COPY AND/OR ONE 
PRINT COPY THAT IS LIMITED TO OCCASIONAL ARTICLES OF PERSONAL INTEREST ONLY. 
WITHOUT LIMITING THE GENERALITY OF THE FOREGOING, YOU MAY NOT DISTRIBUTE ANY PART OF 
THIS SERVISE OVER ANY NETWORK, INCLUDING A LOCAL AREA NETWORK, NOR SELL NOR OFFER IT 
FOR SALE. IN ADDITION, THESE FILES MAY NOT BE USED TO CONSTRUCT ANY KIND OF DATABASE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
4 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
How To Use the Hypnotic Language Shortcut 
System Deck  
 
 
CD 1 
Introduction  
 
I’d like to welcome you to the Hypnosis Training Academy and to congratulate you on 
your purchase of the Hypnotic Language Shortcut System. I’m very excited about this 
deck that you have in your hands because it has been specially designed to help you 
master hypnotic language as quickly and as easily as possible. 
 
In the past, when people tried to learn hypnotic language, they had all kinds of 
difficulties. We had complex phrases and really without a linguistics degree, it became 
very difficult to understand each individual nuance in the hypnotic language patterns 
that you might use. 
 
The deck revolutionizes and changes all that. What it’s done is it’s taken the complex 
language of hypnosis and distilled it into certain language patterns. Phrases that you can 
put into any part of a hypnotic induction and fill with your own suggestion, each of 
which has been designed specifically to affect the unconscious mind in one particular 
form or another. 
 
If you turn to the cards for a moment, you’ll notice a couple of important features. First 
of all, on the front of the card you’ll see an example of a little hypnotic word or phrase 
with some little dotted lines in between. That phrase is your hypnotic language pattern, 
and in the spaces between the phrases is where you insert a suggestion.  
 
Rest assured all this will become clear as we give you demonstrations and examples of 
this in later parts of this recording. If you take any one of those cards and turn it over to 
the other side, you’ll actually see the same hypnotic language pattern, in action this 
time. 
 
So, we’ve filled it in with some content, with some actual suggestions. The front of the 
cards shows you a nice old type face of what the actual hypnotic language is. The back 
of the card shows you some examples of how that would look in action. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
5 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Now if you turn to the end of the deck, you’ll see there are about three suits of black 
cards. What are these black cards? This is a special suit for advance uses of hypnotic 
language.  
 
They are called Special Modifiers, which when combined with the hypnotic language in 
the colored suits, gives you even more scope and more ways to influence the 
unconscious mind and allows you to be able to deal with different situations more 
easily.  
 
Again, we’ll come onto those cards in due course and we’ll walk you through them – 
how they work and how to use them step by step as we continue. 
 
Before we dive into the actual cards and how to use them, I’d like to give you a quick 
overview of what’s included in this whole program so that you have a sense of what’s 
coming up ahead and how you’ll be able to use the content I’ve developed for you here 
in order to master hypnotic language as quickly and as easily as possible.  
 
Overview 
 
Here’s the overview. First of all, we’re going to start with a kind of Hypnosis 101 
introduction to what hypnosis is and how it works, etc. The value of this is for those of 
you who have no hypnosis experience yet. It gives you a context. It gives you a sense of 
where does all this stuff sit and what am I trying to achieve with hypnotic language? 
 
If you already have some experience and some skill with hypnosis, then this section 
won’t be as important to you, and you can skip over it and go to the next section. 
 
After we’ve talked about what hypnosis is and how it works, we’re going to look at the 
actual language patterns themselves. The language patterns are built up of what I call 
Power Words, special words and phrases that have distilled the psychological essence 
of hypnotic language into simple-to-use phrases. 
 
As you learn to use these hypnotic language patterns – these Power Words – you’ll start 
to internalize the hypnotic language and sooner than you’ll think you’ll actually be 
mastering it and it will be very natural to you. 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
6 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
After we’ve introduced you to the Power Words and how they work, we’re going to 
walk through the entire deck of cards one by one. In other words, I will go through each 
individual card.  
 
I’ll explain to you what the Power Word is. I’ll explain to you how it works. I’ll explain to 
you why it works and the psychology behind it. I’ll show you how to use it. I’ll actually 
give you demonstrations of it in action.  
 
That way you cover all the bases. You’ll know what the language is, you’ll know why the 
language works, you’ll know how the language works and you’ll know how and when to 
use the language. You’ll even get lots of demonstrations of the language in action so 
that you can use it for yourself, and you can check on yourself when you’re training to 
make sure you’re doing the right thing. 
 
Next, we’re going to go through the advanced language portion of this deck. Remember, 
there’s a black suit – the Language Modifiers. When we combine these with the Power 
Words in the color suit, it really creates a much more powerful and impactful hypnotic 
effect. 
 
Just as we did with the colored suits, we’re going to walk through each of the black 
cards – each of the Language Modifiers – step by step so that you get a sense of how 
they work and how to use them. 
 
Towards the end of this whole program, we’ll introduce you to the actual hypnotic 
exercises. These are special games that you can play with yourself or with friends that 
will allow you to use the cards in different ways to have fun and build your skills. 
 
It’s very important that you don’t take this stuff too seriously. The more fun you have 
whilst using these cards when you’re playing with your friends for example, the more 
quickly your unconscious mind will internalize the general patterns of the language and 
make it easy for you to use when you want and need to. 
 
Finally, at the end of the whole program I have a special extended demonstration for 
you in which I put as many of the different language pattern cards together as possible 
so that you can see and hear how that whole thing fits together, how it looks in real life, 
how you might actually use it. 
 
 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
7 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Hypnosis 101 
 
 
Let’s begin by diving straight into Hypnosis 101 – the foundations of what hypnosis is 
and how you can use it. If you’re already a hypnotist, feel free to go ahead and skip this 
particular section. For those of you who are not hypnotists yet, I want you to get a basic 
grounding on what hypnosis is.  
 
This is going to be a quick thumbnail sketch just to give you an idea of what it is that 
you’re looking for. Essentially in hypnosis we’re looking to do three things. It’s all 
contained within the ABS Formula. 
 
 
A- stands for absorb attention. 
 
B- stands for bypass the critical factor. 
 
S- stands for stimulate the unconscious mind. 
 
That is exactly what you’re trying to do with hypnosis. You need to absorb someone’s 
attention and pull them in. You need to somehow bypass that part of the mind that 
criticizes, analyzes and rejects information. When that part of the mind is silenced, 
there’s a doorway open for the unconscious mind to listen without any inhibitions. 
 
When it’s listening, you’ve got to make sure that you present a message that the 
unconscious mind can actually hear and can actually act out on. When you do those 
three things – absorb attention, bypass the critical factor and stimulate the unconscious 
mind – you will have a hypnotic context. 
 
How do we do this? There’s a particular kind of language which allows you to do at least 
the very first two things, which are to absorb people’s attention and bypass their critical 
thinking at the same time. 
 
That language is the thing that has been contained within this deck. As you use the 
language, it both draws people into your conversation, into your ideas and it begins to 
shut off their critical factor so that the ideas aren’t overanalyzed or rejected 
automatically. 
 
 
At that point, it comes down to what ideas you’re presenting, what thoughts you’re 
putting inside someone’s mind as to whether or not it will adequately stimulate the 
unconscious. That’s something which trial and error will teach you more of. 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
8 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
The language contained within the cards – the Power Words and phrases, as well as the 
Language Modifiers – is a very powerful set of tools and it works on many different 
levels. 
 
One of the key levels on which it works is the idea of presenting people with a smooth 
stream of ideas. Every time that you jar someone mentally, it basically puts their critical 
factor back online because it’s basically saying oh, let’s have a look, what’s going on 
here, do I need to do something about this? 
 
Whenever you present a smooth train of ideas, however, the critical factor slowly gets 
lulled to sleep because it doesn’t need to be present as much. The ideas naturally flow 
into it.  
 
This is one of the reasons that sometimes you might come across a phrase of linguistic 
bridges. The language of trance is a little bridge that allows one idea to hop over the 
little bridge to the next idea and the next idea and the next idea in keeping that 
unbroken train going. 
 
This is important. You want to make sure that the hypnotic ideas you present people 
flow smoothly, and part of that has to do with how you present those ideas. The 
language is important.  
 
However, your presentation as a hypnotist is more important. So, I’m going to 
encourage you to develop a smooth fluid style, and that’s one of the things that these 
cards will excel at showing you how to do, creating the smooth fluid style in which ideas 
naturally flow through without you having to think too much about it because every 
time you stop and think about what you’re going to say, notice how it interrupts your 
train of thought just by listening to someone having to think for themselves. 
 
As a hypnotist, you’re going to get into this state of mind in which you have an 
intention, an idea that you want to present to someone else. The cards are something 
that you’ll play with to the point where you can automatically just talk in this kind of 
language so that the idea just presents itself smoothly and without stopping. 
 
Once you can do that, then your ideas become much more hypnotic. To help accentuate 
that smoothness, it definitely helps if you develop a smooth and comforting tone of 
voice. 
 
Presenting ideas to people in a smooth and flowing sort of way is a tremendous way for 
them to engage with the energy, the psychology, the state that you happen to be in. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
9 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
One of the key principles then will be to absorb people’s attention with the tonality and 
your goodwill, that sense of feeling comfortable in your own skin and allowing yourself 
to get comfortable and relaxed. 
 
If I get stressed and I talk to you in this tone of voice and tell you to relax, it doesn’t 
really help you. Notice how it jars you because I changed my tone of voice into one 
which is inappropriate for the kind of context or the situation that we’re talking about 
here. 
 
If you’re using any hypnotic stuff, I’m going to strongly recommend that you become 
very smooth in the way of delivering something and you allow your voice to just kind of 
roll comfortably, constantly moving up and down, maybe sometimes faster and 
sometimes a bit slower. As you get used to doing this, your presentation becomes much 
more hypnotic.  
 
There’s one last thing I’d like to talk about in this mini intensive crash course on how to 
hypnotize someone else, and that is the idea of hypnotic intent and the Hypnotic Gaze. 
 
When you have the intention to hypnotize someone else, your whole attention 
becomes more focused, like a laser and that becomes a kind of nonverbal suggestion to 
other people to also become focused like a laser.  
 
Now if you think back to the beginning of this session and the ABS Formula, the very 
first thing that we need is to absorb someone’s attention. When you stare at someone, 
you look at them and you totally focus like a laser, and they begin to fall into that same 
category with you. You just create this kind of bubble around yourself where the two of 
you can fall into a kind of light trance. 
 
At that point, the language – the Power Words and phrases that I’m going to introduce 
you to in the context of this deck – is going to have a much more powerful impact 
because you’ve set the scene. 
 
How do you set the scene?  
 
1. Make eye contact. 
2. Maintain eye contact. 
 
At some point, you’re going to want to look away. Don’t do it. Keep focusing on that 
person completely and utterly. Your complete and utter focus will give that person a 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
10 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
sense of something is going on here and I don’t know what it is yet but I’m going to go 
with it. 
 
In order for them to be able to go with it, you have to maintain a friendly eye contact. 
Most times when people stare, it’s kind of a challenge. If you’re sitting in a bar and guy 
is staring at you over and over again, you’ll end up turning around and say what’s your 
problem? 
 
That’s because the intention behind that staring is very different. The kind of intention 
that I’m going to talk about here and the one I’m going to suggest you use is this very 
positive vibe, this fun vibe, this sense of I’m looking at you and something amazing is 
about to happen. 
 
As you look at them and as you refuse to look away, you might have a little smile 
planted on your lips. You might even get that little crinkle in the corner of your eyes 
which smiles alongside of your lips – which is of course very important – and as you’re 
looking at them, inside you want to build this feeling of oh boy, you are going to have 
such a good time. Such amazing and wonderful things are about to happen. You don’t 
even know the half of it yet. 
 
As you enter that attitude, you sub-communicate that with your attitude, with your 
non-verbals, your body language, your smile, your expression and subtly that stare – 
which is still quite an intense thing for people to process – becomes much friendlier and 
much safer, which is what allows people to slip into a trance rather than becoming more 
alert trying to figure out, is this dangerous or not? 
 
Summary Of The Hypnosis Crash Course 
 
You’re looking for the ABS Formula – attention, bypass the critical factor and stimulate 
the unconscious. 
 
 
You’re going to get attention partly with the language – the hypnotic phrases 
that we’re going to be introducing in the cards – but also partly in terms of your 
performance, which is the Hypnotic Gaze, the positive intention, the smooth 
flowing of your tonality, your voice, your rhythm and so on. All these things will 
engage people’s attention. 
 
 
You’re going to bypass their critical thinking by using these hypnotic phrases – 
the Power Words and Power Phrases, which we’re going to introduce to you in 
the actual cards. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
11 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Then in terms of stimulating the unconscious – we’ll talk more about that later 
on – we’re going to pull out some simple themes initially just to hypnotize 
someone, and later you can pretty much do anything you want with it. 
 
Once you’ve actually flowed through from the attention to bypassing the critical 
thinking, at that point stimulating the unconscious becomes just a question of 
how creative can you get? 
 
So, we started by looking at what hypnosis is or rather how you can use it. One of the 
important things that’s in the whole purpose of you really getting this deck is these 
Power Words, these Power Phrases.  
 
What are they and how do you use them? Power Words or Power Phrases are basically 
the language of the unconscious. They’re the way the unconscious mind thinks and 
creates associations to your ideas, which becomes very seductive to it. It likes to think in 
these ways. 
Law Of Association 
 
The basis of them starts with the Law of Association. The unconscious mind thinks 
associatively. For example, when you’ve had a dream, you’ve often had dreams of a 
person that represents other people. It might be someone who looks like your friend 
but it feels like your father and maybe has something about your pet dog in there as 
well.  
 
There are all these different nuances encapsulated in that one person. So, that symbol 
has lots of layers of associations to it. What the language does, what the Power Words 
I’m about to introduce you to do is allow you to create associations and bring them to 
life inside the other person. 
Power Words 
 
What are these Power Words? Let me give you three examples of Power Words, which 
are actually in the deck, and how you might start using them. Let’s work with some very 
simple Power Words and phrases. 
 
 Because 
 And 
 The more this, the more that 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
12 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Those are three very simple ones. You can remember them without thinking about it. 
What you need to do is take those Power Words and start drilling them so that your 
mind automatically starts using these words and does it in a hypnotic context. In other 
words, it starts presenting ideas more hypnotically by using those words. Let’s start with 
a very simple hypnotic theme.  
Hypnotic Themes 
 
Hypnotic themes, by the way, are just ideas which themselves are helpful for inducing a 
trance. 
 
For example, if someone’s relaxed, they’re more likely to go into a trance. They don’t 
need to be relaxed to go into a trance. You just need to have their attention and bypass 
their critical thinking and then stimulate the unconscious, but being relaxed helps the 
bypassing of their critical thinking. 
 
Being calm is part of being relaxed. Feeling comfortable will help people go into a trance 
as well. Being focused is of course the initial part, the attention-grabbing part. Notice 
how these different themes – relaxation, calmness, comfort, being focused – are all 
themes which will help you with the hypnotic process. They will help you to express the 
ABS Formula in the way that you speak to people. 
 
I’m going to take some very simple themes – the idea of relaxation, maybe the idea of 
comfort or anything along those lines. When we start taking the words of power, I’m 
going to use the words of power basically like glue to allow us to repeat the same idea, 
the same hypnotic theme over and over and over again. 
 
It’s a very basic Power Word drill. At the starting point, I’m going to encourage you to 
take just one Power Word – let’s take the word because for example – and just start 
using it over and over and over and over again until it’s just so simple for you to do that 
you don’t even have to think about it anymore. 
 
It’s actually very quick because let’s face it, if you can speak English, then you can do this 
exercise pretty quickly. If you can’t speak English, then you can’t understand me 
anyway, so you’ve wasted your time and money buying these cards. 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
13 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Using Power Words With Hypnotic Themes  
 
So, let’s take the word because and a simple hypnotic theme – the idea of comfort and 
relaxation – and let’s see how we can just run through that as a very basic drill. Here’s 
an example of how you might do that. 
 
Because you’re listening to me, you can relax, and because you’re relaxing, you can feel 
comfortable because comfort builds more relaxation, so you can relax even more 
comfortably and because you’re relaxing right now, you can feel more comfort 
developing inside you. 
  
Because you’re relaxing, you’ll relax even more and the more you relax because you 
want to relax, you’ll feel yourself relaxing even further. Because you’re relaxing even 
further, the comfort that you feel can continue to grow. 
 
Let me just pause here for a moment and let’s just backtrack on what we did. There’s no 
magic in what I did there. It wasn’t even particularly elegant or eloquent.  
 
What we did is take one simple Power Word – the idea of because – and we’re using it 
to tie the idea of comfort and relaxation together in any way you can possibly creatively 
get to. 
 
Because you’re relaxing, you can feel comfortable and you’re feeling comfortable now 
because you’re relaxing even further. The more you relax, because that relaxation brings 
comfort, you’ll start to feel more comfortable. Because you start to feel more 
comfortable, you can enjoy that relaxation more. 
 
Again, notice how I’m just trying to fit those concepts in, in any way that I can possibly 
do that. It really doesn’t matter if it makes sense right now, and it really doesn’t matter 
if it’s logical or if it sounds like some mangled garbled thing. 
 
What matters is: 
 
1. Can I speak without having to think too much about it? 
 
2. Can I carry on the flow of speaking without any awkward pauses, gaps, 
ums, uhs, etc.? 
 
If you can’t, then just carry on with the same pattern over and over and over again. If 
you can and it feels relatively easy to you, then you can move onto the next one. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
14 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Let’s take the next one, which is possibly a little bit easier, the word and. The Power 
Word and again combines two things together. Here’s an example of how you might use 
and. 
 
You can relax and feel comfortable, and the comfort you feel will make you relax even 
more, and the more you feel the comfort, the more you’ll relax. 
 
Notice how I’m naturally slipping into other things as well. You aren’t restricted to just 
using the word and. You can use any words around it. All that you’re focusing on 
consciously though is to take the word and, and fit it in as a way of creating a bridge 
from thing to the other. 
 
And as you relax, you’ll feel more comfortable. As you feel more comfortable, you’ll relax 
more and more. Relaxing more and feeling comfort is important for relaxation, so as you 
relax and feel comfort and relax even more and feel even more comfort. 
 
Notice again, it doesn’t matter if it makes sense. All that matters is that you’re using the 
word and. Here’s a secret by the way. It’s something you probably will have already 
started to spot as you listened to those couple of very simple and let’s face it pretty 
rough examples of hypnotic language in action. 
 
As you combine the patterns together – because, and – it becomes easier to actually do. 
Here’s an example of what I mean. 
 
Because you’re listening to me and you want to relax, you can feel more comfort 
because comfort and relaxation help you to find a comfortable relaxed position, and as 
you’re sitting or lying comfortably, you can really listen to me because listening can help 
you to relax even further, and as you relax you’ll feel the comfort developing because 
comfort comes from relaxation, and because you’re relaxing you can feel comfort and 
relax even further, and as you’re relaxing even further you can feel more comfortable as 
well. 
 
Again, notice how it becomes smoother now as I start combining the Power Words. 
Why? Because they support each other. They allow me to create more and more 
variation.  
 
Let’s go for a third Power Word and let’s see if we can put it together into one complete 
combination drill. The third Power Phrase is the more this, the more that.  
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
15 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
The more you relax, the more comfortable you feel. The more comfortable you feel, the 
more you can relax. 
 
So, you’re constantly having this bouncing back and forth between ideas. That’s a very 
simple way of using language. Now I’m going to use all three at the same time. Here’s an 
example of what I mean using because, and and the more this, the more that. 
 
Because you’re here to relax and feel comfortable, the more you allow yourself to feel 
that comfort, the more you’ll begin to relax because relaxation is a natural process and 
when you start to relax naturally, the more natural that relaxation is, the more you’ll 
feel yourself relaxing automatically, and comfort comes as a side effect of being relaxed. 
 
Because relaxation and comfort are so closely tied together, the more comfortable you 
can feel right now, the more your body will physically relax, and of course the more your 
body relaxes physically, the more that comfort continues to grow and grow even further 
into the comfort of going into your own relaxed comfortable space. Because relaxing is 
such a natural thing to do, you’ll find yourself relaxing more and more throughout this 
process. 
 
Let’s pause again. Notice how now the language has become somehow more elegant 
and more sophisticated? Why? Because the Power Words and phrases are giving power 
to each other.  
 
Initially, especially if you find a Power Word or phrase that you find difficult to use, 
you’re going to just use that phrase over and over and over and over again just as a way 
of practicing, of creating training wheels to get to the point where you want to get to. 
 
However, once you get relatively good with one particular card, one particular Power 
Word or phrase, then you start combining them with other Power Words and phrases 
and that’s where your job not only gets easier, but you start to sound better.  
 
Already, just by using the three simple Power Words or phrases, we’ve put them 
together and something very eloquent or sophisticated has come out of it. Now 
remember what we talked about in the previous little Hypnosis 101 segment. 
 
What you’re looking for is the ABS Formula – absorb their attention, bypass their critical 
thinking and stimulate their unconscious – and you’re going to use your rhythm, your 
tonality, your intensity and your gaze in a very friendly sort of way to achieve the 
hypnotic context in which the language has a perfect opportunity to do what it’s 
designed to do. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
16 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
With that, you now have the basics of how to use this deck to become a very eloquent 
hypnotist. What I’d like to do in a moment is walk you through all the suits and all the 
cards step by step and give you examples of each card in action, just in the same way as 
I gave you examples of those three Power Words in action a moment ago, just so that 
you can get a sense of how you might be using them yourself. 
 
Then we’ll get into the whole idea of different games and exercises you can play in order 
to use the cards to improve your hypnotic skill. First of all, those of you who are familiar 
with the old deck will notice that the new deck doesn’t just have a new look, but it’s 
actually much larger. 
 
We’ve actually got three additional suits that you didn’t have in the old set. Technically 
they were in the old set. They were on the language modifier cards, but I noticed that no 
one really used the language modifier cards, so I decided to pull them out and actually 
show you how to use them and give you specific exercises so that you can increase your 
hypnotic vocabulary. We’ll talk more about those in a moment. 
 
The Hypnosis Deck Suits 
 
First of all, let’s look at the 10 suits one by one so that you get a sense of what they are 
and how they work, and then we’ll start looking at the actual cards themselves. 
 
The 10 suits are: 
 
 
1. Imagination 
2. Need 
3. Awareness 
4. Linkage 
5. Pseudo Logic 
6. Negation 
7. Assumption  
8. 9. & 10. - 3 levels of Language Modifiers (we’ll look at these 
separately) 
 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
17 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Red Suit - Imagination 
 
What are those seven suits all about? Let’s look first of all at the Red Suit - the 
Imagination suit. 
 
The language in the Imagination suit, the Power Words there don’t just form a linguistic 
bridge. What it also allows you to do is go straight into stimulating the unconscious 
mind. Remember the S part of the ABS Formula? The Red suit – the Imagination cards – 
are perfect for this. 
 
Actually, all cards will allow you to stimulate the unconscious mind. It’s just that the 
Imagination ones are pretty much primed to do that. The imagination is the domain of 
the unconscious. If you stimulate the imagination properly, you will turn off the critical 
factor, the critical thinking, almost by default. It’s just a natural part of how it works.  
 
You can’t be using your imagination and criticizing, analyzing and using that part of your 
thinking at the same time. They are two mutually exclusive operating systems inside 
yourself.  
 
It’s kind of like being stressed and relaxed at the same time. It’s virtually impossible to 
be stressed and physically tense and relaxed and comfortable both at the same time 
because you’re using two totally different parts of your nervous system. 
 
When you get people to really engage their imagination, you’re actually turning off their 
ability to be critical, reject information, be analytical and so on, which is exactly what 
you want. You’re now doing the B and the S part of the ABS Formula simultaneously. If 
you do it well, you’ll also be absorbing their attention because creative imaginative 
ideas tend to draw our attention as well.  
Orange Suit – Need  
 
The next suit – the Orange Suit – is all about Need. Need is a great way of motivating 
people because it’s kind of like a fuel injection system that really drives people to do 
stuff. There’s a certain language that brings the idea of need out. 
 
 You have to 
 You should 
 You must 
 I want you to know 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
18 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
These are all words and phrases that activate that part of our mind, which kind of has to 
get things done. You must, you’ve got to do it. We’ve all had the experience where 
something important was happening which maybe we didn’t really want to engage in 
but we had to do it. 
 
For example, going to an interview where we’re a bit nervous or there’s a job that needs 
to be done and if it doesn’t get done, there are going to be big problems, so you’ve got 
to do it quickly, or there’s something you’ve got to do in order to get a reward that you 
really want but the task itself may not necessarily be so nice. So, you just have to do it. 
You just need to do it.  
 
That state of mind that you’re in, which kind of drives you beyond shall we say the idea 
of logic, beyond the necessity of reason – that’s what you’re engaging in with the Need 
cards – the Orange Suit of the deck. 
 
We’ll talk about each of the seven individual patterns and give you examples of them in 
a moment’s time.  
Yellow Suit - Awareness 
 
Now we’re going onto the Yellow cards – the Awareness cards. Again, the ABS Formula 
starts with the absorbing of attention. Awareness is your attention. When you’re aware 
of something, your attention is on it. So, if you can guide people’s awareness from one 
thing to another, then you have their attention on one thing or the other. 
 
If you have their attention going towards a place you want it to go to, the A part of the 
ABS Formula has already been ticked off. The other thing about awareness is that it’s a 
great way to stimulate the unconscious mind. Why? Because if you’re aware of it, you’re 
stimulated by it. 
 
The very fact that you’re aware of something means that you’re engaging with it. If 
you’re aware of a good feeling, that stimulation begins to grow. It’s based on an old 
principle or law of the mind, which goes something like this: where attention goes, 
energy flows.  
 
Wherever someone’s attention is, there’s a psychological energy that goes into it and it 
builds that up. Sometimes people do this with problems for example. If I’ve got a big 
problem, I’ll think about it and I’ll worry about it and it becomes bigger inside my mind, 
sometimes much bigger than any semblance of reality will allow. 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
19 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
The same is true of good things. If you get excited about something positive – a rock 
concert, a party, an activity that you really enjoy – the more you think about it, the more 
excited you get.  
 
That psychological energy that you have gets put back into the whole system over and 
over again, so the more you think about it and the more attention or awareness is on it, 
the more the excitement grows.  
 
The Yellow cards – the Awareness cards – allow you to direct people’s attention and 
build that psychological energy in order to enhance or accentuate things that you want, 
as well as a few things that you don’t want. Here’s what I mean by that. 
 
If someone is very distracted or thinking about a particular problem or focusing on 
something that’s not really helping them, then one of the things that the Awareness 
cards allow you to do is to keep distracting them away from that, because attention has 
only got a certain amount of units that it can use. 
 
The conscious attention is limited to between five and nine items of information. If you 
fill those five to nine items of information with positive things, there’s no attention left 
for the negative things.  
 
Now all of the energy is starting to flow into the positive things, and provided you keep 
that flow running smoothly for long enough, it breaks the old chain and they don’t think 
about the old problem anymore, or at least they’re free from that old problem. The 
Awareness cards allow you to do that. 
Green Suit – Linkage  
 
Next we’re looking at the Green cards – the Linkage cards. Remember, the fundamental 
law of the mind or the way that the unconscious mind thinks is through association – 
this is the same as that. This person is both a father and your best friend and your pet 
dog all at the same time. This fish represents all these different level of things at the 
same time.  
 
The unconscious mind reasons through association. The Linkage cards – or the 
Association cards – allow you to create those associations. To the extent you get good at 
using these particular language patterns, these particular Power Words and phrases, it 
allows you to basically present information in the way that the unconscious mind tends 
to accept. 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
20 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Let me give you an example of this. A very quick example of this is just the word and. It’s 
the very first of the cards – and we’ll give you examples of it working a little bit more 
when we get into the actual cards. 
 
If I said to you close your eyes and go into a trance, one of the things that happens is 
your conscious mind knows how to do half of that. It knows how to close the eyes. The 
unconscious mind knows how to do a whole lot. It knows how to close eyes and how to 
go into a trance, only consciously you don’t know yet that you can. 
 
So, when I say something as simple as close your eyes and go into a trance, the simple 
fact that you follow the initial request – which is to close your eyes – begins the trance 
process because the unconscious mind has said the first part of the equation has 
happened, so I guess I’d better do the second half also. 
 
That’s the power of the word and. However, saying just that one phrase once and that’s 
it may not create the most deep and profound trance ever. It can do it if the context is 
right, but mostly if you just say to someone randomly close your eyes and go into a 
trance, even if they close their eyes, at best you’ll get a very, very, very mild trance, one 
which most people would miss because they don’t even realize that they’re going into 
one.  
 
You can take a stick or a pencil and snap it in half without any problems. You can take 
two pencils and hold them together and snap them in half. It’s gets a little harder but 
you can still do it. With three pencils it starts getting more challenging.  
 
However, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten pencils all put together in one bundle 
become virtually impossible to break. It requires so much energy or so much strength 
that most people are not capable of doing it. So, the power of the Linkage cards – in fact 
the power of all the Power Words and Power Phrases in this deck – is in the 
combination. 
 
The more you combine them, the more powerful they become. The Linkage cards here 
basically become the glue that allows you to combine all kinds of other things together.  
 
So, whenever you’re stuck, whenever you’re trying to move from one idea to another 
and the other phrases don’t quite work as well, what do you do? You pull out the 
Linkage cards and they’re there to serve you. They will always be there to allow you to 
link two things together, even if they don’t belong together at all.  
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
21 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Blue Suit – Pseudo Logic 
 
Let’s look at the next suit now. This is the Blue Suit – the Pseudo Logic suit. Pseudo 
Logic is interesting. It basically sounds logical but it doesn’t necessarily have to be 
logical.  
 
Why are we interested in Pseudo Logic? You can actually use logic as well but the 
essential thing is this. The more someone is in trance, the less logical you have to be. 
You just have to say this equals that, and the unconscious mind will accept it. 
 
However, at the lighter levels of trance where the critical thinking, the analytical factor, 
the part of the mind that rejects or analyzes information is still slightly active or 
relatively active, you have to be careful because if you present an idea which is 
ridiculous, then that part of the mind kicks in and says hang on a second, there’s 
something wrong here, and it starts rejecting information. 
 
You’re basically waking up the guardian of the gate and making your life more difficult 
again. What the Pseudo Logic cards allow you to do is to actually dive into the ideas in 
such a way that they seem like they should make sense.  
 
Because this is the case, then that’s the case, which means that the other thing can 
happen too and people can do these things, which means that they can naturally do 
these other things as well. The more these things happen, the more those things 
happen. That makes sense, doesn’t it? 
 
Those are just examples of the Pseudo Logic cards in action without any content really. 
It’s basically the way that you can construct arguments. Now just because they’re 
Pseudo Logic does not mean you can’t actually put genuine arguments, genuine logical 
ideas into these ways of putting ideas together. 
 
That kind of gives you a very powerful clue on how to become a great hypnotist. The 
way I use Pseudo Logic is this. When I start a trance process, when I start to hypnotize 
someone, I’ll be very logical. Not because I want to engage the logical side of their brain, 
but rather because I want to disengage it. 
 
If the logical side – the critical thinking part of them – is able to say all these things are 
making sense, then I can start slipping in things which are almost sensible but would 
require so much effort to figure out whether or not they do make sense that they’ll just 
accept them and carry on with it. 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
22 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
As they accept those things and kind of carry on with it anyway, I can introduce 
something which is a little bit more extreme, a little bit wilder, just a small amount, 
something which is almost logical but not quite.  
 
Then I’ll introduce something more illogical and more illogical and more illogical until I 
get to the point where I don’t have to make sense anymore. I don’t have to be logical 
anymore because their unconscious mind is just absorbing the ideas fully. The Pseudo 
Logic cards train you in the ability to do that. 
 
You start off logically and become less and less logical as you go along. I mean you can 
still use logic at the unconscious level. That’s fine. It’s just that you don’t need to 
anymore. When you have someone in deeper trances, you can make bigger leaps. You 
can create changes more powerfully and more quickly because you don’t have to set up 
all the little steps in between.  
 
You just say okay we’re on this steppingstone and I jump to the other side of the river, 
and the unconscious mind says okay we’ll do that, whereas the conscious mind needs 
little steppingstones along the way. 
Purple Suit - Negation 
 
The next suit in the deck is the Purple Suit known as Negation. Negation is a wonderful 
concept. Why? Because it creates a split between consciousness. At the conscious level, 
we of course have negation. I can tell you don’t do that, I don’t like that, I don’t want 
this, stop doing that and so on, and you’ll understand exactly what I mean. 
 
When I say to you stop turning the mic on and off, stop clicking your pen, I don’t like it 
when you treat me this way, you know exactly what I’m talking about. Then if you carry 
on clicking the pen or flipping the light switch, it’s more because you know it’s going to 
annoy me rather than you thinking I don’t know what’s annoying him, it’s not me. 
 
The thing is though that whilst the unconscious mind does understand negations, it has 
to go through a two-step loop - two processes in order to negate something, and that 
two-step loop is something that as hypnotists we can actually take advantage of.  
 
What do I mean by that? Let me give you this example. Whatever you do right now, do 
not think of a purple cat. Do not think of a purple cat sitting in a purple tree, and a 
purple cat licking its little purple paw and saying a little purple meow, maybe just 
jumping down on a purple dog and scratching it. Don’t think of that whatever you do. 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
23 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
What happens? Inside your mind I’m describing a scene, and just because I’m saying 
don’t think about it doesn’t mean you’re not thinking of a scene. In order to know what 
to not think about, you’ve got to think about it first in order to negate it. 
 
You’ll put an X through it or you’ll say okay a different scene from this one or maybe 
change the color, the animals or whatever. But here’s something crazy. Think of it this 
way. Whatever you do for the next minute or so, don’t think of a spoon. Just don’t think 
of a spoon. Whatever you do, do not think of a spoon. 
 
Now some of you can manage it. Many of you will maybe think oh well a spoon, maybe 
go again, and you’ll kind of manage for a few seconds and then fall foul and so on. But 
what do you do in order to not think of a spoon? What do most people do?  
 
Well, if you’re like most people, you’ll be thinking about something like a fork or a knife 
or a plate or something along those lines, but why are you thinking of those things?  
 
You’re thinking of it just so you’re not thinking of a spoon. In other words, you’re filling 
your mind with something which is not a spoon, but here’s the great trap. Why are you 
thinking of a fork or a knife or a plate? Why aren’t you thinking of a rabbit or a car or 
space? 
 
The reason is because it goes right back to the Law of Associations. When I tell you to 
not think of a spoon, you are already thinking of that spoon. By association, you’re 
thinking of forks, knives, plates, etc. These are all things that belong in the same 
category. They’re all associated to one another. 
 
So, when I tell you to not think of a spoon and you think of a knife in order to avoid 
thinking of a spoon, you’ve actually still responded to my suggestion. You’re still in the 
category that I want you to be inside of.  
 
So, whether you think of the spoon because I’ve suggested it in a particular way – and 
we’ll come onto how to do that in a moment – or you’ve refused to think of a spoon but 
think of something else and it invariably ends up being something in the same category 
as a spoon, I as a hypnotist still win. I still have the category open and that’s all that I 
want.  
 
How might you use this in terms of hypnosis? Well, here’s the thing. Whatever you do, 
don’t relax right now. Don’t relax or feel comfortable. Now you could feel comfortable 
in a particular way, but don’t relax into that comfort because you can enjoy a process 
without relaxing comfortably. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
24 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Now you can relax comfortable or you can just relax in any other way. Let me just pause 
it here. See how what we’re doing here is we’re playing with this idea. I’m opening the 
category of relaxation inside your mind.  
 
Your association is being triggered. Your nervous system is being stimulated and at the 
same time because I’m telling you not to do it, your conscious mind doesn’t quite know 
where to go or how to deal with it, so it just kind of runs along the process and does the 
best it can. Invariably though at some point the drawer gets opened up and all the 
relaxation experiences that lie inside are available to me as a hypnotist for use.  
 
The other thing that you can do with negation is it’s a wonderful way of presenting 
what’s called embedded suggestions or embedded commands. In fact all the Power 
Words and phrases are good for creating embedded suggestions and embedded 
commands. 
 
When I say to you for example you really shouldn’t relax, it’s different from me saying 
you really shouldn’t… relax now. Notice how the phrase you really shouldn’t takes the 
conscious mind down one road. It says okay whatever it is, there’s pressure off of me.  
 
But when I just slow down and change my tonality, I emphasize the idea of relaxing even 
though I’m saying you shouldn’t. There’s a mixed communication going on there. You 
really should not relax is one thing. You really should not… relax now is a completely 
different communication and you can feel it already.  
 
That in itself is just one little portion. Remember we talked about the sticks coming 
together? The more pencils you’ve got lined up in a row, the harder it is to break. Well, 
when you start using negation and start putting the concepts together, at some point 
it’s just like the purple cat at the beginning.  
 
I talked about the purple cat so often that even though I kept remind you don’t think 
about it, you shouldn’t think about it, keep it out of your mind, whatever you do, don’t 
go down the purple cat route, invariably you start thinking about it at some point 
because I’m talking about it so much.  
 
That’s the power of negation. It allows you to make people have experiences without 
them realizing that they should be having them or rather it lets you break down 
resistance. It lets you break down fears. It takes the pressure off the other person to 
respond, whilst at the same time you’re opening whatever drawers, whatever files 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
25 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
inside the mind that you need to in order to access the categories that you want to use 
as a hypnotist.  
Violet Suit - Assumption 
 
The final category that I want to look at here is the Violet cards, which are the 
Assumption cards. Assumptions are very powerful ways of presenting ideas because 
assumptions happen outside of the level of awareness. 
 
What do I mean by that? Let’s put it this way. If I tell you that the chair is in the front of 
the room, you might be focusing on the chair – or rather if I say to you the chair is a 
comfortable one, then all your focus of attention comes to the point of does the chair 
really exist or is it really a comfortable chair? 
 
Those are the areas which if there is any critical thinking left, I might be challenged on. 
But what are the things you’ve accepted without realizing? Well, there’s a room. There’s 
a front of a room, so there must be a back of the room.  
 
Just by the fact that you’re deciding whether or not that chair exists in the front of the 
room, you’ve already accepted the room, including the back of the room, and that’s the 
bit that I’m interested in. 
 
What the Assumptions cards do is they allow you to get the unconscious mind to accept 
an idea by implication, by not really stating it out loud, which means that the critical 
thinking has nothing to latch onto. 
 
When I say to you sooner or later you’ll go into a trance, sooner or later you’ll relax or 
sooner or later you’ll have this experience, the bit your conscious mind will tend to 
focus on is the sooner or later. Will it be sooner or will it be later? 
 
The bit which it’s less likely to focus on is; are you going to go into a trance at all? Will 
you experience this now or will that happen later? Again, the question you’re asking 
yourself is, is it a question of now or is it a question of later? It’s not a question of 
whether or not it will happen at all. That bit has been assumed. 
 
Assumption cards are very, very powerful because they allow you to put ideas inside 
someone’s mind, to assume an idea, and present it in such a way that if they’re going to 
resist something, if they’re going to struggle with something, if they’re going to fight 
against something or reject something, it’s not going to be the part of what you’ve said 
that you’ve assumed.  

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
26 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
It’s going to be the bits around it – if it’s going to be sooner or later, if they’re going to 
realize it yet, if they can continue with something or if it will stop at some point earlier, 
if they’ll enjoy it or not. 
 
The fact is I don’t care if they enjoy it or not. I don’t care if it happens now or later. I 
don’t care if it’s sooner or later. I don’t care if it’s something they’ve realized yet.  
 
All I care about is that the event that I’ve suggested occurs at some point, and that’s the 
bit that you’ve accepted when you listen to the assumption and an idea being assumed 
within that. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
27 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
CD 2  
 
Those are the basic seven suits. We’re going to look at the Language Modifier cards a 
little later on in this program because they’re going to be treated slightly different. They 
don’t do the same things as the Power Words. They enhance the Power Words in a 
particular way, and we’ll explore that a little later on. 
 
What I’d like to do with you right now is take you through each of the suits and each 
card individually, and introduce you to the actual card and the idea or the concept 
behind the Power Word or phrase within it and then give you lots of examples of it in 
action to fill your own mind up.   
The Red Suit – The Imagination Suit 
 
You can follow along with me if you like. Pull out the Red Suit – the Imagination cards – 
and let’s look at them in order. The first card in the Red suit is: 
 
1. Imagine _______ 
 
We’re basically stimulating the imagination pretty directly – can you imagine this, 
imagine that and so on. Imagination allows us to bring an idea to life without having to 
give it any reality tone. In other words, you can bring things to life that the person might 
normally reject without thinking about it.  
 
If you’ve never been in a trance before and I told you to go into a trance right now, you 
might say I don’t know how to go into a trance. I have no idea. However, if I say to you, 
imagine going into a trance, you can say yes I wonder what that would be like, and 
already your mind is off beginning to explore possibilities, which is exactly what I want. 
 
How do you use the Imagine card? Very simply. You pull out a hypnotic theme. 
Remember, a hypnotic theme is basically any kind of idea or suggestion you want to 
represent. Let’s start with a simple theme like relaxation.  
 
Imagine you’re relaxing, and imagine that you’re relaxing even more deeply. Imagine 
relaxing into a comfortable space. Imagine that comfort growing now. Imagine that 
comfort growing to the point that you’re relaxing deeply. Imagine yourself going into a 
trance, and imagine yourself enjoying the comfort of trance and relaxing. Imagine that 
relaxation taking you deeper into comfort. 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
28 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Let me pause here. Incidentally, I want to make a point here. If you’re driving a car or 
operating any kind of machinery, this is the point to stop doing that because as we give 
you more and more examples of hypnotic language in action, some of you may start 
being drawn down that particular road, and for safety reasons just make sure you listen 
to the examples that I’m about to give you with your fully attention, without having to 
pay attention to the road or traffic or operating a machine safely. 
 
If you’re doing anything like that, just stop it or stop this recording until you’re ready to 
focus on it fully. So, getting back to the idea of imagination now, notice how again 
without even combining them with other things, I’m now just bringing the idea of 
hypnotic themes – comfort and relaxation – and it’s very easy to just roll through with 
those themes. 
 
But I don’t have to be stuck with just a state, a feeling like relaxation or comfort. I can 
produce any kind of idea with imagination. For example: 
 
Imagine yourself owning this car. Imagine driving down the road and the looks that 
people give you as they see you in this car. Imagine the feel of that steering wheel. 
Imagine the power as you step down on the accelerator. Imagine yourself stopped at a 
traffic light and feeling fantastic knowing that you have this car.  
 
Imagine the car of your dreams being something that you could really own. Imagine for 
a moment that we have a financing option that allows you to afford a car that would 
normally be outside of your budget range.  
 
Imagine being able to make easy and affordable payments every month, which are so 
small that you might not even notice them. Imagine taking this car back home to your 
wife and your kids. Imagine their excitement for a moment. Imagine how good you’ll feel 
about yourself finally having a car that actually fits your position in life.  
 
Again, it’s relatively crude right now that I’m creating these contexts. Why? Because I’ve 
only got one Power Word, one language pattern that I’m running through, so it becomes 
a little bit more stilted. I’m trying to stick within that of course. 
 
As you start putting things together, however, it becomes more and more sophisticated 
and those ideas start becoming more and more shall we say natural to absorb, but even 
that one is an example of how the imagination can stimulate people in a way that gets 
you to be more persuasive. 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
29 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
So, whether the thing that you want to stimulate is relaxation, or the thing you want to 
stimulate is a sense of ownership of a car, or the thing you want to stimulate is perhaps 
someone taking an exam and being comfortable with it, already just this one card allows 
you to do that. 
 
Notice how we’ve still got context around it though. What I haven’t done is said imagine 
sitting in a car, imagine driving home and everyone loving you, imagine this, imagine 
that! Come on, imagine! Notice how my tonality is very different in that example. 
Remember, the smoothness of ideas is a part of what you’re doing here.  
 
Let’s move onto the next card: 
 
2. Just pretend _______ 
 
Just pretend is basically a way of saying put your critical factor on hold. Let’s face it, 
when you’re pretending things, it can be anything you’re pretending. It doesn’t have to 
be real. 
 
Just pretend for a moment that you’re relaxing. Just pretend that that comfort continues 
to grow. Just pretend that you’re feeling comfortable and relaxing at the same time, and 
just pretend just for a moment that that comfort grows into relaxation.  
 
Just pretend that you’re relaxing so comfortably that you get to relax all the muscles in 
your body. Just pretend that your arms are simply relaxed. Just pretend your legs are 
totally relaxed. Just pretend that your breathing can come at a more comfortable pace.  
 
Let me pause here. Again, I’m just running through a one-trip pony, one language 
pattern, so it’s not really eloquent yet, but already you should notice an effect beginning 
to happen just with that particular Power Phrase. 
 
Again, you don’t have to be stuck on particular theme. Just because I’m giving you 
relaxation as the idea doesn’t mean that it’s the only idea you can present this way. You 
can present any idea using these language patterns. Here’s an example of what I mean. 
 
Just pretend that you’re a master hypnotist. Just pretend for a moment that you can 
hypnotize anyone you want anytime, anyplace, anywhere. Just pretend that you have a 
feeling of empowerment and imagine how you’d feel doing that. Imagine yourself 
hypnotizing people without even having to think.  
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
30 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Just pretend that you can naturally speak in a hypnotic language pattern, and imagine 
them going into trances. Imagine for a moment the power that you have, and just 
pretend that you have that power right now as you do the exercise. 
 
Notice again that now I’ve combined two very simple patterns. These are just two in a 
massive deck and already we’re beginning to get much more influential in our 
communication and becoming much more smooth in our presentation of ideas and it’s 
drawing you along much more fully, and we’re still relatively unsophisticated. Why? 
Because we’re only using two cards from one of the suits of the whole deck. 
 
Let’s have a look at another card. The third card in the Imagination sequence is: 
 
3. What’s it like when _______ 
 
What’s it like when forces you to look at something, an experience you already had, and 
think about it to the point where you’re actually having the experience again because 
you can’t answer that answer unless you actually have the experience. You can imagine 
something and you can remember what it’s like to have that experience. 
 
What’s it like when you’re relaxing? What’s it like when you relax so deeply that a sense 
of comfort spreads all over your body? What’s it like to invite that sense of comfort and 
let it grow naturally? I wonder what it’s like to really feel that comfort now, and I wonder 
what it’s like to relax totally into that comfort. What’s it like to let go into relaxation? 
What’s it like to continue that relaxation until you feel comfortable? 
 
Let me pause again. It’s the same idea only we’re using a different language pattern, a 
different phrase. It’s a different nuance this time. In the imagination and pretending 
they have to access information in one way. With what’s it like when, they have to go 
towards their memories, something that they’ve actually experienced, and reactive that 
experience. 
 
In hypnotic terms it’s called a revivification. It’s a very simple way, a very small language 
pattern to create a very profound hypnotic effect. Now we start combining them with 
the other cards and any kind of idea – let’s take the idea of mastering hypnosis – starts 
getting more powerful still. 
 
What’s it like when you’re really learning something easily? Imagine for a moment that 
you could easily learn the language pattern, and just pretend that your mouth will 
naturally speak in these tones without you having any effort at all. What’s it like when 
you do something without any effort?  

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
31 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Imagine doing this without any effort at all. Just pretend for a moment that you’re such 
a good hypnotist that you could speak in these language patterns without thinking 
about it, and imagine how good you’d feel.  
 
What’s it like when you feel empowered in that way? What’s it like when you achieve 
something that seemed hard but you know is easy now? Imagine doing that for yourself, 
and just pretend that you can. 
 
Let’s move on now to the fourth card in the sequence: 
 
4. What would it be like if _______ 
 
It sounds like that’s the same as the last one – what’s it like when, what would be it like 
if – but again you’re subtly switching tracks inside their mind at this point. What would it 
be like if really gets you to contemplate a possibility, whereas what’s it like when gets 
you to remember an actuality. 
 
So, imagination and just pretending for example allow you to go into the field of 
possibilities. You could think about things that actually happened or not. It doesn’t really 
matter so much. You can go into the realm of the imagination. 
 
What would it be like if allows you to explore the imagination with an idea that you may 
not necessarily have experienced for yourself yet. You get to access other memories, 
other experiences and put them together in a novel arrangement, so you get to have an 
experience you never had before. 
 
What would it be like if you could relax? What would it be like if you’re relaxing just to 
the sound of my voice? What would it be like if the sound of my voice would relax you 
even further? I wonder what it would be like if you relaxed so comfortably that you 
needn’t think about anything at all. What would it be like to be so comfortably relaxing 
that ideas just pop into your mind naturally?  
 
What would it be like to be so comfortably relaxed that everything seems easy and 
natural? I wonder what it would be like for you to feel so comfortable that you don’t 
need to make any effort, things just happen automatically. 
 
Notice again that your mind is being subtly steered in a slightly different direction here. 
It’s allowing you to open up a field of possibilities, particularly useful of course when 
you’re talking about something – an event or a sequence – which the person doesn’t 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
32 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
think they’re capable of experiencing, something that they don’t think they’ve ever 
experienced in their life before. 
 
Again, now that we have that language pattern, that Power Phrase under your belt, 
practice it until you just get flowing with it. It really doesn’t matter by the way if you get 
really repetitive: 
 
What’s it like if you’re relaxing? What’s it like if you relax even more? What would it be 
like if you relaxed beyond that? What would it be like if you were relaxing so comfortably 
that you relaxed even more? What would it be like if the comfort or relaxation got you to 
relax even further? 
 
Notice how that’s just a drill, an exercise you’re doing to get fluent with it. Over time 
you’ll become more eloquent. You’ll add more ideas and nuances around it. In 
particular, when you start combining the Power Words and Power Phrases together, 
you get a genuine powerful communication. How do we do that? Well, you’ve got 
examples of this already. 
 
So, let’s combine the four cards that you already know – imagine, just pretend, what’s 
it like when and what would it be like if – and see if what sequences that allows us to 
generate. 
 
What would it be like if you mastered hypnotic language so naturally that you could 
relax every time you thought about doing it? Imagine yourself being totally at ease in 
using hypnotic language.  
 
Just pretend for a moment that you’re so good at hypnotic language that it feels good to 
just keep talking to people in these ways. What’s it like when you’re so comfortable 
around someone that you speak without really having to think about it? What would it 
be like if you could speak to people hypnotically in the same way?  
 
Just imagine speaking to someone hypnotically, and just pretend for a moment that you 
have the ability right now to do that. What’s it like when you really can do something 
naturally and without effort? What would it be like if you mastered these hypnotic 
language patterns without any thought? 
 
Notice again how now that we’re adding more and more levels – we now have four 
pencils, four cards, and already we’re getting to a pretty sophisticated set of 
communications. The ideas are being presented in a very sophisticated way. 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
33 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Something else is happening. I don’t know if you’ve noticed this yet, but you may have 
noticed that as we start combining more and more of these Power Words and Power 
Phrases together, our creativity gets challenged. 
 
In other words, the suggestions that I’m presenting become richer. Why? Because 
creativity works in this way. It’s like having fridge magnets. If you only have one fridge 
magnet, there’s not much poetry you can do with it. If it’s just the same word over and 
over again, there’s not much you can do. 
 
Two fridge magnets could be more interesting. Three, four, five, six or seven fridge 
magnets and suddenly you can create all kinds of interesting poetic phrases just by 
rearranging the order.  
 
So, these Power Words and phrases are the equivalent of fridge magnets, only you’re 
putting them inside your mind so that your mind allows you to rearrange them in any 
way you want to so that you can create any kind of hypnotic experience for people as 
you become more eloquent with it. 
 
Let’s move on now to the next Imagination card: 
 
5. It’s as if _______ 
 
It’s as if does something very interesting. The other ones allow you to imagine things 
and pretend things are happening. They allow you to take something which you haven’t 
experienced and explore that as a possibility. It’s as if actually allows you to assume 
something without telling them to do it. For example, it’s as if you’re relaxing on a 
cloud.  
 
Now two things are happening here. First, I’m telling you to relax without really telling 
you to relax. You can sit there and it’s as if relaxation is a natural part of your 
experience.  
 
Because I say it’s as if, it creates this idea that you don’t actually have to have the 
experience, so you can say oh, he’s just being metaphorical here, but of course in order 
to understand it, you actually have to process that information and it’s as if it starts 
sinking in naturally without you thinking about it.  
 
The other thing that it’s as if allows you to do is to introduce a genuine metaphor, a 
colorful example of something – it’s as if you’re dropping a penny in a glass of water and 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
34 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
watching it gradually and gently float down to the bottom. That’s how simple the 
suggestion can sink it. 
 
Notice how I just used the hypnotic language pattern. It allows you to introduce an 
analogy or a simple metaphor very, very simply. How might you use it with our simple 
hypnotic themes of relaxation and comfort? 
 
You can sit there and it’s as if you’re relaxing. Comfort is as if you’re relaxing your 
muscles to a comfortable level. It’s as if you’re floating comfortably on a cloud, and 
floating comfortably on a cloud is as if you were just relaxing completely. It’s as if you 
had no cares in the world whatsoever.  
 
Notice how that one is a little bit trickier to use on its own, but when you combine it 
with other things, it becomes a really powerful way of creating a richer experience for 
people that sucks people into your communication, to your language, to the ideas that 
you have to present. Here’s what I mean by that. 
 
Imagine for a moment that you really could use these language patterns naturally. It’s as 
if something inside you had already understood how to do this and was making it 
happen automatically. What’s it like when you do things so well that they happen 
automatically?  
 
Just pretend for a moment that you can speak in hypnotic ways without any effort 
whatsoever, and what would it be like if you could speak hypnotically using Power 
Words and phrases without any effort at all?  
 
It’s as if your mouth knows what to do and continues to use hypnotic language without 
any concerns. Imagine how good you’d feel being able to do that now. Just pretend that 
your mouth has a life of its own and it’s just speaking without you having to actually 
think about it too much.  
 
What’s it like when you’re so involved in a conversation you don’t actually think about 
what you’re saying. You’re just allowing it to flow naturally. It’s as if something inside 
you already knows what to say and can say it naturally. What would it be like if you used 
these hypnotic language cards in such a natural and easy a way as that for yourself? 
 
The next card in the sequence is: 
 
6. Suppose _______ 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
35 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Suppose is an interesting Power Word because it basically allows you to get people to 
imagine things when you can’t them to imagine things. Here’s what I mean by that.  
 
Let’s say you’re in a business meeting and you say imagine how powerful this company 
will be when you have all these things. Let’s say that they’ve gotten used to the whole 
used car salesman approach and someone’s oversold them saying imagine this and 
imagine that.  
 
You’re thinking oh, I can’t use that because someone’s just come up and they’ve killed 
the idea of imagination. They’ve abused it too much. It’s become too much of a signal 
for them that you’re doing something and they’re not interested. 
 
Well, suppose you could get them to think about something without you actually having 
to present the idea of imagination at all. Suppose they just went down a particular route 
of thinking without you actually having to ask them to imagine it. Suppose that they 
actually enjoyed those thoughts so much that your ideas became more acceptable to 
them. Now imagine how that would be for you. 
 
You see, supposing and imagination are actually the same idea. It’s just that one is a 
disguised form of imagination. It’s basically saying think of a situation which hasn’t 
occurred yet, which is the same as saying imagine a situation that hasn’t occurred yet, 
but you’re not using the word imagine. Hence, it can slip in more subtly underneath 
their radar.  
 
How do you use the word suppose? You can use the more direct version: 
 
Suppose you were relaxing right now. Suppose you relaxed so comfortably that the 
relaxation continued to deepen. Suppose your arms were relaxed and suppose your legs 
were relaxed. How would that be?  
 
Suppose you relaxed so comfortably that you’d begin to feel good inside. Suppose that 
good feeling continued that process of relaxation to the point where you were just 
relaxing even further. Suppose you’re relaxing without any thoughts whatsoever.  
 
 
Do you see how the word suppose works? Let’s see how it fits into the context of the 
whole Imagination Suit: 
 
Imagine that you’re finding yourself using hypnotic language naturally. Suppose that 
you’re the kind of person that would use these language patterns in any conversation. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
36 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
What would it be like if you were using this in a natural everyday conversation without 
thinking about it?  
 
What’s it like when you speak to someone and you’re not really thinking about what 
you’re saying. You’re just allowing your intention to lead the way. Suppose that you 
could talk to people in a way that would be persuasive to them without having to make 
any effort. Just pretend for a moment that these language patterns are part of how 
you’re thinking and speaking.  
 
Suppose for a moment that that natural way of communicating is something that you do 
every day, and what’s it like when you do something every day? Does it become 
something that’s easier? It’s as if a machine has started ticking inside you. It’s as if a car 
is moving down a hill. It needs no more effort, no more fuel to keep going.  
 
Suppose you kept going with these language drills to the point where you didn’t have to 
do any more effort and it just came out of you accidentally. Imagine how much more 
powerful a hypnotist you’d be at that point. 
 
The next card in the sequence – the final one in the Imagination Suit – is: 
 
7. And you can experience _______ as if  _______ 
 
This is kind of a disguised version of introducing it’s as if. It actually allows you to 
introduce two concepts simultaneously and get them to imagine both. Here’s what I 
mean by that: 
 
You can experience sitting down there as if you were relaxing, and you can experience 
relaxing as if you were feeling totally comfortable.  
 
Notice how we’re putting the two ideas together – the idea of relaxation and comfort. It 
allows us to associate them and at the same time of course you’re using the imagination 
to get there. 
 
You can also use this just like the, it’s as if pattern in order to introduce some kind of 
metaphor or analogy.  
For example: 
 
And you can experience sitting down here and listening to me as if you were floating in a 
comfortable warm bath of relaxation. It’s as if you are relaxing naturally as you’re 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
37 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
learning, and you can experience learning as if it’s the most natural thing in the world. 
It’s as if a snowball was rolling down a hill collecting more and more momentum.  
 
Suppose that your ability to use language began to snowball at that rate. Imagine how 
much more quickly you could be influential. Just pretend for a moment that you were 
already good at these language patterns, and what’s it like when you pretend to the 
point where you forget you’re doing so?  
 
What would it be like if you could talk to anyone about anything in such a persuasive 
way that you just got your point across every time? It’s as if they were there waiting to 
listen to you. Suppose that people were riveted by what you’re saying, and you can 
experience yourself talking to them as if you have something really important to 
communicate.  
 
Imagine just using these language patterns so naturally, and just pretend for a moment 
that you were practicing them to the point each day that you’re not thinking about it 
anymore. What’s it like when something is so automatic it’s easy to do? It’s as if you 
already know how to do this.  
 
Now suppose you practiced these patterns and that happened, and you could experience 
that event as if it’s the most natural part of who you are anyway. Wouldn’t that be a 
great way to learn about hypnosis? 
 
Now let’s move onto the next suit.  
The Orange Suit – The Needs Suit 
 
This is a nice contrast to the Imagination Suit. The Imagination Suit is all about 
expanding your awareness into possibilities. The Needs Suit is all about contracting 
awareness down into specific things, into a specific channel. You’re going to channel all 
their mental energy down a particular road to build the pressure up to make it happen. 
 
Let’s take the first pattern: 
 
1. You really should _______ 
 
Let’s take the idea of relaxing.  
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
38 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
You really should relax. You really should relax comfortably. You really should enjoy the 
experience of relaxation so that you can really relax even more. You really should enjoy 
relaxing to the point where you are comfortable.  
 
Again notice how we’ve started a new suit. There’s a new pattern and on its own it’s a 
little difficult to use. However, just by practicing the Need, you can begin to build the 
pressure. Here’s what I mean by that. Let’s combine this with something you already 
know: 
 
Suppose you were relaxing so comfortably that your whole body felt wonderful. Just 
pretend for a moment that your whole body was relaxed, and you really should enjoy 
that relaxation.  
 
What’s it like when you’re so comfortable that relaxation is a natural thing? You really 
should enjoy relaxation at a natural level. It’s as if your body wants to relax, and you 
really should allow your body to relax in its own natural way.  
 
Notice already just by adding in other ideas, you’ve started using the Need Suit to build 
the pressure up, to just drive that pressure a little bit more, as well as allowing you just 
to flow naturally with the language. 
 
Let’s move onto the second one: 
 
2. I want you to _______ 
 
 
I want you to is a very interesting way of phrasing something because it introduces the 
idea of desire – which again builds up need and that potential – but at the same time 
you’re divorced from it. It other words, I’m the one that has a desire and I’m going to 
use the pressure inside me to put it onto you.  
 
It’s kind of like using social pressure. If someone turns around and says to you I need 
you to do this or I want you to do this, it puts the pressure on you to have the 
experience. 
 
I want you to relax right now is both a benevolent idea and it puts a little bit of pressure 
on you to have the experience. Here’s an example of how it might work: 
 
I want you to relax and I want you to relax comfortably. I want you to relax so 
comfortably that the natural relaxation response kicks in, and I want you to experience 
that relaxation response without any effort.  

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
39 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I want you to just sit comfortably and relax, and I want you to learn about relaxing even 
more deeply without any effort whatsoever. I want you to enjoy that relaxation so that 
you can enjoy relaxing even further and have comfort in your life, and I want you to take 
that comfort and spread it into the rest of your life. 
 
Again, notice how now we’re starting to build the pressure up a little bit more. If you 
start combining the two together and if you want to switch topics to anything else – it 
doesn’t really matter if you’re selling cars or learning something new – you can still build 
the pressure up and have the response you want. For example: 
 
You really should practice using these Power Words and phrases every day, and I want 
you to experience the power of communicating with people more wonderfully when you 
do that. You really should enjoy the process of practicing hypnosis, and I want you to 
enjoy using these language pattern cards and the freedom that it presents to you.  
 
You really should use the Power Words and Power Phrases every day, and I want you to 
use them every day in a way that’s natural to you. You really should enjoy the way of 
being natural with people, and I want you to use this language every day until it’s totally 
natural for you.  
 
You really should experience for yourself just how powerful you become as a 
communicator when you do practice these drills on a daily basis, and I want you to 
experience life as a powerful master hypnotist, and you really should practice these 
language patterns until you are as fluent as any master hypnotist has ever been, and I 
want you to get to that place because when you get there you’ll have a powerful 
experience of who you really can be. 
 
The next card is: 
 
3. I know you want to _______ 
 
This has a similar idea, a similar feel to it, but you’re now switching the responsibility 
from yourself for creating the pressure into them – I know you want to relax. Well, if 
you didn’t do it beforehand, now by thinking about it you’re going maybe yeah, actually 
I can do with some relaxation. So, you can build the experience to the point where the 
pressure is inside them now. 
 
I want you to relax and I know you want to relax even more than I want you to. You 
really should relax to the point where you’re feeling comfortable, and I know you want to 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
40 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
feel comfortable. I want you to feel comfort to the extent you can relax further, and you 
really should relax further now.  
 
I know you want to relax deeply and comfortably in this place, and I want you to have 
that comfort. I really want you to experience relaxation flowing throughout your body, 
and you really should feel totally relaxed at some point in your life. I know you want to 
have more comfort and relaxation in different areas of your life. 
 
Notice how we’re now getting something more sophisticated going here. We have the 
different Need patterns building the pressure, building momentum. You may have 
noticed myself automatically getting faster. Why? Because I feel the need inside myself, 
which of course allows me to translate it onto you. 
 
Your language, your rhythm, your tone and all that stuff feeds into the language 
patterns themselves, into the Power Words and phrases, and so it allows you to create 
that atmosphere of need, of desire, of pressure to actually have the experience. 
 
You can combine them with any of the other stuff. For example: 
 
You can imagine relaxing. Now I want you to imagine relaxing until your body feels 
comfortable, and I know you want to feel comfortable. I know you want to imagine that 
comfort growing throughout your body, and you really should have that imagination 
there. It’s as if you wanted to relax even more fully than you’ve done before. 
 
Again, notice how now we’re starting to pick and choose language patterns between 
different places. It doesn’t matter where they come from. It creates a novel context, a 
novel way of presenting an idea, which becomes much more riveting to people. So, 
we’ve got the absorption, we’ve got the bypassing, we’ve got the stimulation all 
occurring in one big parcel at the same time.  
 
The next card is: 
 
4. You should remember _______ 
 
This is kind of like a warning. It’s kind of like giving someone a sense of like hey, keep 
this in mind. So, it’s putting them on notice. It’s basically putting more energy into the 
idea that’s going to follow, but of course at the same time the word should is one of 
these Power Words which gets people into this idea of need. 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
41 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
You should remember to relax, and you should remember to relax comfortably. You 
should remember to enjoy relaxing, and you should remember to do that every single 
day. You should remember that relaxation is a natural process, and you should 
remember that you can do it anytime, anyplace, anywhere.  
 
Right now you should remember to relax comfortably, and right now you should 
remember to enjoy the experience too, and you should continue remembering that as we 
continue through the process of going through the language pattern cards.  
 
We take that and combine it with the other ones. Again we can switch topics to the idea 
of learning. 
 
And you should remember that you’ve learned things in the past, and I know you want to 
learn how to master all these Power Words and phrases, and I want you to master the 
hypnotic language. You really should practice these drills until it’s a natural way of 
communicating for you.  
 
You should remember that speaking to people is a natural thing that you do every day, 
and I want you to continue speaking to people until you find those language patterns 
coming out naturally. I know you want to speak to people hypnotically, and you really 
should speak to people using hypnotic Power Words and Power Phrases.  
 
You should remember that you can use these Power Phrases anytime, anyplace, 
anywhere and I know you want to use these hypnotic phrases with your friends, families 
and even strangers or work colleagues. You really should remember you can do this 
anywhere, and I want you to do this everywhere.  
 
I know you want to do it with everyone that you meet, and you should remember to do 
that whenever you have a new interaction. It’s easy to use hypnotic language whenever 
you meet someone. You should remember to use these patterns in every conversation 
that you have, even if you just throw it in from time to time. 
The next card is: 
 
5. You really should discover for yourself that _______ 
 
This is a great way of combining the idea of need and moving their awareness in a 
certain direction. By offering someone the ability to discover something; that something 
which is very empowering to people, but adding the idea of should really puts the 
oomph behind it. It kind of pushes them.  
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
42 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
It’s kind of like saying hey, on the other side of this cliff is something really good that 
you should experience, and then as they start looking over the cliff, you give them a nice 
little shove so they fall off the edge – you really should discover for yourself that your 
body can relax naturally. 
 
Now there is an assumption going on there as well – you can relax. The thing that you’re 
looking at is am I relaxing naturally or do I have to make myself relax? The point that 
you’re not asking yourself about is whether or not you can relax.  
 
So, let’s put this into context: 
 
You really should discover for yourself that you can relax anytime, anyplace, anywhere. 
You really should discover for yourself that you can relax comfortably and easily and 
naturally, and you should discover that relaxation continuing to grow all by itself. You 
really should discover for yourself that you can relax in so many different ways. 
 
Now combining them with the other patterns: 
 
You should discover for yourself that using these patterns is easy. You should remember 
to do these drills to the point where they’re natural, and I want you to feel totally natural 
using this hypnotic language.  
 
I want you to enjoy that process, and I know that you want to use hypnotic language 
without having to think about it, and you really should enjoy the process of letting 
language flow smoothly.  
 
You really should discover for yourself that hypnotic language can flow out of your 
mouth without any effort at all, and you should remember it’s the most natural thing to 
do because you’ve spoken to people all of your life. 
 
 I know you want to discover how to work with people in a different way, and I want you 
to use hypnotic language in a powerful way from here on in. You really should discover 
that you can use hypnotic language without any effort, and you really should use this in 
a natural way effortlessly.  
 
I know you want to do this effortlessly, and you should remember to do this effortlessly, 
and you really should discover for yourself how effortless it really is to use hypnotic 
language, and I want you to have that experience now, and I know you want to have the 
experience of being a master hypnotist, and you really should have the experience of 
being a master hypnotist.  

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
43 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
More importantly, you should discover for yourself that being a master hypnotist is 
something that’s within your own powers of achievement. 
 
The next card is: 
 
6. I need to tell you _______ 
 
Again, this drives need coming from you to the other person in the same way as I want 
you to. With I need to tell you, the need starts with me but I’m transferring it onto you 
using social pressure. 
 
Now it seems as though I just want to tell you something, but at the same time I’m 
building pressure with it, and as I’m building pressure with it, the idea that I’m about to 
present to you becomes more important – in other words it gets driven in more 
powerfully.  
 
I need to tell you that you can relax. I need to tell you to relax comfortably, and I need to 
tell you that relaxation is the most natural thing in the world. I need to tell you that you 
can relax comfortably right now, and I need to tell you that you can listen to me and 
relax at the same time.  
 
I need to tell you that you can relax totally comfortably without a care in the world, and I 
need to tell you that you’ll learn more about hypnosis by feeling comfortable and 
relaxing right now than by doing anything else.  
 
Of course, now we have the gateway straight into the combination: 
 
I need to tell you that you really can relax comfortably. You really should relax 
comfortably as you’re using hypnotic language. I want you to use hypnotic language 
comfortably, and I know you want to use hypnotic language comfortably in your day-to-
day settings.  
 
You really should discover for yourself how easy hypnotic language is. You should 
remember that everything you can say, you can say hypnotically, and I need to tell you 
that you can use hypnotic language in any context. I want you to experience hypnosis in 
every context that you come across, and you really should use these Power Words and 
phrases as often as possible.  
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
44 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
You should remember that this is a natural way for you to communicate, and I know you 
want to communicate naturally. I need to tell you that the more you do these patterns, 
the more natural they become to you and you should really discover for yourself that 
using these patterns naturally is the easiest thing in the world.  
 
You should remember that you’ve been speaking to people for your whole life, and I 
know you want to keep using that skill. I want you to develop that skill to the point 
where you truly are a master of hypnotic language. 
 
The final card in the sequence is: 
 
7. You must _______ 
 
You must and you should have the same kind of drive going through them, but you must 
is a little bit more direct. You should goes into the area of possibility. You must is much 
more direct and it’s kind of like that final push that sends someone off the cliff. 
 
You must relax and you must relax comfortably. You must remember that relaxation is a 
natural experience, and you must allow your body to relax naturally. You must allow that 
natural experience to occur, and you must enjoy the experience of relaxing now.  
 
You must be comfortable in order to relax, and you must relax in order to feel more 
comfortable. You must relax right now in order to have a greater sense of comfort in life.  
 
Now if you take that term and combine it with the others, already we have a pretty 
powerful driving force in your hypnotic communication.  
 
You must practice hypnotic language drills until they’re natural, and I need to tell you 
that speaking hypnotically is a natural thing. You should really discover for yourself that 
doing these drills is fun. You should remember to have fun whilst you’re using these 
things, and I want you to know how much fun you can have. You really should enjoy the 
process of mastering. You must enjoy all the things that you do.  
 
I need to tell you how simple it is to use hypnotic language when you’re enjoying 
yourself, and I want you to enjoy yourself and discover for yourself how simple it is to 
master hypnotic language and you must make it easy.  
 
I need to tell you that to make it easy, you just do the drills over and over again, and you 
should remember to use those drills over and over again. You really should keep doing 
these drills until they’re natural, and I want you to experience how natural they can be.  

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
45 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You really should discover for yourself how easy it is to use your hypnotic language when 
you’re not thinking about it, and you must not think about it. You must allow yourself to 
smoothly flow with the experience.  
 
I need to tell you that it’s a tremendously rewarding experience being a master 
hypnotist, and I know you want to be a master hypnotist right now. You should 
remember that being a master hypnotist is easy when you do the drills that bring you 
there, and you really should discover for yourself that doing these drills is totally easy 
and natural right now, and you must maintain a sense of that naturalness.  
 
I need to tell you that it’s easy when you maintain that sense of naturalness, and so you 
should remember that you can do this because you’ve done many natural things in the 
past, and I want you to be yourself when you speak to people in hypnotically engaging 
ways.  
 
I want you to enjoy being yourself, and I know that you want to be yourself when you 
communicate with others in a more hypnotic way. So, you really should enjoy that 
process right now. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
46 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
CD 3 
 
All right, let’s move on to the next suit now. 
The Yellow Suit – The Awareness Suit 
 
The first card is: 
 
1. Notice _______  
 
Awareness is all about moving people’s attention around the place and notice is a great 
way, because you’re basically mentally pointing a finger and saying put your attention 
on this.  
 
Notice your hands. Notice your feet. Notice the sensation in your face. Notice what’s 
happening inside your body. Notice how I can just move your awareness around and 
your attention around just by using the word notice. How do you use this? Well, notice 
that you can relax. Notice whatever part of your body feels relaxed right now. Notice 
how comfortable that can feel. Notice the most comfortable sensation inside your body 
right now. Notice how it grows as you put attention on it. Notice how easy it is to relax. 
Notice how easy it is to be comfortable.  
 
So taking that idea and adding something else, taking the idea of: 
 
2. Have you ever _______ 
 
That’s another way of basically putting their attention on something. Have you ever has 
a lot in common with the imagination exercises. Why? Well, you’re basically pulling 
something out of their memory. They’re going yah, I’ve done that, I remember that. But 
again, have you ever is a way of bringing their awareness, their attention on that. Have 
you ever relaxed? Have you ever relaxed so comfortably that you drifted off 
somewhere?  
 
Have you ever drifted off in such a way that you were blissfully unaware of the outside 
world? Have you ever returned from such a place feeling totally comfortable? Have you 
ever felt so comfortable that you had not a care in the world? Have you ever felt your 
body to be so physically relaxed that your mind began to calm down? Have you ever had 
such a calm and quiet mind that your body felt perfect? Have you ever fallen asleep and 
felt the comfort of falling asleep? Have you ever woken up and felt the comfort of lying 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
47 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
in bed? Have you ever discovered how comfortable you can be in all kinds of different 
situations?  
 
So notice how have you ever allows you to take a trip through people’s experiences. 
Notice allows you to take care of physical experiences. Notice your hands, your 
sensations your thoughts. Have you ever allows you to take a field trip through their 
memories, their stored experiences.  
 
The next card is:  
 
3. Focus your awareness on _______ 
 
So basically, we want their awareness, so we’re just getting it to focus on something.  
 
Focus your awareness on a part of your body, it doesn’t matter which. Focus your 
awareness on how that part of the body feels and focus your awareness on the slightest 
bit of comfort that you can find. Focus your awareness on some part of your body that 
feels comfortable right now. Focus your awareness on that sensation of comfort and 
watch it grow. Focus your awareness when you’re allowing that growing sense of 
comfort to spread throughout your body and become aware of how easy it is to relax 
comfortably.  
 
Again, notice how focus your awareness does the same thing as noticing. It’s just putting 
your attention on something specific, a sensation usually. Of course, you don’t have to 
be stuck with relaxation you can use any hypnotic theme. Our running theme at the 
moment, of course, is to learn and master hypnotic language and you can combine all 
the cards just as in the other ones.  
 
Notice how you’re already getting used to using hypnotic language. Have you ever 
gotten used to a process so quickly that you didn’t have to think about it anymore? Focus 
your awareness when you’re using hypnotic language and notice how much easier it 
becomes. Have you ever experienced yourself doing something totally effortlessly? Focus 
your awareness on that feeling of effortlessness and notice how much easier it becomes 
to use hypnotic language.  
 
Have you ever allowed your mind to take a backseat as you’re just so engrossed in a task 
it becomes natural? Focus your awareness on the task until it becomes natural and 
notice how much more natural it becomes when you stop thinking about it. Have you 
ever felt yourself being so carried away by the moment, you weren’t 100% sure of what 
you were doing or saying, only that it felt so good? Focus your awareness on that right 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
48 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
now, and notice how your unconscious can make that the way that you do hypnotic 
language naturally. 
 
The next card: 
 
4. Remember _______  
 
Again, it’s just a question of going through people’s experiences, their past experiences. 
So it basically gets you to recall or revivify something they’ve already done. Essentially 
you’re going to use this to direct their awareness towards some kind of resource or 
something which will help you achieve the outcome you want. In this case let’s focus on 
the hypnotic theme of comfort and relaxation.   
 
Remember how good it feels to feel comfortable. Remember the comfort of just sitting 
or lying down and not having a care in the world. Remember how comfortable you can 
be. Remember the most comfortable sensation you had in the past. Remember to allow 
it to grow. Remember how comfortable it is to be totally relaxed and remember how 
your thoughts can just quiet down and maybe drift away. Remember to allow those 
thoughts to do whatever they want to do to help you relax even further. Remember, a 
real feeling of relaxation. Remember lying in bed and being comfortable.  
 
Notice how remembering is just basically a way of getting access to resources that were 
there. Now we can combine them with the other cards and basically start moving 
people’s attention through all kinds of different experiences. It allows us to navigate 
throughout someone’s mind, using both their physical experiences, as well as their 
mental and emotional experiences.  
 
Here’s what I mean by that… notice how these cards are becoming more familiar to you. 
Have you ever been doing something to the point where it’s natural to carry on doing it 
without thinking? Remember, you’ve learned many things in the past. Focus your 
awareness on the things you succeeded learning in the past. Have you ever done 
something totally spontaneously and done it well? Notice how doing something well is 
easy and relaxed. Remember how relaxed you were when you were doing things well, 
automatically.  
 
Have you ever done things so automatically there was no effort at all? Focus your 
awareness on learning hypnotic language patterns so automatically and remember you 
can do it. Notice how easy it becomes when you put your mind into it and you stop 
thinking. Have you ever been so fully engaged in something that you weren’t really 
thinking about it until afterwards? Remember what it feels like to be totally engaged in a 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
49 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
process of doing something and focus your awareness, and feeling that way as you do 
your hypnotic language drills. Notice how your language changes. Notice how your 
experience changes. Notice how your tonality changes, and remember that you can do 
this every time you do a hypnotic language drill. Focus your awareness on the cards and 
notice how much more familiar they seem to you right now.  
 
The next card is:  
 
5. I know you’re wondering _______  
 
This is a very interesting card, because you’re basically telling people what to wonder by 
telling them that you pretend you know you’re wondering. It’s kind of another version 
of mind reading. This version, rather than the version you have on the previous set, the 
need cards, I need to tell you or I know you want to feel this way. This particular version 
of the mind read allows you to actually focus the awareness on a certain way of being or 
thinking all their attention on something.  
 
For example, I know you’re wondering just how much more relaxed you can get. I know 
you’re wondering just how to relax properly. I know you’re wondering how deeply you 
can relax right now. I know you’re wondering if you’ll relax as comfortably as you’re 
relaxing deeply. I know you’re wondering just how the comfort and relaxation will 
continue to develop. I know you’re wondering just how much more pleasant the 
experience of relaxation and comfort can be.  
 
Notice for a moment, how what we’re doing here is we’re taking the conscious mind out 
of it. If they’re wondering about something they aren’t actually doing it, which leaves 
the unconscious mind free to do the doing whilst the conscious mind is free of the 
wondering or free to wonder what’s going to happen next. It’s kind of a way of putting 
the critical factor on hold and saying hey, just wonder about this for a while and see 
what happens. In other words, don’t make it happen, don’t do it consciously, allow it to 
emerge. 
 
Whenever you don’t do something consciously by allowing something to emerge guess 
what you’ve done? It’s the S part, the stimulating of the unconscious mind. The 
emerging element is the unconscious mind response, it’s the unconscious mind doing 
something. By letting the conscious mind recede and not quite do it, that’s the critical 
factor coming offline. So you’re taking one thing offline as the other thing gets 
simulated and what do you have? Hypnotic context.  
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
50 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
The next card is: 
  
6. Find yourself _______ 
 
Find yourself is fantastic. Why? Because it allows you to assume someone’s awareness 
and where it’s going to go. Here’s an example of what I mean by that.  
 
Find yourself relaxing comfortably now. Find yourself developing that comfort to a point 
where the muscles in your body just want to relax even further. Find yourself relaxing 
comfortably into relaxation and find yourself just relaxing. Find yourself being 
comfortable and find yourself going deeper into that sense of comfort. Find yourself lying 
down into a comfortable relaxed state, which your mind can hear and your body can feel 
comfortable. Find yourself doing that now.  
 
So, notice how find yourself is yet again doing the same that as, I know you’re 
wondering, which is basically where you’re allowing an experience to emerge and you’re 
putting your attention on it to allow the experience to emerge even further. Of course, 
whenever you allow an experience to emerge rather than trying to make it happen, it 
means the unconscious mind is doing stuff, it’s not the conscious mind doing it, which is 
exactly what you want. You want the unconscious mind to do the work, not the 
conscious mind.  
 
How might that combine with the rest of them? Well, notice that you’re now getting 
better at using these language patterns. Have you ever started using things to the point 
where they’re natural? Focus your awareness on feeling natural right now. Find yourself 
getting into a natural rhythm automatically. I know you’re wondering how much easier 
will it get to do these drills, and remember it gets easier the more you practice. Focus 
your awareness on that ease and comfort of practice. Have you ever felt so comfortable 
that you just felt like doing things naturally, just find yourself using hypnotic language 
naturally and notice how comfortable it is? 
 
Remember, it is comfortable to use hypnotic language automatically. I know you’re 
wondering just how easy it will be for you. Remember something else that’s easy for you 
to do. Remember how easy it is for you to just talk and communicate. Have you ever just 
talked to people because you wanted to? Find yourself talking to them now with 
hypnotic Power Words and power phrases. Notice how easy it becomes as you start 
doing it more and more each day.  
 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
51 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
The final awareness card is to:  
 
7. Realize _______  
 
Realization is, of course, great because it basically means that the conscious mind is 
catching up to something that the unconscious mind already knows. If you realize that 
you’re relaxing, it means the relaxation was there already you just weren’t aware of it 
yet. It’s another way of assuming awareness.  
 
Realize that your body can relax. Realize that relaxation can continue to grow. Realize 
that you will feel comfortable the more you relax. I want you to realize just how 
comfortable it is to really relax thoroughly. Realize that relaxing is natural. I want you to 
realize how natural relaxation can be.  
 
Again notice, by now it should be no rocket science at all to understand how the cards 
are working, how to flow with it and so on. Let’s just put them all together, all the 
awareness cards and see where it takes us. In fact, let’s take another point. Let’s start 
playing with the awareness cards and the other ones together just to see how rich your 
communication has become and you’re only halfway through the deck so far. I want you 
to really master hypnotic language. Realize that if you can speak the English language, 
then you can be a master of hypnotic language.  
 
Find yourself drifting inside your mind until you remember times when you 
communicated powerfully, and I know you’re wondering how you can recreate powerful 
communications with people in other senses. You should remember how powerful you 
felt back then and I need to tell you that when you feel that power inside of you, you can 
notice it growing, and it’s as if that power gets translated into your language. Just 
imagine yourself speaking in these Power Words and phrases and realize you can do it.  
 
Find yourself speaking like this automatically with people and remember to do this 
whenever you can. I need to tell you that it’s natural to speak to people using hypnotic 
Power Words or phrases. I want you to use hypnotic Power Words and phrases and just 
pretend that you’re doing it right now. Imagine that you are so good at hypnotic Power 
Words and phrases that they just tripped off your tongue. It’s as if your jaw was just 
wanting to say these words. 
 
Notice the desire to do it right now, and you really should discover for yourself that you 
can speak automatically hypnotic language without any effort and you must enjoy that 
process. Realize how easy it is. Realize how natural it is and find yourself doing it time 
and time again.  

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
52 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I know you want to master hypnotic language and you really should master hypnotic 
language at your own rate and pace. Suppose you mastered it slowly and really 
developed a rich vocabulary. What would it be like if you mastered it a bit more quickly 
and that rich vocabulary multiplied and became a natural part of your everyday 
communication? Realize that hypnotic language is the same as normal everyday 
language. Just find yourself using the hypnotic phrases more fully than we use other 
phrases.  
 
Remember that a child learns in a certain way and you should remember that you can 
learn to do this in exactly the same way, through repetition. Notice how repetition 
makes it easier for you. Have you ever repeated something to the point where it became 
totally natural or find yourself repeating these language patterns to the point that 
they’re natural for you? Remember to enjoy that process. Focus your awareness on how 
enjoyable it is and notice your skills grow.  
The Green Suit – The Linkage Suit  
 
This is a very easy one to grasp, because all you’re doing is creating association with 
something else. Basically it’s kind of like a plus sign, this plus that, this plus that, this 
equals that or this plus that.  
 
The first card is very simple:  
 
1. _______ and _______ 
 
This and that, relax and feel comfortable, feel comfortable and relax even more. It’s a 
very simple one. And is a very simple way of combining two things together. It’s 
probably the simplest of all the hypnotic Power Words and phrases, because we use it 
so often in everyday language without even thinking about it.  
 
Let’s put and into practice.  
 
Relax and feel comfortable, and as you feel comfortable allow your body to relax even 
further. And as that relaxation continues and you feel more comfortable and you 
continue to deepen that comfort of relaxation and feel yourself going deeper, you’ll 
discover yourself really opening your mind and enjoying the process of deep comfortable 
relaxation.  
 
So you should see that and is actually very simple and easy to use.  

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
53 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Let’s skip straight on to the second pattern which is:  
 
2. As soon as _______, you’ll _______ 
 
This is a beautiful way again of creating an association between two things which don’t 
need to be associated. Let me give you some examples of this.  
 
As soon as you close your eyes you’ll start to relax. As soon as you begin to relax you’ll 
feel some comfort developing and as soon as you feel that comfort developing, your 
relaxation will continue to deepen. As soon as you start listening, really listening to my 
voice you will feel comfort inside your body. As soon as you feel that comfort in your 
body you’ll find it easier to focus on what I’m saying. As soon as you focus more on what 
I’m saying you’ll relax even more completely. As soon as you’re relaxed you’ll feel more 
comfortable. As soon as you notice that comfort deepening your relaxation will continue 
to deep too. 
 
Again, notice that we’re just applying two things together and as soon as allows us to 
put them together.  
 
The next phrase:  
 
3. When you _______, you _______ 
 
When you do this you do that, has the exact same idea at heart, only now there’s more 
control. One is about time, well actually both are about time, the main difference is that 
the when you do this, you do that pattern has more of a sense of control for the person. 
In other words, they get to choose the point of time, whereas the as soon as tends to 
imply a little more about something will happen as soon as you close your eyes, this will 
happen. When you close your eyes, this will happen even more. So it’s a bit more 
insistent, more directed towards the purpose you want.  
 
So when you relax you’ll feel more comfortable. When you close your eyes you’ll start to 
relax, which means when you really close your eyes you’ll start to feel good and when 
you feel good you’ll be comfortable. When you feel comfortable, then you’ll relax even 
further. As soon as you start relaxing further, that relaxation will continue and you’ll 
start learning how to master hypnosis. As soon as you start to relax you will master 
hypnosis and when you learn how to be relaxed as you speak to people, hypnotic 
language will flow automatically and, you will continue to feel good. As soon as you’ve 
mastered these drills, you will find yourself using these all over the place automatically. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
54 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Notice again how we just combined them and they’re starting to flow more and more 
smoothly. The more you do these the smoother they become.  
 
The next card is:  
 
4. _______ as well as _______ 
 
This as well as that. That’s another way of saying and, and kind of enriching it a little bit.  
 
So you can close your eyes as well as relax. You can relax and feel comfort. As well as the 
comfort you feel you can continue to deepen that relaxation. As well as allowing your 
mind to drift, you can allow your mind to drift as well as your body relaxes. And as your 
body relaxes, when you find that comfort inside yourself you can continue to drift even 
further.  
 
And as well as drifting you can feel good. And as well as feeling good you can physically 
relax. And you can physically relax as well as you can mentally relax. And as you 
mentally relax, as soon as that mental relaxation hits the right level your mind will open 
up and you’ll be able to learn these things more quickly and easily than you’ve ever 
thought possible, and that might be something to look forward to might it not? 
 
The next card is: 
 
5. It’s a good thing you’re _______ 
 
It’s a good thing you’re doing this even if you’re getting that. Again, you’re starting to 
flow into the idea, so this is not so much a linkage term as it is a way of introducing 
something. It’s very useful combined with the other linkage terms to create bridges 
between things. For example… 
 
It’s a good thing you’re here. It’s a good thing you’re here to relax and feel comfortable. 
And as well as feeling comfortable it’s a good thing you’re here to learn how your body 
can physically create the experience of relaxation. When you physically relax you’ll find 
yourself mentally relaxing and it’s a good thing you’re mentally relaxing now. As soon as 
you relax mentally, you’ll find your mind more quickly able to absorb information. It’s a 
good thing your mind is able to learn things at such accelerated rates and to master 
things without your conscious involvement. As soon as you let go you’ll find yourself 
mastering these things more easily. It’s a good thing you’re letting go right now. It’s a 
good thing you feel comfortable and relaxed. And find yourself drifting through these 
hypnotic experiences automatically. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
55 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The next pattern again very simply links things together:  
 
6. Every time you _______ you _______ 
 
Every time you do this you’ll do that.  
 
Every time you blink you can relax a bit more comfortably. Every time you feel the 
relaxation developing, let comfort continue to grow. Every time that comfort grows 
you’ll start to breathe in and out in your own relaxed comfortable rate. Every time you 
breathe in you can relax. Every time you breathe out you can feel more comfortable.  
 
So again, we’re just linking two things together. 
 
The final card has exactly the same idea:  
 
7. As you _______, so you _______ 
 
As you do this, so you do that. It’s kind of like as soon as this, but instead of having a 
time based component you’re basically saying the time is now.  
 
As you blink you can relax. As you relax you feel more comfortable. As you feel more 
comfortable you can go deeper. As you go deeper your mind can open up and as your 
mind opens up you’ll really learn the power of hypnosis. Every time you allow that 
process to occur you’re ability to use hypnotic Power Words becomes augmented. And as 
words augmenting the ability to use Power Words, you get to augment the enjoyment of 
using Power Words. When you enjoy using hypnotic language you’ll become a master 
hypnotist.  
 
As soon as you start doing these drills with a real sense of enthusiasm, you’ll find your 
language growing and your ability to use it in an everyday setting improving. As soon as 
you start using these language patterns in everyday conversations, you will start to 
actually experience yourself as a powerful hypnotist. And as you find yourself using this 
in everyday moments, so your confidence in yourself will grow. And it’s a good thing that 
your confidence is growing. Every time you use one of these language drills you’ll find 
yourself wanting to use them more. It’s a good thing to decide to have the desire to use 
it more, because as well as the desire, so your skill will continue to improve as time goes 
by.  
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
56 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
The Blue Suit – The Pseudo Logic Suit 
 
The next set of cards are called pseudo-logic, which are all about creating a sense that 
something logical is going on, so connecting things again but in a topsy-turvy logical sort 
of way.  
 
The first pattern is:  
 
1. The more _______, the more _______  
 
The more this happens the more that happens. This is a classic hypnotic Power Phrase 
and it works incredibly well.  
 
The more you relax, the more comfortable you become. The more comfortable you 
become the more you relax.  
 
You can create nice loops this way. The classic one is in the deepening script.  
 
The deeper you go the better you feel. The better you feel the deeper you go. The deeper 
you go the more you relax. The more relaxed the better you feel. The better you feel the 
deeper you go.  
 
Notice how I’m using the exact same thing, the more this the more that it’s just I’m 
putting the more now into the word, deeper, more relaxed, feel better, all these 
comparatives are basically using the words the more, but putting it into the actual 
phrase itself. So just because you have the language pattern here doesn’t mean that you 
have to be stuck to the actual words, you can put the concept in and around it as well.  
 
The more relaxed the more comfortable you’ll feel. The more comfortable you feel the 
better you are inside. The better you are inside the more natural everything tends to be. 
The more natural everything is, the easier it becomes being a master of hypnosis. The 
easier you start to master hypnosis the more effortless your actual use of hypnotic 
language will be. The more effortless it becomes the more you enjoy it. The more 
enjoyable it becomes the more natural it becomes too.  
 
The next card is something I’ve used a few times already in the other examples, and it 
basically is saying that: 
 
2. _______ to the point where _______ 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
57 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
If you take it to the point where something else happens. So you’re basically saying 
repetition of something takes you to this result and this is the result it will take you to. 
You can relax to a point where you feel comfortable. That’s the logic. I can say also you 
can relax to the point where you feel uncomfortable.  
 
Notice how I’ve said two completely paradoxical things. In other words, they are 
mutually exclusive but they both sound logical and because they sound logical it 
mollifies the critical factor and shuts that down a little bit, so you can actually end up 
doing whatever you want to do, say whatever you want to say and you’re in a hypnotic 
context.  
 
So you can relax to the point where you feel comfortable and you can feel the comfort to 
the point where your mind opens up. The more your mind opens up the more you’ll enjoy 
the hypnotic experience, to the point where you might find yourself using this hypnotic 
language without thinking about it. If you’re not thinking about it you’ll find your 
unconscious mind doing things to the point where you become more eloquent.  
 
Doing these drills will make you more eloquent to the point where you’re using this in 
everyday situations and using it in everyday situations will help you master hypnosis to 
the point where you really understand the power of hypnotic language.  
 
By now you should be getting the idea of how they work. We are now giving shorter 
examples, purely and simply because it’s the same principle and action over and over 
again.  
 
The next pseudo-logic card is: 
 
3. [Fact 1], [Fact 2],  [Fact 3], and _______ 
 
This actually allows you to piggyback suggestions. When I say fact one, fact two, fact 
three, etc. what we’re looking for is for you to make statements which are absolutely 
true for that person.  
 
So right now you’re listening to me, fact one. And, you want to learn about hypnosis, fact 
two. You’re interested in hypnotic language patterns and Power Words, fact three. And 
because you’re interested in that your unconscious mind will help you learn this more 
quickly.  
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
58 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Notice how I’ve now piggybacked the idea that you’re going to learn this more quickly 
onto three facts… 
 
 
You’re listening 
 
You’re curious, and 
 
You want to learn to use Power Words 
 
You can use anything. For example, you have a hand, a foot, a brain and you have the 
ability to use these in coordination. You’ve learned things in the past. You know you will 
learn things in the future. You’ve had the experience of learning things without quite 
knowing how you were learning them. And, you will learn hypnotic language patterns in 
the same way. 
 
You’ve had a whole lifetime of learning experiences. You can remember all kinds of 
different situations in your life. You’ve had pleasant learning experiences and this one 
will be just as pleasant as the best of those. You can listen to me and you can talk. You’ve 
talked to many people in the past, and you’ll be able to talk to them in hypnotic 
language when you start doing these drills.  
 
You have a hand. You have feet. You have a whole body and you can relax that body. 
You have a mind. You have thoughts. You have experiences and you can use those 
experiences to learn to use Power Words more eloquently in any situation. You were 
born somewhere. You grew up, and you learned to speak the English language, which 
means you’ll be able to do these language patterns automatically, once you connect up 
the drills that you’ve been doing here.  
 
Notice how all we’re doing here is throwing out facts. It can be random facts or ideally, 
facts that fit the situation, the context that you’re in, and at the end of these facts 
you’re using the and to piggyback another suggestion, something which may or may not 
be true, but at this point will more likely to be true than not because the brain is used to 
saying yes.  
 
So, in terms of relaxation for example, the classic example being, you can close your 
eyes. You can breathe and you can rest there, and your body can relax. So whether it’s 
three facts you do or two in a row doesn’t matter, after a while just one fact will be fine. 
Sometimes with people who have active critical factors, you may want to put in 10-13 
facts first and then attach a small suggestion, then another 10 facts and another small 
suggestion.  
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
59 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
With people who have a less active critical factor you might just do two facts and a 
suggestion, two facts and another suggestion and then after a while as they get more 
and more into trance one fact one suggestion, one fact one suggestion, and finally you 
go straight on to the linkage, suggestion, suggestion and another suggestion and 
another suggestion. That’s how it fits together into a sequence.  
 
The next card presents a very powerful pattern known as:  
 
4. Because _______, so _______  
 
Because, effect. Basically, something caused something else. Because you’re listening to 
me you can relax. So the fact that you’re listening to me is causing you to relax. It’s the 
kind of suggestion implication I’m creating there.  
 
If I spell it out so completely it becomes a bit more like, hang on a second how can one 
thing cause the other? But the power of this causes that, that element is assumed.  
 
Because you’re here to learn you’re going to learn things more easily. Because you’ve 
learned things in the past you’ll learn things in the future. Because you’re here to learn 
about hypnosis you’ll learn about hypnosis comfortably because you have an 
unconscious mind. You can learn this more quickly than you’ve yet to anticipate and 
because you’ve not realized the full potential that you’ll have, you might be surprised at 
just how simple it is to master the power of hypnotic language.  
 
Moving on to the next card:  
 
5. If you, _______, then _______;  
 
If you do x, then that is again kind of the because so equation put slightly differently.  
 
If you close your eyes then you’ll find yourself relaxing. If you allow yourself to relax then 
you’ll find comfort beginning to develop. If you do these drills you’ll find yourself using 
hypnotic language automatically in everyday settings. If you find yourself using them in 
everyday settings then you’ll really be mastering hypnosis. If you haven’t realized that 
you can do this yet then you’ll master it at the unconscious level first, before you have 
any conscious recollection of this. If you just sit there and listen then you’ll find yourself 
going into the right kind of learning trance you need, in order to master this effortlessly. 
 
Incidentally, you can now start combining them just as all the other things. For example, 
let’s combine the fact-fact-fact and the if you then cards.  

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
60 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
If you sit there and you listen to me and allow your brain to just drift through different 
thoughts and ideas, then you’ll make the right connections to make learning hypnotic 
language easy. If you allow yourself to make those connections than you’ll become a 
master hypnotist because you’re really learning at the unconscious level. The more you 
trust your unconscious to do the learning the quicker you will learn, to the point where 
you’ll surprise yourself how quickly you’ve actually mastered this hypnotic language.  
 
You’re a human being. You have mastered the language that you speak. And speaking a 
foreign language is a difficult thing to foreigners not to the native speakers and because 
you have mastered this language, you’ll find yourself really mastering the nuances, the 
hypnotic Power Words and phrases gives you, to the point where you just become more 
persuasive in everyday situations.  
 
If you allow yourself to become more persuasive in everyday situations, your ability to 
influence people just goes through the roof. And because your intention is right, people 
will trust you enough to go there. You’ve been listening to me speaking for some time 
now. You’ve bought these cards and you’ve read through them. All that means is that 
you’re really going to master the rich vocabulary of hypnotic Power Words and phrases.  
 
Let’s move on to the next card the penultimate card, which is very interesting: 
 
6. A person can you know [Insert Name] ______ 
 
The person can you know, insert the name or do whatever. This is a very interesting 
pattern, because what you’re doing is basically calling their attention and this is perfect 
for putting in an embedded command. When you say someone’s name, their attention 
gets riveted more.  
 
You can overuse people’s names. If you try, let’s say your name is John and I say John, 
that we’ll never use your name, John, you really John, have to pay attention, John, 
because your name John, is something that John, you really want to pay attention to. 
That’s way too much. However, a person’s name is very powerful. Used at the right time, 
it can John, make it more riveting to them. And John, I want you to realize that a person 
can experience hypnosis in so many different ways.  
 
So this pattern, a person can you know, (insert name), do whatever, have that power of 
calling the name whilst at the same time, seeming to be talking about somebody else. 
So you’re talking about a person, a person can relax. A person can you know, John, 
relax.  

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
61 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What we’re doing here is, again, for those of you who want to play with a better 
suggestion that’s a more sophisticated way of using hypnotic language what you’re 
doing is creating another suggestion. John relax. That is the suggestion. That is the 
command, but because you’re putting it into a general phrase like, a person can you 
know, relax. A person can you know, John, relax. So you now have multiple levels of 
communication going on at the same time. I like this language pattern. 
 
You don’t want to overuse it. Of course, when you’re learning, when you’re practicing 
drilling you can go to town on this one. But in ordinary conversation, when you’re using 
this in hypnotic flow then you’re using it to spice it up.  
 
So a person can you know, John, learn to master hypnotic language. If you allow yourself 
to trust your unconscious then the language will come out automatically. The more you 
trust your unconscious the more automatic that process becomes, to the point where 
you don’t have to think about things anymore, they just flow out of you effortlessly. 
 
There are a lot of things you can do effortlessly. You can lift a fork. You can walk and you 
can talk, and you can talk hypnotically because inside you, you already have the 
experience of these drills and have had many examples of them, going on over and over 
again. If you allow these examples to sink into you, then you’ll find yourself using them 
automatically at the right time. And a person can you know, John, do this automatically, 
at the right time.  
 
The final card in the sequence is the idea of meaning:  
 
7. _______ which means _______ 
 
Which means this is technically called the complex equivalence. Basically it’s the 
linguistic or the language component of an equal sign. This equals that.  
 
You’re listening to me which means you’re interested. You’re interested in hypnosis, 
which means you want to learn something important. You have an unconscious mind, 
which means you can learn things at a much quicker rate when you trust it. When you 
trust your unconscious mind you’re learning to really use hypnosis powerfully, which 
means it will become effortless.  
 
You’ve already heard so many hypnotic language patterns and actions, which means 
your mind is already filling up with those things. You have these recordings; which means 
you can listen to them time and time again. The more you listen to these recordings the 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
62 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
easier it becomes to do this stuff to a point where you’re speaking hypnotic language 
automatically.  
 
You’ve listened to dozens of examples of hypnotic language and actions. You’ve 
experienced them for yourself and now you can get others to experience them also, 
because those patterns are now inside your mind.  
 
If you think about it then you’ll realize that you know more than you think you did. A 
person can you know, simply start speaking, and allow things to roll off their tongue, 
which means their unconscious mind has freedom to express itself. The more you give 
the unconscious mind that freedom the more it will surprise and delight you with 
powerful hypnotic language, to the point where you get your point across every time.  
 
Because you have important places in your life where you can use more influence and 
persuasion. If you do these drills, then you will be more persuasive at those times. And a 
person can you know, use hypnosis in so many different ways, which means you now 
have the option to be more persuasive in your day to day life, as well as a hypnotist. A 
hypnotist knows how to use these things whenever and wherever they are, whether it’s 
conversationally or not. The more you think about that, the more you get to feel the 
comfort of knowing that your unconscious mind is on your side. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
63 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
CD 4 
 
The Purple Suit – The Negation Suit 
 
Negation is really about, as we already talked about, introducing an idea without really 
introducing it. Like when someone says for example, don’t take this the wrong way but, 
you know they’re going to give you some criticism and they’re basically blocking you 
from being able to be offended by it. Don’t get upset now when you should know this.  
 
As a hypnotist we’re going to use that, by actually introducing an idea inside their mind, 
which they’re going to hold onto without realizing that they’re doing it.  
 
1. You really shouldn’t _______ 
 
You shouldn’t relax comfortably until you figure out how to do it without having to think 
about it. You really shouldn’t relax, consciously allow your unconscious mind to do the 
work instead. You really shouldn’t try to relax, it’s much easier when it happens 
automatically.  
 
2. I don’t know if you can _______ 
 
The next one, I don’t know if you can is a bit of a challenge at the same time, of course, 
leaving the thread hanging.  
 
I don’t know if you can relax. I don’t know if you can relax and feel comfortable at the 
same time. I don’t know if you really can relax to a point where you’re learning happens 
automatically. I don’t know if you can take that relaxation and allow it to grow. You 
really shouldn’t allow it to grow any more quickly than you can enjoy the process. I don’t 
know if you can enjoy the process of relaxing and you really shouldn’t enjoy that process, 
unless you really are relaxing thoroughly. I don’t know if you can enjoy relaxing 
thoroughly or if you really can relax thoroughly in order to enjoy the experience.  
 
So again, you just need to play around with it and see where it goes.  
 
3. You could _______, couldn’t you? 
 
The third card is you could something or other, couldn’t you? That couldn’t you, mustn’t 
you, mightn’t you, isn’t it, this is technically known as a tag phrase or tag question. It 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
64 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
kind of puts a negative spin in the back of their mind which adds kind of another - partly 
gets in agreement, but it also partly satisfies the needs of someone to have to maybe 
disagree in some respects. You give them the positive and negative at the same time.  
 
You could relax couldn’t you? The difference between saying you can relax or you can 
relax can’t you, is the can’t you allows you to basically agree and disagree at the same 
time, so there’s a part of me that says I can relax but maybe not right now. Maybe that 
maybe not right now bit is being satisfied by the tag question, couldn’t you? Subtle 
things when you throw it in repetitively starts to really sizzle. It’s like lights being added 
to a Christmas tree, it just makes a little bit more sparkle in the communication.  
 
So you could relax couldn’t you? You could listen to me and relax even further could you 
not? You might find yourself feeling comfortable mightn’t you? You might feel the 
comfort until you relax even further could you not? And you felt comfortable in the past 
haven’t you? You will feel comfortable in the future will you not? And you might feel 
comfortable right now might you not? 
 
Another way you can use this, although I would warn you in terms of conversations to 
be a little more subtle about this, is to change the moods and tenses of the tag phrase 
or question from the original one.  
 
So, you really could relax can’t you? You know you will relax at some point in the future 
have you not? To the extent that you can relax right now, you’ll experience it even more 
profoundly in a moment’s time don’t you?   
 
Notice now I’m switching the mood and the tense of the tag question and that has its 
own hypnotic impact. It puts the mind in a mini-twist or mini-loop which makes it easier 
for the next thing to come through. If I do this so blatantly then people will think I have 
no control of the English language I’m just talking weirdly, but if I do it subtly in terms of 
the conversation it starts fitting in more and more naturally.  
 
So, let’s use the three negation patterns together.  
 
You really shouldn’t relax any more comfortably than you’ve done in the past. And I 
don’t know if you can relax comfortably right now. You could experience relaxation, like 
you’re drifting down a pleasant river, can you not? You really shouldn’t experience that 
drifting experience any more quickly than you get to enjoy it. I don’t know if you can 
enjoy it thoroughly, can you not? You could experience yourself drifting down there and 
you really shouldn’t experience it any more deeply than just letting your unconscious 
mind carry away with you can’t you? 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
65 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Notice again, now these are tag questions used a little more often, but I’ve also reduced 
their frequency a little bit so they are disguised and if you listen back to the recording 
you’ll notice that I’ve actually switched the moods and tenses of the tag questions in 
those things where they’re less easily spotted, because it’s part of a wider 
communication now.  
 
Again, I don’t want to over emphasize it otherwise I start talking weirdly, which in itself 
isn’t helpful. It can be helpful if it causes the right level of confusion, but it’s not always 
helpful. So for a moment play with that and see where it takes you.  
 
4. It’s not necessary _______ 
 
The next card is called it’s not necessary. We’re still playing with the idea of need now, 
but we’re both reducing and increasing the idea of need or the pressure at the same 
time. It’s not necessary for you to relax right now. Notice how we’ve both taken the 
pressure off the conscious mind, but with the unconscious level there’s still that sense 
of hey, we better make it happen quickly, there’s a sense of a zing, a timeliness of do it 
now. That’s the power of words like should, need, must, necessary and so on.  
 
It’s not necessary for you to relax right now. It’s not necessary that you relax in a 
moments time. It’s not even necessary that you relax comfortably. All you need to do is 
sit there and let whatever experience arises, arise.  
 
So notice what I’ve done there is opened the category, remember we talked about 
opening the file of relaxation, and by giving you a few examples of that the categories 
are wide open, so just say have whatever experience you’re going to have. What 
experience are you going to have if I’ve opened the file up? It’s just like the spoon. Don’t 
think of the spoon, don’t think of the spoon, don’t think of the spoon; think of 
something else. What are you going to think of? A knife, fork, plate or something like 
that. Why? Because they’re in the same drawer as that spoon.  
 
5. There’s no need to _______, until _______ 
 
The next card is one that I love using, especially in coordination with others... there’s no 
need to… until. So basically you’re taking the pressure off and at the same time putting 
the pressure on. You’re still doing a time bind here, so something will happen 
eventually, but you take the pressure off them from having to perform it straight away. 
The reason you tend to take pressure off people is if their conscious mind is closed to 
the process, you use a lot of negations because a conscious mind doesn’t know how to 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
66 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
handle it; it just goes all right I don’t have to relax. I don’t have to do this. I don’t have to 
do that. Meanwhile, the unconscious mind is doing those things. 
 
So there’s no need for you to relax until you feel comfortable about relaxing. There’s no 
need for you to start doing these hypnotic language drills until that comfort starts to set 
inside of you. There’s no need to feel comfortable until you’ve really listened to these 
audio sessions, so there’s a pattern inside of you and there’s no need for you to become 
masterful at hypnosis until you spend the time to really drill and experience these Power 
Words and phrases in action.  
 
It’s not necessary for you to experience the Power Words and phrases, you could simply 
just use them on your own, could you not? There’s no need for you to use them on your 
own until you just have that sense of wanting to use them because you can, can’t you? 
You really shouldn’t push yourself to really enjoy the experience. And I don’t know if you 
can enjoy the experience without actually having to do anything in particular.  
 
It’s not necessary that you have fun whilst you are using hypnotic language drills. There 
really isn’t any need for you to enjoy doing the hypnotic language drills until you find 
that magical state inside your mind where it flows smoothly through you. And you could 
just enjoy the process way before it becomes natural to you, can you not? 
 
6. You don’t have to _______ 
 
The next language pattern is you don’t have to. This is very much like, it’s not necessary, 
again taking the pressure off them.  
 
You don’t have to relax in order to feel good. You don’t have to go into relaxation in 
order to make the comfort continue to grow inside you. You don’t have to sit 
comfortably in order for your body to relax. You don’t even have to close your eyes, in 
order for you to feel comfortable right now.  
 
7. You really don’t need to be aware of _______ 
 
The final card will allow you to connect a couple of different things you’re already aware 
of…  
 
 The idea of negation 
 The idea of need, and 
 The idea of awareness 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
67 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
All three are combined in one nice little chunk. You really don’t need to be aware of. 
Notice what happens here.  
 
You really don’t need to be aware of your feet right now. You really don’t need to be 
aware of your hands. You certainly don’t have to be aware of anything feeling 
comfortable inside your body right now. You don’t have to be aware of the fact that 
you’re breathing in and out in order for you to go into a trance.  
 
Notice what I’m doing here. I’m both taking the pressure off you and guiding your 
awareness through these things, and for those of you that have been listening, you’ll 
notice that I’ve been using the Pseudo Logic Patterns Fact 1, 2 and 3, but I’ll now turn 
these facts into negations.  
 
You really don’t need to be aware of your feet, fact one. You really don’t need to be 
aware of the fact that you’re thinking, fact two. You really don’t need to be aware of 
how you’re breathing in and out, in order to allow yourself to relax comfortably.  
 
So, I’ve used now, a whole slew of these ideas and I’ll start fitting it together into what 
seems to be a very simple communication. Now you have the power to do this. We 
haven’t gone through the whole deck yet, we still have one more suit to go and yet, look 
at how intricate everything is starting to become.  
 
It’s not complicated, it’s sophisticated. It basically means that if you do each drill on its 
own, each card on its own until it’s natural, sooner or later you’ll get it. Whether you get 
it now as you’re listening to me or you’ll get it later when you actually do the practice 
drills doesn’t even matter. How will you know you’ve got the hang of these language 
drills? I personally don’t know if you’ve realized yet just how much more you’ve learned 
about hypnotic language than you thought you did.  
 
I mean, you can begin to just imagine using these language patterns by yourself, right? 
You can continue right on imagining that, until you pick up the cards and start using 
them for yourself. Now, consciously you might not know what you’re doing, yet 
unconsciously the right kind of language flows through you. Sooner or later you’ll get it 
right. Will you get it right, right now or will you just get to enjoy the process first, so you 
get to really experience the richness of this language in action? 
 
How will you know that you’re speaking more richly? Will it be through people’s 
experiences and otherwise how they react to you? Or, will it be that you just enjoy 
speaking in a different way? I wonder if you realize yet just how much your language has 
changed now just from listening to these audios and you can begin to appreciate the 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
68 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
power of your unconscious mind, just by doing that. Then you can continue right on 
appreciating your unconscious mind until you’re actually using these things.  
 
Now, I don’t want you to jump into it too quickly, because you get to enjoy the process of 
doing the drills by yourself. The more you do the drills the easier they become and you 
can imagine yourself doing these things every single day until it’s a natural part of how 
you communicate. Suppose you were to communicate this way to everyone that you 
meet. You don’t have to do it with every person, can you not? Now, to the extent that 
you do allow yourself to enjoy this process, sooner or later you’ll find yourself being 
simply magical in your communication.  
 
How will you know that you’re more influential? I wonder if you realize that you are 
more influential right now than when you began. Consciously you know certain things 
and unconsciously you know a hell of a lot more. A conscious mind is limited to a certain 
amount of information. Your unconscious mind stores it all away. It has access to 
everything, so how could you possibly fail to succeed if not by just doing these drills to 
the point that they’re natural to you. 
The Violet Suit – The Assumptions Suit 
 
If you turn to the final suit, the cards called Assumptions, you should notice that I used 
pretty much all of them in that example. So really they’re the same thing you’ve been 
doing for the last few hours of this audio recording.  
 
1. Sooner or later _______ 
2. Will you _______ now, or _______ later? 
3. And how will you _______? 
4. I wonder if you realize that _______ yet? 
5. You can begin to _______ 
6. You can continue right on _______ 
7. Consciously _______, whilst unconsciously _______ 
 
Basically, sooner or later this will happen. Will you relax now or later? How will you know 
when you’re relaxing? I wonder if you realize that you’ve relaxed yet. You can begin to 
relax in your own way and you can continue right on relaxing to the point where you just 
drift away.  
 
Consciously you’ll drift away into a world of dreams whilst unconsciously you’ll keep 
listening to me. Sooner or later you will get it. Will you get it consciously now or will you 
just find yourselves speaking this way later? How will you be using these language 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
69 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
patterns when you’ve mastered them? I wonder if you realize that, you know more 
about language than you thought you did. You can begin to use this language in 
everyday situations and you can continue right on enjoying that process as long as it 
takes for you to master it. 
 
Consciously you don’t have to have any idea what’s going on, because unconsciously the 
pattern is already there.  
 
Okay, so we’ve gone through the entire seven suits of the new deck. These are the same 
cards you had previously, they’ve just been presented to you in a slight more easy to 
use, easy to read and direct way. If you look at those cards you’ll notice that the 
language patterns are on the front and on the back you have examples, just like I’ve 
given you, of each card in action to remind you how to use it.  
 
Now it’s up to you to start doing that. To help you do this I want to introduce you to 
some games and then when we’ve talked about these games or exercises, I’d like to 
introduce you to the final modification to this deck, which is the modifying cards, the 
language modifiers, which are the black cards at the end of the suit. We’ll talk more 
about those in a moment. 
 
Five Hypnotic Word Games 
 
First, I want to introduce you to five simple games, simple exercises you can do with 
your friends to really get good at hypnotic language.  
 
1. Hypnotic Snap. 
 
It’s very simple. You sit with a person. You both have your deck of cards. For a moment 
let’s leave the black cards to one side, we’ll talk about those later. So you pull out your 
seven suits and you flip them over on the table. As soon as you flip a card over, and you 
don’t know what the card is going to be, because you’ve mixed them up and they’re all 
shuffled. 
 
All you know is that you’ll put the other person in trance by making them so thoroughly 
relaxed and comfortable that they can’t resist but close their eyes and lay their heads 
down to rest peacefully. Of course, the other person will do the same thing to you. 
When you’re playing hypnotic snap you’ll pick a card up, turn it over and let’s say the 
card is one of the Imagination Cards.  
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
70 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Let’s say it’s the word suppose. Then you say something like, suppose you were to relax 
right now and the other person turns around, opens one of their cards and it might say 
something like, you should remember. At which point they say to you, you should 
remember to relax thoroughly whenever we play or talk to each other.  
 
Now it’s your turn again and you turn over a card and it’s the Awareness card, have you 
ever. So you might say something like, have you ever relaxed so comfortably your eyes 
just want to close?  
 
They turn around and look at you slightly and turn their card over, and it says I need to 
tell you, so they say to you I need to tell you to relax now. You flip over your card and it 
says realize, so you say just realize how much more comfortable you are just listening to 
me.  
 
This is constantly changing, where they say one, you say one and you keep going 
backwards and forwards until literally, one of you has lost the power of speech. It will 
happen if you do it with the right hypnotic intent.  
 
The other thing you can do is to make it a bit more interesting is each one of you gets to 
turn over several cards so you do several phrases together. Here’s an example. Let’s say 
I take the Awareness card I need to tell you and the Imagination card imagine. So I’ve 
turned three cards over so now I’m going to give him a little barrage. Notice how 
comfortable you feel sitting in that chair. I need to tell you that you can feel comfortable 
in that chair and continue right on feeling that comfortable. Imagine that comfort begin 
to spread all the way to your toes right now.  
 
Then of course they’ll come back and turn over their own three cards and they may say 
something like, have you ever felt so comfortable you simply couldn’t talk? I want you to 
experience that comfort right now. What’s it like when you feel so comfortable your eyes 
just want to shut and your mouth simply stops talking? Again, they now just turned 
three cards over, it doesn’t really matter, it doesn’t have to be from different suits, you 
just randomly shuffle the cards up and let whatever they come to, come to. In this way 
you become very, very fluent.  
 
The beauty about cards is that as you shuffle them up you don’t know what order they’ll 
come in, which means you can’t prepare you just have to flip the card over and deal 
with it as it arises. Your unconscious mind will instantly give you an idea and bang, you 
say it and then you move on and on again. This way you become very fluent very 
quickly. 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
71 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
2. The Hypnotic Circle 
 
The second hypnotic game I want to encourage you to play is The Hypnotic Circle. 
Essentially, you and a bunch of friends get in a circle and you take turns. You have your 
cards in your hands and you flip a card over and then do the exact same thing as 
hypnotic snap, only now you’re going to go round and round in the circle. As you go 
round in the circle you listen to what the other people are saying and allow it to affect 
you.  
 
This way you become rich in your communication because if there are five people in the 
circle then you have four other people, four other hypnotists, giving you good examples 
of hypnotic language and as it impacts on you something will have a real impact and you 
go wow, that was so good. Guess what? Now you have grown your ability. You have 
enriched your ability to communicate hypnotically because you’ve heard someone else 
say something.  
 
So hypnotic circles is a great way of gaining more knowledge getting a wider range of 
expressions using these language patterns.  
 
3. Hypnotic Surrender 
 
The third game is similar, although I call it something slightly different. I call it Hypnotic 
Surrender. What you’re going to do now is the same thing, but rather than just listing 
out to the other hypnotists for their version of the language patterns you do in the 
circle, you’re going to find someone to surrender to the trance. 
 
In other words, you’re going to get someone to volunteer to be the trance subject. 
They’re going to sit in the middle and each hypnotist in the circle will take turns to turn 
over one card, two cards, three cards, four cards, however many you agree and give 
them a little bit of a hypnotic blitz and then the next person goes and so on.  
 
So the first person might turn some cards over and say hey, imagine how comfortable 
you can be sitting in that chair. You really shouldn’t feel too comfortable until your eyes 
close. The next person will pick up from there and say something like, because you’re 
here to feel good, your unconscious mind can give you a tremendous sense of comfort 
now. Will you feel the comfort before you close your eyes or will you have to close your 
eyes before you really feel that comfort developing inside, can you not?  
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
72 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
The third person might then say something like, I really want you to experience that 
comfort and you shouldn’t close your eyes too soon, because the longer it takes for you 
to close your eyes the deeper that sense of comfort will be when you finally do.  
 
The reason we separate the idea of The Hypnotic Circle and Hypnotic Surrender is 
because The Circle is all about you learning from your hypnotists by focusing on their 
language and letting it sink it. Hypnotic Surrender, on the other hand, is about focusing 
your hypnotic intention on a specific person, which means all the things we talked about 
in the beginning have to be used. You look at the person. You focus on them. You 
intensely stare at them, but in a friendly inviting safe sort of way. You have your 
intention to put them in trance and then you roll with the language until you get them 
there.  
 
4.  A Hypnotic Benediction 
 
The fourth game/exercise is called A Benediction or A Hypnotic Benediction. We all 
know what curses are. When someone curses you and says I hope you die, that’s a 
pretty nasty thing someone would say to you or to anyone and it’s not necessarily the 
healthiest thing to leave inside someone’s mind. A Hypnotic Benediction does the same, 
but it reverses it by putting something positive in, along the lines of… I hope you live a 
long and healthy life. It does it in a hypnotic context using the language to basically 
empower them. Think of it like a hypnotic pep talk.  
 
How do you do this? You choose your themes. Remember, so far in the examples I’ve 
been doing about relaxation, comfort, learning, mastering hypnosis and I gave you a 
very brief example of a sales thing as well. So what you do is find a person, find out what 
it is they want more of and then you give it to them. By then you basically turn your 
cards over and as you turn your cards over you begin with one theme, let’s say 
relaxation. Then you move to another theme, maybe it’s learning and you finally end up 
with a third theme of mastering hypnosis.  
 
So it might sound something like this. Imagine yourself relaxing right now. Suppose your 
body was so completely relaxed that you feel a wonderful glow of relaxation. I don’t 
know if you can imagine how comfortable you would be in the sense that your whole 
body just drifts away. It’s as if you’re floating on a cloud. Now the more you allow 
yourself to feel that now the more comfortable you become, and your unconscious mind 
begins to have the opportunity to teach you something important.  
 
You see, you’ve learned many things in the past. You’ve mastered many things and now 
you get to master something new, because you’re here to master hypnotic language. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
73 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
Your unconscious mind is on your side, so while it’s consciously focused on relaxing, your 
unconscious can focus on you learning something new. Who knew where you’d end up? 
You don’t have to know what you’re doing consciously, for your unconscious mind to 
actually give you the result you’re looking for, can you not? Simply trust your 
unconscious and allow that to take you forward.  
 
The more you trust your unconscious the closer you get to mastery. When you finally get 
to the point where you’re speaking without thinking about it, all you have is that 
intention inside, then you’ll experience what it’s like to speak like a true master of 
hypnosis now. I don’t know if you can experience that for yourself right now and I want 
you to experience the comfort of how deeply you can learn things without any effort, so 
that, sooner than you think your unconscious mind will show you that you’ve mastered 
the hypnotic language flawlessly. That’s something to look forward to is it not?  
 
So notice how now, in the benediction, you just put everything together and we just 
have more complex hypnotic themes going on.  
 
5. Hypno Judo 
 
The final exercise/game is one we’ll come back to because it will use the language 
modifiers. I call this Hypnotic Judo.  
 
Keep that in the back of your mind because we have one more set of things to do and 
then you can put it all together in a crazy and intense set of hypnotic language. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
74 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
The 3 Black Suits – The Language Modifiers  
 
Now let’s turn to the black cards at the end of your pack. You’ll notice that you have 
three different suits here.  
 
We have the Language Softeners, the Action Accelerators and the Anticipation 
Builders. Each of them do something slightly different. 
 
Language Softeners 
 
1. Perhaps _______ 
2. Maybe _______ 
3. You could _______ 
4. I’m not sure _______ 
5. You might _______ 
6. Would you _______ 
7. Allow _______  
 
Language Softeners are, as the name implies there to soften the impact of something. In 
other words, instead of pushing people into something you’re taking the pressure off 
them.  
 
So, instead of saying relax now you can say to them, perhaps you can relax now. Maybe 
you will relax now. Maybe you could relax now. I’m not sure if you will relax comfortably 
now. You might relax comfortably. Would you relax comfortably now? Would you just 
allow yourself to have the comfort of going into trance? 
 
The way you use the Language Softener, in fact, is the way you use all the modifying 
cards, the black cards, is to add them to Power Words or phrases that you’re already 
familiar with. For example, let’s take the idea of imagination and supposing.  
 
Perhaps you can imagine feeling relaxed. Now, maybe you could suppose that you’re just 
relaxing by yourself. You could imagine yourself going into hypnosis.  
 
So I’m not telling you to imagine it, I said you could imagine it. It’s much softer; hence it 
takes the pressure off of you.  
 
 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
75 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Action Accelerators  
 
1. Now _______ 
2. Fully _______ 
3. Instantly _______ 
4. Suddenly _______ 
5. _______ at once 
6. Rapidly _______ 
7. Immediately _______ 
 
The second set, the Action Accelerators do the very opposite. They actually put more 
pressure on. So whilst one takes pressure off to stop the people over thinking things, 
the other one puts more pressure on, to see if they can get a more unconscious 
response.  
 
Let’s see how that might work and combine them with some of the need cards for 
example.  
 
You really should relax now. You should discover for yourself fully, how completely 
relaxed you can be. I want you to instantly relax. Suddenly, you must find the relaxation 
inside yourself. You should remember that you can relax all at once. I know you want to 
rapidly relax inside yourself, so you immediately find yourself relaxing and you must do 
that right now.  
 
Do you see how much more pressure I put on you as a result of the Action Accelerators? 
They basically get things going, put more pressure on things. So there are times to take 
the pressure off people and build momentum and there’s time to release the 
momentum with the Action Accelerators.  
 
 
Anticipation Builders 
 
1. Soon _______ 
2. Not yet _______ 
3. In a moment _______ 
4. Begin _______ 
5. Gradually _______ 
6. Slowly _______ 
7. Eventually _______ 
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
76 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
The final set are called Anticipation Builders, whereas Action Accelerators are push 
cards, and the Language Softeners are basically taking the pressure off, the Anticipation 
Builders are pull cards. You’re pulling them away from the experience, so they’re like 
Judo, in that they want to go into it. For example… 
 
Soon you’ll be able to relax. You should be able to relax comfortably, but not yet. In a 
moment you’ll feel the relaxation sweeping through you, but wait, because you’ll begin 
to imagine that comfort spreading throughout you. You should really discover for 
yourself how gradually you can relax, slowly build that comfort up. I need to tell you that 
eventually you’ll be so blissfully relaxed that you won’t have a care in the world.  
 
Now, feel it inside you. Instantly build it up stronger and stronger. You should remember 
that you can feel totally relaxed any time you want. Perhaps you’ll feel it right now. 
Maybe it’ll happen in a moment’s time. Soon you might find yourself relaxing 
comfortably and suddenly fall into it, instantly experience the relaxation, totally taking 
you through it and rapidly feel it growing stronger and stronger inside you, now.  
 
So notice what we’ve done, we’ve taken the different things… the push, pull and 
pressure off… in order to create these different range of experiences, one which gets 
you frustrated where you’re going come o, I want to get on with this already; another 
which pushes you over the edge and the other will gently guide you by the hand to show 
you where the edge is.  
 
 Hypnotic Judo – Game #5 
 
What we do with these Action Accelerators is use these as modifiers to modify the 
Power Words and phrases you already know. So what you do is create two piles of 
cards. This is Hypnotic Judo. You have two piles of cards, one will be the Modifiers and 
the other will be the Power Words and phrases, the colored suits. You mix up the 
colored suits and for a moment we’ll leave the other ones in the seven sequence. 
 
The first round is to basically include the modifiers with another Power Word card. For 
example, let’s take the word instantly and take the Need card you should remember. 
You should remember to relax instantly. Do you see how that’s combined? It’s very 
simple. It just creates more pressure there. Let’s see if we can do something else. Let’s 
use the Language Softener ones and take for example, you could, and let’s take some of 
the Awareness cards, for example, notice.  
 
You could notice your breathing, could you not? That’s how we’re combining things now 
and becoming richer in the result. The more you combine these things, you’re now 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
77 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
putting more of these little sticks, these little pencils together for each and every 
suggestion. So now, rather than having to do the same suggestion five times in a row 
using different construction, you’re actually enriching one suggestion by putting more 
and more phrases around it.  
 
You could find yourself relaxing all at once, could you not? Soon, I know you’re 
wondering how soon you will enjoy the experience of relaxation. Focus your awareness 
on the most comfortable part of your body right now. Instantly find it growing. Suddenly, 
find yourself going into that experience until you realize how comfortable you are. 
Maybe you could make it even more comfortable. Have you ever realized just how 
deeply you could feel in a moments time? Begin to feel that now and notice it continuing 
to change.  
 
Using The Hypnotic Language Shortcut System 
 
You should get the idea of how this works now. So, how are we going to use this? Well, 
there’s a couple of ways.  
 
1. The first level is to play Hypnotic Snap, Hypnotic Circle and the other games we 
talked about, using a combination of the Modifiers and the regular language 
deck.  
 
2. The second thing you can do is start playing Hypnotic Judo.  
 
What do I mean by that? Well, in Judo one of the basic principles is if you want to throw 
or pull someone, you push them first to create some counter resistance and as they 
resist, in other words, as you push them and they push back towards you, they push 
against you, you can then use their force to pull them over your shoulder and throw 
them. The same is true the other way around. If you want to push someone over, you 
might start by pulling them, so they resist your pull and as they resist and pull away 
from your pull, you’ll go with their energy and push them so they fall over. It’s a simple 
Judo principle.  
 
How do you use this with the Language Modifiers? Very simply. The Language Softeners 
introduce the topic gently. The Anticipation Builders build anticipation so people get 
frustrated that they’re not allowed to have the experience. Finally, the Action 
Accelerators will allow you to actually release the actual activity, the actual experience 
that you want them to have and they’ll be so keen as a result of the anticipation you’ve 
built to have it, that they’ll trip right into it straight away. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
78 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
How might you do that? Perhaps you can imagine yourself relaxing. Soon you might 
actually feel that relaxation building. Now, allow yourself to go into that full relaxed 
experience as comfortably as you want to. I’m not sure how fully you can relax. I’m not 
sure if you can relax deeply, not yet, but instantly as you fall into the relaxation you can 
feel a real sense of comfort.  
 
Notice how we started with Language Softeners, we cycled into Anticipation Builders 
and we released it with the Action Accelerators. You can also build momentum so you 
can use three or four Language Softeners, three or four Anticipation Builders and then 
end with a couple of Action Accelerators.  
 
Perhaps you know what it’s like to relax. Maybe you could relax all by yourself could you 
not? Not yet. Feeling that relaxation developing inside you could be something that can 
continue to build. Begin to sense the beginnings of that relaxation. In a moment you can 
imagine it growing stronger and stronger, slowly, gradually allowing yourself to drift into 
that sense of comfort and now just dive into it fully. Instantly immerse yourself from 
head to foot in relaxation and rapidly allow it to spread throughout your whole system.  
 
That’s just an example of using the idea of Hypnotic Judo to move between the 
Modifiers into the releasing Action Accelerators. You’re going to use Language Softeners 
when you’re not sure if the result you want them to have, if they’re ready for it yet. Use 
Anticipation Builders to build that into the response potential and use Action 
Accelerators to release that potential as quickly and powerfully as you want to.  
 
So now you basically have the makings of really powerful hypnotic language. Now you 
can basically kick back, shuffle the whole card sets together and start rifting through all 
these different experiences you’ve been having, very naturally.  
 
Just imagine what it would be like if you could use hypnotic language, you might find 
yourself doing this automatically.  
 
Would you naturally find yourself using hypnotic language? You know you’ve listened to 
this recording and heard all the examples time and time again and you’ve probably 
thought about it yourself and that means you can actually have reference experiences, 
which eventually will come out in the things you say. In a moment you’ll have a trance 
experience for yourself. What would it be like if you slowly, gradually build up that skill 
until you suddenly found yourself using hypnotic language in all kinds of different places?  
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
79 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
You really should remember that you can speak English perfectly. You really should 
discover for yourself that you might start speaking English hypnotically. Maybe you 
could find more hypnotic Power Words in the things you’re saying without realizing it. So 
as a conscious mind thinks it’s speaking to someone about something, your unconscious 
mind is layering it with more and more levels of hypnotic Power Words and phrases. And 
you can begin to become more influential slowly and gradually, until eventually you 
suddenly fall into the position where you’re speaking hypnotically all the time.  
 
It’s as if an inner hypnotist has been awoken. Suppose that you could do this naturally 
and easily any time any place, suddenly finding yourself speaking about something, in a 
way that’s deeply and profoundly hypnotic. And you can continue right on speaking in 
those hypnotic ways because I really need to tell you that you might find yourself being 
more persuasive and influential than you ever thought before.  
 
Suppose that this hypnotic language helped you be, not just a better hypnotist but a 
better person. Imagine the power you have to be a force for good in the world, to 
gradually, slowly change people until they suddenly realize that their life is so much 
better than before you started talking to them. Allow yourself to focus your awareness 
on how good you can make people feel and if you make people feel good then they’ll 
want to be persuaded by you.  
 
Would you allow yourself to really enjoy the process of making people feel better as you 
persuade and influence them in a way that’s good for them? Because you can begin to 
enjoy the experiences that you’re having here, to the extent that you instantly offer 
someone else something of value to them, and eventually your ability to persuade them 
will go through the roof. I don’t know if you can simply relax into the experience of 
speaking hypnotically.  
 
Have you ever found yourself saying exactly the right thing to the right person instantly, 
without realizing what it is and how you said it? Slowly and gradually that realization 
can dawn on you and I’m not sure just when your conscious mind will catch up with what 
your unconscious mind already knows. You can begin to use the drills and you continue 
right on using those drills and allow yourself to enjoy that practice, until slowly and 
gradually you build up the experience and instantly you’ll be a master of hypnosis. 
 
It really isn’t necessary for you to be there straight away. There’s no need for you to be a 
master of hypnosis until you build up the possibilities inside yourself and really play with 
the exercises. I know you want to master hypnosis. I want you to do the drills. Do the 
exercises. Play the hypnotic games until you gradually have found yourself becoming a 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
80 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
master hypnotist and instantly realize that you’ve had more experience at doing this 
than you thought you did.  
 
Would you really need to find yourself doing these things automatically, when your 
unconscious mind is doing it already? Suppose you’re doing this without realizing all the 
time anyway, it’s as if your unconscious mind wants you to learn. You really should 
discover for yourself that you know much more about these things, building up these 
skills gradually and instantly knowing you can suddenly use hypnotic language in 
everyday situations, fully and completely, right now.  
 
You might not realize just how far you’ve gone with this. Begin to appreciate the fact 
that you have an unconscious mind and you can discover things about yourself that you 
didn’t even know you could do before, which means you can rely on your hypnotic 
powers of influence and persuasion to grow as time goes by, slowly, gradually and 
eventually you’ll allow yourself to really be the hypnotist that’s waiting inside to come 
out.   
 
It’s as if something inside you is awakening and what would it be like if that awakening 
process worked at just the right pace for you, to have all the influence and persuasion 
that you need. When you allow yourself to go with that flow and trust your unconscious, 
you’ll find yourself being more hypnotic eventually.  
 
Now, will you be a master of hypnosis instantly or will it take time to slowly and 
gradually build up that experience? I don’t know just how quickly you might experience 
yourself, developing that skill but I do know that I want you to develop that skill 
thoroughly. I want you to enjoy that skill for yourself because you really should enjoy 
being a master of hypnosis and a force of good in the world. Maybe you’ll be a force for 
good by helping your friends and family to enjoy their life more, instantly and 
immediately or slowly and gradually as time goes by. 
 
A person can you know, be a tremendous force for good and you can experience yourself 
being a force for good, in the same ways you’ve experienced yourself listening to these 
things over and over again. You might want to listen to these recordings more than once. 
Allow yourself to drift off as you hear the sound of my voice, showing you the different 
ways to use hypnotic language patterns.  
 
Instantly your unconscious mind will recognize exactly what you need to do and you 
should remember to trust your unconscious. I want you to build that relationship of trust 
with your unconscious so you can be a master persuader, influencer, more and more as 
time goes by.  

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System – Transcript Manual 
 
81 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System ©Hypnosis Training Academy All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I need to tell you, that you might find yourself being more influential than you can 
actually imagine right now. You might suppose that hypnotic language is not as easy as 
it turns out to be. So just allow yourself to really enjoy that experience. You don’t have to 
do it any more quickly than you feel comfortable doing that right now, can you not? It’s 
as if something inside you already knows what it is you should be doing. So trust that. 
Pretend it’s happening and let yourself enjoy the process of becoming a true master of 
hypnosis.  
 
I’d like to thank you for buying the new and improved deck and I hope that you have a 
tremendous amount of fun using the skills, the exercises we’ve created for you and 
really using the deck as it was intended as a tool to increase your influence, increase 
your persuasive capabilities and truly master the powerful language of hypnosis.  
 
I look forward to seeing you with some other course or seminar and until then really 
master this fundamental, this core element of what hypnosis is and how to make it work 
powerfully for you.  
 
I’d like to thank you for your attention. I look forward to seeing you some time in the 
future.  
 

