Hypnotic Language Shortcut System - Transcript 
 
1 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System        ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
The ABS Formula 
 
 
 
To help someone enter a trance, there are basically three things that you need to keep 
your attention on. One, is their attention, are you absorbing as much of it as possible? 
The more attention you have, the more the window of opportunity into trance opens 
up. So that’s the key, without attention, it’s impossible to induce a trance.  
 
Now, technically speaking, you could have someone distracted and still induce a trance, 
but at that point you’re still having their unconscious attention. So it gets a little bit 
more elaborate with more advanced sorts of things. That’s not the kind of attention 
we’re interested in right now because we’re just getting into the beginning phases to 
get good at something. 
 
So you know for a fact that when someone’s conscious attention is on you, so is their 
unconscious attention. There are times when their conscious attention is elsewhere, but 
their unconscious attention is still on you, then there’s times when it’s not. Knowing 
what the difference is, is much more delicate a thing to be able to see, so we’re not 
going to worry about it right now. We’re just going to try to get as much of their 
attention as possible, that’s the first thing. 
 
Step number two is to bypass the critical factor, it’s that part of the mind that likes to 
reject ideas, say ‘no’ to things and basically keep the person the same as possible. They 
know how the world works. If you tell them something that’s contrary to that, they’ll 
reject it out of hand. 
 
Some people have almost a chronic illness with their critical factor, you say it’s a 
beautiful day and they’ll tell you they’re going to have cancer or it’s going to be cloudy 
soon and it’s going to rain, because they’ve forgotten how to agree. 
 
Other people are completely the opposite. They will just agree with anything and find 
any way possible to agree with you just because of the harmony they experience 
internally, something they appreciate. Most people will lie somewhere in between. 
 
The third step is to stimulate the unconscious mind. You need to get some kind of an 
unconscious response.  
 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System - Transcript 
 
2 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System        ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
The beauty of the language on these cards is that they do all three things all at once. 
You will be speaking in ways that is naturally engaging. As a result of the way you’re 
speaking, as a result of the psychology based inside each card - of course the audio’s 
that go with the deck will describe the actual psychology behind each one in a little 
more detail - that tends to bypass the critical factor. 
 
Then the final idea of stimulating the unconscious, that’s what your suggestions do. If 
they were tense a moment ago and started to feel more relaxed, did they do that 
consciously? Well, chances are they didn’t because they just listened to you and they 
felt better afterwards. That ‘I just felt better’ is another way of saying, consciously I have 
no idea what happened, but unconsciously, something positive did occur. 
 
So all three things happen at the same time. 

