Hypnotic Language Shortcut System - Transcript 
 
1 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System        ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Dueling Hypnotists – Two On One 
 
 
So let’s do one more variation of this one that you’ll enjoy. In this variation, one of you 
will agree to be the puddle ahead of time. Does anyone want to volunteer? 
 
Janet:  I’m pretty much there. 
 
You’re both very close. Do you want to do it? 
 
Janet:   I can be the puddle. The cardless puddle. 
 
This works well with of course any group of three plus – actually it can work well with 
two as well. We’re going to do basically the same idea of the Dueling Hypnotists only 
rather than use dueling this time, we’re all going to focus our attention on you (Janet). 
For this one we can do the one card draw and three card draw as well. We’ll just focus 
on the three cards just to save a little bit of time on this one. 
 
In a moment I’ll start speaking to you. You have a choice, would you like to start with 
your eyes open or closed? I’ll explain the difference. If you do it with your eyes open 
you’ll get to discover that they’ll close by themselves at some point. If you do it with 
your eyes closed, then you will just drift into Nirvana without even knowing when it hit 
you. So either way, you win. It’s your choice. 
 
Janet:   Let’s do open because I often do things with my eyes closed, so this is going to 
be very exciting. 
 
Sure. In order to do this with eyes open, we can do it with eye contact and so on, but 
because there’s several of us, the easiest way of absorbing attention so you don’t keep 
constantly changing direction, I’d like you to just focus on a light over here, or over 
there or out the window. Just find something you want to look at comfortably and keep 
your attention on that. Okay? So you can hear us without having to look at us is the 
main key here. 
 
Will you find yourself comfortably relaxing now or going into a deep and 
comfortable trance later on, and you might find yourself drifting deeper and 
deeper, that’s right, and I know you’re wondering how those eyes could close so 
quickly as you enjoy drifting even more inside – and Janet, you can experience this 
deep level of comfort and relaxation as if it’s been with you your whole life, since 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System - Transcript 
 
2 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System        ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
the time you were born, because you were put on this earth to feel so comfortable 
and so relaxed, you really shouldn’t ever worry about feeling comfortable and 
relaxed again – and you really should discover for yourself that comfort can take 
you deeper and deeper into a wonderful place, because when you find that 
comfortable place, you’ll experience so much more than just relaxation now, 
suppose your mind drifted into some eternal place of comfort. 
 
I think we have our puddle. [laughter] 
 
Donna:  I think she’s lost her ability to sit up. [laughter] 
 
We’ll let her rest for a little bit here. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

