Hypnotic Language Shortcut System - Transcript 
 
1 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System        ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Final Thoughts 
 
 
So do you have any comments or questions before we finish up? 
 
Donna:  This has just been such a rich experience. And you’re an amazing teacher 
because you build slowly and gently on each concept so that we could bring forward the 
newer concept into the new concept, so yah it’s very well done, very well done. 
 
```` 
Thank you. By the way, for you, for the folks at home, that’s a really useful strategy for 
learning in general. Which is get one concept down; I don’t care if it’s just one card and 
become comfortable with it. Then get comfortable with two, because that just amplifies 
the challenge a little bit more. 
 
Then sooner than you think, there’s a little bit of anticipation there, it all starts coming 
together very smoothly and naturally, which is what we want, so thank you for that. 
 
Janet:  When we first sat down and I saw the cards on the table, I didn’t know what they 
were for and didn’t realize how incredibly simply they would help us step into a new 
experience, both at the learning level and also at the personal, physical and mind level. 
So thank you for this simple and yet very powerful experience. 
 
```` 
Well thank you for coming and I’m sure the folks at home will be happy you took the 
time to work with us. I just want to emphasize to you guys at home - neither of you ever 
had any formal training in hypnosis before, would that be fair to say? 
 
Both: No, not a bit. 
 
I know you guys are already good communicators. That’s part of your jobs, you have to 
talk to people and get them to trust you and so on, but the important thing I want you 
guys to realize is, it doesn’t take very long to get good at this. 
 
I mean how long did we spend here, a couple of hours maybe? It doesn’t take very long 
at all as long as you’re willing to build progressively and don’t beat yourself up about it. 
Just have fun with it. Did you have fun? 
 
Both:  Absolutely, yes. 

Hypnotic Language Shortcut System - Transcript 
 
2 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System        ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Did you enjoy yourself? 
 
Both:   Very much. Yes. 
 
That’s the key to learning. Let’s put it this way. If you had this deck at home, what are 
the chances you’d go home now and keep on practicing with each other? High or low? 
 
Both:   High. Very high. 
 
Janet:   In fact I might even phone you later… 
 
Donna:  We’re leaving with the deck! [laughter]  
 
 
 
 

