Hypnotic Language Shortcut System - Transcript 
 
1 Hypnotic Language Shortcut System        ©Hypnosis Training Academy   All Rights Reserved 
 
Introduction To The Colored Suits 
 
 
Welcome to the Hypnotic Language Shortcut System, I’m here with Donna and Janet. 
We’re going to go through some of these cards in the Hypnotic Language deck to show 
you some of the exercises we can do in order to get your hypnotic language up to 
scratch. 
 
The first thing I want to show you is there are two different suits, there are the colored 
suits over here, and we have the black suits. The first thing I’m going to encourage you 
to do is put the black cards away for now, we don’t need them right now, these are 
special modifiers that will improve, shall we say, the kind of language that you use. For 
now we’re going to stick to these cards here. 
 
When you go through the cards you’ll see that each one has a little phrase here with a 
blank side on it. I’ll pass these around. The idea for this is for you to practice presenting 
the suggestion, using these phrases and the suggestion goes into the blank space. 
 
The very first one I’m going to do just to get used to it is – just grab a couple of cards 
over here, a couple over here – all we’re going to do is choose a simple hypnotic theme. 
The one I’d encourage you to start with is the idea of comfort and relaxation. Who can’t 
do with more comfort and relaxation in their life, after all? 
 
It’s not that hypnosis requires comfort and relaxation; it’s just a nice pleasant way, or 
general atmosphere to create for someone so that they can go into a trance. 
 
All we’re going to do is take one of these cards, I’ll read the phrase which is on the card 
out, so in this case ‘imagine’, and then we’re going to find any way that’s appropriate to 
talk about the theme of comfort and relaxation. 
 
So mine would be very simple. Imagine that you’re feeling comfortable right now. 
Simple? Notice that right now we’re not putting any hypnotic elements in, no language, 
no rhythm, no tone, no voice, no eye contact, it’s okay, I’m just getting used to playing 
with these cards right now. 

