Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        1 
 
Announcing, The Secret 'Speed Hypnosis' 
System That Will Have You Putting People 
Into The Deepest Trances Fast And Then 
Changing Them In 15 Minutes Or Less 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        2 
Contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 
 
!"#$%&"'
(!
&"")')*+,'&%-)*.,'&/,)"01'2"33',)"4*"-,'
(!
+-)0%56$)+%-'
7!
+-)"08+"!'9'4/0)':'
;!
,"&+-/0':'9'4/0)':'
(:!
,"&+-/0':'9'4/0)'<'
7=!
,"&+-/0'<'9'4/0)':'
>?!
,"&+-/0'<'9'4/0)'<'
@A!
"-5'%3',"&+-/0'
:::!
&"")'B%60'*%,)'
:::!
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        3 
Welcome 
 
Welcome To The Hypnosis Masters Series 
In this series, you will be getting interviews and special seminars from some of the 
world’s best Masters of Hypnosis. Each Master Hypnotist is a specialist in one particular 
field and will be revealing his or her hypnosis secrets for you. 
 
Meet This Month’s Master: Jeff Stephens 
 
Jeff Stephens has been hypnotising people since the age 
of 12 and now has over 40 years of experience in 
hypnosis. 
 
He started by emulating the great hypnotists of his day, 
including the television magician “The Amazing Kreskin” 
and the little known Master Hypnotist, Arthur Ellen. 
 
His first experiences where giving his friends simple 
“hypnotic holidays.” This soon evolved to quick but 
powerful hypnotic demonstrations and fixes. He has since 
taken the art of street hypnosis (impromptu hypnotic demonstrations) to brand 
new heights. Jeff’s more bizarre hypnotic moments have included: 
 
! Turning a volunteer into a flesh-eating Zombie 
! Getting another volunteer to see pixies and fairies in her local park 
! Helping a person to instantly acquire the skills of all the people she duelled in a 
competition 
 
Jeff’s work is characterised by its sheer speed. He can hypnotise people in 
seconds and will have them hallucinating in just minutes. 
 
On the more serious side, Jeff has developed a unique 15 minute Hypnotherapy 
process with which he has helped countless people solve issues such as weight 
control, smoking, fears & phobias and more in an average of just 15 minutes. 
 
Today he will reveal to us the secret of how he does all this. 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        4 
Introduction 
 
Welcome to StreetHypnosis.com. My name is Igor Ledochowski and what  you’re about 
to hear is a very special interview, which Master Hypnotist Jeff Stephens did for us at 
the Private Hypnosis Club as part of our Interviews with Hypnosis Masters Series. 
As you will hear, Jeff is true master of the direct art of hypnosis. He has developed the 
stunning speed hypnosis system with, which anyone can induce the deepest of trances 
and get amazing hypnotic responses, including personality changes and hypnotic 
hallucinations in just a few minutes. 
Listen on at the end of the Interview to discover how to get your hands on a full four-
hour seminar revealing his astonishing 15-minute method of speed hypnosis.  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        5 
Interview – Part 1 
 
Igor: 
Welcome to StreetHypnosis.com. This is the Interview with a Master Series. I’m 
here with Master Hypnotist, Jeff Stephens, from: 
 YourPersonalHypnosisMentor.com.  
 
 
Jeffrey is an incredibly good hypnotist. He’s a master of the direct method and 
I’m particularly excited to introduce you to him because he has developed 
something, which he’s famous for, which is the 15-minute therapy.  
 
 
First, let me just welcome you, Jeffrey and thank you very much for coming 
onto this call to meet us today.  
 
Jeff: 
Hi, I’m happy to be here. 
 
Igor: 
Jeffrey, the first thing that everyone wants to know, especially when they meet 
someone who is as good as you are at hypnosis. 
 
! What were your first experiences of hypnosis?  
 
! How did you get into it and what kind of things brought you into the 
whole thing? 
 
Jeff: 
I guess, originally, there were a couple of things. My mom knew a hypnotist, 
back when I was like 11 or 12. I saw her getting hypnotized and at that time 
there was a show on television, ‘The Amazing Kreskin’, who strongly influenced 
me. I happened at one point – all at about the same close period– I found the 
book, Self-Hypnosis by Leslie LeCron.  
 
I never really got a lot out of the self-hypnosis side of it, but I took the same 
principles and started doing hypnosis with friends and things like that mostly, 
for like hallucinations. At that time, I didn’t do a lot of sticking people to things 
and all, but I did a lot of what I like to call 5-minute vacations. 
 
They would say, hey man, let me just relax for a little while, so I would give 
them a short vacation, put them in some imaginary scene and just let it run.  
 
Igor: 
Wow, so you’ve been hypnosis since you were 12 years old. 
 
Jeff: 
Yes, since I was 12 years old. 
 
Igor: 
That’s a long time.  
 
! What makes a 12-year-old kind of gather the courage up to do 
something like hypnosis with his friends? 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        6 
I mean it’s pretty out there, isn’t it it’s not like you’re asking someone to play 
hoops with you or come and do a study group. It’s a big step for a 12-year old 
to take, isn’t it? 
 
Jeff: 
From my perspective, it probably was a little easier, since I was not the kind of 
guy that went outside and played hoops or football or anything else because for 
most of my life, I’ve had an allergy to direct sunlight. As a result, I just was not 
the kind of kid that went outside. 
 
I was a bookworm and when friends came over –we did have a pool table in 
our living room – sometimes we’d sit around and shoot pool and that was a lot 
of fun but shooting pool and just kind of playing games around the house. Since 
it was what I was really reading about and I had read LaCron’s book and then 
started getting a few others.  
 
I just started talking to some of my friends and saying hey, let’s try this. In no 
time at all, I was just going for it. I just assumed that if it’s in the book and it 
says you can do it, you can do it. So I guess it started out as being what some 
would say is playful or just willing to try anything. 
 
Igor: 
That’s actually a very good mindset for the beginner to get into, isn’t it, this idea 
of its just fun, follow the instructions, have a little bit of faith in that and see 
where it takes you. There’s no real pressure to succeed anyway, just do what 
the book says, right. 
 
Jeff: 
Right. I do think a lot of young hypnotists getting into it start out feeling a need 
to perform, a need to actually accomplish something. I think it would make all 
the difference in the world if they would just take the attitude of hey, hypnosis 
works that’s a fact. So it’s not matter of can you make it happen, but when you 
make it happen, what are you going to do with it that will be fun? 
 
Igor: 
Right and that’s a much healthier attitude for people to take, isn’t it? 
 
Jeff: 
I think so. I think taking an attitude of hypnosis that it’s useful, its fun and its 
easy makes it really easy to get the right intent and the right attitude about it as 
you go. 
 
Igor: 
So tell me, you must have made a series of mistakes. There must be some 
interesting bloopers along the way where you kind of messed up, that were 
weird or interesting things happened.  
 
! Can you tell us a little bit about those and how you overcame the 
limitations in those kinds of things? 
 
Jeff: 
Well yes, I made a few mistakes. It didn’t occur to me to put in what I guess 
most hypnotists call ‘safeties’.  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        7 
For instance, one guy that had said he was having a lot of trouble sleeping, that 
in fact it took him almost all night to get to sleep and then it was time to get up 
and go to school or whatever. This was a long time ago.  
 
 
I, basically, put him out, gave him a keyword and said all you need to do is just 
put your hand on your chest, say this keyword and you will almost instantly 
drop right off into a deep and pleasant sleep. But it was a common keyword. It 
was just easy. I forget if it was relax, comfort or something like that.  
 
 
He accidentally did it a few times in public places and just fell asleep. He was 
showing someone what it was and he just suddenly fell asleep.  
 
 
This once was standing up and he fell to the ground, which snapped him awake 
and then a couple of times showing people and trying to explain it. He wasn’t 
catching on that he was actually triggering it. So, he finally realized it because 
people kept telling him. He came back to me several days later and I said oops. 
So I went in and made it so that it only worked when he was laying down in 
bed.  
 
Igor: 
Right, so the importance of giving context and thinking through your 
suggestions fully. 
 
Jeff: 
There are a lot of occasions when I have accidentally left out the issue of 
context, but it’s something I’m careful about now.  
 
Igor: 
This is actually an interesting point because a lot of budding hypnotists or 
newbies are so concerned about actually getting a result, instead of thinking 
about some more important, which is are you getting the right result. 
 
 
In other words, if you’re making a suggestion, can you construct it in a way that 
it’s safe and it’s ethical and if it’s the context, etc. That’s a much bigger concern 
people should be thinking about than whether or not it will actually work in the 
first place.  
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely! When I give suggestions now, I’m careful to apply when, where, 
why and how it’s going to work. I mean, I know it’s going to work. The question 
is I have to stop sometimes and go okay, when might he use this by accident? 
Okay no, that’s not going to be a good one.  
 
 
So like, for instance, one of the common things I build into an awful lot of the 
suggestions is the phrase– and this will only work when it is safe and 
appropriate to do so– because that keeps it from just kicking in. I honestly 
believe the subconscious mind knows when it’s safe and appropriate and it 
won’t let it happen other times. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        8 
Igor: 
It’s interesting that you say that because you’re known for being a very direct 
hypnotist, you’re very good at what you do. What a lot of people don’t realize is 
that you do actually, from the conversation we’ve had, you do borrow a lot of 
ideas or concepts from the Ericksonian school. For example, the thing you just 
said, which is trust your unconscious it’ll know when it’s safe or appropriate. 
 
 
It’s more a mindset rather than necessarily the approach that you take.  
 
! Can you tell us a little bit more about that in terms of what you 
think about direct versus indirect and what influenced your style? 
 
Jeff: 
Early on I just kind of did what I learned from various books and in testing and 
admittedly, stuff that I learned from watching hypnotists on television and things 
like that. I guess almost everybody I saw and almost everybody I read was of 
the direct type school. They tended to just address the issue and give 
instructions, as opposed to letting the individual “discover” the answer to their 
problem.  
 
 
So that’s kind of how I just developed it. It was a very direct methodology. I did 
for a time go into using more of the Ericksonian style, but I found that all it did 
was drag the time out really long and I kind of didn’t see a point in that. If I can 
get the whole thing done in a few minutes, I just don’t see a point in extending it 
out for an hour or an hour and a half or whatever. 
 
 
I started reading a bit more about Erickson and honestly, he considered it good 
if he could get change in 10 or 12 sessions. I’m kind of a one-session guy, so I 
sort of took that and just ran with it. I said, you know what works best for me, 
there’s good stuff in the Ericksonian school. I think it does a hypnotist well to 
know all the options available. I kind of view hypnosis as like a set of tools and 
view it as like having a toolbox when you’re a hypnotist.  
 
 
Have some of everything that’s out there that you find effective and that you 
can work with and are comfortable with and then you have options. When the 
case comes up where some aspect is needed from one school or another, then 
go with it, use what works and what you’re sure of. Because that’s how you’ll 
get the changes that the clients want. 
 
Igor: 
 
! What do you think it takes to be a great hypnotist, to really master 
the subject? 
 
Jeff: 
First and foremost, I think it takes just accepting the fact that hypnosis works 
and then personalizing that to knowing that you, the individual, can do it. I find 
that most of the time when people have doubts, it’s because they either doubt 
that hypnosis does work, which I find really weird for people who actually go out 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        9 
and do it and other parts of the time I find a lot of people who just doubt that 
they can do it. It’s like this is some incredibly intense skill to be mastered. 
 
Well, I’ll tell you right up front, yes it is a skill, yes it does need to be mastered 
and yes there are a lot of aspects to it. That’s why I think training is very, very 
important. But it’s not like brain surgery. It’s not like you’ve actually got to worry 
about tens of thousands of little things. It’s a matter of knowing what needs to 
be done and knowing the best way to get there and get the job done.  
 
I think to be a great hypnotist, you have to be willing – and I’m just interjecting 
this. One of the things that’s often commented about me is that people say, 
well, the reason you’re so good is because you’re willing to play with it. Well, 
yeah, I am. I’m willing to sit somebody down and say, hey, let’s do something. 
 
I have a lot of friends who let me practice on them. I have been doing this, like I 
said, a long time and I still practice. I still develop new things and things that I 
find work better. If something occurs to me that might work better than it did 
before, then I find somebody and I try it. 
 
Igor: 
So tell me, how do you find people because there are a lot of people who are 
sitting at home and they have listened to all this stuff and there’s good quality 
information out there nowadays, yet they don’t actually do anything with it. One 
of the excuses that people typically say, is well, I don’t know who to practice 
with.  
 
I’ve got no one to do it on. If they ask a friend or something, then they get these 
big matte staring eyes and run away screaming because they’re afraid of 
hypnosis or whatever.  
 
! How do you overcome that problem? 
 
Jeff: 
I guess it’s the crowd you run with. I have a lot of friends that a role-play 
gamers. I’ve also had a lot of friends over the years that were just the kind that 
trusted me. They were willing to let me do whatever I wanted to try to learn new 
things. Well, in fact, it’s my standard practice, if you let me practice on you, I’ll 
give you something yourself for your trouble. 
 
 
Like if somebody has a particular issue they want to deal with and usually I 
don’t give away the big stuff. I just give away little stuff, but if somebody has 
some little something they want to work with I say hey, let me practice on you a 
little bit and sure I’ll give you that for free. 
 
Igor: 
 
! What kind of little stuff do you give away? 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        10 
Jeff: 
I do competence enhancers. Not too terribly long ago, I had a young man who 
was going to be a test subject. I asked him, what would you like and he said, 
well, you know, I’m a skateboarder and I’m really good, but there’s one move I 
can’t do. I said, can you imagine it in your mind? Can you picture yourself doing 
it? He said, oh sure. That’s what I did.  
 
I gave him that move, which he did come back and say that he was kind of 
freaked out that I was able to do that, especially since I know nothing about 
skateboarding. 
 
 
I used to hang out at a role-play Game Shop. Role-play gamers are notorious 
for loving to do fun things. If you offer to make the game a bit more real for 
them, well, I’ve had a lot of fun at the Game Shop. They volunteer for just about 
anything I want to try. Actually, the Game Shop is closed now, but they used to 
volunteer for just about anything I wanted to try if I give them some little 
something. 
 
Igor: 
 
! What kinds of things have you done with your Game Shop friends? 
 
Jeff: 
Well, a lot of the usual stuff of just sticking them to things and memory loss 
kinds of things. I did one guy who asked me one night, he said, just do 
something totally different. Something you haven’t done before, spur of the 
moment, it just occurred to me that it would be funny if he kept having 10-
second memory loss.  
 
 
So I set it up so that every time someone said the word magic, which occurs 
quite often in a Game Shop, that he would forget the previous 10 seconds and 
that he would pick up right where he was 10 seconds ago. I brought him out 
and let him go and for the rest of the night he had a wonderful time. At least 
everybody else had a wonderful time.  
 
A lot of people put it to the test. He said most of the night is a blur to him, but he 
just remembers that it was a great night because everybody was constantly 
laughing. 
 
Igor: 
That’s definitely an interesting thing to do.  
 
Jeff: 
Actually, the same guy on another occasion, because of a role-play game that 
he was involved in, specifically asked me to turn him into a flesh-eating zombie. 
So knowing that wouldn’t be healthy but would still be funny, I did because he 
has been playing the character of zombie off and on for a while and he had 
something to work with in his mind.  
 
I, basically, turned that on. Every time he heard a certain word – well, in fact, 
every time he heard the word zombie, he would immediately become a flesh-

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        11 
eating zombie and whoever he first laid eyes on – other than me – he would 
immediately go after them. 
 
 
I set it up with a safety, as usual, so that the moment he actually touched some 
other person, instantly he would snap out of it, which for me was the funniest 
part because somebody would be talking about a game or one of the games 
they were playing and the word zombie would come. Suddenly, he’d make this 
deep sound and stand up and start walking towards them with a glassy-eyed 
look. He’d walk over there very slow. Sometimes they didn’t even notice him 
coming.  
 
 
The instant he’d touch them, his eyes would snap open wide and he’d look 
around like, whoa, how did I get here? For just a second he had transported 
somewhere and then he’d kind of look a little embarrassed and he’d go back to 
his seat. I enjoyed that a lot because the look on his face when he snapped out 
of it was absolutely hilarious. 
 
Igor: 
That’s funny. I mean it’s important when you’re doing these more experimental 
things that you get people’s consent and you think them through carefully, just 
so you don’t end up having someone who thinks they’re a flesh-eating zombie 
going out there biting chunks out of people, right. 
 
Jeff: 
Right. Well, there were a couple of aspects of that. One of the things that I 
always built in at the Game Shop was that every suggestion I gave. Unless it 
was change-work they requested, the instant they walked out the front door of 
the shop all of the fun suggestions instantly faded away and were gone.  
 
 
Plus again, because I did it with so many different things, it was easy for me to 
remember. I think it is important that you think about these things before you 
being the session. Don’t try to remember them as you’re going and work them 
in. You should think in advance, what do I need to do to keep this safe?  
 
 
For the flesh-eating zombie, he asked me on one Friday night and it was the 
next Friday night that I actually did it.  
 
Igor: 
 
! So, will you typically take time off, especially when it gets to the 
more, shall we say, unusual things?  
 
! Do you go away and think about it and make sure you cover all the 
angles before you actually do it? 
 
Jeff: 
Yes. It might sometimes only be 15 or 20 minutes. It depends on how likely it 
was to turn into something dangerous. I would take anywhere from 15 minutes, 
20 minutes to think it through and make sure I covered my bases. Sometimes 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        12 
all the way up to, like I said, not doing anything until the next week and I’d had 
time to go over it.  
 
Igor: 
I mean, this is getting into – well, a lot of people would think some pretty 
advanced hypnosis to be able to change character, personality, even if 
temporarily, to such an extent.  
 
How did you mature as a hypnotist to go from giving people 5-minute holidays – 
which is something simple that everyone can do within probably an hour of 
picking up a book – through to doing something pretty hardcore, like affecting 
people’s memories, turning them into flesh-eating zombies and so on?  
 
! What kind of progression, what kind of lessons have you learned 
along the way that allowed you to go from one to the other? 
 
Jeff: 
Well, I have to say that early on I thought of hypnosis as a thing that I picked up 
and used kind of a mentality to developing over the years the understanding 
that I am the hypnotist and I am doing a process that pretty much can do 
almost anything. Early on I was concerned that there’s got to be all these 
limitations to what people can do.  
 
The more I read, the more I studied and the more things I actually tested, the 
more I found out that the mind can go amazing places in an amazingly short 
period of time. It just has to have the right direction and encouragement. 
 
 
By learning little pieces at a time, like for instance, it’s not that big a leap, but it 
seems like a big one, to go from laying there or sitting there having a little 5-
minute vacation to actually walking out a hallucination where you think you’re 
someone or something that you are not. It’s not that big a leap to get from the 
first one to the second one, but it seems huge. I learned over the years 
watching a lot of stage hypnosis and things like that, on television for most of it 
and then I guest in recent years a lot of YouTube and things like that. 
 
 
I kind of got the whole idea that you build into it. Now the people at the Game 
Shop, there were about 15 or 20 people that regularly volunteered or even 
came up and begged me to do something to screw with their mind. So I got a 
lot of practice with a lot of different people. I do think practice is the key 
because you really need to know that what you’re saying is what’s going to 
happen. 
 
 
Now there are also limitations to that, in that you don’t always know how their 
mind is going to interpret it. That’s one of the things that I had to grow into was 
that, okay, if what I say is what I’m going to get, then I can pretty much say 
what I want. Unfortunately, I’ve had a few incidents where somebody’s mind 
totally interpreted a specific instruction in a completely different way than I 
expected. 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        13 
 
One example of that is the same group that used to hang out at the Game 
Shop, after it closed. That’s been about a year or a year and a half ago – they 
started hanging out at a local park and doing what’s called boffering which is 
essentially sword fighting and the like, with this big padded swords and battle 
axes.  
 
Stuff based off of knights of yore. They have all these weapons, lances and 
such. They’re all padded, but they have these big wars in the park. I guess it’s 
kind of like live action role playing.  
 
One day I went out there and I was just goofing around with them and one of 
the guys I said, every time you hear the word kill, you will notice that your sword 
becomes twice as heavy. He had his own special sword and it was actually 
pretty large to begin with. Well, in my mind, I’m thinking it’s going to get funny 
because it’s going to get harder and harder and he can’t pick it up. Well, in his 
mind, that meant he had to swing twice as hard.  
 
He actually took a swing at his girlfriend, hit her and she pretty much quit for the 
day, because he put her in a lot of pain actually. I personally went over and 
eased her pain using hypnosis and then eliminated that instruction from him 
completely.  
 
I’ve learned since then that you have to also think in terms of the different 
angles that an instruction can be taken. 
 
Igor: 
So really this is a key and important thing in hypnosis. Your intention is not 
always the thing that actually comes across. It’s really how they read your 
intention, how they read or understand the suggestion, which is I guess, why a 
lot of hypnotists will rephrase the suggestion in many different ways to come at 
the same idea from different angles, so that the other person has no 
misunderstandings.  
 
Your sword is going to get twice as heavy, which means it’s going to start 
dragging on the ground and soon you won’t be able to pick it up. That kind of 
surreal suggestion is there in many ways, just to make sure that they don’t 
misunderstand and avoid the kind of problems you’ve experience – and actually 
we’ve all experienced as part of our growing phase.   
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. When you’re deciding what to do with someone of the fun variety, 
just as when you are in a change work type situation, you need to think about 
all the different ways that a given instruction could be understood. I think that’s 
why I spent a lot of time learning things like how to structure the command so 
that you narrow the possibilities of how it can be understood.  
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        14 
 
A lot of that is fancy word play, but sometimes it’s all just obvious and simple 
and other times, mostly when you’re playing, you have to think in terms of okay, 
what are all the different ways this could be understood. So that’s kind of what 
I’ve learned over the years is that when you do it, you need to think of all the 
possible ways.  
 
 
I find it a lot less necessary in terms of therapeutic– and I guess this is going all 
Ericksonian again – because I tend to find that when you give instructions for 
change work, the subconscious tends to look for higher ground. It tends to look 
for what’s going to get the best result for the person. So I use that to my 
advantage.  
 
Igor: 
And after all, they came to you because they have a certain problem and they 
have already got an idea of how it would be like without the problem, otherwise 
they wouldn’t come to you. Right? 
 
Jeff: 
Right. 
 
Igor: 
So you get to use that as a milieu as your starting point so that everything that 
you do then becomes understood in relation to that idea of getting better or 
overcoming this difficulty of entering the promised land. The beauty is when you 
are doing therapeutic change work, which is like the real work of hypnosis. 
 
At that point, you have the unconscious mind already working in your favor. It’s 
already there. It’s primed and ready to go. It knows what it’s doing so it’s a lot 
easier to get the direction set and it’s a lot less likely for you to get a 
misunderstanding of the unconscious.   
 
Jeff: 
Yeah, starting from the position that the subconscious mind wants the best and 
that they came to you looking for a certain improvement that builds the whole 
weight of everything in your favor, but it doesn’t mean you can just take things 
for granted. You still have to be sure that you know that what you’re saying is 
the best way to say it. 
 
 
Now it sounds like of silly, but somebody told me a long, long time ago that if 
you’re working on something new, a new way to deal with a certain issue, it 
doesn’t hurt to hypnotize your pillow a thousand times because it’s going to just 
lay there no matter what.  
 
 
Some of my friends say it’s kind of odd. My hypnotist friends say it’s kind of 
odd, but I tend to start up like a process in my head when I’m doing something 
that I haven’t done before. I’ll start up a process in my head where I’m actually 
going through a session and pretty much just let it run. Even when I’m doing 
other things, it’s running through my mind over and over. Every now and then 
I’ll notice okay, if I worded that this way, it would probably be more effective or 
would have a better result.  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        15 
 
So I’ll let the process run through my head over and over again just so I know 
that by the time I sit down with the client, I’ve really thought this through and I 
know that what I’m going to say is going to be all on the positive side, so to 
speak. That doesn’t mean I don’t use negatives, it just means that I have 
thought about anything that I could come up with that would be – I guess that 
could wrong, I should say and I’ve found a way to word around it. 
 
Igor: 
Now you mentioned something a few times already in this interview. This is 
something that is very close to my own heart also. The importance of 
practicing. A lot of people when they think about practicing hypnosis, what 
comes to their mind is, basically, putting someone in trance and then taking 
them back out again.  
 
! I suspect that you don’t mean that at all, do you? 
 
Jeff: 
Oh no. I mean it’s a good thing when you have volunteers, but before I get up 
to playing around in someone’s head I want to know that I already have a rock 
solid starting point. So like I said, my pillow has heard my scripts a thousand 
times. I don’t use scripts, per se, but I mean when something comes up and I 
know I’m going to be working with a person, I want it to go well.  
 
I will figure out what I want to say, what the desired result is and the best way to 
structure it. Then I’ll just start going through the whole thing in my head so that 
when the time comes and I sit down with them, it just flows right out nice and 
easy and I don’t have to worry about what about this or what about that 
because I’ve already dealt with it by going over it.  
 
 
I believe in mental practice, mental rehearsal over and over. I don’t think you 
can do it too much. I think once you start thinking, well, I don’t need to practice 
because this is so obvious and easy, well, that’s when you’re going to start 
running into trouble. I am a strong proponent of practice. 
 
Igor: 
So that’s the mental rehearsal element in terms of preparing yourself for 
therapy to work and so on and I actually agree with you that it’s an incredibly 
important thing. I think it’s the secret behind most great hypnotists’ success. It’s 
their willingness to go over the same idea over and over again.  
 
Each time shaving away at a nuance here and new nuance there until either 
through sheer repetition with different clients or by mentally restructuring the 
same formula, it comes out in a much more refined and elegant way.  
 
We understand at that point the difference between changing one word, here or 
one word there, pausing a little bit in the middle of something to let something 
happen and not rushing through some other part to let someone have time to 
think and so on. That all comes down to just practice, experience, timing, 
listening to it over and over again and thinking about it and so on. Right? 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        16 
Jeff: 
Yes. I think what you need to do, at least the way it worked for me, it’s the 
same way years ago when I was a little bit involved in martial arts. I would just 
take up a starting stance and then in my mind I would actually see the person 
there that I was fighting. The first few times, I’d run through it just okay, he’s 
going to do that and I’m going to this that.  
 
He’s going to this and I’m going to do that. I would just kind of overview it and 
then in my mind, I would actually see me doing it. So to condition myself 
mentally and muscularly to expect this or prepare for that move. That’s how I 
would learn katas was by running through them in my mind just as though I 
were fighting an opponent. 
 
 
When I do hypnosis, I kind of do it the same way. I kind of see the person there. 
If it’s a person I’ve never seen before, like over the phone or whatever, then I 
tell them I need to meet you and talk to you for a while just so that I can be sure 
that I can give you exactly what you need. 
 
 
When it’s a person that I already know, then I have a mental picture of that 
person and I look for certain reactions. I don’t even exactly know how I do it, but 
I have a level of acuity where I can tell pretty much what’s going on in a 
person’s head while watching them when I’m going through a hypnosis session.  
 
So, I just imagine that they’re actually there, I go through the words and then if I 
stumble somewhere or something sounds wrong, then I have no problem. I can 
just start over again and change that thing until when it comes out of my mouth 
with that person in front of me, it’s smooth, it’s easy and clean.  
 
 
Also, one of the thing’s that’s kind of important to me is shaving away all of the 
unnecessary stuff. I mean I’ll repeat instructions two or, at the most, three times 
because I just don’t find that constant repetition makes it any stronger. If I know 
it’s going to work, it’s going to work. When I start that session, I know that as 
long as I’m clearly understood and my intent is in place, then what I expect to 
happen is what’s going to happen. 
 
Igor: 
That’s what you do when you’re doing hypnotherapy and change work and so 
on. That’s a very powerful process you go through and something that I think 
everyone listening to this interview could learn a lot from. There’s something 
you started the interview with, which I’m also curious about, which is when 
you’re doing more experimental things, which is the other side of the coin 
where you get to expand your range of the things that are possible with 
hypnosis. 
 
! How do you come up with things to do?  
 
! What kinds of things have you done with people? 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        17 
! Where does the inspiration come from when you decide okay, I’m 
going to start practicing or experimenting with something new in 
hypnosis?  
 
! Where do you find your range in your inspiration for that sort of 
stuff? 
 
Jeff: 
Well, a lot of times I ask people, what kind of things would you like to see done 
with hypnosis? Like I said, a lot of times it’s been with groups that I’ve known, 
like at the Game Shop and the boffers at the park, just various people that I’ve 
been around for a while and I can ask them. Once you find a group you can 
practice with, you have a really good advantage because you can ask them, 
what kind of things would you like to see done? 
 
 
There are a lot of times that I’ve actually had to say okay, I write down a couple 
of ideas that they give me and then the next week is when I actually implement 
them because I’ve had time to think them through. Sometimes, they’re very 
simple. People say I’d like to see him over there not be able to see his 
girlfriend. That’s actually pretty straightforward and doesn’t require an awful lot 
of thinking through the details.  
 
 
It kind of depends on that. For me, a lot of times also I’ll just sit around and 
think well, if I was watching a stage show, what would be a neat gag that I’d like 
to see? What is something that I think would be really funny to watch myself? I 
mean hey, if I can’t entertain me, then the whole thing becomes boring.  
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Jeff: 
So, I look around to see what kind of things and admittedly I, steal gags from 
other hypnotists because we all do it. It’s just a matter of where do you get your 
inspiration? A lot of times I’ll watch hypnosis shows or I’ll see maybe a 
YouTube video or something and I’ll get an idea for something. I just won’t do it 
the way they did it. I’ll think of a way to make it more personal for me or more 
personal for the person I’m going to do it with. 
 
 
A lot of times I’ll see something happen in a video or in a show and I’ll think of 
somebody in particular that I would like to see that kind of an effect and then I’ll 
tailor it to them mentally as I practice it. 
 
Igor: 
What strikes me here is going right back to how you started when you were 12 
years old, was actually the playfulness of messing around with an 
experimentation and so on. That seems to be very evident even today in your 
work, all those years later.  
 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        18 
Jeff: 
Oh yeah. I just love hypnosis. I love both what it can do to help people, which is 
one of my prime drivers. It’s really why I enjoy doing hypnosis whenever I can. 
But I also think it’s a lot of fun and I’m willing to try it. If somebody comes up 
with something that I’ve never seen or heard before, I’ll try it. I’ll try to figure out 
a way to make it happen. Various hallucinations.  
 
I was goofing around one day at the park with the boffers and one of the people 
there, a young lady asked me specifically just to do something. Just to do 
something. I wasn’t really thinking it through about what I wanted to do, so I had 
to come up with something that they hadn’t seen before because they like new 
stuff. Everybody does. New toys.  
 
So suddenly it occurred to me that it would be funny if every time she stopped 
moving, the ground under her felt like quicksand. See I have done a lot of visual 
and other things and identity things and memory things. Sensory things are 
kind of funny. I told her that every time she stopped moving, the ground would 
feel like quicksand and she’d start sinking in it, so she’d have to keep moving to 
keep from sinking into the ground. 
 
I watched her after I set it in place and sent her back off to go to the war. I kept 
noticing that she would keep her feet moving, or if she stopped moving, 
suddenly she’d look down at the ground kind of strange and the kind of jump 
back and start keeping her feet moving again. 
 
After watching her for a while, I just completely forgot about it because 
somebody else came over and asked me a question. Probably a half an hour 
later, her boyfriend came over and sat down next to me and we were talking 
about something he wanted done. She came over and she was standing there 
talking to him and I noticed that she was still stepping around a lot. So I had to 
turn it off because I had forgotten because she looked like she was getting kind 
of tired.  
 
Igor: 
Wow, now that sounds like you just invented a fantastic new exercise program. 
Hypnotic exercise. You just keep on going. That was fun for all concerned. 
 
Jeff: 
She definitely got a workout, but then again, because of the situation, the 
fighting and the boffering and all, it was also an inspiration for another thing that 
I did with her, which was something I was testing various ways to – skill 
enhancements, sports enhancements kind of thing.  
 
So, I told her that she would be able to watch – she was basically, I guess, if 
you put her on a scale of all the people that were out there, she was probably 
like maybe eighth, ninth or tenth on the list from top down to how good they 
were. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        19 
 
I wanted to try something. I guess I kind of got the idea from NLP of modeling. 
So I just told her that as she watched the other fighters, she could watch them 
for a just a few seconds to a moment or so and that she would see how they 
did what they did and would be able to use their style comfortably and be good 
at it.  
 
 
As soon as I brought her out, she went right straight out to the field and picked 
up her sword and they started pairing her off with people because everybody 
heard me do it. She actually beat everybody, including the number one guy 
there. Before the day was out, she had beaten everybody. The number one guy 
was using an old drunken master type skill only with a sword and nobody could 
beat this guy. He was like way and afar position number one.  
 
 
She walked up, they started and at first she was not quite getting it and then all 
the sudden it was like this dawn of recognition of what was going on. Then 
bam! She just came back at him with a really similar style that freaked him out 
and in about 30 or 45 seconds, she beat him. 
 
Igor: 
Wow. That’s powerful stuff, isn’t it? 
 
Jeff: 
Yeah. I guess one of the things that keep me going is that it never, ever gets 
old seeing what the mind can accomplish. 
 
Igor: 
Definitely. What I’m interested in as well is you have a very innovative personal 
mentorship program for people who want to become master hypnotists very 
quickly. It’s like a 2-day event. Within these two days, you do something which 
is relatively unique in the industry, which I love. It’s the mall hypnosis exercise.  
 
! Can you tell us a little bit about how you came across this idea and 
some of the experiences you’ve had with your mall hypnosis 
exercise? 
 
Jeff: 
It occurred to me that training people in the classroom was good, but you really 
didn’t know what they learned until; I guess it really is putting them on the spot, 
and it’s obviously meant only in a good way because I want to know. I want 
them to know when they walk away, that they can do what I have taught them 
and what they have been told they can do. I want to make sure they’re happy 
with it. 
 
 
So I had a sign made. It says “Free Hypnosis Today.” It’s just a cheap little sign 
that I ran off on my laser printer and laminated. We go to the mall, grab a 
couple of tables and pull them together. This is in the Food Court, because it’s 
a really high-traffic area. I set up the sign and usually I’ll do the first demo.  
 
The first time someone comes up – and I make sure that we’re looking around 
so that people get an idea that we’re looking for somebody to volunteer. 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        20 
 
The first person that comes up, I’ll go ahead and do them so that they can see 
in this very public, very loud, very possibly uncomfortable situation, you can still 
do it anytime, anywhere for just about anything. 
 
 
I’ll do the first one and then I have them actually start hypnotizing people right 
there in the mall and part of my procedure is, again, as I mentioned several 
times, if somebody volunteers, you give them something for their trouble.  
 
 
So they’ll sit them down and say, what’s some little thing that I can do for you? 
Most of the time, it’s specifically related to competence. Competence is 
something everybody needs. We don’t do things like pain relief or stop smoking 
or weight loss because, well, hey, those are the moneymakers. But we’ll do 
things like competence or increasing the skill level on some particular specific 
skill and I’ll have them run through the process over and over.  
 
 
In fact, the last class I did do, one of my students – we almost had to drag him 
out of there because he loved it. He was having a great time. I mean he had 
hypnotized seven people. He was looking around and ready to go for the next 
one and I said, hey we need to go. He was like, well, we can probably work 
another hour, couldn’t we? I like to see them actually doing it. 
 
 
By the time they get to the mall, they’ve already had my 2-day classes. It’s the 
very last thing. It’s like the graduation exercise. When they get to the mall, they 
know how to do what it is they need to do to make this happen. I may have to 
just give them a little directions like say, if they’re trying to take on something 
that’s too big and I say, hey when you’re doing this kind of work, no.  
 
That’s the kind of thing you do when you’re doing change work, but primarily 
keep it light, keep it easy and they’ll hypnotize them, get two, three, four 
phenomena and then give them the small bit of change work just as a thank 
you and send them on their way. 
 
 
They know they walk away with total competence. In fact, one of the people – 
that very guy that wanted to keep going and keep going – he’s now teaching 
other people what he knows. He got together a small group and he’s teaching. I 
mean he’s not like teaching them advanced stuff. He’s planning on coming 
back to my advanced class, but as far as it goes, he’s teaching people what he 
knows so he can stay in practice. He got together a little group that they could 
all practice on each other and just keep it going. 
 
 
It keeps it on a level where they actually – it’s like instant confidence. The first 
time you do it in a public situation like that where it’s noisy, where it’s not nice 
and quiet in a little office or a little classroom. It’s loud. It’s noisy. Its people 
moving all around you, people walking up and staring at you like you’re weird 
and you can still do it anytime, anywhere. If you can do it there, you can go 
anywhere and do what you need to do.  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        21 
 
Igor: 
That’s amazing. They must have a tremendous real sense of confidence going. 
 
! What do they typically look like when they first go into the mall, as 
opposed to how they look when they come back out of the mall 
after doing this graduation exercise? 
 
Jeff: 
Well, as I say, one of the things is they’re going through the actual 2-day 
training. They are getting an awful lot of competence building there. In fact, one 
of the things that I have them go over starting right off the bat, is every time 
they hypnotize each other for practice, before they wake them up, they give 
them some positive thing, such as this is all very easy. You’re learning it very 
quickly and you’re very comfortable doing it and you have all the confidence 
you need. 
 
 
That happens the whole two days, so by the time they go to the mall, there’s a 
little bit of nervousness because they’ve not been in that situation, but they 
have a fairly good sense of confidence. They just need that extra bump. You 
can see on their faces, the first time they want to sit back and see it happen. 
That’s why I do the first one. So they can see here we are in the loud, Food 
Court at the mall, people everywhere, people looking at you funny. They can 
see it happen so they know okay, well, it can be done so I’m going to do it.  
 
 
Then once they start, I mean it’s instant. The first time they drop someone I the 
mall, that’s it. They’re ready to go. They’re excited. They’re having fun. I had 
one person that kept putting it off, putting it off. This was one of my first-class 
where one of the women just wouldn’t actually do that first one. I finally said, 
this one’s yours and I sat back.  
 
She went well I kind of need to see it one more time. I said, no you don’t just go 
ahead and just remember that you can do this and you know it works. She 
started kind of slow and she started to do a slow induction and I just kind 
signaled her, pick it up. Pick up the pace. So she went into one of the rapid 
inductions, specifically the eight-word induction.  
 
She went into that really quickly and as soon as she saw that person’s head 
just drop and they went into hypnosis, she was on fire. She just took off and just 
had a great time with it. It’s getting that first time you see their head drop, that’s 
what triggers everything. 
 
Igor: 
That’s fantastic. Now, when you do this mall exercise, something else you do 
that I think is very interesting, is you don’t just get people to drop someone into 
trance and bring them back out feeling nice and relaxed or even with a little bit 
of confidence. You actually get them to actually experience or experiment with 
hypnosis, just as you’ve done, right? 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        22 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. One of the things I try to install all along through the training and 
especially at the mall, is hey, this thing is fun. You can play with it because the 
more you play with it, the more you’ll be able to use it for change work, for real 
change in people’s lives to help them. 
 
 
When you’re comfortable with it, you can make others comfortable with it very 
easily. So I’ll get them to do with each person two or three small bits of 
phenomena just so they know. Stick their hand to a table. Stick their hand to 
their face. Hands locked together. Forget their name.  
 
We even have had minor hallucinations where I pretend to hold up a ball and 
they can see the ball. They start describing it and there’s nothing in my hand. I 
just have my hand there like I’m holding a ball and they can describe that ball to 
me in detail and reach over and take it out of my hand. 
 
Igor: 
That’s amazing.  
 
! So, you’re telling me this is something people who have had no 
hypnosis before, that after just two days with you in your personal 
hypnosis mentorship program, they’re actually doing this with 
complete strangers, live in a mall? 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely! I think doing it in that context is what gets them realizing that they 
don’t have to stick with some sort of script. They don’t have to be in some 
specific locked down environment. That they can just take this where it needs 
to go and do whatever they want with it.  
 
 
I want people to have the same attitude that I do to play with it. It’s a handful of 
silly putty. Have fun. 
 
Igor: 
Fantastic! People must leave your courses on a real buzz. Because not only 
have they had the experience of learning from the hands of a true master and a 
lot of experiences, a lot of inductions in the actual course itself, but that final 
graduation exercise is a stroke of genius because then they really know that 
they’re doing it then, don’t they? 
 
Jeff: 
Yes. They know when they walk away that this is something they can use, that 
they won’t have trouble finding people to play with, work with and practice with, 
but they also have enough confidence that they know that if someone comes to 
them and says hey, can you help me with weight loss or stop smoking? 
 
My particular method for those I specifically teach during the class so that they 
know how to do it my way and then make it their own way. Something that they 
feel really comfortable with, but essentially using the method that I do. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        23 
 
They feel that confidence. They feel that playfulness about it that they’re not 
locked into doing it in an office in a nice quiet situation. They can use it 
whenever and wherever.  
 
In fact, one of the students from my last class had decided that he wanted to 
put it to the test after the class was over and he walked into a Steak and Shake, 
which is a kind of a sit-down but fast-food joint. It’s kind of fast-food restaurant 
type situation. He was going to walk in, announce that he was a hypnotist and 
then sit down and just eat his meal and see if anybody said anything. 
 
 
Well, he said he walked in the front door. It’s one of those where there’s a little 
foyer area. He walked in the first door, stood there for a moment and said you 
know what? I can’t do this. Then he said all the things that he had been given 
during class as far as the encouragements that this was easy to do, easy to 
learn, just came out and it just hit him like a brick that, yeah, this is really is 
easy. 
 
 
So he went on in the other door and he announced I am a hypnotist. Then he 
just walked over and sat down at a table and waited for the waitress so he 
could place his order. Within a few moments, he said, people were walking up 
to him going, are you really? Can you do that to me? He got to spend the night 
just playing with people’s heads. 
 
Igor: 
That’s fantastic. Again, that must have been a massive confidence booster for 
him to do it now all by himself in a live environment. I mean that’s about as 
good as it gets, isn’t it? 
 
Jeff: 
Oh yeah. When you’re out there doing it in public and you know that you can do 
what it is you say you can do, it really feels good. I think another aspect of that 
is after you’ve done that, that confidence bleeds over pretty into every area of 
your life. That kind of confidence helps you to look at everything in life from a 
greater position of personal strength. 
 
Igor: 
Now, something that you do and for which you’re very famous as well is 
something I’m very enamored about. I think it’s a great thing that you do. It’s 
you’re very well known for doing 15 to 20-minute bits of therapy.  
 
! Weight loss in 15 minutes.  
! Stop smoking in 15 minutes.  
! Insomnia in 15 minutes.  
 
Pretty much everything that you do, you’ll do in 15 or 20 minutes. It’s something 
that you also teach, of course, on your personalized mentorship program. 
Hypnosis mentorship program. 
 
! Can you tell us a little bit about that and how that developed? 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        24 
 
Jeff: 
Well, without specifically telling the step-by-step, in general, I realized because 
of probably little tidbits from a number of other people, other hypnotists talking 
about what they do, that a lot of what goes on is just build-up or, to me, I just 
call it filler. 
 
 
I realized that the subconscious mind is capable of making the changes quickly. 
You can get a phobia fast and everybody who’s played with hypnosis or NLP 
knows that you can get rid of a phobia in just a couple of minutes. 
 
 
If the subconscious can learn that quickly, then why is there a need to drag the 
whole thing out and go into repetition after repetition and repetition about, for 
instance, on the weight loss. You’re going to love going to the gym. You enjoy 
going to the gym. It feels good to work out blah- blah- blah over and over and 
over again.  
 
 
First, I don’t know that it would and I don’t know that it should. My position is 
that the subconscious mind knows exactly what changes need to take place 
because it’s in control of almost everything that happens within our bodies. The 
conscious mind acts like a rudder to direct it a little bit, but essentially the 
subconscious mind already knows how to achieve any goal because it’s 
achieved the wrong ones. So it knows how to achieve another one. 
 
 
The fact that this individual knows that something isn’t right, tells me that their 
mind knows what right would be. You can’t say something is wrong if there is 
no standard by which you’re gauging. So when I do weight loss or stop 
smoking, I just talk directly to the subconscious mind and I tell it what the 
proper perspective and the way to look at things is and then just send them off 
because so far, with the weight loss, I’ve gotten almost 100% success. 
 
 
I’ve had clients lose upwards of 80-90 pounds at a steady rate of about 
probably anywhere from 10-15 pounds a month. Again, that relates to what 
their subconscious mind considers healthy because all I’m doing is I’m getting 
their subconscious mind to make the changes in what it knows is the healthiest 
way.  
 
 
For weight loss, I just tell it you need to make changes in the activity levels, 
adjust the metabolism, adjust the hungers and cravings, whatever needs to be 
done you already know how to get to this other weight goal.  
 
 
I just set it off on its own path and let it deal with it and some people have 
reported that it took as long as four weeks. Actually, one person five weeks 
before it actually started making the changes and I just simply assumed that, 
that means that their subconscious knew that time was necessary to make the 
adjustments.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        25 
Other people, they come to me later the same day going, you know what? This 
is really weird. I just have no hunger for dinner and I don’t go without dinner. So 
the subconscious mind knows how to make the changes that are necessary, 
and honestly, doesn’t need me giving it all the specifics to know how to do it. I 
just set things in motion and let the subconscious mind take over and make 
whatever changes are necessary. 
 
Igor: 
That sounds like a very elegant solution. From my perspective I’ve got to say it 
also sounds very Ericksonian, but you do it in a very quick amount of time. I 
think that’s a piece of genius. 
 
 
Well, start thinking about trusting the unconscious and letting the unconscious 
do the whole thing and as you say, rather than having to spell it out step-by-
step, treating people like they’re smart – and there’s a shocker, isn’t it?  
 
What if the client actually knows something, rather than having to rely on a 
therapist for everything and becoming a – what is it someone once said, some 
people are an umbilical cord waiting to attach onto something – and they don’t 
need that. They just go okay, it’s my life. I get to do it. I can deal with it. Fifteen 
minutes in- out- done. Beautiful. I think it’s a very elegant way of approaching 
hypnotherapy. 
 
Jeff: 
Right, but a lot of times – I mean I’ll tell you, a lot of times the person doesn’t 
even know that they know. It’s all on the subconscious level. My perspective, 
again, is that the subconscious is in control of like 99.999% of everything that 
goes on within your body. Because of that, it’s handling processes – I mean it’s 
your subconscious mind that keeps your metabolism working it’s your 
subconscious mind that adjusts all your moods and the endocrine system, all 
your hormones. It adjusts and controls and regulates everything. 
 
 
So why not let it move in the right direction to accomplish the goal, rather than 
trying to enforce a set of standards on it? It’s easy to try to take over and 
enforce a change. Again, to a lot of people, they think that would be the more 
logical outflow of the way I do it would be to give them all the changes because 
I am direct, but you know what? My direct stance comes from how I deliver the 
instructions. 
 
 
You’ll notice, I don’t call them suggestions. I call them instructions because I’m 
not suggesting or leaving it to wonder. I’m telling the subconscious which 
direction to go and what the goal is. Then I leave it to the subconscious to 
figure out how to get to that goal. 
 
Igor: 
Beautiful. Now before we finish up, I’d like you to talk us through a little bit 
about your personalized direct hypnosis master hypnotist coaching weekend 
programs. In other words, your mentorship program that you’ve been running 
now for some time and has done all these wonderful things for people. 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        26 
 
! First, why did you start doing them?  
 
Jeff: 
Well, I started doing them originally because I was talking to a lot of people 
about hypnosis and it’s frequent for me to hear, can you teach me how to do 
that? I had been teaching people off and on little bits here and there and they 
would come back and they just didn’t get it because they didn’t have a big 
picture. It’s like somebody leading you to a big pile of boards and showing you 
a hammer and nail and saying, there, that’s a house. They couldn’t put the 
pieces together.  
 
 
So I had someone contact me who was a hypnotherapist and she had been 
doing it for years. However, the person she learned from essentially didn’t 
teach hypnosis. He taught how to use his recordings and his scripts to make 
money. I’m not against making money, but she came and she said, I feel like a 
liar and a fraud because I call myself a hypnotherapist and I have never 
actually put anyone in hypnosis myself. I use his scripts, his recordings, 
everything. 
 
 
I said, well, you probably want to learn how to do it yourself just in case you’re 
somewhere for something that you can’t plan it all out and you want to do it on 
your own. So my first class was actually just one person. I won’t do a one-on-
one again because I think it’s vital that people practice with other people and 
that, as the instructor, I be able to watch so that I have a better perspective of 
what needs to be done and what direction to take the learning. 
 
 
So that was my first class with her some time ago and since then the classes 
have been things where I have just a few people there. I keep all the class 
sizes small – anywhere from two to four people. I don’t want more then that, 
because I want to know that each person:  
 
1. Gets enough practice, so I want other people there;  
 
2. I want to know that any questions that they come up with along the way 
in the class, they know that they will get it answered and they feel 
comfortable asking because.  
 
a) I have the time; and  
 
b) It’s just that with a class size that small, they’re not going to feel 
too embarrassed to actually say what’s on their mind. 
 
 
I also try to keep it on a basis that you should be getting change work all along 
the way to improve the skills that you’re getting all along the way. To put it the 
way a hypnotist friend of mine says it, he uses hypnosis to teach hypnosis. 
That’s what I do. I use hypnosis – and I guess, honestly, it’s kind of a 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        27 
combination of I use hypnosis to teach hypnosis, but I also use hypnosis to 
install hypnosis. Install the skills so that they become a natural working part. 
 
 
It becomes something that they have internally as a skill set, not like reading it 
from a book and then read this, then turn it over and try it and read that and 
turn it over and try it, but actually it’s inside of them. So their reference is on the 
inside and they’re able to follow it smoother and easier. So I use hypnosis to 
both teach and install the skills necessary to do it.  
 
 
The only way I can be absolutely sure that each person really understands, is I 
ask questions during class. I talk to them, I deal with them and I watch them 
work with the others in class. I want to be sure that if somebody needs a very 
specific thing to improve that skill or make sure that skills is fully installed, that 
the class is small enough that I can just stop and it’s like a working 
demonstration.  
 
 
I’ll install that additional part right then and there so that the others can see how 
to make the change instantly and quickly.  
 
Igor: 
So we’re coming up to the end of the interview now.  
 
! Before we do finish up, could you give us a maybe one- or two-
minute very quick summary of what the two days with you look like 
when you do your master hypnotist coaching weekend? 
 
Jeff: 
Okay. When we first get together, we do a meet and greet. I want everybody to 
know everybody and know what’s going on. I explain what my beliefs about 
hypnosis are and why I know that what I do works. 
 
 
Then I start out with some real simple instruction on the development of, you 
might call it, a set. The induction, the actual session and then bringing them out 
and I keep it all very simple, very easy, but I make sure that right off the bat, 
within an hour, everybody is doing hypnosis. Within an hour, everybody has 
been hypnotized and is hypnotizing the others. 
 
 
Then I have them, as I instruct them about different inductions, the first day we 
cover a couple of inductions. We cover what’s typically called deepeners. I like 
to call them intensifiers because I really see the state as something that gets 
intensified, rather than going someplace deeper, although I use that word to do 
it because it kind of has a certain mental connotation. 
 
 
So I give them some inductions, usually just a couple of them to start with so 
they can practice on each other. How to do the deepeners and intensifiers, how 
to do the ex-duction - how to bring them out, how to make sure that when they 
come out they feel better than when they went in. I make sure that they get time 
to practice that. 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        28 
 
Then we go through a few phenomena that they can do so that as they go 
through the process, from that point on, they can do a couple of phenomena to 
be sure that they are getting results every time. 
 
 
We go through some of the simple phenomena. Catalepsy and so forth. I make 
sure that through that first day, they can do hypnosis, do it with anyone else in 
the class and go through a complete process with no problem and be 
comfortable and smooth with it. From that point, honestly, from the first day 
alone, they could go do it if they really – they could go put people in hypnosis, 
get a couple of phenomena and bring them out. 
 
 
Then on the second day, we go into the in depth structuring of how to use the 
hypnosis for change work, a lot of complex phenomena. Of course, at the end 
of the first day, I take question in case anybody’s got any problems or 
confusions about anything. 
 
 
Then throughout the second day, I have to take questions because we go into 
complex phenomena, a number of other inductions and then, basically, the 
principle of anything can be an induction. I teach them how to view things that 
way, and teach them how I do a change work session. 
 
 
I teach them my method, my mindset for it and I install that with hypnosis. We 
lead through more and more complex methodologies. Simply, to be honest, my 
entire process is not that complex, except that you have to have the right 
mindset. You have to have the right things installed so that you can do it and be 
comfortable and know that it’s going to work.  
 
 
So I break that down for them and let them learn exactly how I accomplish 
change work and then I show them how to apply it to all kinds of different 
things. Again, we go through a process where they practice these things. The 
more complex phenomena, they practice – even doing some change work on 
each other right then and there and I do change work for them on that second 
day so that each person gets something that they need just to be more 
comfortable as a hypnotist. 
 
 
If somebody needs confidence, if somebody needs – honestly if they need 
weight loss or stop smoking. I do that too. I pretty much give each person the 
time to have the changes that they need because I think experiencing the 
changes makes a huge different in the confidence level as well. 
 
 
Then finally, on the last day – it’s actually the third day – we can do it at the end 
of the second day or the third day. We take questions and make sure 
everything’s answered and everybody’s comfortable and then we go to the 
mall.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        29 
 
We put this thing in practice and I make sure there’s plenty of time in case the 
mall’s not busy or it takes a while for people to volunteer. We have plenty of 
time for them to go through and work with a number of people. I want them to 
walk away knowing, absolutely knowing that they could walk into a party back 
home, that they could go to a friend’s house and the friend says, hey man, I 
have a headache. Is there anything you can do about that? Yes, I can. 
 
 
Or they go to a party and somebody says, so you’re a hypnotist? Why don’t you 
give us a demo, okay? I want them to be able to feel comfortable wherever and 
whenever they’re called upon to do it and use it.  
 
Igor: 
Wow! That sounds like a fantastic well-thought-out program. So if people want 
to hear more about that or read more about that, they can come to your 
website, which is, of course, YourPersonalHypnosisMentor.com.  
 
You email is also there on the website, so if they need to get in touch with you 
they can. I presume people are welcome to drop you a line and ask you any 
questions about the program, how it works and special needs they might have 
or special things that they might want to have handled and you will get right 
back to them. Is that right? 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. One thing I will say is once I’ve trained you, I’m on call for you. You 
can call me if you have problems or you’re trying to work something out or 
you’re working with somebody doing something you’ve never done before, you 
can give me a call. I’ll give you some direction on how to deal with that new 
situation for you.  
 
I mean my students call me all the time. Most of the time it’s to tell me, hey, I 
just came back from the mall or I just came back from a party and I want to tell 
you all about what happened. 
 
 
Honestly, I love hearing these stories, but every now and then it’s like 
somebody asked me to do this kind of thing for them and I just never thought 
about that, so can you give me advice on how to do that? So I’m on call for you 
once I train you. 
 
Igor: 
That’s really a full-service program there. That sounds fantastic. So that 
website again for everyone is: YourPersonalHypnosisMentor.com. I have been 
interviewing here Jeffrey Stephens, Master Hypnotist Extraordinaire. I can do 
nothing more but recommend you go and have a look at his website. Check it 
out. Check him out. You will not regret any moment spent with him. 
 
 
Until our next interviews in the series, I would like to thank you very much on 
behalf of Street Hypnosis. Jeffrey, thank you for coming along and I look 
forward to meeting everyone else on these Master Class calls on the next 
session. 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        30 
 
Jeff: 
It’s been a pleasure and thank you.  
 
Igor: 
This is Igor Ledochowski from StreetHypnosis.com. I’d like to thank you for 
listening to our interview Master Hypnotist Jeff Stephens. If you’re interested in 
finding out more about our hypnosis training programs, just go to 
StreetHypnosis.com. We have over 30 different programs on all aspects of 
hypnosis and self-hypnosis. If you want to listen to Jeff’s four-hour seminar, 
giving away all the secrets of his special 15-minute speed hypnosis system, 
then simply go to StreetHypnosis.com/Jeff. 
 
 
Thank you for listening and we look forward to meeting you again on a future 
interview or master class.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        31 
Seminar 1 – Part 1 
Igor: 
Welcome to StreetHypnosis.com. This months’ Master Class is an interview 
with 
the 
Hypnosis 
Master, 
Jeffrey 
Stephens, 
from 
YourPersonalHypnosisMentor.com. Now in the first session, we had an in 
depth interview, in terms of Jeff’s background and his attitudes and ideas about 
hypnosis.  
 
 
What we’re going to be doing in this session is have Jeffrey guide us through 
his personal approach, his method of hypnosis, step-by-step so that we can get 
a deeper insight and understanding into how he does things. 
 
 
First, let me welcome you aboard, Jeff, and thanks again for sharing all your 
knowledge with us. 
 
Jeff: 
I’m happy to be here and hey, this is what I enjoy. I enjoy teaching very much.  
 
Igor: 
Let’s just step right into the nitty-gritty and just get into the depths of what you 
do. Let’s begin with your framework, your mental framework and how your 
attitude about hypnosis is set.  
 
 
 
At the beginning, of course, of everything are the basics.  
 
! What is hypnosis?  
 
! What is the conscious and the unconscious mind?  
 
Every hypnotist has their own flavor, their own understanding of these things.  
 
! Could you just kick the ball off by telling us what you think 
hypnosis is and, in your mind, what do you think the difference is 
between the conscious and the unconscious mind and how to use 
those differences? 
 
Jeff: 
To begin with, what I use as a working definition is the standard one. Bypass 
the critical factor and create an acceptable selective thought process. The key 
there, I think, is the acceptable. I honestly think that there’s a need to make it 
something that they can on a subconscious level accept or there will be 
interruption in the process. 
 
 
I guess a simpler way of saying it is that hypnosis is when there’s a hypnotist 
and a hypnotee and the hypnotist uses whatever method to put the hypnotee 
into a state where they pretty much follow instructions without any reserve. 
They just simply follow the instructions that are given. 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        32 
 
I think stepping back just a little bit on a larger level, there’s the need again for 
creating the acceptable nature of the instructions. Because at some level, and I 
don’t know any hypnotist who’s done it for any period of time who hasn’t seen 
people go in and out during a session, I think those out times are because 
something hit the subconscious that just did not register. For some reason, the 
subconscious could not act upon the instruction.  
 
 
So I think that’s where making it acceptable to the hypnotee, to the subject, is 
vital. So you kind of have to know at least a little bit.  
 
Not like when they do stage hypnosis. You have your hypnotist, you have your 
hypnotees and he (or she) keeps everything in a nice broad way so that it can 
be applied pretty much to anybody. But I’ve even seen stage shows where one 
or two people, what the hypnotist said just couldn’t be acted on. They just either 
didn’t know how or it just was so absolutely not who and what they were, that 
the person just kind of sat there and looked at them with a dumb look on their 
face.  
 
Igor: 
Let me pause for a moment, if I may. You’ve raised a very interesting idea and 
the question I have is this idea of what’s acceptable to one person or another-  
 
! How do you develop a sense of what that is?  
 
! How did you do it and how do you help your students do that? 
 
Jeff: 
Well, I use little exercises to help increase sensory acuity, pretty much the 
same ones that are used in NLP and other fields, to increase and develop 
sensory acuity. Plus, I also turn it up with hypnosis during class time, because I 
think you can watch the person and you can see – or at least, it seems to me I 
can–when something is going on in their head that they’re having trouble 
dealing with. 
 
 
It might typically be something that they either don’t understand it because of 
what I’m saying just doesn’t – the way I’m phrasing it doesn’t register with them, 
which is why I typically say things in two, sometimes three different ways. Just 
to be sure it’s understood.  
 
 
I think probably taking the time to talk to them and get to know them will give 
you some general ideas, but then you really need to be aware of the person 
you’re working with so that you can see what’s not registering with them. It 
could be something that they object to. It could be something that they don’t 
understand. There are a lot of different ways it could go, but usually it shows on 
their face at least it does to me. 
 
 
I try to install that in my students so that they can understand and see what’s 
going on. During class, for instance, if I’m doing one of the demos where I’m 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        33 
hypnotizing people, I will actually point out different features to show that. Okay, 
this person understands that and then I’ll say something that’s a little tricky and 
you can see their face kind of screw up just a little bit, going what the heck does 
that mean? 
 
 
So again, it’s a matter of developing acuity, but it’s also something that can be 
installed. I really think you can install sensory acuity. In the same way I install 
hypnosis as I’m teaching it, I try to install a greater and greater sense of acuity.  
 
Igor: 
Okay, going back to that idea then of – absolutely, this is a great definition. I 
think what you’ve just mentioned is an important key to hypnosis, which 
surprisingly few people talk about. It’s strange. People give a sort of token effort 
and say oh yeah, by the way, you have to pay attention to people, but no one 
says what you have to pay attention to, why do pay attention, what if it goes 
wrong and so on.  
 
 
It sounds like you have a good process for developing that skill in people and it 
is a skill. I do tend to agree with you on that. Before I so rudely interrupted you 
with that fascinating little picturesque adventure, you were in the middle of 
telling us about your concept of hypnosis, the conscious and the unconscious 
mind and how all that blend’s with your hypnotic work. 
 
Jeff: 
I will say right off the bat, I don’t really like the term unconscious because, to 
me, that carries a certain baggage with it, especially outside the hypnosis 
world. Unconscious typically means to people unconscious, like passed out or 
something. At least that’s what I’ve run across a lot. So I stick almost 
exclusively with the word subconscious, below the conscious level. 
 
 
So, I use the terms conscious and subconscious and when I’m talking to the 
individual during a hypnotic session, I will specifically address the subconscious 
mind because, as in the first interview I mentioned that virtually everything that 
happens in us is controlled by the subconscious mind. The conscious mind acts 
as a rudder on a giant ship. The rudder doesn’t have to be very big to change 
the direction, but in general, virtually every system that the body’s going 
through is run on a subconscious level. 
 
 
I address it directly for change work, for getting various results, be they 
standard phenomena or actually helping someone with weight loss or stop 
smoking. I use the term subconscious because, to me, it makes more sense 
and in the past, when I’ve used the term unconscious, people have specifically 
said, well, am I supposed to be unconscious for this?  
 
 
I guess, for me, that’s why it’s come up is because it has actually been an issue 
during some times when I was doing hypnosis. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        34 
Igor: 
Let me go onto the next theme then. It’s the idea of what kind of things can you 
achieve in hypnosis – you touched on it a little bit in the first session. You’ve 
mentioned it a little bit again just now when we were talking about the 
subconscious, as you like to call the conscious mind subconscious mind in 
hypnosis. 
 
! In your mind, what can you achieve with hypnosis and, importantly 
also, where do you think the limits are in terms of what you’re 
trying to do with people and what you’d be willing to actually work 
with? 
 
Jeff: 
Wow! That’s a huge topic. Very good. I have honestly probably a very broad 
perspective of what I think hypnosis can be used for because if all the systems 
in your body are being controlled by the subconscious mind, well then, why 
can’t the subconscious mind be called to bear to deal with them.  
 
 
I personally have done all the standard stuff. You know, pain management, 
weight loss, smoking, insomnia and all of that kind of thing. I’ve also dealt with 
erectile dysfunction. I’ve dealt with various emotional disturbances. I’ve even 
dealt with–a guy that had a sore on his arm– but he worked in an environment 
where there were a lot of chemicals and so the sore just wouldn’t heal. We did 
one session where essentially I told his subconscious mind, this isn’t good and 
you know it and you know how to heal that, so do that. 
 
 
It was a little bit more than that, but that was the core of it. Two days later, he 
called me up and said okay, now you’re scaring me because this thing is almost 
completely gone. So I think that just about anything that the subconscious mind 
is in charge of can be dealt with. 
 
 
Now areas I won’t go – let’s face it, there are various organic mental problems 
that I’m not going to deal with. I’m not going to deal with somebody who’s 
schizophrenic or has a major disturbance. I don’t deal with people who are 
manic depressives or have bipolar. I just don’t want to take that chance. Do I 
think it could be used for that? Yes, but I think it would have to be definitely 
under a doctor’s supervision. 
 
 
However, I think it’s been shown in so many studies that using either waking or 
regular hypnosis that you can accelerate healing. You can accelerate recovery. 
You can accelerate the person getting back to their normal life by the use of 
just resetting the brain so it knows it needs to do its job on a faster level or in a 
different way. 
 
 
This has been demonstrated in hospitals, clinics all over the world. So I do think 
that we don’t need to limit ourselves too much. I do think we need to watch 
things that could be harmful to the client such as, like I said, schizophrenia, 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        35 
bipolar and that kind of thing, but when it comes to just about everything else, 
I’m game to give it a try. I’m big on experimentation. Play around. 
 
Igor: 
Thanks for that. Again, you’ve come up with something that is important, I think 
and again, it’s often underemphasized in hypnosis programs, which is to say 
that there are ethical implications in terms of what you do and don’t handle. In 
other words, if you want to do something like schizophrenia or if it’s going to be 
something more medically-oriented, if you like, then it really should be done 
under supervision.  
 
And, if you don’t have the experience or confidence, or if there’s any doubt in 
your mind, then ethically the way to do things is not to get involved because 
you’re working with some important parts of people’s minds, right? 
 
Jeff: 
Oh, absolutely. I really think that it’s important that you don’t go into it 
wondering if you can help. You have to have some sense that you know that 
this is going to be advantageous. That can only come with experience dealing 
with other things or study and training with those who have dealt with other 
things and again obviously, there’s always that aspect of at some point 
somebody had to try it out.  
 
There’s just so much that we can do. We already know that there’ve been 
studies, hundreds and hundreds of examples, we can access all the time and 
its okay to leave alone some areas. It’s okay to not go some places where you 
just don’t know if you’re going to get the right result or a safe result. 
 
Igor: 
Let’s turn our attention to something that we’ve started talking about now, which 
is the idea of Do’s and Don’ts.  
 
! What for you are the Do’s and Don’ts of hypnosis?  
 
! Where do you draw the line?  
! Where would you say people should be careful about these 
things?  
! Where would you say, absolutely make sure you do these things 
and so on? 
 
Jeff: 
Well, like I just mentioned, one of the primary Do is to know what you’re doing 
before you begin some sort of hypnotic intervention in any kind of medical or 
pain relief or anything like that. You should know what you’re doing. I’m a 
strong proponent of being trained. By knowing in advance how to achieve a 
certain effect or result, you keep your personal intent focused and in the right 
way.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        36 
Where most hypnosis goes wrong, at least what I’ve found is when the intent 
drops. When suddenly the hypnotist hits a point of, well, what do I do now? 
Where do I go with this? I’ll just make something up. 
 
 
There’s a prime place where something can go wrong. Or simply nothing 
happened at all, which is actually the most common event. You don’t get any 
good result at all. Intent is so essential. I guess that would be one of the Do’s. 
Be sure that you have the right intent when you go into a situation where you’re 
going to be doing hypnosis. Don’t go in with I’m just going to mess with this 
person, or if somebody’s asking you to help them with pain relief or stop 
smoking or weight loss, don’t go in with an attitude of ah, this is no big deal. I 
can whip through this. 
 
 
Take the weight loss. I mean I’ve done a bunch of them, but I still sit down with 
each person and I take and every session like, okay, this is where I’m at now, 
this is what I’m doing now, my intent needs to be here, I know I can help this 
person, I know my system works so I’m focused on this. 
 
 
Now it’s a little more freewheeling when I’m just doing demos for people and 
I’m playing around, but I’m still actually really focused on the individual who’s 
sitting right in front of me because that’s the person who I can help or I can 
screw something up. Honestly, I don’t say that in a bad, horrible way, but I do 
know that, as a hypnotist, if I can take away somebody’s phobias, I can put one 
in. So I still have to be careful. I have to have my intent and my focus right there 
I’m what I’m doing right then. So that’s definitely a Do. 
 
 
Again, don’t do anything that is of a medical nature unless you’re certain that 
it’s going to be medically dealt with. There’s going to be medical input. It’s good 
to get doctors’ referrals if you can, but even if you can’t, at least be sure that – 
well, for instance, a young lady that I did not too long ago.  
 
Her back was really, really hurting her and there was this big lump on it. It 
looked like actually somebody had hit her with a softball, it was that big. I made 
sure that she already had a doctor’s appointment to see her doctor about this 
thing. Before I did the pain thing, before I dealt with her pain and gave her relief 
from that so she could get some sleep, I made sure she already had a doctor’s 
appointment the next day. 
 
 
You can’t always do that, but when you can, it’s a great idea to be sure that 
there’s genuine medical care when there’s something physically wrong with 
someone. Don’t ever lose sight of the fact that you really can mess with 
someone’s life. A phobia is proof that we can learn things instantly because 
that’s what happens. Some event happens, a strong negative emotion attaches 
to it, bam! You have a phobia and the whole thing took seconds or maybe just a 
few minutes. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        37 
 
So if I know that can happen and I can take it away, then I know that also if I 
don’t carefully think through what I’m saying and what I’m doing, I could just as 
easily install another phobia to replace that one or in some way screw with their 
head. I strongly, strongly – I mentioned it in the other interview. I strongly, 
strongly advocate really going over and over in your mind to know what you’re 
doing and have it planned out before you walk into the situation. That is not 
always possible, but it is usually possible. So have an idea. 
 
 
I was mentioning to someone else earlier today, in fact, that it’s not uncommon 
for me to just walk through scenarios that I’ve run into in my life, even though I 
didn’t do any hypnotic intervention at the time. I’ll think about that situation and 
what happened and I’ll run through, what would I have done? That gives me a 
basis, should any similar situation ever come up like it where I already have 
something in my head that is at least a starting point.  
 
I run a lot of scenarios in my head because I love hypnosis and I do it all the 
time, just about everywhere I go. So does that help? 
 
Igor: 
That’s a great list of Do’s and Don’ts. Something that comes out very strongly 
from that list, particularly for me and I have to agree with these two points. You 
have two very important themes in your work  
 
1. Number one, this idea of hypnotic intent.  
 
Without it, your hypnosis is just some mechanical nothing which fall to pieces.  
 
2. Number two is the idea of practicing.  
 
Practicing the right thing to make it go smooth and creates your confidence and 
builds up skills and a lot of extra stuff. 
 
 
A lot people think well, we don’t need to practice. We’ll just wing it. There is a 
place for winging it, of course. There’s a place for making stuff up in the 
moment with all the information you have, but that’s in the context of having 
skills. That’s in the context of having practiced before, of pulling the tools you 
already have together, rather than making tools up without anything to base it 
on. Right? 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. You need to have something to start with. Again, what I teach in my 
classes, I specifically teach them to think about different situations where they 
could use it. I don’t usually put it in the context of run over them and practice 
them so you have something should you ever run into this situation, but I tell 
them, the way you’re going to get better and to be more effective when you’re 
needed is practice. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        38 
 
Put your mind in a scenario where you can think about what situation you’ve 
been in before that you saw that you now know hypnosis could be 
advantageous. Put yourself in a frame of mind where you could benefit 
somebody just by having been there when they needed it with some hypnosis, 
dealing with a phobia.  
 
I mean if I think back over my life, in all honesty, I’ve probably known 500 or 
600 people with phobias, all kinds of phobias. So honestly, probably 10% or 
less did I ever help, only because at the time, nobody really wanted to be 
hypnotized or whatever, or at the time, it just didn’t occur to me. 
 
 
Going back years and years, let’s face it, when I was in my teens and my early 
‘20s, it never occurred to me to help somebody with a phobia. It just never did. 
If somebody asked, I could and did, but it never occurred to me at the time just 
to think of it myself.  
 
 
So, I’ve developed that sense in me to be aware of what’s going on around me 
and my love for hypnosis has grown and my understanding of what it can 
accomplish has grown. Now I have this broad perspective, in that, there are so 
many areas where I could help people by using hypnosis to improve their life. 
As I think about the scenarios I have seen and been through, there are enough 
of them there that I can build a pretty broad working base. 
 
 
Yes, I do. I pick up a scenario, run through it in my head, intervene with 
hypnosis as I run through it and let that cycle run out however many times until 
I feel comfortable that, had I done this at that time, I would have probably 
gotten a great result. 
 
 
It lets me have something so that I walk into – and it does happen. I walk into a 
situation and somebody with a group who knows that I’m a hypnotist and 
somebody will just go, hey, before we do anything else over here, can you fix 
my headache or something like that? I’ll just help them and I’m ready.  
 
 
In fact, not too long ago at the park, two different girls came up to me on the 
same day and said what can hypnosis do? I was like, well, it can do all kinds of 
things. It can cure phobias – and both of them happened to have fear of 
heights. In both cases, I’d already just run through at least a dozen scenarios 
for getting rid of a fear of heights.  
 
So I whipped through it with both of them and immediately they demonstrated 
that they had no problems. There was a playground nearby and they climbed 
way up to the top of those structures they put there for kids to climb on. They 
climbed all the way to the top and had no problem at all. So it was because I 
was prepared and that I didn’t have to stop and think through or plan anything 
out.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        39 
Igor: 
Now those are nice dramatic examples of what seems to be a third theme that’s 
emerging from you. You have, of course, the hypnotic intent, the idea of 
practicing and the third thing that seems to be emerging again is one that is 
very close to my own heart.  
 
That is the idea of using hypnosis as a force for good, particularly in light of how 
the lay person thinks of a top hat-wearing, manacled, evil hypnotist taking over 
the world or something. It’s all silly, but let’s face it, most hypnotists get into this 
thing because we do want to help people. We do want to do good things with 
what we do. So I think it is an important theme and idea to encourage people to 
get involved with. 
 
! Are there any other major themes or important ideas that underlie 
your work or that underpin your thinking before we get into the 
nitty-gritty of actually doing hypnosis in your approach and your 
method? 
 
Jeff: 
No. I did want to say a little bit more about the intent though. The intent is not 
just what I intend to do in the situation and have an idea where I’m going. Intent 
is being able to walk into the situation and just know that you’re going to get the 
results. You don’t even have to think about it. You don’t have to think yes, I’m 
absolutely, certain that I can get the results. It’s just that sense that, of course, 
when I do this, it’s going to work. This person is going to be better off. 
 
 
Now you mentioned doing it as a thing for good. I know you are a strong 
proponent of that and that you teach it in your class. I really believe that by 
having an attitude every time of I want this to be good for the person I’m 
working with and I want them to benefit from it, that that’s what keeps it fun, 
free and easy. It keeps it moving in a great way for me and for them. 
 
 
In fact, I did want to mention one thing. There’s a group that I have mentioned, 
hanging out with some role players and things like that. When I went over there 
this past weekend to hang out with them for a while, when I first got there, three 
of them walked up to me and shook my hand and said, we just want to say 
thank you. I said okay, you’re welcome, what did I do? 
 
They said well, we just watched all of Derren Brown’s videos and he’s a jerk. 
We want to thank you for never doing those kinds of mean things to us. It was 
kind of an interesting scenario, standing there realizing that they realized by 
watching him that everything I do with them I’m nice about it.  
 
Even when I do something to really play with their heads, I’m nice about it and I 
know that comes from having the attitude that hypnosis is a tool. You can take 
the same hammer and build a house for somebody or you can use it to tear up 
somebody’s house. I want to build, so my attitude is to constantly be on the 
positive side of that. 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        40 
Igor: 
That’s a beautiful story there and I’ve got to say, I’m not surprised that you 
never are short of people to practice on because that attitude is something that 
I’ve seen and it does exude from what you do. That’s actually very important. 
 
It creates that level of safety and people know at the subconscious level that 
when you’re involved together, when you’re going to do your hypnosis together 
that they’re going to be safe. They’re going to be treated with respect and 
they’re going to be better off at the end of the process then they would be if that 
process had never been engaged in the first place. 
 
 
I think that creates a tremendous amount of buy-in from the unconscious mind. 
Let’s face it, without the unconscious or as you like to call it, the subconscious 
they’re doing hypnosis.  
 
! That’s what you need. That’s the element and the key thing that 
makes the whole thing move; wouldn’t you say? 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. It’s definitely vital that you be able to let people know that, hey, 
whoever is sitting in front of you, they’re actually the safest person in the room 
because you’re taking care of them. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly.  
 
! Is there anything else you want to add in terms of the conceptual 
framework you have that underpins your work, or should be dive 
straight into the inductions and your step-by-step process for 
putting people in trance and then using it for whatever results you 
want to be achieving at that point in time? 
 
Jeff: 
No. We can go ahead and jump into the how-to. 
 
Igor: 
Great. In that case, let’s go and get on with what we’ve really come here for, 
which is the idea of hypnosis. Let’s get the hypnosis pony riding and doing his 
thing.  
 
 
The first thing I’m curious about in terms of how you like to do your work, Jeff, is 
the setup. I think you mentioned in the first interview something that is very 
important, which is that most hypnotists spend most of their time just setting 
things up so they can actually do the work and just do the hypnosis. 
 
 
You ended up developing a particular method for creating that setup much 
more quickly, so that you end up having your one- or two-minute trances and 
by the time the first 30 or 40 seconds have passed, you’re actually into the 
change work. So there’s really no wasted effort in the work that you do.  
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        41 
! Can you talk us a little through about your attitude in terms of the 
setup?  
 
Maybe even a step-by-step process, how you actually do the actual setup 
phase. Not the induction, just getting peoples’ minds to the point where they’re 
ready to just dive off into the trance pool.  
 
Jeff: 
Well, for a little clarity sake, usually change work doesn’t start for about three to 
five minutes. First, I tend to view the state of hypnosis as you’re either in it or 
you’re out of it and rather than deeper, I tend to view it as just a more intense 
focus, but I’ve gotten amazing changes doing virtually no intensifiers at all. 
 
 
I guess again, that comes back to intent. When I’m going through the steps, the 
first thing I usually tend to do is just find out what they want. I just talk to 
somebody for a minute and just find out what they want because again, I like to 
make sure that even if we’re doing something for fun that they get something 
beneficial from the process. I just have this strong thing that I practically pound 
the table on is that everyone walks away with something good.  
 
 
So I find out what kind of thing the person might be interested in and then it 
sounds kinds of silly, but one of my students – I don’t know that I particularly 
like this way of putting it – but one of my students likes to call it the hypnotic 
stare. I will simply get to the point where we’re ready to actually begin the 
hypnosis and I’ll just stop and stare at their face. I’ll slowly let my face relax 
down. I’ll keep staring at their eyes and staring at their eyes.  
 
A lot of times they’ll go through a process of mentally adjusting to this because 
being stared at has a tendency to mess with people, but over typically just 
maybe five to 10 seconds, they may look around a laugh once or twice, they 
may giggle a little bit or say something. I just keep staring until they realize the 
idea is to look at my eyes.  
 
Then as my face relaxes down, theirs tends to do the same thing. Once I see 
their face starting to relax down, then I just say take a nice slow, deep breath 
and I let them go ahead and do that. If it was kind of quick, then I have them do 
a second one. Usually, though, one is enough.  
 
At that point, while I’m staring at their eyes and they’re staring at mine, then I 
start my induction. I used to do it by just jumping right into the regular induction, 
but for some reason, I’ve found that when you do this first, your success rate 
just leaps through the roof. So once I have them engaged eye-to-eye and can 
see that they’re focused on me, than I’ll just do an induction really quick. 
 
I may do Cerbone’s butterfly fingers. I may do the eight word induction, or 
honestly, I have about five, six, seven that are my stock in trade, the ones I use 
the most. I’ll just do an induction very quickly and the moment their head goes 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        42 
down, I do one quick intensifier, just a three to zero countdown, then I go 
through where I tell them that the sounds in the room help them to focus more 
and be more comfortable and go even deeper and then I’ll use the fractionation.  
 
A lot of people think fractionation is just as they use it and treat, just as a 
deepener, but it’s actually a phenomena in itself. You’re getting this person to 
wake up and go down, wake up and go down, wake up and go down on your 
command. So that makes it not only an intensifier of the state, but it also makes 
it a phenomena in and of itself.  
 
After I’ve done that a few times, then I’ll throw in a convincer of some sort, like 
hands being locked together or hand being stuck to a table, or forget their name 
or something of that nature. Something that they can identify. See the 
fractionation part acts as a convincer – not really a convincer, but it shows me 
how well they’re in state because you can also use it as a covert test for the 
level of the state they’re in.  
 
Once I have what I consider to be a good solid – I know for a fact that they’re 
in. It’s not just they’re doing what I say, but I can see that they’re actually in 
hypnosis, then again, I’ll do some sort of convincer so that they see it, so that 
they know they’re in hypnosis and that also intensifies the state for them. 
 
Then right after that, I start going into whatever the change work is, or if I’m 
doing something for fun, I’ll go into whatever my fun bit is and when I’ve 
finished the fun bit, then I’ll throw in whatever the thing is that I’m giving them, 
the little bonus, so to speak and bring them on out. 
 
The whole thing rarely runs longer than 20 minutes; 15 minutes is about 
average. I do almost everything in that time. I do weight loss, smoking, anything 
in there.  
 
Igor: 
That’s very powerful stuff and that’s a very nice snapshot overview of your 
method. If you don’t mind, if you’d allow me to just go through the steps again 
just to make sure we’ve got them all separate and haven’t left anything out. Of 
course, people listening can take notes as they go along as well.  
 
 
So in the setup phase, the first thing you do is you just build a little bit of rapport 
and then you just get that very important bit, which is the idea of a motivator. 
The idea of what is it that they want to get out of it so that they end up having 
some positive impact in their life.  
 
 
I’m just going to hallucinate a little bit, in terms of why I might do something like 
that. It would be to partly get the unconscious mind on my side, because it’s 
getting something out of this as well. It’s also partly because we like people and 
we like to use hypnosis as a force of good as well.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        43 
 
The next step after that is you’re creating a nonverbal kind of demarcation line 
saying okay, trance is about to happen now, so you’ve done the mini setup. 
The next little setup is the starting bit. Again, you mentioned some very 
interesting points there. One, you stare and them, but you’re not staring at them 
blindly and just counting in your head until a certain point, you’re actually 
looking for certain things. In other words, you’re looking for their mind to 
become more receptive even for the beginnings of trance. 
 
Jeff: 
I like to use the word engaged. Once I have them engaged, then I move on. 
 
Igor: 
Beautiful. So you’re looking for some kind of engagement and once you see 
that they’re engaged in the process and then you actually begin your formal 
induction, which is, if I understand you correctly, typically some kind of an 
instant induction. We’ll talk about that in a little more detail in a moment. 
 
 
Then you go through a process of fractionation, bringing them in and bringing 
them out to intensify a particular state. I know that you don’t like the word 
deepen and I understand why. 
 
Jeff: 
It’s just a personal preference. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, I’m with you on that one. We can talk about hypnotic scales until the cows 
come home and I personally am not a fan. I’ll use the word deepen because it’s 
a nice metaphor and people understand it most easily, but in terms of the idea 
of what you’re actually doing, I don’t see a tunnel and the deeper you go in the 
tunnel, the more things they’re capable of.  
 
I see people as a complex web of possibilities and if you’re in Zone A, any A 
possibilities are available to you, when you’re in Zone B, B possibilities are 
available to you. The trick is to intensify a more A-like possibility if you want 
more A-like behavior and vice versa. It’s not a question of going to some 
magical state where suddenly everything is possible, but that’s my personal 
hobby horse and you may or may not agree with that. 
 
Jeff: 
Well, yeah, actually I kind of do. That’s pretty much how I view it in the sense 
that it’s not a matter of how deep they are or the whole scales where you hit 
this point, you can get this effect. This point, you get this effect. This point, you 
can get total amnesia.  
 
I’ve gotten total amnesia doing nothing more than an induction saying deeper, 
deeper, deeper, deeper, that’s right. And then have them forget something right 
then and there. I’ve gotten total amnesia. I’ve gotten positive and negative 
hallucinations that quick as well. 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        44 
 
Again, I think that comes back to intent. I don’t know if you’d agree or not, I 
think you might, that it’s a matter of your intent. The results that you get are 
going to be based on what your personal intent is about that particular hypnotic 
event. 
 
Igor: 
Beautiful. So again, this just shows the subtle layers and this one word, intent, 
which people just pick up and discard thinking where’s the real money.  
 
! What words do you say?  
 
! What thing do you do?  
 
They don’t realize that the thing that gets it started is the power behind 
hypnosis it’s that element that drives everything else.  
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. 
 
Igor: 
All the mechanisms, all the things people actually see and are impressed by 
are probably the least important element of the whole process. 
 
Jeff: 
You know, to me, hypnosis begins and ends with intent. You get them there 
through your intent. You achieve whatever change work you need through their 
intent. You bring them out happy and feeling fantastic through your intent 
because again, it comes back to that whole idea that we’re always 
communicating on literally thousands of levels. And consciously, we’re only 
recognizing a few of them, but your intent is going to flow out of you by means 
of signals to the individual and they’re going to read you. 
 
 
They may not even realize that’s what they’re doing. We all have had the 
experience of walking up to someone and for no apparent reason you just 
absolutely do not like this person. You just don’t want to be around them. Or 
you walk up to a person and you realize that, wow, this is a person I really think 
I would like to hang out with and you’ve never said a word and they’ve never 
said a word. 
 
 
It’s because we communicate on so many levels and by having your intent 
right, again, if my intent in a given session has to do with demonstrating 
phenomena for them or for people who are watching, the that’s going to change 
what’s going to happen during the session because my intent leads the 
session. Does that make sense? 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. I think we’re preaching to the converted here.  
 
Jeff: 
Sorry. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        45 
Igor: 
Everyone listening will take something of value, even a hint that something 
important is there. I think it’s an important point to really bring to people and in 
as many different ways as possible because the idea of intent will be as 
multifaceted as the people who use it.  
 
 
Now let’s get back to the mechanics a little bit, just to make sure people have 
something to hold onto. So they’ve built rapport. They now have talked a little 
bit about what the person wants as a positive effect of this whole hypnotic 
process. So you have a little bit of buy-in going on there.  
 
 
Then we switch our intent into overdrive by slowly ourselves down and getting 
ourselves focused and letting ourselves relax and staring at the other person 
and watching the other person until you get this what you would call 
engagement. This idea that they are engaged with the process, their own mind 
is getting more receptive and wants to play along with it. 
 
 
Then you get into your actual induction procedure, which is almost unimportant 
at this stage in terms of which one you actually choose. Then we have the, if I 
understand you correctly, we’ve got the idea of fractionation. So you’ll take 
them into trance, out of trance, into trance, out of trance. Of course, knowing 
that each time they go back into trance, many different things are happening. 
 
1. The first thing that’s happening, of course, is the trance depth or the 
intensity of that trance state is getting more and more intense each time, 
as they get more used to that process.  
 
2. The second thing that seems to be happening is, of course, they’re 
paying attention to you as a hypnotist more and more, which means that 
your words, your suggestions and your instructions as you would call 
them, are more and more their reality. They’re following them on cue, 
without any conscious interference in that process. 
 
 
I’m guessing, at least this is what I would do. Please correct me if you would do 
something different, but part of what you’re looking for in the fractionation 
process is for that immediate response, rather than something where you 
sense that they pause for half a second to reflect and go oh yeah, this is what 
I’m doing now. Literally, you’re looking for them to just do it without thinking.  
 
! So leaping before they look, rather than looking before they leap is 
that correct? 
 
Jeff: 
Yes and there’s actually one other aspect that as a standard I do. The first 
couple of times – see I typically tell them, in a moment I’m going to count from 
one to three and snap my fingers. When I do, your head will come up and your 
eyes will come up and you’re going to feel really wonderful. Absolutely 
fantastic! 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        46 
 
Then any time I say sleep and snap my fingers, instantly your eyes will close, 
you’ll drop down into a state 10 times deeper than you are now, 10 times 
deeper every time because the deeper you go, the better you feel and so on 
and so on. I go through all that. 
 
 
Then the first couple of times when I bring them up, I’ll go 1-2-3, snap, with a 
nice steady paced rhythm. Maybe the third time or the fourth time, I will do it 
where I go 1-2 pause, 3, snap. I watch to see if there’s an anticipatory motion of 
the head coming up or the eyes starting to open. If there is, then I know that I 
have more work to do. If it works exactly on the count and there’s no jumping 
the gun at all on their part, then I know that I have them all the way and that I 
can do anything I want from that point there’s no phenomena I can’t achieve. 
 
Igor: 
Wonderful.  
 
Jeff: 
That’s where I was mentioning earlier that it acts as a test for me to know 
where they are and see if they’re going to jump the gun. If they jump the gun, 
then I know that we’re not there yet. 
 
Igor: 
You mentioned something else, which is interesting in that process that I know 
you do and are quite keen on. When you do your fractionation, or at least when 
a lot of other hypnotists do their fractionation, part of their language is to say, 
when I snap my fingers, you’ll go to sleep and you’ll feel more comfortable and 
more relaxed. You tend to avoid the idea of relaxation and you do it very much 
on purpose.  
 
! Can you tell us a little bit more about that little subtly you put in 
there?  
 
! Why you did it? 
! What results you have gotten, as a result, of focusing on this 
idea? 
 
Jeff: 
Well, I pretty much avoid the word relax. It may slip in once in awhile, but it’s 
rare because usually when I’m doing hypnosis.  
 
First, I know it’s going to be a very quick process and when I’m done at the end, 
I don’t want them all groggy, having to shake off the relaxation and four or five 
minutes getting all back in action again. I avoid telling them to relax because it 
really doesn’t matter. I mean I’ve done it with someone who the whole time 
they’re body was fidgety because when I started, they were in a bit of an 
intense state. 
 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        47 
 
In fact, I didn’t tell them to relax at any point because this person had 
something they had to go to right away and we were doing this pretty quickly. I 
get the result because I’m not really concerned about the relaxation. I honestly 
don’t see much need for it in most situations.  
 
I could understand if you were doing a stress release or if I ever went back to 
doing the 5-minute vacations. Relaxation is a good thing there, but by and 
large, it really does not enhance the state. It does not intensify the state from 
my perspective and unfortunately, I have found in the past – years ago, when I 
would say relax and go deeper, relax and go deeper, relax and go deeper, I 
would find that the relaxation of the body became the focus and honestly the 
other effects just weren’t as intense.  
 
They just weren’t as effective when I did them. So by not focusing on the body, 
by keeping things in the mind where they belong in my opinion, I’m able to get 
really good effect in a very short period. 
 
I know a lot of people out there are practicing what some people called relax-o- 
therapy. They would argue the point, they would try to defend the whole need 
for relaxation, but I just don’t see it. I don’t see a need to get all sunk back in 
the chair. I’ve worked with people standing up. I’ve worked with people leaning 
against a wall and sitting down, just about every position, even lying on the floor 
so it really doesn’t enhance the work and sometimes it interferes from my 
perspective.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        48 
Seminar 1 – Part 2 
 
Igor: 
Now again, an interesting nuance that you just brought up that I rather like and I 
think this is one of the secrets to why you can work so much quicker than many 
other hypnotists out there. That is this dual idea.  
 
1. Number one is staying clear of relaxation.  
 
It appears that relaxation slows everything down and as a result, you need to 
stretch everything out in order to get the results you want, which by the way, it 
can be useful. I don’t know what your feelings on this are, but my idea is that, 
especially for less experienced hypnotists, if you slow everything down, you 
don’t have to think as fast to go to the next step, which could be useful at times. 
 
 
Aside from that, the idea of relaxation, slowing things down, if you avoid the 
comfort of relaxation, you allow yourself to move at a much faster pace.  
 
2. Number two, which I think is very interesting and I really like this idea, is 
you stay within the mind.  
 
In other words, hypnosis is primarily a mental phenomena, if I understand you 
correctly, at least how you conceptualize it. 
 
Jeff: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
It’s primarily a mental phenomenon; therefore, you maintain it in that realm and 
the mind can work pretty much at the speed of thought, which is kind of what it 
does. Hence, you can work again much more quickly than having to work at the 
rate of some other biological function, which can take much longer and a bit 
slower to actually get yourself into gear. 
 
 
It’s not that you can’t get results the other way it’s just that doing it the other 
way will slow things down again, especially if you get into the body and try to 
get them to connect the mind and body in trance. It can again, have that effect 
of having a time relay. 
 
 
The way I view it, the way I conceptualize it is kind of like the old-fashioned 
long-distance telephone calls. You know, transatlantic calls, where you talk, you 
wait for five minutes and the other person hears you. They talk back, wait for 
five minutes and then you hear their voices and a double echo or something 
like that. It’s that sort of long-distance conversation going on and you’re always 
waiting for someone else to catch up, as opposed to what you do, which is by 
avoiding that complex in the first place.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        49 
You’re literally just going straight to the mind and it’s much more like having a 
fiber optic cable, you’re idea is there and it’s already there. As soon as your 
idea is out of the mouth it’s already being absorbed by them, because that’s the 
speed, at which the subconscious processes language anyway.  
 
! Does that kind of match how you do it or am I reading a bit too 
much into your method?  
 
Jeff: 
That definitely matches how I do it. That matches the mental perspective as 
well. By not engaging the body in the process, except for doing phenomena 
and such, then I avoid having to work against their body being so relaxed they 
cannot react to me.  
 
 
For instance, if I want to do a quick arm lock or hand stuck to a table or 
something, I don’t have to wait for them to process the wow, I’m so relaxed, I’m 
so comfortable. Now he wants me to put my hand on the table. I don’t have to 
deal with that because I’ve never relaxed them. They’re sitting there physically 
fairly alert, but mentally again, as you mentioned, it’s a process of keeping it in 
the mind.  
 
By keeping it there, it pretty much keeps things in motion for me so that I can 
get through doing what I do. Yeah, that is one of the reasons why it’s pretty 
quick when I do hypnosis. 
 
Igor: 
Wonderful. Thank you again for really pulling that inside out and displaying it. It 
seems obvious once people mention it, but until someone actually has the 
ability to mention it and state it as clearly as that, it can kind of drift away 
amongst all the other debris of hypnotic sagas and ideas and whatever. 
 
 
So this is an interesting key piece that really outlines the work and I can only 
emphasize to people listening to this recording what now to pay attention to 
that. This is one of those master key secrets that comes along every now and 
than. If you develop that secret for yourself, I suspect you’ll be seeing some 
very powerful results in a very short period. 
 
 
Now let’s turn back again to the method that you’ve been talking about. We’ve 
got, of course, the setup bit with the building rapport, getting some positive 
thing that they want to have. You slow everything down by creating that context 
with your hypnotic stare, your intention. Get set at that point to even more fully 
physically relax yourself so you’re translating all these trance signals. They’re 
beginning to respond to that. You can see them engaging.  
 
When you see their mind’s being ready to, basically, jump off the deep end, 
you’ll do your induction. It could be something as simple as just say sleep or 
whatever you want to do. You may want to say a few words on that, it’s up to 
you more importantly, once they’re in trance, because the induction phase I 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        50 
would imagine from your description takes you all of, what, maybe 10-15 
seconds to actually get the words out.  
 
Then you actually spend more time on the actual fractionation phase, which is 
the idea of bringing them in, bringing, them out, bringing, them in, bringing them 
out and the nuances there are important.  
 
1. Number one, you avoid relaxation. It’s just about going deeper or more 
intensely into trance.  
 
2. Number two; you’re keeping things within the mind, which is something 
you do by not emphasizing the body or any bodily sensations, at that 
point.  
 
3. Number three; you will test them as part of the fractionation by changing 
the count so that if they were anticipating a certain count, they would 
respond differently than if they were following the count precisely as 
you’re mentioning it. Again, by avoiding anticipation, you know that their 
conscious mind isn’t involved.  
 
If there is anticipation, then they’re not following your instructions without 
thought. They’re literally thinking and processing them too much, so you’ll carry 
on for a few more cycles and that seems to be your first test to let you know 
whether, or not this person is in the hypnotic state. 
 
! Once they’ve passed that test, is that when you’re ready to go onto 
the convincer or does something else happen before that? 
 
Jeff: 
Usually, right then is when I begin doing one or two convincers and again, the 
convincer is for them. At that point, I now know where they are. I can do a 
convincer and they can know where they are. It helps them to realize that they 
are experiencing something out of the norm. It helps the whole process 
because it’s like convincing them okay, something’s going on. Then they go 
along even faster and easier and I know that from then on, whatever I say is 
going to be totally accepted. 
 
 
I also use the line – the super suggestion. I’ve had various ways of wording it, 
but I kind of go with the one from John Chase now. I tell them, from this point 
whatever I say to you, no matter how absurd or ridiculous, no matter how stupid 
it sounds becomes your complete and total reality instantly. 
 
 
Then I’ll repeat that a different way, rearranging the words, but saying the same 
thing so that it’s fully understood. That way, at that point, they just accept 
whatever I say. When I say it, they believe it. 
 
Igor: 
Let me just ask you a little bit more about that.  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        51 
! Do you do this element, this setting up the mind, if you like, before 
you do the convincer for them or do you do it after they’ve had that 
convincing moment that tells that something unusual is happening 
and it proves to them that they’re in this hypnotic state?  
 
! Is it before or after or do you not really think it matters? 
 
Jeff: 
Okay, the super suggestion sometimes I even do it before fractionation. It 
depends on what I’m getting from this person. Even before the fractionation, if 
I’m already sensing this person is way gone, then I go ahead and throw it in 
there. I still do the fractionation because, again, it acts as a convincer in and of 
itself. If I’m not yet convinced, I got through the fractionation, then I do that, 
then I do the convincers. 
 
Igor: 
That again brings up an interesting question. Other than using the count and 
finding out how responsive they are, in other words, are they responding to 
your count literally or are they trying to anticipate the rhythm from before or the 
count in other ways. 
 
! What other things do you look for?  
 
! What other things give you that sense that these people are way 
gone or this person needs a little bit more before they’re cooked 
properly? 
 
Jeff: 
Actually, when I do the wake up, as I mentioned, I specifically state, every time 
your head comes up and your eyes come open, you feel better and better and 
better. Ten times better than you have before. What that accomplishes is I can 
watch their face and when their head comes up and their eyes come open, I 
just look at them and say, that feels pretty good, doesn’t it? I can look at their 
face and see if it doesn’t show any sign.  
 
It might be just a casual smile and then I know okay, we’re going to have to do 
go through this a few more times and build this up. You can watch their face 
going up. When their head comes up, you can watch their face and watch their 
body and you can see that they are feeling better and better and better.  
 
Sometimes it almost reaches – after just a few cycles, it’s almost like they’re 
intoxicated. I mean it really becomes easy to observe that each time they do 
feel better than they did before, so you have that to watch.  
 
You have the timing on the counts to watch. You have just how fast, when you 
say sleep and snap your fingers how fast do they really drop back down into 
that state. No, fast doesn’t always mean that it’s better or deeper, because 
some people their head goes down kind of gradually and slowly drifting down, 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        52 
but you can still see on their face whether or not it’s really going into a hypnotic 
state or whether they’re just closing their eyes and moving their head down. 
 
 
You learn to read all these things. They, basically, tell you where they are so 
you know what you can do with them. 
 
Igor: 
 
! That last bit, is that something that you developed yourself in terms 
of just having the experience of hypnotizing thousands of people?  
 
! Do you kind of get an instinct for what someone looks like when 
they’re in trance, versus what someone looks like when they’re just 
closing their eyes and being voluntarily compliant, but not 
necessarily having that little switch thrown inside their mind where 
they just follow your suggestions fully? 
 
Jeff: 
Well, early on, I kept reading about all these hypnotists that had very high 
acuity and could see whether or not a person was in hypnosis or not and for the 
longest time, I couldn’t figure out what they were talking about. People talked 
about the flushing of the skin and the moisture of the skin. I kept thinking, well, 
you’ve got better eyes than I do. 
 
 
So I just started watching the people, one at a time. When I would do hypnosis 
with them, I would observe. I would go through various fractionations or some 
other convincer and you can genuinely tell when a person is sitting there and 
let’s say you do a hand lock. You can genuinely tell are they really shocked that 
their hands won’t come apart, or are they just going along with you? 
 
 
By observing over and over, it got easier and easier to see more and more of 
the subtle signs. So now that I kind of know what to look for – well, no, now that 
I do know what to look for, I like to point that out in class also so that I can get 
other people seeing exactly what I’m looking at and it gives me a reference 
point. I mentioned earlier about installing it.  
 
Once they’ve seen it, then I can install that so it kind of comes more naturally to 
them, but for me, it was kind of a long drawn out process of noticing differences 
starting from the big and obvious differences to subtle differences. 
 
Igor: 
This is an interesting idea, this idea of spotting differences between normal 
consciousness and the trance state of consciousness. For most hypnotists, 
most skill hypnotists anyway, a lot of them are self-taught or have gone their 
own ways.  
 
Literally, it’s a question of, hundreds of hours of experience before one day the 
light bulb comes on and you go, I’ve got it this person is there and you don’t 
quite know necessarily, how sure you could make a map to say okay, there’s 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        53 
something about his breathing, the eyelids and the skin tone. It becomes like 
this whole texture that just tells you yes or no or kind of halfway in between. 
 
 
The beauty of what you just said, again, in terms of your training – this is the 
thing where the idea of a personalized approach is very nice – is by actually 
doing the demonstration live in front of people, you can speed that process up 
by just getting them to pay attention.  
 
Say hey, did you notice that thing just happened? They’ll go no. Well, pay 
attention again. We’ll do it one more time. Then again, did you see that happen 
then? Some people will go, oh yeah, I saw that. Some people will go, still no. 
So you go okay, let’s do it one more time and each time that you do that, of 
course, it prepares the mind that much more fully. 
 
Jeff: 
Yes. One of the tests that I do now – because it’s something people can see – 
is I do a lights-out test. I’ll have the person sitting there with their eyes wide 
open. I tell them I’m going to count to three and snap my fingers and when I do 
all the lights will go out and it will be dark in the room. Then I’ll have people 
around so they can see it.  
 
 
I’ll say, 1-2-3, snap and you watch their pupils and their pupils will just get big, 
like its dark in the room. That’s a good way for people to see the little things. It’s 
a great test, but once you’ve seen that happen, you can start recognizing other 
things more easily. It’s kind of like one of those snowballing effects.  
 
Once you see the bigger things that point to the trance state, then you start to 
notice more and more of the little ones and it snowball’s until you’re really 
reading dozens and dozens of signs in seconds. 
 
Igor: 
 
! It goes back to the old principle that success breeds more success, 
does it not? 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely.   
 
Igor: 
Now let me ask you one more question, which is going backwards a little bit in 
terms of theory because I think it’s important here. You’ve spoken a lot about 
different phenomena you like to create and some very dramatic demonstrations 
from turning the lights off and all that sort of stuff. 
 
! Where do you stand on the idea that some people are hypnotizable 
and some people aren’t and some people can be hypnotized deeply 
and achieve certain effects and other people simply cannot?  
 
! Is that something that is part of your reality, or do you think 
everyone can be hypnotized?  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        54 
 
! Do you think everyone can be hypnotized and achieve all the 
different phenomena?  
 
! Where is it that you sit in that whole ballpark? 
 
Jeff: 
You had to go there, didn’t you?  
 
Well, I believe anyone and everyone can be hypnotized, unless for some 
physical or mental reason they are completely unable to focus. I don’t like using 
IQ numbers, but let’s face it there are people who simply do not have the 
mental capacity to focus on anything for more than a couple of seconds. 
 
 
It’s going to be pretty tough to get that person into a state of hypnosis, if you 
can at all. There are people who for emotional reasons can’t focus long 
enough. If you’ve ever seen or really observed somebody who’s schizophrenic, 
you would think, well, they’re already in some sort of weird mental state. It 
should be very easy to hypnotize them, but it really isn’t because their brain has 
changed the topic 12 times before you get the first sentence out. 
 
 
So you’re not going to get a state of focus. You’re just going to get maybe a bit 
of extension on their very confused state to begin with. I think anybody that 
does not have some sort of mental or physical reason why they cannot 
concentrate can be hypnotized. Now how effective and what kind of 
phenomena? Again, I’m a person who flat out believes you’re either in hypnosis 
or you’re out. If you’re in hypnosis, then I can get phenomena out of you. 
 
 
I’m not going to just stand up and be bold and say, ooh, here’s a challenge. I 
can do anybody anytime and get any and every effect. Again, it goes back to 
earlier when we talked about – or at least I did – about reading each other on 
so many levels. Thousands of levels that we don’t even realize we’re reading 
each other on. 
 
 
I may not be able to get an effect today with you or somebody, because of the 
fact that on some level, you’re reading me in a way that you just can’t follow 
that suggestion. That doesn’t mean I can’t get the effect tomorrow. Again, we’re 
back to intent. My intent is going to control how I’m dealing with everything and 
it’s going to affect how we’re communicating on pretty much every level. 
 
 
So I think, unless there’s a physical or emotional reason why a person simply 
can’t focus, they can be hypnotized and I can’t say I’m of the perspective that if 
I can get you under, I can get phenomena. Now I’m not going to say I can get 
all the phenomena at any given time but again, I can get phenomena. 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        55 
Igor: 
So here’s some interesting points you’ve raised there again. So for you, the 
fundamental driver of trance is the idea of focus. For a lot of hypnotists, they 
focus on relaxation, but you’ve discarded that already very early on in your 
career and your method is very much predicated on avoiding relaxation for the 
reasons you spoke about.  
 
So for you, the whole driving force is to get focus and the more focus you have 
– in other words, that’s what you want to intensify – the more the state is 
intensified, switched on, or however you want to put it. Have I understood you 
correctly there? 
 
Jeff: 
Correct. Once I get hypnosis, I do intensify it, but as I’ve said, again, we’re 
talking about how on some level you’re communicating, but you’re not 
consciously aware even yourself that you’re doing so. You might not be able to 
get all the phenomena at any given time, but if I can get you into hypnosis, I 
can get phenomena from you.  
 
Igor: 
This reminds me of something very interesting, which is – you’re probably 
familiar with the old school hypnotist, George Estabrooks. One of the bad boys 
of hypnosis. He said something once, which really struck a chord with me. That 
was the idea that a hypnotic subject will absolutely not actualized a suggestion 
or act out a suggestion that the hypnotist himself doesn’t actually believe in.  
 
! Does that kind of conform to your point of voice, or is there 
something you want to add to that in terms of how you look at it? 
 
Jeff: 
I guess I’d have to say yes. If I can’t accept that it’s going to happen, it’s not 
going to happen no matter how perfectly I do the delivery. It’s just not going to 
happen. I think that should pretty much drive any given hypnotist in where he’s 
willing to go and what he’s willing to do because if I can’t believe in what I’m 
going, then on some level, I’m going to communicate that to the subject. Did 
that answer your question? 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. I think that’s a great point. Again, we keep circling around and 
around and around to this point of hypnotic intent. This is one of the reasons, 
I’ve got to say, it’s strange to me. You may not appreciate the way I’m saying 
this, but your thinking, or my understanding of Ericksonian hypnosis, is what 
hypnosis is all about.  
 
You think like an Ericksonian and then you act externally, very much like a 
traditional, classical speed hypnotist. I think you’ve got a very interesting and I 
think very effective, blend of the two mindsets that allows your particular 
method to work so well. I think it’s a very elegant method. I have to say I do 
appreciate it and I’m having fun talking about these things.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        56 
Hopefully, you are as well because I think the beautiful thing about what you’re 
doing is you’re showing all these principles from a very different light so people 
get to get a sense of oh, we’re talking about the same thing here, but it looks 
very different.  
 
The elephant from the left side and right side may look different. An African 
elephant and an Indian elephant are different sizes, bigger head, smaller head, 
one has big old ears, the other one has tiny little ears, but they’re still 
elephants. They still share that common theme.  
 
This is why it’s a pleasure talking to you because you focus on elements that 
other hypnotists maybe necessarily don’t and, as a result, you show principles 
in a much more three-dimensional fashion. That’s very nice to see. 
 
Jeff: 
I will say that, from what you just said, I’ve had people that I’ve worked with in 
the past that learn from me, they demonstrate it, they can do it and then they go 
away and go to someone else’s training and they essentially tell me, well, no, 
I’m doing it this way now because this way works. I’m finding this way very 
effective. 
 
 
So I tell my students, I tell the people that I work with on every level, consider it 
like a toolbox. You get something from me, it’s like you bought a tool from 
Sears and you put it in your toolbox. Okay, you go over here to the hardware 
store and you buy another tool. You don’t throw out the one you got from Sears 
to replace it with the new one if it’s still good. You have two tools in your toolbox 
now. 
 
 
I stress it now. Learn from everybody. Learn from all the different teachers and 
so forth that have something to teach that you really want and feel you can 
work with, but don’t throw out something else just because the new thing is 
working also. You never know when you’re going to need that old tool. You 
never know when this is going to come up. I just think, as you said, my style 
reflects Ericksonian thought, but practically it’s more Estabrooks, Elman or that 
type of direct, jump right in, do the deed, get out. 
 
 
So I think that’s a large part of my success is that I can look at all the different 
pieces and, as a friend of mine used to say all the time, eat the meat and spit 
out the bones. Just take what I can really use from this teaching, that teaching 
and build it into something. I believe that I have built a system that works 
extremely well and it’s very fast.  
 
 
I have demonstrated it time and time again. I’ve taught others and they’ve gone 
out and shown me even more that my methods are extremely effective, 
because I didn’t just jump to one side of the chart and say okay, everybody on 
the other side of the chart doesn’t exist or everybody over there’s wrong.  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        57 
 
I think everybody gets something from the whole thing. Hey, I’m willing to take 
the absolute best of everything anybody has to offer me and I think I’ve 
developed a really solid system. 
 
Igor: 
I think what you just said there is a very healthy attitude and it’s something that 
I run across with a lot of, shall we say very masterful hypnotists. Not 
necessarily all of them, but most of the top hypnotists that I’ve worked with 
have the same attitude, which is to say, have your own discipline have your 
favorite approach or way of doing things, but then just go out there and find 
what everyone else is doing.  
 
 
It’s not good just putting your head in the sand and saying, oh, that doesn’t 
work. If someone out there is actually making it work, it’s like, hello, you can’t 
ignore it. It’s clearly working. It’s the bits which when you see someone that 
does something that shouldn’t work, but it’s still working anyway despite the 
fact that it contradicts your theory.  
 
At that point, you should get excited because you’re about to learn a principle at 
a much deeper level than you’ve ever understood it before. That’s the point at 
which you get excited and you can’t do that by following one particular path. 
You do need one path in terms of being able to be a bit stable on something, 
but then just to find those other paths that give so much more richness. 
 
 
That’s one of the reasons I really like this Interview With a Masters Series that 
we’re doing here because, hopefully, it gives everyone exposure to a broad 
range of different hypnotists, different attitudes, different beliefs and different 
principles, but then really once you’ve listened to them all – this is something 
that I found happened for me.  
 
At first it sounds like they’re saying totally different things, but after hearing 
them over and over again, you suddenly realize they’re saying exactly the same 
thing, but just saying it in different ways. They’re expressing it differently, 
physically or verbally and so on, but its principle that’s what makes it work.  
 
To date, I haven’t found anyone that’s worked under a different set of principles 
than what I’m doing. So I’d like to thank you for emphasizing that because I 
think that’s really important. You can tell it’s kind of one of my hobby horses as 
well. 
 
Jeff: 
I have to say that you’re a good example of that for me because my method is 
what I’ve been doing for years and I have extremely high success rate. I mean 
very good success rate. Yet I took your class in Palm Springs and I even told 
you there, this really isn’t how I work and it’s just something I really want to find 
more out about.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        58 
 
The class was amazing and I have found that since I’ve come home, I’ve been 
able to integrate a lot of things that you taught right into my style. It’s not that 
it’s something extra that I’m slapping on the outside, like a decal or something. 
It’s honestly become a practical part of what I do.  
 
It allows me a lot of times when, in fact, using conversational type hypnosis I’m 
able, if somebody, for instance, is sitting there and they’re uncertain that they 
even want to do hypnosis, but they really do want the result. I find that I can use 
some conversational language and patterns that I learned from you that I can 
sit down and I can talk to them for a few minutes and they become open to, 
okay well, I guess sure, let’s go ahead and try this. 
 
 
I can take them from, it’s just the idea of doing hypnosis, all the way to okay, 
let’s give it a try, in just a few moments using the conversational techniques that 
I learned from you. In the past, I would have simply said well, if you don’t really 
feel comfortable and don’t want to do, then we’ll just do it some other time. I like 
the fact that I have a way to make them comfortable. If it’s something they want 
to do and they just don’t feel comfortable for some reason, I can make them 
comfortable. I like that. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you for the wonderful set of compliments. It was totally unscripted. I 
promise you, folks. Again, I’d like to draw something out that you said there, 
which is again an attitude. This is an Interview with the Masters. It’s the whole 
concept of doing these interviews for me.  
 
It’s to show people not just the techniques that the Masters use. That’s 
interesting and it’s important and you’ll get a lot of those things, but I think the 
much more interesting thing is how a Hypnosis Master thinks. If you start 
thinking like a Hypnosis Master, if you start acting like a Hypnosis Master, well 
guess what, you’ll be a Master Hypnotist.  
 
 
Something that you said there, which I really like again, which I think resonates 
very strongly with everything that I have ever learned. It’s the idea that you 
don’t try to copy other hypnotists. You may do that for a while and you’ll feel 
awkward and clunky and all the rest of it because, of course, you’re copying 
someone else’s style.  
 
The magic starts happening when you come back to your style and you 
integrate what you’ve learned somewhere else into your style. You do it how 
you do it. No one can do hypnosis like you can because they’re not you.  
 
 
My sincere hope is to one day meet one of my students and see them doing 
stuff and going, oh my God, that’s crazy. I can’t do that. Not because I can’t 
achieve the same effect or I can’t use another method to get to the same place, 
but because they’re doing something in such a natural way to who they are as 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        59 
a person that it’s just wonderful to see. It’s just elegant to watch because it’s 
their whole personality engaged with it so their whole being is doing hypnosis.  
 
This comes back to the idea of hypnotic intent and something that I think you 
mentioned also in the last session, which I strongly believe in. Hypnosis is not 
something that you do. You become the hypnotist. Hypnosis is something that 
just happens as an outcome.  
 
! Does that kind of fit your world view as well? 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. There is a point at which, I guess in the learning process, where 
hypnosis is this thing that I can do. Then it moves into once you’re more 
comfortable with it, you feel good with it and you’re able to really get your intent 
and it becomes I do hypnosis and I’m good at it. 
 
 
Then at some point – I don’t even think you recognize the point – but at some 
point it just becomes I’m a hypnotist. Once it hits that point, it’s something that 
is so engrained and natural for you that it’s like I don’t even have anything to 
compare it with.  
 
It’s just something that just flows from you naturally and it becomes easier and 
easier to use it in any situation where somebody can be helped by it. 
Somebody’s life can be made a bit better by it. It becomes a natural part of who 
and what you are.  
 
Igor: 
Let’s take these concepts we’ve been talking about, particularly the 
methodology because I know a lot of people want to focus and understand it, 
especially the beginning of the whole process of the step-by-step procedural 
elements.  
 
 
We’ve talked about the whole process. You start with the setup, the mindset, 
the staring to create the context and the induction. The fractionation I think 
we’re clear with. Then you do the funky change work or the funky phenomena, 
which we’ll focus on more in the next part of this interview session. Then you 
wrap it all up and you finish. 
 
 
That’s kind of your method in a nutshell, if I’ve understood it correctly.  
 
! What happens if things go wrong?  
 
! How do you start troubleshooting?  
 
! Could you kind of run is through the kinds of problems you’ve come 
across and the kind of things that you’ve done to overcome the 
problems along the way? 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        60 
Jeff: 
I guess in dealing with so many different people over the years, I came to the 
point where I realized – and I know a lot of people still when they’re new 
hypnotists, when they’re newbies out there and they’re trying to learn this, they 
start going through the process. They do an induction and the person is 
giggling.  
 
 
The assumption is usually, oh well, it didn’t work, or they’re coming back out, or 
it didn’t happen. Honestly, if you’ve followed the steps and your intent is there, 
there’s a very, very strong chance that you have hypnosis. So just accept that 
you have hypnosis and use everything. Here we go, Ericksonian again, but 
utilization. If they start giggling say that’s right, it does feel good doesn’t it? Just 
let that take you even deeper. Something like that where you utilize whatever 
you see.  
 
I had one once when I was doing the mall one time. I had a subject there and 
his head was down, his eyes were closed and one of his friends said, wow, I 
wonder what that feels like. Without moving his head or opening his eyes, he 
said, this is awesome. You really have to try this. 
 
The person that I was there with doing it, looked at me and went, is it over? I 
said, no. So I just kept right on with the process. He never came out. The fact 
that he spoke did not mean he was coming out of hypnosis because there’s still 
a level of communication activity going on all the time. At that point, however, I 
took the time to say that my voice was the only one he heard and understood 
so that he wouldn’t keep responding to them and pop himself out. 
 
Utilizing whatever comes up is a vital key. If you’re in a noisy place, like when I 
do it at the mall, I utilize that particular thing. I utilize that noise by saying that it 
helps them to focus even more on what I’m saying and making it easier to 
follow my instructions. It can be laughter. It can be giggling. It can be talking. It 
can be whatever. Utilize it in your favor. 
 
There are also sometimes emotional reactions. I have had a subject in front of 
me where during the process, suddenly there was a look of fear on his face 
because I had said something about you feel yourself floating. I didn’t know he 
had a fear of heights. I should have asked. I probably shouldn’t have done 
something kind of off the cuff like that. So I immediately dealt with it. It didn’t 
bring him out. It simply brought him to a place where I needed to deal further 
with what was going on. 
 
Again, dealing with all the distractions that are going to come up, two things 
that I use every time. Every single time I put someone under, even if I’ve 
hypnotized this person 100 times, I don’t care. There are a few people that I 
have hypnotized that many times or more where I will say first, dealing with the 
sounds around them. 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        61 
All the sounds you hear around you make you feel more comfortable and make 
it easier and easier to focus on my voice and to follow my instructions. So 
dealing with those kinds of distractions. 
 
I also put in, absolutely nothing I do or say will disturb you in any way, shape or 
form. That’s because there have been a few times in the past when going 
through the process and suddenly I cough. It startled the person and it brought 
them all the way back out. Their eyes popped open and they looked at me like, 
what the heck was that? They were so focused on every sound coming from 
me, that it shocked them. I immediately reached over and touched them on the 
forehead and said, sleep. They were all the way back down. 
 
That’s one of the nice things about hypnosis. You have a little grace period 
there when someone comes out. So using utilization as a constancy, as 
something that you do all the time. If you noticed it, they could notice it. Utilize 
it. Make it work in your favor. 
 
Utilize the common stuff. Everybody knows this. Using every breath you take 
takes you deeper and deeper and makes you feel more and more comfortable. 
Things like that. Utilizing everything that happens is important.  
 
Now, there have been roughly six people that I just couldn’t hypnotize that, at 
least I don’t think they had any mental damage or physical problems. In all 
these cases, it was a hypnotist. In every case, when examined afterwards 
about why it didn’t work, I realized the same exact thing came up.  
 
Well, I was trying to just follow your instructions, but I kept trying to analyze 
everything you said and figure out how I could use it or what you were trying to 
do. Now in those cases, I didn’t really know how to get past it because they 
wouldn’t quit doing it. Since then, I’ve developed a few ways to bypass even 
that analysis, but you’ve got to be quick and you better be prepared.  
 
That’s one of those hey, study- study- study, practice- practice- practice 
because as soon as you realize what’s happening, you need to be able to 
quickly just handle it. When it comes up, you’re only going to have a couple of 
seconds at best to bypass that critical examination of what you’re doing. So I 
think that examining that and following through with that and never letting the 
flow break is really important.  
 
A lot of people have mentioned how tough it is to deal with analyticals. In 
general, I don’t find any problem because it’s easy to confuse people and that’s 
typically what I do is a confusional. 
 
Igor: 
Great. That’s actually a fairly, complete list of the kind of problems that people 
can prevent going into hypnosis, a couple things that people are typically also 
concerned about.  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        62 
As novice hypnotists, or even relatively experienced hypnotists come across 
this or fear this at this at some level, so I wonder if I could just straight ask you. 
I suspect I know what your answer is going to be, but I want to throw these 
ideas at you and you give us your interpretation of how these things are and 
how much they affect you and why they occur and how to deal with them. 
 
 
The first one is the idea of fear or doubts. If someone is afraid of going into 
hypnosis and they go, oh, I don’t know about hypnosis. That sort of stuff.  
 
 
The other classic one that people are afraid of is, oh, I can’t be hypnotized. No 
one can hypnotize me. Hypnosis doesn’t work. It just doesn’t exist. 
 
! How do you deal with those two kinds of mindsets, if you even 
come across them anymore? 
 
Jeff: 
I do once in awhile still come across people who say, I can’t be hypnotized. I 
have too much of a control issue, so you’re not going to be able to bypass that. 
Honestly, the last three or four times it came up I dealt with it by just doing a 
very rapid shock induction. I don’t set up for it. I don’t do the hypnotic stare.  
 
I don’t do anything. I just do a really rapid hypnotic shock induction, like an arm 
pull type or gently putting my hand right in front of their face and it blocks their 
eyes really quick and saying sleep – because it has a sort of shock effect when 
someone’s hand is about an inch from your eyeballs.  
 
 
I’ll do a shock induction and people who said they don’t think they can be 
hypnotized almost always can. The people who have fears, I know the typical 
standard party line is, do a nice pre-talk so that they don’t worry about will they 
get stuck there; will they reveal their deepest, darkest secret; can I make them 
go out and rob a bank and shoot everybody in the building; all the nonsense.  
 
 
I don’t get asked those questions. Every once in a great while, somebody will 
come up with one and it’s only because I’ll simply say something like, do you 
have any questions? That is the extent of a pre-talk for me, do you have any 
questions? If they do, then I deal with them. As far back as I can remember, 
there have been three times somebody said, yeah and they hit on some natural 
fear like, am I going to get stuck there or can you make me act like a zombie? 
Well, oddly enough, I can.  
 
Igor: 
Very funny.  
 
! Why do you think that is that you don’t get this, while so many 
other people get it constantly?  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        63 
My personal opinion is – and I don’t know if you agree with this – that it goes 
right back to the idea of hypnotic intent. If you are afraid that they might be 
afraid, if you’re insecure in yourself as a hypnotist, then people pick up on that.  
 
 
When they mention some kind of fear of hypnosis, they’re not actually saying 
that they’re afraid of hypnosis. What they’re actually responding to is your own 
insecurity being projected, your own fear being projected and then they come 
up with some rationalization, which is something they may have heard in the 
media, like what if you take my mind over, what if you make me jump off a tall 
building or something like that.  
 
That’s actually a post-fact rationalization, whereas those hypnotists who are 
very relaxed and comfortable in their own skin, especially when it comes to the 
idea of hypnosis and for whom hypnosis really is just a genuine force for good 
and they just live and breathe that attitude. There’s no shadow of a doubt inside 
your mind, for those people, magically, fears just don’t seem to arise. It just 
doesn’t happen because those people around them don’t seem to respond in 
that same way. 
 
! Is that kind of what you think is happening or do you think 
something else is going on? 
 
Jeff: 
I don’t think I could have said it more elegantly. The fact is that when I go into it, 
I know what I can do. I don’t think it’s a natural ability that’s above and beyond 
other people, but I’m able to build rapport fairly quickly and strongly. For the 
longest time, I didn’t even realize that’s what I was doing.  
 
 
People just trust me. When someone is willing to do hypnosis with me, there’s 
generally no fear of any kind. They just trust me that it’s going to be safe, it’s 
going to be good and they’re going to get the result they want. I think, as you 
say, it’s the fact that that’s how I approached it in the first place. I didn’t come in 
standardized, like okay, here’s my whole pre-talk. I have to go through this first. 
I have to do that. So that it feels clinical and disconnected. 
 
 
I approach it every time as a personal experience that I’m going to enjoy with 
this person. I honestly believe they sense that and so issues like fears and that 
they need to find a reason for. 
 
I’ve actually asked the question, do you have any fears or anything that you 
want me to explain before we begin? A couple of times, they looked at me like 
no, I didn’t think there was anything to be afraid of. Should there be? So I don’t 
even ask that anymore. I don’t even want to open the door because they’ve 
already said yes I want to do hypnosis with you, so they’re comfortable and I’m 
comfortable. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        64 
 
Again, I don’t want to give them any reason to think there’s something they 
should be afraid of. If they’re comfortable with what’s about to happen, that’s 
exactly where I want them to be.  
 
Igor: 
I think that’s a wonderful attitude. Now the final question I have before we finish 
up for this section of the interview is, what happens if things kind of don’t quite 
go the way you planned them in the middle of the whole process? 
 
For example, you talked about in the fractionation process, one of your indirect 
tests is to give them suggestions that they’ll better than they’ve ever felt before 
in their life. So what if they open their eyes and they’re just looking at you okay, 
but there’s no joy of life shining in their eyes and it’s not getting any stronger 
each time you do it?  
 
! Has that sort of thing ever happened to you and how would you 
deal with it if it did? 
 
Jeff: 
That’s an excellent question. When that comes up – I guess it brings me back 
to something I think I briefly touched on in the first interview. What do you do 
when it doesn’t work, because that’s the single biggest fear I’ve seen or that I 
hear about when I talk to newcomers to hypnosis. What do you if you go 
through the steps and absolutely nothing happens or it seems to happen but 
then they come right back out? 
 
 
Well, in my case, one of the things that I have learned is first, I never tell them, 
okay, let’s try something, or let’s go ahead and do an induction and try to get 
you in hypnosis. I don’t do anything like that. I just say, okay, let’s do 
something. I’ll have them follow some steps and there have been a few times 
actually in the last few years where maybe three or four times, I did an 
induction and absolutely nothing happened. The person just stood there staring 
at me. 
 
 
The only thing is that I never told them, okay, this is an induction because all I 
said was, let’s do something. They look at you kind of funny, but all I do is look 
back at them and go, okay, good, well that tells me something. Then I’ll just go 
right into the next induction. They never know that something failed. That to me 
is the key.  
 
That was one of those we talked about practice- practice- practice, so I’ve 
practiced failing. I practiced what happens when it doesn’t work. By doing that, I 
was prepared that when the situation came up, I knew how to just flow right into 
the next induction.  
 
 
On all but one occasion, I got the person on the second induction. The one girl 
that I was working with went down on the third induction. So it’s just a matter of, 
again, where you are. Why didn’t it work the first times? I have no idea. I really 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        65 
don’t even care because it just didn’t work and that’s all it was. I moved onto 
the next induction and I had total success.  
 
 
If I’m doing, for instance, you mentioned the fractionation – bringing them up, 
putting them down, bringing them up and putting them down. When I bring 
them up, if they don’t have that every time getting happier and feeling better, 
happier and feeling better, well then I know that I need to change what I’m 
doing. So, I’ll simply drop immediately into a different type of intensifier. It can 
be anything from counting the numbers down to losing the numbers. Counting 
backwards from 100 and each one gets harder to say and so on. I’ve done that 
one. 
 
 
I just move to a different thing. For me, it’s just one of those where if something 
doesn’t work, I approach the whole situation, as well as, some things just don’t 
work with everybody. I don’t know why and it really doesn’t matter. As long as I 
have toolbox full of tools, I’ll pick another one out of the box and go to work on 
it. That’s how I deal with it. I keep myself prepared so that no matter what I see, 
I have something as a back-up. For that point in the process, I have something 
that I can revert to instead. 
 
Igor: 
This is actually a nice interesting point and I think a very great point to finish 
this portion of the interview on, which is the idea that you never want to be a 
one-trick pony. However good an induction is, however good the particular 
process that you run is, there’s always going to come a point where it fails for 
whatever reason.  
 
That’s when you want to have a Plan B and a Plan C and possibly even a Plan 
D lined up behind it. That’s just something you get with experience and the 
willingness to learn many different approaches. That’s just part of the richness 
of what our field has to offer us. 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. We need to keep learning because it’s not learning like, oh, you 
don’t know enough. It’s just learning like expanding your options. You don’t 
have just one crescent wrench in your toolbox. You have a whole bunch of 
sizes. 
 
Igor: 
Precisely. So I think that’s all we have time for, for this portion of the interview. 
Jeff, thank you again so much for an in-depth look at your hypnotic process. It’s 
funny that we should spend an hour and a half speaking about something that 
takes about five minutes to do.  
 
But hopefully, people listening to this will have teased out or seen teased out so 
many nuances and subtleties, which is what turns me on about hypnosis, the 
idea of the things that make it work, the 5-minute patter is nothing it’s just an 
afterthought.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        66 
It’s the thought that’s gone into those five minutes – that’s what’s important and 
that’s what separates the Masters from the wanna-be’s and try-hards. I think 
that’s something that’s really come across in this portion of the interview today, 
so I’d like to thank you for that, Jeff.  
 
Jeff: 
My pleasure. 
 
Igor: 
Before we move onto the ending of this session, I just wanted to give you a 
quick taste of what the final session in this interview series with Jeff is going to 
be about. 
 
 
Now that we’ve got Jeff’s secrets for inducing trance in people and the nuances 
behind that, Jeff is going to reveal his secrets for actually getting hypnotic 
phenomena. He’ll reveal the different kinds of hypnotic stunts he’s done with 
people and give you, for a few of them, word-for-word instructions on how to do 
it and the reasoning behind why he uses those kinds of suggestions in that 
process. 
 
 
Then he’ll talk us through his 50-minute change work process. He’ll give us his 
mindset, his ideas and the kinds of things that created that process in the first 
place. 
 
 
Now I for one am tremendously looking forward to your sharing those thoughts 
and ideas with us on the next session, Jeff. Until then, remember everyone 
Jeff’s website is YourPersonalHypnosisMentor.com because that’s exactly what 
he is. 
 
 
Jeff, thank you very much for joining us today. I look forward to meeting you 
again on the next and final session. 
 
Jeff: 
I’m looking forward to it already. I’ll be geared up and ready to open the 
floodgates and just give it all away. Nope. Not really. But I’ll share a lot. 
 
Igor: 
That’s good to know.  
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        67 
Seminar 2 – Part 1 
 
Igor: 
Welcome to StreetHypnosis.com. I’m here with Master Hypnotist Jeff Stephens 
from YourPersonalHypnosisMentor.com. Jeff specializes in teaches hypnotists 
from the ground up in specialized one-to-one, two-on-one type programs and 
all those skills that really everyone wants to learn about hypnosis. How to put 
people in trance quickly, how to get results quickly and things like that.  
 
 
In Seminar 1, we talked a little bit about your ideas in terms of what hypnosis is 
and the important underlying principles. Then you shared with us your process 
for putting pretty much anyone in trance in next to no time. We’re talking about 
in a minute or less, really. 
 
 
Today, we want to focus on the other stuff that you do, which is something 
that’s fascinating to people.  
 
1. First, is hypnotic phenomena, all the crazy stunts that you have yourself 
pulled and that you can get out of hypnosis.  
 
2. Second, finishing up how all that fits into your unique change work model 
so you can actually do therapy in 15 or 20 minutes as the average time 
that it takes for you to do some pretty solid change work. 
 
 
Jeffrey, thanks for being with us, welcome back. 
 
Jeff: 
I’m glad to be here. 
 
Igor: 
Let’s just kick off with this fascinating area of hypnotic phenomena.  
 
! What’s your opinion on what they are?  
 
! How to get them and just your general background of how you came 
across them in the first place? 
 
Jeff: 
I believe I mentioned before, one of my early experiences of watching hypnosis 
on TV was the “Amazing Kreskin.” The guy could have me rolling on the floor 
with some of the things he did with people. I started watching a lot of what he 
did and it was actually years later before I started playing with those kinds of 
things or at least any of the hallucination-type phenomena. 
 
 
I started right away doing things like hands stuck together, getting numbness 
and different things like that. Later on, I started playing with more of the 
advanced type of phenomena, getting positive and negative hallucinations and 
getting the full effect of post-hypnotic instructions. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        68 
 
Then probably the last seven or eight years, I’ve been doing a lot of fun stuff 
with playing around with just totally weird phenomena for the sake of fun 
because, as I mentioned before, I have friends who are role-play gamers and 
they’re always wanting something new. So, I always have to come up with 
something new to amuse them.  
 
 
I started doing many different types of hallucinations, both positive and 
negative, with them, plus I started getting into doing a lot of the really rapid type 
of things like walking up on someone quickly and doing a quick induction, a 
really fast induction, or even sometimes without what someone might formally 
call an induction. Sticking their hands to the table, sticking someone’s hand to 
the door handle as they’re walking out of their building. Just things to keep their 
attention and keep everything light and fun. 
 
 
Learning to do the phenomena on the fly is a little tricky. You kind of have to 
learn how to get that mindset that says anything can be an induction. A lot of 
times, things like getting their hands stuck to a wall is the actual induction. I’ve 
used that a few times.  
 
Probably maybe five or six months ago, I was at a business downtown and 
there was a guy standing there talking to me. We were talking about general 
things, he was leaning on the wall with one hand and he just kind of somehow – 
I don’t even know how – the conversation got around to my being a hypnotist. 
While leaning on the wall, he looked at me and he said, well, you know, I don’t 
think any of that hypnosis stuff is real. If it is real at all it’s just weak-minded 
people who can’t think for themselves. 
 
I looked at him and I didn’t say anything for about five seconds. I stared hard at 
him and when I saw his face kind of go into that okay, what’s going on here, I 
said, so then tell me right now, your hand is stuck to the wall. Why is that? Why 
is it that no matter how hard you try, you can’t remove that hand from the wall?  
 
Suddenly, I saw him trying to pull his hand off the wall, getting a little bit 
frightened and I let him hang there for 10 or 15 seconds and then I said, 
release and snapped my fingers. He stood up, he jerked his hand back and 
pretty much the conversation ended right there because he just looked at me 
kind of frightened, kind of freaked out and walked away. 
 
Igor: 
That’s a great story. Let me just pause you there for a minute and talk about 
that a bit because that’s kind of like the type of Jedi mind trick that everyone 
has heard about in hypnosis and would love to be able to do. So, you’re clearly 
looking for some things and doing some things to allow it to happen.  
 
The first question I have is this. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        69 
How do you view hypnotic phenomena, in terms of how they fit into people’s 
everyday lives or not as the case may be, so that you have to do something to 
get them? Or, is it more like they’re already lying under the surface and it’s just 
a question of finding the right time to scrape away the veneer so that they’re 
there already?  
 
! What’s your general idea of hypnotic phenomena in the first place? 
 
Jeff: 
In general, I think the hypnotic phenomena is just when the hypnotist is able to 
take control of the moment on that person’s subconscious and get it to focus on 
the thing you are working on. 
 
 
Early on, I had a lot of trouble. For instance, one of the ones that everybody 
wants, I used to have a lot of trouble getting people to forget their name. You 
would not even believe how many people said, I won’t believe I’ve been 
hypnotized until you can make me forget my name. Early on, I had a lot of 
trouble getting that to happen. 
 
 
Then some things that several people said to me brought to me to the 
realization that if they don’t have something in their mind that sets a context for 
what you’re saying, then it’s just not going to work because they’re 
subconscious has no idea how to do what it’s never even thought of before. 
 
 
An example with forgetting the name is, early on, I would just simply go through 
the direct commands, the direct instruction – in a moment, when I snap my 
fingers, your name will disappear, you can’t remember it and a bit more than 
that – then I’d snap my fingers and ask them a question. Then I’d ask them 
their name and they’d say it right out, no problem at all. 
 
 
I kept thinking, why is this so hard? So once I realized that it has to 
contextualize – well, let’s face it, not a lot of people go around forgetting their 
own name. I mean, unless they’re heavy drinkers or something. What I started 
doing was to set it up. Actually, I tend to do a double one.  
 
 
First, I have them in their mind imagine their name written up on a big 
chalkboard and then I tell them to take an eraser and start erasing their name. 
Right after I say that, I say something to effect of, there are a lot of times when 
you’re out and about and you’re doing things, maybe you get introduced to 
somebody and then somebody off to the side says something to you and when 
you look back, you cannot remember that person’s name.  
 
 
Easy, common information that you should have sometimes just becomes 
unavailable. You just lose it for a moment. Once I started doing that, then I’d 
right into, in a moment I’m going to snap my fingers and when I do you’re going 
to forget your name. At that point, they now have something in their brain that 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        70 
they can work with. Something that their brain can figure out, how can I follow 
this instruction? 
 
 
If there’s nothing there that they have as a reference point, then there’s 
absolutely, no way they can follow your instruction. They just simply don’t know 
how to do what you’ve told them to do. 
 
 
For instance, positive and negative hallucinations – positive tends to be easier 
because, as a child, let’s face it, everybody has pretended to have something 
or be something or do something and so in your mind, you pretend that there 
really is this friend with you, or you pretend that you really have this toy or 
whatever. So the mind knows how to do that. 
 
 
Negative hallucinations, we tend to do naturally, but we don’t actually ever 
contextualize it. Like we toss our keys down and you may look back at that 
table and just not see your keys. Go somewhere else and come back and there 
they are. That’s a negative hallucination, but it’s not something that has ever 
been done on purpose.  
 
 
So you can set those up too by throwing in an example, like what I just did with 
the keys. Their mind knows okay so you’re saying don’t see what really is there. 
Then it knows how to contextualize your instruction when you say, when I snap 
my fingers, you will not be able to see me, but you’ll be able to see everybody 
else in the room. You’ll hear my voice, but you won’t be able to see me. Snap. 
Now their brain knows what to do with it. It knows how to just not register the 
information that I’m visually there. 
 
 
A lot of it is setting it up by understanding that if their mind does not have 
something somewhere that it could use, to know how to follow the instructions 
then it’s just not going to be able to. With the hand stuck, I don’t do the 
interlaced fingers because well, it’s kind of like cheating. I just have them put 
their palms together with the fingers folded all together around the sides of the 
hand. I still get that almost, always to work because I have something almost 
everyone has done, which is they stuck their hands or fingers together with 
Super Glue or something else.  
 
 
It sounds crazy, but it’s true. So their mind has something there. So when I 
have them put their hands together, I say, now you’ve stuck your fingers or your 
hands together with Super Glue before, right? They look at me and go yeah, of 
course, they look a little embarrassed. Then I simply follow that with, well, see 
we all have. Right now I want you to feel that Super Glue in between your 
hands hardening. I want you to feel that Super Glue hardening now. Can you 
feel that now? 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        71 
 
As a rule, they start to actually react to that. You can see it on their face. 
They’re reacting to that. Something’s going on there so their hands stick 
together.  
 
Igor: 
So you’re doing something very interesting here, which I think sounds like it’s 
relatively simple in terms of the steps, but that’s actually very clever and very 
sophisticated.  
 
 
- The first thing you seem to be doing is you’re creating the hypnotic context, 
whether you’re staring at someone for five or 10 seconds until their reality 
orientation is getting unbalanced, they’re getting a little nervous and they don’t 
know what’s going to happen next. Or, if you use the formal in trance induction 
or the fractionation and all the rest of it, you’re already creating a context in 
which normal things stop happening and unusual things can begin to happen. 
 
 
- The next thing you do, which I think is very interesting and this is something 
that I picked up a while ago from Erickson, but coming from that route you see 
a lot of stage hypnotists do the same. It’s the idea of triggering association. I 
think you call it the context.  
 
 
You’ve got to give them the experience of what you want them to have first, so 
that they know how to have the experience of what you want them to have. 
Hence, forgetting your car keys or losing your car keys when they’re right in 
front of your nose. That triggers a set of associations.  
 
 
Your Super Glue, or the hands induction again, is something that I think many 
people have seen hypnotists do, but the thing that you do that I think is 
relatively unique and very smart is that little question you ask beforehand. 
You’ve stuck your hands together before, haven’t you? In other words, you’re 
getting them to search for an experience of having done it before within the 
hypnotic context, so already what’s going to happen is that, as they’re looking 
at it within a hypnotic context, the experience becomes stronger. It starts 
coming to life. I think that’s very smart. 
 
 
- Then you do the third step, which is you are actually looking at or giving them 
a very clear, precise instruction of what experience you want or behavior you 
want or expect from them and what you don’t. So with the hands stuck 
together, you start with the hypnotic context, maybe staring at them or the 
hands on the wall. Then you ask the question along the lines of Super Glue, 
hands stuck together and that sort of thing. You start building that up. You build 
up the imagination to give a little bit more impetus.  
 
 
- Then you give them a very clear, precise, direct instruction along the lines of, 
when I count to three, you will not be able to open your hands. Your hands will 
be stuck together, or you’re not going to be able to see this pen. You can see 
everything else in the room. You’ll see me and everyone else it’s just that as far 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        72 
as you’re concerned, this thing has vanished and no longer exists- 1-2-3- so it’s 
a very simple three-step process, but at the same time, there’s a lot of thought 
at each step along the way. Right? 
 
Jeff: 
Yes and actually the first point you brought up is an important one. That context 
that you set up is vital. For instance, with the guy leaning on the wall. when the 
conversation first turned to hypnosis, I probably made some remark or he might 
have and then I said, I am a hypnotist, which immediately puts something in his 
mind as to something weird is about to happen, or this guy does something 
weird.  
 
It changes the context of everything that’s happening very suddenly because 
everybody has an idea of what that means if they know anything at all about 
hypnosis and if you’re in the Western culture, everybody has some idea from 
TV shows, movies, etc. So all it really took, the whole setup was just simply him 
hearing that I am a hypnotist. 
 
 
Then, as you mentioned, I did stop and I focused on his eyes and I waited for 
that shift where I could see that he was expecting something to happen. That’s 
when I went right into it. Now a lot of the people that I’ve talked to and some of 
the people that I’ve trained, when they first came to me, they’re whole idea was, 
well, I’ve read books and I know you have to do this whole pre-talk and you 
have to set up the whole thing. You have to make sure there’s a hypnotic 
agreement and blah, blah, blah.  
 
 
Well, you really don’t. You just need to set the frame with a few well-chosen 
phrases, like I’m a Master Hypnotist and by that stare that tells their 
subconscious mind that something freaky is about to happen and then go right 
into it. It doesn’t take this big, long explanation. It only takes something that 
triggers a subconscious response in them. Once that’s triggered, I’m directing 
the subconscious response if I want to. 
 
Igor: 
The key thing you’re doing – and I really like this – in some respects you’re 
doing the whole idea of pre-talk and everything else compacted into those 
simple sentences. This is where your hypnotic intent, I think, will probably come 
in very strongly, which is rather than saying, hypnosis does this, this, this and a 
long list for the conscious mind, your intention does it all.  
 
 
Just by saying you’re a Master Hypnotist that sets that strong context. 
Something that I suspect you do, which is coming out a little bit from what 
you’re saying – and please correct me if I am reading too much into the 
situation – is that you’re waiting for the right moment. I think people are too 
much in a hurry sometimes to do the magic hypnosis bit and they rush ahead 
just before the point at which they would have succeeded. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        73 
 
So they might see some trance signals, maybe their blinking slows down, 
maybe their breathing slows down, maybe they’re looking a little bit more 
glassy-eyed or whatever it is and they go, great. I have them now, let’s go. 
 
 
Whereas you’re doing something more. You’re waiting for those signals and 
you’re waiting for something a little bit extra. A kind of very receptive mind. It’s 
very difficult to describe what it is that you’re looking for. I guess that’s why you 
want live training so you show people, do you see what just happened? This is 
the point where it’s happened. Now you can go to the next step. Until people 
see it, it’s very difficult to describe it.  
 
 
Once you have that – in other words, you don’t just have the trance developing, 
but you have this receptive mind that is kind of waiting for something important 
to happen. At that point, really, that’s when you’re pretty much set. Then it’s just 
a routine of, okay, give examples, lighten up the associations and go off and 
give the instructions and then see what happens. 
 
! Does that kind of match how you do things? 
 
Jeff: 
Yes, it does. The thing there is that I don’t really look for the classic examples 
of the signals that hypnosis is occurring– the moistening of the skin or the 
power of the skin. Honestly, you’re right, you have to be sitting right here with 
me when I do it with somebody so you can watch what happens. There are few 
things that I could just say like, for instance, you’ll notice the size of the pupils 
change suddenly, but there’s a look that people get that lets me know they’re 
ready.  
 
One of the things that I do– and we talked about this in the first half– is that 
because I use hypnosis to teach hypnosis, while they’re watching that, I kind of 
jack up their perception, their acuity whatever term you want to use. I kind of 
jack it up so that as they’re watching me doing it, they’re observing more than 
they probably normally would have and it stays with them.  
 
That way, almost immediately, I notice that my students, when they start using 
it right there in class, within two hours of sitting down the first time, they’re 
already noticing those same things. They’re already noticing the exact moment 
that they should be doing the next step.  
 
That’s one of the things that I think is really important is actually sitting and 
seeing it though. Because until you observe what’s happening, it’s easy to hear 
about the pupils changing, the texture and tone of the skins tends to change a 
little, I guess that’s not one of the things I really notice, but apparently it’s in all 
the books so I’m going to assume it’s true. 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        74 
The thing that matters from the way I do it is that if you can see what I’m 
seeing, then you’ll know the moment. So far, my students do very well on that 
point. One of the things I enjoy is watching someone suddenly go, I saw it. I 
saw that. I saw that happen! To me, that’s pretty exciting. 
 
I love NLP and so forth, I really do think developing sensory acuity, which is 
one of the things they tend to train on, is a very, very powerful skill. Some 
people – and I believe I am one of them – tend to come by it naturally, but I’ve 
also found that I can pass it on. I can help people to see and understand what’s 
happening and it stays with them, so they can go right out and do it. 
 
As I said, one of the students from one of my past trainings, it’s only a couple of 
months ago and good grief. He’s gone out playing with it with friends, at group 
meetings, at all kinds of stuff. He’s been playing with hypnosis and in just a 
couple of months, he’s already gone out and found opportunity to hypnotize 
some 50, 60, 70 people because one of the other things about it is I insist you 
use what you get. When you know how to do it, do it. 
 
So once they have that acuity where it actually works for them, then you can 
play with it. Honestly, becoming skilled at getting all the different phenomena 
and using it to your advantage so that you can make real change in people 
comes from actually using the skills. The more you do it, the more you play with 
it, the more you’re going to see how it works. That’s why I put so much stress 
on actually using it in class and using it, well, at the mall to graduate classes. 
 
Igor: 
Something that is coming out of this, which I think is important, is the idea that 
part of what makes your system so simple – not simplistic, but just simple – and 
I think it’s a very elegant way of doing it is you have two sides of the hypnotic 
equation, boiled down to its barest bones.  
 
 
On the one side, you have the ability to set the frames and the context and give 
very precise, simple suggestions for what you want and understand the 
principles behind those suggestions so that you set them up in a way that it will 
work.  
 
For example, trigger the association first and then use the imagination a little 
bit. Then use the precise description of what behavior and experience you want 
the person to have before you release it. Right? 
 
Jeff: 
Right. 
 
Igor: 
But on the other side – and this is part of where the speed comes from – so 
setting time in terms of words is one element, but that’s no good if all you’re 
doing is just throwing words out and hoping for the best. The other part and this 
is the nuance, the subtle. I really love this stuff.  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        75 
It’s the ability to recognize moments of choice, moments of this is where it’s 
happening. I think these moments come and go within a hypnotic session all 
the time, but if you’re not aware of them, if you don’t know what you’re looking 
for, then you’ll miss them. 
 
 
I think the difference that marks a Master Hypnotist from a novice is basically 
the Master might actually be doing exactly the same things as the novice. The 
key difference is timing. By waiting a fraction of a second or going a fraction of 
second longer, or pushing a little bit harder at the right point in time, suddenly 
stuff happens, which the other person was doing exactly the same way.  
 
It’s just they missed the timing ever so slightly. It’s either a little too soon or a 
little too late, a little too much pressure or a little bit too little and it’s those 
subtleties. When you’ve got that right, it’s when magic happens. That’s when, 
for me anyway the excitement of hypnosis really comes out. I seem to be 
hearing that is what you’re doing also. 
 
Jeff: 
Oh, absolutely and I do think that one part of attitude that is extremely vital is 
that doing hypnosis, you need to be enjoying what you’re doing. If you’re going 
through this process and you’re all nervous and freaking out and being worried 
about it, moment by moment, as you go through it with people, that’s going to 
take all the fun out of doing it anyway.  
 
That’s again, why in class I take the time to have them hypnotize each other so 
many times, that they really get a sense of that timing and they feel good about 
what they’re doing. Because of that, because they get that sense of this feels 
good and this feels fun, they have no problem with taking it out to do hypnosis 
anywhere, anytime.  
 
I do think that that timing is something that is transferable. It is trainable. I know 
a lot of people and I’ve read a lot of different teachers online who talk about. 
You have to train for many hours and they have whole courses on how to just 
become aware of the timing and all, but if I can give that to somebody quickly – 
which I can and do – then they’re out there doing it right away.  
 
It is timing and knowing that moment when this instruction that I give them is 
just going to drop right into place have a full effect and it’s going to totally blow 
their minds.  
 
Igor: 
Let’s talk a little bit more about the idea of timing. So we know one thing you 
look for is this idea that the hypnotic context is set. You’re staring at them for a 
little bit longer perhaps, or setting a framework around something. Then you’re 
looking for them to shift, that slight dilation of the pupils, slight glassy or 
stareness in the eyes.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        76 
There’s a shift that you recognize, which you can possibly describe elements 
of, but not necessarily the full thing, but you can definitely demonstrate or show 
to people. 
 
 
The next question is…  
 
! Do you wait or do you think okay, once they got that shift, now at 
this point I can make any suggestion I want and it will pretty much 
work or do you look for a similar kind of shift at each stage?  
 
For example, you’ve got the first stage, which is the hypnotic context. Then you 
create the triggering of associations or the context within which the suggestion 
should work. Then you set up the whole you’ve had your hands Super Glued 
together before. 
 
! Do you look for something there as well or are you pretty safe that 
once they’re in the hypnotic context in the first place, the rest will 
pan out sort of automatically? 
 
Jeff: 
Okay, kind of yes and kind of no. Actually, it is a separate thing. The moment 
when I look for that timing, when I know right now is the moment and I’m going 
to be able to drop them instantly. Then once they’re under, I look for and I don’t 
really call it deepening, but I understand everybody else does, so I’ll use that 
term. When I go into the deepening process I look for that moment when I know 
that it’s not merely that they’re in hypnosis and will follow the instructions, but  
its the intensity with which you can know, that right now is the time to put it to 
the test. It’s going to show them just how powerful this thing is. 
 
 
As a hypnotist, you understand that getting them to that moment where, in their 
mind, they’re saying, wow, this is really happening. That’s the moment when 
you can work miracles. So it breaks down in stages. 
 
 
For example, when I lock their hands together. When I have them put their 
hands together, I put my hand on theirs and hold them together as I’m going 
through the patter about the Super Glue and all that. I tell them, when I take my 
hand away – this is how I normally do it. I say, when I take my hand away, your 
hands will be completely stuck together.  
 
The Super Glue will be hardened and you will not be able to pull your hands 
apart until I release them. I stare at their eyes for a few seconds and you’ll see 
that moment when they see okay, this is going to happen. That’s when I pull my 
hand away. So yeah, there’s timing in steps all the way through the process. 
 
Igor: 
Let me pause again for a moment, because you just came out with a little 
nugget of absolute gold dust and this is something I was hoping you would talk 
about, which is the suggestion isn’t the thing that happens after you say 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        77 
something. It very often is what happens, as a result, of what you say. So you 
have to wait for suggestions to take before you actually start testing it. 
 
 
This is ingenious because this goes back to your timing. You essentially have 
done the same thing as with hypnotic context or creating the hypnotic context in 
the first place, but on a more subtle and a quicker scale. So you present the 
suggestion and then you look for what I would personally call – and forgive me 
for using my words, it’s just that it’s easier for me to describe – the moment of 
hypnotic surrender.  
 
When you’ve presented an idea and you’re looking for it. At first it maybe sits 
on the surface of the mind and as you keep watching, it’s almost a weird thing 
that I think only hypnotists who’ve seen this and recognize this will understand 
what I’m talking about here. I think you will. 
 
 
You can almost see that idea sinking down somewhere in the back of their 
mind and as soon as it’s at the back, it’s at a point where it feels like it’s clicked 
in and you can see it. You should see it in their look. It’s something that’s 
shifted ever so slightly that tells you they’ve accepted it. So rather than just 
giving the suggestion and saying, I hope to God this works, you’re actually 
waiting. It’s not the moment you give a suggestion that’s important.  
 
It’s what happens immediately afterwards and if you don’t get that moment, 
then you know you have to do a little bit more. You have to add something. You 
have to stack suggestions in some way. You have to deepen it or distract them 
in some way, because there’s another piece of work that you need to do before 
you can actually test that effect. 
 
! Does that kind of match what your experience is? 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. There is that moment. I love that phrase, hypnotic surrender 
because that’s exactly what it is there’s a moment when you can see on their 
face – and I don’t know, I mean don’t profess to be a genius on what really 
happens deep inside somebody’s mind and how the electrical processes work. 
But, I notice that in hypnosis, you have to allow that moment to pass for them to 
fully process the instruction and know how to follow it. 
 
 
So that’s what I’m looking for. I’m looking for that moment when you can see it 
on their face. Got it. That’s essentially the words I attach to that look. Got it. 
That way I know they’re ready and then I can follow through. I see that moment 
on their face and that helps me through the whole process. I don’t try to rush it, 
honestly.  
 
It’s true that my sessions are very fast, but I don’t try to rush anything. As far as 
I’m concerned, if we’re sitting here for an hour or an hour and a half, that’s fine. 
It just never takes that long. Everything that I do is cut right down to the 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        78 
essentials and then you look for that moment when you know, okay, that has 
been accepted. Then you most to the next item. Does that make sense? 
 
Igor: 
That makes perfect sense. I’m kind of getting excited about this because you’ve 
just given away the real secret behind your whole method and why it works so 
fast. You know the old adage, more haste, less speed. People are in such a 
hurry to get the result that they actually miss the point of success.  
 
So rather than just presenting something with all the time in the world – and the 
irony is when you take longer to do something, it actually ends up being shorter 
just because the mind goes, oh I don’t have any hurry. It’s no problem. It just 
comes like a natural response for the unconscious to respond in a certain way. 
 
 
As a result, everything speeds up, even though inside – and I think it is 
probably your experiences. It certainly is my experience as a hypnotist. Inside, 
everything seems to be going very slow. There’s no speed, there’s no pressure. 
Sometimes you might have this little voice in the back of your mind saying oh, I 
should hurry up because people are watching, but you just put it one side and 
say no- no, it will take its own time. Invariably, it’s actually very short because 
everyone else is sitting there with a time distortion. They can’t believe what 
they’re seeing anyway.  
 
By the time you’re done, it’s much more elegant because you’re not rushing the 
process. All you’re saying is what’s my next step? How do I do it? What am I 
looking for? Do I have it? Yes, great. No, I’ve got to do something else.  
 
! Is that kind of what you do as well? 
 
Jeff: 
Yeah. You used a very good term there it’s the one that actually describes what 
I’m going through, which is time distortion. I did a smoking cessation two days 
ago. The guy was sitting there. We went through it and he had specific areas 
when he really, really said, there’s just no way for me to get past this point 
without wanting a cigarette. 
 
 
So I dealt with those areas. The way I break it down, I do modify it slightly to the 
client, but in general my method is kind of generic, but when I was working 
through that with him, it came to that point when I’d gone through everything 
and I knew I was ready and I brought him out and looked at him. I said, how do 
you feel and he said, absolutely amazing. I would have sworn that this was one 
of the longest sessions I’ve done I looked at my watch and the whole thing had 
taken about 14 minutes.  
 
Igor: 
That’s fantastic. 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        79 
Jeff: 
It was there. I mean he looked at me and was like, this is the weirdest feeling 
I’ve ever had because I can’t remember not wanting a cigarette and I don’t want 
one. In my mind, I guess because I looked at my watch and saw 14 minutes, I 
thought, oh my goodness, did I hit everything? 
 
 
It was perfect. It went absolutely fantastic. Like you say, by slowing it down and 
waiting to see that the instruction has been given. You know, I think that’s what 
happens, in my opinion, what goes wrong with a lot of stop smoking sessions is 
they involve dozens and dozens of repetitions of the same exact phraseology 
or very similar. If you give the instruction once and you wait and you see that 
moment when it’s accepted, you don’t have to say it 20 more times and that’s, 
basically, how I work. 
 
Igor: 
So again, this brings us to another idea and I think what you’re doing is a very 
elegantly designed mechanisms, which is why I think it works so quickly.  
 
 
The question is, let’s assume that you’ve got the context, you’ve set up the 
suggestion and they half accept it. You can see that they’re not resisting it and 
there’s no actual problem with it, but at the same time, they’re not quite there 
yet. They’re not quite to the point where you feel confident that if you release 
your hand, their hands will stuck, or whatever else it is. 
 
 
At that point, when you see that moment, that choice point where they’re not 
quite there yet, but they haven’t necessarily rejected the idea either. 
 
! How do you deal with that?  
 
! Where do you go from that point? 
 
Jeff: 
Okay, there are actually two ways to go. Most of the time the path I follow is 
when I’m watching them and I don’t see that recognition, where I see, okay, 
sure, whatever, but I don’t see that moment where they accepted and it is now 
true for them. Then I’ll say the same thing one more time slowly watch what the 
sticking point is – because usually it’s the way something is phrased. I found 
that to be true almost all the time. It’s how something is phrased.  
 
 
So I’ll go through it slowly and I’ll watch the point at which they seem to go, all 
right, whatever. When I see that, I know that’s the part I have to rephrase, to 
make it more acceptable so then I’ll just rework the statement really quick to 
say that and it almost never fails.  
 
 
Now one of the most important things that every and I mean every new 
hypnotist, needs to understand is there are going to be times when you’re doing 
a specific phenomena test, convincer or whatever you want to call it and it’s just 
not going to work. You tell them their hands are stuck and they tug for a 
moment and then their hands come apart before you told them to. That’s okay. 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        80 
You need to be prepared for that event and when it happens, you simply go, 
excellent. That tells me what I need to know. Now put your hands down.  
 
Then you move right onto some more intensifying of the process. Some more 
deepening, if you will. Again, it’s a matter of timing because if you halt and stop 
and stutter for a moment, well, you’ve blown the whole thing for them, but if you 
just already accept that one time out of 500 or so, those hands are just going to 
come right apart, then you’re ready for it. You just flow right into the next thing. 
You intensify the state some more and then do a different one. 
 
Igor: 
I like that approach because it’s kind of like a doctor prodding and poking you 
and going, ah-ha, I see. Oh now I understand. It’s not this, it’s that. 
 
Jeff: 
Exactly. 
 
Igor: 
So it gives them a lot of confidence of where you’re going with it, like you really 
know what you’re talking about, which actually you do because if they’re hands 
are coming apart, you know that you missed a step somewhere along the way. 
It should really take most of the fear out of what you’re doing because how can 
you fail? 
 
Jeff: 
Exactly. 
 
Igor: 
All you’ve done is learned a little bit more about that person and how to 
proceed onward. Right? 
 
Jeff: 
Yeah and by putting it in the context of saying, excellent, that tells me what I 
need to know and then moving right on, they’ve received that as, oh, okay, so 
that was supposed to happen or it was supposed to show him something. 
Good. We’re still moving ahead. That’s what it says to them. 
 
Igor: 
Precisely. So then you have constant progress. It’s the law of compounding 
effect hasn’t been broken yet. You’re still building on something. It’s just they 
don’t necessarily know what it is that you’re building on. 
 
Jeff: 
Exactly and I don’t expect them to. I’m the hypnotist, not them. 
 
Igor: 
Precisely. That’s the whole point, right? 
 
Jeff: 
Exactly. That’s why they come to me.  
 
Igor: 
Okay, so you’ve got this idea, you’ve seen that choice point and it hasn’t quite 
worked out. You’ve either gone down the road of, you’re intensifying the state 
or you’re looking for that point of hesitation where something is phrased in a 
way that they don’t quite get for whatever reason and you rephrase it in a way 
that does work. 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        81 
 
The other possibility is, of course, that for some reason, you missed that subtle 
cue, you missed your timing slightly or you were going for the test a little too 
soon and those hands come apart. It happens. Even an acrobat in the circus 
from time to time loses his balance. It’s just part of nature, right? 
 
 
So at that point you don’t panic. You say I know what I need to know now and 
you move on. Now my instinct is – and this is something I would do, but I want 
to find out what you would do at that point. At that point, I might intensify the 
experience to some extent and then try it with something else, another 
phenomenon so that they get a demonstration that it’s actually worked, before 
maybe or not going back to the one that they failed on.  
 
You might or might not go back, I’m not so strong about that, but there should 
be some definitive point of success, where they can go yes, he really didn’t 
know what he was looking for. 
 
Jeff: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
 
! Is that what you do as well, or do you do it differently? 
 
Jeff: 
Well, that’s kind of it, except what I typically use to do that, almost immediately 
– because before I do any of the convincers or test phenomena I almost, 
always without fail use fractionation where it has multiple built-in tests that don’t 
really appear as a test for them. They don’t know that they’re being tests, but it 
tells me how intense the state is.  
 
 
That is, when I go into the fractionation. I do the 1-2-3, snap my fingers, your 
head will come up, eyes come open and you will feel absolutely amazing and 
every time I do it, you will feel 10 times better than the time before and when I 
say sleep and snap my fingers, eyes will close, head will go down and you’ll go 
10 times deeper than before. The deeper you go, the better you feel, etc. etc. 
 
 
I guess where I look at this and I know it’s understood, but it seems like when I 
talk to people learning hypnosis, they don’t get it. That is, in and of itself, 
phenomena. The fact that they are reacting to you counting to three and 
snapping your fingers. That’s a phenomena. You use that phenomena to 
intensity the state.  
 
 
Well, the fact that it’s work is in and of itself a test and then every time they’re 
head comes up and you say, you feel even better, don’t you and you look at 
their face and read it. Are they really feeling better? Each time you do it, you go 
through it two or three times and by the third time they’re looking like they’re 
drunk or high or something. So you know that it’s really working.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        82 
 
Even if a particular phenomena that you do after that, that is supposed to give 
them the convincers, when you go into a convincer and that convincer doesn’t 
work, you already know that they’re state is there and that they are in hypnosis 
and it’s very intense. So typically, I accept that as something that I misread in 
doing like the hands stuck together.  
 
I thought they accepted it, but they didn’t. Not a big deal. I move right on. I do 
two or three more fractionations and then I stick their hand to a table or make 
them forget their name. Do something like where every time I ask their name, it 
changes – which actually was very funny when I did it a few weeks ago to 
somebody. Sorry. There’s an aside. 
 
 
It was absolutely hilarious because she kept trying to write it down and every 
time she’d write it down and then look at it, she’d go, why did I write that? 
That’s not my name.  
 
Igor: 
That’s fantastic. 
 
Jeff: 
She wrote it like 20 times.  
 
Igor: 
That’s kind of like a constant feedback. What’s all this other stuff this is 
obviously not my name. I can see that being very funny. It’s also very elegant 
proof to other people of several things, like hypnotic creativity – because some 
interesting names are coming out. The fact that she never hesitates to write the 
new name. She doesn’t sit there going, ah, what’s my name now, which is what 
a normal person in the conscious state would do. She just goes, oh that’s 
clearly not it because this is it.  
 
Jeff: 
Right. She wrote down, I think one of the names was Lisa. She wrote that down 
and then she looked up and said something to me, looked back down and 
went, why did I write that? That’s not my name. She scribbled it out and wrote 
Aretha, or something right under it. It was instant. It was constant changing of 
the name and after a while she’s like, why am I writing all these names down? 
What’s going on here? 
 
Igor: 
I’m going to have to get you to hypnotize my sister when she has her next 
baby, so she can actually find a name that’s much easier.  
 
Jeff: 
That sounds like fun. 
 
Igor: 
Yeah, it would be, wouldn’t it? So I think we’ve covered the broad principles 
around how to get phenomena to an accurate and pretty deep level. I thank you 
for taking the time to do that. 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        83 
 
Before we actually look at specific party tricks, you know, name loss, 
numbness, hands stuck that stuff, which I think people listening to this will really 
be interested in, figuring out the language you use and the kind of frames you 
use to set it up.  
 
Before we look at those specifically, there’s one thing that I’m really interested 
in and again, something that is not fully understood in the hypnosis community 
and something that people get by accident more often than not, is the idea of 
post-hypnotic suggestions. 
 
 
People just throw post-hypnotic suggestions out there like rice at a wedding, 
but there’s no, I feel at least, there’s a tendency to be inaccurate with this. Just 
like the shotgun approach. Hopefully, one of these bullets will hit, rather than 
being very targeted for the outcome. Now I have a sense that you do this 
slightly differently.  
 
! Could you talk a little bit more about how you view post-hypnotic 
suggestions and what your whole framework is for setting them up 
in the first place? 
 
Jeff: 
First, as I think I’ve mentioned before, I don’t usually call them suggestions. I 
call them instructions or commands because when I give them, as has been 
mentioned, I use a very authoritative style. I don’t suggest that something will 
happen. I specifically define what the expected result will be. What is going to 
happen when (X). I do not just leave things out in the open. Like when you 
wake up, you’re just going to feel totally confident, ready to go blah- blah- blah. 
 
 
I anchor it to something that is real to them. Typically, I anchor confidence to 
something that’s very, very easy. Door handles, door knobs, or anything that 
open and close a door because then every time they’re going into a room or out 
of a room, it’s re-fired. Their confidence is built.  
 
Again, I structure these so that for – let me see how to explain this. When I put 
someone under, I bring into it aspects of an experience that I can then tell their 
conscious mind, now you have no – and I know you’re going to say, that’s very 
Ericksonian of you – but I do. I say, the conscious mind really doesn’t need to 
pay attention to what I’m doing. You can just enjoy the experience in the mind 
and the in body.  
 
Then I say I’m speaking directly to the subconscious. Then I use you, you will, 
you do, you whatever. I address it directly like it was a separate person. If it’s 
something that needs altering, then I alter it. If it’s something that needs 
installing, I install it, but I do it in such a way that the subconscious mind can 
accept it and really have no contending issues with it. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        84 
A lot of people say, well, you can’t do that. In fact, one of the discussions I was 
having with somebody online the other day was, well, what if my subconscious 
mind doesn’t agree with you that it needs to stop doing (X). I said it’s not 
relevant. This is hypnosis. When I tell your subconscious mind that it has been 
doing (X) and it needs to stop doing (X) because it’s no longer the right thing or 
the best thing, it accepts it as long as I give it something to replace it. You can’t 
leave that hanging either.  
 
If somebody has a habit they’re trying to break, you can’t just throw it out there 
and leave it hanging. You can’t just say, okay, you’re not going to punch your 
brother in the face anymore. You have to give them something as an alternative 
behavior because, like a hypnotist friend of mine likes to say, the subconscious 
mind is like a very bright 9-year old.  
 
Anybody who’s a parent is going to understand the principle that if you take 
something away from a 9-year old, you need to give it something to replace 
that. It doesn’t have to be even in the same realm. It just has to be something 
that it can replace that with. 
 
So, I do it in a very direct format. I do it in a very concise format. Again, it’s kind 
of like with all the other phenomena, I define it clear enough so that nothing is 
left for the subconscious mind to have to figure out. I put it in a context that, 
okay, this is the new behavior. This is what I will do from now on in (X) 
situations. Did that make sense? 
 
Igor: 
That makes a lot of sense and particularly I think an important element that is 
coming out and something that I would personally like to emphasize is your 
distinction between a hypnotic suggestion and a hypnotic instruction. I think the 
intention behind how you present something is going to be very important. The 
idea about not leaving a void in the mind. 
 
 
Now something that I’m interested in getting into a little more detail about here 
is, let’s imagine that we have someone listening who is a novice hypnotist 
who’s maybe a little bit like, they want to test their ability to give a genuine post-
hypnotic suggestion. I think it’s an absolutely admirable desire to have. We 
want to make sure that what we’re doing works.  
 
 
So they might want to do something like they have a friend there. They’ve put 
them in trance and given them a couple of interesting experiences. Maybe even 
had success with some of the hypnotic phenomena that we’ve been talking 
about. So now they want to test it.  
 
Let’s say he wants to get his friend to go over and select a book and saying 
something or maybe at a certain look or when a bit of music comes on, jump up 
off the sofa and say, I’m Elvis. You know, the kind of the thing that we’ve seen 
that would be pretty dramatic for us to realize this is going on. 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        85 
Jeff: 
Right. 
 
Igor: 
 
! How would they know, in terms of, with a regular suggestion or 
regular hypnotic instruction, like the hands being stuck together, 
you’re looking for the suggestion to be accepted and at that point, 
you can allow the test to occur.  
 
! How would someone know that the post-hypnotic suggestion or 
post-hypnotic instruction as you would call it, that you just 
presented to them?  
 
! How would you know that it’s actually taken enough that you can 
take them out of trance and at the cue word, you’ll know you’ll get 
the results? 
 
Jeff: 
Okay, I do it all the time. Number one – and I’m going to go back to this from 
the whole first session – intent is absolutely everything here. You have to 
absolutely expect it to happen. I’m not saying believe it’s going to happen. I’m 
saying expect it to happen because it has to be so sure that it’s matter of fact. 
Well, of course, they’re going to get up and walk over and take a book off the 
shelf and say a certain phrase.  
 
 
Once your intent is there – I guess, again, where I find a lot of struggling for 
new hypnotists to get these things followed is that you cannot overcomplicate. 
Let’s go back to the bright 9-year-old. There’s only so much a 9-year old is 
going to really comprehend, so the instruction needs to be given in a very clear 
terms.  
 
As you said, for instance, I’m might say to somebody – I would make sure that I 
had them to that point where they’re ready to take it and then I would say, now 
in just a moment – and this is how I phrase most everything before I give a 
comment. In just a moment, not now, but in just a moment. I do that because it 
kind of throws the brain off.  
 
I say, I’m going to clap my hands and you’re going to come wide awake out of 
hypnosis and feel absolutely wonderful and for no reason at all, you’re going to 
get up, walk over, take War and Peace off the shelf, open it up and say this is a 
silly book.  
 
Once I say it, once I’ve explained it, I’ll go through it a second time. Most of the 
time, I’ll go through it a second time so that I know in my head that I’ve covered 
every step as I expect it to happen and then I tend to look at them and I’ll either 
say nod your head if you understand or nod your head if you accept that.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        86 
Almost, always I say nod your head if you accept that. I don’t ask I state, nod 
your head if you accept that. The reason I do that is that tells me – I’ve already 
seen that they are in, that they’re locked in, that they’re deep, that they’re 
reacting and everything’s right, so now when I get their actual acceptance of 
what I’ve said, I know it’s going to work. When I do that, I can’t recall anytime 
that it has not worked; ever.  
 
Any instruction whether their post-hypnotic or convincers or whatever. Once I 
get that agreement, then I’m there. It locks in. I know what’s going to happen 
and I just don’t doubt it anymore because, for me, it becomes a done deal. 
Again, that’s part of the whole confidence/intent issue, but I know that once 
they’ve accepted it and agreed to it, it’s going to happen. 
 
Igor: 
So the equivalent of doing hypnotic phenomena, checking that the suggestion 
has sunk in before you test it, for you the big test for the person suggestion is 
after you’ve presented the idea clearly and specifically, so you know that the 
steps are clear, you just check with the unconscious mind and say hey, have 
you got it? Are you willing to do this, right?  
 
If there’s any hesitation there, then you’ll go over it again or you’ll find out 
where the hesitation might be and clear that up.  
 
! If there isn’t, then it’s just going to work because you’ve set up the 
context in the right place. Is that correct? 
 
Jeff: 
Let me just run through this in my head like I’m doing it. It will be a lot easier. I 
give the instruction and once I know that I’ve stated the instruction clearly, 
again, I look at them I wait for that moment when I know it’s clear. They know 
what I want. Then I ask for the acceptance. Then I’m done. At that point, I know 
it’s going to work. So it’s actually three parts. 
 
 
It’s giving it clearly; watching them for that moment when, okay, I got it; and 
then saying, if you understand and accept that, nod your head. Then I have 
everything in place at that point that I know it’s going to be done.  
 
Igor: 
Beautiful. So we’ve talked a lot about your way of telling that someone’s got it 
and more kind of waking suggestions when their eyes are open and maybe 
doing a suggestion and experiment or a little test.  
 
! How do you tell when someone’s got it when their eyes are closed 
and they’re more in a formal kind of trance?  
 
! Are there things you look for?  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        87 
I suspect this is, again, partly something that can’t be described, but I’m sure 
there are elements that you can actually tease out in terms of your experience 
and what you look for. 
 
Jeff: 
It’s kind of hard to explain how you know that got it moment, but you can see it 
every day, you can just walk around and talk to your friends and explain 
something. Explain something simple, whether you just learned it, you just read 
it on the Internet or whatever.  
 
Everybody’s seen it. They’ve seen it tens of thousands of times. Even in those 
conversations, when you know that person goes, oh, okay, yeah I got it. Believe 
it or not, those expressions are universal. They are absolutely universal. You 
will see something in the shoulders and in the face that tells you, okay, I got it. 
It’s at that moment that you know. Everybody wants to say, it can’t work that 
way because everybody’s different.  
 
It’s not even relevant that everybody’s different. There are just certain universal 
expressions and that got it moment is one of them. The thing is most people 
never look at people long enough to actually recognize it when it happens, or 
the person’s head is down so you can’t see it. That’s why as a general rule, I 
have people sit – if I see someone’s head drooping way down I’ll say, you can 
lift your head up and feel more comfortable now, just to get them to do it so that 
I can keep seeing their face. 
 
I admit a lot of people have told me, well, that kind of limits you if you have to 
be looking at their face, but you know what? A high success rate is good and, 
honestly, I don’t find it as a limitation. I find it as something that, for me, makes 
the process a lot clearer and a lot easier to go through and it speeds everything 
up because I’m not just hoping. I’m actually looking for that expression. 
 
Igor: 
That’s excellent. I think you’ve given us another little nugget there, which is the 
idea that this is something I’m trying to talk to my students also about, which is 
if the conditions are right for you, then change them. If someone’s head is too 
far down, then get them to pick it up. If you don’t know where someone’s mind 
is at, then ask them because people can talk in trance quite happily as well. 
 
Jeff: 
Oh yeah. 
 
Igor: 
So one of the things you do, which I like, again, is you take control of the 
hypnotic context so that it suits your purpose. It fits what it is you’re trying to 
achieve. 
 
 
The other thing is again, you’re looking for a very common every day type 
response, but you’re now looking inside the hypnotic context, which tells you, 
okay, something’s just happened here. Something is going on there, right? 
Whether their eyes are open or closed is irrelevant at that point because they’re 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        88 
breathing, their shoulders are set, their facial expression tells you just as much 
as the actual content within the eyes itself. 
 
! Is that correct? 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. That look you can achieve just by walking up to your best friend and 
say, I saw a movie with Russell Crowe, whomever or whatever. The moment 
you name that name, watch their face and you’ll notice a moment – it may be 
very brief – but you’ll notice a moment when they recognize who you’re talking 
about – or they give the opposite look, which says okay, whoever that is.  
 
I have no idea who you’re talking about – and you’ll know. So if you walk up to 
people and say things that you know they’ll know and you watch for that look, 
you can improve your hypnotic skills immensely. 
 
Igor: 
I think that’s a great exercise, particularly because it’s so simple and it is 
something that, as a rule, people forget to do. They forget to realize that they 
have hypnotic context around them every single day from which they can learn, 
from which they can improve their influence. 
 
 
To do something as simple as that, like look at someone – because socially, 
we’re not really allowed to look at people for too long in case we, I don’t know, 
see too much or they get uncomfortable or something like that. As hypnotists, 
we’re actually doing the opposite. We’re actually using that minor violation of 
the social contract, don’t look too hard, don’t look too long don’t make people 
feel uncomfortable.  
 
We’re actually going to do that on purpose. Make them feel uncomfortable in a 
certain way so that the normal way of looking at the world doesn’t work 
anymore. You look longer so that they can feel a little bit uncomfortable. Look 
longer so you can actually start seeing the signals that are happening So just 
by changing a few little bits from the social environment, which we’re normally 
not allowed to do, suddenly we transform the whole situation into something 
more hypnotic, which is really what we’re trying to achieve here.  
 
You’ve got something insightful there. Again, what I really like about what 
you’re talking about there, Jeff, is the idea of how natural it is. It’s just part of 
normal everyday life. You don’t have to be a rocket scientist to get this. We’re 
getting it all the time anyway and the side effect of this – and this is one of the 
other reasons I like hypnosis – is because when you’re getting it this way, you 
actually become a better conversationalist full stop. 
 
Now that you’re looking for these signs, you know when you’ve made a 
suggestion to someone just in normal everyday life and they don’t understand it 
or they haven’t got it. Rather than being socially polite and nodding the head 
and you accept that you go okay, let’s repeat it in some other way so that they 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        89 
can come on board properly. So you expand your ability to communicate in all 
realms and not just in that one context. 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        90 
Seminar 2 – Part 2 
 
Jeff: 
I do think and I always tell my students that it’s something they need to do. 
When you’re talking to people, notice the looks on their face because those are 
the things that are going to be useful to you once you have someone in 
hypnosis. When you notice what it looks like when a person doesn’t understand 
and even what it looks like when they agree when they don’t understand, you 
can set those up in a conversation and see that. 
 
 
Most of these facial reactions, even with the eyes closed, are kind of universal. 
So get to know people. You’re right. Once you really understand that principle 
and are able to really learn how to read people using those, well good grief, just 
go into the local restaurant or pub or whatever and you can get to know people 
better and they’re going to think you’re a better conversationalist because you 
seem to understand them better. It’s going to help you in and out of a hypnotic 
context. 
 
Igor: 
Let’s move on a little bit then. I think we’ve got a great handle now on the idea 
of what hypnotic phenomena are, the principles that you look for in terms of 
presenting suggestions in general and how to fit them together and so on. 
 
 
Perhaps you can take us now step-by-step through the actual process of some 
of the most common suggestions that people like to give and the hypnotic 
phenomenon they like to get. The hands being stuck to a floor or a table is 
something that people are always fascinated by. Losing a name or number. 
Maybe feeling numbness in the hands. Hallucinations are another one that 
people are very interested in. 
 
Jeff: 
Okay, one that I did just a few weeks ago was a young lady, one of the gamers, 
I was up at a game and one of the young ladies there wanted to experience 
something that she had experienced previously in the park with seeing elves in 
the park. So I just put her under. Once I went through the fractionation and had 
her definitely in a very intense state, I simply structured it very straightforward. 
 
 
I said, in a few moments, not now, but in just a few moments, I’m going to wake 
you up. When you wake up, you’re going to find around the room, around the 
house, elves peeking out from behind stuff. Sometimes they’ll talk to you. 
Sometimes they’ll leave you alone. Sometimes they’ll just annoy you, but you’re 
just going to see elves popping out to talk to you.  
 
You’ll notice them and you can interact with them if you want or not. You can 
just watch them if you want. Once you wake up, they’re going to be real to you. 
They’re going to be there and you’re going to enjoy the experience. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        91 
 
Then I went through the wake-up. It was really, that quick and that simple. The 
whole thing, the entire putting her under, intensifying it and giving the 
instruction and waking her up was about four to five minutes. 
 
 
Oh, I did put the safety on there that I always put on everything because she 
didn’t actually live where the game was going on. I said, the moment you walk 
out of this place, the moment you walk through the front door, this will go away 
entirely. All the elves will be gone. All the instructions I give you will be gone.  
 
 
Then I went through the wake-up process. So that way I knew that she wasn’t 
out driving and seeing elves in the car. The funny thing was, though, right after 
that, I started driving home and she actually called me on the phone and said, 
hey, there’s this one that’s really nice and I like talking to him. Can you make 
him stay? Can I keep him? I was like, no, that’s not a good idea. 
 
 
For instance, with the hands stuck, let me run through this in my head so that I 
can explain it better. It’s easy to show. It’s a little tricky to tell. Once I have them 
under and I’ve done like three or four levels of fractionation, then I’ll bring them 
up and I’ll say, you feel good now, don’t you? I’ll get that reaction from them so 
I know they’re really, really in an intense state.  
 
Then I’ll say I want you to do something for me. Put your hands together just 
like this – and I’ll demonstrate it. Then when they put their hands together, I’ll 
put my hand on theirs like I’m holding them together and I’ll say, now, you’ve 
experienced getting your hands or fingers stuck together with Super Glue or 
something in the past, haven’t you? 
 
 
When they nod or give me an affirmative reaction, then I say well, imagine right 
now that I’m squirting Super Glue. Then I’ll take my other hand and poke my 
finger in between a couple of times in different places and say, I’m squirting 
Super Glue between your hands right now and it is starting to harden 
immediately, because that’s what Super Glue does. 
 
 
Again, that’s contextualizing. Then I’ll say, now as you feel that hardening, you 
know that these hands are getting stuck together. Just imagine right now that 
Super Glue is hardening completely and you can feel that happening, can’t 
you? When I get the affirmative on that, then I say, good. Now when I take my 
hand away, you will find that your hands are stuck together and they will not 
come apart until I release them. They are locked together completely until I 
release them. 
 
 
Then I stare at them for just a moment. I look at that and most of the time I’ll 
also say – once I get that acceptance, that okay, I get it look – then I’ll say, nod 
your head if you accept and understand that. When I get that, then I’ll just stare 
for just a moment longer because it tends to screw with their head, I jerk my 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        92 
hand away real quick and say, now try to pull them apart and prove they won’t 
come apart. Go ahead and try and prove they won’t come apart. 
 
 
They’ll go white-knuckled pulling. I only let them do it for four or five seconds 
and then I’ll snap my fingers and say, release! When their hands come apart, 
that’s when they give you the, what the heck was that look. Then I just take my 
hands push their hands down to their lap real nice and gentle and say, sleep. 
Then they go back down instantly. 
 
 
Well, the process there a lot of it if you notice in the language is a lot of 
presupposition. When I say, you can feel that Super Glue in there hardening 
now, can’t you? It presupposes that there is Super Glue in there. Things like 
that. By using presupposition in the instructions, the mind finds it a lot easier to 
accept, at least that’s what I’ve found.  
 
 
It’s usually that quick, that brief. The whole thing takes seconds; 20-25 seconds 
tops. 
 
Igor: 
Wow. That’s quick because I think a lot of people would normally think that they 
have to spend five, six, seven minutes to really be sure about this whole thing.  
 
 
Now I have  a suspicion – and please tell me what you’ve experienced around 
this – that one of the reasons – and this tends to be my experience – is that 
sometimes faster works better because there’s less time for their intellect to 
kick in and less time for doubt to kick in, etc. So speed plus pressure are two of 
the essential elements. 
 
 
Is that what you’re doing as well? It sounds a bit like that’s what you’re doing. 
 
Jeff: 
Yeah, that plays into it. In fact, I have tested in a few times. In fact, every time 
somebody comes up with a new theory, I find somebody to test it on because I 
like to play. I’ve tested a few times on different people using things, someone 
else’s way instead of mine and I have way less – even when I’m just as 
confident that it will work, even when I’m sure it’s going to work – I still have 
less success. 
 
 
One of the biggies that I have found is repetition, repetition, repetition, 
repetition, repetition – after a while, it’s like I don’t know whether their 
subconscious is interpreting that repetition as doubt or what, but it tends to 
make it fail more often. Once they understand what is going to happen and 
once they say they accept it, I’m done. I know it’s going to happen and it’s 
going to produce the result in their mind that I want it to produce. 
 
 
I think you’re right. I think it is very important to make it happen very directly, 
very quickly and very cleanly.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        93 
Igor: 
Another thing that I think you’re doing there, which I think is important, is the 
idea of the pressure you put on after the suggestion. So that moment of silence 
where you’re waiting for that sort of hypnotic surrender, if you like. It’s almost 
like the last thought in their mind which was, basically, the idea of their hands 
being stuck together. The mind starts looking for something and goes, what the 
hell do I do? Oh there’s this thing.  
 
I guess this is what we’re doing now. So I think it’s also a very important part of 
it. The putting pressure on the idea without actually getting the conscious 
involved. Without saying, okay, this is what’s going to happen now, you just 
look at them.  
 
 
It’s a little bit like when someone quotes you a price for a car or something and 
says, $200 and you look at them and you just wait. Invariably, they’ll end up 
trying to justify why it’s worth $200 and after a while they might just come down 
and say, well, maybe $150. Maybe I’ll accept that. So they start talking 
themselves out of it because the pressure somehow changes something in 
their mind. I’m not entirely sure what it is yet, but it’s definitely something that 
you can observe.  
 
 
I have a suspicion this is part of what you’re doing as well, intuitively and 
sometimes on purpose too, so we’ve gone through the idea of how to get hands 
stuck together. 
 
! How do you think about the idea of losing a name or numbers?  
 
! What’s your process for doing that?  
 
! What are the little tricks that you like to put in there to ensure 
success? 
 
Jeff: 
Well, as I mentioned early, when I do the loss of the name, I make sure that 
they have something to work with to know how to follow that instruction. Like I 
said most people, unless they’re used to going out and getting roaring drunk 
every weekend, don’t really even have anything in their mind on well, how do I 
forget my name? That’s who I am. I use it every day over and over. 
 
 
I set it up by moving it into a context of something that is commonly forgotten. I 
don’t think I’ve ever met anybody that didn’t get introduced to somebody at a 
party or in a public place and then turned to do something else, looked back 
and forget that person’s name and had to ask it again or something similar to 
that. 
 
 
So, by giving them something that they have experienced, that they can attach 
the result to, it sets it up. Again, to me, name loss is a tricky one because of the 
fact that it is one of those core identity issues. Changing someone’s name is 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        94 
actually much easier than getting them to forget their name. I have yet to figure 
out why that is. Getting them to actually forget their name tends to be – since it 
is such a strange thing, I set it up with the chalkboard – and no, I didn’t invent 
that. It’s stolen, like everything else. 
 
 
I do the chalkboard and then I do the social situation where this is a common 
event and immediately I apply it to their, own name where I’ll say, you’ve been 
in this situation. You were introduced to somebody, you looked away, you 
looked back and you couldn’t remember their name. In that same way, your 
own name can be forgotten and when I wake you up, you’re going to forget 
your name entirely until I give it back to you. 
 
 
Well, I think part of it has to do with using the combination of the chalkboard 
and then the social situation and then giving the instruction because it’s also 
part of that overwhelming the mind. Giving it multiple directions to go at once 
makes it that much more effective. Does that make sense? 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. I quite like the idea of putting something in its place. In other words, 
putting a name in its place, which fit’s the social context again, I have a name, 
now I’ve forgotten it. I can see where that’s a lot easier because it still fits the 
normal parameters. In normal life, people have names and they know what 
they, even if it changes.  
 
Also you have the idea that children often change their own names when 
they’re young and they play let’s pretend games. They’ll be their favorite 
cowboy or they’ll adopt a name that they thought was particularly beautiful and 
for a while they’ll only respond to that name it’s just a game that a lot of children 
do play.  
 
Changing a name is much more inside of people’s experience than not having 
a name at all. That’s a very odd experience to have. Hence, you have to 
probably work a little bit more to set the context up safely. 
 
Jeff: 
That makes a lot of sense. 
 
Igor: 
A question I have for you – and this is something which I don’t know what your 
experience is on this. A lot of hypnotists claim that, for example with numbers 
and making numbers disappear, people for whom in their profession numbers 
are important, like accountants and so on, that making numbers disappear is a 
bit more difficult because they’re so important to them. 
 
! What’s your take on that?  
 
! Do you think there’s an accuracy there, or do you think it’s just as 
easy for them to lose a number provided you make it safe and make 
them aware the number will come back when it’s appropriate? 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        95 
Jeff: 
Well, it’s definitely a context issue because, again, if you can frame it in a way 
that does not create an awkward situation for them, then it’s just as easy as 
anybody else. Forgetting the numbers, one of the things that I’ve used for 
forgetting a number that has worked for me – actually, he was a bookkeeper 
most of the year and part of the year he was just a tax guy, which that’s all they 
do is numbers.  
 
 
When I did it, every time I was referring the number that was missing, I’d move 
my hand in front of his face. Not fast, just a little gentle maneuver, not right in 
front of his face, probably about a foot or a foot and a half away. Just kind of 
little wave when I’d say, it’s away. It’s gone. The number is gone.  
 
 
Then it kind of tied it to that. So when he started counting, the first time – once 
I’d brought him up and had him counting his fingers, the first time he got to that 
point, I did the little gesture again. After that, it worked perfectly.  
 
Igor: 
I think that’s a very nice little piece. I’ve seen a couple of other stage hypnotists 
do this and it works tremendously well. It’s the idea that it’s not just a trigger 
that you’re creating there you’re also creating a little bit of distraction just to the 
point of recall.  
 
 
You know how it is when you’re trying to say something, you get distracted by a 
phone call or something and you come back to the conversation and go, what 
the hell was I talking about before? 
 
Jeff: 
Been there! 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. It’s just part of the natural way life works and having that little moment 
of distraction just at the right time creates an interference pattern, which then 
allows you to use the law of reverse effects. So the harder they try to look for 
that number, the more it fails because now they’re kind of frantically searching 
for it, which is exactly what prevents it from coming back.  
 
 
I’ve seen this same idea as that little hand wave. I’ve seen people put a little tap 
on the forehead or on the side of the head. I’ve seen people give a little shake. 
Just ever so slight, something that will jar the neurology enough at just at the 
point that they’re about to try to recall that number – or a name actually for that 
matter – they get distracted and then suddenly they get confused a little bit and 
they don’t know what to do with it.  
 
Of course, it’s easy to carry on from the next point than try to find the thing 
again and that’s going to reinforce a cycle of a numberless cycle.  
 
Jeff: 
Exactly. Yeah. By setting up that something that hits on the first cycle through 
when they’re up and counting, it throws off every cycle after that.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        96 
Igor: 
Very cool. So let’s move on now to the next idea. Numbness or anesthesia or 
anything like that – have you worked with that at all? I notice this is particularly 
for medical professionals something that they’re greatly concerned with and 
interested in.  
 
! Have you worked with that before and is the kind of thing you do?  
 
! If so, how would you work with that sort of thing? 
 
Jeff: 
I’ve never done it in a dental situation or a surgical situation. One example of it 
was I went to the place where I used to work years ago, just to visit the people. 
One of the women that worked there walked up, she said hi and when I shook 
her hand – and it was just a very slight touch – she winced and leaned towards 
her shoulder. 
 
I knew what was hurting and I said, is everything okay and she said, well, about 
four months ago, I had to have my entire shoulder rebuilt surgically because the 
joint there was in really bad shape. So they had to build it up with material and 
put the shoulder back together. This past weekend, we moved from one house 
to another and I was lifting boxes and everything else, so it’s in a lot of pain 
right now.  
 
 
So the way I dealt with that was I said, well, here, let me just give you a gift. I 
just lifted her arm up gently so that it point straight out in front of her and I said 
how’s that feel? She said well, it hurts my shoulder just a little bit. I said was it 
hurting before? Oh yeah. It hurts all the time. I said, okay, good. Now just hold 
your arm there just a moment – and I kept my hand under her elbow so that 
she could rest if she needed to.  
 
I said, just focus on where that pain is right now. Just focus on it because 
you’re in charge of it. In your mind, just go in there and look at that pain, notice 
where it is, actually see it in your mind just like you could go in and look at the 
muscles. Like you could see right through the skin and everything. Notice 
where the inflammation is, notice where the pain is.  
 
Now just watch it fade. Just watch the inflammation go away, completely. I’ve 
probably stood there about 20-30 seconds and I probably said completely 
about four or five times. Like, completely… completely… completely. 
 
 
Then I just let go and I was already across the room and she was still standing 
there completely in a daze and I just went, Jan and snapped my fingers. Her 
head snapped up, she looked at me and went, oh. Then she went, whoa, it 
doesn’t hurt. It doesn’t hurt that’s probably one of the best I ever did, I generally 
find if you can get them to visualize the pain going away, then you get that 
result. I think that has to do with more people being visually-oriented than 
sensory-oriented.  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        97 
 
Do you know what I’m saying? Kinesthetically-oriented. So even though they 
feel the pain, seeing it go away tends, at least for my experience – well, 
actually, I did it with someone else who was having back pain just a couple of 
weeks ago. It only took 30, 40, maybe 50 seconds and they could actually see 
the pain go away. Then at that point, they had no more pain.  
 
Igor: 
That’s a fantastic story. Very inspiring as well because this is going back to 
something which is very close to my heart, which is using hypnosis as a force 
for good. Now something I like to emphasize – and I’m sure you do this also.  
 
Just to bring it out for people listening, especially the more novice people, 
something that is very important with pain control, something that I know you 
do, Jeff. It’s the idea of use it only in the right context. In other words, under 
some form of medical supervision. 
 
 
The lady with the reconstructed shoulders, of course, seeing a doctor 
constantly to get it checked out, which is important because pain is very often a 
signal that something’s wrong or prevents them from doing something that’s 
going to hurt them. So it actually is a valuable signal and it can’t just be taken 
away willy-nilly.  
 
It’s got to be taken away intelligently so that the person doesn’t end up either 
damaging themselves because they can’t feel pain anymore, or they ignore a 
condition that needs medical attention and, as a result, it can worse before they 
actually get any treatment. I’m sure you do that same sort of thing. It’s just 
something that I think is very important for people to realize. 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. One of the first questions I ask someone who asks me to relieve 
their pain is; is this something you’re seeing a doctor for? Do you have an 
appointment to deal with that? I’ve actually told people, sorry. Yes, I can 
probably take your pain away, but until you know why it’s there, you need it. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. That’s the only ethical way, I think, to work with pain. Sometimes if 
they’re really in big pain, it’s enough to take a little bit of it away so it’s more 
tolerable until the cause is found, until it’s investigated properly because you’re 
risking someone’s entire health and it’s not a lighthearted thing to get into.  
 
 
It’s a great thing to do for people, but you always have to come at it intelligently 
and with your ethics in the right place, right? 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. You need to be thinking, any time you’re doing anything that’s pain 
relief, you need to be sure that this isn’t something that – you’re going to take 
their pain away and they’re going to walk away and forget all about it because 
serious, serious injury can result. Always, always make sure that this person is 
either seeing a doctor or already has an appointment or something. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        98 
 
Now I’m not one of those that says don’t do it until you have something signed 
by a doctor saying he approves. I don’t do that. As long as I know that person’s 
going to see a doctor, I deal with it. 
 
Igor: 
Great. Let’s move on then to the final set of phenomena that we’ve been really 
talking about today, which is the idea of hallucinations – positive and negative.  
 
! How would you go about actually achieving those? 
 
Jeff: 
I tend to frame those in the context that, that person has something that they 
can work with. For instance, with the gamers, I can do anything I want. As I 
mentioned on the previous recording, I turned one of them into a flesh-eating 
zombie. Although he didn’t eat any flesh.  
 
 
I gave people elves. I’ve had people throwing fireballs at each other in a battle 
across the Game Shop. Just fun stuff like that. All hallucinations. The gal I had 
running around the park chasing down elves. Those things are because, well, 
that’s what gamers think about. So it’s there for them. 
 
 
With normal people, I do simple things like, most of the time I stick with things 
that fit with who they are. A hallucination of not seeing me, which is a negative 
hallucination. Not seeing someone else in the room. Or, which is sometimes 
fun, having people see me as a stunningly handsome movie actor of some sort 
that they know of. Oh, if I could only be. No. Sorry, the mind took off there, but 
I’ve had people see me as someone else.  
 
This is a hallucination that I kind of get a kick out of because it’s different with 
everybody. I tell them that when they’re looking at me, they can’t focus. They 
can’t figure out exactly what I look like and then it’s really fun to get them to try 
to describe you because it sounds like they’re describing a Picasso. 
 
Igor: 
That’s a very interesting effect, I mean, these are some pretty wild and bizarre 
things that you’re doing with people. It sounds like its some hypnotee again. 
But, of course, behind all this there are some simple principle’s that we’ve 
actually addressed already and a simple process that you use. 
 
! Could you talk a little more about how you might go about setting it 
up with say, a normal person, a very imaginative person, to get 
those kind of results?  
 
! What process will you take them through to get there?  
 
Or, do you just say, I’m going to count to three and you can’t see me. Done! I 
suspect there’s a little bit more behind it than just that. 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        99 
Jeff: 
For example, I would first induce them, intensify the state, go through some 
cycles of fractionation and then once I know that they’re at that point where 
they can actually take it and run with it – then one thing I really, really stress 
because I’ve had a problem with it myself.  
 
Know what you’re going to do before you ever induce them because standing 
there going um, has a tendency to bring them right back out so plan something 
out. Jot down ideas through the day of things you might want to do. Let’s say I 
wanted somebody to be unable to see me.  
 
I frame it by saying, now in just moment, not now, but in just a moment, I’m 
going to clap my hands and you’re going to wake right up, feel really good and 
you’re going to be able to look around the room and see everybody and 
everything that’s here, except me.  
 
You’ll be able to hear my voice, but you will not be able to see me. No matter 
where you look, no matter how hard you try, you simply will not be able to see 
me. You’ll know I’m here somewhere, but you won’t be able to see me.  
 
Then I’ll go on from there. It really is that simple. The factors that play into that 
are that even that instruction can be construed weirdly because sometimes 
they will start waving their arms around trying to find you. Sometimes they will 
understand you can’t see me.  
 
I had one person that I told he couldn’t see me and he kept looking at me and 
talking to me, but not as the hypnotist. He was talking to me as somebody else, 
like I was another person on stage. Well, it wasn’t on stage; it was actually in 
the park, but like I was another person there being hypnotized. 
 
I finally said do you know who I am? He went, no idea, but you know you sound 
just like the hypnotist. By the way, do you know where he went? 
 
Igor: 
That’s funny. I like that.  
 
! How do you actually set it up?  
 
It this set up pretty much the same as you did with the other things. In other 
words, you set the context, you’ve lost your car keys and you looked right at 
them and couldn’t see them.  
 
! Or, do you just pretty much dive into the direct instructions there? 
 
Jeff: 
Well again, it depends on the situation. If you want to take that time, it always 
makes it easier for the subject to process the instruction if you can give a 
context where you know that’s happened. The car keys that are there, but you 
just didn’t see them.  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        100 
Something like that always helps. In fact, it makes it way easier for them to 
process it and the easier they process it, the better the result is. That’s a good 
point you bring up. I glossed over that, but yeah, you need to make sure there’s 
a frame that they have to work with it.  
 
For instance, one of the times when I was doing the hands stuck together and I 
said, you’ve stuck your hands together with Super Glue, right? He looked at me 
like no, what’s Super Glue? I went okay, have you ever had like syrup or 
something like that stuck on your hands and your hands were all sticky and it 
feels real nasty because they’re stuck? They stick to things every time you 
touch something.  
 
 
By framing it that way, making him go inside and find that sensation, then I was 
able to use that. Something you mentioned earlier that I think is important. You 
can get on-going feedback the whole time. They can talk to you just fine. If you 
ask them a question, they can answer it. I know a lot of people like to use the 
ideomotor responses, but I just ask because I know they can talk to me and I 
know it’s not a problem. 
 
 
It’s actually saved me a few times when I planned to go one way and I asked 
the question and they had no idea what I was talking about. In fact, I had one 
person that said, no, he’s never, ever forgotten a name when he was 
introduced to somebody. He said it’s like a natural skill. I hear someone’s name 
once and I look at them and it’s permanent. I never forget it again. 
 
 
Well, I changed and did something totally different for him because you can ask 
them the question and then you can find out if they understand that situation.  
 
For instance, saying the thing about the keys and giving them a chance to 
respond. You’ve had that experience before. Now again, most of the time, I do 
frame it, but I don’t ask them a question because most of the time, I use very, 
very simple things that everybody’s experienced. The keys on the table. 
Meeting someone and forgetting their name. Experiencing things happening on 
automatic.  
 
 
For instance, I had one person who wanted to experience what it would be like 
to be robotically controlled. We had to talk a little bit so I understood what he 
meant by that, but he meant so that if somebody gave him an instruction to do 
something, he had no choice. He just did it.  
 
So I used the experience that everybody else uses about you’re driving home 
and suddenly you realize you’re home and you don’t remember the trip at all, 
but you know you did all the right things. You just followed the normal 
instructions that you were subconsciously given to do this and do that and you 
got home fine. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        101 
 
I think I framed out a couple more similar to that so that when I woke him up, he 
stood there and he just had a blank look on his face. It was his brother there 
and I told his brother, he’s programmed. Just start telling him what to do. He 
just everything his brother said, even things that I didn’t think he could pull off. 
So again, you have to frame it in almost every situation and when you are using 
some sort of a complex frame, then it’s good to actually say, you’ve had that 
experience, haven’t you? Then wait for a reaction. 
 
Igor: 
Right. So, it appears, that what you like to do is use simpler frames that are 
more universal experiences. A couple of examples is enough because 
everyone kind of pretty much gets it, but if it gets more complicated, a bit more 
sophisticated, then you want to double check to make sure that they really have 
got it because then it’s not necessarily such a straightforward given.  
 
Jeff: 
Exactly. One of the one’s that’s commonly used is people talking about we go 
through hypnosis every day. You’ve been reading a book and you’re so 
engrossed in the book, that somebody’s talking to you and you didn’t even 
know they were there.  
 
I was doing that with someone who looked up at me and he had a totally 
puzzled look on his face. I said, have you had that experience and he said, no, 
but then I’ve only read one book in my life.  
 
Igor: 
Wow. 
 
Jeff: 
I was like, whoa. That’s a strange one.  
 
Igor: 
That certainly is. I guess he just watched his DVDs instead, right? 
 
Jeff: 
He gets all news online and on TV. I don’t know.  
 
Igor: 
Let’s move on a little bit. We’ve got the idea of the phenomena. This is 
something I think has tremendous value. I think people have been fascinated 
by this for a long time and there have been a lot of hang-ups and fears around 
it and I think you’ve done a great job of clarifying, at least the way you do it. It 
sounds like a very successful process. 
 
 
The other thing that you’re well-known for, other than just the games you play, 
which are in and of themselves, I think, fascinating, is your ability to do change 
work. You do therapy in an average of 15-20 minutes. That’s your average 
session time and you have developed a whole bunch of processes for weight 
loss, smoking, stress and all kinds of stuff like that, which work quickly, really 
powerfully and really efficiently. Usually just one session and, importantly, on 
average no more than 15 to 20 minutes. 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        102 
! Could we talk a little bit about that?  
 
First, just to us a little about your philosophy on what you do and how therapy, 
in your mind, should work and why you do the things that you do in the way that 
you do them. 
 
Jeff: 
Again, going back to one of my first premises in the first recording we did here, 
I don’t see the need to branch out into why someone is doing something or why 
they have such and such condition. They have something going on now and 
they want that something to change now. So by starting with that, I eliminate a 
large portion of the things that other people try, but I don’t see a need for. 
 
 
The core of my philosophy is that everybody who walks through that door for 
my hypnosis services wants the exact three same things. They want to feel 
good, they want to feel well and they want to be happy. 
 
 
Feeling good is an emotional thing. You know, I feel good because people are 
telling me I look nice now. Weight loss. Feel well – I don’t want to feel like I’m 
weak and all that as I’m losing weight and being fat also makes me feel heavy 
and it makes me feel uncomfortable, etc. So feel good, feel well and then be 
happy. You give them what they need to fill all three of those categories and 
you have an absolute happy client. There’s no way they will walk away 
unhappy. 
 
 
In fact, they will be more than happy to tell all their friends about how amazing 
you are because you filled the three things that they need to have filled. For 
instance, let’s take a weight loss. I do a lot of those. Once I have them under 
and I actually begin the session. I’ve told the conscious mind not to pay 
attention and I’m dealing with the subconscious. I specifically deal with the 
subconscious and say, you’ve been working towards this goal, now you know 
that goal is no longer the appropriate goal.  
 
This goal is the appropriate goal. Whatever weight they choose. Or if it’s like I 
need to work out – you’ve been working towards a laid back goal, now you’re 
working towards a goal of exercise, etc., etc. 
 
 
When I’m talking to the subconscious, I specifically say, this is what you’ve 
been doing. You now know that’s not right. Do this. A lot of people say, well, 
that’s too aggressive, but it works. I mean I’ve shown it too many times to doubt 
it.  
 
 
Then with the weight loss, the way I structure it the pressure’s not on them 
because I have the subconscious mind working on it completely behind the 
scenes. So the subconscious mind is making whatever changes need to be 
made to produce the weight loss so they will physically feel better. 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        103 
 
Then when I get done with that portion of the session, I go right into – I don’t 
know if I mentioned it before or not, but a friend of mine calls it magic mirror. I 
just call it the mirror process. I have a specific process that I go through that’s 
designed to make them feel really good about themselves the way they are 
now and the way they’re going to be and it makes them happy to feel good and 
when I close, I throw in the kind of statements like. 
 
For instance, when I wake you up, you will absolutely know that your 
subconscious mind and your body are doing their jobs and the weight is going 
and that makes you feel good. 
 
 
They’re already following instructions and all my instructions are very direct 
anyway. I shouldn’t say all, but the vast majority are very direct anyway. So by 
covering all three of those bases, I know that this person is going to be happy 
with what happened and they’re going to feel good about the process. 
 
Igor: 
That’s wonderful. So if I understand you correctly, your first starting point is to 
realize that the unconscious mind is running at incorrect program and you’ve 
just got to change the program. It doesn’t matter why it’s running it. It doesn’t 
matter where it came from. Just change it and they’ll be happier.  
 
Jeff: 
Yes. Definitely right.  
 
Igor: 
Next, you look at the idea of subconscious motivation, of people who want to 
feel self-esteem. They want to feel good about themselves. They want to have 
all these other things. I think the three processes you mentioned are actually 
very important. They become kind of motivated, which is the fuel that gets the 
unconscious mind to go, all right and then I’ll make the effort to change 
because this is going to be better for me than what it was before. Right? 
 
Jeff: 
Yes.   
 
Igor: 
Then finally, the rest is just going back to the idea of hypnotic phenomena. 
You’re doing pretty much the same thing. All that you’re doing is taking the idea 
of weight loss or stop smoking, etc. instead of making them stick their hands 
together you’re just going to get them to become lighter. Instead of making a 
name disappear, you’re making sure that the desire to smoke disappears.  
 
So, basically, it’s the same process. It’s just with a few more insights in terms of 
the psychology and the set-up. You’re going the same route, which is again 
why you can work so quickly. Right? 
 
Jeff: 
Yes. By having it understood that this is like a pattern I follow, it makes it so that 
I don’t have to really try to recall what I’m doing. I know where I’m going and 
what the result is going to be from each step. The nice thing about it is that, 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        104 
again, it covers the three things that absolutely have to be covered for a 
session to be successful.  
 
Igor: 
Okay, so now we’ve got an idea of how you structure your sessions and why it 
is that it works so quickly. Essentially, the same idea behind the phenomena, I 
know that on your personal mentorship programs, where you have two-on-one, 
three-on-one type sessions that you actually give people specific instructions 
on how to do certain kinds of sessions.  
 
You talk them through step-by-step, give an example of it, sometimes even run 
them through it themselves if it’s an issue that they’re dealing with in life, so 
they actually have a personal experience. 
 
! Could you let us know a little bit of the list of sessions that you 
normally teach people just as a simple here’s a no-brainer couple 
of things, try these and practice a little so they can eventually go 
home and have a practice ready to go?  
 
! What kind of things do you focus on? 
 
Jeff: 
I cover a lot of the ones that I’ve done. Of course, weight loss, smoking, stress 
reduction, insomnia, dealing with phobias, etc. I cover, basically, all of those. 
Even simple things like how to give people confidence. Then I almost, always 
go into the mirror part of the session and I always finish with things that will 
have that person wake up feeling very, very good about things.  
 
 
The structure almost never changes it’s just that one portion that deals 
specifically with the issue that they’ve come to me for, but I cover all the basics. 
The thing is the way I do them, because it is direct, because it is very 
straightforward, the only thing that really needs to change knows that this issue 
may have certain things. 
 
 
For instance, smoking. I had over a period of a few months, three people come 
back to me saying, I started smoking again and I got all broken-hearted 
thinking, oh darn, what am I doing wrong? All three of them said the exact 
same thing – because my first question was, okay, tell me, what was the 
withdrawal like and what kind of cravings did you have?  
 
In all three cases, it was oh, I had no desire to smoke and I had no cravings of 
any kind. I just happened to be hanging out with friends and they kept 
constantly offering me a cigarette and it was just easier hanging out with them 
to be one of them to smoke a cigarette. 
 
 
Well, I’m not in the business of changing somebody’s entire social life. I mean 
it’s been suggested to me that I should tell them that they won’t want to hang 
out with people like that, but you know, I don’t tell people who to be friends with.  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        105 
Aside from that, nobody has ever come back to me and said, man, the cravings 
were there. Man, I was having withdrawals. Man, these things were just 
bugging me. Nobody has ever come back to me at all like that. 
 
Igor: 
Well it sounds like, Jeff, that your sessions are well set up and really following 
the same process of the phenomena. There’s no real difference between 
getting a phenomenon of a hand sticking and the phenomenon of not having a 
craving, or not seeing someone and not feeling something. It’s essentially the 
same idea. 
 
 
If you wrap that around the psychology process – in other words, understanding 
the context like, what the issues are with smoking and so on and you wrap that 
into some really nice positive suggestion around self-esteem and things like 
that, well, I could see that being very powerful and very simple therapy, which 
acts very quickly.  
 
 
I mean you could fill an entire practice and the beauty of your method is you 
can see just so many more people, which means there are more people out 
there who are feeling better and, of course, your practice becomes more 
successful as a result because you don’t have to spend five hours with one 
patient. In those five hours, you can see 20 or 30 patients.  
 
Jeff: 
I did a stop smoking just a few days ago. I mentioned it earlier. When he 
walked in the door, one of the first things he said was dude, this better work 
because right now, I am totally jonsing. I have not had a cigarette today and I 
just don’t do that. I said, so you’re going to know right away, whether it worked? 
He said, yeah. I’m going to know the moment that I wake up if it’s going to 
work. 
 
 
When he woke up, when I brought him out of it, he looked at me and he had a 
huge grin on his face and he said I can’t even imagine putting a cigarette in my 
mouth. That just sounds nasty.  
 
Igor: 
Fantastic.  
 
Jeff: 
So again, keeping it simple, honestly and waiting for the feedback to know that 
they have accepted the instruction you’ve given – you’re right. It’s the same 
whether I’m sticking their hands together or they’re going to stop smoking. It’s 
the same if I’m going to give them a hallucination or they’re going to lose 
weight. It’s the same structure exactly, except that it’s focused on the issue that 
they need and want.  
 
 
If there are certain issues around that, then go there, but keeping the context 
that this is very straightforward and this is what is going to happen. When I’m 
talking to their subconscious, I’m not asking it to make a change. I’m telling it 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        106 
what it’s going to do. Since it doesn’t have to make a decision or think it 
through, it happens.  
 
 
I think that’s a key element right there is that the subconscious mind does not 
have to figure out how to follow the instruction. I tell it how to follow the 
instruction and that resolves the issue. It just does it.  
 
Igor: 
Okay and I think what’s coming out of here is that your understanding – and 
you have a much deeper perception of how hypnotic phenomena work than a 
lot of hypnotists – that’s really what’s gone into your change work and one of 
the reasons it works so quickly is because you’re really reducing it down to its 
simplest parts. It’s the same basic principle, just applied in a different way. 
 
 
Now, in terms of how you know it’s working again, this is a big question on 
hypnotherapists’ minds. It’s has the session worked? I said the words, they 
were kind of like relaxed and in trance, but have I actually achieved the 
outcome? Well, if you made the other things happen and if you’re doing the 
same sort of things in the session, well then you’re looking for the same things, 
aren’t you? 
 
 
For example, I imagine one big thing you do in your hypnotherapy sessions is 
you check for that receptive mind. You look for that moment of hypnotic 
surrender around the actual idea of weight loss, stop smoking and so on. Then 
if you don’t have it, well then you know something needs to happen.  
 
You need to either rephrase the suggestion or you need to figure out or ask 
them even what their hesitation is, what their fear or concern is and then 
reframe that in some way so that you can get to the point of hypnotic surrender. 
 
! Now at that point, you’re pretty much set. You know the session 
will work because it can’t, not, is that correct? 
 
Jeff: 
Exactly. Again, getting back to that – and I love that phrase, hypnotic surrender 
– when you get that acknowledgment that okay, I got it, it’s a done deal. You 
can rest. You can know that they are going to get the result that they came to 
you for.  
 
Again, it’s one of the areas where I have trouble with people who use a lot of 
recordings, a lot of devices or they do the repetition, because, they’re not 
paying attention to the person. I think that’s the key element.  
 
When someone is sitting in front of you asking you to help them stop smoking 
or asking you to help them lose weight or whatever, they’re supposed to be the 
center of your attention at that moment.  
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        107 
Since I am sitting there looking for the reactions that tell me that they have 
accepted or understood, or maybe not understood the instruction, since I’m 
sitting there waiting for and noticing it, then they are the center of my attention. 
That way, I can know that on the level that matters, their subconscious mind, 
okay, it’s a done deal. I accept that, I surrender that’s the way things are going 
to be. 
 
Igor: 
Perfect and I think that is a very elegant way of looking at hypnosis. It’s 
reinforcing a point that is very close to my heart, which is one of the reasons I 
hate the idea of scripts is not that scripts don’t have useful suggestions in them. 
They do. But if you spend most of your time looking up at a paper and 
hypnotizing that, you’re not actually with your client.  
 
Hypnosis is a relationship. It’s a feedback loop. You have to see what’s going 
on and if you don’t see what’s going on then you’ll miss the timing. You’ll miss 
everything else. The very thing that makes it difficult for others who are stuck in, 
shall we say, more inside their head, more thinking about stuff, more afraid or 
looking at a bit of paper, is what makes it easy once you get out of your 
thoughts, emotions and feelings and look at the person to see what they’re 
actually giving you.  
 
 
It’s very simple. Once you haven’t got the signal yet that they’ve got it, well, you 
need to do a little bit more work. Once you get the signal that they’ve got it then 
you can move on. It’s as simple as that. That makes for a very efficient, very 
quick, very natural process. 
 
Jeff: 
I’ve watched you work and that’s what impresses me is that at that moment, 
that person that you are talking to, that person is the center of your attention. If 
this business is not about the hypnotist focusing on the person who has come 
to them to ask for help, then what is it about? I love that whole H+ that you 
present.  
 
That making it an experience that this person is going to get the result they 
want and that they’re going to feel good about having done it. That just makes it 
an amazing experience for everybody. It makes it great for me. I feel 
sometimes better than the client when it’s over because I’m all lit up about how 
it went.  
 
Igor: 
I think that’s important point. It’s something you do with your three golden rules 
there. The other thing is just being a therapist, instead of being drained at the 
end of the day because we’ve given everything, when you give someone a pep 
talk you’re actually taking a lot.  
 
Because, as they’re lighting up, getting infused and happy and all the rest of it, 
on the one side, it frames change of something which is fun, something 
positive, which it should be.  

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        108 
But on the other side, of course, you as a therapist are getting a lot more back, 
which means your stamina goes up, because you’re not putting so much 
energy into it. You’re getting it all back again in forms of the happiness and 
enthusiasm and the appreciation that you get from your client. So everyone 
wins. I think it’s a tremendous way of working. 
 
Jeff: 
I absolutely agree. I’ve said it before, if this ever stops being something fun and 
enjoyable, I’m not going to do it anymore.  
 
Igor: 
And I agree with that. I think we’ve come to the end of our time together, unless 
there’s anything else you want to add or sum up in terms of what we’ve talked 
about.  
 
Jeff: 
No, I’m good. Well, I did want to just kind of go over one point that we had 
covered earlier and that’s about when you’re going along and something does 
not work the way you expected, even in a session, look for that. When you’re 
looking for that response, you don’t have to be some genius who can drag the 
session out forever and ever until it’s understood. Just say what you’re going to 
say, keep it clear, keep it simple just say it from a different direction.  
 
 
That’s why, again – and I know I mentioned it in the first part. Hypnotize your 
pillow a thousand times. Once you have a structure for weight loss, for 
smoking, for stress, for whatever, practice saying that until it’s comfortable. Not 
because it’s a script.  
 
In fact, the beauty of it is if you get away from scripts and you stick to just 
dealing with the individual, looking for that response that they understand and 
accept what you’ve said, you cut not only your time, but also the number of 
words you have to say. If you did script it out, it would be like one paragraph, 
but if you’re looking at a paragraph, you’re not focusing on that person.  
 
So as far as troubleshooting those situations where the person is sitting there 
and they don’t seem to get it – and you get those. You will get those where the 
way you said it made sense to you, but it made no sense at all to them. It’s not 
a problem. Just say the same thing very simply but in a different way. If you’re 
prepared that this is what you will have to do in that event, then you won’t be 
worried about it when the time comes.  
 
Let’s face it, people communicate differently. It’s that level of communication, of 
being there, talking to them, you’re paying attention to them, you know, that 
they don’t understand, so you go over it again slowly. You recognize the point, 
at which they’re not getting it, which is the part you work on.  
 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        109 
Once they accept it and say oh okay, I understand, you’re there. You’re done. 
But be prepared that you may have to explain something a couple of different 
ways. It’s not a big issue, it’s not a big thing and it’s definitely nothing to be 
afraid of.  
 
Although it is one of the things that a lot of people write me and ask me about. 
Okay, what do I do if I explain it and they just don’t get it? Explain it differently. 
It’s that simple. 
 
Igor: 
I think what you’re describing is very elegant. Again, it goes back to your idea of 
bringing everything down to the simplest common denominator. You make the 
suggestion you wait for it be taken. If it’s not being taken, you change it until it 
can be accepted and again, going past this idea of overcomplicating things.  
 
Complexity is just an idea of lots of simple things put together so it’s always 
simple. If it’s too complicated, then just cut it back again to the point where it’s 
simple for you again. That’s make your life a lot easier as the hypnotist and I 
can see it being tremendously successful. 
 
 
Obviously, you are. That’s one of the reasons we’ve had this chat in the first 
place, right? 
 
Jeff: 
Absolutely. Just as an example of what I’m saying here. I did do a session with 
a doctor once who was a medical doctor, but he held like three or four PhDs. 
He had one in physics and I think one in biochemistry. He had this huge 
vocabulary and when he spoke to you, it had that air of academia, if you will.  
 
 
I just treated him like anybody else because, again, going back to the principle 
that when you’re talking to the subconscious mind, it’s like talking to a very 
bright 9-year-old. It doesn’t change. Keep it simple, keep it clear and you’ll 
solve most of your problems. Don’t worry about what they know and what they 
don’t know. Work with what you have. Always keep it simple. 
 
Igor: 
I think those are tremendous words to keep in mind and to finish on. I’d like to 
first, take this time to thank you, Jeff, for coming to us and sharing so much. 
You really do know your stuff incredibly well. To just share that with us has 
been a great moment. I think you’ve solved a lot of questions. You’ve given a 
great perspective into the hypnotic process. I for one would like to thank you for 
that. 
 
Jeff: 
I appreciate the opportunity to do this and appreciate your time. I’ve really 
enjoyed this, a lot.  
 
 
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        110 
Igor: 
Me too, so all that remains to be said is folks, if you’re interested in Jeff’s work, 
go to YourPersonalHypnosisMentor.com.  
 
My name is Igor from StreetHypnosis.com and I’ve been talking to Jeff 
Stephens from YourPersonalHypnosisMentor.com. Go and check these people 
out. You’ll have a great time. If you want to learn hypnosis, this is a great set of 
resources for you.  
 

Hypnosis Master – Jeff Stephens 
 
 © Street Hypnosis Publishing All Rights Reserved                        111 
End of Seminar 
 
On that final note, everyone, as much as I hate to say this, this is the end of this 
particular session. We will be back again with another Master next month.   
Until then, I’ve been talking to a true hypnotic genius, Hypnosis Master Jeff 
Stephens from YourPersonalHypnosisMentor.com. My name is Igor Ledochowski 
from StreetHypnosis.com and I look forward to speaking with everyone again in the 
next session. 
 
Meet Your Host 
 
Each month’s Interview with a Master will be hosted by Igor Ledochowski, a master 
hypnotist of international acclaim. He is regarded as one of the world's foremost 
experts and trainers in conversational or covert hypnosis. 
Igor created the Private Hypnosis Club, the world’s first community for master 
hypnotists. 
He was the first ever hypnotist to release a full audio course on Conversational 
Hypnosis, the latest version of which is 'The Power Of Conversational Hypnosis' and 
is the No. 1 best-selling hypnosis course in the world. 
Igor is also the creator of over 30 other advanced hypnosis programs. All his 
programs are available from: 
 
www.StreetHypnosis.com  
 
 
 
 
 
 

