The Emancipatrix
Homer Eon Flint
I. THE MENTAL EXPEDITION 
II. ALMOST HUMAN 
III. WORLD OF MAMMOTHS 
IV. THE GOLD-MINER 
V. THE SUPER-RACE 
VI. IMPOSSIBLE, BUT-- 
VII. THE MISSING FACTOR 
VIII. FIRE! 
IX. FOUND! 
X. AT HALF COCK 
XI. THE EDGE OF THE WORLD 
XII. OUTSIDE INFORMATION 
XIII. THE TWELVE 
XIV. THE SLAVE RAID 
XV. OVERLOOKED 
Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.
[Illustrated title: 'The Emancipatrix' in script, over a background of a bee 
silhouetted against a full moon on the horizon.] 
I. THE MENTAL EXPEDITION
The doctor closed the door behind him, crossed to the table, silently offered 
the geologist a cigar, and waited until smoke was issuing from it. Then he
said: 
"Well," bluntly, "what's come between you and your wife, Van?" 
The geologist showed no surprise. Instead, he frowned severely at the end of
his 
cigar, and carefully seated himself on the corner of the table. When he spoke 
there was a certain rigor in his voice, which told the doctor that his friend 
was holding himself tightly in rein. 
"It really began when the four of us got together to investigate Capellette,
two 
months ago." Van Emmon was a thorough man in important matters. "Maybe I
ought 
to say that both Billie and I were as much interested as either you or Smith; 
she often says that even the tour of Mercury and Venus was less wonderful. 
"What is more, we are both just as eager to continue the investigations. We 
still have all kinds of faith in the Venusian formula; we want to 'visit' as 
many more worlds as the science of telepathy will permit. It isn't that
either 
of us has lost interest." 
The doctor rather liked the geologist's scientific way of stating the case,
even 
though it meant hearing things he already knew. Kinney watched and waited and 
listened intently. 
"You remember, of course, what sort of a man I got in touch with. Powart was 
easily the greatest Capellan of them all; a magnificent intellect, which I
still 
think was intended to have ruled the rest. I haven't backed down from my 
original position." 
"Van! You still believe," incredulously, "in a government of the sort he 
contemplated?" 
Van Emmon nodded aggressively. "All that we learned merely strengthens my 
conviction. Remember what sort of people the working classes of Capellette
were? 
Smith's 'agent' was typical—a helpless nincompoop, not fit to govern

himself!" 
The geologist strove to keep his patience. 
"However," remarked Kinney, "the chap whose mind I used was no fool." 
"Nor was Billie's agent, the woman surgeon," agreed Van Emmon, "even if she
did 
prefer 'the Devolutionist' to Powart. But you'll have to admit, doc, that the 
vast majority of the Capellans were incompetents; the rest were exceptions." 
The doctor spoke after a brief pause. "And—that's what is wrong, Van?" 
"Yes," grimly. "Billie can't help but rejoice that things turned out the way 
they did. She is sure that the workers, now that they've been separated from
the 
ruling class, will proceed to make a perfect paradise out of their land." He 
could not repress a certain amount of sarcasm. "As well expect a bunch of 
monkeys to build a steam engine! 
"Well," after a little hesitation, "as I said before, doc, I've no reason to 
change my mind. You may talk all you like about it—I can't agree to such
ideas. 
The only way to get results on that planet is for the upper classes to
continue 
to govern." 
"And this is what you two have—quarreled about?" 
Van Emmon nodded sorrowfully. He lit another cigar absent-mindedly and
cleared 
his throat twice before going on: "My fault, I guess. I've been so darned 
positive about everything I've said, I've probably caused Billie to
sympathize 
with her friends more solidly than she would otherwise." 
"But just because you've championed the autocrats so heartily—" 
"I'm afraid so!" The geologist was plainly relieved to have stated the case
in 
full. He leaned forward in his eagerness to be understood. He told the doctor 
things that were altogether too personal to be included in this account. 
Meanwhile, out in the doctor's study, Smith had made no move whatever to 
interrogate the geologist's young wife. Instead, the engineer simply remained 
standing after Billie had sat down, and gave her only an occasional hurried 
glance. Shortly the silence got on her nerves; and— such was her nature, as 
contrasted with Van Emmon's—whereas he had stated causes first, she went 
straight to effects. 
"Well," explosively, "Van and I have split!" 
Smith was seldom surprised at anything. This time was no exception. He merely 
murmured "Sorry" under his breath; and Billie rushed on, her pent-up feelings 
eager to escape. 
"We haven't mentioned Capellette for weeks, Smith! We don't dare! If we did, 
there'd be such a rumpus that we—we'd separate!" Something came up into her 
throat which had to be choked back before she could go on. Then— 
"I don't know why it is, but every time the subject is brought up Van makes
me 
so WILD!" She controlled herself with a tremendous effort. "He blames me, of 
course, because of what I did to help the Devolutionist. But I can't be
blamed 
for sympathizing with the under dog, can I? I've always preferred justice to 
policy, any time. Justice first, I say! And I think we've seen—there on 
Capellette—how utterly impossible it is for any such system as theirs to last 
indefinitely." 
But before she could follow up her point the door opened and the doctor
returned 
with her husband. Kinney did not allow any tension to develop; instead, he
said 
briskly: 
"There's only a couple of hours remaining between now and dinner time; I move

we 
get busy." He glanced about the room, to see if all was in place. The four 
chairs, each with its legs tipped with glass; the four footstools, similarly 
insulated from the floor; the electrical circuit running from the odd group
of 
machinery in the corner, and connecting four pair of brass bracelets—all were 
ready for use. He motioned the others to the chairs in which they had already 
accomplished marvels in the way of mental traveling. 
"Now," he remarked, as he began to fit the bracelets to his wrists, an
example 
which the rest straightway followed; "now, we want to make sure that we all
have 
the same purpose in mind. Last time, we were simply looking for four people, 
such as had view-points similar to our own. To- day, our object is to locate, 
somewhere among the planets attached to one of the innumerable sun-stars of
the 
universe, one on which the conditions are decidedly different from anything
we 
have known before." 
Billie and Van Emmon, their affair temporarily forgotten, listened eagerly. 
"As I recall it," Smith calmly observed, "we agreed that this attempt would
be 
to locate a new kind of—well, near-human. Isn't that right?" 
The doctor nodded. "Nothing more or less"—speaking very distinctly— "than a 
creature as superior as we are, but NOT IN HUMAN FORM." 
Smith tried hard not to share the thrill. He had been reading biology the 
previous week. "I may as well protest, first as last, that I don't see how
human 
intelligence can ever be developed outside the human form. Not—possibly!" 
Van Emmon also was skeptical, but his wife declared the idea merely unusual,
not 
impossible. "Is there any particular reason against it?" she demanded of the 
doctor. 
"I will say this much," cautiously. "Given certain conditions, and inevitably 
the human form will most certainly become the supreme creature, superior to
all 
the others. 
"However, suppose the planetary conditions are entirely different. I conceive
it 
entirely possible for one of the other animals to forge ahead of the man-ape; 
quite possible, Smith," as the engineer started to object, "if only the 
conditions are different ENOUGH. 
"At any rate, we shall soon find out. I have been reading further in the
library 
the Venusians gave us, and I assure you that I've found some astonishing 
things." He fingered one of the diminutive volumes. "There is one planet in 
particular whose name I have forgotten, where all animal life has disappeared 
entirely. There are none but vegetable forms on the land, and all of them are 
the rankest sort of weeds. They have literally choked off everything else! 
"And the highest form of life there is a weed; a hideous monstrosity, shaped 
something like an octopus, and capable of the most horrible—" He stopped 
abruptly, remembering that one of his hearers was a woman. "Never mind about 
that now." 
He indicated another of the little books. "I think we will do well to 
investigate a planet which the Venusians call 'Sanus.' It belongs to the 
tremendous planetary family of the giant star Arcturus. I haven't read any 
details at all; I didn't want to know more than you. We can proceed with our 
discoveries on an equal footing." 
"But," objected Smith, recalling the previous methods, "how are we to put our 
minds in touch with any of theirs, unless we know enough about them to

imagine 
their view-points?" 
"Our knowledge of their planet's name and location," replied the doctor,
"makes 
it easier for us. All we have to do is to go into the telepathic state, via
the 
Venusian formula; then, at the same time, each must concentrate upon some 
definite mental quality, some particular characteristic of his own mind,
which 
he or she wishes to find on Sanus. It makes no difference what it may be; all 
you have to do is, exert your imaginations a little." 
There was a pause, broken by Smith: "We ought to tell each other what we have
in 
mind, so that we don't conflict." 
"Yes. For my part," said the doctor, "I'd like to get in touch with a being
who 
is mildly rebellious; not a violent radical, but a philosophical
revolutionist. 
I don't care what sort of a creature he, she, or it may be, so long as the
mind 
is in revolt against whatever injustice may exist." 
"Then I," stated Smith, "will stick to the idea of service. Nobody was
surprised 
that the engineer should make such a choice; he was, first, last, and all the 
time, essentially a useful man." 
Van Emmon was not ready with his choice. Instead: "You say, doc, that you
know 
nothing further about Sanus than what you've already told us?" 
"I was about to mention that. The Venusians say that conditions are reversed 
from what we found on Capellette. Instead of Sanus being ruled by a small
body 
of autocrats, it is—ruled by the working class!" 
"Under the circumstances," said Van, "I'll take something different from what
I 
got last time. No imperiousness this trip." He smiled grimly. "There was a
time 
when I used to take orders. Suppose you call my choice 'subordinacy.'" 
"How very noble of you!" gibed Billie. "My idea is supremacy, and plenty of
it! 
I want to get in touch with the man higher up—the worker who is boss of the 
whole works!" She flashed a single glance at her husband, then threw herself 
back in her chair. "Go ahead!" 
And before two minutes were up, the power of concerted thought, aided by a 
common objective and the special electrical circuit which joined them, had 
projected the minds of the four across the infinite depths of space. The vast 
distance which separated their bodies from Sanus was annihilated, literally
as 
quick as thought. 
Neither of the four stirred. To all appearances they were fast asleep. The
room 
was quite still; only the clock ticked dully on the wall. Down- stairs, the 
doctor's wife kept watch over the house. 
The greatest marvel in creation, the human mind, was exploring the unknown. 
II. ALMOST HUMAN
Of course, the four still had the ability to communicate with each other
while 
in the trance state; they had developed this power to a fair degree while 
investigating Capellette. However, each was so deeply interested in what he
or 
she was seeing during the first hour of their Sanusian experiences that

neither 
thought to discuss the matter until afterward. 
When the doctor first made connection with the eyes of his agent, he 
instinctively concluded that he, at least, had got in touch with a being more
or 
less like himself. The whole thing was so natural; he was surveying a sunny, 
brush-covered landscape from eyes whose height from the ground, and other 
details, were decidedly those of a human. 
For a moment there was comparative silence. Then his unknown agent swiftly 
raised something—a hand, presumably—to a mouth, and gave out a piercing cry. 
Whereupon the doctor learned something that jarred him a trifle. His agent
was—a 
woman! 
He had time to congratulate himself upon the fact that he was (1) a doctor,
(2) 
a married man, (3) the father of a daughter or two, before his agent repeated 
her cry. Almost immediately it was answered by another exactly like it, from
an 
unseen point not far away. The Sanusian plainly chuckled to herself with 
satisfaction. 
A moment later there came, rather faintly, two more calls, each from a
different 
direction in the dun-colored brush. Still without moving from the spot, the 
doctor's agent replied two or three times, meanwhile watching her
surroundings 
very closely. Within half a minute the first of her friends came in sight. 
It was a young woman. At a distance of about twenty yards she appeared to be 
about five feet tall and sturdily built. She was dressed in a single garment, 
made of the skin of some yellow, short-haired animal. It may have been a lion 
cub. Around her waist was a strip of hide, which served as a belt, and held a 
small, stone-headed tomahawk. One shoulder and both legs were left quite
bare, 
revealing a complexion so deeply tanned that the doctor instantly thought: 
"Spanish!" 
In a way, the girl's face gave the same impression. Large, dark-brown eyes,
full 
lips and a healthy glow beneath her tan, all made it possible for her to pass
as 
a Spaniard. However, there was nothing in the least coquettish about her; she 
had a remarkably independent manner, and a gaze as frank and direct as it was 
pure and untroubled. 
In one hand she carried a branch from some large-leafed shrub. The eyes which 
Kinney was using became fixed upon this branch; and even as the newcomer
cried 
out in joyous response to the other's greeting, her expression changed and
she 
turned and fled, laughing, as the doctor's agent darted toward her. She did
not 
get away, and immediately the two were struggling over the possession of the 
branch. 
In the midst of the tussle another figure made its appearance. 
"Look out! Here comes Dulnop" [Footnote: It made no difference whatever as to 
what language was used. The telepathic process employed enabled the 
investigators to know all that their agents' subconscious minds took in. The 
brains of the four automatically translated these thought-images into their
own 
language. However, this method did not enable them to learn what their agents 
were thinking, but only what they said, heard, and saw.] cried Kinney's
agent; 
at the same time she made a special effort, and succeeded in breaking off a

good 
half of the branch. 
Instantly she darted to one side, where she calmly began to pluck some small, 
hard-shelled nuts from the branch, and proceeded to crack them, with entire 
ease, using a set of teeth which must have been absolutely perfect. 
She gave the latest comer only a glance or two. He—for it certainly was a 
man—was nearly a half a foot taller than the girl already described; but he
was 
plainly not much older or younger, and in build and color much the same. He
was 
clothed neither more nor less than she, the only difference being that some 
leopard-like animal had contributed the material. In his belt was tucked a 
primitive stone hammer, also a stone knife. His face was longer than hers,
his 
eyes darker; but he was manifestly still very boyish. Dulnop, they had called 
him. 
"Hail, Cunora!" he called to the girl who had brought the nuts; then, to her
who 
was watching: "Rolla! Where got ye the nuts?" 
Rolla didn't answer; she couldn't use her mouth just then; it was too full of 
nuts. She merely nodded in the direction of Cunora. 
"Give me some, Cunora!" 
The younger girl gave no reply, but backed away from him as he approached;
her 
eyes sparkled mischievously and the doctor thought, somewhat affectionately. 
Dulnop made a sudden darting move toward her branch, and she as swiftly
whirled 
in her tracks, so that he missed. However, he instantly changed his mind and 
grasped the girl instead. Like a flash he drew her to him and kissed her 
noisily. 
Next second he was staggering backward under the weight of her hard brown
fist. 
"Do that again, and I'll have the hair out of thy head!" the girl screamed,
her 
face flaming. Yet Kinney saw that the man was laughing joyously even as he 
rubbed the spot where her blow had landed, while the expression of her eyes 
quite belied what she had said. 
Not until then did the doctor's agent say anything. When she spoke it was in
a 
deep, contralto voice which gave the impression of riper years than either of 
the other two. Afterward Kinney learned that Rolla was nearly ten years their 
senior, a somewhat more lithe specimen of the same type, clad in the skin of 
what was once a magnificent goat. She carried only a single small knife in
her 
belt. As seen reflected in pools of water, her complexion was slightly paler
and 
her whole expression a little less self-assertive and distinctively 
philosophical. To those who admire serious, thoughtful women of regular
feature 
and different manner, Rolla would have seemed downright beautiful. 
"Dulnop," said she, with a laugh in her voice, "ye will do well to seek the
nut 
tree, first as last." She nonchalantly crushed another shell in her mouth. 
"Neither Cunora nor I can spare good food to a kiss-hungry lout like thee!" 
He only laughed again and made as though to come toward her. She stood ready
to 
dodge, chuckling excitedly, and he evidently gave it up as a bad job. "Tell
me 
whence cameth the nuts, Cunora!" he begged; but the girl pretended to be
cross, 

and shut her mouth as firmly as its contents would allow. 
Next moment there was a shout from the thicket, together with a crashing
sound; 
and shortly the fourth Sanusian appeared. He was by far the larger; but his
size 
was a matter of width rather than of height. An artist would have picked him
as 
a model for Ajax himself. His muscles fairly strained the huge lion's skin in 
which he was clad, and he had twice the weight of Dulnop within the same
height. 
Also, to the doctor's eye, he was nearer Rolla's age. 
His face was strong and handsome in a somewhat fierce, relentless way; his 
complexion darker than the rest. He carried a huge club, such as must have 
weighed all of forty pounds, while his belt was jammed full of stone weapons. 
The doctor classed him and the younger girl together because of their vigor
and 
independence, while Dulnop and Rolla seemed to have dispositions very similar
in 
their comparative gentleness and restraint. 
"Hail, all of ye!" shouted this latest arrival in a booming baritone. He
strode 
forward with scarcely a glance at the two younger people; his gaze was fixed 
upon Rolla, his expression unmistakable. The woman quietly turned upon Dulnop 
and Cunora. 
"Look!" she exclaimed, pointing to a spot back of them. "See the curious
bird!" 
They wheeled instantly, with the unquestioning faith of two children; and
before 
they had brought their gazes back again, the big man had seized Rolla,
crushed 
her to his breast and kissed her passionately. She responded just as warmly, 
pushing him away only in order to avoid being seen by the others. They showed 
only an innocent disappointment at having missed seeing the "curious bird." 
"A simple-minded people, basically good-humored," was the way the doctor
summed 
the matter up when reporting what he had seen. However, it was not so easy to 
analyze certain things that were said during the time the four Sanusians
spent 
in each other's company. For one thing— 
"Did They give thee permission to go?" Rolla was asked by the big man. His
name, 
it seemed, was Corrus. 
"Yes, Corrus. They seemed to think it a good idea for us to take a little 
recreation to-day. I suppose ye left thy herd with thy brother?" 
He nodded; and the doctor was left to wonder whom "They" might be. Were They
a 
small group of humans, whose function was to superintend? Or were They, as
the 
books from Venus seemed to indicate, another type of creature, entirely 
different from the humans, and yet, because of the peculiar Sanusian
conditions, 
superior to the humans? 
"They have decided to move their city a little farther away from the forest," 
Rolla overheard Dulnop telling Cunora; which was the first indication that
the 
planet boasted such a thing as a city. Otherwise, things appeared to be in a 
primitive, rather than a civilized condition. 
These four skin-clad savages seemed to be enjoying an aboriginal picnic. For 
lunch, they munched on various fruits and nuts picked up en route, together
with 

handfuls of some wheat-like cereal which the big man had brought in a
goatskin. 
From time to time they scared out various animals from the brush, chasing the 
creatures after the fashion of dogs and children. Whenever they came to a 
stream, invariably all four splashed through it, shouting and laughing with 
delight. 
However, there were but two of these streams, and both of them quite small. 
Their banks indicated that either the season was very far advanced, or else
that 
the streams were at one time vastly larger. 
"A rather significant fact," the doctor afterward commented. 
Nevertheless, the most impressive thing about all that the doctor learned
that 
day was the strange manner in which the excursion came to an end. The quartet 
was at that moment climbing a small hill, apparently on the edge of an
extensive 
range of mountains. An occasional tree, something like an oak, broke the 
monotony of the brush at this point, and yet it was not until Rolla was quite
at 
the top of the knoll that Kinney could see surrounding country with any
degree 
of clearness. Even then he learned little. 
The hill was placed on one edge of a valley about forty miles in width. A
good 
part of it was covered with dusty vegetation, presumably wild; but the rest
was 
plainly under cultivation. There were large green areas, such as argued grain 
fields; elsewhere were what looked like orchards and vineyards, some of which 
were in full bloom—refuting the notion that the season was a late one.
Nowhere 
was there a spot of land which might be called barren. 
Rolla and her three friends stood taking this in, keeping a rather curious 
silence meanwhile. At length Cunora gave a deep sigh, which was almost
instantly 
reproduced by all the rest. Corrus followed his own sigh with a frank curse. 
"By the great god Mownoth!" he swore fiercely. "It be a shame that we cannot 
come hence a great deal oftener! Methinks They could allow it!" 
"They care not for our longings," spoke Cunora, her eyes flashing as angrily
as 
his. "They give us enough freedom to make us work the better —no more! All
They 
care for is thy herd and my crops!" 
"And for the labor," reminded the big man, "of such brains as Rolla's and 
Dulnop's. It be not right that They should drive us so!" 
"Aye," agreed the younger man, with much less enthusiasm. "However, what can
ye 
do about it, Corrus?" 
The big man's face flushed, and he all but snarled. "I tell ye what I can do!
I, 
and ye as well, if ye but will! I can—" 
He stopped, one hand upraised in mighty emphasis, and a sudden and startling 
change came over him. Downright fear drove the anger from his face; his
massive 
body suddenly relaxed, and all his power and vigor seemed to crumble and
wilt. 
His hands shook; his mouth trembled. At the same time the two women shrank
from 
him, each giving an inarticulate cry of alarm and distress. Dulnop gave no 
sound, but the anger which had left the herdsman seemed to have come to him;
the 

youngster's eyes flared and his breast heaved. His gaze was fixed upon
Corrus's 
neck, where the sweat of fear already glistened. 
Suddenly the big man dropped his head, as though in surrender. He gasped and 
found voice; this time a voice as shaky and docile as it had been strong and 
dominant a moment before. 
"Very well," he spoke abjectly. "Very well. I—shall do as you wish." He
seemed 
to be talking to thin air. "We—will go home at once." 
And instantly all four turned about, and in perfect silence took the back
trail. 
III. WORLD OF MAMMOTHS
Immediately upon going into tele-consciousness Smith became aware of a
decided 
change in his surroundings. The interior of the study had been darkened with 
drawn shades; now he was using eyes that were exposed to the most intense 
sunlight. The first sight that he got, in fact, was directed toward the sky;
and 
he noted with an engineer's keen interest that the color of the sky was blue, 
slightly tinged with orange. This, he knew, meant that the atmosphere of
Sanus 
contained at least one chemical element which is lacking on the earth. 
For a minute or two the sky remained entirely clear. There were no clouds 
whatever; neither did any form of winged life make its appearance. So Smith
took 
note of sounds. 
Presumably his agent—whoever or whatever it might be—was located in some sort
of 
aircraft; for an extremely loud and steady buzzing, suggesting a powerful 
engine, filled the engineer's borrowed ears. Try as he might, however, he
could 
not identify the sound exactly. It was more like an engine than anything
else, 
except that the separate sounds which comprised the buzz occurred infinitely 
close together. Smith concluded that the machine was some highly developed 
rotary affair, working at perhaps six or eight thousand revolutions a 
minute—three or four times as fast as an ordinary engine. 
Meanwhile his agent continued to stare into the sky. Shortly something
arrived 
in the field of vision; a blurred speck, far to one side. It approached 
leisurely, with the unknown agent watching steadfastly. It still remained 
blurred, however; for a long time the engineer knew as little about its
actual 
form as he knew about his mysterious agent. 
Then, like a flash, the vision cleared. All the blurring disappeared
instantly, 
and the form of a buzzard was disclosed. It was almost directly overhead,
about 
a quarter of a mile distant, and soaring in a wide spiral. No sound whatever 
came from it. Smith's agent made no move of any kind, but continued to watch. 
Shortly the buzzard "banked" for a sharper turn; and the engineer saw, by the 
perspective of its apparent speed, that the aircraft whose use he was
enjoying 
was likewise on the move. Apparently it was flying in a straight line,
keeping 
the sun—an object vastly too brilliant to examine—on the right. 
The buzzard went out of sight. Once more the clear sky was all that could be 
seen; that, and the continual roar of the engine, were all that Smith
actually 

knew. He became impatient for his agent to look elsewhere; it might be that
the 
craft contained other specimens of the unknown creatures. But there was no 
change in the vigilant watch which was being kept upon the sky. 
Suddenly the engineer became exceedingly alert. He had noticed something 
new—something so highly different from anything he had expected to learn that
it 
was some minutes before he could believe it true. 
His borrowed eyes had no eyelids! At least, if they did, they were never
used. 
Not once did they flicker in the slightest; not once did they blink or wink, 
much less close themselves for a momentary rest from the sun's glare. They 
remained as stonily staring as the eyes of a marble statue. 
Then something startling happened. With the most sickening suddenness the 
aircraft came to an abrupt halt. Smith's senses swam with the jolt of it. All 
about him was a confused jumble of blurred figures and forms; it was
infinitely 
worse than his first ride in a hoist. In a moment, however, he was able to 
examine things fairly well. 
The aircraft had come to a stop in the middle of what looked like a cane
brake. 
On all sides rose yellowish-green shafts, bearing leaves characteristic of
the 
maize family. Smith knew little about cane, yet felt sure that these
specimens 
were a trifle large. "Possibly due to difference in gravitation," he thought. 
However, he could not tell much about the spot on which the machine had
landed. 
For a moment it was motionless; the engine had been stopped, and all was
silent 
except for the gentle rustling of the cane in the field. The unknown operator 
did not change his position in the slightest. Then the craft began to move
over 
the surface, in a jerky lurching fashion which indicated a very rough piece
of 
ground. At the same time a queer, leathery squeaking came to the engineer's 
borrowed ears; he concluded that the machine was being sorely strained by the 
motion. At the time he was puzzled to account for the motion itself. Either 
there was another occupant of the craft, who had climbed out and was now
pushing 
the thing along the ground, or else some form of silent mechanism was
operating 
the wheels upon which, presumably, the craft was mounted. Shortly the motion 
stopped altogether. 
It was then that Smith noticed something he had so far ignored because he
knew 
his own dinner hour was approaching. His agent was hungry, like himself. He 
noticed it because, just then, he received a very definite impression of the 
opposite feeling; the agent was eating lunch of some sort, and enjoying it. 
There was no doubt about this. All that Smith could do was to wish, for the 
hundredth time, that he could look around a little and see what was being
eaten, 
and how. 
The meal occupied several minutes. Not once did the strange occupant of that 
machine relax his stony stare at the sky, and Smith tried to forget how
hungry 
he was by estimating the extent of his vision. He decided that the angle 
subtended about a hundred and sixty degrees, or almost half a circle; and he 
further concluded that if his agent possessed a nose, it was a pretty
trifling 

affair, too small to be noticed. It was obvious, too, that the fellow's mouth 
was located much lower in the face than normal. He ate without showing a
single 
particle of food, and did it very quietly. 
At length hunger was satisfied. There was complete stillness and silence for
a 
moment, then another short lurching journey through the cane; and next, with
an 
abruptness that made the engineer's senses swim again, the fellow once more
took 
to the air. The speed with which he "got away" was enough to make a 
motorcyclist, doing his best, seem to stand still. 
It took time for Smith to regain his balance. When he did, the same unbroken 
expanse of sky once more met his gaze; but it was not long until, out of the 
corners of those unblinking eyes, he could make out bleary forms which
shortly 
resolved themselves into mountain tops. It was odd, the way things suddenly 
flashed into full view. One second they would be blurred and unrecognizable;
the 
next, sharply outlined and distinct as anything the engineer had ever seen.
Yet, 
there seemed to be no change in the focus of those eyes. It wasn't as though 
they were telescopic, either. Not until long afterward did Smith understand
the 
meaning of this. 
The mountains grew higher and nearer. Before long it seemed as though the 
aircraft was entering some sort of a canon. Its sides were only sparsely
covered 
with vegetation, and all of it was quite brown, as though the season were 
autumn. For the most part the surface was of broken rock and boulders. 
Within a space of three or four minutes the engineer counted not less than
ten 
buzzards. The unknown operator of the machine, however, paid no attention to 
them, but continued his extraordinary watch of the heavens. Smith began to 
wonder if the chap were not seated in an air-tight, sound-proof chamber, deep
in 
the hull of some great aerial cruiser, with his eyes glued fast to a
periscope. 
"Maybe a sky patrol," thought the man of the earth; "a cop on the lookout for 
aerial smugglers, like as not." 
And then came another of those terrifying stops. This time, as soon as he
could 
collect his senses, the engineer saw that the machine had landed
approximately 
in the middle of the canon, and presumably among the boulders in its bottom.
For 
all about it were the tops of gigantic rocks, most of them worn smooth from 
water action. And, as soon as the engine stopped, Smith plainly heard the
roar 
of water right at hand. He could not see it, however. Why in the name of
wonder 
didn't the fellow look down, for a change? 
The craft began to move. This time its motion was smoother arguing an even 
surface. However, it had not gone far before, to the engineer's astonishment,
it 
began to move straight down a slope so steep that no mechanism with which
Smith 
was familiar could possibly have clung to it. As this happened, his adopted
eyes 
told him that the craft was located upon one of those enormous boulders, in

the 
center of a stream of such absolute immensity that he fairly gasped. The
thing 
was—colossal! 
And yet it was true. The unseen machine deliberately moved along until it was 
actually clinging, not to the top, but to the side of the rock. The water 
appeared to be about five yards beneath, to the right. To the left was the
sky, 
while the center of that strange vision was now upon a similar boulder
seemingly 
a quarter of a mile distant, farther out in the stream. But the fellow at the 
periscope didn't change position one whit! 
It was so unreal. Smith deliberately ignored everything else and watched
again 
for indications of eyelids. He saw not one flicker, but noticed a certain
tiny 
come-and-go, the merest sort of vibration, which indicated the agent's 
heart-action. Apparently it beat more than twice as fast as Smith's. 
But it relieved him to know that his agent was at least a genuine living
being. 
For a moment he had fancied something utterly repellent to him. Suppose this 
Sanusian were not any form of natural creature at all, but some sort of 
supermachine, capable of functioning like an organism? The thought made the 
engineer shudder as no morgue could. 
Presently the queer craft approached the water closely enough, and at such an 
angle, that Smith looked eagerly for a reflection. However, the water was 
exceedingly rough, and only a confused brownish blur could be made out. Once
he 
caught a queer sound above the noise of the water; a shrill hiss, with a
harsh 
whine at the end. "Just like some kind of suction apparatus," as he later 
described it. 
And then, with that peculiar sound fresh in his ears, came the crowning shock
of 
the whole experience. Floating toward the boulder, but some distance away,
was 
what looked like a black seed. Next moment the vision flashed clear, as
usual, 
and the engineer saw that the object was really a beetle; and in a second it
was 
so near that Smith's own body, back on the earth, involuntarily shrank back
into 
the recesses of his chair. 
For that beetle was an enormity in the most unlimited sense of the word. It
was 
infinitely larger than any beetle the engineer had ever seen— infinitely! It
was 
as large as a good-sized horse! 
But before Smith could get over his amazement there was a rush and a swirl in 
the water behind the insect. Spray was dashed over the rock, a huge form
showed 
itself indistinctly beneath the waves, and next instant the borrowed eyes
were 
showing the engineer, so clearly as to be undeniable, the most astounding
sight 
he had ever seen. 
A fish of mountainous size leaped from the water, snapped the beetle into its 
mouth, and disappeared from sight. In a flash it had come and gone, leaving
the 
engineer fairly gasping and likewise wondering how he could possibly expect 

anybody to believe him if he told the bald truth of what he had seen. 
For he simply could not have invented anything half as incredible. The fish 
simply could not be described with ordinary language. IT WAS AS LARGE AS THE 
LARGEST LOCOMOTIVE. 
IV. THE GOLD-MINER
As for Van Emmon, his experience will have to be classed with Smith's. That
is 
to say, he soon came to feel that his agent was not what is commonly called 
human. It was all too different. However, he found himself enjoying a field
of 
view which was a decided improvement upon Smith's. Instead of a range which 
began and ended just above the horizon, his agent possessed the power of
looking 
almost straight ahead. 
This told the geologist that his unsuspecting Sanusian was located in an 
aircraft much like the other. The same tremendous noise of the engine, the
same 
inexplicable wing action, together with the same total lack of the usual 
indications of human occupancy, all argued that the two men had hit upon the 
same type of agent. In Van Emmon's case, however, he could occasionally
glimpse 
two loose parts of the machine, flapping and swaying oddly from time to time 
within the range of the observer, and at the front. Nothing was done about
it. 
Van Emmon came to the same conclusion as Smith; the operator was looking into 
something like a periscope. Perhaps he himself did not do the driving. 
From what the geologist could see of the country below, it was quite
certainly 
cultivated. In no other way could the even rows and uniform growth be
explained; 
even though Van Emmon could not say whether the vegetation were tree, shrub,
or 
plant, it was certainly the work of man —or something mightily like man. 
Shortly he experienced an abrupt downward dive, such as upset his senses 
somewhat. When he recovered, he had time for only the swiftest glance at
what, 
he thought rather vaguely, was a great green-clad mountain. Then his agent 
brought the craft to one of those nerve-racking stops; once more came a
swimming 
of the brain, and then the geologist saw something that challenged his 
understanding. 
The craft had landed on the rim of a deep pit, or what would have been called
a 
pit if it had not been so extraordinary. Mainly the strangeness was a matter
of 
color; the slope was of a brilliant orange, and seemingly covered with frost, 
for it sparkled so brightly in the sun as to actually hurt the eyes. In fact, 
the geologist's first thought was "A glacier," although he could not conceive
of 
ice or snow of that tint. 
Running down the sides of the pit were a number of dark-brown streaks, about
a 
yard wide; Van Emmon could make them out, more or less clearly, on the other 
side of the pit as well. From the irregular way in which the walls were
formed, 
he quickly decided that the pit was a natural one. The streaks, he thought, 
might have been due to lava flow. 
His agent proceeded to drive straight over the rim and down the slope into
the 
pit. His engine was quite stopped; like Smith, the geologist wondered just

how 
the craft's wheels were operated. Next he was holding his breath as the
machine 
reached so steep a point in the slope that, most surely, no brakes could hold 
it. Simultaneously he heard the hiss and whine which seemed to indicate the 
suction device. 
"It was a whole lot like going down into a placer mine," the geologist
afterward 
said; and in view of what next met his eyes, he was justified in his guess. 
Down crept the machine until it was "standing on its nose." The sun was
shining 
almost straight down into the slope, and Van Emmon forgot his uneasiness
about 
the craft in his interest in what he saw. 
The bottom of the pit was perhaps twenty feet in diameter, and roughly 
hemispherical. Standing up from its bottom were half a dozen slim formations, 
like idealized stalagmites; they were made of some semitransparent rock, 
apparently, the tint being a reddish yellow. Finally, perched on the top of
each 
of these was a stone; and surrounding these six "landmarks," as Van Emmon
called 
them, was the most prodigious display of wealth imaginable. 
For the whole queer place was simply sprinkled with gold. Gold—gold
everywhere; 
large nuggets of it, as big as one's fist! Not embedded in rock, not
scattered 
through sand, but lying LOOSE upon the surface of that unbelievable orange
snow! 
It was overwhelming. 
The mysterious Sanusian lost no time. Operating some unseen machinery, he
caused 
three shovel-like devices to project from the front of his machine; and these 
instantly proceeded, so swiftly that Van Emmon could not possibly watch their 
action, to pick up nuggets and stow them away out of sight in what must have 
been compartments in the hull. All this was done without any sound beyond the 
occasional thud of a nugget dropped in the scramble. 
Suddenly the Sanusian wheeled his machine about and started hurriedly up the 
slope. Van Emmon judged that the chap had been frightened by something, for
he 
took flight as soon as he reached the top of the pit. And—he left half a
million 
in gold behind him! 
This new flight had not lasted two minutes before the geologist began to note 
other objects in the air. There were birds, so distant that he could not 
identify them; one came near enough, however, for him to conclude that it was
a 
hawk. But he did not hold to this conclusion very long. 
The thing that changed his mind was another aircraft. It approached from
behind, 
making even more noise than the other, and proceeded to draw abreast of it.
From 
time to time Van Emmon's agent turned his mysterious periscope so as to take
it 
all in, and the geologist was able to watch his fill. Whereupon he became 
converted to a new idea: 
The birds that Smith and he had seen had not been birds at all, but aircraft 
built in imitation of them. 
For this new arrival had been made in almost perfect imitation of a bee! It
was 
very close to an exact reproduction. For one exception, it did not have the 

hairy appearance so characteristic of bees; the body and "legs" were smooth,
and 
shiny. (Later, Van Emmon saw machines which went so far as even to imitate
the 
hairs.) Also, instead of trying to duplicate the two compound eyes which are 
found, one on each side of a bee's head, a perfectly round representation of
a 
single eye was built, like a conning tower, toward the front of the bow. 
Presumably, the observer sat or stood within this "head." 
But otherwise it was wonderfully like a drone bee. Van Emmon was strongly 
reminded of what he had once viewed under a powerful lens. The fragile 
semitransparent wings, the misshapen legs, and even the jointed body with its 
scale-like segments, all were carefully duplicated on a large scale. Imagine
a 
bee thirty feet long! 
At first the geologist was puzzled to find that it carried a pair of 
many-jointed antennae. He could not see how any intelligent being would make
use 
of them; they were continually waving about, much as bees wave theirs.
Evidently 
these were the loose objects he had already noted. "Now," he wondered, "why
in 
thunder did the builders go to so much trouble for the sake of mere realism?" 
Then he saw that the antennae served a very real purpose. There was no doubt 
about it; they were wireless antennae! 
For presently the newcomer, who so far had not shown himself at any point on
his 
machine, sent out a message which was read as quickly as it was received by
Van 
Emmon's agent, and as unconsciously translated: 
"Number Eight Hundred Four, you are wanted on Plot Seventeen." 
Whereupon Van Emmon's unknown assistant replied at once: 
"Very well, Superior." 
It was done by means of an extremely faint humming device, reminding the 
geologist of certain wireless apparata he had heard. Not a word was actually 
spoken by either Sanusian. 
Van Emmon kept a close watch upon the conning tower on the other machine. The 
sun was shining upon it in such a fashion that its gleam made inspection very 
difficult. Once he fancied that he could make out a short, compact figure
within 
the "eye"; but he could not be sure. The glass, or whatever it was, reflected 
everything within range. 
Was the airman a quadruped? Did he sit or stand upright, like a man? Or did
he 
use all four limbs, animal-fashion? Van Emmon had to admit that he could not 
tell; no wonder he didn't guess the truth. 
Shortly after receiving the summons, the geologist's agent changed his
direction 
slightly; and within ten minutes the machine was passing over a large grain 
field. On the far edge was a row of trees, and it was toward this that the 
Sanusian proceeded to volplane, presently coming to another nausea-producing 
stop. Once more Van Emmon was temporarily helpless. 
When he could look again, he saw that the machine had landed upon a steep
slope, 
this time with its nose pointing upward. Far above was what looked like a
cave, 
with a growth of some queer, black grass on its upper rim. The craft
commenced 
to move upward, over a smooth, dark tan surface. 
In half a minute the machine had reached the top of the slope, and the

geologist 
looked eagerly for what might lie within the cave. He was disappointed; it
was 
not a cave at all. Instead, another brown slope, or rather a bulging
precipice, 
occupied this depression. 
Van Emmon looked closer. At the bottom of this bulge was a queer fringe of
the 
same kind of grass that showed on top of it. Van Emmon looked from one to the 
other, and all of a sudden the thing dawned upon him. 
This stupendous affair was no mountainside; it was neither more nor less than 
the head of a colossal statue! A mammoth edition of the Goddess of Liberty;
and 
the aircraft had presumed to alight upon its cheek! 
The machine clung there, motionless, for some time, quite as though the
airman 
knew that Van Emmon would like to look a long while. He gazed from side to
side 
as far as he could see, making out a small section of the nose, also the huge 
curves of a dust-covered ear. It was wonderfully life-like. 
Next second came the earthquake. The whole statue rocked and swayed; Van
Emmon 
looked to see the machine thrown off. From the base of the monument came a 
single terrific sound, a veritable roar, as though the thing was being
wrenched 
from the heart of the earth. From somewhere on top came a spurt of water that 
splashed just beside the craft. 
Then came the most terrible thing. Without the slightest warning the statue's 
great eye opened! Opened wide, revealing a prodigious pupil which simply
blazed 
with wrath! 
The statue was alive! 
Next second the Sanusian shot into the air. A moment and Van Emmon was able
to 
look again, and as it happened, the craft was now circling the amazing thing
it 
had just quit, so that the geologist could truthfully say that he was dead
sure 
of what he saw. 
He was justified in wanting to be absolutely sure. Resting on the solid earth 
was a human head, about fifty yards wide and proportionately as tall. It was 
alive; but IT WAS ONLY THE HEAD, NOTHING MORE. 
V. THE SUPER-RACE
It will be remembered that Billie wanted to get in touch with a creature
having 
the characteristic which she had said she admired: supremacy—"A worker who is 
the boss!" Bearing this in mind, her experience will explain itself,
dumfounding 
though it was. 
Her first sight of the Sanusian world was from the front of a large building. 
The former architect was not able to inspect it minutely; but she afterwards 
said that it impressed her as being entirely plain, and almost a perfect
cube. 
Its walls were white and quite without ornament; there was only one entrance,
an 
extremely low and broad, flat archway, extending across one whole side. The 
structure was about a hundred yards each way. In front was a terrace,
seemingly 
paved with enormous slabs of stone; it covered a good many acres. 
Presumably Billie's agent had just brought her machine from the building,

for, 
within a few seconds, she took flight in the same abrupt fashion which had so 
badly upset Smith and Van Emmon. When Billie was able to look closely, she
found 
herself gazing down upon a Sanusian city. 
It was a tremendous affair. As the flying-machine mounted higher, Billie 
continually revised her guesses; finally she concluded that London itself was 
not as large. Nevertheless her astonishment was mainly directed at the 
character, not the number of the buildings. 
They were all alike! Every one was a duplicate of that she had first seen: 
cube-shaped, plain finished, flat of wall and roof. Even in color they were 
alike; in time the four came to call the place the "White City." However, the 
buildings were arranged quite without any visible system. And they were
vastly 
puzzled, later on in their studies, to find every other Sanusian city
precisely 
the same as this one. 
However, there was one thing which distinguished each building from the rest.
It 
was located on the roof; a large black hieroglyphic, set in a square black 
border, which Billie first thought to be all alike. Whether it meant a name or
a 
number, there was no way to tell.[Footnote: Since writing the above, further 
investigations have proved that these Sanusian house-labels are all numbers.] 
Billie turned her attention to her agent. She seemed to belong to the same
type 
as Smith's and Van Emmon's; otherwise she was certainly much more active,
much 
more interested in her surroundings, and possessed of a far more powerful 
machine. She was continually changing her direction; and Billie soon 
congratulated herself upon her luck. Beyond a doubt, this party was no mere 
slave to orders; it was she who gave the orders. 
Before one minute had passed she was approached by a Sanusian in a big,
clumsy 
looking machine. Although built on the bee plan, it possessed an observation 
tower right on top of its "head." (The four afterward established that this
was 
the sort of a machine that Smith's agent had operated.) The occupant
approached 
to within a respectful distance from Billie's borrowed eyes, and proceeded to 
hum the following through his antennae: 
"Supreme, I have been ordered to report for Number Four." 
"Proceed." 
"The case of insubordinancy which occurred in Section Eighty-five has been 
disposed of." 
"Number Four made an example of her?" 
"Yes, Supreme." 
"Whereupon the operator flew away, having not only kept his body totally out
of 
sight all the while, but having failed by the slightest token to indicate, by 
his manner of communicating that he had the slightest particle of personal 
interest in his report. For that matter, neither did Supreme." 
Scarcely had this colloquy ended than another subordinate approached. This
one 
used a large and very fine machine. She reported: 
"If Supreme will come with me to the spot, it will be easier to decide upon
this 
case." 
Immediately the two set off without another word; and after perhaps four
minutes 

of the speediest travel Billie had known outside the doctor's sky-car, they 
descended to within a somewhat short distance from the ground. Here they 
hovered, and Billie saw that they were stopped above some bills at the foot of
a 
low mountain range. 
Next moment she made out the figures of four humans on top of a knoll just 
below. A little nearer, and the architect was looking, from the air, down
upon 
the same scene which the doctor was then witnessing through the eyes of
Rolla, 
the older of the two Sanusian women. Billie could make out the powerful
physique 
of Corrus, the slighter figure of Dulnop, the small but vigorous form of
Cunora, 
and Rolla's slender, graceful, capable body. But at that moment the other
flier 
began to say to Supreme: 
"The big man is a tender of cattle, Supreme; and he owes his peculiar
aptitude 
to the fact that his parents, for twenty generations back, were engaged in 
similar work. The same may be said for the younger of the two women; she is 
small, but we owe much of the excellence of our crops to her energy and
skill. 
"As for the other woman," indicating Rolla, "she is a soil-tester, and very 
expert. Her studies and experiments have greatly improved our product. The
same 
may be said in lesser degree of the youth, who is engaged in similar work." 
"Then," coolly commented the Sanusian whose eyes and ears Billie enjoyed;
"then 
your line of action is clear enough. You will see to it that the big man
marries 
the sturdy young girl, of course; their offspring should give us a generation
of 
rare outdoor ability. Similarly the young man and the older woman, despite
their 
difference in ages, shall marry for the sake of improving the breed of 
soil-testers." 
"Quite so, Supreme. There is one slight difficulty, however, such as caused
me 
to summon you." 
"Name the difficulty." 
The Sanusian hesitated only a trifle with her reply: "It is, Supreme, that
the 
big man and the older woman have seen fit to fall in love with one another, 
while the same is true of the youth and the girl." 
"This should not have been allowed!" 
"I admit it, Supreme; my force has somehow overlooked their case, heretofore. 
What is your will?" 
The commandant answered instantly: "Put an immediate end to their desires!" 
"It shall be done!" 
At that moment there was a stir on the ground. In fact, this was the instant 
when Corrus began his vehement outcry against the tyranny of "They." The two
in 
the air came closer; whereupon Billie discovered that Supreme did not
understand 
the language of the humans below. [Footnote: The humans did not realize this 
fact, however; they assumed that "They" always understood.] Yet the
herdsman's 
tones were unmistakably angry. 
"You will descend," commented Supreme evenly, "and warn the big man not to 

repeat such outbreaks." 
Immediately Supreme's lieutenant darted down, and was lost to view. The 
commandant glanced interestedly here and there about the landscape, returning 
her gaze to Corrus just as the man stopped in mid-speech. Billie was no less 
astonished than the doctor to see the herdsman's expression change as it did; 
one second it was that of righteous indignation, the next, of the most abject 
subservience. 
Nevertheless, Billie could see no cause whatever for it; neither did she hear 
anything. The other flier remained out of sight. All that the architect could 
guess was that the operator had "got the drop" on Corrus in some manner which 
was clear only to those involved. Badly puzzled, Billie watched the four
humans 
hurry away, their manner all but slinking. 
A moment later still another aircraft came up, and its operator reported. As 
before, Billie could make out not a single detail of the occupant herself.
She, 
too, wanted the commandant's personal attention; and shortly Billie was
looking 
down upon a scene which she had good reason to remember all the rest of her 
life. 
In the middle of a large field, where some light green plant was just
beginning 
to sprout, a group of about a dozen humans was at work cultivating. Billie
had 
time to note that they were doing the work in the most primitive fashion, 
employing the rudest of tools, all quite in keeping with their bare heads and 
limbs and their skin-clad bodies. About half were women. 
Slightly at one side, however, stood a man who was not so busy. To put it 
plainly, he was loafing, with the handle of his improvised mattock supporting 
his weight. Clearly the two up in the air were concerned only with him. 
"He has been warned three times, Supreme," said the one who had reported the 
case. 
"Three? Then make an example of him!" 
"It shall be done, Supreme!" 
The lieutenant disappeared. Again the commandant glanced at this, that, and
the 
other thing before concentrating upon what happened below. Then Billie saw
the 
man straighten up suddenly in his tracks, and with remarkable speed,
considering 
his former laziness, he whirled about, dodged, and clapped a hand upon his 
thigh. 
Next second he raised an exultant cry. Billie could not understand what he
said; 
but she noted that the others in the group echoed the man's exultation, and 
started to crowd toward him, shouting and gesticulating in savage delight.
Then 
something else happened so sudden and so dreadful that the woman who was 
watching from the earth was turned almost sick. 
Like a flash Supreme dropped, headlong, toward the group of humans. In two 
seconds the distance was covered, and in the last fifth of a second Billie
saw 
the key to the whole mystery. 
In that last instant the man who before had seemed of ordinary size, was 
magnified to the dimensions of a colossus. Instead of being under six feet,
he 
appeared to be near a hundred yards in height; but Billie scarcely realized
this 
till later, it all happened so quickly. There was an outcry from the group,
and 

then the commandant's aircraft crashed into the man's HAND; a hand so huge
that 
the very wrinkles in its skin were like so many gulleys; even in that final 
flash Billie saw all this. 
Simultaneously with the landing there was a loud pop, while Billie's senses 
reeled with the stunning suddenness of the impact. Next second the machine
had 
darted to a safe distance, and Billie could see the man gnawing frantically
at 
the back of his hand. Too late; his hand went stiff, and his arm twitched 
spasmodically. The fellow made a step or two forward, then swayed where he 
stood, his whole body rigid and strained. An expression of the utmost terror
was 
upon his face; he could not utter a sound, although his companions shrieked
in 
horror. Another second and the man fell flat, twitching convulsively; and in
a 
moment or two it was all over. He was dead! 
And then the truth burst upon the watcher. In fact, it seemed to come to all 
four at the same time, probably by reason of their mental connections.
Neither 
of them could claim that he or she had previously guessed a tenth of its
whole, 
ghastly nature. 
The "cane" which Smith had seen had not been cane at all; it had been grass.
The 
"beetle" in the stream had not been the giant thing he had visualized it; 
neither had that fish been the size he had thought. 
Van Emmon's "gold mine" had not been a pit in any sense of the word; it had
been 
the inside of the blossom of a very simple, poppy-like flower. The "nuggets"
had 
been not mineral, but pollen. As for the incredible thing which Van Emmon had 
seen on the ground; that living statue; that head without a body—the body had 
been buried out of sight beneath the soil; and the man had been an ordinary 
human, being punished in this manner for misconduct. 
Instead of being aircraft built in imitation of insects, the machines had
been 
constructed by nature herself, and there had been nothing unusual in their
size. 
No; they were the real thing, differing only slightly from what might have
been 
found anywhere upon the earth. 
In short, it had all been simply a matter of view-point. The supreme creature
of 
Sanus was, not the human, but the bee. A poisonous bee, superior to every
other 
form of Sanusian life! What was more— 
"The damned things are not only supreme; THE HUMANS ARE THEIR SLAVES!" 
VI. IMPOSSIBLE, BUT—
The four looked at each other blankly. Not that either was at a loss for
words; 
each was ready to burst. But the thing was so utterly beyond their wildest 
conceptions, so tremendously different in every way, it left them all a
little 
unwilling to commit themselves. 
"Well," said Smith finally, "as I said in the first place, I can't see how
any 
other than the human form became supreme. As I understand biology—" 
"What gets me," interrupted Van Emmon; "what gets me is, WHY the humans have 

allowed such an infernal thing to happen!" 
Billie smiled somewhat sardonically. "I thought," she remarked, cuttingly,
"that 
you were always in sympathy with the upper dog, Mr. Van Emmon!" 
"I am!" hotly. Then, with the memory of what he had just seen rushing back
upon 
him: "I mean, I was until I saw—saw that—" He stopped, flushing deeply; and 
before he could collect himself Smith had broken in again: 
"I just happened to remember, doc; didn't you say that the Venusians, in
those 
books of yours, say that Sanus is ruled by the workers?" 
"Just what I was wondering about," from Van Emmon. "The humans seem to do all 
the work, and the bees the bossing!" 
The doctor expected this. "The Venusians had our view-point—the view- point
of 
people on the earth, when they said that the workers rule. We consider the
bee 
as a great worker, don't we? 'As busy as a bee' you know. None of the
so-called 
lower animals show greater industry." 
"You don't mean to say," demanded Smith, "that these Sanusian bees owe their 
position to the fact that they are, or were, such great workers?" 
Before the doctor could reply, Van Emmon broke in. It seemed as though his
mind 
refused to get past this particular point. "Now, why the dickens have the
humans 
allowed the bees to dominate them? Why?" 
"We'll have to go at this a little more systematically," remarked Kinney, "if
we 
want to understand the situation. 
"In the first place, suppose we note a thing or two about conditions as we
find 
them here on the earth. We, the humans, are accustomed to rank ourselves far 
above the rest. It is taken for granted. 
"Now, note this: the human supremacy was not always taken for granted." He 
paused to let it sink in. "Not always. There was a time in prehistoric days
when 
man ranked no higher than others. I feel sure of this," he insisted, seeing
that 
Smith was opposed to the idea; "and I think I know just what occurred to make 
man supreme." 
"What?" from Billie. 
"Never mind now. I rather imagine we shall learn more on this score as we go
on 
with our work. 
"At any rate, we may be sure of this: whatever it was that caused man to
become 
supreme on the earth, that condition is lacking on Sanus!" 
Van Emmon did not agree to this. "The condition may be there, doc, but there
is 
some other factor which overbalances it; a factor such as is— well, more 
favorable to the bees." 
The doctor looked around the circle. "What do you think? 'A factor more 
favorable to the bees.' Shall we let it go at that?" There was no remark,
even 
from Smith; and the doctor went on: 
"Coming back to the bees, then, we note that they are remarkable for several 
points of great value. First, as we have seen, they are very industrious by 
nature. Second, all bees possess wings and on that count alone they are far 
superior to humans. 

"Third—and to me, the most important—the bees possess a remarkable
combination 
of community life and specialization. Of course, when you come to analyze
these 
two points, you see that they really belong to one another. The bees we know, 
for instance, are either queens, whose only function is to fertilize the
eggs; 
or workers, who are unsexed females, and whose sole occupations are the 
collecting of honey, the building of hives, and the care of the young. 
"Now," speaking carefully, "apparently these Sanusian bees have developed 
something that is not unknown to certain forms of earth's insect life. I mean,
a 
soldier type. A kind of bee which specializes on fighting!" 
Van Emmon was listening closely, yet he had got another idea: "Perhaps this 
soldier type is simply the plain worker bee, all gone to sting! It may be
that 
these bees have given up labor altogether!" 
"Still," muttered Smith, under his breath, "all this doesn't solve the real 
problem. Why aren't the HUMANS supreme?" For once he became emphatic. "That's 
what gets me! Why aren't the humans the rulers, doc?" 
Kinney waited until he felt sure the others were depending upon him. "Smith,
the 
humans on Sanus are not supreme now because they were NEVER supreme." 
Smith looked blank. "I don't get that." 
"Don't you? Look here: you'll admit that success begets success, won't you?" 
"Success begets success? Sure! 'Nothing succeeds like success.'" 
"Well, isn't that merely another way of saying that the consciousness of 
superiority will lead to further conquests? We humans are thoroughly
conscious 
of our supremacy; if we weren't we'd never attempt the things we do!" 
Van Emmon saw the point. "In other words, the humans on the earth never BEGAN
to 
show their superiority until something—something big, happened to demonstrate 
their ability!" 
"Exactly!" cried Kinney. "Our prehistoric ancestors would never have handed
down 
such a tremendous ambition to you and me if they, at that time, had not been 
able to point to some definite feat and say, 'That proves I'm a bigger man
than 
a horse,' for example." 
"Of course," reflected Billie, aloud; "of course, there were other factors." 
"Yes; but they don't alter the case. Originally the human was only slightly 
different from the apes he associated with. There was perhaps only one slight 
point of superiority; today there are millions of such points. Man is
infinitely 
superior, now, and it's all because he was slightly superior, then." 
"Suppose we grant that," remarked the geologist. "What then? Does that
explain 
why the bees have made good on Sanus?" 
"To a large degree. Some time in the past the Sanusian bee discovered that he 
possessed a certain power which enabled him to force his will upon other 
creatures. This power was his poisonous sting. He found that, when he got his 
fellows together and formed a swarm, they could attack any animal in such
large 
numbers as to make it helpless." 
"Any creature?" 
"Yes; even reptiles, scales or no scales. They'd attack the eyes." 
"But that doesn't explain how the bees ever began to make humans work for
them," 
objected Van Emmon. 

The doctor thought for a few minutes. "Let's see. Suppose we assume that a 
certain human once happened to be in the neighborhood of a hive, just when it 
was attacked by a drove of ants. Ants are great lovers of honey, you know. 
Suppose the man stepped among the ants and was bitten. Naturally he would 
trample them to death, and smash with his hands all that he couldn't trample. 
Now, what's to prevent the bees from seeing how easily the man had dealt with 
the ants? A man would be far more efficient, destroying ants, than a bee;
just 
as a horse is more efficient, dragging a load, than a man. And yet we know
that 
the horse was domesticated, here on the earth, simply because the humans saw
his 
possibilities; the horse could do a certain thing more efficiently than a
human. 
"You notice," the doctor went on, with great care, "that everything I've
assumed 
is natural enough: the combination of an ant attack and the man's approach, 
occurring at the same time. Suppose we add a third factor: that the bees,
even 
while fighting the ants, also started to attack the man; but that he chanced
to 
turn his attention to the ants FIRST. So that the bees let him alone! 
"We know what remarkable things bees are, when it comes to telling one
another 
what they know. Is there any reason why such an experience—all natural 
enough—shouldn't demonstrate to them that they, by merely threatening a man, 
could compel him to kill ants for them?" 
Billie was dubious for a moment; then agreed that the man, also, might notice 
that the bees failed to sting him as long as he continued to destroy their
other 
enemies. If so, it was quite conceivable that, bit by bit, the bees had found 
other and more positive ways of securing the aid of men through threatening
to 
sting. "Even to cultivating flowers for their benefit," she conceded. "It's 
quite possible." 
Smith had been thinking of something else. "I always understood that a bee's 
stinging apparatus is good for only one attack. Doesn't it always remain
behind 
after stinging?" 
"Yes," from the doctor, quietly. "That is true. The sting has tiny barbs on
its 
tip, and these cause it to remain in the wound. The sting is actually torn
away 
from the bee when it flies away. It never grows another. That is why, in
fact, 
the bee never stings except as a last resort, when it thinks it's a question
of 
self-defense." 
"Just what I thought!" chuckled Smith. "A bee is helpless without its sting!
If 
so, how can you account for anything like a soldier bee?" 
The doctor returned his gaze with perfect equanimity. He looked at Van Emmon
and 
Billie; they, too, seemed to think that the engineer had found a real flaw in 
Kinney's reasoning. The doctor dropped his eyes, and searched his mind 
thoroughly for the best words. He removed his bracelets while he was
thinking; 
the others did the same. All four got to their feet and stretched, silently
but 

thoroughly. Not until they were ready to quit the study did the doctor make 
reply. 
"Smith, I don't need to remind you that it's the little things that count.
It's 
too old a saying. In this case it happens to be the greatest truth we have
found 
today. 
"Smith"—speaking with the utmost care—"what we have just said about the bee's 
sting is all true; but only with regard to the bees on the earth. It is only
on 
the earth, so far as we know positively, that the bee is averse to stinging,
for 
fear of losing his sting. 
"There is only one way to account for the soldier bee. Its sting has no
barbs!" 
"No barbs?" 
"Why no? If the poison is virulent enough, the barbs wouldn't be necessary, 
would they? Friends, the Sanusian bee is the supreme creature on its planet;
it 
is superior to all the other insects, all the birds, all the animals; and its 
supremacy is due solely and entirely to the fact that there are no barbs on
its 
sting!" 
VII. THE MISSING FACTOR
By the time the four once more got together in the doctor's study, each had
had 
a chance to consider the Sanusian situation pretty thoroughly. All but Billie 
were convinced that the humans were deserving people, whose position was all
the 
more regrettable because due, so far as could be seen, the insignificant
little 
detail of the barbless sting. 
Were these people doomed forever to live their lives for the sake of insects? 
Were they always to remain, primitive and uncultured, in ignorance of, the 
things that civilization is built upon, obeying the orders of creatures who
were 
content to eat, reproduce, and die? For that is all that bees know! 
Perhaps it was for the best. Possibly Rolla and her friends were better off
as 
they were. It might have been that a wise Providence, seeing how woefully the 
human animal had missed its privileges on other worlds, had decided to make
man 
secondary on Sanus. Was that the reason for it all? 
All but Billie scouted the idea. To them the affair was a ghastly perversion
of 
what Nature intended. Van Emmon stated the case in a manner which showed how 
strongly he felt about it. 
"Those folks will never get anywhere if the bees can help it!" he charged. 
"We've got to lend a hand, here, and see that they get a chance!" 
Smith said that, so far as he was concerned, the bees might all be consigned
to 
hell. "I'm not going to have anything to do with the agent I had, any more!"
he 
declared. "I'm going to get in touch with that chap, Dulnop. What is he like, 
doc?" 
Kinney told him, and then Van Emmon asked for details of the herdsman,
Corrus. 
"No more bees in my young life, either. From now on it's up to us. What do
you 
think?" turning to his wife, and carefully avoiding any use of her name. 

The architect knew well enough that the rest were wondering how she would 
decide. She answered with deliberation: 
"I'm going to stay in touch with Supreme!" 
"You are!" incredulously, from her husband. 
"Yes! I've got a darned sight more sympathy for those bees than for the
humans! 
The 'fraid-cats!" disgustedly. 
"But listen," protested Van Emmon. "We can't stand by and let those
cold-blooded 
prisoners keep human beings, like ourselves, in rank slavery! Not much!" 
Evidently he thought he needed to explain. "A human is a human, no matter
where 
we find him! Why, how can those poor devils show what they're good for if we 
don't give 'em a chance? That's the only way to develop people—give 'em a
chance 
to show what's in 'em! Let the best man win!" 
Billie only closed her mouth tighter; and Smith decided to say, "Billie, you 
don't need to stand by your guns just because the Sanusian working class
happens 
to be insects. Besides, we're three to one in favor of the humans!" 
"Oh, well," she condescended, "if you put it that way I'll agree not to 
interfere. Only, don't expect me to help you any with your schemes; I'll just 
keep an eye on Supreme, that's all." 
"Then we're agreed." The doctor put on his bracelets. "Suppose we go into the 
trance state for about three minutes—long enough to learn what's going on 
to-day." 
Shortly Billie again using the eyes and ears of the extraordinarily capable
bee 
who ruled the rest, once more looked down upon Sanus. She saw the big "city," 
which she now knew to be a vast collection of hives, built by the humans at
the 
command of the bees. At the moment the air was thick with workers, returning 
with their loads of honey from the fields which the humans had been compelled
to 
cultivate. What a diabolical reversal of the accepted order of things! 
The architect had time to note something very typical of the case. On the 
outskirts of the city two humans were at work, erecting a new hive. Having
put 
it together, they proceeded to lift the big box and place it near those
already 
inhabited. They set it down in what looked like a good location, but almost 
immediately took it up again and shifted it a foot to one side. This was not 
satisfactory, either; they moved it a few inches in another direction. 
All told, it took a full minute to place that simple affair where it was
wanted; 
and all the while those two humans behaved as though some one were shouting 
directions to them—silent directions, as it were. Billie knew that a
half-dozen 
soldier bees, surrounding their two heads, were coolly and unfeelingly
driving 
them where they willed. And when, the work done, they left the spot, two 
soldiers went along behind them to see that they did not loiter. 
As for the doctor, he came upon Rolla when the woman was deep in an
experiment. 
She stood in front of a rude trough, one of perhaps twenty located within a 
large, high-walled inclosure. In the trough was a quantity of earth, through
the 
surface of which some tiny green shoots were beginning to show. 
Rolla inspected the shoots, and then, with her stone knife, she made a final 
notch in the wood on the edge of the trough. There were twenty-odd of these 

notches; whereas, on other troughs which the doctor had a chance to see,
there 
were over thirty in many cases, and still no shoots. 
The place, then, was an experimental station. This was proven by Rolla's next 
move. She went outside the yard and studied five heaps of soil, each of a 
different appearance, also three smaller piles of pulverized
mineral-nitrates, 
for all that the doctor knew. And before Kinney severed his connection with
the 
Sanusian, she had begun the task of mixing up a fresh combination of these 
ingredients in a new trough. In the midst of this she heard a sound; and
turning 
about, waved a hand excitedly toward a distant figure on the far side of a 
near-by field. 
Meanwhile Smith had managed to get in touch with Dulnop. He found the young
man 
engaged in work which did not, at first, become clear to the engineer. Then
he 
saw that the chap was simply sorting over big piles of broken rock, selecting 
certain fragments which he placed in separate heaps. Not far away two
assistants 
were pounding these fragments to powder, using rude pestles, in great, 
nature-made mortars—"pot-holes," from some river-bed. 
It was this powder, beyond a doubt, that Rolla was using in her work. To
Smith, 
Dunlop's task seemed like a ridiculously simple occupation for a nearly grown 
man, until he reflected that these aborigines were exactly like toddling 
children in intellects. 
Van Emmon had no trouble in making connections with Corrus. The herdsman was
in 
charge of a dozen cows, wild looking creatures which would have been far too 
much for the man had they been horned, which they were not. He handled them
by 
sheer force, using the great club he always carried. Once while Van Emmon was 
watching, a cow tried to break away from the group; but Corrus, with an
agility 
amazing in so short and heavy a man, dashed after the creature and tapped her 
lightly on the top of her head. Dazed and contrite, she followed him meekly
back 
into the herd. 
The place was on the edge of a meadow, at the beginning of what looked like a 
grain field. Stopping here, Corrus threw a hand to his mouth and gave a
ringing 
shout. Immediately it was answered, faintly, by another at a distance; and
then 
Van Emmon made out the form of Rolla among some huts on the other side of the 
grain. She beckoned toward the herdsman, and he took a half-dozen steps
toward 
her. 
Just as abruptly he stopped, almost in mid-stride. Simultaneously Van Emmon 
heard a loud buzzing in either ear. Coitus was being warned. Like a flash he 
dropped his head and muttered: "Very well. I will remember— next time." And 
trembling violently he turned back to his cows. 
"Well," remarked the geologist, when the four "came out" of their seance,
"the 
bees seem to have everything their own way. How can we help the humans best? 
Hurry up with your idea; I'm getting sick of these damned poisoners." 
The doctor asked if the others had any suggestions. Smith offered this: why 
couldn't the humans retire to some cave, or build tight-walled huts, and thus 
bar out the bees? 

No sooner had he made the remark, however, than the engineer declared his own 
plan no good. "These people aren't like us; they couldn't stand such 
imprisonment long enough to make their 'strike' worth while." 
"Is there any reason," suggested Billie, indifferently, "why they couldn't
weave 
face nets from some kind of grass, and protect themselves in that way?" 
Smith saw the objection to that, too. "They'd have to protect themselves all 
over as well; every inch would have to be covered tightly. From what I've
seen 
of them I'd say that the arrangement would drive them frantic. It would be
worse 
than putting clothes on a cat." 
"It's a man-sized job we've tackled," commented the doctor. "What Smith says
is 
true; such people would never stand for any measures which would restrict
their 
physical freedom. They are simply animals with human possibilities, nothing 
more." 
He paused, and then added quietly, "By the way, did either of you notice any 
mountains just now?" 
Smith and Van Emmon both said they had. "Why?" 
"Of course, it isn't likely, but—did you see anything like a volcano
anywhere?" 
"No," both replied. 
"Another thing," Kinney went on. "So far, I've seen nothing that would
indicate 
lightning, much less the thing itself. Did either of you," explicitly, "run 
across such a thing as a blasted tree?" 
They said they had not. Billie hesitated a little with her reply, then stated 
that she had noted a tree or two in a state of disintegration, but none that 
showed the unmistakable scars due to being struck by lightning. 
"Then we've got the key to the mystery!" declared the doctor. "Remember how 
brown and barren everything looks, excepting only where there's artificial 
vegetation? Well, putting two and two together, I come to the conclusion that 
Sanus differs radically from the earth in this respect. 
"The humans have arrived rather late in the planet's history. Or—and this is 
more likely—Sanus is somewhat smaller than the earth, and therefore has
cooled 
off sooner. At any rate, the relationship between the age of the planet and
the 
age of its human occupancy differs from what it is on the earth." 
"I don't quite see," from Smith, "what that's got to do with it." 
"No? Well, go back to the first point: the dried-up appearance of things.
That 
means, their air and water are both less extensive than with us, and for that 
reason there are far fewer clouds; therefore, it is quite possible that there 
has been no lightning within the memory of the humans." 
"How so?" demanded the geologist. 
"Why, simply because lightning depends upon clouds. Lightning is merely the 
etheric electricity, drawn to the earth whenever there is enough water in the 
air to promote conductivity." 
"Yes," agreed Smith; "but—what of it?" 
Kinney went on unheeding. "As for volcanoes—probably the same explanation 
accounts for the lack of these also. You know how the earth, even, is rapidly 
coming to the end of her 'volcanic period.' Time was when there were
volcanoes 
almost everywhere on the earth. 
"The same is likely true of Sanus as well. The point is," and the doctor
paused 
significantly, "there have been no volcanic eruptions, and no lightning 

discharges within the memory of Sanusian man!" 
What was he getting at? The others eyed him closely. Neither Van Emmon nor
Smith 
could guess what he meant; but Billie, her intuition wide awake, gave a great 
jump in her chair. 
"I know!" she cried. A flood of light came to her face. "The Sanusians— no 
wonder they let the bees put it over on them! 
"They haven't got FIRE! They've never had it!" 
VIII. FIRE!
From the corner of his eyes Kinney saw Van Emmon turn a gaze of frank
admiration 
at his wife. It lasted only a second, however; the geologist remembered, and 
masked the expression before Billie could detect it. 
Smith had been electrified by the idea. 
"By George!" he exclaimed two or three times. "Why didn't I think of that?
It's 
simple as A, B, C now!" 
"Why," Van Emmon exulted, "all we've got to do is put the idea of fire into 
their heads, and the job is done!" He jumped around in his chair. "Darn those 
bees, anyhow!" 
"And yet," observed the doctor, "it's not quite as simple as we may think. Of 
course it's true that once they have fire, the humans ought to assert 
themselves. We'll let that stand without argument." 
"Will we?" Smith didn't propose to back down that easy. "Do you mean to say
that 
fire, and nothing more than fire, can bring about human ascendency?" 
The doctor felt sure. "All the other animals are afraid of fire. Such
exceptions 
as the moth are really not exceptions at all; the moth is simply driven so
mad 
by the sight of flame that it commits suicide in it. Horses sometimes do the 
same. 
"Humans are the ONLY creatures that do not fear fire! Even a tiny baby will
show 
no fear at the sight of it." 
"Which ought to prove," Van Emmon cut in to silence Smith, "that superiority
is 
due to fire, rather than fire due to superiority, for the simple reason that
a 
newborn child is very low in the scale of evolution." Smith decided not to
say 
what he intended to say. Van Emmon concluded: 
"We've just got to give 'em fire! What's the first step?" 
"I propose," from the doctor, "that when we get in touch this time we 
concentrate on the idea of fire. We've got to give them the notion first." 
"Would you rather," inquired Billie, "that I kept the idea from Supreme?" 
"Thanks," returned her husband, icily, "but you might just as well tell her, 
too. It'll make her afraid in advance, all the better!" 
The engineer threw himself back in his seat. "I'm with you," said he, laying 
aside his argument. The rest followed his example, and presently were looking 
upon Sanus again. 
All told, this particular session covered a good many hours. The four kept up
a 
more or less connected mental conversation with each other as they went
along, 
except, of course, when the events became too exciting. Mainly they were
trying 
to catch their agents in the proper mood for receiving telepathic 
communications, and it proved no easy matter. It required a state of 
semi-consciousness, a condition of being neither awake nor asleep. It was 

necessary to wait until night had fallen on that particular part of the
planet. 
[Footnote: It should be mentioned that the parts of Sanus showed the same 
condition of bee supremacy and human servitude. The spot in question was
quite 
typical of the colonies.] 
Van Emmon was the first to get results. Corrus had driven his herd back from
the 
brook at which they had got their evening drink, and after seeing them all 
quietly settled for the night, he lay down on the dried grass slope of a
small 
hill, and stared up at the sky. Van Emmon had plenty of time to study the
stars 
as seen from Sanus, and certainly the case demanded plenty of time. 
For he saw a broad band of sky, as broad as the widest part of the Milky Way, 
which was neither black nor sparkling with stars, but glowing as brightly as
the 
full moon! From the eastern horizon to the zenith it stretched, a great
"Silvery 
Way," as Van Emmon labeled it; and as the darkness deepened and the night 
lengthened, the illumination crept on until the band of light stretched all
the 
way across. Van Emmon racked his brains to account for the thing. 
Then Corrus became drowsy. Van Emmon concentrated with all his might. At
first 
he overdid the thing; Corrus was not quite drowsy enough, and the attempt
only 
made him wakeful. Shortly, however, he became exceedingly sleepy, and the 
geologist's chance came. 
At the end of a few minutes the herdsman sat up, blinking. He looked around
at 
the dark forms of the cattle, then up at the stars; he was plainly both
puzzled 
and excited. He remained awake for hours, in fact, thinking over the strange 
thing he had seen "in a dream." 
Meanwhile Smith was having a similar experience with Dulnop. The young fellow 
was, like Corrus, alone at the time; and he, too, was made very excited and 
restless by what he saw. 
Billie was unable to work upon her bee. Supreme retired to a hive just before 
dusk, but remained wide awake and more or less active, feeding voraciously,
for 
hours upon hours. When she finally did nap, she fell asleep on such short
notice 
that the architect was taken off her guard. The bee seemed to all but jump
into 
slumberland. 
The doctor also had to wait for Rolla. The woman sat for a long time in the 
growing dusk, looming out pensively over the valley. Corrus was somewhere
within 
a mile or two, and so Kinney was not surprised to see the herdsman's image 
dancing, tantalizingly, before Rolla's eyes. She was thinking of him with all 
her might. 
Presently she shivered with the growing coolness, and went into a rough hut, 
which she shared with Cunora. The girl was already asleep on a heap of
freshly 
gathered brush. Rolla, delightfully free of any need to prepare for her
night's 
rest—such as locking any doors or cleaning her teeth—made herself comfortable 
beside her friend. Two or three yawns, and the doctor's chance came. 
Two minutes later Rolla sat bolt upright, at the same time giving out a sharp 

cry of amazement and alarm. Instantly Cunora awoke. 
"What is it, Rolla?" terror-stricken. 
"Hush!" The older woman got up and went to the opening which served as a
door. 
There she hung a couple of skins, arranging them carefully so that no bee
might 
enter. Coming back to Cunora, she brought her voice nearly to a whisper: 
"Cunora, I have had a wonderful dream! Ye must believe me when I say that it 
were more than a mere dream; 'twere a message from the great god, Mownoth, or
I 
be mad!" 
"Rolla!" The girl was more anxious than frightened now. "Ye speak wildly!
Quiet 
thyself, and tell what thou didst see!" 
"It were not easy to describe," said Rolla, getting herself under control. "I 
dreamed that a man, very pale of face and most curiously clad, did approach
me 
while I was at work. He smiled and spake kindly, in a language I could not 
understand; but I know he meant full well. 
"This be the curious thing, Cunora: He picked up a handful of leaves from the 
ground and laid them on the trough at my side. Then, from some place in his 
garments he produced a tiny stick of white wood, with a tip made of some 
dark-red material. This he held before mine eyes, in the dream; and then
spake 
very reassuringly, as though bidding me not to be afraid. 
"Well he might! Cunora, he took that tiny stick in his hand and moved the tip 
along the surface of the trough; and, behold, a miracle!" 
"What happened?" breathlessly. 
"In the twinkling of an eye, the stick blossomed! Blossomed, Cunora, before
mine 
eyes! And such a blossom no eye ever beheld before. Its color was the color
of 
the poppy, but its shape—most amazing! Its shape continually changed, Cunora;
it 
danced about, and rose and fell; it flowed, even as water floweth in a
stream, 
but always upward!" 
"Rolla!" incredulously. "Ye would not awaken me to tell such nonsense!" 
"But it were not nonsense!" insisted Rolla. "This blossom was even as I say:
a 
living thing, as live as a kitten! And as it bloomed, behold, the stick was 
consumed! In a moment or two the man dropped what was left of it; I
stooped—so 
it seemed—to pick it up; but he stopped me, and set his foot upon the
beautiful 
thing!" 
She sighed, and then hurried on. "Saying something further, also reassuring, 
this angel brought forth another of the strange sticks; and when he had made 
this one bloom, he touched it to the little pile of leaves. Behold, a greater 
miracle, Cunora! The blossoms spread to the leaves, and caused them to bloom, 
too!" 
Cunora was eyeing her companion pretty sharply. "Ye must take me for a simple 
one, to believe such imagining." 
Rolla became even more earnest. "Yet it were more than imagining, Cunora;
'twere 
too vivid and impressive for only that. As for the leaves, the blossoming 
swiftly spread until it covered every bit of the pile; and I tell thee that
the 
bloom flowed as high as thy hand! Moreover, after a moment or so, the thing 
faded and died out, just as flowers do at the end of the season; all that was 

left of the leaves was some black fragments, from which arose a bluish dust, 
like unto the cloud that ye and I saw in the sky one day. 
"Then the stranger smiled again, and said something of which I cannot tell
the 
meaning. Once more he performed the miracle, and this time he contrived to 
spread the blossom from some leaves to the tip of a large piece of wood which
he 
took from the ground. 'Twas a wonderful sight! 
"Nay, hear me further," as Cunora threw herself, with a grunt of impatience, 
back on her bed; "there is a greater wonder to tell. 
"Holding this big blooming stick in one hand, he gave me his other; and it 
seemed as though I floated through the air by his side. Presently we came to
the 
place where Corrus's herd lay sleeping. The angel smote one of the cows with
the 
flat of his hand, so that it got upon its feet; and straightway the stranger 
thrust the flowing blossom into its face. 
"The cow shrank back, Cunora! 'Twas deadly afraid of that beautiful flower!" 
"That is odd," admitted Cunora. She was getting interested. 
"Then he took me by the hand again, and we floated once more through the air.
In 
a short time we arrived at the city of the masters. [Footnote: Having no 
microscopes, the Sanusians could not know that the soldier bees were unsexed 
females; hence, "masters."] Before I knew it, he had me standing before the
door 
of one of their palaces. I hung back, afraid lest we be discovered and
punished; 
but he smiled again and spake so reassuringly that I fled not, but watched
until 
the end. 
"With his finger he tapped lightly on the front of the palace. None of the 
masters heard him at first; so he tapped harder. Presently one of them
appeared, 
and flew at once before our faces. Had it not been for the stranger's firm
grasp 
I should have fled. 
"The master saw that the stranger was the offender, and buzzed angrily.
Another 
moment, and the master would surely have returned to the palace to inform the 
others; and then the stranger would have been punished with the Head Out 
punishment. But instead the angel very deliberately moved the blooming stick 
near unto the master; and behold, it was helpless! Down it fell to the
ground, 
dazed; I could have picked it up, or killed it, without the slightest danger! 
"Another master came out, and another, and another; and for each and all the 
flowing blossom was too much! None would come near it wittingly; and such as
the 
angel approached with it were stricken almost to death. 
"When they were all made helpless the angel bade me hold my hand near the
bloom; 
and I was vastly surprised to feel a great warmth. 'Twas like the heat of a 
stone which has stood all day in the sun, only much greater. Once my finger 
touched the bloom, and it gave me a sharp pain." 
Cunora was studying her friend very closely. "Ye could not have devised this 
tale, Rolla. 'Tis too unlikely. Is there more of it?" 
"A little. The angel once more took me by the hand, and shortly set me down 
again in this hut. Then he said something which seemed to mean, 'With this
magic 
bloom thou shalt be freed from the masters. They fear it; but ye, and all
like 

ye, do not. Be ye ready to find the blossom when I bid thee.' With that he 
disappeared, and I awoke. 
"Tell me; do I look mad, to thine eyes?" Rolla was beginning to feel a little 
anxious herself. 
Cunora got up and led Rolla to the entrance. The glow of "the Silvery Way"
was 
all the help that the girl's catlike eyesight needed; she seemed reassured. 
"Ye look very strange and excited, Rolla, but not mad. Tell me again what
thou 
didst see and hear, that I may compare it with what ye have already told." 
Rolla began again; and meanwhile, on the earth, the doctor's companions 
telepathically congratulated him on his success. He had put the great idea
into 
a fertile mind. 
Presently they began to look for other minds. It seemed wise to get the
notion 
into as many Sanusian heads as possible. For some hours this search
proceeded; 
but in the end, after getting in touch with some forty or fifty individuals
in 
as many different parts of the planet, they concluded that they had first hit 
upon the most advanced specimens that Sanus afforded; the only ones, in fact, 
whose intellect were strong enough to appreciate the value of what they were 
told. The investigators were obliged to work with Rolla, Dulnop, and Corrus 
only; upon these three depended the success of their unprecedented scheme. 
Rolla continued to keep watch upon Supreme; and toward morning—that is,
morning 
in that particular part of Sanus—the architect was rewarded by catching the
bee 
in a still drowsy condition. Using the same method Kinney had chosen, Billie 
succeeded in giving the soldier bee a very vivid idea of fire. And judging by 
the very human way in which the half- asleep insect tossed about, thrashing
her 
wings and legs and making incoherent sounds, Billie succeeded admirably. The 
other bees in the hive came crowding around, and Supreme had some difficulty
in 
maintaining her dignity and authority. In the end she confided in the 
subordinate next in command: 
"I have had a terrible dream. One of our slaves, or a woman much like one, 
assaulted me with a new and fearful weapon." She described it more or less as 
Rolla had told Cunora. "It was a deadly thing; but how I know this, I cannot 
say, except that it was exceedingly hot. So long as the woman held it in her 
hand, I dared not go near her. 
"See to it that the others know; and if such a thing actually comes into 
existence, let me know immediately." 
"Very well, Supreme." And the soldier straightway took the tale to another
bee. 
This told, both proceeded to spread the news, bee-fashion; so that the entire 
hive knew of the terror within a few minutes. Inside an hour every hive in
the 
whole "city" had been informed. 
"Give them time now," said the doctor, "and they will tell every bee on the 
planet. Suppose we want a couple of weeks before doing anything further? The 
more afraid the bees are in advance, the easier for Rolla and her friends." 
Meanwhile Corrus, after a sleepless night with his cattle had driven them 
hurriedly back to the huts surrounding the "experimental station." Here the 
herdsman turned his herd over to another man, and then strode over among the 
huts. Outside one of them—probably Rolla's—he paused and gazed longingly,
then 

gave a deep sigh and went on. Shortly he reached another hut in which he
found 
Dulnop. 
"I was just going to seek ye!" exclaimed the younger man. "I have seen a 
wondrous sight, Corrus!" 
Thus the two men came to compare notes, finding that each had learned 
practically the same thing. Corrus being denied the right to visit any woman 
save Cunora, Dulnop hurried to Rolla and told her what he and the herdsman
had 
learned. The three testimonies made an unshakable case. 
"By the great god Mownoth!" swore Corrus in vast delight when Dulnop had 
reported. "We have learned a way to make ourselves free! As free as the 
squirrels!" 
"Aye," agreed the younger. "We know the method. But—how shall we secure the 
means?" 
Corrus gave an impatient gesture. "'Twill come in time, Dulnop, just as the 
dream came! Meanwhile we must tell every one of our kind, so that all shall
be 
ready when the day comes to strike! 
"Then"—his voice lost its savagery, and became soft and tender—"then, Dulnop, 
lad, ye shall have thy Cunora; and as for Rolla and I—" 
Corrus turned and walked away, that his friend might not see what was in his 
eyes. 
IX. FOUND!
It was two weeks to a day when the four on the earth, after having seen very 
little of each other in the meanwhile, got together for the purpose of
finishing 
their "revelation" to the Sanusians. 
"Mr. Van Emmon and I," stated Billie coolly, as they put on their bracelets, 
"have been trying to decide upon the best way of telling them how to obtain 
fire." 
Neither Smith nor the doctor showed that he noticed her "Mr. Van Emmon." 
Evidently the two were still unreconciled. 
"I argue," remarked the geologist, "that the simplest method will be a
chemical 
one. There's lots of ways to produce fire spontaneously, with chemicals; and 
this woman Rolla could do it easily." 
Billie indulged in a small, superior smile. "He forgets that all these
chemical 
methods require PURE chemicals. And you don't find them pure in the natural 
state. You've got to have fire to reduce them with." 
"What's your proposition, then?" from the doctor. 
"Optics!" enthusiastically. She produced a large magnifying-glass from her 
pocket. "All we have to do is to show Dulnop—he's something of a 
mineralogist—how to grind and polish a piece of crystal into this shape!" 
Van Emmon groaned. "Marvelous! Say, if you knew how infernally hard it is to 
find even a small piece of crystal, you'd never propose such a thing! Why, it 
would take years—Mrs. Van Emmon!" 
Smith also shook his head. "Neither of you has the right idea. The easiest
way, 
under the circumstances, would be an electrical one." 
He paused, frowning hard; then vetoed his own plan. "Thunder; I'm always 
speaking first and thinking afterward. I never used to do it," accusingly, 
"until I got in with you folks. Anyhow, electricity won't do; you've got to
have 
practically pure elements for that, too." 
"Guess it's up to you, doc," said Billie. And they all looked respectfully 
toward their host. 
He laughed. "You three will never learn anything. You'll continue to think
that 

I'm a regular wonder about these things, but you never notice that I merely
stay 
still and let you commit yourselves first before I say anything. All I have
to 
do is select the one idea remaining after you've disproved the rest. Nothing
to 
it!" 
He paused. "I'm afraid we're reduced to the spark method. It would take too
long 
to procure materials pure enough for any other plan. Friction is out of the 
question for such people; they haven't the patience. Suppose we go ahead on
the 
flint-and-spark basis." 
They went at once into the familiar trance state. Nightfall was approaching
on 
the part of Sanus in which they were interested. Smith and Van Emmon came
upon 
Dulnop and Corrus as they were talking together. The herdsman was saying: 
"Lad, my heart is heavy this night." Much of his usual vigor was absent. "When
I 
were passing Cunora's field this day, some of the masters came and drove me
over 
to her side. I tried to get away, and one threatened to kill. I fear me, lad, 
they intend to force us to marry!" 
"What!" fiercely, from the younger. 
Corrus laid a hand upon his arm. "Nay, Dulnop; fear not. I have no feeling
for 
thy Cunora; I may marry her, but as for fathering her children—no!" 
"Suppose," through set teeth, "suppose They should threaten to kill thee?" 
"I should rather die, Dulnop, than be untrue to Rolla!" 
The younger man bounded to his feet. "Spoken like a man! And I tell thee, 
neither shall I have aught to do with Rolla! Rather death than dishonor!" 
Next moment silence fell between them; and then Van Emmon and Smith noted
that 
both men had been bluffing in what they had said. For, sitting apart in the 
growing darkness, each was plainly in terror of the morrow. Presently Corrus 
spoke in a low tone: 
"All the same, Dulnop, it were well for me and thee if the secret of the
flowing 
blossom were given us this night. I"—he paused, abashed—"I am not so sure of 
myself, Dulnop, when I hear Their accursed buzzing. I fear—I am afraid I
might 
give in!" 
At this Dulnop broke down, and fell to sobbing. Nothing could have told the 
investigators so well just how childlike the Sanusians really were. Corrus
had 
all he could do to hold in himself. 
"Mownoth!" he exclaimed, his eyes raised fervently. "If it be thy will to 
deliver us, give us the secret this night!" 
Meanwhile, in Rolla's hut, a similar scene was going on under the doctor's 
projected eye. Cunora lost her nerve, and Rolls came near to doing the same
in 
her efforts to comfort the other. 
"They are heartless things!" Rolla exclaimed with such bitterness as her
nature 
would permit. "They know not what love is: They with their drones and their 
egg-babes! What is family life to Them? Nothing! 
"Somehow I feel that Their reign is nearly at an end, Cunora. Perhaps the
great 
secret shall be given us to-night!" 

The girl dried her tears. "Why say ye that, Rolla?" 
"Because the time be ripe for it. Are not all our kind looking forward to it? 
Are we not all expecting and longing for it? Know we not that we shall, must, 
have what we all so earnestly desire?" It was striking, to hear this bit of 
modern psychology uttered by this primitive woman. "Let me hear no more of
thy 
weeping! Ye shall not be made to wed Corrus!" 
Nevertheless, at the speaking of her lover's name, the older woman's lips 
trembled despite themselves; and she said nothing further beyond a brief
"Sleep 
well." After which the two women turned in, and shortly reached the drowsy 
point. 
Thus it happened that Rolla, after a minute or two, once more aroused Cunora
in 
great excitement, and after securely closing the entrance to the hut against
all 
comers, proceeded to relate what she had seen. She finished: 
"The seed of the flower can be grown in the heart of rotting wood!" And for 
hours afterward the two whispered excitedly in the darkness. It was hard to
have 
to wait till dawn. 
As for Corrus and Dulnop, they even went so far as to search the heaps of
stone 
in the mineral yards, although neither really expected to find what they
sought. 
But the four on the earth, not being able to do anything further until
morning, 
proceeded to make themselves at home in the doctor's house. Smith and the
doctor 
slept together, likewise Billie and Mrs. Kinney; Van Emmon occupied the 
guest-room in lonely grandeur. When he came down to breakfast he said he had 
dreamed that he was Corrus, and that he had burned himself on a blazing cow. 
Again in the trance state, the four found that Rolla and Cunora, after
reaching 
an understanding with Corrus and Dulnop, had already left their huts in
search 
of the required stone. Five bees accompanied them. Within a few minutes
however, 
Corrus and Dulnop set out together in the opposite direction, as agreed upon; 
and shortly the guards were withdrawn. This meant that the holiday was 
officially sanctioned, so long as the two couples kept apart; but if they
were 
to join forces afterward, and be caught in the act, they would be severely 
punished. Such was bee efficiency—and sentiment. 
The doctor had impressed Rolla with the fact that she would find the desired 
stone in a mountainous country. Cunora, however, was for examining every rock 
she came to; Rolla was continually passing judgment upon some specimen. 
"Nay," said she, for the hundredth time. "'Tis a very bright stone we seek,
very 
small and very shiny, like sunlight on the water. I shall know it when I see
it, 
and I shall see it not until we reach the mountains." 
Soon Cunora's impatience wore off, and the two concentrated upon making time.
By 
midday they were well into the hills, following the course of a very dry
creek; 
and now they kept a sharp lookout at every step. 
Van Emmon and Smith had similarly impressed Corrus and Dulnop with the result 
that there was no loss of time in the beginning. The two men reached the

hills 
on their side of the valley an hour before the women reached theirs. 
And thus the search began, the strangest search, beyond a doubt, within the 
history of the universe. It was not like the work of some of earth's
prehistoric 
men, who already knew fire and were merely looking up fresh materials; it was
a 
quest in which an idea, an idea given in a vision, was the sole driving
force. 
The most curious part of the matter was that these people were mentally 
incapable of conceiving that there was intelligence at work upon them from 
another world, or even that there was another world. 
"Ye saw the stars last night?" Corrus spoke to Dulnop. "Well, 'tis just such 
stars as shall awaken the seed of the flower. Ye shall see!" 
Both knew exactly what to look for: the brassy, regularly cut crystals with
the 
black stripings, such as has led countless men to go through untold hardships
in 
the belief that they had found gold. In fact, iron pyrites is often called
"fool 
gold," so deceptive is its glitter. 
Yet, it was just the thing for the purpose. Flint they already had, large 
quantities of it; practically all their tools, such as axes and knives, were 
made of it. Struck against iron pyrites, a larger, fatter, hotter spark could
be 
obtained than with any other natural combination. 
It was Dulnop's luck to see the outcropping. He found the mineral exposed to 
plain view, a few feet above the bottom of the ravine the two were ascending. 
With a shout of triumph he leaped upon the rock. 
"Here, Corrus!" he yelled, dancing like mad. "Here is the gift of the gods!" 
The older man didn't attempt to hide his delight. He grabbed his companion
and 
hugged him until his ribs began to crack. Then, with a single blow from his
huge 
club, the herdsman knocked the specimen clear of the slate in which it was
set. 
Such was their excitement, neither dreamed of marking the place in any way. 
First satisfying themselves that the pyrites really could produce "stars"
from 
the flint, the two hurried down-stream, in search of the right kind of wood.
In 
half an hour Corrus came across a dead, worm- eaten tree, from which he 
nonchalantly broke off a limb as big as his leg. The interior was filled with
a 
dry, stringy rot, just the right thing for making a spark "live." 
Then came a real difficulty. It will be better appreciated when the men's 
childish nature is borne in mind. Their patience was terribly strained in
their 
attempts to make the sparks fly into the tinder. Again and again one of them 
would throw the rocks angrily to the ground, fairly snarling with
exasperation. 
However, the other would immediately take them up and try again. Neither man
had 
a tenth the deftness that is common to adults on the earth. In size and
strength 
alone they were men; otherwise—it cannot too often be repeated—they were mere 
children. All told, it was over two hours before the punk began to smolder. 
"By Mownoth!" swore the herdsman, staring reverently at the smoke. "We have
done 
a miracle, Dulnop—ye and I! Be ye sure this is no dream?" 

Quite in human fashion, Dulnop seriously reached out and pinched the
herdsman's 
tremendous arm. Corrus winced, but was too well pleased with the result to
take 
revenge, although the nature of these men was such as to call for it. 
"It be no dream!" he declared, still awestruck. 
"Nay," agreed Dulnop. "And now—to make the flower grow!" 
It was Corrus's lungs which really did the work. His prodigious chest was
better 
than a small pair of bellows, and he blew just as he had been told in the 
vision. Presently a small flame appeared in the tinder, and leaped eagerly 
upward. Both men jumped back, and for lack of enough air the flame went out. 
"Never mind!" exclaimed Dulnop at Corrus's crestfallen look. "I remember that
we 
must be ready with leaves, and the like, as soon as the blossom appears.
Blow, 
ye great windmaker, and I shall feed the flower!" 
And thus it came about that two men of Sanus, for the first time in the
history 
of the planet, looked upon fire itself. And when they had got it to burning 
well, each of them stared at his hands, and from his hands to the little heap
of 
"flowers"; from hands to fire they looked, again and again; and then gazed at 
one another in awe. 
X. AT HALF COCK
Rolla and Cunora searched for hours. They followed one creek almost to its
very 
beginning, and then crossed a ridge on the left and came down another stream. 
Again and again Cunora found bits of mineral such as would have deceived any
one 
who had been less accurately impressed than Rolla. As it afterward turned
out, 
the very accuracy of this impression was a great error, strange though that
may 
seem. 
Finally Rolla glanced up at the sun and sighed. "We will have to give it up
for 
this day," she told Cunora. "There be just time enough to return before
night." 
Neither said anything about the half-rations upon which they would be fed in 
punishment for running away. 
So the two started back, making their way in gloomy silence through the woods 
and fields of the valley. Cunora was greatly disappointed, and soon began to 
show it as any child would, by maintaining a sullenness which she broke only 
when some trifling obstacle, such as a branch, got in her way. Then she would 
tear the branch from the tree and fling it as far as she could, meanwhile 
screaming with anger. Rolla showed more control. 
It was nearing nightfall when they came within sight of the huts. At a
distance 
of perhaps half a mile they stopped and stared hard at the scene ahead of
them. 
"Hear ye anything, Cunora?" asked the older woman. 
The girl's keen ears had caught a sound. "Methinks something hath aroused our 
people. I wonder—" 
"Cunora!" gasped Rolla excitedly. "Think ye that Corrus and Dulnop have 
succeeded in growing the flower?" 
They ran nearer. In a moment it was clear that something most certainly was 
arousing the people. The village was in an uproar. 
"Stay!" cautioned Rolla, catching her friend's arm. "Let us use cunning!
Mayhap 

there be danger!" 
They were quite alone in the fields, which were always deserted at that hour. 
Crouching behind a row of bushes, they quickly drew near to the village, all 
without being seen. Otherwise, this tale would never be told. 
For Corrus and Dulnop, after having satisfied themselves that the wondrous 
flowering flower would live as long as they continued to feed it, had 
immediately decided to carry it home. To do so they first tried building the 
fire on a large piece of bark. Of course it burned through, and there had
been 
more delay. Finally Corrus located a piece of slate, so large that a small
fire 
could be kept up without danger of spilling. 
The two men had hurried straight for the village. Not once did either of them 
dream what a magnificent spectacle they made; the two skin-clad aborigines, 
bearing the thing which was to change them from slaves into free beings, with 
all the wonders of civilization to come in its train. Behind them as they 
marched, if they but knew it, stalked the principles of the steam engine, of
the 
printing-press, of scientific agriculture and mechanical industry in general. 
Look about the room in which you sit as you read this; even to the door-knobs 
every single item depends upon fire, directly or indirectly. But Corrus and 
Dulnop were as ignorant of this as their teeth were devoid of fillings. 
Not until then did it occur to the four watchers on the earth that there was 
anything premature about the affair. It was Smith who first observed: 
"Say, Van, I never thought to impress Dulnop with any plan for using the
fire. 
How about you and Corrus?" 
"By George!" seriously, from the geologist. And immediately the two set to
work 
trying to reach their agents' minds. 
They failed! Dulnop and Corrus were both too excited, far too wide awake, to 
feel even the united efforts of all four on the earth. And the two Sanusians 
marched straight into the village without the remotest idea of how they
should 
act. 
"It is a flower!" he shrieked, frantic with joy. "The flower has come!" the 
shout was passed along. "Corrus and Dulnop have found the flowering blossom!" 
Within a single minute the two men were surrounded by the whole human
population 
of the place. For the most part the natives were too awe- struck to come very 
near; they were content to stand off and stare at the marvel, or fall upon
their 
knees and worship it. It was now so dark that the flames fairly illumined
their 
faces. 
Shortly one or two got up courage enough to imitate Dulnop as he "fed the 
flower;" and presently there were several little fires burning merrily upon
the 
ground. As for the aborigines, they let themselves loose; never before did
they 
shout and dance as they shouted and danced that night. It was this Rolla and 
Cunora heard. 
Before five minutes had passed, however, a scout awakened Supreme. Billie
could 
see that the bee was angry at having been disturbed, but swiftly collected 
herself as she realized the significance of the scout's report. 
"So they have found the terror," she reflected aloud. "Very well. Arouse all 
except the egg-layers and the drones. We can make use of the food- gatherers
as 
well as the fighters." 

The hive was soon awake. Billie was sure that every last bee was greatly
afraid; 
their agitation was almost pitiful. But such was their organization and their 
automatic obedience to orders, there was infinitely less confusion than might
be 
supposed. Another five minutes had not passed before not only that hive, but
all 
within the "city" were emptied; and millions upon millions of desperate bees 
were under way toward the village. 
Rolla and Cunora knew of it first. They heard the buzzing of that winged
cloud 
as it passed through the air above their heads; but such was the bees' intent 
interest in the village ahead, the two women were not spied as they hid among 
the bushes. 
By this time twilight was half gone. The firelight lit up the crowd of humans
as 
they surged and danced about their new deity. For, henceforth, fire would 
replace Mownoth as their chief god; it was easy to see that. 
Moreover, both Corrus and Dulnop, as primitive people will, had been 
irresistibly seized by the spirit of the mob. They threw their burden down
and 
joined in the frenzy of the dance. Louder and louder they shouted; faster and 
faster they capered. Already one or two of their fellow villagers had
dropped, 
exhausted, to the ground. Never had they had so good an excuse for dancing 
themselves to death! 
And into this scene came the bees. Not one of them dared go within ten yards
of 
the flames; for a while, all they did was to watch the humans. Such was the 
racket no one noticed the sound of the wings. 
"Shall we attack those on the edge of the crowd?" one of Supreme's
lieutenants 
wanted to know. The commandant considered this with all the force of what
mental 
experience she had had. 
"No," she decided. "We shall wait a little longer. Just now, they are too 
jubilant to be frightened; we would have to kill them all, and that would not
be 
good policy." 
Of course, the bee had the pollen crop, nothing more, in mind when she made
her 
decision; yet it was further justified. There was no let-up in the rejoicing;
if 
anything, it became more frantic than before. Darkness fell upon a crowd
which 
was reeling in self-induced mental intoxication. 
Rolla and Cunora came a little nearer; and still remaining hidden, saw that
more 
than half their friends had succumbed. One by one the remainder dropped out; 
their forms lay all about what was left of the fire. The two women could
easily 
see what their friends were blind to: the bees were simply biding their time. 
"Ought we not to rush in and warn them?" whispered Cunora to Rolla. "Surely
the 
flower hath driven them mad!" 
"Hush!" warned the older woman. "Be quiet! Everything depends upon our
silence!" 
It was true. Only two of the villagers remained upon their feet, and shortly
one 

of these staggered and fell in his tracks. The one who was left was Corrus 
himself, his immense vitality keeping him going. Then he, too, after a final 
whoop of triumph and defiance, absolutely unconscious of the poison-laden
horde 
that surrounded him, fell senseless to the earth. Another minute, and the
whole 
crowd was still. 
AND THE FIRE HAD GONE OUT. 
The bees came closer. Several thousands of them were stricken by smoke from
the 
embers, and the rest of the swarm took good care to avoid it. They hovered
over 
the prostrate forms of the aborigines and made sure that they were
unconscious. 
"Is there nothing we can do?" whispered Cunora, straining her eyes to see. 
"Nothing, save to watch and wait," returned Rolla, her gaze fixed upon the
dark 
heap which marked her lover's form. And thus an hour passed, with the four on 
the earth quite unable to take a hand in any way. 
Then one of the villagers—the first, in fact, who had dropped out of the 
dance—stirred and presently awakened. He sat up and looked about him, dazed
and 
dizzy, for all the world like a drunken man. After a while he managed to get
to 
his feet. 
No sooner had he done this than a dozen bees were upon him. Terror- stricken,
he 
stood awaiting their commands. They were not long in coming. 
By means of their fearful buzzing, the deadly insects guided him into the 
nearest hut, where they indicated that he should pick up one of the rude
hoelike 
took which was used in the fields. With this in hand, he was driven to the 
little piles of smoldering ashes, where the fires had flickered an hour
before. 
Hardly knowing what he was doing, but not daring to disobey, the man
proceeded 
to heap dirt over the embers. Shortly he had every spark of the fire
smothered 
beneath a mound as high as his knees. Not till then did any of the others
begin 
to revive. 
As fast as they recovered the bees took charge of them. Not a human had
courage 
enough to make a move of offense; it meant certain death, and they all knew
it 
only too well. As soon as they were wide awake enough to know what they were 
doing, they were forced to search the bodies of those still asleep. 
"We must find the means for growing the flower," said Supreme, evidently 
convinced that a seed was a seed, under any circumstances. And presently they 
found, tucked away in Corrus's lion-skin, a large chunk of the pyrites, and a 
similar piece on Dulnop. 
"So these were the discoverers," commented Supreme. 
"What is your will in their case?" the subordinate asked. 
The commanding bee considered for a long time. Finally she got an idea, such
as 
bees are known to get once in a great while. It was simply a new
combination—as 
all ideas are merely new combinations—of two punishments which were commonly 
employed by the bees. 
As a result, eight of the villagers were compelled to carry the two

fire-finders 
to a certain spot on the bank of a nearby stream. Here the two fragments of 
pyrites were thrown, under orders, into the water; so that the eight
villagers 
might know just why the whole thing was being done. 
Next the two men, still unconscious, were buried up to their necks. Their
heads, 
lolling helplessly, were all that was exposed. So it was to be the Head Out 
punishment—imprisonment of one day with their bodies rigidly held by the
soil: 
acute torture to an aborigine. But was this all? 
One of the villagers was driven to the nearest hut, where he was forced to 
secure two large stone axes. Bringing these back to the "torture- place," as
the 
spot was called, the man was compelled to wield one of the clumsy tools while
a 
companion used the other; and between them they cut down the tree whose
branches 
had been waving over the prisoners' heads. Then the villagers were forced to 
drag the tree away. 
All of which occurred in the darkness, and out of sight of Rolla and Cunora. 
They could only guess what was going on. Hours passed, and dawn approached.
Not 
till then did they learn just what had been done. 
The villagers, now all awake, were driven by the bees to the place on the
bank 
of the stream. There, the eight men who had imprisoned the two discoverers
told 
what had been done with the "magic stones." Each villager stared at the 
offenders, and at something which lay on the ground before them, and in sober 
silence went straight to his or her work in the fields. 
Presently the huts were deserted. All the people were on duty elsewhere. Such 
bees as were not guarding the fields had returned to the hives. Rolla and
Cunora 
cautiously ventured forth, taking great care to avoid being seen. They
hurried 
fearfully to the stream. 
Before they reached the spot Rolla gave an exclamation and stared curiously
to 
one side, where the tree had been dragged. Suddenly she gave a terrible cry
and 
rushed forward, only to drop on her knees and cover her face with hands that 
shook as with the palsy. At the same instant Cunora saw what had been done;
and 
uttering a single piercing scream, fell fainting to the ground. 
Heaped in front of the two prisoners was a large pile of pebbles. There were 
thousands upon thousands in the heap. Before each man, at a distance of a
foot, 
was a large gourdful of water. To the savages, these told the whole story; 
these, together with the tree dragged to one side. 
Corrus and Dulnop were to be buried in that spot every day for as many days
as 
there were pebbles in the heap; in other words, until they died. Every night 
they would be dug up, and every morning buried afresh. And to keep them from 
telling any of the villagers where they had found the pyrites, they were to
be 
deprived of water all day long. By night their tongues would be too swollen
for 
speech. For they had been sentenced to the No Shade torture, as well; their 
heads would be exposed all day long to the burning sun itself. 

XI. THE EDGE OF THE WORLD
It is significant that Billie, because of her connection with the bee,
Supreme, 
was spared the sight that the doctor saw from Rolla's point of view.
Otherwise, 
the geologist's wife might have had a different opinion of the matter. As it 
was— 
"Corrus and Dulnop," said she as cooly as Supreme herself might have spoken, 
"are not the first to suffer because they have discovered something big." 
Whereupon her husband's wrath got beyond his grip. "Not the first! Is that
all 
you can say?" he demanded hotly. "Why, of all the damnably cruel,
cold-blooded 
creatures I ever heard of, those infernal bees—" 
Van Emmon stopped, unable to go on without blasphemy. 
The doctor had got over the horror of what he had seen. "We want to be fair, 
Van. Look at this matter from the bees' view-point for awhile. What were they
to 
do? They had to make sure, as far as possible, that their supremacy would
never 
be threatened again. Didn't they?" 
"Oh, but—damn it all!" cried Van Emmon. "There's a limit somewhere! Such
cruelty 
as that—no one could conceive of it!" 
"As for the bees," flared Billie, "I don't blame 'em! And unless I'm very
much 
mistaken, the ruling class ANYWHERE, here on the earth or wherever you 
investigate, will go the limit to hold the reins, once they get them!" 
The expression on Van Emmon's face was curious to see. There was no fear
there, 
only a puzzled astonishment. Strange as it may seem, Billie had told him 
something that had never occurred to him before. And he recognized it as
truth, 
as soon as she had said it. 
"Just a minute," remarked Smith in his ordinary voice; "just a minute. You're 
forgetting that we don't really know whether Rolla and Cunora are safe. 
Everything depends upon them now, you know." 
In silence the four went back into telepathic connection. Now, of course,
Smith 
and Van Emmon were practically without agents. The prisoners could tell them 
nothing whatever except the tale of increasing agony as their torture went
on. 
All that Van Emmon and Smith could do was lend the aid of their mentality to
the 
efforts of the other two, and for a while had to be content with what Billie, 
through Supreme, and the doctor, through Rolla, were able to learn. However, 
Kinney did suggest that one of the other two men get in touch with Cunora. 
"Good idea," said Smith. "Go to it, Van Emmon." 
The geologist stirred uneasily, and avoided his wife's eyes. "I—I'm afraid
not, 
Smith. Rather think I'd prefer to rest a while. You do it!" 
Smith laughed and reddened. "Nothing doing for an old bach like me. Cunora 
might—well, you know—go in bathing, for instance. It's all right for the
doctor, 
of course; but—let me out!" 
Meanwhile the two women on Sanus, taking the utmost care, managed to retreat 
from the river bank without being discovered. Keeping their eyes very wide
open 
and their ears strained for the slightest buzz, the two contrived to pass 
through the village, out into the fields, and thence, from cover to cover,

into 
the foothills on that side of the valley where their lovers had found the 
pyrites. 
"If only we knew which stream they ascended!" lamented Cunora, as they stood
in 
indecision before a fork in the river. 
"But we don't!" Rolla pointed out philosophically. "We must trust to luck and 
Mownoth, ye and I." 
And despite all the effort the doctor could put forth to the contrary, the
two 
women picked out the wrong branch. They searched as diligently as two people 
possibly could; but somehow the doctor knew, just because of the wrong choice 
that had been made, that their search would be unsuccessful. He thought the 
matter over for a few moments, and finally admitted to his three friends: 
"I wonder if I haven't been a little silly? Why should I have been so
precious 
specific in impressing Rolla about the pyrites? Pshaw! Almost any hard rock
will 
strike sparks from flint!" 
"Why, of course!" exploded Van Emmon. "Here—let's get busy and tell Rolla!" 
But it proved astonishingly difficult. The two women were in an extraordinary 
condition now. They were continually on the alert. In fact, the word "alert" 
scarcely described the state of mind, the keen, desperate watchfulness which 
filled every one of their waking hours, and caused each to remain awake as
long 
as possible; so that they invariably fell to sleep without warning. They
could 
not be caught in the drowsy state! 
For they knew something about the bees which the four on the earth did not
learn 
until Billie had overheard Supreme giving some orders. 
"Set a guard on that river bank," she told her subordinate, "and maintain it 
night and day. If any inferior attempts to recover the magic stone, deal with 
him or her in the same manner in which we punished the finders of the deadly 
flower." 
"It shall be done, Supreme. Is there anything further?" 
"Yes. Make quite sure that none of the inferiors are missing." 
Shortly afterward the lieutenant reported that one of the huts was empty. 
"Rolla, the soil-tester, and Cunora, the vineyardist, are gone." 
"Seek them!" Supreme almost became excited. "They are the lovers of the men
we 
punished! They would not absent themselves unless they knew something! Find 
them, and torture them into revealing the secret! We must weed out this
flowing 
blossom forever!" 
"It shall be done!" 
Such methods were well known to Rolla and Cunora. Had not their fellow 
villagers, many of them, tried time after time to escape from bondage? And
had 
they not inevitably been apprehended and driven back, to be tortured as an 
example to the rest? It would never do to be caught! 
So they made it a practice to travel only during twilight and dawn, remaining 
hidden through the day. Invariably one stood watch while the other slept. The 
bees were—everywhere! 
Upon crossing the range of mountains going down the other side, Cunora and
Rolla 
began to feel hopeful of two things—first, that their luck would change, and
the 
wonderful stone be found; and second, that they would be in no danger from
the 

bees in this new country, which seemed to be a valley much like the one they
had 
quit. It was all quite new and strange to them, and in their interest they 
almost forgot at times that each had a terrible score to settle when her
chance 
finally came. 
Twice they had exceedingly narrow escapes. Always they kept carefully hid,
but 
on the third day Cunora, advancing cautiously through some brush, came
suddenly 
upon two bees feeding. She stopped short and held her breath. Neither saw
her, 
so intent were they upon their honey; yet Cunora felt certain that each had
been 
warned to watch out for her. This was true; Billie learned that every bee on
the 
planet had been told. And so Cunora silently backed away, an inch at a time, 
until it was safe to turn and run. 
On another occasion Rolla surprised a big drone bee, just as she bent to take
a 
drink of water from a stream. The insect had been out of her sight, on the
other 
side of a boulder. It rose with an angry buzz as she bent down; a few feet
away 
from her it hung in the air, apparently scrutinizing her to make sure that
she 
was one of the runaways. Her heart leaped to her mouth. Suppose they were 
reported! 
She made a lightninglike grab at the thing, and very nearly caught it.
Straight 
up it shot, taken by surprise, and dashed blindly into a ledge of rock which 
hung overhead. For a second it floundered, dazed; and that second was its
last. 
Cunora gave a single bound forward, and with a vicious swing of a palm-leaf, 
which she always carried, smashed the bee flat. 
Before they had been free five days they came to an exceedingly serious 
conclusion: that it was only a question of time until they were caught.
Sooner 
or later they must be forced to return; they could not hope to dodge bees
much 
longer. When Rolla fully realized this she turned gravely to the younger
girl. 
"Methinks the time has come for us to make a choice, Cunora. Which shall it
be: 
live as we have been living for the past four days, with the certainty of
being 
caught in time or—face the unknown perils on the edge of the world?" 
Cunora dropped the piece of stone she had been inspecting and shivered with 
fear. "A dreadful choice ye offer, Rolla! Think of the horrible beasts we
must 
encounter!" 
"Ye mean," corrected the philosophical one—"ye mean, the beasts which men SAY 
they have seen. Tell me; hast ever seen such thyself? Many times hast thou
been 
near the edge, I know." 
The girl shook her head. "Nay; not I. Yet these beasts must be, Rolla; else
why 
should all men tell of them?" 
"I note," remarked Rolla thoughtfully, "that each man tells of seeing a 
different sort of beast. Perchance they were all but lies." 

However, it was Cunora's fear of capture, rather than her faith in Rolla's 
reasoning, which drove the girl to the north. For to the north they traveled,
a 
matter of some two weeks; and not once did they dare relax their vigilance. 
Wherever they went, there was vegetation of some sort, and wherever there was 
vegetation bees were likely to be found. By the time the two weeks were over, 
the women were in a state of near- hysteria, from the nervous strain of it
all. 
Moreover, both suffered keenly for want of cereals, to which they were 
accustomed; they were heartily tired of such fruits and nuts as they were
able 
to pick up without exposing themselves. 
One morning before daybreak they came to the upper end of a long, narrow 
valley—one which paralleled their own, by the way—and as they emerged from
the 
plain into the foot-hills it was clear that they had reached a new type of 
country. There was comparatively little brush; and with every step the
rockiness 
increased. By dawn they were on the edge of a plateau; back of them stretched 
the inhabited country; ahead, a haze- covered expanse. Nothing but rocks was 
about them. 
"Ye are sure that we had best keep on?" asked Cunora uneasily. 
Rolla nodded, slowly but positively. "It is best. Back of us lies certain 
capture. Ahead—we know not what; but at least there is a chance!" 
Nevertheless, both hesitated before starting over the plateau. Each gazed
back 
longingly over the home of their kind; and for a moment Rolla's resolution 
plainly faltered. She hesitated; Cunora made a move as though to return. And
at 
that instant their problem was decided for them. 
A large drone passed within six feet of them. Both heard the buzz, and
whirled 
about to see the bee darting frantically out of reach. At a safe distance it 
paused, as though to make sure of its find, then disappeared down the valley. 
They had been located! 
"We have no choice now!" cried Rolla, speaking above a whisper for the first 
time in weeks. "On, as fast as ye can, Cunora!" 
The two sped over the rocks, making pretty good time considering the loads
they 
carried. Each had a good-sized goatskin full of various dried fruits and
nuts, 
also a gourd not so full. In fact, it had been some while since they had had 
fresh water. Cunora was further weighed down by some six pounds of dried
rabbit 
meat; the animals had been caught in snares. Both, however, discarded their
palm 
leaves; they would be of no further use now. 
And thus they fled, knowing that they had, at most, less than a day before
the 
drone would return with enough soldiers to compel obedience. For the most
part, 
the surface was rough granite, with very little sign of erosion. There was 
almost no water; both women showed intense joy when they found a tiny pool of
it 
standing in a crevasse. They filled their gourds as well as their stomachs. 
A few steps farther on, and the pair stepped out of the shallow gully in
which 
they had been walking. Immediately they were exposed to a very strong and 
exceedingly cold wind, such as seemed to surprise them in no way, but
compelled 

both to actually lean against its force. Moreover, although this pressure was 
all from the left, it proved exceedingly difficult to go on. Their legs
seemed 
made of lead, and their breathing was strangely labored. This, also, appeared
to 
be just what they had expected. 
Presently, however, they found another slight depression the rocks; and 
sheltered from the wind, made a little better progress ahead. It was bitter 
cold, however; only the violence of their exercise could make them warm
enough 
to stand it. All in all, the two were considerably over three hours in making 
the last mile; they had to stop frequently to rest. The only compensating
thing 
was their freedom from worry; the bees would not bother them where the wind
was 
so strong. So long as they could keep on the move they were safe. 
But what made it worse was the steadily increasing difficulty of moving their 
legs. For, although the surface continued level, they seemed to be CLIMBING
now, 
where before they had simply walked. It was just as though the plateau had 
changed into a mountain, and they were ascending it; only, upon looking back, 
nothing but comparatively flat rock met the gaze. What made them lean forward
so 
steeply anyhow? 
Rolla seemed to think it all very ordinary. She was more concerned about the 
wind, to which they had become once more exposed as they reached the end of
the 
rift. On they pressed, five or six steps at each attempt, stopping to rest
twice 
the length of time they actually traveled. It was necessary now to cling to
the 
rock with both hands, and once Cunora lost her grip, so that she would have
been 
blown to one side, or else have slipped backward, had not Rolla grasped her
heel 
and held her until she could get another hand-hold. 
"Courage!" gasped Rolla. Perspiration was streaming down her face, despite
the 
bitter cold of the wind; her hands trembled from the strain she was
undergoing. 
"Courage, Cunora! It be not much farther!" On they strove. Always it seemed
as 
though they were working upward as well as onward, although the continued 
flatness of the surface argued obstinately against this. Also, the sun
remained 
in the same position relative to the rocks; if they were climbing, it should 
have appeared overhead. What did it mean? 
Finally Rolla saw, about a hundred yards farther on, something which caused
her 
to shout: "Almost there, Cunora!" 
The younger girl could not spare breath enough to reply. They struggled on in 
silence. 
Now they were down on their hands and knees. Before half the hundred yards
was 
covered, they were flat on their faces, literally clawing their way upward
and 
onward. Had the wind increased in violence in proportion as the way grew
harder, 
they could never have made it, physical marvels though they were. Only the 
absolute knowledge that they dared not return drove them on; that, and the 

possibility of finding the precious stone, and of ultimately saving the two
men 
they had left behind. 
The last twenty feet was the most extraordinary effort that any human had
ever 
been subjected to. They had to take turns in negotiating the rock; one would 
creep a few inches on, get a good hold, and brace herself against the wind, 
while the other, crawling alongside, used her as a sort of a crutch. Their 
fingers were bleeding and their finger- nails cracked from the rock and cold; 
the same is equally true of their toes. Had it been forty feet instead of 
twenty— 
The rocks ended there. Beyond was nothing but sky; even this was not like
what 
they were used to, but was very nearly black. Two more spurts, and Rolla
threw 
one hand ahead and caught the edge of the rock. Cunora dragged herself 
alongside. The effort brought blood to her nostrils. 
They rested a minute or two, then looked at one another in mute inquiry.
Cunora 
nodded; Rolla took great breath; and they drew themselves to the edge and
looked 
over. 
XII. OUTSIDE INFORMATION
The two women gazed in extreme darkness. The other side of the ridge of rock
was 
black as night. From side to side the ridge extended, like a jagged knife
edge 
on a prodigious scale; it seemed infinite in extent. Behind them—that is, at 
their feet-lay the stone-covered expanse they had just traversed; ahead of
them 
there was—nothingness itself. 
Cunora shook with fear and cold. "Let us not go on, Rolla!" she whimpered. "I 
like not the looks of this void; it may contain all sorts of beasts. I—I am 
afraid!" She began to sob convulsively. Rolla peered into the darkness.
Nothing 
whatever was to be seen. It was as easy to imagine enemies as friends; easier
in 
fact. What might not the unknown hold for them? 
"We cannot stay here," spoke Rolla, with what energy her condition would
permit. 
"We could not—hold on. Nor can we return now; They would surely find us!" 
But Cunora's courage, which had never faltered in the face of familiar
dangers, 
was not equal to the unknown. She wailed: "Rolla! A little way back—a hollow
in 
the rock! 'Tis big enough to shelter me! I would— rather stay there than—go
on!" 
"Ye would rather die there, alone!" 
Cunora hid her face. "Let me have half the food! I can go back to the
pool—for 
water! And maybe," hopefully—"maybe They will give up the search in time." 
"Aye," from Rolla, bitterly. "And in time Dulnop will die, if we do nothing
for 
him—and for Corrus!" 
Cunora fell to sobbing again. "I cannot help it! I am—afraid!" 
Rolla scarcely heard. An enormous idea had just occurred to her. She had told 
the girl to think of Dulnop and Corrus; but was it not equally true that they 
should think of all the other humans, their fellow slaves, each of whom had 
suffered nearly as much? Was not the fire equally precious to them all? 

She started to explain this to the girl, then abruptly gave it up. It was no 
use; Cunora's mind was not strong enough to take the step. Rolla fairly
gasped 
as she realized, as no Sanusian had realized before, that she had been given
the 
responsibility of rescuing A WHOLE RACE. 
Fire she must have! And since she could not, dared not, seek it here, she
must 
try the other side of the world. And she would have to do it— alone! 
"So be it!" she said loudly in a strange voice. "Ye stay here and wait,
Cunora! 
I go on!" 
And for fear her resolution would break down, she immediately crept over the 
edge. She clung to the rock as though expecting to be dragged from it.
Instead, 
as she let her feet down into the blackness, she could feel solid rock
beneath 
her body, quite the same as she had lain upon a moment before. It was like 
descending the opposite side of an incredibly steep mountain, a mountain made
of 
blackness itself. 
The women gave one another a last look. For all they knew, neither would gaze 
upon the other again. Next moment, with Cunora's despairing cry ringing in
her 
ears, Rolla began to crawl backward and downward. 
She could plainly see the sun's level rays above her head, irregular beams of 
yellowish light; it served slightly to illuminate her surroundings. Shortly, 
however, her eyes became accustomed to the darkness; the stars helped just as 
they had always helped; and soon she was moving almost as freely as on the
other 
side. 
Once she slipped, and slid down and to one side, for perhaps ten feet. When
she 
finally grabbed a sharp projecting ledge and stopped, her vision almost
failed 
from the terrible effort she had put forth. She could scarcely feel the deep 
gash that the ledge had made in her finger- tips. 
After perhaps half an hour of hard work among bare rocks exactly like those
she 
had quit, she stopped for a prolonged rest. As a matter of course, she stared
at 
the sky; and then came her first discovery. 
Once more let it be understood that her view was totally different from
anything 
that has ever been seen on the earth. To be sure, "up" was over her head, and 
"down" was under her feet; nevertheless, she was stretched full length, face 
down, on the rock. In other words, it was precisely as though she were
clinging 
to a cliff. Sky above, sky behind and all sides; there were stars even under
her 
feet! 
But all her life she had been accustomed, at night, to see that broad band of 
silver light across the heavens. She had taken it for granted that, except at 
two seasons of the year, for short periods, she would always see "the Silvery 
Way." But to-night—there was no band! The whole sky was full of—stars,
nothing 
else! 
It will be easier to picture her wonder and uneasiness if she is compared 
mentally with a girl of five or six. Easier, too, to appreciate the fact that 
she determined to go on anyhow. Mile after mile was covered in the darkness. 

Rolla was on the point of absolute exhaustion; but she dared not sleep until
she 
reached a spot where there was no danger of falling. It was only after
braving 
the gale for over four hours in the starlight that Rolla reached a point
where 
she was no longer half crawling, half creeping, but moved nearly erect.
Shortly 
she was able to face the way she was going; and by leaning backward was able
to 
make swift progress. In another half-hour she was walking upright. Still no 
explanation of the mystery! 
Finding a sheltered spot, she proceeded to make herself comparatively 
comfortable on the rock. Automatically, from habit, she proceeded to keep
watch; 
then she must have remembered that there was now no need for vigilance. For
she 
lay herself down in the darkness and instantly fell asleep. 
Three hours later—according to the time kept by the watchers on the
earth—Rolla 
awoke and sat up in great alarm. And small wonder. 
It was broad daylight! The sun was well above the horizon; and not only the 
Sanusian but the people on the earth were vastly puzzled to note that it was
the 
western horizon! To all appearances, Rolla had slept a whole day in that
brief 
three hours. 
Shortly her nerves were steady enough for her to look about,
uncomprehendingly, 
but interestedly, as a child will. There was nothing but rock to be seen; a
more 
or less level surface, such as she had toiled over the day before. The day 
before! She glanced at the sun once more, and her heart gave a great leap. 
The sun was rising—IN THE WEST! 
"'Tis a world of contraries," observed Rolla sagely to herself. "Mayhap I
shall 
find all else upside down." 
She ate heartily, and drank deep from her gourd. There was not a cupful 
remaining. She eyed it seriously as she got to her feet. 
Another look back at that flat expanse of granite, which had so gradually and
so 
mysteriously changed from precipice to plain, and Rolla strode on with
renewed 
vigor and interest. Presently she was able to make out something of a
different 
color in the distance, and soon was near enough to see some bona-fide bushes;
a 
low, flowerless shrub, it is true, but at least it was a living thing. 
Shortly the undergrowth became dense enough to make it somewhat of an effort
to 
get through. And before long she was noticing all manner of small creatures, 
from bugs to an occasional wandering bird. These last, especially, uttered an 
abrupt but cheerful chirp which helped considerably to raise her spirits. It
was 
all too easy to see, in her fancy, her lover helpless and suffering in the
power 
of those cold- blooded, merciless insects. 
In an hour or two she reached the head of a small stream. Hurrying down its 
banks as rapidly as its undergrowth would permit, Rolla followed its course
as 

it bent, winding and twisting, in the direction which had always been north
to 
her, but which the sun plainly labeled "south." Certainly the sun mounted 
steadily toward the zenith, passing successively through the positions 
corresponding to four, three and two o'clock, in a manner absolutely
baffling. 
About noon she came out of the canon into the foothills. Another brief rest,
and 
from the top of a knoll she found herself looking upon a valley about the
size 
of the one she called "home." Otherwise, it was very different. For one
thing, 
it was far better watered; nowhere could she see the half-dried brownishness
so 
characteristic of her own land. The whole surface was heavily grown with all 
manner of vegetation; and so far as she could see it was all absolutely wild. 
There was not a sign of cultivation. 
Keeping to the left bank of the river, a much broader affair than any she had 
seen before, Rolla made her way for several miles with little difficulty.
Twice 
she made wide detours through the thicket, and once it was necessary to swim
a 
short distance; the stream was too deep to wade. The doctor watched the whole 
affair, purely as a matter of professional interest. 
"She is a magnificent specimen physically," he said in his impersonal way,
"and 
she shows none of the defects of the African savages." 
And such was his manner, in speaking of his distant "patient," that Billie
took 
it entirely as a matter of course, without the slightest self-consciousness 
because of Van Emmon and Smith. 
All this while Rolla had been intent, as before, upon finding some of the 
coveted crystals. She had no luck; but presently she discovered something 
decidedly worth while—a fallen tree trunk, not too large, and near enough to
the 
bank to be handled without help. A few minutes later she was floating at
ease, 
and making decidedly better time. 
A half-hour of this—during which she caught glimpses of many animals, large
and 
small, all of which fled precipitately—and she rounded a sharp bend in the 
stream, to be confronted with a sight which must have been strange indeed to 
her. Stretching across the river was—a network of rusty wire, THE REMAINS OF
A 
REINFORCED CONCRETE BRIDGE. 
There was no doubt of this. On each bank was a large, moss-grown block of
stone, 
which the doctor knew could be nothing else than the old abutments. Seemingly 
there had been only a single span. 
The woman brought the log to the shore, and examined the bridge closely. 
Instinctively she felt that the structure argued a high degree of
intelligence, 
very likely human. A little hesitation, and then she beached her log,
ascended 
the bank, and looked upon the bridge from above. 
A narrow road met her eyes. Once it might have been twice as wide, but now
the 
thicket encroached until there was barely room enough, judged the doctor, for
a 
single vehicle to pass. Its surface was badly broken up—apparently it had

been 
concrete—and grass grew in every crack. Nevertheless, it was a bona-fide
road. 
For the first time in a long while, Rolla was temporarily off her guard. The 
doctor was able to impress her with the idea of "Follow this road!" and to
his 
intense gratification the woman started away from the river at once. 
Soon the novelty of the thing wore off enough for her to concern herself with 
fresh food. She discovered plenty of berries, also three kinds of nuts; all
were 
strange to her, yet she ate them without question, and suffered nothing as a 
result, so far as the doctor could see. 
The sun was less than an hour from the horizon when the road, after passing
over 
a slight rise, swung in a wide arc through the woods and thus unveiled a most 
extraordinary landscape. It was all the more incredible because so utterly
out 
of keeping with what Rolla had just passed through. She had been in the 
wilderness; now— 
A vast city lay before her. Not a hundred yards away stood a low, square 
building of some plain, gray stone. Beyond this stretched block upon
block—mile 
upon mile rather—of bona-fide residences, stores and much larger buildings.
It 
is true that the whole place was badly overgrown with all sorts of
vegetation; 
yet, from that slight elevation, there was no doubt that this place was, or
had 
been, a great metropolis. 
Presently it became clear that "had been" was the correct term. Nothing but
wild 
life appeared. Rolla looked closely for any signs of human occupancy, but saw 
none. To all appearances the place was deserted; and it was just as easy to
say 
that it had been so for ten centuries as for one. 
"There seems no good reason why I should not go farther," commented Rolla
aloud, 
to boost her courage. "Perchance I shall find the magic stone in this queer 
place." 
It speaks well for her self-confidence that, despite the total strangeness of 
the whole affair—a city was as far out of her line as aviation to a miner—she 
went forward with very little hesitation. None of the wild creatures that 
scuttled from her sight alarmed her at all; the only things she looked at 
closely were such bees as she met. The insects ignored her altogether, except
to 
keep a respectful distance. "These masters," observed Rolla with
satisfaction, 
"know nothing of me. I shall not obey them till they threaten me." But there
was 
no threatening. 
For the most part the buildings were in ruins. Here and there a structure
showed 
very little damage by the elements. In more than one case the roof was quite 
intact. Clearly the materials used were exceptional, or else the place had
not 
been deserted very long. The doctor held to the latter opinion, especially
after 
seeing a certain brown-haired dog running to hide behind a heap of stones. 
"It was a dog!" the doctor felt sure. To Rolla, however, the animal was even 
more significant. She exclaimed about it in a way which confirmed the

doctor's 
guess. On she went at a faster rate, plainly excited and hopeful of seeing 
something further that she could recognize. 
She found it in a hurry. Reaching the end of one block of the ruins, she
turned 
the corner and started to follow the cross street. Whereupon she stopped
short, 
to gaze in consternation at a line of something whitish which stretched from
one 
side of the "street" to the other. 
It was a line of human skeletons. 
There were perhaps two hundred in the lot, piled one on top of the other, and 
forming a low barrier across the pavement. To Rolla the thing was simply 
terrible, and totally without explanation. To the people on the earth, it 
suggested a formation of troops, shot down in their tracks and left where
they 
had fallen. The doctor would have given a year of his life if only Rolla had
had 
the courage to examine the bones; there might have been bullet-holes, or
other 
evidence of how they had met their death. 
The Sanusian chose rather to back carefully away from the spot. She walked 
hurriedly up the street she had just left, and before going another block
came 
across two skeletons lying right in the middle of the street. A little
farther 
on, and she began to find skeletons on every hand. Moreover—and this is 
especially significant—the buildings in this locality showed a great many
gaps 
and holes in their walls, such as might have been made by shell-fire. 
This made it easier to understand something else. Every few yards or so the 
explorer found a large heap of rust in the gutter, or what had once been the 
gutter. These heaps had little or no shape; yet the doctor fancied he could 
detect certain resemblances to things he had seen before, and shortly
declared 
that they were the remains of motors. 
"Can't say whether they were aircraft or autos, of course," he added, "but
those 
things were certainly machines." Later, Rolla paid more attention to them,
and 
the doctor positively identified them as former motor-cars. 
The sun had gone down. It was still quite light, of course; darkness would
not 
come for a couple of hours. Rolla munched on what food she had, and pressed
on 
through the ruins. She saw skeletons and rusted engines everywhere, and once 
passed a rounded heap of rust which looked like nothing so much as a large 
cannon shell. Had the place been the scene of a battle? 
Just when she had got rather accustomed to the place and was feeling more or 
less at her ease, she stopped short. At the same time the doctor himself
fairly 
jumped in his chair. Somewhere, right near at hand, on one of the larger 
structures, a bell began to ring! 
It clanged loudly and confidently, giving out perhaps thirty strokes before
it 
stopped. The stillness which followed was pretty painful. In a moment,
however, 
it was broken as effectively as any silence can be broken. 
A man's voice sounded within the building. 
Immediately it was replied to, more faintly, by several others. Then came the 

clatter of some sort of utensils, and sundry other noises which spoke loudly
of 
humans. Rolla froze in her tracks, and her teeth began to chatter. 
Next moment she got a grip on herself. "What difference doth it make, whether 
they be friend or enemy?" she argued severely, for the benefit of her shaking 
nerves. "They will give thee food, anyhow. And perchance they know where
liveth 
the magic stone!" 
In the end Rolla's high purpose prevailed over her weak knees, and she began
to 
look for the entrance to the place. It was partly in ruins— that is, the
upper 
stories—but the two lower floors seemed, so far as their interior could be
seen 
through the high, unglazed windows, to be in good condition. There were no
doors 
on that street. 
Going around the corner, however, Rolla saw a high archway at the far corner
of 
the structure. Approaching near enough to peek in, she saw that this arch 
provided an opening into a long corridor, such as might once have served as a 
wagon or auto entrance. After a little hesitation she went in. 
She passed a door, a massive thing of solid brassy metal, such as interested
the 
doctor immensely but only served to confuse the explorer. A little farther
on, 
and the corridor became pretty dark. She passed another brass door, and 
approached the end of the pavement. There was one more door there; and she
noted 
with excitement that it was open. 
She came closer and peered in. The room was fairly well lighted, and what she 
saw was clear-cut and unmistakable. In the middle of the room was a long
table, 
and seated about it, in perfect silence, sat an even dozen men. 
XIII. THE TWELVE
For a minute or two Rolla was not observed. She simply stood and stared,
being 
neither confident enough to go forward nor scared enough to retreat.
Childlike, 
she scrutinized the group with great thoroughness. 
Their comparatively white faces and hands puzzled her most. Also, she could
not 
understand the heavy black robes in which all were dressed. Falling to the
floor 
and reaching far above their necks, such garments would have been intolerable
to 
the free-limbed Sanusians. To the watchers on the earth, however, the robes
made 
the group look marvelously like a company of monks. 
Not that there was anything particularly religious about the place or in
their 
behavior. All twelve seemed to be silent only because they were voraciously 
hungry. A meal was spread on the table. Except for the garments, the twelve 
might have been so many harvest hands, gathered for the evening meal in the 
cook-house. From the white-bearded man who sat at the head of the table and 
passed out large helpings of something from a big pot, to the fair-haired
young 
fellow at the foot, who could scarcely wait for his share, there was only one 
thing about them which might have been labeled pious; and that was their 
attitude, which could have been interpreted: "Give us this day our daily 

bread—and hurry up about it!" 
Apparently Rolla was convinced that these men were thoroughly human, and as
such 
fairly safe to approach. For she allowed her curiosity to govern her caution, 
and proceeded to sidle through the doorway. Half-way through she caught a
whiff 
of the food, and her sidling changed to something faster. 
At that instant she was seen. A tall, dark-haired chap on the far side of the 
table glanced up and gave a sharp, startled exclamation. Instantly the whole 
dozen whirled around and with one accord shot to their feet. 
Rolla stopped short. 
There was a second's silence; then the white-bearded man, who seemed, to be
the 
leader of the group, said something peremptory in a deep, compelling voice. 
Rolla did not understand. 
He repeated it, this time a little less commandingly; and Rolla, after 
swallowing desperately, inclined her head in the diffident way she had, and 
said: 
"Are ye friends or enemies?" 
Eleven of the twelve looked puzzled. The dark-haired man, who had been the
first 
to see her, however, gave a muttered exclamation; then he cogitated a moment, 
wet his lips and said something that sounded like: "What did you say? Say it 
again!" 
Rolla repeated. 
The dark-haired man listened intently. Immediately he fell to nodding with
great 
vigor, and thought deeply again before making another try: "We are your
friends. 
Whence came ye, and what seek ye?" 
Rolla had to listen closely to what he said. The language was substantially
the 
same as hers; but the verbs were misplaced in the sentences, the accenting
was 
different, and certain of the vowels were flatted. After a little, however,
the 
man caught her way of talking and was able to approximate it quite well, so
that 
she understood him readily. 
"I seek," Rolla replied, "food and rest. I have traveled far and am weary." 
"Ye look it," commented the man. His name, Rolla found out later, was Somat.
"Ye 
shall have both food and rest. However, whence came ye?" 
"From the other side of the world," answered Rolla calmly. 
Instantly she noted that the twelve became greatly excited when Somat
translated 
her statement. She decided to add to the scene. 
"I have been away from my people for many days," and she held up one hand
with 
the five fingers spread out, opening and closing them four times, to indicate 
twenty. 
"Ye came over the edge of the world!" marveled Somat. "It were a dangerous
thing 
to do, stranger!" 
"Aye," agreed Holla, "but less dangerous than that from which I fled.
However," 
impatiently, "give me the food ye promised; I can talk after my stomach be 
filled." 
"Of a surety," replied Somat apologetically. "I were too interested to
remember 

thy hunger." He spoke a word or two, and one of his companions brought
another 
stool, also dishes and table utensils. 
Whereupon the watchers on the earth got a first-class surprise. Here they had 
been looking upon twelve men, living in almost barbaric fashion amid the
ruins 
of a great city; but the men had been eating from hand- painted china of the 
finest quality, and using silverware that was simply elegant, nothing less! 
Luxury in the midst of desolation! 
Rolla, however, paid little attention to these details. She was scarcely
curious 
as to the food, which consisted of some sort of vegetable and meat stew, 
together with butterless bread, a kind of small-grained corn on the cob, a 
yellowish root-vegetable not unlike turnips, and large quantities of berries. 
She was too hungry to be particular, and ate heartily of all that was
offered, 
whether cooked or uncooked. The twelve almost forgot their own hunger in
their 
interest in the stranger. 
It was now pretty dark in the big room. The white-bearded man said something
to 
the young fellow at the foot of the table, whereupon the chap got up and
stepped 
to the nearest wall, where he pressed something with the tip of his finger. 
Instantly the room was flooded with white light—from two incandescent bulbs! 
Rolla leaped to her feet in amazement, blinking painfully in the unaccustomed 
glare. 
"What is this?" she demanded, all the more furiously to hide her fear. "Ye
would 
not trick me with magic; ye, who call yourselves friends!" 
Somat interpreted this to the others. Some laughed; others looked pityingly
at 
her. Somat explained: 
"It is nothing, stranger. Be not afraid. We forgot that ye might know nothing
of 
this 'magic.'" He considered deeply, apparently trying to put himself in her 
place. "Know ye not fire?" Of course, she did not know what he meant. "Then," 
with an inspiration, "perchance ye have see the flower, the red flower, ye
might 
call—" 
"Aye!" eagerly. "Doth it grow here?" 
Somat smiled with satisfaction, and beckoned for her to follow him. He led
the 
way through a small door into another room, evidently used as a kitchen.
There 
he pointed to a large range, remarkably like the up-to- date article known on 
the earth. 
"The flower 'groweth' here," said he, and lifted a lid from the stove. Up
shot 
the flame. 
"Great Mownoth!" shouted Rolla, forgetting all about her hunger. "I have
found 
it—the precious flower itself!" 
Somat humored her childlike view-point. "We have the seed of the flower,
too," 
said he. He secured a box of matches from a shelf, and showed her the "little 
sticks." 
"Exactly what the angel showed me!" jubilated Holla. "I have come to the
right 
place!" 

Back she went to her food, her face radiant, and all her lurking suspicion of 
the twelve completely gone. From that time on she had absolute and
unquestioning 
confidence in all that was told her. In her eyes, the twelve were simply
angels 
or gods who had seen fit to clothe themselves queerly and act human. 
Supper over, she felt immensely tired. All the strain of the past three weeks 
had to have its reaction. Like a very tired, sleepy child, she was led to a
room 
in another part of the building, where she was shown an ordinary
sleeping-cot. 
She promptly pulled the mattress onto the floor, where she considered it 
belonged, and fell fast asleep. 
Meanwhile, back on the earth, Van Emmon and Smith had lost no time in making
use 
of the doctor's description of the twelve. Within a few minutes they had new 
agents; Van Emmon used Somat's eyes and ears, while Smith got in touch with
the 
elderly bearded man at the head of the table. His name was Deltos. 
"A very striking confirmation of the old legends," he was saying through a
big 
yawn, as Smith made connection. He used a colloquial type of language, quite 
different from the lofty, dignified speech of the Sanusians. "That is, of 
course, if the woman is telling the truth." 
"And I think she is," declared the young fellow at the foot of the table. "It 
makes me feel pretty small, to think that none of us ever had the nerve to
make 
the trip; while she, ignorant as she is, dared it all and succeeded!" 
"You forget, Sorplee," reminded Somat, "that such people are far hardier than 
we. The feat is one that requires apelike ability. The only thing that
puzzled 
me is—why did she do it at all?" 
"It will have to remain a puzzle until she awakens," said Deltos, rising from 
the table. "Lucky for us, Somat, that you saw fit to study the root tongues. 
Otherwise we'd have to converse by signs." 
Neither Smith nor Van Emmon learned anything further that night. The twelve
were 
all very tired, apparently, and went right to bed; a procedure which was 
straightway seconded by the four watchers on the earth. Which brings us in
the 
most ordinary manner to the events of the next day. 
After breakfast all but Somat left the place and disappeared in various 
directions; and Rolla noted that the robes were, evidently, worn only at meal 
time. Most of the men were now dressed in rough working garments, similar to 
what one sees in modern factories. Whimsical sort of gods, Rolla told
herself, 
but gods just the same. 
"Tell me," began Somat, as the woman sat on the floor before him—he could not 
get her to use a chair—"tell me, what caused thee to leave thy side of the 
world? Did ye arouse the wrath of thy fellow creatures?" 
"Nay," answered Rolla, and proceeded to explain, in the wrong order, as a
child 
might, by relating first the crossing of the ridge, the flight from the bees, 
the "masters'" cruel method of dealing with Corrus and Dulnop, and finally
the 
matter of the fire itself, the real cause of the whole affair. Somat was 
intelligent enough to fill in such details as Rolla omitted. 
"Ye did right, and acted like the brave girl ye are!" he exclaimed, when
Rolla 
had finished. However, he did not fully appreciate what she had meant by "the 

winged masters," and not until she pointed out some bees and asked if, on
this 
part of the planet, such were the rulers of the humans, that the man grasped
the 
bitter irony of it all. 
"What! Those tiny insects rule thy lives!" It took him some time to
comprehend 
the deadly nature of their stings, and the irresistible power of concerted 
effort; but in the end he commented: "Tis not so strange, now that I think on 
it. Mayhap life is only a matter of chance, anyway." 
Presently he felt that he understood the Sanusian situation. He fell silent;
and 
Rolla, after waiting as long as her patience would allow, finally put the 
question temporarily uppermost in her mind: 
"It is true that I have crossed the edge of the world. And yet, I understand
it 
not at all. Can ye explain the nature of this strange world we live upon, 
Somat?" There was infinite respect in the way Rolla used his name; had she
known 
a word to indicate human infallibility, such as "your majesty," she would
have 
used it. "There is a saying among our people that the world be round. How can 
this be so?" 
"Yet it is true," answered Somat, "although ye must know that it be not round 
like a fruit or a pebble. No more is it flat, like this," indicating the lid
of 
the stove, near which they sat. "Instead, 'tis shaped thus"—and he took from
his 
finger a plain gold band, like an ordinary wedding ring—"the world is shaped 
like that!" 
Rolla examined the ring with vast curiosity. She had never seen the like
before, 
and was quite as much interested in the metal as in the thing it illustrated. 
Fortunately the band was so worn that both edges were nearly sharp, thus 
corresponding with the knifelike ridge over which she had crawled. 
"Now," Somat went on, "ye and your people live on the inner face of the
world," 
indicating the surface next his skin, "while I and my kind live on the outer 
face. Were it not for the difficulties of making the trip, we should have
found 
you out ere this." 
Rolla sat for a long time with the ring in her hand, pondering the great fact 
she had just learned. And meanwhile, back on the earth, four excited citizens 
were discussing this latest discovery. 
"An annular world!" exclaimed the doctor, his eyes sparkling delightedly. "It 
confirms the nebular hypothesis!" 
"How so?" Smith wanted to know. 
"Because it proves that the process of condensation and concentration, which 
produces planets out of the original gases, can take place at uneven speeds! 
Instead of concentrating to the globular form, Sanus cooled too quickly; she 
concentrated while she was still a ring!" 
Smith was struck with another phase of the matter. "Must have a queer sort of 
gravitation," he pointed out. "Seems to be the same, inside the ring or
outside. 
Surely, doc it can't be as powerful as it is here on the earth?" 
"No; not likely." 
"Then, why hasn't it made a difference in the inhabitants? Seems to me the 
humans would have different structure." 
"Not necessarily. Look at it the other way around; consider what an enormous 
variety of animal forms we have here, all developed under the same

conditions. 
The humming-bird and the python, for instance. Gravitation needn't have
anything 
to do with it." 
Billie was thinking mainly of the question of day and night. "The ring must
be 
inclined at an angle with the sun's rays," she observed. "That being the
case, 
Sanus has two periods each year when there is continuous darkness on the
inner 
face; might last a week or two. Do you suppose the people all hibernate
during 
those seasons?" 
But no one had an answer to that. 
Van Emmon said he would give all he was worth to explore the Sanusian
mountains 
long enough to learn their geology. He said that the rocks ought to produce
some 
new mineral forms, due to the peculiar condition of strain they would be 
subjected to. 
"I'm not sure," said he thoughtfully, "but I shouldn't be surprised if
there's 
an enormous amount of carbon there. Maybe diamonds are as plentiful as coal
is 
here." 
At the word "diamonds" Smith glanced covertly at Billie's left hand. But she
had 
hidden it in the folds of her skirt. Next moment the doctor warned them to be 
quiet; Somat and Rolla were talking again. 
He was telling her about his world. She learned that his people, who had
never 
concerned themselves with her side of the planet, had progressed enormously 
beyond the Sanusians. Rolla did not understand all that he told her; but the 
people on the earth gathered, in one way or another, that civilization had 
proceeded about as far as that of the year 1915 in Europe. All this, while 
fellow humans only a few thousand miles away, not only failed to make any 
progress at all, but lived on, century after century, the absolute slave of a 
race of bees! 
But it was a fact. The ancient city in which Rolla found herself had been,
only 
a generation before, a flourishing metropolis, the capital of a powerful
nation. 
There had been two such nations on that side of the planet, and the most
violent 
rivalry had existed between them. 
"However," Somat told Rolla, "'twas not this rivalry which wrought their 
downfall, except indirectly. The last great war between them was terrible,
but 
not disastrous. Either could have survived that. 
"But know you that the ruler of one of the nations, in order to carry on this 
war—which was a war of commerce (never mind what that means)—in order to
carry 
it on was obliged to make great concessions to his people. In the other
nation, 
the ruler oppressed the workers, instead, and drove them mad with his
cruelty. 
So that, not long after the end of the war, there was a great rebellion among 
the people who had been so long oppressed, and their government was
overthrown." 

Back on the earth the four investigators reflected on this in amazement. The 
case was wonderfully like that of Russia after the great war. Perhaps— 
"Immediately the other nation forced its soldiers to fight the victorious 
rebels. But at home the workers had tasted of power. Many refused to work at 
all; and one day, behold, there were two rebellions instead of one! And within
a 
very short time the whole world was governed by—the working class!" 
So this was what the Venusians had meant when they wrote that Sanus was ruled
by 
the workers! 
"What became of these rebellions?" Rolla asked, little understanding what it 
meant, but curious anyhow. 
"Devastation!" stated Somat solemnly. He waved a hand, to include all that
lay 
within the ruined city. "Not altogether because of the workers, although they 
were scarcely fit for ruling but because the former rulers and others of that 
kind, who liked to oppose their wills upon others, saw fit to start a fresh 
rebellion. Conflict followed conflict; sometimes workers were in power, and 
sometimes aristocrats. But the fighting ended not until"—he drew a deep 
breath—"until there were none left to fight!" 
"Ye mean," demanded Rolla incredulously, "that your people killed themselves
off 
in this fashion?" 
Aye," sorrowfully. "There were a few of us—they called us 'the middle
class'—who 
urged equality. We wanted a government in which all classes were represented 
fairly; what we called a democracy. Once the experiment was started, but it 
failed. 
"Saw ye the skeletons in the streets?" he went on." 'Twas a dreadful sight, 
those last few days. I were but a lad, yet I remember it all too well." He 
paused, then broke out fiercely: "I tell ye that I saw brother slay brother, 
father slay son, son slay mother, in those last days! 
"Lucky am I that I fled, I and my parents! They took me to a mountainous 
country, but even there the madness spread, and one day a soldier of the army 
killed my father and my mother. He sought me, also, that he might slay me; but
I 
hid from him beneath a heap of manure. Aye," he gritted savagely, "I owe my
life 
to a pile of manure! 
"These other eleven men all have like tales to tell. Only one woman survived 
those awful days. Young Sorplee is her son; his father was a soldier, whom
she 
herself slew with her own hands. Even she is now dead. 
"Well," he finished, after a long pause, "when the madness had spent itself,
we 
who remained came from our hiding-places to find our world laid waste. 'Tis
now 
thirty years since Sorplee's mother died, since we first looked upon these 
ruins, and we have made barely a beginning. We have little heart for the
work. 
Of what use is it, with no women to start the race afresh?" 
Rolla started despite herself. Was this the reason why she, despite her 
savagery, had been made so welcome? 
"Ye have not told me," said she hurriedly, "why ye and the others all wear
such 
curious garments when ye eat." 
Somat was taken off his guard. He had been chuckling to himself at the
woman's 
childlike mind. Now he had to look apologetic and not a little sheepish as he 
made reply: 

"The robes are a mere custom. It were started a great many years ago, by the 
founders of a—a—" He tried to think of a simpler expression than "college 
fraternity." "A clan," he decided. "All of we men were members of that clan." 
"And," pursued Rolla, "will ye give me the magic stone, that I may take the 
flowing blossoms back to my people, and release my loved one from the
masters' 
cruelty?" 
The great question was put! Rolla waited in tremulous anxiety for the answer. 
"Aye, stranger!" replied Somat vigorously. "More; ye shall have some of the 
little sticks!" 
Whereupon Rolla leaped to her feet and danced in sheer delight. Somat looked
on 
and marveled. Then, abruptly, he got up and marched away. He had not seen a 
woman in thirty years; and he was a man of principle. 
That night, when the twelve were again seated at the table, Somat related
this 
conversation with Rolla. Since he used his own language, of course she did
not 
understand what was said. "And I told her," he concluded, "how we came to be 
here; also the reason for the condition of things. But I doubt if she
understood 
half what I said. We have quite a problem before us," he added. "What shall
we 
do about it?" 
"You mean this woman?" Deltos asked. Rolla was busy with her food. "It seems
to 
me, brothers, that Providence has miraculously come to our aid. If we can
handle 
her people rightly the future of the race is assured." 
Somat thought it was simple enough. "All we need to do is send this woman
back 
with a supply of matches, and implicit instructions as to how best to proceed 
against the bees. Once released, their friends can make their way over the
edge 
and settle among us. Let the bees keep their country." 
The two who had seconded him before again showed agreement. Sorplee and
Deltos, 
however, together with the other seven, were distinctly opposed to the
method. 
"Somat," protested Deltos, as though surprised, "you forget that there's an 
enormous population over there. Let them come in of their own free will? Why, 
they would overrun our country! What would become of us?" 
"We'd have to take our chances, replied Somat energetically, "like good
sports! 
If we can't demonstrate our worth to them, enough to hold their respect, we'd 
deserve to be snowed under!" 
"Not while I'm alive!" snarled Sorplee. "If they come here, they've got to
give 
up their wilderness ways, right off! We can't stand savagery! The safest
thing 
for us, and the best for them, is to make an industrial army of 'em and set
'em 
to work!" His enthusiasm was boundless. 
"I must say," admitted Deltos, with his usual dignity, "that you have the
right 
idea, Sorplee. If I had stated it, however, I should have been more frank
about 
it. The arrangements you propose simply means that we are to take possession
of 
them!" 

"What!" shouted Somat, horrified. 
"Why, of course! Make slaves of them! What else?" 
XIV. THE SLAVE RAID
Despite all that Somat and his two backers could say, the other nine men
swiftly 
agreed upon the thing Deltos had proposed. Somat went so far as to declare
that 
he would warn Rolla; but he was instantly given to understand that any such
move 
would be disastrous to himself. In the end he was made to agree not to tell
her. 
"We aren't going to let you and your idealism spoil our only chance to save
the 
race!" Sorplee told him pugnaciously; and Somat gave his word. At first he
hoped 
that the nine might fall out among themselves when it came to actually
enslaving 
the Sanusians; but he soon concluded that, if there was any difference of 
opinion, the aristocratic element would take charge of half the captives,
while 
Sorplee's friends commandeered the rest. The outlook was pretty black for 
Rolla's friends; yet there was nothing whatever to do about it. 
Among the four people on the earth, however, the thing was being discussed
even 
more hotly. Van Emmon found himself enthusiastically backing Somat, the 
liberal-minded one. 
"He's got the right idea," declared the geologist. "Let the Sanusians come
over 
of their own free will! Let the law of competition show what it can do! Dandy 
experiment!" 
Smith could not help but put in: "Perhaps it's Deltos and Sorplee who are
right, 
Van. These Sanusians are mere aborigines. They wouldn't understand democratic 
methods." 
"No?" politely, from the doctor. "Now, from what I've seen of Rolla, I'll say 
she's a perfect example of 'live-and-let-live.' Nothing either subservient or 
autocratic in her relations with other people. Genuinely democratic, Smith." 
"Meanwhile," remarked Billie, with exaggerated nonchalance, "meanwhile, what 
about the bees? Are they going to be permitted to show their superiority or 
not?" 
Van Emmon took this to be aimed at him. "Of course not! We can't allow a race
of 
human beings to be dominated forever by insects! 
"I say, let's get together and put Rolla wise to what Deltos and Sorplee are 
framing up! We can do it, if we concentrate upon the same thought at the
right 
time!" 
Smith did not commit himself. "I don't care much either way," he decided. "Go 
ahead if you want to"—meaning Van Emmon and the doctor—"I don't want to butt 
in." 
"Don't need you," growled the geologist. "Two of us is enough." 
"Is that so?" sarcastically, from Billie. "Well, it'll take more than two of
you 
to get it over to Rolla!" 
"What do you mean?" hotly. 
"I mean," with deliberation,—"that if you and the doctor try to interfere
I'll 
break up our circle here!" They stared at her incredulously. "I sure will!
I'm 

not going to lend my mental influence for any such purpose!" 
"My dear," protested the doctor gently, "you know how it is: the combined 
efforts of the four of us is required in order to keep in touch with Sanus. 
Surely you would not—" 
"Oh, yes, I would!" Billie was earnestness itself. "Mr. Van Emmon was so good
as 
to blame me for what I did in that Capellette mix-up; now, if you please, I'm 
going to see to it that this one, anyhow, works itself out without our 
interference! 
"Well, I'll be darned!" The geologist looked again, to make sure it was
really 
his wife who had been talking thus. "I'm mighty glad to know that you're not 
intending to warn Supreme, anyhow!" 
"Maybe I shall! snapped Billie. 
"If you do," stated the doctor quietly, "then I'll break the circle myself." 
They looked at him with a renewal of their former respect as he concluded 
emphatically: "If you won't help us stop this slave raid, Billie, then, by 
George, you'll at least let the bees fight it out on their own!" 
And so the matter stood, so far as the investigators were concerned. They
were 
to be lookers-on, nothing more. 
Meanwhile the survivors of a once great civilization prepared to move in
person 
against the bees. They did this after Deltos had pointed out the advantages
of 
such a step. 
"If we rout the bees ourselves," said he, "the natives will regard us as
their 
saviors, and we shall have no trouble with them afterward." 
This was sound policy; even Somat had to admit it. He had decided to be a
member 
of the expedition, for the reason that Rolla flatly refused to accompany the 
other men unless he, her special god, went along. His two liberal-minded
friends 
stayed behind to take care of their belongings in the ruined city. 
The expedition was a simple one. It consisted of a single large auto truck
and 
trailer, the only items of automotive machinery that the twelve had been able
to 
reconstruct from the ruins. However, these served the purpose; they carried 
large supplies of food, also means for protection against the bees, together 
with abundant material for routing them. A large quantity of crude explosives 
also was included. The trailer was large enough to seat everybody; and the
ten 
men of the party had a good deal of amusement watching Rolla as she tried to
get 
accustomed to that land of travel. She was glad enough when the end of the
road 
was reached and the truck began to push its way into the wilderness, giving
her 
an excuse to walk. 
No need to describe the trip in detail. Within three days the truck was as
far 
as it could go up the rock wall of the "edge." The point selected was about 
twenty miles west of where Cunora was hid, and directly opposite the upper
end 
of her home valley. No attempt was made to go over the top as Rolla had done; 
instead, about two miles below the ridge a crevasse was located in the
granite; 
and by means of some two tons of powder a narrow opening was made through to

the 
other side. Through it the men carried their supplies on their backs, 
transferring everything to improvised sleds, a hundred pounds to a man. 
While this was being done, Rolla hurried east and located Cunora. The girl
was 
in a pitiful condition from lack of proper food, and comparative confinement
and 
constant strain. But during Rolla's absence she had seen none of the bees. 
"What are you going to do now?" she asked Rolla, after the explorer had told
her 
story. 
Rolla shrugged her shoulders indifferently. "These gods," she declared with 
sublime confidence, "can do no wrong! Whatever they propose must be for the 
best! I have done my part; now it is all in the hands of the Flowing
Blossom!" 
Not until they reached the head of the valley which had been her home did
Rolla 
ask Somat as to the plan. He answered: 
"Ye and the other woman shall stay here with me, on this hill." He produced a 
telescope. "We will watch with this eye-tube. The other nine men will go
ahead 
and do the work." 
"And will they separate?" 
"Nay. They intend to conquer this colony first; then, after your people are 
freed and safely on the way to my country, the conquerors will proceed to the 
next valley, and so on until all are released." He kept his word not to warn 
Rolla of the proposed captivity. "In that way the fear of them will go ahead
and 
make their way easy." 
Meanwhile the nine were getting ready for their unprecedented conquest. They
put 
on heavy leather clothes, also leather caps, gloves and boots. Around their 
faces were stiff wire nets, such as annoyed them all exceedingly and would
have 
maddened Cunora or Rolla. But it meant safety. 
As for weapons, they relied entirely upon fire. Each man carried a little
wood 
alcohol in a flask, in case it was necessary to burn wet or green wood. 
Otherwise, their equipment was matches, with an emergency set of flint and
steel 
as well. There could be no resisting them. 
"We'll wait here till we've seen that you've succeeded," Somat told Deltos
and 
Sorplee. "Then we'll follow." 
The nine left the hills. The hours passed with Rolla and Cunora amusing 
themselves at the "eye-tube." They could see the very spot where their lovers 
were being punished; but some intervening bushes prevented seeing the men 
themselves. The other villagers were at work quite as usual; so it was plain 
that, although the bees were invisible, yet they were still the masters. 
Hardly had the nine reached the first low-growing brush before they
encountered 
some of the bees. None attempted to attack, but turned about and flew back to 
report. It was not long before Supreme, and therefore Billie, knew of the 
approaching raiders. 
"They are doubtless provided with the magic flower," Supreme told her 
lieutenants. "You will watch the blossom as it sways in the wind, and keep 
always on the windward side of it. In this way you can attack the inferiors." 
The word was passed, bee-fashion, until every soldier and worker in the
colony 
knew her duty. The stingers were to keep back and watch their chance, while

the 
workers harassed the attackers. Moreover, with the hives always uppermost in
her 
mind, Supreme planned to keep the actual conflict always at a distance from
the 
"city." 
It was late in the day when the nine reached the stream in whose bed rested
the 
pyrites taken from Corrus and Dulnop. This stream, it will be remembered,
flowed 
not far from the torture-place. Deltos's plan was to rescue these two men
before 
doing anything else; this, because it would strengthen the villagers' regard
for 
the conquerors. 
The bees seemed to sense this. They met the invaders about three miles above
the 
village, in an open spot easily seen by the people with the telescope. And
the 
encounter took place during twilight, just early enough to be visible from a 
distance, yet late enough to make the fire very impressive. 
"Remember, it's the smoke as much as the flame," Deltos shouted to the
others. 
"Just keep your torches on the move, and make as much fuss as you can!" 
Next moment the swarm was upon them. It was like a vast cloud of soot; only,
the 
buzzing of those millions of wings fairly drowned out every other sound. The 
nine had to signal to one another; shouting was useless. 
Within a single minute the ground was covered with bees, either dead or 
insensible from the smoke. Yet the others never faltered. At times the
insects 
battered against the wire netting with such force, and in such numbers, that
the 
men had to fight them away in order to get enough air. 
Supreme watched from above, and kept sending her lieutenants with fresh 
divisions to first one man and then another, as he became separated from the 
rest. Of course, nobody suffered but the bees. Never before had they swarmed
a 
creature which did not succumb; but these inferiors with the queer things
over 
their faces, and the cows' hides over their bodies and hands, seemed to care
not 
at all. Supreme was puzzled. 
"Keep it up," she ordered. "They surely cannot stand it much longer." 
"It shall be done!" 
And the bees were driven in upon the men, again and again. Always the torches 
were kept waving, so that the insects never could tell just where to attack. 
Always the men kept moving steadily down-stream; and as they marched they
left 
in their wake a black path of dead and dying bees. Half of them had been
soldier 
bees, carrying enough poison in their stings to destroy a nation. Yet, nine 
little matches were too much for them! 
Presently the invaders had approached to within a half-mile of the 
torture-place. One of Supreme's lieutenants made a suggestion: 
"Had we not better destroy the men, rather than let them be rescued?" 
The commandant considered this fully. "No," she decided. "To kill them would 
merely enrage the other villagers, and perhaps anger them so much as to make 
them unmanageable." More than once a human had been driven so frantic as to 
utterly disregard orders. "We cannot slay them all." 

The bees attacked with unabated fury. Not once did the insects falter; orders 
were orders, and always had been. What mattered it if death came to them, so 
long as the Hive lived? For that is bee philosophy. 
And then, just when it seemed that the wisest thing would be to withdraw, 
Supreme got the greatest idea she had ever had. For once she felt positively 
enthusiastic. Had she been a human she would have yelled aloud for sheer joy. 
"Attention!" to her subordinates. "We attack no more! Instead, go into the
huts 
and drive all the inferiors here! Compel them to bring their tools! Kill all 
that refuse!" 
The lieutenants only dimly grasped the idea. "What shall we do when we get
them 
here?" 
"Do? Drive them against the invaders, of course!" 
It was a daring thought. None but a super bee could have conceived it. Off
flew 
the lieutenants, with Supreme's inspired order humming after them: 
"Call out every bee! And drive every last one of the inferiors to this spot!" 
And thus it came about that, a minute later, the nine looked around to see
the 
bees making off at top speed. Sorplee raised a cheer. 
"Hurrah!" he shouted, and the rest took it up. Neither admitted that he was 
vastly relieved; it had been a little nerve-shaking to know that a single 
thickness of leather had been all that stood, for an hour, between him and 
certain death. The buzzing, too, was demoralizing. 
"Now, to release the two men!" reminded Deltos, and led the way to the 
torture-place. They found Corrus and Dulnop exactly as the two women had left 
them six weeks before, except that their faces were drawn with the agony of
what 
they had endured. Below the surface of the ground their bodies had shriveled
and 
whitened with their daily imprisonment. Only their spirits remained
unchanged; 
they, of all the natives, had known what it was to feel superior. 
For the last time they were dug out and helped to their feet. They could not 
stand by themselves, much less run; but it is not likely they would have
fled. 
Somehow they knew that the strange head-coverings had human faces be hind
them. 
And scarcely had they been freed before Sorplee, glancing about, gave an 
exclamation of delight as he saw a group of natives running toward them. 
"Just what we want!" he exclaimed. "They've seen the scrap, and realize that 
we've won!" 
Looking around, the nine could see the other groups likewise hurrying their
way. 
All told, there were a couple of hundred of the villagers, and all were armed 
with tools they knew how to use very well. 
"Who shall do the honors?" asked Sorplee. "Wish Somat was here, to explain
for 
us." 
"Don't need him," reminded Deltos. "All we've got to do is to show these two 
fellows we dug up." 
And it was not until the first of the villagers was within twenty yards that
the 
nine suspected anything. Then they heard the buzzing. Looking closer, they
saw 
that it was—an attack! 
"Stop!" cried Deltos, in swift panic. "We are friends, not enemies!" 
It was like talking to the wind. The villagers had their choice of two fears: 
either fight the strangers with the magic flower, or—be stung to death. And

no 
one can blame them for what they chose. 
The nine had time enough to snatch knives or hatchets from their belts, or
clubs 
from the ground. Then, with wild cries of fear, the natives closed in. They 
fought as only desperate people can fight, caught between two fires. And they 
were two hundred to nine! 
In half a minute the first of the invaders was down, his head crushed by a 
mattock in the hands of a bee-tormented native. In a single minute all were
gone 
but two; and a moment later, Deltos alone, because he had chanced to secure a 
long club, was alive of all that crew. 
For a minute he kept them off by sheer strength. He swung the stick with such 
vigor that he fairly cleared a circle for himself. The natives paused,
howling 
and shrieking, before the final rush. 
An inspiration came to Deltos. He tore his cap from his head and his net from 
his face. 
"Look!" he screamed, above the uproar. "I am a man, like yourselves! Do not 
kill!" 
Next second he froze in his tracks. The next he was writhing in the death
agony, 
and the bees were supreme once. 
Supreme herself had stung Deltos. 
XV. OVERLOOKED
Of the four on the earth, Smith was the first to make any comment. He had 
considerable difficulty in throwing his thought to the others; somehow he
felt 
slightly dazed. 
"This is—unbelievable!" he said, and repeated it twice. "To think that those 
insects are still the masters!" 
"I wish"—Billie's voice shook somewhat—"I wish almost that I had let you warn 
Rolla. It might have helped—" She broke off suddenly, intent upon something 
Supreme was hearing. "Just listen!" 
"Quick!" a lieutenant was humming excitedly to the commandant. "Back to the 
hives; give the order, Supreme!" 
It was done, and immediately the bees quit the throng of natives and their 
victims, rushing at top speed for their precious city. As they went, Supreme 
demanded an explanation. 
"What is the meaning of this?" 
For answer the lieutenant pointed her antennae straight ahead. At first
Supreme 
could see nothing in the growing darkness; then she saw that some of the sky
was 
blacker than the rest. Next she caught a faint glow. 
"Supreme, the deadly flower has come to the hives!" 
It was true! In ten minutes the city was near enough for the commandant to
see 
it all very clearly. The fire had started on the windward side, and already
had 
swept through half the hives! 
"Quick!" the order was snapped out. "Into the remaining houses, and save the 
young!" 
She herself led the horde. Straight into the face of the flames they flew, 
unquestioningly, unhesitantly. What self, compared with the Hive? 
Next moment, like a mammoth billow, the smoke rolled down upon them all. And 
thus it came about that the villagers, making their cautious way toward the
bee 
city, shouted for joy and danced as they had never danced before, when they
saw 

what had happened. 
Not a bee was left alive. Every egg and larva was destroyed; every queen was 
burned. And every last soldier and worker had lost her life in the vain
attempt 
at rescue. 
Suddenly one of the villagers, who had been helping to carry Corrus and
Dulnop 
to the spot, pointed out something on the other side of the fire! It was
Rolla! 
"Hail!" she shouted, hysterical with happiness as she ran toward her people. 
Cunora was close upon her heels. "Hail to the flowing flower!" 
She held up a torch. Down fell the villagers to their knees. Rolla strode 
forward and found Corrus, even as Cunora located her Dulnop. 
"Hail to the flowing flower!" shouted Rolla again. "And hail to the free
people 
of this world! A new day cometh for us all! The masters—are no more!" 
The four on the earth looked at each other inquiringly. There was a heavy 
silence. The doctor stood it as long as he could, and then said: 
"So far as I'm concerned, this ends our investigations." They stared at him 
uncomprehendingly; he went on: "I don't see anything to be gained by this
type 
of study. Here we've investigated the conditions on two planets pretty 
thoroughly, and yet we can't agree upon what we've learned! 
"Van still thinks that the upper classes should rule, despite all the misery
we 
saw on Capellette! And Billie is still convinced that the working classes,
and 
no others, should govern! This, in the face of what we've just—seen! Sanus is 
absolute proof of what must happen when one class tries to rule; conflict, 
bloodshed, misery—little else! Besides" —remembering something, and glancing
at 
his watch—"besides, it's time for dinner." 
He and Smith got to their feet, and in silence quit the room. Billie and Van 
Emmon were still fumbling with their bracelets. The two young people rose
from 
the chairs at the same time and started across the room to put flip bracelets 
away. The wire which connected them trailed in between and caught on the 
doctor's chair. It brought the two of them up short. 
Van Emmon stared at the wire. He gave it a little tug. The chair did not
move. 
Billie gave an answering jerk, with similar lack of results. Then they
glanced 
swiftly at one another, and each stepped back enough to permit lifting the
wire 
over the chair. 
"In other words," Van Emmon stammered, with an effort to keep his voice 
steady—"in other words, Billie, we both had to give in a little, in order to
get 
past that chair!" 
Then he paused slightly, his heart pounding furiously. 
"Yes Van." She dropped the bracelets. "And—as for me—Van, I didn't really
want 
to see the bees win! I only pretended to—I wanted to make you—think!" 
"Billie! I'll say 'cooperate' if you will!" 
"Cooperate!" 
He swept her into his arms, and held her so close that she could not see what 
had rushed to his eyes. "Speaking of cooperation," he remarked unsteadily, 
"reminds me—it takes two to make a kiss!" 
They proceeded to experiment. 

