






Contents
CONTENTS
PART 1 LOSING A LEG & BECOMING WHOLE
CHAPTER 1 HITTING THE GROUND
CHAPTER 2 WAKING UP
CHAPTER 3 LOOKING DOWN
CHAPTER 4 THE BIG DEPRESSION
CHAPTER 5 ENDING A FIVE YEAR ODYSSEY
CHAPTER 6 LIFE INSIGHTS FROM LOSING A LIMB
PART 2 MASTER THE BASICS
CHAPTER 1 WHO SHOULD YOU TRUST?
CHAPTER 2 STRONG & LEAN WITHOUT GOING TO THE GYM IS IT POSSIBLE?
Paralysis By Analysis (PBA)
Develop The Cat Mindset
Underestimating Bodyweight Exercise
What if you have bad genetics?
CHAPTER 3 WHY TRAIN AT HOME?
Advantages of Bodyweight Training
Gym Machines vs. Bodyweight
Is This Program For You?
CHAPTER 4 WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT STRENGTH TRAINING
What is Strength?
How Many Reps Should I Do?
How Often Should I Train?
How Many Sets Should I do?
How Long Should I Rest?
Training Plateaus
Overtraining
Recovery
CHAPTER 5 ABS THE HOLY GRAIL OF FITNESS
The Truth About Ab Training
The Big Crunch
CHAPTER 6 STRETCHING FACTS & FALLACIES
To stretch or not to stretch?
CHAPTER 7 MOBILITY - USE IT OR LOSE IT
What Causes Joint Issues
Mobility vs. Flexibility
CHAPTER 8 TIPS FOR DEALING WITH BODYWEIGHT EXERCISE RELATED INJURY
Injury Treatment 101
Elbow, Shoulder and Wrist Pain From Straight Bar Chin-ups
Solutions & Tips
Wrist Pain From Pushing Exercises
PART 3 HOMEMADE MUSCLE WORKOUTS
CHAPTER 1 HOMEMADE MUSCLE PROGRAM STRUCTURE
The Arnold Fallacy

The 8 Essential Bodyweight Exercises
Primal Movement Patterns
How Strong Should You Become?
CHAPTER 2 WARMING UP
Dynamic Stretching
CHAPTER 3 BEGINNERS
CHAPTER 4 BASIC
CHAPTER 5 ADVANCED
6  The Number of the Beast
Why Dead-hangs?
Introduction Part (1 Week)
Phase 1 (3 months)
Phase 2 (4 months)
Workout C - Rest/Pause technique
Phase 3 (4 months)
Workout C - Reversed Pyramid
PART 4 NUTRITION
CHAPTER 1 LOST IN DIET LAND
How Diets Trick You Into Losing Weight
Why Do Diets Make You Feel Better?
CHAPTER 2 BREAKFAST: NOT THE MOST IMPORTANT MEAL OF THE DAY
Reality and Science Behind Breakfast.
Special Weight Loss Diets - What Works For Me
CHAPTER 3 INTERMITTENT FASTING & THE MYTH OF FREQUENT MEALS
Training in a Fasted State & The Frequent Meal Myth
CHAPTER 4 HOW CLEAN SHOULD YOUR DIET BE?
CHAPTER 5 MY SECRET WEIGHT-LOSS STRATEGY
CHAPTER 6 THE TRUTH ABOUT SUPPLEMENTS
CHAPTER 7
FINAL THOUGHTS ON NUTRITION
FINAL THOUGHTS ON HOMEMADE MUSCLE
Common Excuses Your Mind Will Use Against You to Avoid Working Out
How to train when life gets in the way
Missing your passion for exercise
Weights or Bodyweight Exercise - What is Better?
EXERCISE MENU
Developing the Zen mindset
Recommended Equipment (optional)
Video Tutorials
#1 Pull-ups - The king of upper body exercises (Lats, Arms & Forearms)
#2 Push-ups (Chest, Triceps , Serratus Anterior)
#3 Pistol Squats (whole legs)
#4 Dips (Chest, Shoulders, Triceps)
#5 Inverted Rows (Middle Back Area)
#6 Handstand Push-ups (Shoulders & Triceps)
#7 Leg Raises (Lower and Side Abs)
#8 Prone Cobra (Lower Back)

End Notes

Part 1
Losing a Leg & Becoming Whole

Chapter 1
Hitting the ground
It is March of 2008 and I am working the late night shift as a pizza delivery guy
while finishing my studies in sports science and physical education at the
Aristotelian University in Thessaloniki (Greece). I'm driving in a dark alley
when suddenly big bright lights unexpectedly blind my eyes. I crash with a big
automobile and I start floating into thin air...
Movies tell you that in moments like these, time goes into slow motion and you
see a reel of memories playing a short version of your life. Although I didn't see
a short trailer of my life, time indeed felt to be flowing a lot slower. What was
probably a 3-4 second flight felt more like 15 seconds. I experienced a weird, but
pleasant, state of weightlessness. It felt as if I was going to keep ascending into
the vastness of the dark sky.
Then suddenly, I hit the pavement, twenty-three meters away from the crashing
point (as they inform me later on). I still haven't fully understood what
happened. I try to get up and I look at my leg. Something is wrong. The lower
part of my leg is twisted and my ankle... wait a moment that can't be right. I
close and re-open my eyes to confirm what I had just seen. My leg is twisted in
such a way that my ankle is lying on top of my knee. This is not a good sign, I
think to myself.
The weird thing is that I feel no pain yet, which made me wonder if my eyes
fooled me for a second. Fortunately, the human brain releases hormones that
relieve pain in situations like these. Unfortunately, this doesn't last as long as you
would want it to.  Suddenly I sense a weird electrifying feeling. It is as if burning
electricity is starting to flow through my leg. The endorphins that were relieving
my pain start to fade away and the affected nerves start to wake up.
As I lay on my back, pain and fear start to overwhelm me. I hear people around
me shouting to call an ambulance. With the side of my eye I can see a puddle of
blood next to my leg on the pavement. I can't see much more than that because I
am wearing long blue-jeans. I lay there and look at the dark sky while I feel
people gather around me. The pain is growing stronger and stronger so I can't
pay too much attention them. I just close my eyes and hope that the ambulance
will come as soon as possible to take me to the hospital (and hopefully numb the

pain). At one moment I feel a presence next to me, I hear a male voice talking to
me, trying to comfort me. I don't remember what he said but he gave me his
hand and told me to squeeze it. I did and it helped a little bit with the pain.
After about twenty minutes, which felt more like hours, the ambulance finally
arrives. They start placing me on the stretcher and the moment they lift my leg I
start screaming. They pain is excruciating.  We are now heading to the hospital
and I'm in the back of the ambulance with a paramedic. He asks me if I have a
phone on me and someone I should notify. I say yes and I reach into my pouch
(you know the one pizza delivery guys wear). As I'm reaching for my phone I
notice that the floor is covered with my blood. I have never seen so much blood
in my life before so I start stressing out again. I asked the paramedic why is there
so much blood? I haven't realized yet, that both bones of my lower leg, the tibia
(the thick one) and the fibula (the thin one) are sticking out of my skin. So I
asked the paramedic what is wrong with me, why is there so much blood?! I
don't know why, but he doesn't respond. I asked again. ''Hey man! Why is there
so much blood, am I dying or something?'' He doesn't answer again... Well, that
can't be a good sign I think to myself.
I wondered for quite some time after my accident why didn't he answer me, or at
least try to console me. Who knows, maybe it was his first day on the job and he
was also freaking out. Anyway, back to the story.
The drive to the hospital seems like it takes forever. Because there are no
available hospitals nearby, we had to drive all the way to the other side of town,
which took a good twenty minutes. Twenty whole minutes on a bumpy road, and
every bump firing up the nerves in my leg, causing me to clench my teeth and
breathe heavily out of my nose. The paramedic reminded me to call someone, so
I decided to call my parents. I took two deep breaths, and used a fake calm voice
to inform them that I had a ''little'' accident and they probably should come to the
hospital. When I arrive at the hospital I start to doze off as the pain is a bit more
bearable. Maybe they have given me something for the pain, I don't know.
Everything is really fuzzy, as if I'm in a dream.
Suddenly they take me in a room to clean my leg wound. I'm not sure but I think
they are using some type of water hose, designed for these kinds of situations.
The pressure of the water on the open wound brings me back into reality. This is
probably the most uncomfortable sensation I have ever had. I start to groan again
and the nurse tells me ''relax its just water.''  Yeah right, I thought to myself; easy

for you to say, you didn't snap your leg in two an hour ago.  I am informed I
have an open fracture and I'm going to be operated the moment a surgery room
is available. After that, I dose off again.
I wake up in a surgery room and a surgeon with a very calm voice and a smile on
his face starts talking to me. He asks me typical stuff like what's my name,
where did I grow up and other similar questions to calm me down. But suddenly,
the seriousness of my injury overwhelms me with horrific thoughts. I begin to
think what if I might not be able to run again? I loved mountain running,
especially on the cold and crisp-air highlands west of Greece, where I grew up.
The thought that I might not be able to do that again makes me panic. I tell him I
want to run again and that he HAS to fix my leg. I grew up being an exercise-nut
and having a healthy leg meant everything to me at that moment. I was 23 years
old and I felt too young to become crippled. A sweet sense of drowsiness
disrupts my stressful thoughts. The anesthesia has kicked in. I slowly fall asleep.
After what I was told was a 5½ hour-long surgery I wake up vomiting. There's a
reason doctors don't allow you to eat for a day before surgery I guess. It felt as if
I was already puking for a while before I even came to my senses. The doctor
was relieved that I woke up. ''You got us worrying there for a moment champ.'' 
They had some difficulty waking me up, I am told later.

Chapter 2
Waking up
The next day I wake up in a typical hospital room to the smell of iodoform (you
know, that usual sterilized hospital smell). I feel...ahh, how can I say this
eloquently? I feel like crap. My leg hurts, my back hurts, everything hurts and
feels achy. I basically feel as if I have fallen off some cliff; like the coyote from
Road-Runner. It made sense; I did fly twenty-three meters before landing on the
pavement after all. A team of doctors who are performing morning rounds pass
by and they tell me I am lucky I didn’t sustain any other wounds (besides a leg
split open in two). One of them tells me that being in such good shape as an
athlete probably saved me from a couple of more fractures.
I have all kinds of IV tubes attached on my arms; an electrolyte IV to keep me
hydrated, antibiotics for a leg infection (I later learn I have) and a blood
transfusion to replenish the blood I have lost. Its day one and I am already
running out of patience with these stupid uncomfortable tubes. I generally don't
like wearing excessive or restrictive stuff. I can barely tolerate a watch on my
wrist and I don't wear a coat unless it’s minus degrees outside.  During the next
few days, I was given five of those blood bags in order to replenish the lost
blood from all the surgeries and the accident. The doctor who performed my
surgery, and is responsible for me, enters my hospital room. He tells me they did
everything they could to save my leg. Although they have reattached it, they had
to remove an inch of bone, some muscle tissue and skin in order to avoid further
infections. If the infection didn't calm down they would have to remove more
bone and tissue off my leg the following days.
Less than twenty-four hours have passed since my first surgery, when I am
informed that I need to be operated on again. As my doctors feared, the infection
has started to spread. The antibiotics haven't managed to keep it under control.
They take me back to the surgery room, once again give me general anesthesia
and remove more bone and soft tissue.
Over the next 5 weeks I have another 4 similar surgeries. After surgery number
4, I wake up and look at my leg realizing that some weird metallic system is
attached to it. The doctors pass by and tell me that it's called an external fixator -
its purpose is to keep the fractured bones aligned until they heal. They tell me
that the pins screwed in my leg... wait what? I ask them what do you mean
screwed in my leg? I realize that this weird metallic device is not just externally

attached on my leg as I first thought. It is actually screwed in it.
I'm still fresh out of surgery and highly medicated so I can't really feel a whole
lot, but the thought of having this weird system screwed in my leg makes it look
more like a medieval torture apparatus than a modern system for fracture
treatment. I ask them again to explain to me what exactly this device is. They tell
me that external fixators are used in severe open fractures in order to immobilize
bones and allow them to heal. They consist of a number of pins and thick screws
which go through your skin and bone, entering one side of the affected limb and
coming out the other end. These pins and screws are secured together outside of
the affected limb with clamps and rods constructing this whole metallic frame.
Picture 1 - The medieval torturing apparatus I was telling you about...
The surgeries have worn me out, physically and mentally, I am tired and in
constant pain. The pain treatment sucked. You see... Greek hospitals, mainly due
to limited funding and corruption, are not the most ideal place to be hospitalized
in the western ''developed'' world. Anyway, let's try and stay out of politics and
let's focus on the story.

It's late at night and I am lying in bed unable to sleep. My leg pain starts getting
worse and sweat is constantly dripping of my back soaking up the bed. I press a
button to call a nurse so I can maybe get some more pain medication. Half an
hour passes and no response. I look at an old clock on the wall - its 3 a.m. I
squint my eyes for a couple of seconds and when I open them its daylight.
Nurses are passing by and family and friends are in the room. How can this be
possible I think to myself, it was 3 a.m. seconds ago. I talk to the people around
me but no one replies. My voice has a weird echo... I squint my eyes again and
I'm back in the dark room lying on sweaty sheets. Ok, relax I say to myself.
You're just hallucinating from the fever and the drugs. Since day one I had a
non-stop fever which made everything even worse. The doctors informed me
that it was a normal reaction to the physical stress from all the surgeries, drugs
and the open wound I sustained. Nightmares and weird hallucinations from the
fever and drugs is how I spend most nights. 
Another thing that makes these days seem endless is the fact that my back is also
killing me. Your back can get extremely sore when you have been lying on it for
days. At some point, my back hurt even more than my leg. One day I noticed a
physiotherapist doing rounds with some students. You could see right through
his fake attempts to impress the young female interns with that ''I run shit here''
attitude. I tell him my back is killing me and ask if he can do something about it.
His response, ''And why are you asking me about something like that?'' I look at
him with a dumbfounded look as he leaves the room. The only thing that comes
to mind is the lyrics of my favorite rock poet, Jim Morrison''People are
strange... ♪''
On week three, my doctor comes in with some bad news. He tells me that if the
infection keeps on spreading they will have to amputate my leg. ''We ought to
inform you about this so that you can be prepared.'' I said, “ok” and pretended to
be cool until he left the room, when I turned on the side and teared up a bit. I
was tired and confused. How had my life suddenly taken such a turn? A week
ago, I was sprinting along the seafront of Thessaloniki's Port at lightning speed
and now I am in a hospital bed wondering if I'll have my leg sawed off. I am
operated on again the next day and three days after that a team of doctors enters
the room to update me about my situation. “You've dodged the bullet,” they tell
me.  I feel relieved, for now...
Due to the trauma and all the surgeries to avoid infection, one-third of my lower
leg had literally no skin. All that was separating it from thin air was the bandage

that a medical intern would change every morning. In my last surgery, doctors
took a skin graft from my thigh to cover the exposed part of my leg. In such
situations like mine, skin-graft transplants are not the equivalent of cosmetic
surgery. It's not like they cover the wound with what looks as normal skin. It's
simply a thin layer of scar tissue that covers the wound and makes it look more
like a third degree burn than anything else. To avoid infections, the following
couple of days, an intern had to apply a form of acidic liquid on the wound and
the healing skin. He had to do this every morning. Every day at exactly 11 a.m.
he would enter the room and the torture would begin. You know that stinging
feeling you get when you have a small cut on your finger and lemon juice comes
in touch with it? Imagine the same feeling, and multiply it, let's say, about a
hundred times. And there I thought my torture had ended.

Chapter 3
Looking down
After five weeks in a hospital bed, five surgeries and countless feverish nights I
have lost more than ten pounds. I also haven't walked for a month so my leg is
extremely atrophied but I haven't really noticed yet.  Because the lower part of
the leg is swollen due to the trauma, I didn't notice how much muscle mass I had
been gradually losing. Some nights I feel my abnormally thin thigh muscles
when I rub them to divert the pain from the lower affected area of the leg. But
when it's daylight I forget about it. Even thought I knew on some level that my
thigh had lost a lot of it's muscle mass, I didn't expect to see what I saw when I
observed my whole leg a week before I checked out of the hospital.
It's a Tuesday morning and my doctors tell me I'm going home in a few days.
Once they leave the room I have a good look at my leg while as I'm trying to
change my shorts. What I see shocks me. I look down and realize that my thigh
is actually thinner then my knee. How is this possible? I was in top condition a
month ago. Sprinting on the beach, dead lifting in the gym, muscle striations and
veins popping from my athletic legs... it now seems as if my left thigh belongs to
someone dying of starvation. You see, our legs might have the strongest and
biggest muscles in the whole body, but these muscles are also the ones that
atrophy the fastest once you stop bearing weight on them. A few weeks of no
walking were enough for what felt like maybe even 70% of my leg's muscle
mass to disappear.
A nurse enters the room, “tomorrow you'll be allowed to stand up again,” she
tells me. “What do you mean,” I ask, while feeling disoriented from my previous
realization. “Well, you'll get started on learning how to move around with
crutches on your healthy leg” she explains.  I nod, open my laptop and put in a
DVD with old Friends episodes a buddy of mine had brought earlier that day. I
try to forget what I had just seen and maybe divert my attention enough to get a
laugh or two. On the bright side, I had family and friends every day who also
cheered me up a bit, or at least tried to... It's funny how in times like these people
you think will be by your side vanish while others you least expect end up
showing up every day.
Like my buddy Kostas for example. We had met 6 months ago, me being his
Canoe Coach at the Nautical Club where I used to train and also work part-time
during my studies. He was a hard worker and that's something I always

appreciated as a coach in my athletes but also in people generally.  We got along
well but I didn't expect him to visit me every single day - for 5 whole weeks! He
would try to cheer me up and also distract me from this whole mess I was in. Not
too long ago, I was bossing him around the Nautical Club to do pull ups and
work on his rowing technique but now our roles had switched. My doctors had
me doing some toe extensions and flexions to keep the nerves in the leg active. I
didn't really have the mood for it... So Kostas made sure I didn't slack off and
motivated me to try even harder.
On the other hand, some lifelong friends didn't even appear. That's ok, I never
kept hard feelings on account of that. I myself was a very different and shallow
person back then, before all this.
I thought getting out of the bed would be easy. You see, until now due to all the
surgeries, I wasn't even allowed to sit up straight on my bed. I was constantly
laid on my back. A physiotherapist entered my room to get me started on some
moving around with my crutches. I expected we would be doing that from day
one. “So, am I going to walk today?” I asked.  “Of course not,” he tells me. 
“Day one is just about getting you to sit upright on the bed.” The cocky ignorant
voice in my head is going on saying ''oh come on man, I'm not a hundred years
old, I'm a strong guy for goodness 'sake.''
The moment I stand upright on the bed, my heart starts racing, I start sweating
and feeling dizzy. It was as if the moment I tried to stand up my body triggered
an alarm. I laid down again wondering what is going on?  Why is my body
freaking out? They tell me that it's a common reaction in cases like mine. The
body has been adjusted to being on a supine position for a long period of time
and it overreacts when it has to compensate for the effect of gravity upon the
change in the distribution of blood and blood pressure.
So, the next three days I just try to readjust my body in a standing upright
position. It took three days to be able to do just that. Three days just to learn to
sit straight up on a bed.  Man how did I get to this point, I think to myself.  After
that, I slowly start walking on crutches. First walking three steps and back, then
three meters and back, then to the bathroom and back, and after a week, I start
walking a bit in the corridor outside my room. It was extremely tiring just to
move around my bed; those walking attempts felt like the equivalent of an hour
of mountain running. But they also started giving me a bit of confidence.
Forty-two days after my accident the doctors come in my room with, what is

considered for them, good news. “You are going to be discharged in a couple of
days,” they tell me. I ask them, how long is my recovery going to take. “About a
year,” they reply. I'm startled...”a whole year?” I ask again. ''Well yes, give or
take. It will take a lot of time to re-lengthen your leg to cover the lost bone
length, but we think we will succeed.'' You see the fixator they had installed on
my leg (that medieval torturing device) besides stabilizing my leg's fractured
bones, also had the ability to lengthen it.
The way this works is that every time your bones start to stick together, you turn
a screw in the system that pulls the bones a bit apart until they re-build new bone
tissue between the new gap and start sticking together. Think of it as teeth
braces, but instead of aligning your teeth, it also lengthens them (bad analogy I
guess, anyway). They told me that even short people who wanted to become
models used external fixators to gain height. I think to myself - these people are
definitely out of their mind to go through such torture just to become a model.
Once the doctors leave the room I try to digest the fact that I am going to be a
patient for a whole year. It isn't easy, especially for a non-sedentary/exercise
freak like me. How am I supposed to spend a year on crutches and sitting on my
ass without going cuckoo?

Chapter 4
The big depression
After leaving the hospital, I returned to my parent’s home for my recovery. The
thing I enjoy most of all during those first weeks is...eating! After six weeks of
crappy hospital food and losing a lot of weight my body was constantly craving
anything that has calories and a decent home-cooked taste.
The nights are still tough. I am constantly uncomfortable. Besides the screws and
pins in my leg, the rest of my body also feels extremely restricted. After being a
lifetime prone-sleeper my only option now is to sleep on a strict straight position
on my back (due to the external fixator). I can't get used to it...I am constantly
craving sleep but at the same time the leg pain and the awkward lying position I
am restricted to prevents me from shutting my eyes long enough for Mr.
Sandman to visit.
Any time I have to move, for example going to the kitchen to get a glass of
water, I have to carefully walk on crutches - slower than a turtle. I also get dizzy
most of the time I stand up so that adds extra difficulty to the task. I hate the fact
that I need crutches for every little movement I have to do and wonder how
handicapped people get through a whole life in this manner. My admiration for
these people grows tremendously within a couple of days. People who spend a
lifetime in wheelchairs and using crutches while maintaining a positive attitude
deserve tremendous respect. They ground me and remind me that situations like
mine are minor in comparison.
Still, I hated the condition I was in. For the next three months I didn't leave
home. I had no desire to see or socialize with people. I just stayed in my room
most of the day watching TV shows. Thank goodness we live in a golden age of
TV and I have plenty of shows to distract my attention.
However, you can't watch TV shows all day on your laptop, you need a break at
some point otherwise you get a headache. After those three months, I decide to
start moving around a bit. A friend comes by and we go for a walk in the
neighborhood. People stare at the metallic device screwed into my leg as if it is
from outer space. Being an introverted person I hated the attention. I decide
maybe it would be better to go out during the evening to attract less attention.
The next day I had a routine check up with my doctor.
After taking some x-rays of my leg, I am in the waiting room with another dozen

fracture related patients. A lot of them also have fixators on their arms and legs,
which makes me feel as if we all share a silent comradery. It had been quite
awhile since I was surrounded by people without feeling as if I was from another
planet. Other than that, it's like any typical boring doctor visit. People in the
waiting room looking indirectly at each other for what feels like forever. Others
pretending to be reading something serious on their phone or flicking through
some magazine pages. A couple of heavy sighs from patients who were in pain
(some probably more dramatic and frequent than required). The buzz of the x-
ray machine in the background and finally... hearing the receptionist call your
name. I go in, say hello with a fake smile and give my doctor my x-rays. After
looking at them with his team, he tells me, “we have progress.” The bone seems
to be healing and considering my youthful age and healthy background I
probably won't have any problems with my recovery. After the appointment and
for the next couple of weeks I gradually start feeling optimistic. Unfortunately
this does not last that long.
A month later, and five months in total after my accident, the healing process has
come to a halt. We schedule a new surgery. They have to install a different
fixator in my leg and draw bone marrow from my pelvis and inject it in the
fracture site. They explain this is a typical process performed to assist bone
healing in extreme fractures like mine so I agree to go on with it. I thought I was
done with surgeries so I wasn't thrilled when I heard I had to have a new one.
Unfortunately, the new fixator installed in my leg is now even bigger and more
uncomfortable. The following months I suffer from extremely painful pin
infections caused by this new fixator and I'm on and off heavy antibiotics and
pain-killers all the time. Days, weeks and months keep on passing by. Winter,
spring, summer...trees grow green leaves, the leaves die again and I'm just
waiting in my dark room, which is on the last floor/attic of my parental home.
Curtains closed, depressed and not in the mood for company. The leg continues
to show no progress at all.

The new even bigger and more uncomfortable fixator.
My doctors recommend a new surgery again. They now plan to remove a small
piece of bone from my pelvis and place it on top of the fracture inside my leg.
They explain to me this is another approach used in cases like mine and most of
the time is successful. Man, I think to myself, what is next, leg transplantation?!
They inform me that the down side of this procedure is that there might be
permanent nerve damage on the side of my pelvis and the post-surgery recovery
period is considered quite painful (which is the technical term for ''it will hurt
like a mother-f#$%r). A couple of hours after waking up from surgery, the
anesthetic starts to wear off. I feel as if a horse has kicked me below the rib cage.
A couple of days later I am once again checked out the hospital and back to my
attic room - or what I also had started calling that period ''The bat-cave.''  Every
time I had a check up with my doctor, I just asked how much longer... He always
gave me the same answer, ''A couple of months more, have patience...'' That was
probably the worst part of all these years. Building hope every couple of months
just to receive bitter disappointment again. The X-rays (which by now I have
become an expert in examining by myself) only show a black disheartening gap.
No white color, no calcium formations... just a black gap, which also resembled

my mental state. I started spending most days in my room contemplating if an
amputation would be a better solution. Whenever I talk about it with my doctors
they tell me to have some more patience and not to rush into extreme decisions.
Not to rush?  It's been almost two years and still no results, what do you mean
not to rush? I don't want to spend all my youth sitting in a dark room and having
surgeries every couple of months!
Those were the darkest times of my life. Locked in my room, unwilling to do
anything productive, feeling too tired to feel angry, feeling down.  I have never
felt so tired in my life before, even though I did nothing but sit or lay on my bed
all day. Where is all this fatigue coming from I wondered. I had been an athlete
most of my life, training for national championships, lifting weights , swimming
3km's, running up to two hours some days and training a total of 3-5 hours most
days. Yet, I never felt as tired as I felt now. Just going to the bathroom felt like a
whole journey. Physically, I felt as if I had grown forty years over the past
twenty months. I guess depression does that to you.
Since I was young, I always had a tendency to get depressed and melancholic
due to my nihilistic philosophy about life (Nietzsche was sort of my role model).
But, exercise was a great way to distract me from those moods. Now, however, I
was going through all this and had nothing to distract me from such feelings. My
body felt heavy, my mind was constantly blurry with no energy to focus on
anything. I would try reading a book, but after trying to focus on a couple of
lines, my mind just became foggy and I felt worn out. I felt disconnected from
everything and everyone. There would be days when I would spend all day in
bed with some music playing in the background from my laptop speakers while I
just starred at the empty ceiling. Those two years felt literally like an eternity.
Some days I almost counted every single minute.
Everything was failing and my doctors once again proposed a new operation.
They would remove a piece of muscle from my back and place it on top of the
fracture where the skin quality was bad. ''Because a lot of muscle and skin tissue
has been removed in the first surgeries, the fracture-sight might benefit from
some additional healthy soft tissue,” they tell me.  “Yet it's quite a risk because
you are left with only one functional artery for blood supply in this area,'' they
explain to me. I begin to think they must be making a bad joke.. When I
understand they are serious about removing part of a muscle from my back and
placing it on my leg, I decide I have had enough of all this and that I am going
somewhere else for a second opinion.

After what had been two and a half years and a total of 8 surgeries and no actual
progress in the last year, I decided to fly over to the Netherlands. I am also half
Dutch from my mother’s side and have a few folks there. The Netherlands have
a good reputation in trauma medicine so I decide it's a good place to get a second
opinion. I move to the Netherlands, find a good surgical team and get started
with treatment again. After a couple of surgeries and two different fixators
installed in my leg, the bone seems to start to healing again. A year passes by
and they install an inner titanium plate removing my fixator. I'm finally fixator-
free for the first time in three and a half years! You can't imagine what a relief it
is not to have any metallic objects going through my leg after such a long time.
Although I do have an inner titanium plate, I don't really care. I can't feel it that
much anyways. I could finally sleep in a different position other than my back
and walk outside without people staring at my leg as if it has some kind of alien
technology installed on it.
After two months I have an inner infection again and they are forced to remove
the plate. Still the bone has healed quite a bit and they tell me that it might
completely heal in the following months even with just a leg cast. After three
months my doctors allow me to walk again and I start rehabilitation. Something,
though, doesn't feel right. It is as if my leg will crack and break if I put too much
pressure on it. It just doesn't feel sturdy enough. I inform my doctors and we do
some x-rays, but nothing really shows up. It's probably normal to feel like this
after not walking for so many years; apparently it’s just psychological I think to
myself. Until, one day I trip while crossing the road and the bone breaks again.
There I was, after four and a half years of walking on crutches and canes, having
six different metallic systems screwed into my leg and severe depression - back
to square one. Waiting on the side of the road for my second ambulance ride.
This must be big long nightmare I think to myself. Maybe I was left in a coma
after my accident and I'm just imagining all this.
A couple of days later, I am once again lying down on a couch at home with a
broken leg, staring at the wall. They had put a splint on it, hoping it would heal.
Since the skin of my leg was so destroyed from the accident and all the prior
operations, it couldn't sustain any more surgeries. Two months pass by and the
bone-healing rate is minimal.

Chapter 5
Ending a Five Year Odyssey
The doctor's solution to my desperation was as usual, ''have more patience.'' 
That summer my mental health had regressed. Out of the blue, I started having
panic attacks. My heart would race and the air in the room felt so dense as if I
had to swallow it to breath. My hands would suffer from extreme eczema
breakouts. They would suddenly get covered with painful red blisters, to the
point where I couldn't even use my crutches. So there I was, me and my useless,
deformed limb that didn't even look like a leg to me anymore. Not able to even
use my crutches to go to the bathroom and struggling to breathe.
Until one day, I said to myself I had enough....
I decided to chop off what was left of that useless part of a leg I was dragging
around for the last 4 years and I would go on with my life. I told my doctors I
wanted to amputate (feeling like a fool that I hadn't done this earlier). Even
though none of my doctors had recommended it until now, I knew that it was the
only true solution. The doctors respected my opinion and finally told me it was a
better choice if I wanted to have an athletic lifestyle again. After making this
huge decision that day and after receiving my doctor's approval, I felt liberated.
It was as if a huge weight I had been carrying with me all those years since my
accident, was lifted. After a lot of time I felt a sprinkle of self-confidence again.
That summer was a huge revolution in my life. I would wake up every day
feeling like a different person. I believe that people rarely change, but a life
tragedy can offer the proper conditions for this to happen. After being depressed
for four and a half years, I decided I was just tired of feeling like crap. I wanted
to be happy again. Within a couple of weeks I was transformed. Meditation
played a huge role in all this and it was what got me started on my journey of
self-improvement. I don't remember why, but I ordered a book about meditation
I had found online. It was written by a Tibetan monk and a science reporter for
the New York Times. The book talked about how meditation had been proven to
have positive effects on the brain and other cool stuff like that. I thought why not
give this a try. After starting to meditate I also decide to feed my body with
proper food and to start some strength training.
Although I need crutches to move around, and going to a gym isn't an option, I
am determined to find a way to workout. So I start developing a home

bodyweight routine. I just did a couple of pull ups, push ups, leg raises and dips
in the beginning. I don't have any equipment so I used a door-frame to do my
pull ups on (picture below) and a narrow stairway to do my dips. Even though
this wasn't a lot, my muscles started to wake up again. As body-fat started to fall
off, muscular curves and vascularity began to emerge beneath my skin. My
reflection on the mirror started to remind me of my good old fit self - it was
really empowering. My hand eczema started to subside and my brain-fog started
to clear up, so I started reading more books. I became obsessed with anything I
could find on health, nutrition and exercise but also on self-improvement.
The surgery was scheduled in six months and I promised myself that I would be
prepared for it in every possible way. As an athlete most of my life, having a
strong body was something that also supported me mentally. I don't know about
you but when I'm in good shape I feel more rooted to the ground. My body and
mind feel sturdier. So, I knew that if I wanted to face this surgery with courage
and tenacity, I would have to be strong both mentally and physically. For six

months I trained consistently both body & mind. Meditating, strengthening my
muscles and eating healthy. It all paid off. I was feeling healthier than ever and
my body was in great shape. I was ready to face the big challenge.
The big day
It's January 17th and Amsterdam is covered in snow. I am looking out a hospital
room window at the snowy scenery. After waiting peacefully for a couple of
hours a nurse enters and tells me with a soft smile that it's time. I'm reflecting to
my situation and my own calmness amazes me for a brief moment. I never
thought someone could be heading to surgery - to have his leg cut off, without
experiencing severe anxiety, especially when this person was me. I had been
extremely calm these past few months, mainly thanks to my new daily habit of
meditation. However, a part of me was wondering if I would freak out the day of
the big operation. My heart beat raised and my hands felt unsteady a few times.
However, a couple of seconds focusing on my meditational techniques were
enough to remove the tension. I simply reminded myself that this all was for the
best and observed my physiology's response to my emotions until they melted
away.
As I lay on the surgical table I say to myself - this is it. My palms feel shaky
again as I realize that a part of my body which I have been carrying around all
my life will disappear. But, my mind is at peace. I accept that this is a huge
turning point in my life and that it's only going to be uphill from now on. The
anesthetic slowly starts to kick in and my vision becomes blurry. I can only see
the gloomy white lights on the ceiling. Once again I enjoy the feeling of
weightlessness and I let myself fall asleep.
A couple of hours later I wake up and a nurse tells me the surgery went well. I
am freezing cold which is a typical post surgery reaction. The nurse brings me a
heated blanket. Suddenly I realize I still feel my leg. Did they do the
amputation? I ask. The nurse tells me yes. What's weird is that I still feel my leg,
and even though I was prepared for this, the sensation was remarkably realistic...
it's called phantom limb, and if you've never heard about it before, it's the
sensation an amputee experiences when the amputated limb still feels attached to
his body. Approximately 75% of amputees experience phantom sensations in
their amputated limbs. Some of the typical sensations are pain, warmth,
cold, itching, tightness, and tingling.
Luckily, I didn't experience that much pain, not even in the beginning. My main

feelings where pressure and an extremely annoying itch which kept me sleepless
for the first three weeks. Thankfully that also subsided. A week after, I was
discharged from the hospital and had to rest at home for three weeks before any
kind of rehabilitation could begin. However I didn't want to get completely out
of shape and, being the stubborn person that I am, I started doing some pull ups
after day 4 at home. I was also extremely eager to begin walking on my
prosthesis. Rehab took 5 months and I was finally able to walk without crutches
again. Once I started to walk, I woke up every day early in the morning and went
for a stroll to practice my gait. I loved those mornings - the feeling of freedom
was incredible. Walking with my chin up, no crutches, no canes and without the
hunched-up depressed posture I had all those years was something that felt
extremely empowering. It still does, maybe not as much as those days but
whenever I need to uplift myself, going for a prideful walk always refuels my
self-confidence.

Chapter 6
Life Insights From Losing a Limb
Alexander the Great was once faced with a terrific challenge. In a city named
Phrygia, there was a famous knot - called the Gordian knot. Nobody could undo
this knot and the oracles foretold that the person who would accomplish this,
would also rule Asia. When Alexander  arrived in the city of Phrygia he spend
some time trying to figure out which way the ropes were wrapped and attempted
to find a smart way to untie the knot. As a lot of eager ambitious men had done
before him, Alexander struggled, became frustrated and in the end failed to
loosen it. He suddenly stepped back and called out, "what does it matter how I
loosen it?" With that, he drew his sword, and in one powerful stroke, he severed
the knot.
Sometimes the only way to move forward in life is by cutting off that piece of
your past which you've been dragging on and on. Sometimes you just have to
leave things behind. We all carry stuff from the past that are holding us back
from what we really want to do. Either that's people, bad memories, negative
mindsets (conditioned through a lifetime growing up), a useless limb or as in my
situation: all the above. Sure it's scary; it takes tremendous effort and a lot of
courage. Being courageous though is not about being fearless. It's about
accepting fear, looking deeply into its core and moving forward anyways.
Melancholy and passive negativity are two of the mind's most favorite
companionships. Getting rid of this two-headed monstrous state of mind requires
audacity. Remaining depressed and motionless when life gets hard is easy. It
does not require any effort, it's a state of mind that arises by itself and the more
you stand still in it, the more it paralyzes you. The more it becomes a swamp of
quicksand that keeps pulling you in.
When life has thrown you down on your knees, be courageous. Look fear in the
eye and cut the Gordian knot that is holding you back. It's not going to be easy
and most of the time it will take a lot more than one strike of the sword. You will
have to fall and rise up a thousand times. But the goal is not to remain standing.
The goal is to learn that if you can get up once you can do it again. You develop
a sort of muscle memory in overcoming adversities and you learn to do this more
efficiently every time. Don't look at life as a sprint, but a marathon. A marathon
filled with challenging obstacles. Everybody goes through dark times and
everybody has those moments when they lose faith. When you are going through

hell though - simply keep on going, as Winston Churchill once said. Because
once the darkness passes by and daylight slowly starts to appear, you always
wake up stronger.
Just do the best you can within your circumstances and in the process, if
possible, try inching forward in the world just a little bit. If you cannot do
anything about your own situation, find others you can help and support.
Helping others grow stronger is sometimes the best way to strengthen yourself. I
guess this is part of what HomeMade Muscle is about...
The days we live in, compared with all historical times, are some of the most
prosperous. If you're not born in what is considered a third world country then
you are going to suffer a lot less disease, war and hunger than most humans have
who lived on this planet.
However, even though we might not face as many external challenges, we
definitely experience equally difficult internal challenges. Even though we're not
confronted daily with dangers that threaten our lives, we do experience negative
emotions almost every living hour. Even after all I went through with my
accident, and even though I could go through a leg amputation with an extremely
calm attitude, I still have days when the tiniest things stress me out. Why is that?
Well, the first simple reason is that life is unexpected. We don't always have the
luxury of knowing when a demanding situation (like amputation surgery) will
happen. We don't always have 6 months to prepare for it in the best possible
manner. Shit just happens - unexpectedly! And because we are human we react
emotionally. We become angry, scared, anxiety gets the best of us and we might
even do the worst things to the people we love the most.
We can thank and blame our human biology for that because it's how a part of
our brains are wired in order for us to survive. We evolved from an environment
very different from the one we currently inhabit. As a result, we carry all kinds
of biological baggage. Our brains convert daily situations into potentially
harmful threats. For example, when we're angry, blood flows to the hands. This
makes it easier to grasp a weapon or punch a potential enemy. Heart rate
increases, and a rush of catecholamine hormones such as adrenaline produce a
burst of energy to face this threat.  When we experience fear, blood goes to the
large skeletal muscles, such as in the legs. This makes it easier to run away from
predators that might be hunting us. It's also what makes our face turn white as
blood is shunted away from it (creating the feeling that the blood runs cold).

Now here is the good news. We are also not the limited anxious organisms we
once thought we were. Advances in science have shown that the brain has great
flexibility in changing the way it is wired - what is also called Neuroplasticity. 
As Mingyur Rinpoche says in his great book, The Joy Of Living, ''most people
simply mistake the habitually formed, neuronally constructed image of
themselves for who and what they really are.'' A great way to change these
negative thinking patterns and images is meditation. When we meditate we adopt
the objective perspective of a scientist toward our own subjective experience.
Practicing meditation can help us develop daily awareness. This awareness can
help us see things more clearly.
For example when our cup of coffee spills all over our freshly washed clothes,
we can be aware of how minor of a problem this is, smile and change our shirt
instead of going crazy over it. Instead of starting to curse, yell and waste the rest
of the day feeling angry over a simple cup of java, we can take a step back, look
at the situation as an external observer and just laugh. We can build positive
reactive skills like these, and later on implement them into even more serious
situations. Sadly though, for most of us, minor things like beverage accidents
become levers for negative emotions which trigger patterns of negative reactions
and behaviors (anger, disappointment, etc) that continue throughout the rest of
the day or even more.
Surely, we are not always capable of reacting calmly. No matter how well you
train yourself, your emotions will sometimes get the best of you. However,
instead of soaking in an emotional lake of anger and stress or what is considered
your ''flight or fight mode'' there are other alternatives to consider. You can find
ways to discharge. Daniel Goleman, in his book Emotional Intelligence says,
''All emotions are impulses to act.'' They are the instant plans for handling life
that evolution has instilled in us.
Therefore, discharging negative emotions with some physical activity is a great
alternative. When you are overwhelmed with fear in life, go for a power walk or
a run to move all that blood flooded in your legs. When anger is controlling you,
do some strength training. Once you're done, sit down quietly and observe the
world around you. Realize that you're the one making everything much more
dramatic than it is.
Look around you and usually all you'll see is stillness. People doing their thing,
not even caring about you. Even if hostile people are surrounding you, observe

their irrational behavior for what it is: impulsive, emotional reactions caused by
problematic biological baggage. You might not always be able to control your
exterior environment but you can always control your reaction to it. That's all
meditation is for me...just shutting off the crazy emotional side of the brain and
observing reality through an unbiased relaxed lens. You simply sit inside the eye
of the cyclone and leave the rest of the crazy world spinning around you. If you
don't keep on feeding anger, fear or sadness with more anger, fear or sadness,
you can't really remain in such a state for too long.
Now take deep breath and observe the calmness around you. Rest that drama-
queen lizard brain inhabiting your skull and slowly observe how much suffering
you can save yourself by implementing this mindset in your daily life.
Enjoying the book so far?
Click here to share on Facebook

Part 2
Master the Basics

I love exercise; strength training, fitness, physique enhancement, running,
swimming, rowing, you name it. It has been a part of my life ever since I took
training seriously by joining my hometown rowing team at the age of 12. Since
then, committing to the disciplined lifestyle of an athlete has equipped me with
many helpful skills to deal with life's challenges. Leaving the world of
professional sports caused me a great deal of disappointment due to not
accomplishing as much as I aspired to. Fortunately I can now see the bigger
picture in life. I can see how exercise can be a friend in lonely times, a place
where I can find comfort and peace or a medium I can funnel my fears in and
express my anger through.
Having purchased this book, I am hoping you also have at least some interest in
health and exercise. If not, then at the very least, I hope my story intrigues you
into developing a relationship with strength exercise and healthy habits as we go
;)
Ever since I began this project I have been faithful to bodyweight exercise.
Whether I train at home or outside at a park, I always use bodyweight exercises.
This way I stay loyal to this project and serve you - the people interested in
home workouts - in the best possible way. I consider myself a lifelong student,
constantly studying and learning the latest developments in athletic nutrition,
strength science and bodyweight exercise. I am constantly keeping my mind
busy on how to implement this knowledge into my project. I want to ask you to
give me the honor of trusting me as your trainer. At least for a while to help you
get started. By purchasing this book, you have in a sense, hired me to show you
the best way to become strong and lean without going to the gym.  When I
commit to someone I always do my best to help them reach their goals. This is
my duty as your trainer.
Keep in mind that because of this, I might occasionally disrespect what you
consider traditional exercise information and I might challenge some of your
ideas on exercise and nutrition. In this book you will read things such as
''breakfast not being the most important meal of the day'' or that ''you don't have
to do any more than 15 repetitions if your goal is fat loss.'' These sorts of things
might be old news to some people like fitness enthusiasts who stay in touch with
the latest developments in exercise and nutrition.  But, because we live in an age
of misinformation they might be new or even considered irrational for others.
For the latter, I simply ask you to keep an open mind to what I have to say,

examine the science behind these ideas and give them a fair chance before
rejecting them. A lot of the myths I will be dispelling, will be myths I also
suffered from until I started using an evidence based approach to exercise and
nutrition. If you have spent the last several years reading the wrong exercise
blogs, books and fitness magazines, it might be difficult at first.
Zen story
Nan-in, an ancient Japanese Master once received a very educated person who
came to inquire about Zen. Nan-in served tea. He poured his visitor’s cup full,
and then kept on pouring. The guest watched the overflow until he no longer
could restrain himself. “It is overfull. No more will go in! ”Like this cup, Nan-in
said, “you are full of your own opinions and speculations. How can I show you
Zen unless you first empty your cup?” Try to empty your cup for the following
six months and give this program an honest try. If you are a total beginner in
strength exercise and your cup is almost empty, even better!

Chapter 1
Who Should you Trust?
Don Meyer, a famous basketball coach, once said: ''It is always easy to do right,
when you know ahead of time what you stand for.'' I love this quote and this is
why I considered it important to write this chapter. Ever since I started
Homemade Muscle, I try to keep it supported by the latest developments in
exercise and nutritional science. I have the fortune of being surrounded by very
intelligent people who help me stay up to date with everything. At the same
time, I spend every day studying and also filtering everything through
experimentation in my own laboratory - my body.
''It is always easy to do right, when you know ahead of time what you stand for''
Personal Results Are Good But Not Enough
I have put hundreds of training hours in this project and my personal results
show that I practice what I preach. Still, keep in mind that someone's personal
results are not enough to put your faith on. You shouldn't trust someone who
uses solemnly personal experience to back up his opinions. There are numerous
people in the fitness community who do this and the information they spread is
to some extent (if not to a great extent) wrong. Many of them just have amazing
genetics or use illegal substances such as steroids. Unfortunately, this does not
mean their information will apply to the average Joe. As shown in studies people
using steroids can get better results than people who exercise, sometimes even if
they don't exercise at all! Of course it's a good sign that the person you trust has
an analogous image to what he is preaching. I am a bigger fan of people who
practice what they preach and have the results to show for it. But, that alone,
should not be a reason for you to put your faith in him. There are some
incredible coaches out there who look like they don't even lift due to crappy
genetics. This becomes their personal reason and motive to become so
passionate about finding the best way to supplement their efforts through solid
knowledge.
If you want to be a proper coach and trainer, personal experience cannot be your
only reference point. The fitness world is a wild jungle filled with deception,
self-proclaimed gurus with God complexes, pseudoscience and scam artists. For
those of you who are fitness and health enthusiasts and want to avoid being
victimized, as I've often been in the past, I have included some guidelines that
can help you avoid these pitfalls.

Science is Good But Not Perfect (yet)
Science is for sure the best place to start in this crazy world but...it is not perfect.
When it comes to exercise and fitness, studies performed in universities have
limitations. For example, when it comes to basics of strength training like ideal
repetition ranges, or how many sets should an advanced trainee do; this area of
research is hindered with difficulties in comparing studies.  For example, the
testing groups used are quite small, and in many cases they might even be
undergraduate students who either are beginners in strength training or even
subjects completely untrained. Due to this, the ''newbie gains'' effect can
interfere with the study, producing biased results. The newbie gains effect is the
phenomenon of adding muscle and strength in a faster rate when you are a
beginner in strength related training. This also happens, to a great extent,
regardless of how optimum the training program that is being utilized. In
addition, men around the age of 18 might still be developing and therefore their
hormonal profile will be a lot more optimum for muscle growth than someone in
his forties.
On the upside, we live in a great time for exercise science. Breakthrough studies
are being performed on topics (such as the recent study on 'Recommendations
for Natural Bodybuilding'') by great people like Brad Schoenfeld & Alan Aragon
who are some of the people leading the movement towards evidence-based
information in nutrition and exercise science nowadays. Research is gradually
starting to focus more on trained populations. The more of these studies
accumulate, the more of a solid ground there is to make clearer conclusions. No
doubt, these are very interesting times for evidence-based fitness. And even
though there is not enough science based on bodyweight exercise, I will do my
best to integrate these two (bodyweight exercise and weight-lifting science) in
the best possible way.
Avoiding Fitness Deception
When you want to be sure that a health authority, organization, youtuber or blog
can be trusted, ask yourself the following questions:
1. Do they help you understand their approach or do they get emotional when
being questioned?
Someone who has knowledge on a topic should also be able to teach it. It is also
very important is hear people once in a while say, ''I don't know.'' No-one knows
everything and if someone is trying to give you that impression he is probably
trying to fool you. Many times people ask me something and I simply answer, “I

don't know.” Even if I think I know the answer but I am not 100% sure, I've
learned to acknowledge my lack of knowledge and experience rather than
mislead someone with incorrect information.
2. Do they use their credentials instead of solid references to make heavy
scientific claims?
Basing something on the fact someone has a Dr before his name or a PhD after
it, is not a good enough reason to trust someone. This is the common fitness-trap
I fell into when I started this journey. Also, remember that references should be
based on articles and studies published in reputable places (not Wikipedia).
3. Are they willing to admit they are wrong?
When health authorities are stuck in old outdated information and aren't capable
of acknowledging failures or facts that have been disproved in their program, it's
a clear indication that they are more concerned with preserving their image than
actually helping people. Realizing that I have used outdated data or have made a
mistake and instantly admitting it has been one of the best ways for me to learn.
I'm fortunate to have a network of very smart people around me, so I can't get
away with mistakes anyway.
4. Do they have financial and/or emotional motives behind of what they are
promoting?
It's normal of course for a health/fitness professional to make money from his
projects and work. I'm certainly not unhappy whenever I sell an eBook, because
it gives me the chance to invest even more money in this project and improve it
in anyway possible. Still, this should also be a reason to remain cautious. If
someone, for example, is selling muscle gaining supplements on his website be
cautious when he is making extreme claims such as ''my program with the right
supplements can help you build 20 pounds of muscle in a month.''
Feel free to question what I say. It's the best way for you and me both to learn
and expand. If I believe I have made a mistake in this book, I would gladly
accept an email from you and discuss your concerns.
Quick Summary
In conclusion, the HomeMade Muscle code consists of a Bruce Lee-ian approach
to exercise and nutrition but it's also filtered through science. Here are my four
most important suggestions for you:

1. Research and question everything.
2. Absorb only what is rewarding and focus on perfecting it; Reject the rest.
3. Once you're mature enough, give it a touch of your personal experience
and needs.
4. Simplicity is key to brilliance (Bruce Lee Quote)
I haven't really created anything new in this home workout program. I have just
constructed a simplified hybrid approach to home-strength and fitness
development infused with the best information of Nutrition, Bodybuilding,
Strength Training and Calisthenics.

Chapter 2
Strong & lean without going to the gym
Is it possible?
When I first started the HomeMade Muscle project there were days when I used
to chat online or Skype with friends, telling them I just finished my home
workout routine. Most of them thought I was just fooling around doing a couple
of push ups and pull ups and didn't really take me too serious. A couple of
months later, when they saw how my body started to change they were amazed.
''All that, just by training at home with no equipment at all?''
Paralysis By Analysis (PBA)
Today I try to show people that it's not about complex workouts, secret training
techniques that ''shock your muscles'' and diets that have you eating magic
berries and drinking weird colored beverages.  Paralysis By Analysis is a
common paradox that plagues the fitness community and one of the main
reasons we consider getting in shape so difficult. The internet is one of the mains
reasons this paradox exists and if you were born after an internet connection was
available in every household, you have an even bigger chance of suffering from
this paradox. Do not worry, you can get rid of this problem now that you are
using HomeMade Muscle. PBA is a common problem nowadays among people
who are trying to get in shape (I've also gone through it). In order to give you a
better picture of this conundrum, I'll share with you a story by Aesop, the great
ancient Greek fabulist. If these stories bore you, just bear with me for a few
more lines.
''A cat and a fox discuss how many tricks and dodges they have in order to avoid
their enemies. The fox boasts that he has many; the cat confesses to having only
one. Just at that moment, they hear the cry of a pack of hounds coming their way.
The cat immediately scampered up a tree and hid herself in the boughs. The fox
lost in confusion, unable to choose between the plethora of all its tricks gets
killed…''
Develop The Cat Mindset
That is precisely the problem that most people  face nowadays when they fail to
get in shape. Most of them carry the fox mindset. They have all this abundance
of free knowledge accumulated in their heads from surfing around the internet
all day but they end up neurotic and unable to stick to a single exercise plan. I

even see this happen quite often with exercise professionals. They have so much
knowledge accumulated in the heads, yet for some reason they seem as if they
are too afraid to apply any of it. They are afraid that it just might not be the
perfect workout plan. As a result, they end up switching from program, to
program, to program... My advice? Be a cat! Ok that might not sound that
masculine, but think of big manly ripped cat like Liono from the Thunder Cats
(if you are too young and don't know what a Thunder Cat is, you are missing one
of the greatest cartoons of all times).
On the other hand that is why people in prisons get so jacked up. They have very
few means of training to choose from and a very big motive to fuel them. It’s
about survival, you have no choice.
Conclusion
The basic reasons most of us fail to attain our fitness goals is that we do not
appreciate simplicity. We prefer complex approaches and ideas wrapped with
fancy and shinny material. We look for the easy way out in everything we want
to accomplish. Why train hard four hours a week when Cindy the fitness chick
(with that stunning bosom) tells you that you can get ripped by training 12
minutes a day. We want exercise apps on our phone as if we are not wasting
enough time on our smartphones already...
Screw all the fancy marketing fitness hype! Focus on finding proper guidance,
consistency, and eating right.
Underestimating Bodyweight Exercise
Bodyweight exercise is commonly underestimated. Have a look at gymnasts or
the new viral trend that has arisen on YouTube the several last years. People all
over the world are training with only bars and bodyweight exercises, doing what
they call Street-Workouts and Calisthenics. You can see incredibly amazing
physiques on these guys and they’re just training in their neighborhood park.
How cool is that?
A recent study found that people’s ability to get up from the floor with no
support from their hands was an accurate predictor of fitness—and even
mortality. I don't know about you, but avoiding early death would be one of my
top motives for getting in shape and taking bodyweight exercises seriously. I
don't care if you can curl ninety pounds; if you cannot do ten strict pull ups,
chest to bar, I don’t consider you strong.
Bodyweight exercise provides a sense of personal mastery, control and self-

confidence. What can be more empowering in the physical realm than mastering
your own body?  That is one of the main reasons I believe bodyweight exercise
is superior to barbells and machines; that is if one must choose between one of
the two. The bodybuilder physique was the ultimate accepted status quo in
strength conditioning during the eighties and the nineties. Fortunately, this is
starting to change; especially during the last few years where more natural and
functional forms of exercise are starting to become popular. Seriously, how can
somebody be considered strong if he cannot even move his own body. Instead of
"bro can you even lift?" the real question should be ''Bro, can you even lift
yourself?"
Just pick a guy out of any gym who can easily pull his own body weight in the
lat pull-down machine and ask him to do the same repetitions on a pull up bar.
Or pick a guy who can bench press double his bodyweight and ask him to do a
one-arm push up...99.9% of them will fail. I don't know about you, but for me
doing a one-arm push up on the spot is a lot cooler than claiming that you can
bench press an X amount weight. Stick around long enough and we'll get to that
one-arm push up before you know it!
Four Reasons Bodyweight Programs Fail People
1. Either Doing Too Little or Doing Too Much
Since I started this project, very often people come to me for advice on their
bodyweight workouts. The following are usually the two main reasons they are
not progressing: Either they are doing too little or they are doing too much. The
first category usually adopts a bodybuilding philosophy in their bodyweight
routine - such as dividing workouts into back training days, chest training days
and leg training days. This training approach of training one muscle group once
or twice per week will not benefit you when applied to bodyweight training
(more on this later in Strength Basics).
The second category is usually doing too much. Not so much in terms of training
volume, but rather in the variety of exercises. Doing a numerous variety
exercises in one workout but not really going hard on any of the important
exercises won't do you any good either. This is a common problem with most of
the bodyweight ebooks I have read. Most of them offer people a huge
overwhelming variety of bodyweight exercises. As a result, people end up doing
a little bit of this, a little bit of that without focusing on the simplest, but also

most important principle of strength training, Progressive Overload. Progressive
Overload simply means to focus your training efforts in such a way that you
continue to increase the intensity of your exercises through time (more on this in
Strength Basics).
Bodyweight training, in comparison with weight lifting, may have limitations
when it comes to finding a variety of high intensity functional exercises.
Because there is a lot of extra fluff in terms of how many bodyweight exercises
there are out there, you will have to - as Bruce Lee would simply say – “absorb
what is useful and discard what is not.” You need to take maximum advantage of
the big muscle building bodyweight exercises. If you remember only one thing
from this chapter, remember the following:
If an exercise is important, do it three times per week; if it's not, don't do it
all...
2. Not Doing The Right Exercises.
If you want to get strong and build muscle you have to train using your primal
movement patterns. Pull, push and squat. If you are not focusing on Pull ups,
Push ups, Dips and Pistol squats as a beginner in every bodyweight workout,
you are training in vain. These multi-joint exercises give you the best bang for
your buck and focusing on anything else will simply waste your time. The whole
secret to bodyweight strength is to repeatedly  do these exercises in every
workout while keeping your rep range between 5-15 reps as you will see in point
3.
Pull, Push & Squat - The Big Muscle Building Movements
3. Tooooo Many Reps.
If you want to build muscle, science has proven that an intensity level between
70% and 90% is the most optimum range. This means that you have to use a rep
range of between 5-15 reps. Applying this rep range to all the big muscle
builders will recruit muscle fiber in depth and trigger anabolic hormones in the
most effective way in order to build muscle and burn fat. Higher rep ranges of 20
reps can offer some extra benefits but only after you have been training seriously
for at least a year. We will discus this topic more later on.

Unfortunately, most people who train with bodyweight turn their strength
workouts into cardio workouts by doing push-up sets of 30 repetitions or more.
If you have reached a point in an exercise where you can do 15 clean push-ups,
its time to move onto a more difficult progression. If you are wondering how to
increase the intensity of an exercise, I have included in the last chapter of this
book enough progressions for all of the bodyweight exercises. Stick around long
enough and you will be doing one arm push ups and all kinds of cool
progressions in the near future.
Keep your form clean and stick between 5 and 15 repetitions
4. Not Keeping Notes.
Always write down your reps and the progression you are using. Especially in
bodyweight training, it's very difficult to keep track of your progress if you don't
do this. If you neglect this detail you will never get passed your newbie gains.
Here is how I do it. I always note the exercise, my reps and the point after which
my form started breaking down a bit.
For example:  Pull ups with elastic band: 3 X [8 + 8 + (6+2)]
This means I did 3 sets of 8 repetitions. The first two sets were done with perfect
form and in the third set, after the sixth rep, my form started to break down a
little bit.
Quick Summary
If you want to build muscle and burn fat you have to:
1. Set aside all the extra fluff and focus on the big muscle building exercises
2. Do the important exercises three times per week
3. Focus on rep ranges between 5-15 reps
4. Keep notes
The big muscle building exercises for a beginner are:
1. Pull ups
2. Push ups

3. Pistol Squats
4. Dips
What if you have bad genetics?
You might have noticed by now that I'm a fan of Bruce Lee. What I love most
about Bruce is that he was quite ahead of his time. Even though he was a master
in everything he did, Lee would always focus on perfecting the basics and
simplifying what was too complex. That is the problem with most people - they
forget to focus on the basics. My core value is to struggle for close to perfect
results in the basics and screw the rest. Another huge influence on me is Dan
John. Although I have never met him, I still consider him to be one of my
mentors. His book, “Never Let Go” changed my life. I should probably read it
again now that I'm thinking about it... Even nowadays, when my progress hits a
plateau, I know I have been neglecting the basics. This is one of the most
simplistic, but also the greatest insights, I have gained training these last couple
of years.
I might have developed a better than average physique, yet I don't consider my
results something out of anybody's reach. People around me tend to say things to
me such as, “I just have good “genetics,” or “I don’t need to train hard to stay or
get in good shape and that’s why my home-workout is so effective.” Yes, there
are people who have to work harder than the average population to achieve the
same results. And yes, there also are people with good genetics who work less
for achieving the same goals. Personally, I belong to the average population
when it comes to exercise genes. Most of us unfortunately are not the unique
snowflake we think we are, either that's being gifted with a perfect six-pack from
the fitness-fairy or cursed by the evil diet-witch with broken metabolisms.
The sum total of the life you have been living till now is what has made you
what you are. Accept it and instead of complaining that you want to make a
change, take action.
As an athlete, I was always the typical guy in the team who trained the hardest,
following my coach’s advice to the letter. Still, I had average results and ended
up not having a chance when competing with the pair of guys on my team who
were blessed with great genetics. I never had that, and just like most of us, I have
always worked hard for my results.
As to body composition, that's another excuse I have been hearing all my life.

Things like ''you eat all you want and still stay ripped'' and ''it's in your genes to
stay skinny'' are excuses I have heard from people around me all my life. Talking
is a lot easier than doing. Because I heard this one so often, I started believing
that I am probably blessed with good body composition. I thought that I could
probably eat a bit more than others without gaining as much fat. When I started
this project and delved deeper into the field of nutrition and exercise, I decided
to test this theory. The basic reason people gain weight is because they consume
more calories than they burn (duuuh).
So, for three and a half months I tracked my calories to extreme detail and kept
close watch on my weight. I ate the exact amount of calories my body burned
according to a very accurate formula for tracking caloric needs. Besides ''clean''
foods'', my diet also included stuff like ice-cream and chocolate up to 15% of my
total caloric intake. Results? After eating the exact amount of calories my body
required for three and a half months, I gained...two hundred grams! Two hundred
grams is an insignificant amount of weight and means that my weight remained
stable. This simply confirms that I belong to the typical average male of my age
and I do not have magic metabolism. Trust me, I wish I did...I'd be probably
eating a bucket of ice-cream while writing this paragraph.

(Four years after my accident and an unhealthy lifestyle)
The years that followed my accident took a great a toll to my body. Being in and
out of hospitals for five years, being operated on a total of thirteen times,
consuming huge amounts of antibiotics all those years and being in a stressed
and depressed mental state for so long was detrimental. From being in fantastic
shape as a competitive athlete, I ended up becoming what people call ''skinny
fat'' (lack of muscle tissue in combination with excessive fat). My whole body
looked weak and sick and my stomach was constantly bloated.  The good thing
out of this experience was that I was able to start building my physique from
scratch and I can give you an unbiased picture of my progress and results.
Along the way I made a lot of mistakes, but I also learn a great deal from them. I
have made several adjustments in the training programs I have today in my book
and I believe that you can make even more progress using these programs in
their current, perfected state.

Left side: 6 months later. Right side after 1 year later
My progress after 1.5 year of training with HomeMade Muscle

Chapter 3
Why train at home?
When I first started training at home, it was mostly out of necessity and for
personal reasons. Nowadays, having a couple of thousand subscribers on my
YouTube channel and people in general reaching out to me who find my work
helpful and motivating, is something that has become a very powerful inspiration
for me to keep on working on my HomeMade Muscle project. Training at home
every day gives me more and more insight to improve this project while
implementing it with all kinds of other topics that I study. Even if it wasn't for all
the above, I still would not consider switching to a gym workout program. Once
you know how to effectively train in the comfort of your own house, it can
become incredibly convenient and suitable to your lifestyle. I don't know about
you, but I love convenience.
Here are some typical advantages of training at home:
• Not having to plan going to the gym, taking a bus or the car, looking for a
parking spot, etc.
• Not packing a big gym bag and worrying about forgetting something (growing
up as an athlete, I always hated this)
• Not undressing and changing clothes with weird dudes in the locker room
• No smelling people in your face
• Not sitting in someone else's sweat or worrying about athletes foot in the
showers
• No waiting in line for busy exercise equipment, such as the bench press
• No one to hassle you about lifetime memberships or rules
• No Christina Aguilera playing loudly while you're trying to concentrate and get
in those last two reps.
My Favorite Reasons For Training at Home
1.HomeMade Muscle will save you a lot of Money
The first and most obvious advantage of training at home is not paying for a gym
membership and expensive equipment. Home bodyweight workouts have only
two requirements: 1) gravity; and 2) your own body. The only equipment I

strongly advise you to get in the beginning is a pull up bar. Pull ups are the king
of strength exercise when it comes to the upper body. If you think of all the
money you will be saving yourself from gym membership fees just by spending
$20 bucks for a pull up bar - trust me you are making a wise investment.
2. HomeMade Muscle workouts will save you a lot of Time
The most common excuse I hear from people who don’t exercise is that they
don’t have time. Well, training in your own house, besides saving you money,
also saves you a lot of time. Think about it, if you calculate all the time you need
to pack a gym bag, travel all the way to the gym, change in the locker room, wait
for your turn on crowded exercise machines and then all of that in reverse, it
usually costs most people at least an extra hour or two. Training in the comfort
of your own house means no commuting, no need for looking for a parking
space and no need to unpack big gym bags of sweaty clothes. Once you are
finished training in your home, you can immediately take a nice hot shower in
your own bathroom, wear dry clothes and kickback, or do whatever else you
have to do. This program requires, on average, 3 training hours per week which
is time well worth spending by anyone for the reward of a healthier, stronger and
leaner body.
3. HomeMade Muscle is Psychotherapy
One of the things I love most when training at home is that you can really let go.
You can express all of the frustration and aggression that bottles up during the
rest of the day at work, school or wherever. You can scream through those last
reps, curse, yell and generally express whatever emotions you are going through
that day or that phase of your life! (Try though not to do this late at night, you
don’t want your neighbor calling the police thinking you are strangling
someone). This has a great calming affect once you finish training. It may sound
weird to some and others will totally understand what I’m talking about. I
consider it as a kind of catharsis. A lot of times, training for me is more
psychotherapy than exercise. Just give it a try and you will understand. People
nowadays keep too much emotion bottled up in them and expressing these
emotions through physical exertion gives the body and mind a great relief.
Ah, home sweet home, where your own personal gym is always open, twenty-
four hours a day and three hundred and sixty five days a year. The speakers are
playing Rihanna... wait what? I mean the speakers are playing Survival by
Eminem or Burning Heart by Survivor, the air smells the way you like it to smell

and the water in the shower is always warm.
Advantages of Bodyweight Training
From Michael Boyle's fantastic book - Advances in Functional Training
"Technique,Technique,.Technique. Never compromise. Use bodyweight when
possible and practical. Do lots of push-ups, fee-elevated push-ups, one-leg
squats, chin-ups and dips. Bodyweight exercises are humbling. Not only will
athletes learn to respect their bodyweight, but they will also see the value of
these easy exercises."
From Easy Strength by Dan John and Pavel Tsatsouline
"Pull-ups not only build the pulling muscles but also develop the abs. I dare you
to find someone who can do 20 strict reps and does not have rockhard abs. Use
many pull-up variations: change grips, do pull-ups off ropes and rings, etc"
I expect people to be excited when I motivate and tell them that they can get in
great shape in the comfort of their own home spending only $20 bucks on a pull
up bar. Unfortunately, most of them just look at me in disbelief. It probably
sounds too good to be true or they have tried getting in shape with some other
promising easy home workout plan that didn’t work.
Gym Machines vs. Bodyweight
Unfortunately, most of us have been mislead into believing that in order to get in
shape we need all those shiny complicated machines we see in big corporate
gyms with touch screens and all sort of other gizmos on them. Some of them feel
as if you are using some fighting machine to battle against aliens. The truth is
that battling ehm.. I mean exercising only with machines and focusing too much
on isolation movements can lead to developing a dysfunctional body. There is
lack of development in stabilizing muscles in our body's connective tissue. As a
result, there is no functional strength and people are more prone to injury.
On the other hand, mastering your own bodyweight requires:
• Multi-joint exercises that activate multiple muscle groups
• Analogous development of muscles with their connective tissues
• Superior core activation in comparison with gym type machines
• Balance improvement
• Coordination improvement

• Kinesthetic awareness
Kinesthetic awareness is your body’s knowledge of your surroundings which
you receive via the sensory receptors in your joints, muscles and skin. Also,
those of you who are wondering if they are missing a lot from not doing
isolation exercises, keep in mind that multi-joint exercises are more effective in
producing an anabolic hormonal stimulus for muscle hypertrophy than small
scale / single joint isolation type exercises.
Practicality: Bodyweight exercises can be done almost anywhere with
minimum equipment.
Awesomeness Factor: Bodyweight exercises are a much more entertaining and
motivational way to develop strength. Instead of striving to add that extra plate
of weight every month, your goal is to perform cooler and more impressive
movement variations. Once advanced bodyweight exercises can be performed
with good form and ease, they can provide great visual appeal. Think about it,
what is more awesome and fun...talking about how much weight you can bench
press at the gym or performing a one arm push up at the beach while making it
seem easy?
After all the training systems I have tried in my life, I always conclude that
bodyweight exercise makes me stronger and keeps my body and mind healthier...
Is This Program For You?
Bodyweight training can be quite challenging especially for heavy people and
people who haven't previously done any kind of strength exercise in their life.
For this reason, I have included progressions for every exercise in order to help
you gradually ease into them. There are multiple easier progressions to start
from until you are strong enough to perform the basic form of the exercise. Plus,
I also have extra advanced variations for when you grow even stronger. So,
regardless of your sex, current physical condition and your weight, if you stick
to the guidelines in this book you won't have any problems.
What If I'm Too Heavy?
Just to be realistic and not BS you, keep in mind that excessive fat can get in the
way of this program if you want to get the most out of it. Think about it, if you
weigh 300 pounds and you are trying to perform a handstand push-up it would
be the equivalent of trying to push more than 330 pounds on an overhead
shoulder-press machine. No matter how strong you become, it will be pretty
difficult to attain such a high level of strength and you will be stuck in the simple

progressions of some exercises probably forever.
My advice to overweight people is to combine HomeMade Muscle workouts
with a proper diet in order to lose as much excessive fat as possible. Besides
being more efficient at bodyweight exercises, losing weight and getting closer to
a 12% body fat (for men) will help your physiology to maximize muscle
hypertrophy and decrease fat storage. In simple words, your body will be able to
build muscle and burn off fat faster.
What If I'm Too Strong For It?
Moving to the other end of the spectrum, if you believe you are too strong for
bodyweight exercises don't rush too quickly to such a conclusion before you can
perform all the advanced variations of the exercises with perfect form.
Personally, I'm not at that point either. Just trying to perfect your form can have a
major impact on increasing the difficulty of an exercise. So set your ego aside
and focus on good form before you think you are too good for bodyweight
exercise.
“He who conquers others is strong; he who conquers himself is mighty”
- Lao-tzu

Chapter 4
What you need to know about strength training
In order to become stronger, your body needs three things: Stress, Recovery and
Adaptation. This means that your muscles should be stressed enough in order to
understand that next time the same stress occurs they must be stronger to handle
it more efficiently. Once stress is applied to our neuromuscular system, an
appropriate amount of time is required in order for our body to recover. If stress
is re-applied too soon, strength development will happen at a slower rate. 
Therefore, thanks to the ability of the human body to adapt and become stronger
in order to survive, we can manipulate stress (in our case, stress provided by
bodyweight exercises) in order to become stronger and develop a more aesthetic
physique. In fact, the main reason our species has survived till this point in time,
is mainly thanks to how gifted we are in this whole process of adaptation.
Of course, there are limitations and different rates in which adaptation occurs.
For example, if you're a complete novice in strength training you will build
muscle and strength a lot faster than someone who has been training for two
years. So even though a beginner might add one or two pull ups every week ,
this doesn't mean that this will continue to happen at the same rate. Think about
it, if you begin doing 3 pull ups and add just one pull up every week, within a
year, which is about 52 weeks, you will be able to do 55 pull ups. In two years
you will be able to do more than 200 pull ups. Sorry to disappoint, but that's not
how it works (if only).
As obvious as this is, a lot of people, and especially beginners, tend to ignore
this point. So did I when I started lifting weights at the age of 15. Man, I
thought, if I continue adding 10 kilos to my bench press every month I'll be a
beast before I'm even 18!
As a forewarning, the rest of this chapter may be somewhat technical and
clinical in nature. So, those of you who don't have a background in exercise
science or haven't read any other strength related books might get a tiny bit
bored by learning words like eccentric and isometric contraction. Still, I need
you to have a basic understanding of these concepts so that we can communicate
more efficiently throughout the remainder of the book and so that you can get
the best value and results out of it.
What is Strength?

Strength is the foundation from which all forms of athletic movement becomes
possible. A solid strength foundation should be the first and most important
element in someone’s exercise program. If your goal is simply to develop an
aesthetic physique, strength training in combination with a proper diet is all you
need. Not that cardio is bad or cannot aid your goals if done strategically, but it's
not necessary (more on this later).
Our muscles are governed by our nervous system, which is operated by our
brain. Together, our muscles and our nervous system form our neuromuscular
system. These two are always interconnected; think of them like electricity and
magnetism - you cannot have the one without the other. Therefore, whenever
you apply stress on your muscles, whether you are doing pull-ups or pistol
squats, you also apply stress on your nervous system. Both of them can only
handle so much. If you over-train them for a long period, they will eventually
start to fatigue and the overall amount of reps you can perform on a daily basis
will decline.
Types of Muscle Tension
Strength is produced by our muscles with three types of tension:
1. Concentric Tension: This is when the muscle ''belly'' decreases in size to
produce force. To remember this type, think that the muscle always contracts in
the concentric type. Keep in mind that in all three situations the muscles contract
but most people have in mind concentric tension when they think about muscle
contraction.
2. Eccentric Tension: Is when the muscle belly increases in size while the
muscle is contracting. To remember this, think that the muscle extends when the
muscle is in eccentric contraction.
3. Isometric Tension: Is when the length of the muscle remains the same while
still producing tension. Iso in Greek means equal.
If it's the first time you are hearing of these terms you might feel overwhelmed.
Hey, when I first heard them I was more than overwhelmed. But, have a look at
the following examples which will clear up any confusion: 
Because a video is worth a thousand words here's a short video example.
Concentric Contraction Examples
Concentric contraction is when the muscle produces tension while it's decreasing

in size.
- When you are pulling yourself up by doing a chin up, your biceps are
contracting concentrically;
- When you are pushing yourself up during a push up, your chest is again
contracting concentrically; and
- When you are pushing yourself up during a pistol squat, your quadriceps are
once again performing a concentric contraction.
Eccentric Contraction Examples
Eccentric tension occurs when, as we said previously, the muscle decreases in
size. In eccentric contraction our muscles are used as brakes so that we have
better control over the movement.
- When you are lowering your body down from the top point of a chin up, your
biceps act like brakes to control the movement and make it smoother;
- When you are lowering yourself down during a push up, your triceps are
performing a concentric contraction.
Isometric Examples:
Isometric tension happens when the muscle produces tension while the joints
around it remain in a fixed position. Whenever you are flexing your guns
(biceps) in pride, while keeping your elbows steady, you are performing an
isometric contraction. Isometric contraction is used mainly for stability and
balance purposes. Here are some more examples of isometric contractions:
- If you pull yourself up in a chin up and remain at the top position, your biceps
are contracting isometrically;
- If you remain on the top or bottom position of a push-up, your triceps are again
contracting isometrically; and
- If you stand on the tip of your toes on one leg, your calf muscle is contracting
isometrically.
Don't worry if you are still struggling to fully understand the differences between
these contractions, its completely normal. Add a bookmark on this page and
refer to it whenever you stumble upon these terms in the remainder of the text.
As you read more examples in this book, you will gain a better understanding of
them.

Positive and Negative Phases of a Repetition
Each repetition has a positive and negative phase. The positive phase of the
repetition is when the muscle is contracting eccentrically (reducing its belly
length). In a chin up for example, the positive phase is when you are pulling
yourself up. During this motion, the bicep muscles contract, becoming shorter.
The negative phase of the repetition is when the muscle elongates (lengthens). In
the chin up, the negative phase is when you lower yourself down and straighten
your arms.
An easy way to remember this is to keep in mind that the negative phase of a
repetition is easier than the positive phase. So if you are doing a push, for
example, and you want to figure out which is the negative phase, ask yourself:
Which is the easiest part of the movement? The correct answer is the lowering
phase.
Important Tip: Although the positive phase produces most of the muscle
growth in an exercise, keep in mind that the negative phase (eccentric
contraction) is also responsible for a significant part of it. Focusing on the
negative rather than the positive phase is also another important factor in
bodyweight exercise. You don't have to overdo it as some people believe;
however you need to be actively controlling the movement while you are
lowering your weight instead of letting gravity doing the work for you.
How Many Reps Should I Do?
If you want to become strong and lean you need to build as much muscle mass
as possible. Some people tell me oh well I don't want to look like a bodybuilder.
Don't worry, getting that swollen without steroids look is almost impossible.
Even if you do reach a size that you are happy with that you want to maintain,
just watch your diet and calorie intake and you'll be fine. It takes a lot of food to
continue to grow after a certain point. After 2-3 years of serious work, once you
have reached your genetic potential, muscle gains become slower and slower.
The more muscle mass you have the easier it becomes to stay lean. Keep in mind
that there are also important nutritional parameters for this to happen which are
discussed in the nutritional part of the book. When it comes to getting big, this is
the most important thing you need to know.
Stronger is Bigger
Say that once again and don't forget it - Stronger is Bigger. This is the most
important lesson I have learned from strength training while trying to gain

muscle size. When you increase the strength of a muscle, whether you are using
lower rep range (1-6 reps) or a higher rep range (7-20 reps), the muscle will
always get bigger. There is however a prerequisite for this - you also need
enough calories to facilitate the additional muscle growth. This is especially true
if you're a skinny guy, if you are trying to get stronger and bigger but you are not
eating a bit more from what your body needs just to preserve its weight (calorie
maintenance), your body won't have enough energy to build additional muscle.
It's not as if you will be building additional tissue out of thin air. You might think
that your body will use all your fat down to the last drop in order to build the
extra muscle. That is not true. Yes, you can slowly build muscle and continue to
lose fat if you are doing everything down to the letter, however the more you go
lower than 10% body fat the more difficult and slower this process takes. Your
body sees going lower than that as a threat to your existence. This is how your
body thinks when you are losing too much fat: ''What if I don't have enough fat
to survive the following winter or the next time there will be food scarcity? I
better save some of this fat and go easy on the muscle building...''
Traditional (outdated) approach to Strength & Hypertrophy
Still, there are many approaches out there towards hypertrophy (muscle cell
growth).The most typical approach is the bodybuilder's approach, where training
focuses on higher reps (12-20) with brief resting periods (usually 20-50
seconds). By now you are probably asking, ''So which is it dude? Should I do
low reps or high reps to get big?''  If you want to get big in the most effective
way possible, the answer is BOTH. The latest scientific research shows that you

need a good strength foundation based on low reps to build on a higher rep range
in order to build muscle mass in the most effective way. Homemade Muscle
serves that goal by always starting you with five reps and focusing on building
that up to 15. Once you reach 15 reps you move to a higher progression starting
from 5 reps again.
Why Low Reps Are Important
Our neuromuscular system, as described previously is the functional integrated
whole of our body's nerves and muscles. Training with low reps helps improve
this relationship by increasing the way our muscles communicate with our
nervous system. This helps stimulate our muscles in more depth during exercise.
Using our neuromuscular system with such efficacy builds an ideal foundation
for muscle growth.
To use a more scientific terminology: Low rep ranges improve muscle
recruitment, which is defined as the number of motor units (motor neurons
integrated to muscle fibers) activated in the muscle and generating force during
contraction. Due to this and the increase of contractile proteins created in muscle
cells, low rep ranges play a big role in muscle hypertrophy. Especially when it
comes to beginners.
To make a long and sciency sentence short: You need to become stronger if you
want to be bigger...
Why Bodybuilding Reps Are Also Important
A traditional bodybuilding rep range is also essential for getting big. After all,
it's how the majority of people did it in the past. High rep ranges (8-15 reps)
cause our muscles to store additional glycogen. Glycogen is, in simple words,
liquid muscle sugar. It is the main fuel used by the muscles in high rep ranges
and it contributes to the increase in our muscle's size. However because high rep
range training lacks a strength foundation, it might explain why some athletes
such as lightweight power-lifters can lift heavier weights than bodybuilders.
If you want to get big, you need to take advantage of a broad rep range.

How Often Should I Train?
The main consensus on training frequency in the weightlifting world, according
to science, ranges between training a muscle group 2-3 times per week, leaning
mostly towards 2 times.
Now even though this might be accurate in the weightlifting world, it's not
something you can copy & paste in a bodyweight program. A weightlifting
program in comparison to a bodyweight program has only one advantage; you
can go heavier on leg training using bilateral barbell squats, which, at the same
time will tax the whole body. You see, a heavy barbell squat does not only train
the lower body but it also puts a large amount of load on your upper body that
has to stabilize the weight. Pistol squats on the other hand focus mainly on the
legs themselves.  Due to this, using a whole body workout with a frequency of
three times per week in bodyweight training is a lot more efficient. You can also
train effectively using a higher training frequency. But in order to avoid burning
out your neuromuscular system, this type of training requires a basic amount of
experience and knowledge, as well as discipline. To create such program and
apply it successfully requires periodization.
Periodization in simple words is a training program that has been planned in

advance for a long period of training. The aim is to reach the best possible
performance using progressive cycling of bigger resting periods like deloading
weeks, different training volumes and training intensities. This is used in the
advanced program included in this book.
How Many Sets Should I do?
For a complete beginner, 2-3 sets seems to provide the greatest results. Still, this
is not absolute because it depends on how much the individual pushes himself.
In addition, muscle groups like legs for example seem to tolerate an increased
training volume. As we mentioned previously when someone passes the
beginners phase, his adaptive capacity becomes more advanced to the point
where progress does not happen from workout session to workout session but is
accumulative.  The gym and the bodyweight world differ significantly in this
area since bodyweight exercises such handstand push-ups and pistol squats
require great technique - neuromuscular efficiency. Factors such as coordination,
balance and kinesthetic awareness are part of performing these exercises
properly and therefore increased training volume and frequency strategically
play a great role in breaking training plateaus in bodyweight exercise.
Kinesthetic awareness is your body’s awareness of your surroundings, which
you receive via the sensory receptors in your joints, muscles & skin.
Since most of us are not gymnasts who have been working on these abilities
since we were six years old, we need a lot of practice to improve them.
Increasing training frequency and training volume by reducing a bit of intensity
can help the advanced bodyweight trainee to continue to improve. Increasing
these abilities will also increase strength which will eventually lead to more
muscle mass. Remember - Stronger is bigger.  However, as previously said, this
should be done strategically with an organized training program. Providing
adequate rest for the neuromuscular system and joints from time-to-time by
using strategies, such as de-loading weeks, is essential.
How Long Should I Rest?
The classic guidelines for muscle hypertrophy in the bodybuilding world
recommend short resting periods. Although, literature doesn't have any basis to
support this theory just yet, based upon both personal experience, and rest, in the
anecdotal consensus out there, I believe there is some benefit in small resting
periods for means of hypertrophy. Internationally renowned hypertrophy expert
and scientist - Brad Schoenfeld (who has also won natural bodybuilding titles)

says there isn't enough evidence yet to draw concrete conclusions on this topic
but shorter resting periods increase metabolic stress, which is known to stimulate
muscle remodeling. For these reasons, I have concluded that shorter resting
periods used once a week in the advanced program can add some value in the
training program. Plus, it also helps to make your workouts a bit more fun.
In the rest on the book I consider it important to take your time when you rest
between sets until your body feels ready. I do recommend specific resting
periods for practical reasons (like saving time) yet it's important to also trust
your own body. From general experience and due to the fact that beginners don't
have enough experience to stress their body close to its highest potential, I
recommend relatively short breaks of one minute in the beginners phase. Later
on in the advanced phase, once the trainee has more experience, it's important to
get adequate rest in order to perform every set feeling recharged and using good
form (2-3 three minutes is usually enough for this purpose). Still, these resting
periods aren’t meant for you to login to your Facebook with your mobile device
to catch up on your notification - Stay focused!
Training Plateaus
If you complete a whole year of bodyweight strength training, remaining faithful
to your program, progress will be slower and slower, just as in any strength
program. As said previously you can't continue adding a pull up each week up to
infinity. That's not how the body works.
There will be periods in which you will experience great improvement in your
workouts and your body's physique. These periods are usually followed by
plateaus. Unless you are a beginner, your progress in strength exercise will never
be gradual. You advance with sudden jerks and starts. Then you may remain
stationary for a while. In some cases, especially after your second year, you
might even regress a tiny bit! You may strive hard for a long period of time and
not see any progress. Then one day when you least expect it, you suddenly start
ascending again. Many people get discouraged on these long periods of
stagnation and think that the workout plan they are using is not good or is not
effective anymore. So they take the easy way out - they quit!
It is crucial to learn to recognize these plateaus and have the emotional
intelligence required to stay faithful to your program. Plateaus are natural... This
means that you are no longer a beginner and that you have taken your workouts
seriously. Long periods of no progress can be tiring mentally and physically, so

you must remain patient and develop mental toughness during these times. What
you can achieve is strictly up to you. When it comes to health and fitness goals,
it does not matter if you have the best personal trainer and the best nutritionist in
the world. If you are missing a strong will, all else will crumble. As my bro
Bruce would say:
"If you always put limits on everything you do, physical or anything else, it will
spread into your work and into your life. There are no limits. There are only
plateaus, and you must not stay there, you must go beyond them."
- Bruce Lee
Overtraining
Recovery depends on multiple factors including how much time you rest
between your workouts. Recently, a guy named CT Fletcher became popular on
YouTube. CT, who is probably the most motivational exercise figure I have ever
seen, promotes the ''There is no overtraining'' approach to exercise in many of
his videos. A lot of people take it literally, criticize him, blame him for lying on
steroid use, etc., etc... What do I think? Well I won't get into the whole steroid
thing, but I will focus on what matters; overtraining definitely exists. If you
overdo it, you will harm your progress and your body. Still, I think CT gets a
very important message across. His message is that there are too many lazy
people and keyboard warriors out there, afraid to push themselves a bit and
talking shit while eating bon bons (as CT puts it) instead of getting their lazy ass
of the couch (as he says). Some people just need figures like CT to wake up. I
don't believe he is being literal by saying there is no overtraining and I'm sure if
you read his workout books there will be some kind periodization in his training
programs. So don't take people like him literally, avoid extremes and if it helps
you - use these people to get pumped up and motivated.
Recovery
Aside from the exercise/resting ratio, there are also some other very important
factors that influence recovery and strength performance. Remember, our
muscles grow while we are resting. Three important factors to take under
consideration for a proper recovery in strength development are the following:
1. Sleep Quality and Quantity
Sleep quality and quantity. Our DNA hasn’t changed much in the last 10.000
years and that means that our biological clock works optimally in the same
natural rhythms as our ancient ancestors. Our bodies are programmed to sleep

according to the circadian cycle which basically means that we are programmed
to sleep when there is darkness and wake up when there is light. Studies have
shown that there might even be a connection of bad sleep with diabetes, obesity
and depression.
Sleep is probably the most important factor for strength athletes in terms of
recovery. Getting an average of 8 hours of quality sleep (30-60 more minutes if
you are in your teens) is a natural way to supplement your exercise program with
anabolic hormones. Proper hormonal secretion depends highly on having a
proper sleep cycle. Hormones like Testosterone and the Growth Hormone are
highly associated with proper sleep and play a big role in muscle recovery.
Sleeping Tips:
My approach for getting quality sleep is to always get in bed early and stay there
for at least eight hours. There are periods when I don't actually sleep many of
those hours, however I still make it a habit to always rest during that time span.
In the winter when there is less light I go to bed around 10:00 p.m., read for
about half an hour and sleep (or lay there) until at least 6:30 a.m. If you have
trouble sleeping early, reading in bed is the best solution I have found to solve
this problem. The second best is 15-20 minutes of mindfulness meditation prior
to nap time.
Never eat a big heavy meal prior to going to bed unless you like nightmares and
restless sleep. If you eat dinner late at night, either make sure you eat a
moderate-small portion of food, or if you eat a big meal like me, do it at least
three hours before.
2. Physical & Mental Relaxation When You Are Not Training or Sleeping.
When you are too stressed mentally for long periods of time, your body’s
capability to build muscle optimally might be hindered. Your body will be over-
producing stress related hormones, such as cortisol, which reduce the production
of opposite anabolic hormones (like Testosterone and Growth Hormone) which
help your body recuperate and build bigger and stronger muscles. You may
think, ''Ok bro, this is all good but I cannot command my mind not to be stressed
or depressed, can I?'' Yes you can and this brings me to my next tip:
Meditation
Exercise, in combination with meditation and a daily dose of sunlight on top of

that, is the best way to naturally fight stress and depressive moods. Personally,
besides exercising, I also meditate every day which has made a huge difference
in my stress levels and has also improved the quality of my thoughts, making me
a more positive person. Meditation has clinically shown to have the following
effects:
- Reduces blood pressure
- Stress reduction
- Improves sleep quality
- Strengthens the immune system
- Makes us react more calm in stressful situations
- Might help us against premature aging
- Improves concentration
The type of meditation that works for me is mindfulness meditation but there are
many types of meditation out there, each suitable for everyone’s idiosyncrasies.
Here are some different forms of meditation:
• Mindfulness
• Bioenergetics and dancing meditation
• Sound meditation
• Body awareness meditation
• Chanting meditation
And the list goes on…
If you are interested, just find a good book on the type of meditation that seems
most appealing to you and begin practicing every day. As shown in studies even
as little as 15 minutes per day can make a difference!
Personal Trick to Stop Stressing Over Useless Stuff: Whenever I find myself
stressing over trivial matters, I have a personal trick to relax myself. I visit the
future elderly version of me. I imagine him laid on a bed, wrinkled and having
just a few more days to live. The moment I see myself through his eyes,
stressing over the insignificant matters that are burdening me, I realize how
unimportant it all is and that life is too short to pay attention to  such things. Try

it; you'll be surprised at how much it can help at times.
3. Sunlight
Many people suffer from symptoms of seasonal affective disorder during the
winter months. This is believed to be closely correlated with lack of sunlight
exposure. Sunlight exposure can benefit mood by boosting levels of key
hormones and also by producing vitamin D. Vitamin D is produced in the liver
and kidneys from precursor chemicals that are synthesized in the skin, when UV
rays from the sun shine on it.
Despite the limited evidence available currently, athletes and trainers in the early
20th century believed that UVB radiation was beneficial to athletic performance.
Accumulating evidence (1,2) supports the existence of a functional role for
vitamin D in skeletal muscle with potentially significant impacts on both the
performance and injury profiles of young, otherwise healthy athletes. While
further research is required to evaluate the level of vitamin D required for
optimal muscular function, my personal experience says that getting 15 minutes
of sunlight on a daily basis (ideally somewhere after your workout) can help you
recover more efficiently. Consider this my bro tip.
Excuses
For the last couple of months while I have been training, the noise from a bar on
the lower level of my house has been interfering with my sleep quality. Two to
three times per week my sleeping quality sucks and there are days when I see it
affecting my workouts. I feel heavier. Still, I pay my dues and follow my
workout plan. My point here is that if you wait for the perfect conditions in life
they will never come. You will always have at least some stress in your life, you
might live in a country with not enough sunlight or you might have a kid that
keeps waking you up late at night. Try to get the best out of your current
situation and find a way to get your workout done. The only bad workout is the
one that doesn't happen.

Chapter 5 Abs
The holy grail of fitness
I'm not a BIG fan of the expression - abs are made in the kitchen. Sure, its 50%
true, but in order to lose fat and reveal the abdominal area you also need to train
it. Abs are just like any other skeletal muscle. They are a striated, skeletal
muscle group, which means that you need to work on them at least two times a
week. Where people take a wrong approach to ab training is using the wrong
exercises and overdoing it.
This is a picture of me last summer.
If you zoom in on it you can see that the upper part of my abs extends even more
than my chest, so you could say my abs were quite defined during that time
period. Also, I had a very low body fat percentage which, besides helping me
look really ripped, also cost me some muscle loss; with my chest looking flatter
than ever. During that period, the only direct ab-work I did was Dragon Flags.
However, notice that I say direct work since I was doing a hell of a lot of
bodyweight exercises.

How Much Abs is Healthy?
The first and most important thing I want to mention on this topic is that having
a six-pack isn't per se equivalent to being healthy. Once you start going lower
than 11-12% body fat (21-22% for women) and start moving closer to 6% body
fat (13% for women) you are likely doing more harm than good to your health.
Of course keep in mind that people are different due to genetic factors and while
some can feel great at 8% others might feel weak and even sick.
I'm not saying you shouldn't try getting ripped if that is your goal. But, if your
face is starting to look way too edgy, or if, besides your abdominal area, the rest
of your physique starts to look worse and if other related problems start
occurring; like experiencing a low libido, if you're a guy, or having menstrual
issues, if you're a woman, these are good signs that you are probably doing more
harm than good.
Abs tend to be a topic people obsess on a lot.  Since the abdominals are part of a
bigger unit - the core, I will also mention some important points about the core
in general. First, let’s start with two of the most common myths when it comes to
abdominal training...
The Truth About Ab Training
Although these myths are finally starting to fade from the fitness industry, I feel
it’s important to make sure that everybody who reads this article knows the
following two myths about abdominal and core training:
1. Doing hundreds of abdominal exercise repetitions every day won’t help you
build a strong ripped stomach! Your abs are anatomically just as any other
muscle which means that you don’t need to train them more than three times a
week. You need to use high intensity and a rep range of 1-15 repetitions per set.
Overtraining your abs, as many people do especially by doing a lot of crunches,
can only cause you problems like back pain as we will see later on.
2. Abdominal exercises burn fat around your stomach! There is no direct
metabolic pathway from your abdominal musculature to the fat tissue
surrounding it. In order to burn fat and convert it to energy, your body must first
send the fat to your liver where it will be broken down to fatty acids. This fat
comes from all over your body. Gender, age and genetics are responsible for
determining which areas are going to be more “preferred” as fat sources. For
example, if you are the “chicken-leg” body type, while you are doing ab
crunches your body might be burning more fat from your legs!

A guy named Ged Musto, performed 1,555 Unaided Sit-Ups in 30 minutes in
2005 which was an Official British and World Record. If you Google him or
check out his YouTube vids, his abs just look like they simply belong to a guy
that simply works out - nothing really special though.
Remember that abs are just like all the other muscles you train. You need muscle
tension. If you are doing more than 15 - 20 reps per set, you are doing too many!
Three basic points to keep in mind when pursuing abs:
• You have to get rid of the extra fat. Although strength exercise can tone your
abs and help you burn some extra calories, it's only gonna get you half way
there. The other 50% is diet which will play the biggest role in revealing them.
Your abs may be even more defined than Stallone in Rocky 3 but if you never
burn the fat around them they will never be visible.
• It won't happen at the same speed for everyone. Genetics play a big role.
Some people just have a harder time getting a ribbed stomach because they tend
to store more fat around the stomach due to their body type. If you belong in this
group of people then unfortunately you need to have greater patience.
• Leaner doesn't always mean healthier. If you pass the point of 8-10% body
fat and continue to drop weight, keep in mind that you will also start losing a
significant amount of muscle tissue and you can create hormonal imbalances that
can lead to further problems.
The Big Crunch
A lot of people base their ab work on the thought that the basic function of the
abdominal muscles is movement production. If you study anatomy &
kinesiology you will see that a significant role of the abdominal musculature is
actually to prevent motion and to keep your lumbo-pelvic region (lower back)
more stable.
Are crunches causing you back pain?
Typical floor crunches train mostly the upper part of your rectus abodminis,
which most of the time is already too tight. Dr. Stuart M. McGill a Professor of
Spine Biomechanics and one of the most famous scientists on this topic. After
studying how the spine works for more than three decades, Dr. McGill has come
to loathe sit-ups. It doesn’t matter whether they are the full sit-ups beloved by
military trainers or the crunch versions so ubiquitous in gyms. “What happens
when you perform a sit-up is that the spine is flexed into the position at which it

damages sooner.”
My Favorite Ab Exercises
The following are my 2 favorite and only targeted exercises for ab training.
1. Dragon Flags. Your rectus abdominis (six-pack) in combination with your
external obliques (side abs) act as stabilizing muscles which are responsible for
keeping your torso aligned with your lower body. Dragon Flags are the best
exercise I have encountered so far to work not only your abs, but also your
whole core. Of course, this is not an easy exercise and you need to build it up
very carefully. Start with leg raises and slowly through time use the progressions
in the exercise menu chapter to work yourself up to the famous Dragon Flag. It
personally took me a year to get 5 clean reps - so take it easy ;)
2. One arm-push ups - the side ab exercise. You might be asking, “how the hell
are one arm push-ups going to work my side abs?” Besides being an awesome
exercise for your shoulders, arms and chest, it's also a good rectus abdominis
exercise and an even greater oblique (side ab) exercise. Your obliques need to
work very hard to keep the body from rotating due to the lack of stability by
balancing only on one arm. The first time I started working on one arm push ups,
I woke up the next day feeling as if someone had punched me on the side of my
stomach. Sure it’s a difficult exercise and not ideal for beginners, but you can
work on progressions and gradually build it up.

Chapter 6 Stretching
Facts & Fallacies
A common myth is that flexibility increases the length of your muscles. This is
something that has been disproven a long time ago. Still most of us have
experienced greater flexibility by making stretching a habit so why is this?
When we assume uncomfortable and unusual positions, like bending over to
touch our toes, our muscles tend to tighten up due to protective mechanisms.
Because of these mechanisms. when we try to extend our range of motion in
these positions, for example when we are trying to stretch our hamstrings, we
experience discomfort. What happens when we practice stretching is that our
neuromuscular system becomes more accustomed to unusual positions and it
learns to relax in them. This lets our muscles loosen up and as a result bigger
ranges of motion are allowed in our joints.
Studies have also shown that it might cause you to get injured if done exactly
before intense exercise. Some specialists still recommend it though, not directly
before the main part of an exercise program but prior to warming up. Personally
I like to stretch some of the tight muscles in my lower body before warming up.
To stretch or not to stretch?
Below is a list of the most common stretching myths that have been disproven
by science in the last decades. Stretching research has shown that:             
• Stretching is not an effective warm-up
• Stretching does not prevent delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS)
• Stretching does not prevent injury
• Stretching does not increase the structural length of your muscles
So, to stretch or not to stretch? That is the question...
Stretching feels good to a lot of people (including me). Also, even though
research has shown that it doesn't reduce muscle soreness; a lot of people report
the opposite. In my experience, sometimes it does, other times it doesn't. Very
often, I just have a strong urge to stretch. It feels as if its an annoying
neurological itch I just have to scratch in order to feel better. Stretches such as
toe touches for hamstrings, as well as stretching muscles like the gluteus medius
and piriformis in a lying position almost feels as good as a professional massage.

Still, the exact science of these feelings and what might only be physiological in
nature,  is not yet clear in the academic world.
Here is my recommendation for stretching with HomeMade Muscle. Stretch
when you feel like it and specifically, focus on the muscles that feel tight. There
is no need to over-stretch your joints that are already too flexible. Doing this, for
no specific reason (like being a martial artist) and without professional
acquiescence might even cause hyper-mobility related problems. Avoid
stretching intensely before working out. If you have the urge, just gently stretch
whatever feels tight for a brief 5-10 seconds and do it a bit dynamically instead
of completely statically. 
I personally believe there is more to stretching than what has been discovered up
until now, and in the future it will find its place in exercise science. Until then, I
still like to stretch whenever it feels right. Stretching also helps me relax
mentally. If you would like to dive more into the whole scientific analysis of
stretching, I highly recommend you read Paul Ingraham's amazing article, “Quite
a Stretch.” Say hello to him from me if you pass by his website and leave a
comment.
Here are some of my favorite stretches...
1. Doorway Chest & Shoulder Stretch. Stand under the middle of a doorway
with one foot straddling the threshold and your hands gripping the inside of the
doorway, on each side. Shift your weight on the forward foot until you feel a pull
in your shoulders and chest. Keep your hands at chest height, first to focus more
on the chest. After that, place your hands just above your shoulder’s height, to
focus more on your anterior deltoids (front part of the shoulder). To isolate arms
separately, face your body a bit towards the opposite side of the arm you want to
focus on.

(doorway stretch)
Desk Stretch for Lats and Chest. You can use your desk, a windowsill, a
kitchen counter or any kind of ledge about waist high. Sit on your knees, bend
over and place your hands on the surface just a bit wider than shoulder width.
Gently lower your torso until you feel the stretch on your lats and chest. You can
also isolate one arm at a time.
(desk stretch)
Hamstring stretch with bike tube. Using again the bike tube, an elastic band,

or even a wide belt, lie on your back, keep your left leg on the floor and bend
your right leg so that your foot rests flat on the floor. Loop your elastic band
around the upper part of your right foot, holding onto an end of the band with
each hand. Straighten your knee and pull the leg slowly towards your chest. You
will feel in a stretch in the whole back area of your right leg. Pull your leg really
slow so you don’t end up straining your hamstrings or anything else. Do the
same for the other leg. This stretch is ideal for people with a sedentary lifestyle
where these muscles tend to be quite tight.
(bike tube stretch)
Piriformis & Gluteus Medius Stretch. Lie on your back, legs extended along
the floor, right arm resting on the floor straight out to the side. Bring your right
knee in toward your chest and very gently clasp the knee with your left hand,
then gradually pull the knee over toward the floor, keeping your right arm and
shoulder flat on the floor. You should feel a stretch in the hip and lower back.
This can help relax muscles that cause back pain and get tight when you spend a
lot of time sitting (office jobs etc).

(ideal stretch for lower back tension)

Chapter 7
Mobility - Use it or Lose it
A day came when my, once young and well-oiled shoulders, started feeling like
the squeaky hinges of a metallic old door. Sensitive elbows, wrists and tight
shoulders are common among people who abuse bodyweight training for too
long. Two other factors that seem to cause these types of problems for people in
general are aging and inactivity. It's easy to blame the natural process of aging
for all our problems but another very important fact that contributes to joint
issues is inactivity.
I did a lot of research and self experimentation with self-myofascial relief
methods such as foam rolling, massage and stretching but I found out that the
best way to treat this issues is the also the simplest.  The best way to prevent
common joint problems and also improve issues from past exercise abuse is
motion. You just need to prescribe your joints with a healthy diet of mobility
drills.  Why? Simply said, “Motion is lotion.” Joint health depends largely on
repetitive healthy movement that covers all the natural ranges of motion the joint
has.
Whenever somebody tells me about a new recovery or physical conditioning
method, the first thing I do is to check that he is not trying to get in my wallet.
What Causes Joint Issues
Aging, imbalanced strength programs, bad exercise technique, not warming up
or a combination of all of these are the usual suspects and can cause reduction of
your joint's synovial fluid (which in simple words is your joint's natural
lubricant). It can also cause calcium deposits and adhesions (connective tissue
growth in the wrong places surrounding your joints).
Mobility vs. Flexibility
When it comes to mobility, a typical mistake is to confuse it with flexibility.
Stretching for mobility is not that helpful since one does not depend on the other.
You can be flexible with poor mobility and vice versa. If you want more
functional joints - mobility trumps flexibility.
''Flexibility does not equal Mobility''
Joints in comparison with muscles have no direct blood supply to receive
nutrients. Mobility drills improve the circulation of your joint's synovial fluid,

which also helps your joints remove waste products and ''smooth out'' adhesions.
Practicing mobility drills can restore a lot of range of motion and can help you
reduce that rusty sensitive feeling your joints have as you grow older. In
summary, if you want healthier and more functional joints, mobility drills are the
way to go.
''Mobility trumps Flexibility''
Mobility Drills - When should I do them?
Joints such as ankles, shoulders, neck and wrists can benefit greatly from
mobility drills which can help restore the joints natural range of motion. A
common problem I hear from people is that they have no time to do all these
''extra'' healthy things. Here is how you can include mobility drills in your
routine to save time. Simply replace your warm up with a full body mobility
routine, add a pull and push exercise of a couple (2-3) easy sets for the upper
body, a multi-joint exercise for the lower body (like squats) and you are ready to
go! Other ways to include mobility drills in your schedule are as active recovery
after your workout or as a separate session. Starting your day with a mobility
drill can energize you in the morning or help you discharge at night before sleep.
Nowadays I include my mobility drill in my exercise's warm up and some days I
do them before going to bed to release some tension from my body (which also
helps with sleep).
From personal experience, practicing mobility drills four times per week can
make a big difference within just 21 days. Check out this video I made with a
basic mobility drill that covers all the basic joint movements and focuses on
shoulders which are commonly-known problematic joints in people.

Chapter 8
Tips for dealing with bodyweight exercise related injury
When I started training again at age 27, I realized that I didn't have the same
body I had in my early twenties. I'm guessing it wasn't only the age, since I
wasn't that old, but also all the years of inactivity, depression and maybe even all
the drugs I had to take for my leg recovery; tons of antibiotics, surgery drugs and
several others.
Injury Treatment 101
When I was 20 I thought I had those indestructible "wolverine joints.” Quite
often I would skip doing a proper warm up and no matter what crazy stuff I
would be doing, I almost never had problems. Nowadays I wish I could visit the
younger version of me and tell him to slow down a little bit. Hey, I don’t know
about you but I want to be that strong and a lean 65 year old tough grandpa one
day. Going to the playground with my grand kids and hitting 20 chin-ups with
ease while young dudes look in awe.
Keep in mind that I'm not an expert on injuries but I'll at least share with you the
basics. For very mild injuries that lead to inflammation the recipe is usually
simple. Elevation, Ice, Rest, Heat and Movement.
The first two days, ice the affected area every couple of hours (don't overdo it
and get ice burns) and try to keep it elevated. After 48 hours, if 90% of the pain
is gone, it's time for heat and some movement. When I say movement, you just
want to go cautiously through the natural ranges of motion of the affected joint
and later on apply some very mild stretching. All this without experiencing any
pain of course. You may feel very mild discomfort but avoid anything more
intense than that. Some soft massage and hot showers/baths after that are not a
bad idea. Avoid working out again for at least three to four days and always go
easy on your first workout.
In the following section, we will go over some of the most troublesome areas in
bodyweight trainees.
Elbow, Shoulder and Wrist Pain From Straight Bar Chin-ups
A common problem strength athletes face is elbow pain. A typical reason this
happens to bodyweight athletes are straight bar chin-ups. While doing chin-ups
on a straight pull-up bar, your arms move in a constant fixed position, which can
place unnatural stress on your joints.

(I have also made a video about this problem)
Those of you who are experiencing elbow pain from chin-ups will notice that
your arms and shoulders feel restriction in the lowering phase of this exercise.
Especially if you lock out (straighten) your elbows. This is caused by the lack of
mobility your arms have to externally rotate (that's the movement your arm does
when you open a doorknob with your right hand).
To verify this do the following experiment (see image below):
1). Straighten your arm in front of you with your palm facing the floor; and 2).
Slowly turn your palm towards the ceiling (rotating it externally) until it is
facing it in a flat position. If you experience difficulty with keeping your palm
flat while facing the ceiling, or if you cannot even flatten your palm, the chances
are good that this exercise will cause you joint pain at some point if it hasn’t
already.
From position number 2 lift your arm vertically as if you were going to grab a
bar to do chin-ups. You will observe that it becomes even more difficult to keep
your palm upwards. While doing chin-ups, twisting forces are occurring inside

your joints to compensate for this lack of mobility. Continuous repetition of
these abusive movements will eventually cause overuse injuries.
A lack of mobility in the shoulder in combination with a lot of chin-ups over
time will eventually cause some, or a combination of, the following issues:
• wrist pain
• elbow pain
• shoulder pain
Solutions & Tips
That being said, I hope I have not scared you away from chin-ups, that was that
not my intention. Chin-ups are one of the best upper body exercises and they
should be included in your strength exercise arsenal. Minimizing the injury
potential of this exercise with the following tips will help you to keep on
pounding chin-ups until you're 65 and beyond.
Tip #1 – Don’t Lock Out
Always keep your elbows bent a bit while doing this exercise. Never lockout and
hang on the bottom position of the reps. Don't worry, this won't hurt your gains
and it will keep constant tension on your biceps, giving you a cool post-workout
pump.
Tip #2 – Frequency
Don’t overdo it. Six sets per week is an ideal frequency. The rest of the week use
different grip varieties as mentioned below, which will also support you in doing
more chin-ups and improving pulling strength in general.
Tip #3 – Grip Variety
If possible, also try to use a variety of grips. Most pull-up bars today have a
neutral grip (palms facing each other) or a zig-zag grip which are friendlier for
your joints. If your pull-up bar has one of these grips I would definitely prefer
them over straight bar chin-ups.
Tip #4 – Don’t Squeeze Too Hard!
When you squeeze your grip too hard it radiates tension up to the arm and can
affect the elbow. I recommend this tip especially for people who have sensitive
elbows and experience elbow pain frequently. Hold the bar more loosely and this
will alleviate or prevent your elbow pain from flaring up.

Also consider some shoulder mobility exercises. These two exercises have
helped me : a) subscapularis stretch; and b) shoulder dislocations (Check out
video links).
Ending Notes. It should go without saying, that when you are experiencing
persisting pain due to chin-ups, you should first let your body heal before
applying the tips above. Once you get back to your bodyweight routine, get
started with a different and easier pulling exercise instead of chin-ups. Inverted
rows are a good alternative. When the time is right, start gradually including
chin ups back in your weekly schedule again.
Wrist Pain From Pushing Exercises
A common problem people face from bodyweight exercises is wrist pain. Too
much hyperextension of the wrist in exercises like push-ups and handstands can
take a toll on them.
Tips for people with sensitive wrists
If you have sensitive wrists, I highly recommend doing your push-ups on your
knuckles. When doing knuckle push-ups, your wrists are in a neutral position
and you spear them a great deal of stress (plus they look cooler). If knuckle
push-ups are too difficult for you, you can always buy push up grips (or just man
up and learn to do the knuckle version). Because handstand push-ups are also
quite stressful for your wrists, you should also prepare your wrists before any
handstand work. Check out this special warm up I include for my wrists before
working on handstands.

Another conditioning exercise gymnast’s use for their wrists are wrist push-ups.
Ever since I started doing these, I never had wrist issues again. Check out this
tutorial on how to get started with wrist push-ups.
Chapter Ending Thoughts
When an injury happens, stop worrying and remember that they just are part of
the game. Even when people warm up perfectly, use perfect form and eat super
healthy, they still very often end up getting hurt. The important thing is to find
ways to minimize injury potential by figuring out what went wrong and how it
could be prevented. A lot of people get discouraged when injuries present
themselves and react very emotionally (especially if this happens in the
beginning). For example, you might have just started your program and you're
feeling thrilled with all the progress you've achieved after a lot of hard work.
Then, suddenly when you least expect it, you get injured. You overreact and
think that all the effort was for nothing. You think to yourself I might as well
quit now to avoid wasting any more time or getting disappointed again in the
future. The best advice I can offer is to take it easy and see these situations as a
useful break for your joints and muscles to rest. You can even do some isometric
exercises on the rest of the body that is not affected, if you're in the mood. Find a
book on isometrics and study about it, even if it’s just for fun and to keep your
mind occupied.

Part 3
HomeMade Muscle Workouts

Chapter 1
HomeMade Muscle program structure
The HomeMade Muscle training program consists of three training levels:
1) Beginners' level
2) Basic level
3)  Advanced level
Even if you have trained using bodyweight exercises previously, if you haven't
trained for more than two weeks I highly recommend you start from the
beginner’s level. This way you will avoid things like extreme soreness and
injuries. Once you hit a plateau using the beginners phase, move onto the basic
phase. Many beginners have the tendency to skip steps in order to ''get stronger
faster.'' This is something I also tried to do when I was a teenage rower. If only I
could go 10 years back with the knowledge I now have, I could have
accomplished so much more. This brings me to the classic mistake most
stubborn young dudes experience when they first get started with strength
training, ''The Arnold fallacy''.
The Arnold Fallacy
When Arnold Schwarzenegger released his training program in the seventies,
everybody who wanted to develop the famous Arnold-physique bought his book.
Most of them skipped the intermediate phase and used the advanced program
that Arnold was using to train himself after he first invested years on mastering
the basics. That didn't work well for them. Of course, I'm not comparing myself
to the great Arnold, but this is a common theme in strength training.
When I was in the junior rowing team of my hometown, around the age of 15,
me and a buddy of mine always tried to secretly do what the big team was doing
in order to get better faster (obviously we thought we were smarter than our
coach). Results? We ended up burned out.
If you are new to strength and bodyweight training, skipping the beginner’s level
will just result in hindering the rate of your progress. There is no need to hurry;
in fact, the beginners phase is an amazing period. It's the period of the glorious
''newbie gains'' when building muscle and adding reps will be easier than ever.
Enjoy and appreciate this time because it doesn't last long. Don't try to outsmart
your body by rushing into a training phase if you haven't first done the

appropriate work.
Learn to respect the basics... 
The 8 Essential Bodyweight Exercises
Sculpting a lean, muscular and symmetrical physique is something I consider a
form of art. What I like the most about it is that if you know how to handle the
right tools it can be a form of art mastered by anyone. Of course it might seem
complicated in the beginning. If you enter a huge gym for the first time you will
probably become overwhelmed by the sheer volume of exercise equipment.
Being completely new to strength exercise can make this experience
intimidating. Something very important to learn from the beginning is that
exercise quality is a lot more important than quantity.
During my journey of getting stronger, I tried almost all of the bodyweight
exercises I could find out there. And trust me when I say this - there are
countless of them. After doing research on a lot of bodyweight exercise books, I
realized that most of them offer an endless list of exercises. Trying to mastering
all of them would take a lifetime. After all, not everyone wants and can afford to
train all day like a professional athlete just to look and feel good.
After a great deal of experimenting, I concluded that in order to get as strong as
possible and attain an aesthetic physique I only need to use and focus on
mastering 8 of them. The 8 bodyweight exercises that focus on the basic human
movement patterns in the best possible way are the following:
1. Pull-ups
2. Push-ups
3. Pistol Squats
4. Dips
5. Inverted Rows
6. Handstand Push-ups
7. Leg Raises
8. Prone Cobra
Less is more...
Keep in mind that all of these movements have progressions and advanced
variations which gradually bring into play new stimulus for the body. These

exercises resemble some of our most basic primal movement patterns which
highly stimulate our neuromuscular system and strengthen our body’s prime
mover muscles in balance with your core, joints, ligaments and tendons. Trust
me; if you conquer every variation of the exercises in this book you will have
greater relative body strength than 99% of all people around you.
Primal Movement Patterns
Primal Movement Patterns are movements which were important for survival
before man stopped living in the wild. Think about it, if you lived in the wild,
would bicep curls serve great purpose in any important movements? Not really.
On the other hand, you would definitely have to climb up high surfaces which
would require pulling yourself up in all kinds of different angles, according to
the terrain around you.
Once you pull yourself up to chest height while climbing a surface, the next
thing you have to do is to push yourself up in order to rest your chest on it. This
resembles the movement used dips and push-ups.
Living in the wild would also require you to hold heavy things above your head;
for example in order to build a roof for a shelter. A movement like that would
require the same muscles used in handstand push-ups.
People used to spend hours in front of a fire or while building tools in a deep
squat. Nowadays, everybody is afraid that squats are bad for our knees. Squats
are not what is causing your knees to hurt, but rather the lack of doing them. The
lack of using a deep squat has de-trained the proper neuromuscular pathways
required to attain this position properly. Move slowly through the progressions I
provide in this book and focus on good form.
Last, but most important of all, to perform every single one of these moves
efficiently, you would need a strong core. No, our ancestors did not train their
abs and low back muscles, because all of these muscles never atrophied and lost
their integrated neuromuscular coordination in the first place. These muscles
always worked in perfect sync with the rest of their body during all the
movements mentioned above.
Unfortunately, our lifestyle has deeply weakened and de-trained these muscles,
making us forget how to turn them on in harmony with the rest of our body when
needed. Using leg raises, prone cobras and all of the exercises intergraded in this
book will help you re-establish the relationship between your core and the rest of

the body.
How Strong Should You Become?
The goal of the basic level is to provide you an impressive athletic physique and
a realistic training program that can be performed long-term without
overstressing the body's joints and ligaments. It's also ideal for people over the
age of 40. It uses a three-time per week training frequency, which makes it an
easy and sustainable workout plan on which you can continue to make progress
steadily over time. If you’re looking to become strong, healthy and look good;
there is really no reason to go beyond the basic level.
Keep in mind that once you have built a significant amount of muscle with the
basic level program, there is also something else you can do to do to improve
your physique, even if you're just working out 1-2 times per week to maintain
your progress. Improving your diet and shedding a couple of extra pounds of fat
is the easiest way to look and feel better without the additional exercise effort.
Leanness reveals detail. Looking stronger and bigger is not only about the
amount of size your body has, but also has to do with definition and how visible
your muscles are (especially if your goal is to look good on the beach).
Don't go to extremes though. Obsessing over body fat once you are around 9-
12% for men and 16-21% percent for women is not always a healthy thing,
either mentally or physically.  If you want an aesthetic physique your goal
should be on average below 15% all year round and maybe a bit closer to 10% in
the holiday season if you want to look good on the beach.
A Couple of Words on the Advanced Phase
Going beyond the basic training level means that you will add a significant
amount of stress on your body. The advanced level is not meant for everyone
since a lot of discipline and compromise is required for it to work. Your life will
be focused around your training program, which means that you will have to be
seriously devoted to it. You will need to rethink a lot of your life's priorities and
realize that this commitment will require you to focus a big part of your time in
your training program and all the other extra aspects it's tied to (such as nutrition
and rest). You will have to choose a goodnight sleep over staying up late with
your friends. Your daily food should include a ton of protein. You will have to
pass on that extra beer and you will probably have to get rid of all the useless
habits (like watching TV) to find more free time to workout and rest. If you don't
mind all these sacrifices and you want to take it a step further, you can move on

to the advanced phase. This twelve month training program will bring you closer
to your strength and physique's highest potential much faster. However, before
you move on the advanced level, make sure you complete at least six months
training with the basic level's program. You should also meet a couple
requirements that I mention later on in this book.
Do This Before You Get Started
I want to talk to you a brief moment about the importance of taking a ''before''
photo once you decide to begin training. Why is this so important? Well think
about it, this is something that won't cost you more than 20 seconds (just go next
to a mirror and take a quick selfie with your phone).
Here is why you should to consider this:
• If you start losing motivation along the way you can look back at your ''before''
photo and remind yourself how you don't want to look like that ever again.
• As we mentioned previously, after your newbie gains, progress becomes
slower. Therefore, if you have a monthly picture of your progress, it will make it
easier to track your advancement.
• Get your picture posted on my website. Once you start seeing good results
from your hard work, you can send me your before and after picture and I can
upload it on my website. This is a cool way to show off to friends, girls or
whoever. It's also a great reminder of what you accomplished. Plus it also helps
me spread my message.
• Get personal training advice. Work hard, follow my plan and share your results
with me and I'll give you a personal training consult through Skype for free!
Tips on Comparison Photography
If you want to take a proper before and after photo, here are some helpful tips:
1. For better contrast, choose a neutral background such as a white wall
2. Stand a few feet in front of the wall to minimize the sharpness of the shadow
which may distract body outline. Note down your distance from the wall and the
camera for next time.
3. It's better to have natural light as a light source. Ideally, the light source
shouldn't be 90 degrees direct but in a slight angle (something like 70-80

degrees).
After all this, I am very excited that you have read this book so far because this
is the part where things get interesting. Time to build HomeMade Muscle and
become Strong & Lean without going to the Gym!

Chapter 2
Warming Up
Here is a quote that you should engrain in your mind: ''If you don't have enough
time to warm-up, you don't have enough time to train.'' I always take my warm-
up serious, since a proper warm-up has been proven to increase performance and
reduce injuries probability. I hate watching results I have been building for
months go down the drain just because I was too lazy to warm-up for ten
minutes. In this eBook I include two warm-up methods, dynamic stretching and
warm-up sets. For the beginners and the basic phase, dynamic stretching is
enough. If you continue to the advanced phase, special warm-up sets are added
after dynamic stretching.
Dynamic Stretching
A short definition of dynamic stretching would be - stretching as you are
moving. Dynamic stretching is an active movement of your body that brings
forth a stretch but is not held statically in the end position.
When it comes to strength training, dynamic stretching and warm-up sets have
been proven highly superior to “traditional” types of warm-up routines like
jogging or static cycling. Traditional types like these don’t really prepare you for
the intensity and all the specific movement patterns of your workout. Think
about it this way, during a strength workout, stress is applied to specific muscles,
tendons, ligaments and joints; so how would static cycling or jogging prepare
your upper body? For example, how would your shoulder joint be prepared for
doing a simple push-up? The only positive effect cycling or jogging would have
is by raising your temperature and warming up your legs. This is not bad of
course, but it is also not enough.
Dynamic stretching on the other hand can prepare your body’s connective tissues
and muscles by performing targeted movements related to the movement
patterns you will perform. More blood is pumped into the parts of the body you
are about to train and their temperature rises. This will also increase your joints
range of motion required to perform your exercises properly and injury-free.
Once again, I am not saying that some jogging or cycling will hurt. For me,
however, doing too much cardio before strength training takes my edge off.  If
you want to combine some traditional cardio exercise before dynamic stretching,
five minutes to raise your body’s temperature is enough. If you want to do more
cardio for weight loss purposes, I would recommend doing it after your strength

workout.
1. Neck rolls. Standing tall and relaxed, drop the chin close to your chest and
gently roll the head toward one shoulder in a semicircular motion. Do 5 rolls in
each direction (right and left shoulder) but be careful not to leave the head fall
too far backwards. Make slow, big and fluid movements while keeping other
muscles that aren’t directly involved in the movement (like your shoulders)
relaxed.
2. Shoulder rolls. The shoulder area is one of the most easily tensed areas in our
bodies nowadays, due to bad postural habits, lifestyle and mental stress. Again
standing tall and relaxed, start rotating your shoulders forwards in a big smooth,
circular motion. Bring your shoulders up close to your ears and then back and
down as low as possible. Repeat by doing the motion backwards this time. Start
slow and increase the speed a bit after 15 seconds. Do two sets of 10 rolls with a
10-15 second rest in between.
3. Arm rotations. Start rotating your arms forward in a crossed position (right
arm over left arm and try to alternate after every rotation). Keep your elbows
slightly bent using a slow tempo. As you get used to the movements, increase the
tempo a bit (as long as it feels comfortable). Do this for 20 seconds. Next rotate
your arms forward, one at a time and each one for 15 seconds. Last, repeat all of
this again but this time rotating your arms backwards.

4. Dynamic lat stretch. Stand with your feet shoulder width apart. Gently start
to swing arms up and above your head and then back down all the way behind
your body. Keep your elbows slightly bended during the movement. As you feel
yourself loosening up and getting warmer, try to extend the arms further in each
direction. Perform this exercise twice, for 20 seconds with a 10-15 second pause
in between.
5. Dynamic chest stretch. Standing again with feet shoulder width apart, raise
arms to chest height. Start swinging them across your chest and behind your
body gradually increasing the speed a bit. Make sure you keep your arms close
to chest height. Perform 10 repetitions twice with a pause of 10-15 seconds.
6. Dynamic shoulder stretch with elastic band. You can also find this exercise
online called “Shoulder Dislocations” but I find that name a bit frightening.
Don’t worry, you aren’t going to dislocate your shoulders (if you pay attention to
my guidelines). This exercise is usually performed with special resistance bands.
If you don’t have one, just find a bicycle-wheel inner tube that you don’t need
any more. I’m sure there is one lying somewhere around your house. If not then
you can buy a cheap one for just 2 dollars instead of spending 30 dollars for a
regular resistance band. I actually prefer bicycle tubes because they have the
ideal amount of elasticity, not to hard and not too soft. Many people use
broomsticks as well but I highly recommend something with elasticity to make
sure you don’t injure your shoulders.
a) Start by holding the band about twice as wide as your shoulder width in front
of you.
b) Start raising your arms up overhead. Be careful not to allow your shoulders to
shrug upwards.
c) Bring the band all the way backwards, always making sure there is enough
slack on it that allows you to do this movement without over-stressing your
shoulders.
As you warm up you can slowly try to decrease the width of your grip on the
band. The more you increase your flexibility in this exercise, the more you will
be able to hold a narrower grip. Just make sure you always start wide enough
and gradually decrease the width.
7. Alternating sitting toe touches (Windmill). This exercise will warm-up your
back and open up your hamstrings without overstretching them. From a seated

position, place your feet apart - about twice the distance of your shoulder width.
Bend at the hips, and keep your spine straight and elongated (very important).
Don't round your back! If you feel too much tension in your hamstrings bend
your knees a little. From this position, perform the following:
a. Extend both arms out to your side, at shoulder height and
b. Rotate your trunk by bending a bit forward reaching with your arm towards
the opposite toe.
c. If you are not flexible, bend your knees enough in order to touch your toes
(aim for tension not pain!)
d. Alternate sides.
Note: If you do this exercise with bad form you can place unnecessary stress on
your lower back so pay attention to proper form.
8. Chair Squats. This is more of a warm-up set but it's important in order to
properly warm-up your legs. Find a chair that is not too tall; anything below
knee height will do. Place a chair just behind you and stand in front of it. Place
your feet shoulder-width apart or even a bit wider (whatever feels more
comfortable) with your toes pointing a couple degrees outwards. Bend the knees
and slowly squat towards the chair while keeping the weight on your heels
(important). Avoid letting your knees surpass your toes. Sit on the chair for half
a second and push up again through your heels, feeling at the same time your
glutes push your body up.  Fully extend the legs until you're back to a standing
position. Repeat this for 3 sets of 5-20 repetitions. 
Final Notes: Pay attention to the guidelines above for proper form and technique
The general sensation we ought to have after completing an efficient warm-up
should consist of the following basic points:
• Feeling our muscles stimulated enough and energized but not drained.
• Enough freedom of movement in our joints and muscles to perform all the
exercises our basic program consists of.
• A rise in temperature enough to cause at least a mild perspiration.
It is far better to spend 15 minutes warming up every time, instead of training for
months and watch all your results go down the drain, just because you skipped
warm-up once and got injured.

Chapter 3
Beginners
When you're a beginner, you are far from your ultimate physical potential of
strength and muscle growth. Your body doesn't know how to perform
bodyweight exercises properly by activating neuromuscular pathways efficiently.
This means that your body doesn't know yet how to combine strength and
technique efficiently to use all the ''horse power'' it already has. The reason you
improve a lot in the beginning of a strength training program is not only because
your muscles grow bigger, but also because your nervous and muscular system
learn to co-operate more effectively.
The more you perform an exercise, the more your neuromuscular system evolves
and becomes more efficient at using every bit of neuronally-integrated muscle
fiber that can facilitate this movement. Think of your neuromuscular efficiency
as untapped strength you already have but cannot take advantage of. It's like
having a fast car but not knowing how to drive yet. Focusing on proper
technique in every exercise is essential in the beginners phase.
A beginner's ability to recover also improves. Recovery can be trainable to some
extent, especially in the beginning.
Simply put, a beginner is someone for whom the stress applied during a single
workout is enough to cause an adaptation until the next workout. This means that
a beginner can become stronger in every single training session! This allows him
to add repetitions or move to a more difficult progression in almost every
workout during the first couple of weeks. After that, more reps or a more
difficult progression can be performed about every two to three work outs. The
end of the beginners phase is marked when the minimum progress of adding one
rep or performing a more difficult progression every week ceases to happen. For
people new to strength training this is usually somewhere between the second
and third month.
The exercises that will be used as a criterion to the general guidelines above will
be pull-ups, pistol squats and push-ups. Once you are able to perform at least 5
repetitions of pull-ups, pistol squats and push-ups with good form, then you are
ready to move onto the advanced program. This doesn't mean that you shouldn't
focus on improving your strength in the rest of the exercises, but these three
particular exercises are the best criterion to test your pulling, squatting and

pushing strength and to conclude with when you are ready to switch to the
intermediate phase.
Beginners Program Structure
The beginner program is divided in two parts. Part A, which is the introductory
program with the purpose to gradually introduce you to essential bodyweight
concepts and exercises. It contains 4 basic exercises, each one focused on
strengthening a primal movement pattern. The basic primal movement patterns
are Pull, Push and Squat. To cover these you will do:
1. Pull-ups and Chin-ups as pulling pattern movements
2. Push-ups as a pushing pattern and
3. Pistol squats (or bodyweight squats) as a squatting pattern movement.
Supplementary exercises will also be included for your core. I say
supplementary because no matter what exercise you do, bodyweight training
always activates your core for stability and control (this is one of the cool
benefits of bodyweight exercise).
- Your primal movement patterns are Pull, Push and squat
Phase A lasts three weeks. Because everybody differs in weight, height and
strength, many people won't be able to perform the basic form of every exercise.
Many people cannot do a pull-up once they get started. If you're one of them,
don't let this overwhelm you. It's natural and I got your back. As mentioned
previously, in the exercise menu you can find easier progressions for every
movement. For example, even if you can't do regular push-ups, you can start
with push-ups on your knees. Dips are not included in part A, but they will be
added in Part B so that your shoulders can toughen up a bit first.
First week's goal is to experience a little soreness, but not so much that daily
activities are impaired. Feeling some tenderness the next day, like for example
below your armpits, in your chest, legs and glutes is to be expected. On the other
hand, if lifting your glass of water is causing you pain, you could have gone a
little easier on yourself...
Workout frequency in both phases is three times per week and one day of rest
minimum is required between every session. You can train for example on -
Monday, Wednesday and Friday or Tuesday - Thursday and Saturday. I like the
first example because I prefer kicking back on the weekend. The program starts

with pull-ups & chin-ups, doing 4 pulling sets in total. Combining these
exercises two pulling variations in a workout builds immense upper body
strength, especially in the arm and back areas.
Part A (3 Weeks)
Part B (5 -10 Weeks)
In every workout of the week there will be a difference in the exercise order.
This way you focus once a week on each big muscle-building exercise, in the
beginning of the program when your muscles are fully energized. Keep in mind
that pistol squats will always be placed in the middle of the program due to the
fact that they are a lower body exercise. This way you give your upper body a bit
more time to recover before continuing with the rest of the upper body exercises.
Workout #1

Workout #2
(Workout 2 starts with dips. Make sure you warm up your shoulders properly)
Workout #3

The last workout of the week starts with Push-ups.

Chapter 4
Basic
The end of a great era...The ending of the beginners phase is also the end of the
''Newbie gains period.'' Anything you do related to strength training can produce
some kind of muscle growth when you're a beginner. That's right - everything
works! Even strength exercises such as running can cause some hypertrophy
effect on your legs. Even doing 40 repetitions, which is far away from what the
ideal rep range for strength and hypertrophy, can stimulate a significant amount
of muscle growth when you're a novice. Still, this doesn't make all the crazy
training programs out there valid (even though a lot of people get confused by
this). Choosing an appropriate training method can extend the Newbie-Gains
period as much as possible, so stick to a proper training program like
HomeMade Muscle.
Some beginners might even respond better to a greater frequency than 3
workouts per week. This happens because they don't push themselves enough
and are thus training with lower intensity than required. BUT it is important to
establish a healthy training frequency from the beginning. This way it can be a
frequency that will be maintained long-term and make your training program an
inseparable part of your weekly routine. A three time per week training
frequency in the beginning is enough to produce optimal muscle growth and
strength while keeping you, at the same time, hungry enough for more. This will
keep you motivated in the long run. Don't worry, there is more training volume
coming later on if you are up to it!
After the newbie gains period starts to fade away, comes a critical time...this is
when a big part of people gradually start to give up on their exercise program.
Once plateaus start to hit their progress, they become discouraged. They might
blame the training program and they're usually right. Most flashy training
programs you stumble upon, whether you find them online or they were given to
you by your neighborhood's gym, are only effective for beginners. Trainers get
away with this because as we said, ''everything works when you're new to
strength exercise.''
As your relationship with strength training deepens, you get to know your body
better. You can now utilize your neuromuscular system more efficiently and push
yourself closer to your strength potential. Although this is a great

accomplishment, it also means that progress won't happen as often as it did in
the beginning. It is now critical not to obsess on improvement from one workout
to another. Sometimes progress won't even happen from week to week, but
instead might take ten days, two or even three weeks towards the end of this
phase. Don't worry, you are still on the right path. Be proud of your progress
when it occurs and stick to your program. Remember, nobody adds reps every
week through eternity. The human species is a great adaptive organism but still,
there's a limit to how fast you can adapt as you keep on improving.
Bodyweight athletes (that's you) who pass the beginners level, benefit from
exposure to new movement patterns. This is why handstand push-ups and
inverted rows are added at this point.
Basic Program Structure
The most demanding bodyweight exercises for the majority of people are Pull-
ups, Handstand push-ups, Dips and Pistol squats. That is why the first three of
them are placed in the beginning of one workout, once every week. This way, as
mentioned previously in the book, you can hit them hard with your
neuromuscular system fresh. As for pistol squats, since they are a lower body
exercise, they are placed in the middle of every routine so that you are not too
drained and they can give your upper body a bit more time to recover before
continuing with the rest of the upper body exercises.
You will notice that there are some differences in the total amount of sets from
day to day within the week. This is done for two reasons. Number one; there is
always some extra volume in the first exercise of each workout (for the reasons
mentioned in the previous paragraph). Number two; there is a decrease in sets of
some other exercises that come later on in each training session. This is done in
order to balance the total workload applied on pull and push movements.
The first workout of the week starts with pull-ups & chin-ups doing 5 sets in
total. Combining these exercises together builds immense upper body strength,
especially in the arm and back department. Because these two exercises have
very similar movement patterns, they will be considered to be part of the same
exercise - exercise one.
Workout #1

Average time to complete Workout: 1 hour
Workout 2 starts with handstand push-ups. Remember, handstand push-ups take
a while to accomplish. Once you are able to perform this highly intense exercise,
make sure you thoroughly warm up your shoulders. Adding some handstands on
a wall and two sets of pike push-ups to your warm up sets before doing the
exercise is a good idea.
Workout #2

Average time to complete Workout: 1 hour
The last workout of the week starts with dips which are one of the best
bodyweight exercises for the chest. This is the last day of the week, so warm-up
well and don’t be afraid to push yourself. There will be plenty of time to recover
during the next two resting days.
 
Workout #3

Average time to complete Workout: 1 hour

Chapter 5
Advanced
 
For those of you willing to move on to the advanced level, I highly recommend a
complete week off. Give your joints and tendons a break to recover properly.
As I mentioned previously, the advanced phase is for serious bodyweight
athletes. If you decide to go forward on this challenging path, I salute you and I
promise I am going to be next to you the entire way. Anytime you need me, just
e-mail me at homemademusclemail@gmail.com and add ''advanced level'' in the
subject area. That being said, it's time for some serious work so let's get started...
The advanced training level consists of a twelve-month plan which is divided in
main three phases. Phase one lasts three months; phase two and three both last
four months. There is also a transitional week in the beginning to ease into the
program. I highly recommend this if you took some time off after completing the
Basic Program or if you are an experienced bodyweight athlete and skipped the
first two programs (Beginner's & Basic). To perfect this twelve month program, I
went through a lot of trial and error. For an entire year, I experimented and
trained 10-15 training hours per week to perfect it. In the end I looked, felt and
became stronger then I ever was. And So will you! In fact, you will be even
better off than I was since you don't have to go through my mistakes now that
the program is perfected.
Increasing Training Frequency
As you remember training frequency is important and you should train using
whole-body workouts at least three times per week when it comes to bodyweight
exercise for optimum progress. If done properly, you can increase frequency by
lowering a bit of your intensity. Training more frequently will benefit you at this
point because you will improve your neuromuscular efficiency faster this way.
As we discussed in strength basics - factors like coordination, balance and
kinesthetic awareness - are part of performing complex exercises such as one
arm push-ups and handstand push-ups. Increased training frequency can help
you a lot during this phase of your development as a bodyweight athlete.
Unless you are blessed with the genetics of a talented gymnast, frequency is
more important than intensity at this point. This does not mean that you will
train lightly. It just means that you will not be going to failure on low intensity

days. Used in a proper organized training program, high frequency will make
you stronger, faster and bigger.
Simply said: More frequency minus a bit intensity = more strength = more gains
Preliminaries (IMPORTANT)
Besides training with the basic program for at least six months, I have three
basic prerequisites you should meet in order to make sure you are ready for the
Advanced Phase, as follows:
1. Pull-ups - 10 clean reps (chest to bar)
2. Pistol squats - 6 clean reps (ass to the grass)
3. Handstand push-ups - 5 clean reps (head slightly touching the floor)
If you cannot perform these exercises with good form just yet, stick to the Basic
Program for a while longer.
6 The Number of the Beast
If you want to become a bodyweight beast, this is the exact number of exercises
you are going to need to focus on in the basic part of every training session - six
basic movements. While developing this program, I only had one thing on my
mind - how to get the best out of the minimum. Thinking in terms of anatomy
and kinesiology, these were also the best bodyweight exercises to strengthen the
body to its greatest potential while keeping it in balance.
This is how the main part of your workout should look by the end of the year:
1. Handstand Push-ups
2. Pistol Squats
3. Pull-ups (chest to bar)
4. One arm-push-ups
5. Dragon Flags
6. One arm dead hangs
Don't worry if you're not yet at the point were you can do one-arm push-ups and
dragon flags. Neither could I when I started working on this program. Follow
this program to the letter, lose the extra weight that is weighing you down and by
the end of the year you will be a mean one arm push-up machine training abs
Bruce Lee style.

One-Arm Deadhangs
A new exercise that is added in this level is Dead-hangs. Forearms and grip
strength are quite neglected in most of today's training programs. If you are a
beginner, then just doing simple pull-ups is enough for developing this area. But
if you go past the point of a beginner, you will need to include specialized
training in order to further develop these muscles. It might surprise you how
difficult it can be to just hang with one arm on a pull up bar. Think about it; if
you compare it to a simple two-arm dead-hang, which you are used to doing, you
are now adding twice the intensity.
Grip Strength Importance: Unless you're genetically gifted with thick
forearms, they can be quite resistant to growth. A pair of muscular forearms is
quite impressive visually but that is not the only reason you should strengthen
them. Grip strength adds strength to all pulling exercises, it can help you
overcome pull-up plateaus, and in general they allow better stability and control
during most pulling related bodyweight exercises. The main reason this happens
can be described by the principle of ''Irradiation.'' This principle states that you
can contract a muscle harder if you also contract the muscles surrounding it.
If this all sounds a little weird, try the following experiment:
1. Try flexing your bicep as hard as possible without making a fist.

2. Now try to flex your bicep as hard as possible while making a fist and
squeezing it really tight.

Didn't your bicep contract harder the second time? Grip strength is also
extremely important if your goal is to achieve a one-arm pull-up in the future.
Why Dead-hangs?
I tried several ways to strengthen my forearms during 2013, I even bought those
70's grippers. Well...that was a big waste of money. Served me right for making
such a stupid compulsive purchase, I could easily have avoided just by using my
brain for ten seconds. I mean seriously, how is sitting in front of the TV and
squeezing these grippers a couple of hundred times a day, going to improve your
grip strength? Also, how is it going to add functional strength to your training
program? Our forearms need progressive overload and a rep range of 1-15
repetitions or (if you are using isometrics) a total time under tension of 5-60
seconds in order to get stronger, just like most of the muscles in our body. What
can be more functional in developing grip strength than hanging on something?
When it comes to strength training, generally the simplest solution is the most
effective.
Forearm Recovery
In order to aid your recovery a bit more, it is a good idea to add some soft tissue
work on your forearms while developing them. Find a ball about the size of a
tennis ball but a bit harder. Like a lacrosse ball, a golf ball or a baseball. Place a
towel on the table (so that it's less slippery) and apply pressure on your forearms
by rolling them on the ball against the table.

After your soft tissue work, you can add a simple stretch for your fingers. Just
put your fingers on the edge of a table and softly press so that they extend. Once
finished, do the same thing with your thumbs. Two or three sets of twenty
seconds is enough. Click here if you want to read more on why grip strength is
important. More on how to build those Popeye forearms in the exercise menu.
Warming Up
Another parameter that changes in this phase is your warm up. You are now at a
point that your body knows how to tap into your body's ultimate horse power.
This also means that you need to warm up even more efficiently to avoid
stressing your joints and ligaments. In fact, in this training level, the warm up is
half the workout. Yes, you read that correct, half the workout!
''The warm up is half the workout''
Inverted rows, push-ups, bilateral (two legged) squats and prone cobras are now
part of your warm up. You body has now matured enough to use easy-sets (low
intensity) of these exercises in order to warm up and prepare yourself for the
remainder of the program. Inverted Rows will prepare you for pulling
movements. Push-ups will prepare your wrists, elbows & shoulders for pushing
movements. Bilateral squats will warm up your legs and prone cobras will warm
up the whole back chain all the way up from your head, through your upper and
lower back, and down to your glutes and hamstrings. Warming up this way will
also add a little more ''easy strength to the bank'' without exhausting you for the
rest of the program.
1. Start your warm up with our dynamic stretching routine.
2. Rest for 30-60 seconds and move on to easy sets.
Easy Sets
Sensation: While doing these sets you are not supposed to be experiencing any
great amount of fatigue. A mild ''pump'' to get some blood flowing in your
muscles is what you're aiming for.
Warm up sets order:
1. Inverted rows
2. Push-ups
3. Bodyweight squats

4. Prone cobra
Sets and Rest: These exercises are going to be performed in a form of circuit
training. After each exercise rest briefly (5-10 seconds max) and move on. Once
you are finished with one round of all four exercises, rest for ninety seconds and
repeat. You are going to complete a total of two to three rounds. Two rounds are
enough if you are working out in a warm environment and if you've been awake
for more than six hours. Three rounds are required if you train early in the
morning and/or in cold environments.
Reps: The number of reps should be about half the reps you would need to do,
in order to come close to failure in an exercise by doing 3 sets with one minute
rest in between. If you have completed the basic level training, then you now
that exact number but let's see an example just to be sure. If you would do three
sets of 15 push-ups with one minute rest in between in order to come close to
failure, then your warm up sets should consist of 7-8 repetitions. Remember to
balance this number with the sensation described above. Feel free to add or
reduce a few of reps to get the right feeling.
Introduction Part (1 Week)
The first week is meant to ease you into the program and get you accustomed
with the main philosophy and purpose. It consists of three training sessions with
each training session having at least one day of rest in between. There are two
types of workouts: Workout A and Workout B, which will also be included in the
Advanced Phases. The main difference between workout A and B is the order of
the exercises (for the same reasons mentioned in previous chapters). Specifically,
workout A begins with Handstand Push-ups whereas workout B starts with Pull-
ups. These two exercises are the two basic cornerstones of HomeMade Muscle
and that is why it is crucial that you perform them in the beginning of your
workout.
Rule #1 of the Advanced Program - Never go until failure on workouts A & B.
Intensity should not be very high in workouts A & B in order for this program to
work. Remember increasing frequency needs to occur strategically. All of your
sets should be performed with perfect form. Use perfect technique in every set
and every rep!
- Have good control over your body in every single rep; observe and focus on

muscle contraction.
- Don't just pull or push yourself up - contract your muscles consciously.
- Feel the floor or the bar in every movement, don't just hang or depend on them.
- Be aware not only of the whole movement, but also of the movement as a
whole.
Important Note: Until this point you have just been doing reps. ''I now want
you to experience conscious movement against gravity''.
Once you get to the point where you feel that your next rep might not be
performed with perfect form or might fail - stop. If you miscalculate and you
come close to failure, simply quit the rep at that point instantly. You will learn to
do this more efficiently over time.
Here is an example with pull-ups to make this even clearer. Let's say you are
doing 3 sets of 10 repetitions. Your first set should be relatively easy. In the
second set, somewhere after 6-7 reps you should be starting to feel quite heavy.
In set number three your last 3 reps should be tough enough so that you have to
put a more effort in them, but not that tough that you break form. All three sets
should be done with outstanding form.

Now that you have reached the Advanced Training Level, you should be getting
closer to exercises like one arm push-ups and dragon flags. Work on the
progressions and variations of these exercises and don't worry if you still feel far
from achieving these. Using the Advanced Level Training Program will get you
there before you know it. All you need is patience and consistency.
Phase 1 (3 months)
Phase 1 lasts three months and consists of four training sessions per week. You
will start your week with two back-to-back training days followed by one day
off. That means you will be doing Workout A on day one and Workout B on day
two. After resting on day three, you will perform again Workout A on day four
and Workout B on day five. Day six and day seven are resting days.
Due to the increased training frequency, it is possible that you will feel ''heavy''
the first twenty days of Phase 1. Don't worry if this happens. Once you get past
these days and have the low volume training week I prescribe, your body will
adapt and your performance will go up again. This is how your weekly plan will
look (assuming that you begin your training week on Mondays).

Low Volume Week
From now on every time you complete four weeks of continuous training you
will have a low volume training week as described below. This will allow your
neuromuscular system to recover properly.
Rule #2 of the Advanced Program - Have a low volume training week every
four weeks.
Phase 2 (4 months)
Before moving on to Phase 2, instead of having a low volume training week,

take a whole week off. Trust me, you are going to need it for the next phase. Do
not worry, nobody's physique and strength fell apart from taking a single week
off once every couple of months. On the other hand, there are many people out
there who achieved a great physique and amazing strength levels but did not last
very long due to problems such as bad shoulders, elbow pain or repetitive knee
injuries. If you worry about issues like gaining weight, etc., just stay active
during this week by doing low intensity cardio activities. Go for a one-hour long
walk in the morning or a jog for thirty minutes, three times per week and you'll
be fine.
Rule #3 of the Advanced Program - Take a week off whenever you switch from
one phase to another.
Taking one week off replenishes muscle glycogen storage, helps you avoid
overuse injuries and lets your muscles and especially the nervous system,
recover properly. There might be a slight feeling of strength loss when you get
back to your program but don't worry. You'll be back on track after two workout
sessions. 
To avoid extreme muscle soreness, go easy on your first workout after your
whole week off. Otherwise, too much soreness will get in the way later on.
Rule #4 of the Advanced Program - Always go easy on your first workout after
a whole week off.
Phase 2 lasts four months and consists of five training sessions per week. You
will start your week with two back-to-back training days followed by a day off.
That means you will be doing Workout A on day one and Workout B on day two.
After resting on day three, you will repeat the same on day four and day five. On
day six you will perform Workout C and on day seven you will rest again. Once
again, due to the increased training frequency, it is possible that you will feel
''heavy'' the first three to four weeks of Phase 2. Once you get past these weeks
and have a low volume training week, your body will adapt and your
performance will go up again.  This is how your weekly plan will look:
(Workouts A and B are the same as in Phase 1)
Workout C - Rest/Pause technique

In Workout C you will be using a popular strength developing technique called
Rest/Pause. The Rest/Pause technique became popular by a famous 1960's
power lifter named Jim Williams. In his early life big Jim had been involved in
some criminal activity and was sentenced to ten years in prison. Due to the
limited equipment available in the prison, this technique helped him train hard
without using a lot of weight.
What you need to know about the Rest/Pause technique
Rest/Pause training divides your training set with a brief resting period of 15
seconds that allows you to do a couple more reps.  For example, let's say you can
perform three sets of ten pull-ups with about a minute of rest between each set.
Using the Rest/Pause technique, once you are finished with ten repetitions, you
rest for 15 seconds and add two to three more reps. After that, you rest and
repeat 2 more sets.
This technique will give you a great muscle pump and will add extra (metabolic)
stress to your muscles. It is believed that the effects of metabolic stress increases
muscle fiber recruitment and enhances the growth potential of the muscle as a
whole. Although exercise scientists (such as hypertrophy expert Brad
Schoenfield) are still researching this, it has been one of the classic secret tools
bodybuilders use to get big since the rise of their sport. Besides that, it also
makes your workouts more challenging and motivational! Because Rest/Pause
sets are quite demanding, you will only focus on two exercises. These are our
favorite Handstand push-ups and Pull-ups.
Note: Never go to failure in handstand push-ups. Shoulders need a lot of work
and time to get used to this exercise until you can go hard at it without risking
injury. Pull-ups on the other hand can take more of a beating so feel free to go all
in with this exercise on Workout C.

Don' forget your low volume training week
Phase 3 (4 months)
Again, before moving on to this next Phase take a whole week off followed by
the transition week. Phase 3, just like Phase 2, consists of five training sessions
per week.
(Workouts A and B remain the same as in Phase 1 & 2)
 
Workout C - Reversed Pyramid
The reason this workout is called the ''Reversed Pyramid'' is because of the way
the repetitions are structured. You begin your first set by doing 50% of the total
repetitions you would do on Workout A or B. After that, you rest one minute and
add one more rep. Continue doing this until you fail to add another rep. Again,
because this program is quite tough, you are only going to do two exercises -
Handstand push-ups and Giant pull-ups.
If this seems a bit complicated, let’s have a look at an example with pull-ups.

Let’s say that the amount of pull-ups you do on a regular workout such as
Workout B is eight. This is how your reversed pull-up pyramid will look:
• 1st Set: Do 4 reps (50%) and rest for one minute.
• 2nd set: Do 5 reps and rest for one minute.
• 3rd set: Do 6 reps and rest for one minute etc
Do this until your reach the first set where you fail to add another rep with
perfect form.
Low Volume Week

Just as in Phase 1 and 2, every time you complete 4 weeks of continuous training
you will add a low volume training week as described below.
Basic Rules of the Advanced Phase:
1. Never go until failure on Workouts A & B.
2. Have a low volume training week every 4 weeks.
3. Take a week off whenever you switch from one phase to another
4. Always go easy on your first workout after a whole week off.

Part 4 Nutrition
All diets work, until they don't. Get started on any diet plan and I guarantee you
that you will lose some weight or feel better in the beginning. Also, some diets
work good for some people but not so good for others. After extensively
studying nutrition, I understand that it can be a frustrating subject to research.
Everyday new diets arise, nutrition specialists and the even the USDA change
their opinions on what is healthy or not. And the number of obese people
continues to rise... Nowadays, statistics show that even though more people are
on more diets than ever before, we are also fatter than ever.

Chapter 1
Lost in diet land
When I first began my healthy-eating journey, I quickly became a victim of
countless fad diets. As Denise Minger says in her great book - Death by Food
Pyramid, ''I had fallen under the spell that seduces health voyagers; the power of
unsubstantiated anecdote and well-posed before and after pictures.''
Since I wasn't the best critical thinker at the time, I just read all the popular diet
books available on Amazon. The criteria I used to judge them was probably
identical with everybody else; I just paid attention to the shinny 5-star reviews,
the fancy PhD titles next to the authors names and all the ''scientific'' studies
quoted in them (which I never cared to examine). To my defense, the educational
system I grew up in (as probably most educational systems) never taught me
critical thinking skills. The Sports Science University I graduated from had a
course on nutrition (taught by a suspiciously overweight nutrition professor) and
focused primarily on the typical food pyramid, which didn't seem to work, either
for me or the rest of the world.
The Truth About Weight Loss.
If you only care about controlling your weight, then the solution is simple
(although not practical). If you're a healthy individual, losing weight is strictly a
matter of calories in and calories out. Your body burns a specific amount of
calories every day, which you can easily calculate if you go online. If you are not
familiar with calorie calculators, just Google something like “free daily calorie
intake calculator” and you will find a ton of free calorie calculators. After that, it
is just a matter of counting your calories every day (although this is a pain in the
ass). If you want to lose weight you have to be on a caloric deficit and if you
want to gain weight, you have to be on a caloric surplus. Some of you reading
this might be quite skeptical; I also was a couple of years ago.
A nutritionist from the University of Kansas named Mark Haub performed the
following experiment. He followed a hypocaloric diet based on 70% junk food
such as Doritos, Oreos, cereals based on sugar and other foods with ''empty
calories.'' The rest of his calories came from some veggies, a protein supplement
and a multivitamin. Results after 10 weeks? He lost 27 pounds and his blood
work improved! Of course we don’t know what the long term health effects of
that diet would be and neither I nor Mark Haub think it would be a healthy

dietary approach in the long run. The professor himself obviously doesn't
recommend this diet to anyone and the reason he did this experiment was to
prove that a diet doesn't have to be 100% clean in order to be healthy as many
nutritional and fitness gurus out there suggest.
Special Diets
The only diets supported by solid scientific evidence that might have a slight
benefit over the general rule of caloric intake, are high protein diets. High
protein diets have a slight benefit, mainly due to the fact that protein is a
macronutrient that has a bigger thermogenic effect on your body. This means
that in comparison with fat and carbs, your body uses more energy in order to
break down protein (or what is also called protein catabolism, which is the
process of your body dissolving protein macromolecules into amino acids and
other simple derivative compounds to serve all kinds of functions in your body).
Another hot topic currently is fasting related diets such as Intermittent Fasting.
Some say that they might have a small metabolic advantage mainly due to the
hormonal manipulation that occurs from the fasting periods these diets have.
Still there is no solid scientific evidence to support something like this, since at
the end of the day the human body tends to balance out most of these hormonal
fluctuations.
The main point here is that no matter what diet you choose, if your daily calories
overextend your daily caloric needs, you will, without a doubt, gain weight after
a certain point. Of course the media, doctors, and other health specialists who
want to promote their new “groundbreaking” diet books and other products, will
try to mislead you. When you are trying to lose weight, the truth is as simple as
doing some calorie-math. No matter what you hear, keep in mind that all the
serious and unbiased scientific research backs this up.
How Diets Trick You Into Losing Weight
Diets help you lose weight by tricking you into eating less. While that might not
sound bad, it can lead to unhealthy eating behaviors in the long run. For
example, let's take Paleo diet. Paleo cuts out most carbs, sugar and processed
food, which means that you can only eat food categories like meat, nuts and
fruits. One problem with this diet approach is that it's really difficult to fill all
your caloric needs based on these few food categories - trust me I've tried! No
wonder people ''miraculously'' lose weight on Paleo. If you're overweight, it can
work for a long time but at some point you will end up starved. Another trick

Paleo and other diets use is encouraging you to eat more protein. Protein has
shown to be the most satiating macronutrient. This means that eating high-
protein foods helps you feel full for longer periods of time, which again helps
you eat less.
Let’s also examine an opposite diet like veganism. Vegan diets help a lot of
people lose weight because they exclude two other major food categories, meat
& dairy. At the same time, they also encourage you to eat more fiber, water and
total food volume, which is again a good strategy to lose weight and to feel
better! There is nothing wrong with strategies that help you eat less and healthier
of course.
Eating enough protein and a lot of vitamin and mineral dense foods is important.
However, what bothers me is when diet-book authors use these strategies
secretly, making false claims. Making you falsely thing that the foods you are
excluding from your diet are what is making you overweight and unhealthy. This
can lead to very unhealthy eating behaviors in the long run. 
Why Do Diets Make You Feel Better?
Another thing that confused me when experimenting with a few diets is that I
was experiencing a big energy boost. There were periods, especially in the
beginning, when I was eating less and even sleeping less, yet I felt unstoppable. I
was a lean mean exercise machine!  As I learned later, the reason this occurs is
not due to the magic powers of the diet. Instead it was due to elevated
Catecholamines; also known as the ''flight or fight response'' hormones.
Adrenaline (epinephrine), noradrenaline (norepinephrine) and dopamine can
increase your heart rate, blood pressure, breathing rate, muscle strength, mental
alertness and even produce a feeling of euphoria. Catecholamines are often
released into the bloodstream due to stress or fright and prepare the body for the
"fight-or-flight" response. Mystery solved. Although I love the energy surplus I
experience on a hypocaloric diet, unfortunately you can't keep on losing weight
for ever.

Chapter 2
Breakfast: Not the most important meal of the day
For some of you who stay current with the latest updates in nutrition, this won’t
be anything new to you. For others, it may even sound crazy... “But I have been
told all my life by parents, doctors and TV commercials that breakfast is this
most important meal of the day, what the hell are you talking about?!” you will
think.
The Shocking Truth Behind Cereal
The common notion is that when you haven’t eaten anything for a whole night,
once your body wakes up, it immediately needs a meal rich in carbs to have
energy for the rest of the day’s mental and physical tasks. Not eating breakfast
will damage your metabolism, make you fat, decrease your energy, and maybe
cause world war 3 - who knows! The truth is simple, think about it from an
evolutionary point. Did our hunter and gatherer ancestors who lived in the wild
for hundreds and thousands of years have food available to them the moment
they woke up? The answer is no, of course. They had to hunt or at least go out
and wander around in the wild to gather their food. Prepackaged and ready to eat
breakfast cereals began with the American temperance movement in the 19th
century. In a species that is around earth for a hundreds & thousands of years,
that’s quite a small segment of time. We might not live as hunters and gatherers
anymore but the modern lifestyle which considers breakfast the most important
meal of the day began as a habit that was forced upon us in the USA by people
like John Harvey Kellogg.
Surprisingly, cereal wasn’t originally a cynical marketing ploy to sell sugar to
children if that was your original thought.
In the 1830s, the Reverend Sylvester Graham preached the virtues of a
vegetarian diet to his congregation, and in particular the importance of whole-
meal flour. “Meat-eating,” he said, “excited the carnal passions.” After that, the
Seventh-Day Adventists John Harvey Kellogg took up the mission. He set about
devising cures for what he believed were the common ills of the day; in
particular constipation and masturbation (wtf right?). In Kellogg’s mind, the two
were closely linked. Kellogg experimented in the sanitarium kitchen to produce
an easily digested form of cereal.
That’s right; breakfast cereal was a cynical marketing ploy by religious

fundamentalists to destroy your sex drive! Isn't that just dandy!?
Reality and Science Behind Breakfast.
In typical healthy individuals cortisol levels peak every morning after a good
night sleep for about an hour to ninety minutes after you wake up. This normal
spike of cortisol helps break down body fat by increasing the release of fatty
acids for fuel. Some of you might ask yourselves, “won't Cortisol also break
down muscle?” Here is where growth hormone comes to the rescue. Another
thing that happens in the morning is the release of a hormone called Ghrelin.
Besides making you feel hungry, Ghrelin also stimulates the release of Growth
Hormone which also stimulates fat burn and doesn’t allow your body to burn
muscle tissue just by abstaining from food for half a day. When you start
consuming big sugary bowls of cereal and in general foods rich in carbs in the
morning, you spike up your insulin which shuts downs the production of all the
hormones associated with fat burn I mentioned above. I'm not trying to say
anything out of the norm here, all I want to say is that when you start eating your
body stops burning fat and starts burning food (duuh).
Most people, once they get used to it, function a lot better without breakfast.
They also notice better energy levels. The reason for this is that after having
fasted for about 8-10 hours (while sleeping), when you wake up your body turns
on your sympathetic nervous system, which is basically your “fight or flight”
mode. When you eat a breakfast rich in carbs, insulin production increases and
you over-stimulate your opposite-parasympathetic mode, which in simple words
means you start feeling lazy and sleepy. That’s the main reason most people feel
sleepy in the morning hours at work and need a liter of coffee to get through
these ''heavy'' hours.
Still some people (especially women) don’t function well when skipping
breakfast. If that's the case with you, try starting your day with a meal high in
protein like an omelet. Keep in mind that even though I'm an advocate of
skipping breakfast, it doesn't mean I don't enjoy Sunday morning pancakes every
now and then. Once you have reached your ideal weight, your diet can become
quite flexible if you follow some basic rules we will talk about later on.
Special Weight Loss Diets - What Works For Me
Let's face it...No matter how many tips you find on dieting and no matter what
strategies you use, if you want to lose a lot of weight you will experience some
moments of hunger. Still, it's not the worst thing that could happen to you. The

human spirit has gone through some really hard situations in the past, people
have gone through war, slavery, torture and so much more. So man-up and stop
looking for excuses! Set your weight goals and make it clear to yourself that
until then, you will be disciplined.
We have established that counting calories is the most efficient way to lose
weight, yet it's also not the most practical one. Having a general idea of how
many calories you are eating and being able to calculate calories of the typical
foods you eat on a daily basis can be very helpful. Foods like eggs, oatmeal,
brown bread, fruits and nuts are typical things I eat on a daily basis. Due to this,
I know how many calories are in these foods which helps me have a general idea
of my daily caloric intake.
Because I tend to get lazy though on counting calories for every single meal I
have, I don't obsess over calorie counting and I just focus on some basic eating
strategies when I want to lose some weight. What I do is I focus on reducing
carbs, junk food and only allow myself to eat in a specific time window. A
method that helps a lot with the programming of the latter is Intermittent fasting.

Chapter 3
Intermittent Fasting & The myth of frequent meals
Most of you have heard that eating small frequent meals speeds up your
metabolism and does all kinds of magical things. The truth is that this is also just
a myth which science once again has disproven. We have become so
brainwashed today when it comes to food, that we are afraid of staying unfed for
even a couple of hours. We think that it will screw up our metabolism or burn all
our muscles. Once again, I was also a victim of this eating myth until I read
books like Orie Hofmekler’s book “The Warrior Diet,” Jason Ferrugia’s “The
Renegade Diet” and “Eat Stop Eat” by Brad Pilon. These books changed my
perspective on nutrition and broadened my research on fasting diets.
The human body is an amazing organic machine and wouldn’t have survived
hundreds of thousands of years in the wild if it suffered such consequences when
it stayed unfed for as little as 16 hours. Do you think your cavemen ancestors
had a fridge in his cave where they could go and have a snack whenever they felt
they had the “munchies”?
I know fasting may sound a bit scary at first if you are not familiar with this diet
technique, however don’t be afraid... You don’t have to wander around the desert
of Jerusalem for 40 days like Jesus in order to fast. Intermittent fasting (IF)
divides your daily eating schedule into 2 phases: 1) a fasting phase; and 2) an
eating phase. The only important thing to watch when you are doing intermittent
fasting is to remain hydrated during the fasting phase. If you think about it, we
all fast intermittently at night when we sleep. The only thing that changes
usually in IF is that you fast for a couple of hours more after you wake up. Just
think of IF as simply skipping breakfast in the beginning, it will make the whole
process a lot easier.
In order to fast intermittently, you eat your last meal 3-4 hours before you go to
bed. I personally eat my last meal around 7 - 8pm since I go to sleep at 11pm.
After fasting for 16 hours you can have your first meal the next day around 11am
- 12pm. I try not to go beyond 16 hours, otherwise I don’t have enough time to
fulfill my caloric needs without compromising my energy levels by having to eat
huge meals during the rest of day.

During the fasting phase (8pm – 12 noon the next day) I always make sure to
stay hydrated, especially in the morning hours and during my workout, since I
train in a fasted state. Other than water, you can also have coffee and tea. If you
want to add sugar to your coffee or tea, avoid adding more than one teaspoon.
As with every diet, there is going to be a brief adaptation phase in the beginning
for everyone. But generally after 3-7 days most people start noticing the benefits
of this eating-style. Improved energy levels, mental clarity (especially in the
morning fasted hours) and improved productivity in mental and physical
activities are some common benefits people experience (including me). If you
find it too difficult to begin fasting for 16 hours, you can start progressively with
12 hours and add one hour every one or two days until you reach 16 hours.
Personally, giving my body a break from eating, helps me function better. This is
noticable especially during the fasting phase in which I experience increased
energy levels and I can also concentrate more effectively on my everyday's tasks.
One of the reasons this happens as believed by authors of fasting diets, is that
your body gets a break from digesting food all the time and your nervous system
can focus more on the rest of your body’s voluntary (e.g. concentration) and
involuntary (e.g. energy levels and liver detoxification) tasks.

Basic Guidelines of IF:
• Eat a fulfilling meal 3-4 hours before bed time;
• After that, fast for 16 hours (calorie-free liquids are allowed)
• Once you break your fast, you have an 8-hour window to consume the amount
of calories, micro and micronutrients your body requires.
Some of the people I wouldn’t recommend fasting, are the following:
• Kids whose bodies are still developing;
• Special groups of population with health issues (this goes for any advice in this
book of course)
• People with high metabolic rates who are trying to build muscle or highly
competitive athletes who need big amounts of calories to sustain their weight
• People, especially women, who find they don’t feel very well after a week of
this fasting routine.
Training in a Fasted State & The Frequent Meal Myth
I have done my best workouts during a fasted state. Besides feeling really good
during working out in a fasted state, training this way is the best way I have
personally found to stay lean.
Does everybody have to train fasted? No, of course not; people are all different.
If you feel good training in a fasted state, you can train ideally just before you
break your fast. Once you are finished training, jump on the first meal of the day.
Something proponents of intermittent fasting are also suggesting nowadays is
having a whey protein shake before your workout. This can be done without
considering it as breaking your fast and theoretically, it can help with your
muscle building goals. I have been doing this the last couple of months, but I
haven't really seen any differences in my physique or workout productivity.
Keep in mind that I achieved all of my big results in physique and strength
without any supplements; so don't worry if having a protein shake before your
workout is not an option.
Important note: Make sure you have a fulfilling meal rich in carbs and protein
the day before you train in a fasted state.

Chapter 4
How clean should your diet be?
Yes, clean eating can help most of you (including me) stay lean or even lose
weight. Well, in the short run at least. It's common for people to end up harming
their health by eating strictly clean because they think that they can have as
much ''clean'' calories as they want. Clean eating allows you to have whole and
minimally processed foods such as rice, vegetables, chicken, etc. and restricts, or
even eliminates, items such as sweets and ''junk'' food from your diet.  Clean
foods play an important part of a healthy diet due to their nutritional value and
the satiety they provide.  However, making them the only food choices allowed,
becomes not only boring but eventually also repressive.  As Anthony de Mello
once said:
''Every time you renounce something, you are eternally tied to it''
Try the following experiment. Think of a food category you don't mind eating
but you are also not crazy about. For me that would be something like legumes.
Now imagine that someone told you, you could never have this food again.
Imagine this scenario very vividly for a couple of minutes and you will probably
end salivating over a food you thought you never really cared about (I'm craving
brown beans this moment). Now imagine what happens once you renounce
majestic foods such as ice-cream. Besides the fact that you'll be constantly
obsessing over ice-cream, there will come a day when you will just end up
binging on it and probably get back most of the calories you skipped.
How Clean Should Your Diet Be? Enter Flexible Dieting
Especially once you reach a weight you are happy with, the key to sustaining it
long-term is a diet that can be flexible. What is most important is that a diet
should suit your lifestyle and cover your personal needs in nutrients and calories.
Avoid extreme diets that completely exclude food categories. For example, there
is no concrete scientific evidence that excluding meat from your diet by going
vegetarian is a healthier choice. Sure eating too much meat might be bad, but
even water in excess can be harmful for your health. If you are not exceeding
your calories and if you are covering your needs in macronutrients (proteins,
fats, carbs) and micronutrients (vitamins & minerals) you can have some of the
''dirty'' stuff.  Here are some basic guidelines for a healthy & flexible diet:
1. Eat primarily real and minimally processed food.

Prefer products that are the end result of sun, air, water and earth. In other words,
you should be able to kill it, grow it out of the earth or pick it off a tree.
This doesn't mean that you can't have some junk food or sweets every now and
then. Keeping a diet that consists 80-90% of healthy and minimally processed
food is the key to a balanced diet and maintaining a healthy eating behavior.
Diets that completely exclude foods only lead to huge binge eating episodes and
other unhealthy eating behaviors in the long run. For example, if most of your
calorie intake was from healthy foods today, it's ok to have something sweet or a
small portion of junk food meal at the end of the day. Just try to keep it around
200-300 calories. If you ate clean the whole week, it's ok to have a bigger
indulgence on the weekend.
Personally, I prefer keeping it 95% ''clean'' during the week and inside my house.
I avoid having junk lying around the kitchen. Even if I'm not hungry, I know that
if I see those oreos lying around it will be difficult to resist. On the weekend I eat
around 75% clean. I allow myself more of the fun stuff so that when I go out
with friends or have social commitments, I don't end up being the weird guy who
says I'm on a diet while the rest of the group is having beer, eating pizza and
having fun. Either you want it or not, if you're a clean eater you will eventually
become an outsider in such situations. If I happen to go out on a Thursday night
I switch that day with my weekend day.
2. Eat Enough Calories According To Your Own Needs.
Someone who spends his whole day working in an office does not have the same
caloric needs as a construction worker. Calculate how many calories your body
needs and have a basic awareness of the amount of caloric content the foods you
eat on a daily basis.
3. Have Protein With Every Meal.
Protein is the most satiating macronutrient and together with healthy fats they
are the two most essential macronutrients for health. You could survive without
carbs in your diet for example, but not without protein and fat. Every year more
and more scientific studies report the importance of a protein rich diet for
appetite control and weight loss. It is also as we all know an essential
macronutrient for building muscle. Try to include at least a bit of protein in all of
your meals. Examples: Have some nuts with your fruits, have some Feta cheese
with your salad or have an omelet in the morning rather than a sugary bowl of
cereal.

4. Eat Slower
Slow eating can aid digestion and give you a more long-lasting satisfaction from
every meal. This will help you eat less on a daily basis.
Flexible Dieting is Practical But Not Easy
I see a tendency among former clean eaters to go to the other end of the
spectrum once they get off the clean eating wagon. It's easy to misunderstand
flexible dieting and think that there is no effort required to follow a healthy
flexible diet. The truth is that flexible dieting may allow you a bit of all the
yummy stuff but that doesn't make it easy. You still need to put some effort into
it, to be organized, and constantly work on healthy eating habits. After all, if
eating healthy and being ripped was easy, everyone would be doing it.

Chapter 5
My secret weight-loss strategy
If you want to lose a large amount of weight, then you might have to modify IF a
little bit after a certain point. IF works great if you are doing it for the first time,
but after a certain point you might hit a weight loss plateau. Begin with regular
IF and once you reach that plateau start abstaining from carbs during the day
until you have your main meal at dinner. During the day, eat vegetables, fruits
and food with healthy fats and rich in protein like meat, eggs, yogurts, kefir,
cottage cheese, etc. Go for easily digestive meat sources, such as fish and
poultry. A similar approach is used in Ori Hofmekler's - Warrior diet, and I see it
as a helpful progression of intermittent fasting once you reach a weight plateau.
At the end of the day, enjoy yourself with a fulfilling meal rich in vegetables,
carbs and protein. If some of you are thinking that eating a bit meal late at night
might make you gain weight, that's also another outdated myth drawn as a faulty
conclusion from epidemiological studies in the past. If you eat a lot during the
day and then eat again a lot during the evening, guess what? You will gain
weight, of course! It’s simple calorie math. But if you control your calorie intake
during the day so that you have more room for extra calories during the evening
hours, this problem will not occur.
Knowing that you will end your day with a satisfying dinner will make it a lot
easier to stay disciplined during the rest of the day. After a long day, once you're
done with all your busy responsibilities you are in the perfect relaxed state to
properly eat and digest a nice, warm and fulfilling meal.  Enjoy – you earned it!
Helpfull tips to avoid overeating during your last main meal of the day:
1. Start your meal with vegetables. Get the healthy stuff out of the way
otherwise it's easy to fill yourself up with rice and steak and end up skipping
your salad. Filling yourself up with some veggies in the beginning of the meal
will help you reach satiety faster.
2. After your veggies, continue with your carbs and protein.
3. Eat slow and be aware of the process. Enjoy every bite of your meal and
learn to eat consciously. It's very important for reaching satiety faster. Avoid
things like eating in front of the TV.
4. Have a glass of water on the table. Drinking some water together with your

meal can also help with satiety. Don't overdo it though because more than a glass
can disrupt digestion for some people.
5. Have dessert only when it's worth it. You can have a little piece of your
favorite dessert now and then. If your favorite dessert is on the table don't torture
yourself to avoid eating it. This can and in most cases does lead to binge eating
later on. However, don't eat dessert just because it happens to be around. Learn
to apply some discipline, when it's do-able. 
6. Tip to avoid overeating - brush your teeth. Sometimes no matter what we
do, even if we feel we’ve had enough, we have an uncontrollable feeling of
greedy hunger that wants us to keep on going. A cool trick to avoid this from
happening is during your last meal of the day, brush your teeth once you feel
you’ve had enough. Most people don't feel like eating after their mouth is clean
and fresh, especially since it makes many foods taste bad. If brushing your teeth
isn't practical at the moment, a good mouthwash can also work.
Helpfull tips to avoid overeating during the rest of the day:
1. Stay Busy. The best way not to over eat is not to have too much free time to
think about eating in the first place. The best way I have found to avoid eating
too much is to stay busy, doing stuff I enjoy. Arrange daily tasks during the times
of the day when hunger strikes when you usually want to indulge in all kinds of
calorie dense temptations.
2. Walk. If you have a sedentary lifestyle, if your work doesn't require any
physical activity, you need to add some extra movement in your life. My choice
of movement is walking. I just put a good audiobook in my mp3 and go walk for
an hour, at least 3 times a week. Find a nice calm place to walk, it will also help
clear your mind, it can improve your sleep if you do it in the evening and its also
a great way to start your morning. Regardless of where or when, what is most
important is that you plan time in your schedule to get some movement. If you
don't like walking, an alternative is to jog for 30-40 minutes instead, play some
football or basketball with your friends, swim, ski, play with your kids, whatever
physical activity you prefer, just find a way to include movement in your daily
schedule. Skip the elevator, don't take the car/bicycle/motorbike. Do it the old
fashion way - use your legs!
Important note: The fact that you add some movement in your life is not an
excuse to eat more. Walk to feed your body with movement not to feed your
body with calories afterwards.

Training on a fasted state
If you have a good fulfilling meal before you start fasting; you can last a lot
more than 16 hours on a fasted state in order for your liver’s glycogen stores to
run out and begin the muscle breakdown to re-fuel you. If you want to be 100%
sure that you’re on the safe side, I would not recommend prolonging your fasts
the days you train for more than 16 hours. The only thing your muscles may lose
during a fast is muscle glycogen (sugar) which will be replenished after you
have a meal rich in carbohydrates.

Chapter 6
The truth about supplements
Almost all supplements promise extreme results, by misleading and
brainwashing many people in the exercise-fitness community. In my experience,
if your diet and our lifestyle are perfect, supplements will may offer your muscle
building goals an extra 5% help (and half of that might just be a placebo effect).
Just to be clear, I am not anti-supplement. I just find it too boring to deal with
most supplements in my daily schedule because I just prefer eating and spending
money on real food.
Supplements supported by Science:
1. Protein Supplements. Increased protein consumption has been proven to aid
athletic muscle building goals. Do you need protein powder for this? The answer
is no. You can get all your protein through your diet if you want and it makes no
difference if you take no protein supplements. The reason protein supplements
are helpful is because they are practical. Not everybody can eat a ton of meat and
other protein rich food sources on a daily basis. We have busy schedules, we
don't always have the luxury of cooking our meals and finding proper sources of
protein when eating outside is not always possible (and for a lot of us it's also
very costly). Quality meat in the Netherlands for example (which is were I'm
residing at the moment) is quite expensive. A scoop of quality protein costs less
than 1 euro when at the same time getting the same grams of quality protein can
cost me quadruple that price. I don’t mean you should substitute dietary protein
with powder protein. If you can afford it, by all means get all the quality protein
you can. Fill your fridge with salmon, eggs, beef and all of that good stuff.
Some people are afraid that protein supplements can cause kidney problems. The
only category of people that might be in danger by a very high protein diet are
people with kidney issues and this category of people is often used as a faulty
generalization by mass media or other people to criticize high protein diets. Yes,
protein requires more effort by your kidneys to be processed, but guess what?
The kidneys are always under stress! That’s what they’re made for. About 20%
of the blood pumped by the heart goes to the kidneys and they filter a total of
180 liters (48 gallons) of blood every single day.
Adding some more protein to your diet may increase their workload a little, but
it is really insignificant compared to the immense amount of work that they do
already. A study examining bodybuilders with protein intakes of 2.8g/kg vs.

well-trained athletes with moderate protein intakes revealed no significant
differences in kidney function between the groups. Additionally, a review of the
scientific literature on protein intake and renal function concluded that "there is
no reason to restrict protein in healthy individuals."
Personally, I keep a protein whey supplement around the house and use it mostly
in the following scenarios:
a. On days that I skip a meal due to being too busy;
b. When I can't afford foods like a big juicy grass fed steak to cover my high
protein needs; or
c. When I feel like having a pre-workout liquid meal after fasting intermitted.
2. Creatine Monohydrate has been shown to improve power output and is often
used by athletes to increase high-intensity exercise capacity and lean body mass.
It is one of the most studied supplements and it has been proven to aid muscle
building goals very effectively. Most Studies show that supplementing with
creatine properly doesn't cause health issues as some people fear. Keep in mind,
however, that there are a fair amount of people who are non-responders, so there
is a possibility that you won't see any results by adding this supplement. I don't
have a lot to say on this topic since I don't have enough personal experience with
this supplement to offer you any anecdotal insight.
3. Beta-alanine is a modified version of the amino acid alanine and it has been
shown to enhance muscular endurance. Many people report being able to
perform one or two additional reps in the gym when training in sets of 8-15
repetitions and it's a supplement often combined with Creatine. Once again, I
don't have any personal experience with this supplement to offer you any
anecdotal insight.
My Secret Supplement
Oh, this is another substance I forgot to mention that also has been proven to be
effective. I use a caffeine supplement as a pre and intra-workout supplement
most of the days I train. It's inexpensive, you can easily find it at the supermarket
and it's called - Coffee! You add a teaspoon of it in water, stir and drink. I prefer
ice coffee during the warm months of the year and hot coffee when it's cold. I do
this regardless if I'm training fasted or not. Having a cup of coffee is more of a
ritual than a pre-workout for me. I love sipping some hot or ice coffee while I'm

preparing my training music list and checking my notes in my training log from
the previous workout.
Doesn't Coffee Dehydrate You?
Someone recently asked me if coffee is ok as a pre and intra-workout drink
during intermittent fasting because it is said to dehydrate the body. This is just
another myth, coffee just as any drink can contribute to your daily fluid
requirement. Coffee as part of a normal lifestyle doesn't cause fluid loss in
excess of the volume ingested. Yes it does have a mild diuretic effect but it
doesn't appear to increase the risk of dehydration. Of course anything in excess
is not good for you (not even plain water) so avoid extreme coffee consumption.
Here is how I deal with my coffee ''addiction.'' Because I love the taste of coffee
and enjoy drink it often during the day, I have small cups (1/2 of normal cup)
and drink it light and plain (no sugar or milk). This way I drink about 5-6 cups a
day but its more like 2-3 cups
P.S. Sometimes in the afternoon I splurge and add some milk and sugar in my
last cup!
Final thoughts on supplements
As you can see my experience with supplements is quite limited but I considered
it important to mention them since this is an important topic that many people
frequently ask questions about. The three supplements above are the only a few
that are backed up by serious scientific research and are the only few proven to
work. If you want to supplement your athletic diet it's up to you. Make sure you
choose a quality manufacturer and just to be on the safe side ask a nutritionist for
some extra guidelines referring to dosage and any implications they might have
with  your other dietary habits and/or medications.
My advice is to find the weak links in your lifestyle and diet and if you cannot
fix them naturally, ask a specialist for advice on how to address these needs.
Don’t forget however, supplements are not magical and won’t give you any
significant results, especially if you don’t train hard enough. As a matter of fact,
a poor diet with a good training program will give you greater results than an
average training program combined with the perfect diet and the finest powder
and pill supplements.
Don't obsess over supplements. I find that a lot of people spend too much time
worrying over supplements which distracts them from what really delivers
results - Hard work.

Chapter 7
Final thoughts on Nutrition
One of the most essential characteristics of a diet is that it should be sustainable
in the long run. The word diet originates from the Greek word Dieta (δίαιτα) and
it relates to dieting as a way of living. If you keep on hopping from one diet to
another and one binge episode to another after each time you try to eat healthy,
you are simply moving one step forward and two steps backwards. There is no
progress and you are creating unhealthy eating behaviors. The only way that you
will able to control your weight long term is if you turn your diet into a long
lasting lifestyle that vitalizes you, keeps your mind clear, keeps you healthy,
doesn’t make you over-weight and as a result of all the above makes you happy.
The environment we live in today, as well as the way we are wired through
evolution in order to survive, make us easily prone to obesity. However, we are
also equipped with the capabilities of forming new habits, developing awareness
of our actions and cultivating discipline. It might be easier to blame nutritional
myths for the reason why people become obese but the truth is as simple as basic
principles of thermodynamics. If you consume more caloric-fuel than the energy
you produce, you will gain weight. Be a grown up and learn to take
responsibility. Admit that if you're not satisfied with your weight it’s because
you prefer sitting rather than moving. Finding pleasure in overeating is a bigger
priority to you than health and self-confidence. This also goes for the skinny
guys who complain about not being able to gain weight. If you want to gain
weight, stop complaining about how hard it is and organize your calorie intake.
Plan more frequent and bigger meals and do more strength training. You need to
take action, period.
Start With The Basics.
Don't start strict diets before you begin with the basics. What are the basics?
Start doing what your mother told you when you were young...
1. Eat all your vegetables. Eat at least three portions a day, I like to eat a huge
veggie mix before dinner.
2. Eat fruits. Try to eat at least two portions a day.
3. Eat all your food. Eat the appropriate amount of calories your body needs
Now go clean up your room...

Start with these basic guidelines and you'll be eating healthier than 80% of the
people out there. Doing extreme/express diets every year for a couple of weeks
to lose weight rapidly only puts stress on your body and mind and usually leads
to regaining the weight you lost. Constantly seeking instant pleasure in junk food
may make you feel better temporary but always has a larger negative impact on
your physical and mental health in the long-run. If you understand all the above,
then you will know that putting in the effort to create a proper and organized diet
on a weekly basis is the smart thing to do.
"To eat is a necessity, but to eat intelligently is an art"
- La Rochefoucauld

Final thoughts on homemade muscle
Most people want an aesthetic physique. Wanting though is very different from
willing to do what is required to achieve this goal. They fail because they always
find excuses along the way. When I was developing this home workout program,
I had a severely fractured leg, which means I had to train most of the time with
full leg casts, special fracture boots and crutches. Of course, I don't advise
people recovering from bone fractures to train hardcore using bodyweight
exercises. My point here is that if you want to get into shape, you have to stop
finding excuses.
Socrates, the ancient Greek philosopher said, “It is a disgrace for someone to
grow old without ever seeing the beauty and strength of which your body is
capable.” Time flies by us faster than we realize and one day it will be too late to
make a difference. So stop disrespecting your body, get off the couch and start
strengthening body and mind! There is only one thing that can get between you
and your aspirations, and that is you!
“It is a disgrace for someone to grow old without ever seeing the beauty and
strength of which his body is capable”
Common Excuses Your Mind Will Use Against You to Avoid Working Out
1) Limited Time
On average, this program takes 3 hours per week of your time. A week has 168
hours, so training 3 hours per week means you have to spend less than 2% of
your week in order to accomplish your goals. Anybody can sacrifice that amount
of time in order to get in shape and to look and feel better.
2) Fear of Failure
Sometimes we just make up excuses to avoid chasing our goals, because we are
afraid. This fear may be conscious or subconscious but it's there...it's the fear of
failure. We are too scared that we might put time and effort into something that
has no guarantee of success. A lot of us fail in our minds before we even start.
Fear is nothing we should run away from though. Fear is a natural human
emotion and there is no need to consider it a negative one. On the contrary, it
means you are getting out of your comfort zone, which is the only place you can

find place for growth. When fear shows up at your door, say hello and invite it
in; become friends with it. The more you push it away, the more it insists on re-
visiting.
Accept your fears but don't be a coward...
3) Laziness
Sloth (laziness) is another great enemy everyone faces when they set a goal,
especially when it comes to exercise. We make excuses to cover our indolence
because we are simply too attached to immediate gratification in favor of long-
term growth. Evolutionarily it makes sense to always go for the sure bet - to eat
that candy in front of us right now. Our ancestors didn’t have to worry about
becoming overweight or heart disease. Our brain evolved in a world where we
probably wouldn’t live long enough to meet your grandchildren. The primitive
part of our brain wants us to gobble up anything edible around us and reserve as
much energy possible. In simple words, it wants us to strive to be fat and lazy! 
How to train when life gets in the way
Your training program won't always run as smoothly as shown in training tables
of exercise books. There will be periods when life will just happen. Unexpected
events will get in your way. You or other people will get sick and life in general
will be tough. Keep in mind that I don't expect you to always consider these
events the easy way out. I have days when I have leg problems, when I sleep
less, or train at different times (which I hate because I'm a control freak). Some
days I have to force myself to get through the workout because I know that after
completing it I will feel better.
The 90-20 Axiom: Anytime you feel like not working out remember this self-
evident truth:
90% of the times you feel physically or mentally tired it's only the first 20% of
the workout that you will have to push yourself through. Once get past the
warm-up and maybe a couple of sets into your workout, you will get into it and
you will be happy you got started after all.
Missing your passion for exercise
Still, even if you develop a passionate relationship with exercise, there will
always be periods in your life when you won’t want to exercise at all. As with
any long-term relationship, passion always comes and goes through time. During
difficult periods, when you feel you have no flame in your heart for working out,
it is quite easy to just let go and see all your hard work disappear. Less than forty

days for most people is enough time to see more than half of their results
disappear. When we experience this lack of passion, it's important to avoid the
following two mistakes:
1. Pushing it too hard. When you're going through a rough patch and you have
no desire at all to workout, if you push yourself to train as hard as you always
do, you will usually end up resenting your workout.
2. Quitting entirely. When there is no inner motivation to exercise it's also easy
to completely quit on your workouts. This usually happens when you are having
too much fun doing other stuff or because you are too depressed to do anything
at all. The end result is that you end up dismissing your fitness goals all at once.
If you're going through such periods, learn to train just enough to maintain your
current condition. Don't think about progress, breaking plateaus and don't worry
if you come short a couple of reps from your usual routine. Just shut your brain
off and do a couple of sets for the basic three movement patterns. Pull, Push and
Squat. The following training plan contains two fifteen minute training sessions
that will keep you in shape during such times. Even at our darkest hours, we can
all find time and energy to work out 30 minutes a week.
Do this two times per week...
"You don't develop courage by being happy in your relationships every day. You
develop it by surviving difficult times and challenging adversity"
~  Epicurus
Weights or Bodyweight Exercise - What is Better?
Exercise benefits both body and mind. Studies have shown that aerobic and
strength training can help battle feelings of depression.  The antidepressant effect
of exercise has been shown in studies to be just as effective as that of
antidepressant drugs. In general, the more you include healthy movement in your
lifestyle the better your chances are to feel better (study). If you have major

depression related issues, I am not suggesting you should quit taking the
medication your doctor might have prescribed for you. I am simply
recommending adding some exercise on top of that and see what happens.
Even if you reach a point in life when physical growth will stop, when there will
be no more space for building stronger muscle fibers or improving your
neuromuscular coordination, that momentum you've gained from physical
growth through strength training will keep you growing internally.
Homemade Muscle is not against training at the gym or any other kind of
strength exercise. Homemade Muscle is about motivating you to be strong no
matter what your circumstances are. Still I have to give you my opinion. I have
to tell you, which out of the two I consider superior. I started these workouts
because they were the only alternative I had at the moment.  Nowadays if I had
to choose between working out at the gym or using bodyweight exercise,
without a blink of an eye, my answer would be bodyweight exercise. It still
remains the only form of exercise I do.
I don't care what others say:
- No gym pushing exercise can beat handstand push-ups
- No gym pulling machine can beat pull-ups
- No gym crunching machine can beat dragon flags
- No gym machine and beat one-arm push ups.
If you want to get the most out of both worlds, my suggestion would be adding
barbell squats to the lower body exercises of this program while using pistol
squats as warm-up sets (that is, once you're strong enough to perform them).
Maybe I'll write a program like that in the future. As I said previously, if having
to choose between the two, bodyweight exercise is the best and ultimate form of
strength exercise in my opinion.
Here are the basic reasons I know this to be true:
1) Reward: Gaining greater self-mastery and control of your own body by
conquering new bodyweight progressions and skills is one of the most
functional, empowering, motivational and rewarding feelings exercise can
provide.
2) Symmetry: Bodyweight exercise develops balanced strength and builds the

body as a whole. There is no room for a weak core when you are doing exercises
like handstand push-ups. The moment you lose connection between your upper
and lower body through a weak core, you will start shaking like a leaf.
3) Ultimate Self-Mastery: The feeling of self-mastery you attain by mastering
your physical self also carries over to self-mastery of your inner world. Balance
your body and you will find balance in life. Strengthen your muscles and your
mind will follow. The reward that comes after patience and persistence develops
a mindset that can help you deal with most of life's other challenges.
“Mastering Bodyweight Exercises trumps working out at the Gym”
~ Homemade Muscle
Did this book add value to your life?
Scroll to the end and give me a positive rating!

Exercise Menu

Developing the Zen mindset
People have told me that exercises, such as the one-arm pull ups, are only for
those born strong. This always made my goals a bit intimidating, but there's
nothing I love more than proving people wrong. I  was never the strongest guy of
the group. I also never was the underdog of my sports teams. But, I also never
believed genetics can define you to a great extent. One of the most important
mindsets you have to develop in life is to never let someone's opinion of you
become your reality. I got my first one arm pull-up after two years of serious
bodyweight training because I never let people around me set my limitations.
One arm push-ups, dragon flags, and even one arm pull-ups can be achieved if
you continue to focus on steady and gradual progress.
Pick progressions in every exercise that are suitable for you and just keep on
hammering them. You have to develop a Zen mindset..
"Stay thirsty but do not become impatient. Let there be emotional yearning but
avoid frustration. If you obssess about it, it will never happen. Just like a seed
doesn't seem to be  blosoming into a flower if you keep on staring at it... Be
patient and it will come naturally, on its own terms”.
Exercises, like handstand push-ups, might sound too tough for you if you're a
beginner. However, remember that your goal is to work yourself up through
easier progressions. Personally, it took me 5 months to get 5 clean reps of
handstand push-ups! On the other hand, I've seen people do them within two
weeks of training. Today, handstand push-ups are one of my top three favorite
exercises for strength training. If you would tell me you only have time for three
exercises, I would tell you to pick Handstand push-ups, Pull-ups and Pistol
squats.
''Don't let someone else's opinion of you become your reality''.
~ Les Brown
Recommended Equipment (optional)
Full disclosure -- I have no connection with the company that makes these
items.)
As you will see below in the exercise tutorial, I offer ways to do each exercise
without any equipment. Still, I believe a Pull-up bar is a must if you want this

workout plan to be efficient. I personally use the Iron Gym pull-up bar which
currently costs around 30 dollars. It has three grip positions, narrow, wide, and
neutral which come in handy. It uses leverage to hold against the doorway, so
there are no screws and no need to damage your door. Plus it's quite easy to
assemble. If you visit their website you can easily find a local retailer in your
neighborhood.
After that, if you want to invest some more money on bodyweight equipment, I
would also recommend a dip station. The main reason I recommend a dip station
is that it's friendlier for your wrists. The one I use is called ''Ultimate Body Press
Dip Stand.'' For its value, it's the best dip stand I have found around the web and
currently costs about 90 dollars. It is a simple piece of equipment made of steel
construction that snaps together. It's ideal for dips and inverted rows. You can
easily pack it and transport it in a car and It goes together and comes apart in
seconds. The only problem you might have with it is if you are on the tall side;
so check the dimensions at the manufacturer’s website if you decide to purchase
it.
Video Tutorials
Videos, like the one below, are included because I consider them essential for
understanding exercise. Most exercise books just use photos which is a very
limited way to demonstrate movement. Most of these are the first videos I made
once I got back on my feet (foot to be accurate), after my accident. Being an
introvert at the time and having no experience with cameras and public speaking,
my presentation skills are quite lame to say the least. But bear with me since
they will help you understand all exercises in depth!

#1 Pull-ups - The king of upper body exercises (Lats, Arms & Forearms)
"Pull-ups not only build the “pulling” muscles but also develop the abs. I dare
you to find someone who can do 20 strict reps and does not have rock-hard abs".
From the book Easy Strength by Dan John and Pavel Tsatsouline - Renouned
strength specialists
I cannot think of a better exercise than pull-ups to determine one’s relative upper
body strength. If I had to choose only one exercise to strengthen my upper body,
this one would be it. It's best if you have a pull-up bar as I mentioned previously,
but you can also find other solutions to do pull ups if you are creative enough.
Check out some below in the video tutorial..
Proper Technique - The Perfect Pull-up:
Step 1
Place your hands slightly wider than shoulder-width apart on the surface you
have chosen to use for your pull-ups. Keep your wrists aligned with your
forearms and bend your knees with your feet crossed. You should be using an
overhand grip (palms pointing outwards so that they are facing away from you).
Step 2
Don't just be hanging on your ligaments and letting your neck sink between your

shoulders. To avoid this, keep your shoulders down and chest up by depressing
your shoulder blades down and retracting them together. Look at the video
below:
Step 3
Now, pull your body up by focusing on bringing your elbows to your sides, and
avoiding swinging motions of your legs and pelvis. To avoid involuntary
swinging, brace your glutes and pull your belly button a bit inwards prior to
every pull-up. Bring your body up until you pass at least the height of your eyes.
As you become stronger, focus on bringing your body higher while maintaining
your elbows close to the body for greater lat activation. I personally don’t count
a pull-up if it doesn’t pass chin height.
Step 4
Lower yourself down in a slow controlled motion.
Common Pull-up Mistakes
Mistake #1
One of the most common mistakes is swinging motion occurring in the waist and
lower body area, doing a kind of cross-fit / kipping pull-up. If you are not
training to break a cross-fit record, then set your ego aside and focus on doing
fewer reps with a proper smooth form.  This will make a ton of difference in
getting stronger, more muscular and avoiding soft tissue injuries like tendon

strains.
Mistake #2
The second most common mistake is doing pull-ups in a very small range of
motion. Just lifting your body off the ground and bending your elbows is not a
pull-up. As a matter of fact, it will deprive you of many benefits, like building
muscle more effectively. Doing limited range of motion pull-ups is only OK for
a beginner, however, once you can do at least 5 normal range of motion
repetitions, I see no reason to continue doing small reps.
Progressions For Beginners:
If you can't do pull-ups just yet, check out the video tutorial below or follow the
steps I have written following the video...
Progression #1: Dead Hangs
If your forearms are too weak to sustain your body while simply hanging on a
bar or wherever you do your pull-ups, then you must strengthen your forearms
and your hand grip by performing dead hangs (meaning just hanging on the bar).
Start with 4 sets of 3-10 seconds or more depending on your strength and as you
get stronger progress to 30 seconds. Once again, don’t just hang on your
ligaments letting your head sink, do the dead hangs with scapula activation and
keeping your chest up. This will also strengthen your upper back muscles as they
will be contracting (isometrically).

Progression #2: Negative / Assisted Pull-up System
One of the best ways to master most bodyweight exercises is doing negative
repetitions. In case you don’t know what a negative repetition is read the
following paragraph, otherwise move on to the Negative Repetition
Progressions.
Progression #3: Negative Repetitions
1. Place a steady chair that can support your weight under the pull-up bar. Get on
the chair and grip the bar. Keeping the bar at chin height try to lower your body
slowly (counting around 2-3 seconds) without depending on the chair. Once you
lower yourself down, use the chair again to grab the bar at chin height and
repeat. Depending on how easy the exercise is for you, perform 5-12 negative
repetitions, two times, with one minute rest between each set. Once you can
perform 12 repetitions move on the next progression
2. Place the chair a bit behind the pull-up bar, put one leg on the chair and pull
yourself up using as less as possible strength from your leg. Once you reach the
top, remove your leg from the chair cautiously and lower your body down
slowly (counting 2-3 seconds). Start again with 5-12 reps and once you can
perform two sets of twelve repetitions with one minute rest, move on the next
phase.
At this point, you should be able to do at least 2-3 normal pull-ups. Begin the set
by doing as many normal pull-ups as you can and continue with assisted pulls
until you complete a total of at least 5 reps. As you grow stronger, you will
eventually be able to do 3 sets of 5 normal reps. Once you achieve this, start
adding more reps until you are able to do 3-4 sets of 12-15 reps. After you
master that, then start experimenting with advanced variations. Keep in mind
that performing 15 reps is a goal that takes time to build up to while you focus
on keeping perfect form.
Quick Summary:
• Start with negatives reps
• Do as many normal pull-ups as you can, combined with assisted pull-ups
• Build up to at least 3 sets of 12 good form pull-ups before you move on to a
more advanced variations.
Note: Another exercise that will contribute to your success in doing normal pull-
ups is table rows. As you grow stronger in table rows, you will also get better in

pull-ups.
Advanced Variations:
Chest Height Pull-ups
These are my favorite pull-ups and they are just like normal pull-ups but instead
of raising your body until eye level with the bar, this time you will raise your
body until the bar touches height of your upper chest - just below your
collarbone. Using this technique, you will also focus more on your lats because
the lats are fully contracted when your shoulder are drawn down and back. Once
you can perform 12-15 reps, move on the next variation. Nowadays, I'm going
even lower touching the bar on my sternum which has given me great results in
pulling strength.
Pull-ups With Legs Raised
Start with bended knees (90 degrees) in front of you. As this becomes easier,
extend your legs until they are parallel to the floor. Once you can perform 15
reps, move on the next variation. This progression will also give your abs a great
work out.
Weighted Pull-ups
Wear a weighted backpack (you can fill up your backpack with books, sandbags,
dumbbells, etc.). You can also buy special weighted backpacks for bodyweight
exercises online.
Wide Grip Pull-ups (A variation you should avoid)
A common theory is that the wider your grip is when doing pull-ups, the “wider”
your lats will become. In my experience, this only means a smaller range of
motion and less lat activation which can lead to injuries like in my case, where I
strained my teres major using a wide grip. A common injury in bad form or too
wide-grip pull-ups.

Chin-ups - The best bodyweight exercise for big guns!
I consider chin-ups more as a variation of the pull-up, than a different exercise.
That is one of the reasons why I categorize pull-ups and chin-ups as one exercise
since the basic difference is the way you grip the bar. The other two basic
reasons I combine pull-ups and chin-ups as one exercise is: 1) because including
them as different exercises and doing too many sets of them combined in a
program can get your arms too tired for the rest of the exercises; and 2) when
they are combined as one exercise they give incredible results in upper body
strength and muscle development.
Chin-ups use an underhand grip where your palms face inwards so that they are
facing towards you. The basic thing you want to keep in mind is that pull-
ups/chin-ups both focus on the lats & arms and combined together they will
activate your upper body’s musculature in the best way possible. Combining
pull-ups and chin-ups, in my personal experience, is the best way to get killer
gains in the arm and back department!
Proper Technique and Common Mistakes
Besides using an opposite - underhand grip the rest of the technique and
common mistakes in chin-ups are basically the same as in pull-ups. I would
advise you not to straighten your elbow joints completely in the lowering phase

while doing chin-ups; keep them a bit bent. Locking-out (straightening) the
elbows with an underhand grip puts too much stress on the elbows of many
people, including me. More on this topic in the video below.
Progressions For Beginners:
Use the same progressions you used with pull-ups. Once you are able to
comfortably do pull–ups, you will definitely be able to do chin-ups, since they
are pretty similar and usually easier for most people. Both of them assist each
other in the beginning while you are still learning them so try to perform both.
Leg Positions for Pull ups & Chin ups
A common question I get is "Which is the best leg position for Pull ups and Chin
ups". Because training at home usually means that the height of your pull up bar
is limited, I always recommend using knees bent and legs crossed. If you have
the luxury of a tall pull up bar in your house or yard, check out the following
video where I explain all the benefits and disadvantages of each leg position
separately


#2 Push-ups (Chest, Triceps , Serratus Anterior)
This is one of the most classic bodyweight exercises. But.. many people who
train for strength have come to underestimate them. The main reason for this is
people being unaware of cheating the exercise by using bad form. Performing a
set of push-ups while focusing on perfect form might have you re-evaluate your
thoughts on them.
Later on, instead of quitting them when they become too easy, give the one-arm
push-up a try and you will be once again humbled by this great exercise. For
others, it may be a great challenge just performing a couple of reps since a
typical push-up uses approximately 65% of your total bodyweight. This can be
quite challenging for many people, due to their physical condition and weight.
The great thing about push-ups is that they can be done anywhere! In
comparison with a bench press, the push-up also requires core stability
especially from your Rectus Abdominis (six-pack).
Click on the video below for proper technique, progressions and advanced
variations
"A typical push-up requires lifting 65% of your total bodyweight and also
activates your abs"
Why you need to learn how to do a one arm push up

Once you can do three sets of 15 perfect form push-ups and the advanced
variations above, start working on one arm push-ups. Besides being an awesome
exercise for triceps, chest and shoulders, it's also an amazing oblique (side ab)
exercise. How do push-ups work your side abs? Your obliques need to work very
hard to keep the body from rotating due to the lack of stability by balancing only
on one arm. If you never got sore in your side abs from gym machines trust me,
one-arm push ups will do the trick. It’s a great bodyweight weapon to have in
your arsenal if you want to target multiple muscles just by doing just one
exercise!

#3 Pistol Squats (whole legs)
This is probably the greatest bodyweight exercise to strengthen your legs, and in
comparison with barbell exercises, they don't load the back that much. Also,
there is a phenomenon known as the bilateral deficit, which states that the sum
of the forces produced by each leg is greater than the total bilateral force
production. This means that the overall load you can overcome with each leg (in
exercises such as the pistol squats) is higher than bilateral leg exercises (such as
barbel squats).
Due to the balance required for this bad ass exercise, your neuromuscular system
is challenged to a great extent: contracting, stretching, and stabilizing at the same
time a big amount of muscle use. Pistol squats is an exercise that recruits your
lower body’s muscles probably more effective than any other leg exercise.
If you have difficulty getting down in a deep squatting position and for more
progressions on pistol squats once you conquer them, check out this Ultimate
Pistol squat article I wrote.

#4 Dips (Chest, Shoulders, Triceps)
This is one of the greatest exercises for strengthening the chest. Find two stable
and equal height surfaces. The height of them should not allow your knees touch
the ground as you lower yourself during the exercise. These surfaces can be two
tables, two bar stools, a narrow staircase, two sofas, kitchen countertops (pic.
below), etc. In case you cannot find surfaces that are exactly the same height,
add a book to even out the height, or make sure you switch sides after every set.
For more details on progressions and alternatives to do dips check out the video
below:

 

#5 Inverted Rows (Middle Back Area)
Although pull-ups and chin-ups are great for strengthening your back muscles,
the disadvantage is that they focus more on the lower part of your back (lats)
neglecting your trapezius muscle which is the muscle between your shoulder
blades. Inverted rows, if done correctly, will focus on that area and will support
you in building a strong symmetrical back.
Proper Technique:
Lie beneath the rod so that your chest is directly under it and grab it, placing
your hands shoulder-width apart using an overhand grip. It is important to keep
your body aligned during this exercise. Prior to pulling yourself up, activate your
core by pulling your belly button a bit inwards and squeeze your glutes, this will
help keep your thighs, pelvis and upper body in alignment. When you pull
yourself upwards, make sure that you bring your chest as close as possible to the
rod and keep your head in alignment with the rest of the body.
Important Tip: In order to properly activate the correct muscles in this exercise,
it is essential to focus on bringing your shoulder blades as close as possible to
each other as your reach the top height of every rep. If you don’t focus on this
scapular retraction you will just activate your lats and arms therefore neglecting
your upper back muscles. A good way to work on this once you are strong
enough, is to pause at the top of the exercise. When you reach maximum height,

remain there for 3 seconds, focusing on squeezing your shoulder blades together.
This will add a great isometric contraction on your upper back. If 3 seconds is
too long, start with 1 second and build it up to 3.
One Leg
Another good variation is to use one leg to balance your lower body while
keeping the other leg extended just above the floor. Again this will also activate
more of your core, glutes and hamstring muscles.

#6 Handstand Push-ups (Shoulders & Triceps)
This is my second favorite bodyweight exercise after pull-ups. It is also the best
exercise to strengthen the antagonistic (opposite) muscles of pull ups. Together,
these two are enough to transform your upper body into that of a bodyweight
warrior. The reason I love handstand push-ups is because it's the most
demanding bodyweight exercise of all. It requires tremendous relative upper
body strength, balance and kinesthesia due to your body’s reversed position.
Neglecting this exercise and overloading you shoulder joint long-term with pull-
ups/chin-ups can also lead to shoulder issues.
Proper Technique:
1. Place your hands approximately 1 foot away from the wall (this may vary a bit
depending on your height), have your hands a bit wider than shoulder width,
your fingers spread and parallel to each other. Position your feet just as a 100
meter sprinter would in a starting position, one leg close to your body and one a
bit more far away. Usually placing your kicking/strong leg closer to your body is
more comfortable.
2. Kick up with the leg closer to your body into a handstand. Remember to
maintain your fingers spread out and once you touch the wall keep your back
slightly arched and slowly bend your knees (approximately 90 degrees). Either
lean on the wall with the upper half of your foot’s sole or with just the toes,
whatever feels more comfortable.
3. Engage your core muscles, carefully lower yourself down and press yourself
up.
Remember this is a very difficult exercise; personally it took me 5 months of
consistent training to conquer 5 good form reps.

Contradictions
This exercise also puts a great deal of pressure on your shoulders, so don’t try
this if you have shoulder issues. Also, because it requires your legs to be
elevated and causes blood to rush to your head, I would not recommend it to
people with high blood pressure, or those who get dizzy easily.

#7 Leg Raises (Lower and Side Abs)
This is an exercise done by a lot of people in gyms, but most of them start with
progressed versions of it, activating the wrong muscles and missing out on all
the benefits their abs and core can get out of it. Everyone should start from the
following two steps and only allow themselves move on the next progression if
they can perform them with perfect form.
Dragon Flags - Train Abs Bruce Lee style
I consider this a progression of the leg raise exercise, and it's the best Ab
exercise you can perform at home. You see, the main function of your core is to
keep your body in a firm position, resisting external forces (such as someone
trying to throw you down).  Besides being a badass exercise, Dragon Flags is
also one of the best functional exercises for abdominals. Don't rush into this
exercise and focus on perfecting leg raises first.

 

#8 Prone Cobra (Lower Back)
This is a great exercise, especially for people who sit at desks all day, gamers,
and generally those with a sedentary lifestyle, with a type of rounded posture. If
you tend to have a hyperlordotic posture, squeeze your glutes during this
exercise, this will reduce over-recruitment your low back muscles which, in this
case, are probably already too stressed. Use prolonged sets of twenty to sixty
seconds, with fifteen second rest periods. Start with 1-3 sets and progress until
you can perform 3 sets of 60 seconds.
Proper Technique:
1. Lie face down on a soft surface and rest your arms at your side.
2. Lift your torso while simultaneously squeezing your shoulder blades together
and externally rotating your arms by pointing your thumbs up.
3. When you have reached the proper end position, your palms should face way
from your body, your head and neck should be in neutral alignment and your
toes should be touching the ground

End Notes
Doing an exercise with good form, contrary to doing an exercise with bad form,
can play a huge role on the difficulty of it, and injury prevention. Just the feeling
that you are performing an exercise correctly, doesn’t always mean you actually
are. It’s important to pay close attention and observe your form. You can use
mirrors, or ask someone experienced to spot you while exercising. Almost every
cell phone has a camera today, so you can also use your phone or any other
device available for you, and film your trainings to see how your form looks. If
you notice mistakes, write them down and focus on them next time.
Having the perfect technique in every single rep and every single moment is not
always possible, not even by professionals. But that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t
try. As one of my favorite quotes says,
"Perfection is not attainable, but if we chase perfection we can catch excellence"
~ Vince Lombardi

SUBSCRIBE TO MY YOUTUBE CHANNEL:
https://www.youtube.com/user/HomeMadeMuscles
 
LIKE MY FACEBOOK PAGE:
https://www.facebook.com/HomeMadeMuscles
For daily tips on exercise nutrition and how to develop a positive mindset

