HOME SECURITY 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
No special skills are required, but some experience of 
electrical work would be an advantage when fitting a burglar 
alarm. 
  
 
 
It is estimated that as many as 60% of burglaries are made 
by entry through unlocked windows and doors, so it makes 
sense to check that you have secured all your doors and 
windows before going to bed or leaving the house. An 
intruder alarm provides additional peace of mind and a 
simple smoke alarm gives advanced warning in the event of 
fire. All the equipment you need is available for you to fit 
yourself.  
  
 
 
Securing your home against burglary is more about common 
sense than making your house into a fortress. 
  
It is estimated that as many as 60% of burglaries are made 
by entry through unlocked windows and doors, so it makes 
sense to check that you have secured all your doors and 
windows before going to bed or leaving the house. 
  
An intruder alarm provides additional peace of mind and a 
simple smoke alarm gives advanced warning in the event of 
fire. All the equipment you need is available for you to fit 
yourself.  
 
2  - Basic security 
Contact your local Crime Prevention Officer at the nearest 
police station for advice on how to protect your home from 
intruders.  
 
 
Most burglars are opportunists looking for lapses in home 
security but there are measures that can be taken to 
improve home security and make life difficult for even the 
more resourceful intruder:  
• 
Always fit the best-quality security devices you can 
afford. Choose fittings that carry a British Standard 
Kitemark as recommended by the police and 
insurance companies.  
• 
Always remove the key from a lock and place it out 
of sight and reach of an intruder.  
• 
Leave a light on and the radio playing when you go 
out for the evening.  
• 
Buy one or two time switches and set them to 
operate some lights when you are away on holiday. 
Remember to cancel regular deliveries such as 
newspapers and milk. It is a good idea to inform 
your neighbours and the police that you are away.  
• 
Make an invisible identification mark such as your 
name and postcode on your valuables using a 

special property-marking pen.  
• 
Do not rely on ordinary window catches to keep 
intruders out - really determined burglars will simply
break the glass and slip the catch.  
 
 
Special key-operated locks are available to fit most types of 
window, from traditional sliding sashes and casements to 
modern metal-framed windows and patio doors. Keep keys 
out of reach of the window but where you can reach them in 
an emergency. 
 
 
If you are going away, 
 
 
1. 
Leave a key with a trusted neighbour who will check
your house regularly and ask him or her to collect 
the post and free newspapers.  
2. 
Upgrade your windows by fitting locks particularly 
to ground-floor and basement windows, and to 
others that can be reached easily without the aid of 
a ladder. 
 
3  -  Windows - Sliding sash windows  
Wooden sliding sash windows are often secured with a cam 
or fitch fastener placed at the centre of the sash meeting 
rails. These look attractive and are reasonably efficient but a 
burglar can unlock them with nothing more than a strong 
knife, so when choosing locks, look for those that have a 
removable key. 
 
 
 
Press-locking bolt 
 
Improve your security by 
fitting a press-locking bolt.  
1. 
Fit the keeper to the 
outer sash frame 
and the lock body to 
the inner meeting 
rail. Fit a single lock 
close to the centre of a small window and fit a pair 
of locks to a wider one.  
2. 
Having screwed the keeper in place extend the bolt 
so that you can use it to position the lock body 
accurately. Turning a key releases the lock.  
  
 
Window bolt 
 

As an alternative to a press 
locking bolt fit a discreet 
window bolt to secure a sash 
window. This is a thin bolt 
that passes through both 
meeting rails, preventing 
them from sliding apart.  
 
Fit one or two, depending on 
the width of the window.  
1. 
With the window closed drill a hole for each bolt 
through the inner meeting rail into the outer rail. 
Mark the drill with tape to establish the depth of the 
hole.  
2. 
Open the window and tap the metal liners (supplied 
with the bolt) into the holes until they are flush.  
3. 
Close the window and insert the threaded bolt using 
the special key provided. Unscrew and withdraw the 
bolt to open the window.  
 
 
Keep keys out of reach of the window but where you can 
reach them in an emergency.  
 
 
 
Sash stops 
 
Sash stops allow you to o
a window partially for 
ventilation without 
compromising security. Fit a 
sash stop on both sides of 
the window.  
pen 
nd 
 
r 
1. 
Drill a hole in the 
upper sash frame 
about 75mm (3in) 
above the meeting rail.  
2. 
Cut a recess and screw the fitting in place.  
  
To open the window fully push back the bolt with the key.  
 
4  - Windows - Wooden casement windows  
Wooden casement windows 
are hinged down one side a
fastened to the fixed frame
with a lever or cockspu
handle. A casement stay is 
often used to hold the 
window in the open position. 
A number of simple devices are available for securing 
casements:  
 
 

Fitting instructions are usually supplied with window locks 
and bolts - as each lock differs in detail, it pays to read the 
manufacturer's recommendations before you start work.  
 
 
• 
Replace old cockspur handles with new lockable 
ones - these are made for left or right-hand 
opening.  
• 
If you want to retain your original cockspur handles 
screw a lock (or a pair of locks) to the fixed frame. 
A keeper plate, screwed to the casement, latches 
automatically when you close the window and is 
released with a key.  
• 
Secure the casement stay with a simple key-
operated lock. A threaded stud, which can be used 
to replace the original stay peg, passes through a 
hole in the stay arm. Screwing a locknut onto the 
stud prevents the stay from moving.  
Keep keys out of reach of the window but where you can 
reach them in an emergency.  
 
5  - Windows - Metal casement windows  
Locks for metal-framed 
windows are similar to those 
used for wooden casements, 
but you will have to drill pilot 
holes in the metal for the 
fixing screws.  
 
 
Fitting instructions are usually supplied with window locks 
and bolts - as each lock differs in detail it pays to read the 
manufacturer's recommendations before you start work.  
 
 
• 
Replace old cockspur handles with new lockable 
ones - these are made for left or right-hand 
opening.  
• 
If you want to retain your original cockspur handles,
screw a lock (or a pair of locks) to the fixed frame. 
A keeper plate screwed to the casement, latches 
automatically when you close the window and is 
released with a key.  
• 
Secure the casement stay with a simple key-
operated lock. A threaded stud, which can be used 
to replace the original stay peg, passes through a 
hole in the stay arm. Screwing a locknut onto the 
stud prevents the stay from moving.  
Keep keys out of reach of the window but where you can 
reach them in an emergency.  
 
 
6  - Patio doors  
Patio doors are, in effect, large horizontally-sliding windows. 
 
 

 
Special key-operated locks 
are available to improve 
security. Fit one at the top 
and one at the bottom to 
prevent the glazed frames 
being lifted from their tracks.  
 
 
 
Fitting instructions are usually supplied with window locks 
and bolts - as each lock differs in detail it pays to read the 
manufacturer's recommendations before you start work.  
 
 
 
Keep keys out of reach of the window but where you can 
reach them in an emergency.  
 
7  - Fitting burglar alarms 
Your first line of defence against burglary should always be 
strong locks on all vulnerable entry points to your home. 
However, an alarm siren or bell prominently displayed on an 
outside wall will deter the majority of burglars. 
 
 
There are basically two types of intruder alarm: passive 
systems and perimeter systems, but some alarm kits are a 
combination of both.  
 
 
If you are not sure what type of alarm system would best 
suit your home ask your local Crime Prevention Officer for 
advice.  
 
 
Many people prefer to have an alarm installed by a 
professional but there are numerous alarm packages 
designed for self-installation.  
 
 
 
Hard-wired systems  
 
Hard-wired systems incorporate individual sensors that 
monitor all points of entry:  
  
• 
vibration sensors are fixed to glass;  
• 
contact breakers are fitted to door and window 
frames;  
• 
pressure pads are placed on stair treads and floor 
mats.  
Passive sensors that detect the presence of an intruder may 
also be included. Each sensor is connected by bell wire to a 
central control unit that is wired into the mains.  
  
The wire runs are fairly unobtrusive but it is best to conceal 

them when possible. Run wires under the floor or tuck them 
beneath the edges of fitted carpets. 
  
 
Wire-free systems 
 
Wire-free alarm systems are particularly easy to install and 
avoid having to deal with unsightly wire runs.  
  
When the alarm system is activated passive detectors will 
sense the presence of an intruder and transmit a radio 
signal to a central control unit that, in turn, triggers the 
siren or bell. You can have as many detectors as you like 
and each one is set with the same simple code that will be 
recognised by your control unit.  
  
Ensure any alarm switches off automatically after 20 
minutes, as there are penalties for causing a nuisance.  
  
Wire-free systems invariably include a magnetic-contact 
transmitter which protects the main entry/exit point of the 
house. This transmitter will activate the control unit and 
sound the alarm when the contacts are separated. A delay 
can be set to allow you plenty of time to deactivate the 
alarm when you come home.  
  
Other accessories include a personal alarm or 'panic button' 
which is usually screwed to the front door. The system can 
be controlled with a small remote-control transmitter. This 
device doubles as a personal alarm up to several metres 
from your home.  
  
Wire-free systems can be dismantled easily so that you can 
take your alarm with you when you move home.  
 
8  - Smoke detectors  
A smoke alarm is an early-warning device designed to sense 
the presence of smoke and fumes before a serious fire 
develops. Mains-powered detectors incorporate a battery as 
a back-up. 
 
 
It is possible to connect up to twelve detectors with two-core
bell wire. When one detector senses smoke all the detectors 
sound the alarm.  
 
 
Most householders opt for self-contained battery-powered 
detectors that are very easy to install. This type of detector 
has a test button to check that the battery is still working 
and will even emit an intermittent alarm to indicate that the 
battery is running low. Some also incorporate a high-output 
escape light that is activated with the alarm to illuminate the
area.  
 
 
Make sure a smoke detector conforms to BS5446 Part 1, and
carries the British Standard Kitemark.  

 
 
You should install a smoke detector where it will give you 
the earliest possible warning of fire, but preferably not 
directly over a heater or air conditioning vent, nor in 
bathrooms or kitchens where it could be triggered by steam. 
However, some detectors have a built-in 'pause facility' 
which allows you to silence the alarm for a few minutes 
should it be accidentally activated.  
 
 
Screw a smoke detector to the ceiling at least 300mm (1ft) 
away from the walls and light fittings. If it is more 
convenient to mount the detector on a wall, it must be at 
least 150mm (6in) but not more than 300mm (1ft) below 
the ceiling.  
 
 
• 
In a bungalow fit a detector to the ceiling of your 
hallway, halfway between your bedroom and the 
living areas where a fire is most likely to break out. 
• 
In a two-storey home fit one detector in the hallway 
just above the foot of the stairs, and a second 
detector on the upstairs landing.  
Most smoke detectors are powered by nine volt batteries. 
Test your alarm occasionally to check it is working and 
change the battery at least once a year or when the low-
battery warning sounds.  
 
 
 
9  - Fire blankets/extinguishers  
Install a fire extinguisher and fire blanket in the kitchen 
where most fires start. Choose a general-purpose 
extinguisher that complies with BS5423. 
 
 
 
Domestic extinguishers are designed to tackle small fires 
only and should not be used to extinguish a chip-pan fire. 
 
 
 
If the fire gets out of control call the fire brigade 
immediately.  
 
 
 
Fire extinguishers come with a wall-mounting bracket that is 
attached with screws. Position the extinguisher in a 
prominent position and close to a door that will provide a 
safe escape route. Have fire extinguishers checked and 
serviced regularly.  
 
 
 
Chip-pan fires are common and easily get out of hand. Turn 
off the heat source and use a fire blanket to smother the 
fire. Do not try to move the pan, carry it outside, or 

extinguish the fire with water.  
 
 
 
Check that a fire blanket meets BS6575 standards and 
mount the blanket dispenser next to your fire extinguisher.  
 
 
 
Take the fire blanket from its dispenser and drape it over the
pan to deprive the fire of oxygen.  
 

