

HOUSEPLANT
Party


HOUSEPLANT
Party
FUN PROJECTS & GROWING TIPS  
FOR EPIC INDOOR PLANTS
Lisa Eldred Steinkopf

©2020 Quarto Publishing Group USA Inc. 
Text ©2020 Lisa Eldred Steinkopf
First Published in 2020 by Cool Springs Press, an imprint of The Quarto Group, 
100 Cummings Center, Suite 265-D, Beverly, MA 01915, USA. 
T (978) 282-9590 F (978) 283-2742 QuartoKnows.com
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without written  
permission of the copyright owners. All images in this book have been reproduced with the 
knowledge and prior consent of the artists concerned, and no responsibility is accepted by 
producer, publisher, or printer for any infringement of copyright or otherwise, arising from the 
contents of this publication. Every effort has been made to ensure that credits accurately comply 
with information supplied. We apologize for any inaccuracies that may have occurred and will 
resolve inaccurate or missing information in a subsequent reprinting of the book.
Cool Springs Press titles are also available at discount for retail, wholesale, promotional, and bulk 
purchase. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager by email at specialsales@quarto.com or 
by mail at The Quarto Group, Attn: Special Sales Manager, 100 Cummings Center, Suite 265-D, 
Beverly, MA 01915, USA.
24 23 22 21 20     1 2 3 4 5
ISBN: 978-1-63159-883-8
Digital edition published in 2020
eISBN: 978-1-63159-884-5
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 
Steinkopf, Lisa Eldred, 1966- author. 
Houseplant party : fun DIY projects & growing tips for epic indoor
   plants / Lisa Eldred Steinkopf. 
ISBN 9781631598838 (board) | ISBN 9781631598845 (ebook) 
1.  House plants--Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Indoor
   gardening--Handbooks, manuals, etc.
LCC SB419 .S72748 2020 | DDC 635.9/65—dc23
 
LCCN 2020011599
Design and page layout: Laura McFadden Design, Inc.
Photography: Heather Saunders Photography, except for page 108 and African violet images on 
page 103 by Chelsea Steinkopf
Illustration: Mattie Wells
Printed in China

This book is dedicated to my daughters  
Hayley and Chelsea and my rock, my husband John. 
Love you all!  
z


Contents
8 
Introduction 
11 
The Best Plants for Your Living Space 
29 Taking Care of Your Houseplants
39 15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts
 
40 Marimo Ball Aquatic Garden
 
44 Recycled T-Shirt Plant Hanger
 
48 Macramé Plant Hanger
 
54 A Haworthiopsis Zen Garden
 
58 Test Tube Propagator 
 
62 Recycled Table Knives Plant Stakes
 
66 Wooden Plant Trellis
 
70 Swinging Plant Hanger
 
74 Kokedama 
 
78 Grafting Cacti 
 
82 Bonsai Planting and Pruning
 
86 Shadow Box Trio for Air Plants 
 
90 Plant Shelves 
 
94 Propagating Plants by Air Layering
 
98 Taking Leaf and Stem Cuttings
106 Acknowledgments
108 About the Author
109 Index
SECTION ONE
z
SECTION TWO
z
SECTION THREE
z

8 Houseplant Party 
INTRODUCTION
z
Houseplants were all the rage in  
the 1970s, and then, for unknown 
reasons, they fell out of favor. As you 
presumably know (you picked up 
this book, after all!), their popularity 
has returned. 
Why the resurgence? People are more aware of 
the healthy benefits plants have to offer. Plants 
provide us with oxygen, clean the air, and lower 
our blood pressure. Without them we wouldn’t 
have air to breathe; they are therapeutic and 
can reduce stress. After a long day at work, 
our plants greet us when we walk in the door, 
and the cares of the day melt away. We may 
have even stopped on the way home to pick up 
a new friend to add to our burgeoning collec-
tion. Plants give us something to love and take 
care of without the intensity of a pet. The new 
term applied to plant owners is “plant par-
ents.” So fitting! 
As a human parent myself, I understand what 
tremendous meaning that term has. Being a 
parent is serious business, so taking on the 
role of plant parent means making sure your 
plants are loved, tended to, and treated like 
part of the family. You’re the one who will pro-
vide what they need not only to survive, but to 
thrive. And even better: plants don’t talk back 
or cause any problems (for the most part, any-
way). As long as you choose the best plants 
for your conditions (start with the cool plants I 
profile in the first section), meet their need for 
sufficient light, water them at the right time, 
and provide fresh air, they’re going to thrive. 
Listen to your plants and they’ll “tell” you how 
they’re feeling. Do they seem pale and spindly? 
They may be telling you they need more light. 
Do they have leaves that are yellow or wilted? 
They may be receiving too much or too little 
water. Don’t lose heart. The second section of 
this book tells you all about how to properly 
care for your indoor plants to help ensure your 
chances of success. 
Maybe you’ve had a plant fatality or two and 
want to give up. Or you don’t feel you have the 
fabled “green thumb” others seem to have two 
of. Some people may have a natural affinity for 
plant care, but you too can have success with 
plants. A “green thumb” can be yours simply 
by paying attention and meeting the plant’s 
needs in a timely manner. 
Once you have met your plant’s basic needs, 
it’s time to bring home some new “toys” for 
your green babies. It’s time to spoil them! 
That’s where the third section of this book 
comes in. I’ve put together 15 houseplant- 
focused projects that add to your décor and at 
the same time give your plants new places to 
hang out and grow. Some include upcycling—
using things that might otherwise end up in a 
landfill. Some are super easy, and some take 
a bit more time and materials. But I promise 
you, they are all fun to make, alone or with 
a handful of houseplant-loving friends! Let’s 
make it a houseplant party! 



 11
T he Best Plants for 
Your Living Space
SECTION ONE
z

12 Houseplant Party 
Though they’re called air plants 
and they do seem to literally live 
on air, these unique plants need 
more than air to survive. They 
don’t grow in soil like most plants. 
Instead, they usually call some 
other object home, such as a 
tree branch or even a telephone 
wire. But they have essentially 
the same needs as terrestrial 
plants—light, air, and a place to 
anchor themselves. And perhaps 
most importantly, air plants need 
water. If you drive through warm, 
tropical climates, you’ll observe 
air plants growing just about 
everywhere. Did you know the 
Spanish moss often draped over 
tree branches in these places is 
actually a type of tillandsia?
When air plants live inside our 
homes, they need very specific 
care. First, tillandsias need 
bright light. A good rule of 
thumb is if the air plant is silver 
in color, it needs more light and 
can be watered less often. If the 
air plant has green, thin leaves, 
it needs water more often and 
can be in a lower-light situation, 
yet a medium to bright location 
is still needed. These plants  
cannot live only on air. They 
need to be soaked thoroughly  
on a regular basis.
Misting them in between  
thorough soakings is beneficial, 
but misting should never be 
an air plant’s primary form of 
receiving moisture. If your plants 
have good light, they should be 
soaked once a week. Completely 
submerge them in water for 
30 to 60 minutes. It won’t hurt 
them if they are in the water 
longer. After soaking, remove 
from the water, give them a good 
shake to remove the excess, and 
let them dry upside down. Spe-
cies like Tillandsia xerographica, 
T. tomentosa, and other silver 
ones do not get soaked as often. 
I only water those every 2 to 3 
weeks. After your plants are dry, 
return them to their growing 
areas. 
AIR PLANTS
Tillandsia species

The Best Plants for Your Living Space 13
Have you ever had a burn from 
the sun or a hot stove? You 
probably have. That’s why keep-
ing a burn plant, or aloe vera, in 
the house is a good idea. The 
sap inside the leaves soothes 
burns and is used in many 
creams and beauty products. 
Though it has small spines on 
the edges of the leaves, it’s not 
a cactus, but rather a succulent. 
The foliage of aloe vera sits on 
top of the growing medium and 
produces a lot of babies called 
offsets. Let these baby plants 
grow a few inches tall, and then 
you can cut them away from the 
mother plant and pot them up 
individually. They are perfect for 
sharing with friends and make 
great gifts. 
Aloe vera can grow leaves up to 
2 feet (60 cm) tall, and if it has 
enough light in your home, they 
may send up a flower stalk of 
yellow tubular-shaped flowers. 
These plants are pollinated by 
hummingbirds in their natural 
habitats. Grow them in a well-
drained potting medium, letting 
it almost completely dry out 
between waterings. (I use the 
word “medium” in place of “soil” 
as, most times, indoor potting 
mixes contain no actual soil. 
However, the words “medium” 
and “soil” are interchangeable.)  
If you repot your aloe, make sure 
that you plant it at the same 
level it was originally. Because 
the leaves naturally sit on top of 
the soil line, if they’re planted 
too deeply, they may rot. These 
plants are easy to grow as long 
as they have bright light and are 
not overwatered. 
MEDICINE PLANT, BURN PLANT
Aloe vera (Barbadensis)

14 Houseplant Party 
FAIRY WASHBOARD
Haworthiopsis limifolia (syn. Haworthia limifolia)
This diminutive native African 
succulent plant is one of my 
favorites. Unlike most other 
succulents, it doesn’t need 
high light to thrive indoors. 
A medium to bright light is 
sufficient for Haworthiopsis. 
No bright south exposure? No 
problem. If your plant turns red 
instead of its normal green color, 
that’s an indication it’s receiving 
too much sun. 
The common name of fairy 
washboard refers to the ridges 
on the leaves that resemble 
those of a tiny washboard. If  
you aren’t familiar with a wash-
board, it was a board with ridges 
on it that people used to scrub 
their clothes on before electric 
washers became a thing. The 
fairies, I’m sure, still use these. 
(They don’t have electricity, after 
all.) If you have an indoor fairy 
garden, this plant is a must! 
Fairy washboard plants are in 
the shape of a rosette, and as 
they get older, the leaves begin 
to grow in a slight spiral fashion. 
With enough light, it may send 
out a long flower stalk and  
produce small, bell-shaped, 
white flowers. 
Use a well-drained cacti and 
succulent potting mix for this 
plant, and don’t let it stand  
in water. Water thoroughly until 
water runs out of the drainage 
hole and then allow the potting 
medium to become almost  
completely dry before watering  
it again. Eventually your plant 
may produce offsets or babies, 
which can be potted up and 
shared with friends. 

The Best Plants for Your Living Space 15
This cousin of the African 
violet is a beautiful plant in the 
gesneriad family. One would 
never guess there are family 
ties as the goldfish plant has 
small shiny leaves that in no 
way resemble the fuzzy ones of 
an African violet. Its diminutive 
orange flowers resemble small 
puffy goldfish, thus its endearing 
name. The cultivar ‘Tropicana’, 
with dark-orange stripes on the 
flowers, is worth looking for. The 
natural cascading properties of 
the goldfish plant make it per-
fect for hanging baskets, which 
is usually how it is sold. In its 
natural habitat in Brazil it grows 
on trees, clinging to branches as 
an epiphyte, with no soil at all.
Full sun isn’t needed, but to 
produce the “goldfish,” it does 
need bright light. An east- or 
west-facing window is optimal. 
If no flowers appear, move it 
into more light, as light is what 
encourages the plant to bloom. 
Keep it evenly moist to eliminate 
leaf drop, which may happen if 
it becomes too dry. Like a violet, 
the root system isn’t large, so 
don’t overwater. Be sure to 
plant it in a fast-draining potting 
medium containing some peat 
moss, such as an African violet 
potting mix (more on potting 
soils in section 2). Goldfish 
plants are easily propagated 
from stem cuttings, which can 
be shared with others (see  
section 3 on how to take  
plant cuttings). 
GOLDFISH PLANT
Nematanthus gregarious

16 Houseplant Party 
Though called a bamboo, this 
plant is not a true bamboo at all, 
but it does resemble bamboo 
with the raised rings that are 
prominent on its stems. Lucky 
bamboo originates in southeast 
Asia and has been used in the 
practice of feng shui for thou-
sands of years. It’s thought to 
bring good luck and happiness. 
Most often sold growing hydro-
ponically (in water), it is easy to 
grow, adding to its popularity. 
Lucky bamboo prefers medium 
to bright light. If grown hydro-
ponically, change the water 
often. Using water without chlo-
rine or fluoride is best, so if you 
have these chemicals in your 
water, use bottled water or rain-
water. These plants can be found 
in different forms, including curly 
and braided. Buying them in 
these forms is easier than trying 
to do it yourself, but, if you want 
a challenge, try it. For curly, 
allow the plant to grow toward 
the light, turning the plant grad-
ually so it will grow toward the 
light in the other direction. Keep 
turning it until it’s the shape you 
like. This will take patience. If 
you want to braid the stems, buy  
the stems when they are young 
and pliable and braid them as 
they grow. 
You can also grow lucky bamboo 
in potting medium like any other 
houseplant. Choose a well-
drained brand and make sure 
they never stand in water. That’s 
ironic, isn’t it? Especially after 
pointing out that they usually 
grow hydroponically. But, plants 
grown exclusively in water or 
exclusively in soil have different 
types of roots and thus need to 
be treated differently. If the tops 
of your stems turn yellow, cut 
below the yellow area, and the 
plant should resprout  
from the cut end. Don’t mistake  
the brown parts at the base  
of the leaves as a problem or a 
“yellowing” plant. Those are old 
leaf sheaths that protected the 
new leaves as they emerged. You 
can easily peel those off if you 
find them unsightly. 
LUCKY BAMBOO
Dracaena sanderiana

The Best Plants for Your Living Space 17
Wouldn’t it be nice if a plant 
could grow money? You can own 
a money tree, but unfortunately, 
you shouldn’t expect any money 
to appear. As the word aquatica 
in the botanical name implies, 
this plant likes water; keep it 
moist. In its natural habitat in 
Mexico, it grows in freshwater 
swamps and along riverbanks. 
While it may grow in standing 
water in nature, don’t let it stand 
in water in your home, because 
it could end up with root rot. 
Money trees may attain a height 
of up to 60 feet (18 m) in nature, 
but expect it to only reach 6 to 
8 feet (about 2 m) in your home. 
Place this plant in bright light, 
such as an east or west window. 
In nature, money trees produce 
flowers, which in turn become 
fruit. The fruit is eaten raw, 
roasted, or ground into flour. 
Unfortunately, however, it most 
likely will not produce flowers in 
your home. 
The practice of feng shui utilizes 
the money tree to bring good 
luck. The five leaflets that form 
each compound leaf are thought 
to represent the elements: water, 
metal, wood, fire, and earth. It 
is most often sold in a braided 
form and can be found for 
purchase as a large-specimen 
floor plant. If your money tree 
develops yellow leaves, it may 
be suffering from low humidity. 
Place it on a pebble tray filled 
with water to raise the humidity 
around the plant (more on this 
technique in section 2). If it has 
brown crispy leaves, that may 
indicate it is too dry. Though it 
won’t bring you monetary gain, 
it’s a beautiful plant to grow in 
your home.
MONEY TREE
Pachira aquatica

18 Houseplant Party 
FRIENDSHIP PLANT
Pilea peperomioides
One of many endearing qualities 
of the friendship plant is the 
large number of small plantlets 
it produces. Because of this, it is 
easy to share with others, thus 
the friendship moniker. Who 
doesn’t want to be friends with 
someone who shares plants? 
The friendship plant’s perfectly 
round, flat leaves give it its other 
common name: the pancake 
plant. It may also be referred to 
as the money plant. 
Pilea peperomioides is so popu-
lar, it has social media accounts 
dedicated exclusively to its 
photogenic qualities. Even better, 
this plant is easy to grow, as 
long as it has bright to medium 
light and is allowed to dry out a 
bit between waterings. Because 
of its succulent stem, petioles 
(leaf stalks), and leaves, it can 
be treated somewhat like you 
would treat a succulent plant. 
The leaves of this plant like 
to turn quickly toward a light 
source. Because of this, turn the 
plant frequently to make sure it 
grows in a symmetrical fashion. 
This plant will produce babies on 
its stems, as well as in the soil 
around its base. If you decide 
to separate the babies, remove 
them carefully with a sharp 
knife. The roots are quite deli-
cate, so cut the plantlets out of 
the potting medium rather than 
trying to pull them out. Place 
both types of baby plants in con-
tainers of moist potting medium. 
Alternatively, the plantlets on the 
stem can be left there, creating 
a multi-stemmed, fuller plant. 
This plant may reach 3 to 4 feet 
(about 1 m) tall and may require 
staking to remain upright. 

The Best Plants for Your Living Space 19
The white “flowers” the peace 
lily sends up are one of the rea-
sons for its popularity. This plant 
does not need full sun to bloom, 
nor does it want to be in that 
much light. Instead it prefers 
a medium light. It may bloom 
continually when in the correct 
lighting situation.
You might assume the elliptical- 
shaped appendage cupped 
around the knobby spike is a 
flower, but it’s not. It’s a spathe, 
and the actual flower is the 
knobby spike in the center 
(called a spadix). Often you will 
see white dust on the leaves 
of your plant. You may panic, 
thinking there are bugs or a 
disease present, but don’t worry. 
The spadix produces white 
pollen, and sometimes it falls 
on the leaves. If that dusty look 
bothers you, wipe it off or leave 
the spathe and cut the spadix 
off. The spathe will give you the 
PEACE LILY
Spathiphyllum
after you give it water. Do not 
use this as an indicator of when 
to water, though. It works, but 
the consequences will be yellow 
leaves and brown tips if it hap-
pens too often. Instead, always 
keep your peace lily moist, but 
not standing in water. 
look of a flower, and the messy 
pollen-maker will be gone. 
Peace lilies let you know when 
they need water by wilting  
over the side of the pot. The 
good thing is, unlike many other 
plants, it will perk back up soon 

20 Houseplant Party 
It’s a good thing we have Latin 
scientific names for plants, 
because they can have many 
common names, as is the case 
with Beaucarnea recurvata. Most 
often, though, it is known as the 
ponytail palm—even though it’s 
not a palm at all. If you’ve ever 
seen one, it will be obvious why 
the ponytail name was chosen. 
The long, strappy leaves start 
out very tight together where 
they come out of the stem. They 
look as if they are tied together 
with an elastic band.
The swollen bulbous stem 
(called a caudex) resembles the 
leg of an elephant, especially 
as the plant ages. This large 
stem stores water like a camel’s 
hump, and because of this fea-
ture, this plant doesn’t need to 
be watered often. In fact, a pony-
tail palm should not be watered 
until the potting medium is 
almost completely dry. It is a 
light-loving plant originating in 
parts of the southwestern United 
States. If it’s placed in a low-light  
situation, the usually thick, 
leathery leaves may become  
thin and floppy. 
In its native habitat, a ponytail 
palm can reach up to 30 feet  
(9 m) tall! But inside, it will only 
reach a few feet (less than 1 m) 
in height, and this over many 
years as it’s a slow grower. Use 
a clay pot when planting ponytail 
palms; it allows evaporation of 
water through the walls of the 
pot, helping prevent the soil 
from becoming waterlogged.
PONYTAIL PALM, ELEPHANT FOOT,
BOTTLE PONYTAIL
Beaucarnea recurvata

The Best Plants for Your Living Space 21 
Are you trying to attain the 
“jungle look” with vines  
scrambling up your walls and 
around the windows? If so, 
pothos is the plant for you! This 
iconic houseplant has been 
climbing walls and framing 
windows for decades. It can 
live in full sun, yet also will do 
well in a low-light situation. In 
our homes it will remain in its 
juvenile form, never producing 
the enormous leaves with splits 
in them, not unlike their relative, 
the monstera plant. Most often, 
the plant you purchase will have 
yellow markings on the leaves. If 
it’s placed in too little light, the 
yellow markings will disappear 
on the new growth. If that hap-
pens, place it in a location with 
higher light, which will help new 
growth again display the yellow 
markings. 
Pothos plants also come in 
bright green, dark green, and 
variegated white forms, so there 
are many to choose from. If 
you have a low-light situation, 
choose the non-variegated, dark-
green form; the variegated forms 
need more light.
POTHOS, DEVIL’S IVY
Epipremnum aureum
Use a 4- to 6-inch (10- to 15-cm) 
piece cut off the end of the 
stem to propagate a new plant. 
This cutting can be planted on 
its own, planted back into the 
same container to keep the plant 
looking full, or shared with a 
friend (see section 3 for how to 
propagate plants via cuttings).
Keep this plant evenly moist. 
It is forgiving of occasional 
dry conditions but will develop 
yellowing leaves and may drop 
its oldest leaves, leaving bare 
stems behind. It is easy to keep 
the plant full by trimming the 
long stems back to the soil level. 
New shoots will arise from the 
cut stem, creating a fuller plant. 

22 Houseplant Party 
This easy succulent will be a 
conversation piece in your plant 
collection. Depending on which 
movie you’ve seen, you may  
prefer to call it Shrek’s ears 
or ET’s fingers. It’s also said 
that the name Gollum came 
from Tolkien’s character from  
The Lord of the Rings trilogy. 
Regardless of what you call it, 
this plant is a monstrose form of 
the original jade plant (Crassula 
ovata), which has flat leaves. 
Monstrose is the term used for 
funky forms of regular plants 
that come about through chance 
genetic mutations. 
Shrek’s ears is an easy-to-care-
for succulent, as long as it gets 
enough light. A bright south- or 
west-facing window is preferred. 
Because of its water-storing 
capabilities, it can survive for 
quite a while without water. If the 
leaves start to pucker, it needs 
water. Water thoroughly at that 
time but try not to let it get that 
dry again. Plant Shrek’s ears in a 
cactus/succulent potting mix to 
provide good drainage. Clay pots 
are a great choice for succulent 
plants as they are porous and 
excess water can evaporate out 
the sides of the pot. This plant 
could eventually grow up to  
3 feet (91 cm) tall and 2 feet  
(61 cm) wide. 
SHREK’S EARS, ET’S FINGERS,  
HOBBIT’S PIPE, TRUMPET JADE
Crassula ovata ‘Gollum’

The Best Plants for Your Living Space 23
It may surprise you to know that 
the snake plant has received a 
lot of bad press in the past. Sur-
prising because this plant has 
become a collectible, with new 
cultivars being created all the 
time. It also has the common 
name mother-in-law’s tongue 
because of the sharp edges of 
its leaves, which doesn't paint 
mothers-in-law in a good light. 
The snake plant is commonly 
used as a low-light plant, though 
it can often be found perishing 
in dark corners. While these Afri-
can succulents will survive in low 
light for a few years, they much 
prefer high light. In enough 
light they may even send out 
bloom stalks, and their strong 
underground stems (rhizomes) 
may grow so zealously that they 
break the container they are 
growing in! 
Snake plants are thick-leaved 
succulents. They’re quite 
drought tolerant and don’t want 
to be kept in a wet potting 
medium. If you feel it may need 
moisture but are not sure, err on 
the dry side to be safe.
Propagate your snake plant by 
cutting a single leaf in 2-inch 
(5-cm) increments and plant-
ing each piece in moist potting 
soil, first allowing the cut end(s) 
to callus over for a few days. 
(Please note: Bantel’s Sensation 
SNAKE PLANT
Sansevieria trifasciata ‘Bantel’s Sensation’
[shown] will not grow with the 
variegation from propagated 
leaves as it is a chimera plant. 
Dividing the plant is best.) A 
baby snake plant will appear as 
long as you make sure to plant 
the bottom side of the leaf in the 
medium. Your snake plant can 
also be propagated from offsets, 
separating the baby plants 
that will rise from the potting 
medium. You will need a knife to 
cut through the rhizomes. 

24 Houseplant Party 
SPIDER PLANT, AIRPLANE PLANT
Chlorophytum comosum    
Many people have sentimental 
feelings toward the ubiquitous 
spider plant. Perhaps your 
mother or grandmother had one 
in her window. Some describe 
the dangling plantlets as “spi-
ders,” while others call them 
“airplanes.” Both evoke pictures 
of plants in the air, whether 
soaring like planes or swinging 
from silken threads like a spider. 
However they are described, 
the appendages are captivating, 
adding movement to the plant. 
They are exceptional hanging 
plants, but also make a great 
“hairdo” for a face-shaped pot.
There are variegated and plain 
green forms, and both need 
medium to bright light or the 
leaves will stretch, become 
weak, and flop over. If they 
receive enough light, they will 
produce diminutive white flowers 
and multiple runners with baby 
plantlets.
Keep your spider plant evenly 
moist and the humidity high to 
prevent brown tips on the leaves. 
Fertilizer salt buildup or fluo-
ride in municipal water sources 
can also cause brown leaf tips. 
Trim the brown ends when they 
develop, and remedy the situa-
tion causing them. 
Spider plants have fleshy, tuber-
ous roots that quickly fill the pot. 
They may distort a plastic pot 
or even push the plant up out of 
the container. When this hap-
pens, up-pot your plant to the 
next size container. 
To propagate your spider plant, 
remove the baby plantlets and 
place them in soil or water, roots 
down. You may also leave the 
plantlet on the runner attached 
to the mother plant, pin it to 
another container of moist soil 
with a piece of bent wire or a 
paper clip, and allow it to root 
while still receiving water and 
nutrients from its mom. After  
it begins to grow, cut it off  
the stem that attached it to  
its mother. 

The Best Plants for Your Living Space 25
Imagine a plant so popular it 
has taken over social media one 
day a week. This is the plant 
that #MonsteraMonday is all 
about! Its lesser-known name 
of fruit salad plant refers to its 
fruit, which tastes like a cross 
between a pineapple and a 
banana. The unripe fruit is not 
edible, though, and may cause 
mouth and throat irritation if 
ingested. 
This large plant was a fixture of 
mid-century modern decorat-
ing, and the lofty ceilings and 
open floor plans popular today 
have allowed this plant to come 
back into vogue. The enormous 
fenestrated (hole-filled) leaves 
are unique, and the holes help 
the plants cope with the strong 
winds and large amounts of rain 
they receive in the jungles they 
call home. You may be con-
fused when you buy your plant, 
because its juvenile form doesn’t 
always have split leaves, but 
they’ll appear as the plant ages. 
For additional moisture, mon-
steras send out aerial roots that 
also help stabilize the plant. In 
SWISS CHEESE PLANT, FRUIT SALAD PLANT
Monstera deliciosa
our homes, these roots attach 
themselves to floors or walls and 
leave marks when removed, so 
watch for them and cut them off, 
or place them back into the con-
tainer. As your monstera grows 
in size, you may find a trellis will 
be helpful to support your plant 
(see section 3 for a DIY wooden 
plant trellis project).
Monstera can tolerate low light 
but prefers medium to bright 
light. In their native habitat, 
they start life on the jungle 
floor and scramble along  
until they find a tree to  
cling to, climbing to the 
top for light. 
Keep this plant evenly 
moist, letting it get quite 
dry before watering again. 
All you need to propagate a 
monstera is a leaf attached 
to a small piece of the stem. 
It can be rooted in water or in 
a container filled with moist 
potting medium. 

26 Houseplant Party 
VENUS FLYTRAP
Dionaea muscipula
These carnivorous plants have 
specialized parts that attract 
insects, and after capturing them, 
the plant digests the insect and 
uses the nutrients they provide. 
Why do they need to eat insects, 
you ask? They live in such poor 
soil conditions, they need to find 
nutrients another way. 
The modified leaves of the 
Venus flytrap are like a large 
mouth with hairs on the edges. 
The mouth is often red inside 
and contains nectar glands that 
attract certain insects. There 
are small trigger hairs on the 
inside of the trap, and when an 
insect lands inside and touches 
the same hair twice within 20 
seconds, the leaf snaps shut. 
The hairs on the edge of the 
mouth become like the bars 
of a prison, keeping the insect 
in. Immediately, the plant 
releases enzymes that begin 
to digest its prisoner. 
Venus flytraps need bright 
light, high humidity, and a 
highly acidic potting mix 
containing mostly peat moss. 
Yes, they make their own food 
by means of photosynthesis, 
but the nutrients the insects 
provide help the plant grow 
better. If you can direct some 
flies their way, it’s helpful, but 
the plant will survive without 
them. Contrary to popular 
belief, Venus flytraps shouldn’t 
be fed hamburger or other 
raw meats because the plant 
does not release the diges-
tive enzymes unless the food 
source is moving around.
These plants go dormant for 
about 5 months during the 
winter season. Throughout 
this natural dormancy period, 
they need to be in a cold 
place, just above freezing. A 
garage or an unheated room 
works perfectly. With a little 
bit of extra care and some 
insects to eat, these unusual 
plants will thrive.

The Best Plants for Your Living Space 27
ZZ PLANT, ZANZIBAR GEM
Zamioculcas zamiifolia
rhizomes develop leaves on top 
and roots on the bottom. 
An unusual attribute of this plant 
is that new plants can be grown 
from an individual leaflet. How-
ever, patience is needed. Just 
place one leaflet in moist potting 
medium  or water. It can also be 
propagated from an entire stem 
or divided by cutting through the 
rhizomes to separate smaller 
plants from the larger one. 
Though the ZZ can do well in 
low light, it prefers medium to 
bright light and can become 
quite a large plant.
Because of its large fleshy rhi-
zomes, this plant is drought tol-
erant and doesn’t appreciate an 
overly wet potting soil. If it’s in a 
higher light situation, it will need 
more water, and if it becomes 
too dry, it will drop leaflets. 
modern vibe to any room. The 
leaves are upright and made up 
of many leaflets on each rachis 
(stem of a compound leaf), the 
actual “stem” being the under-
ground tuberous rhizomes, 
not unlike a snake plant. The 
If you have a low-light area and 
everything you’ve tried growing 
dies, you haven’t tried the ZZ 
plant! This East African native 
plant sports glossy, dark-green 
leaves that make a strong archi-
tectural statement and lend a 


 29
Like a dog, cat, or any other pet, houseplants need your care to  
survive and thrive. Of course, they don’t need to go for a walk and 
there won’t be any poop to scoop, but there are still things that a 
plant needs. These include water, light, food, shelter, and of course, 
love. We’re going to talk about a few important factors to consider 
when it comes to caring for your houseplants. 
Taking Care of  
Your Houseplants
SECTION TWO
z

30 Houseplant Party 
Light
Though you need to put food out for your pets, 
plants make their own food through photosynthe-
sis. Without going into great detail (this isn’t sci-
ence class, after all!), let me explain a little about 
the process. When light falls on the green leaves of 
your houseplants, the chlorophyll inside the cells 
collects that light. Along with the light, the plant 
uses water (which you provide), carbon dioxide 
from the air, and minerals to make glucose/sugar, 
which is the food that fuels the plant’s growth. 
A by-product of this process is oxygen, which, of 
course, we humans need to live. As it photosynthe-
sizes, the plant is oxygenating and cleaning the air 
at the same time.
In order for photosynthesis to occur, plants need 
light. The amount of light they need depends on 
the conditions under which they naturally grow. 
How do you know if you have enough light to keep 
a plant alive? If you can read in your room during 
the day without a light on, you have enough light 
to support a living plant. (No faux plants, please.) 
There are different levels of light, however, and 
you need to determine if you have high, medium, 
or low light before choosing which plant to add to 
your home. 
To determine the level of light you have, consider 
which direction your window faces. 
 •  If the sun comes up in your window (proba-
bly earlier than you would like it to), it faces 
east. East light is a medium to bright light 
and is a soft, low-temperature light. 
 •  If the sun goes down in your window, it faces 
west. This is also a medium to bright light, 
but it is a hotter light because it comes in the 
window in the afternoon. 
 •  If you have light in your window almost all 
day, it faces south, and that is a great win-
dow for cacti and other succulents, as well as 
other high-light plants.
 •  If the sun never shines directly in your win-
dow, it faces north. This window is perfect for 
low-light plants, such as ferns and Chinese 
evergreens. 
Determining the amount of light your window 
receives is key to deciding which plant to bring 
home. If a plant doesn’t have enough light to sur-
vive and grow, it will slowly deteriorate and even-
tually die. Choose the right plant for the light you 
have, and you’ll be the owner of a thriving plant!


32 Houseplant Party 
Temperature
Most of our indoor plants come from warm  
climates. Different plants like different tempera-
tures, but a good rule of thumb is: if you are 
comfortable, your plant probably is as well. If, on 
the other hand, you like to keep your home below 
55°F (13°C), that might not work for your plants. 
Many houseplants prefer the temperature around 
them above 55°F (13°C), and warmer would be 
better. The range between 55°F and 85°F (13°C 
and 29°C) is acceptable for most plants. Tem-
peratures higher than 80°F (27°C) may cause 
damage to some plants, especially if they are dry. 
They can take higher temperatures if the humidity 
is elevated, because they are not losing water as 
fast through transpiration. If the temperature falls 
below 55°F (13°C), some plants may suffer cold 
damage. Although temperature requirements differ 
from plant to plant, all plants like a slight tempera-
ture drop at night. This mimics the nighttime fall of 
temperature in nature. 
Water
There is much discussion and controversy when 
it comes to watering houseplants. I’m going to tell 
you what works for me and will work for you. First, 
all plants are watered in the same way: Add water 
until it runs steadily out of the drainage hole. This 
includes cacti and other succulents. The differ-
ence is the amount of time between waterings. 
For plants that like it on the drier side, water less 
frequently. For plants that prefer more moisture, 
water more frequently. By watering so the water 
runs completely through the container, you are 
wetting the entire root ball, as well as drawing air 
down through the root area.
How to water a plant in a pot with a  
drainage hole: 
A pot with a drainage hole is important, especially 
if you’re a new houseplant parent. If there’s no 
drainage hole, it isn’t easy to determine whether 
or not a houseplant has enough water. After all, 
you won’t know if the plant is standing in water or 
if the root ball was moistened all the way to the 
bottom. If you have a drainage hole, carry the pot 
to a sink or bathtub and pour water over the soil. 
Giving your plant a shower at the same time is a 
great way to clean the leaves. Keep adding water 
until it freely drains out the drainage hole. Let the 
pot sit in the sink or tub until it finishes draining, 
then move it back to its home base.
How to water a plant in a decorative container: 
When you water a plant whose pot is nestled 
inside a more decorative container (cachepot), 
take it out of the decorative container completely, 
water it, let it drain fully, and then return it to the 
decorative container. This method ensures that 
your plant is never standing in water, which will 
lead to root rot. 
How to water a plant with a saucer  
beneath the pot: 
When you water a plant in a pot with a saucer, the 
excess water will drain into the saucer instead of 
draining out of the hole and down the sink. If water 
is standing in the saucer 30 minutes to an hour 
after watering, empty the saucer into the sink. This 
may be difficult if the container is large and hard 
to move, but the roots of your plant may rot if wa-
ter is left standing in the saucer for long periods of 
time. A turkey baster is a good tool to include with 
your houseplant tools; use it to remove the excess 
water from the saucer.

Taking Care of Your Houseplants 33
NO DRAINAGE HOLE? NO PROBLEM!
If you find a container you must have and it 
doesn’t have a drainage hole, there are a couple 
of ways to handle it. If you have a drill, you can 
purchase a masonry or diamond-tipped drill bit 
and carefully drill a hole in your container. If 
you cannot drill a hole, I suggest you use your 
container without a drainage hole as a cachepot 
(cachepot means “hide a pot” in French). In 
other words, your houseplant will stay in the 
grower’s pot it came in, and you will simply slip 
the plant into the decorative container so the 
grower’s pot will be hidden.

34 Houseplant Party 
How do you know when to water again?
The first thing to know is to never water a plant  
on a set schedule. Many factors must be taken 
into account, including the amount of sunshine 
and temperature fluctuation. A good idea is to 
check your plant on a schedule to determine if  
it needs water. 
There are many different water meters you can 
buy to check for moisture, but the best way is to 
stick your finger in the soil. If it’s dry up to your 
second knuckle and the plant prefers to be con-
sistently moist, it’s probably time to water. If you 
have a large floor plant, using your finger isn’t the 
best way to check the moisture level. The bottom 
layers of soil may have a different moisture level 
than the soil at the top. In this case, use a large 
dowel or bamboo stake, sticking it all the way to 
the bottom of the pot and leaving it there for a few 
minutes. When you pull it out, check the bottom of 
the stick, and if it’s wet, don’t water the plant. See 
photos below.
Fertilizer
Did you know that fertilizer is not food for plants? 
The only food a plant receives is from the light 

Taking Care of Your Houseplants 35
that falls on it. Fertilizing is something you don’t 
have to do—your plant will do just fine with sun-
shine and nutrients from its potting mix. However, 
it is beneficial to fertilize a plant, as long as you 
don’t overdo it. Fertilizing a plant is equivalent to 
humans taking vitamins. It provides the plant with 
extra nutrients. 
Fertilizing should only be done when the plant is 
actively growing. If you live in an area where daylight 
hours are shorter in the winter season, your plants 
won’t need fertilizer from fall until spring. When you 
see signs of new growth in the spring, start your 
fertilizing regimen again. I fertilize my plants every 
fourth watering, or approximately once a month, 
using a water-soluble fertilizer with even numbers, 
such as 10-10-10 or 20-20-20. 
If you use an organic fertilizer, such as fish 
emulsion, those three numbers will be much lower 
and may not be equal, which is perfectly natural. 
Some people prefer to use only organic fertilizers 
for their plants. One saying that definitely applies 
when fertilizing plants is “less is more.” I never 
use the fertilizer at full strength or use more than 
the directions call for. If you choose, you could use 
a small amount of fertilizer, such as one-fourth 
strength, in your water every time you water  
your plants. 
THE MEANING OF 
FERTILIZER NUMBERS 
The three numbers on a fertilizer container 
represent, in order, the percentage of 
nitrogen, phosphorous, and potassium 
found in the fertilizer. A good way to 
remember those elements and how they 
help your plant is the old saying, “Up, 
down, all around.”
•  The first number represents nitrogen, 
which helps the “up” part (the green 
part) of the plant. 
•  The second number represents  
phosphorous, which helps the “down” 
part of the plant, meaning it helps pro-
mote strong root growth. It also helps 
the flowers grow larger, last longer, and 
have a richer color.
•  The third number represents  
potassium, which helps with the  
“all around” health of the plant. 

36 Houseplant Party 
QUICK TIPS FOR HOUSEPLANT CARE
How to improve your light: 
To help maximize the amount of 
light reaching your plants, wash 
your plants to remove dust and 
grime blocking their photosynthetic 
process. Wash your windows, espe-
cially when bringing your plants in 
after a summer sojourn outside. 
 
Choose a light paint color on your 
walls to reflect light to your plants. 
Use mirrors in strategic places to 
bounce light around the room and 
give your plants a boost. 
How to raise the humidity:
Plants love humidity. Most houseplants are found 
growing naturally in humid climates, such as rainfor-
ests. Use a room humidifier, or if that isn’t feasible, a 
pebble tray. Place your plant pot with its saucer on a 
larger saucer or tray filled with pebbles and water. Keep 
the pebble tray filled with water, and as it evaporates 
around your plant, the humidity will rise. If you choose 
not to use a saucer under your pot,  make sure the pot 
isn’t sitting directly in the water; it should be propped 
up by the rocks. If misting is something you like to do, 
go for it. Just know that it isn’t really doing much for 
your plant. 

Taking Care of Your Houseplants 37
How to improve flowering:
Fertilizer does not make a plant flower. If you have a 
flowering plant that is not flowering at some time in a 
yearly cycle, it likely needs more light, not fertilizer. Move 
it closer to a light source or add an electric light if it isn’t 
possible to move it to another location. 
How to groom plants:
When a plant leaf has turned yellow, 
it won’t turn green again. If it has a 
brown tip, you can trim the tip off, 
cutting it the same shape as the 
original leaf. If most of the leaf is 
yellow, it’s time to cut the leaf off 
entirely. Cut it back to the stem it 
originates from. 
How NOT to improve drainage:
Many people put gravel or pot shards (broken pieces of 
pots) in the bottom of a container because they believe it 
helps with drainage. It doesn’t help and can actually hinder 
the drainage process. I use a piece of window screening to 
cover the hole, allowing water to escape easily while the 
potting medium stays in. 


 39
15 Houseplant  
Projects and Crafts
SECTION THREE
z

40 Houseplant Party 
MARIMO BALL AQUATIC GARDEN 
Quite often plants die because they are overwatered. The best thing about aquatic 
plants is that you can’t overwater them because they live in water! A marimo ball 
(Aegagropila linnaei)—also called a moss ball, lake ball, or lake goblin—is a perfect 
plant for your desk or bedside table, as long as it receives medium light. 
What is a marimo moss ball, you might wonder? 
The first thing to know is that it isn’t moss at all, 
but a type of algae. Their native habitat is fresh- 
water lakes in Japan and Iceland, where they thrive 
rolling back and forth on the lake bottom with the 
waves. This gives them their spherical shape. In 
Japanese, marimo means “bouncy ball.” 
As they live at the bottom of lakes, marimo balls 
can grow in low to medium light, which makes 
them perfect for home environments. If they’re 
exposed to too much bright light, they will suffer 
and turn brown. In addition, unwanted algae will 
grow if the container receives too much light, 
which may also block the amount of light get-
ting to the marimo ball. Marimo balls need to be 
turned regularly to expose all sides to the light, 
otherwise brown, dead patches develop. Mimick-
ing the movement of their natural environment 
helps keep their round shape. 
A glass display 
container (Choose a 
larger container if  
you’d like to add fish to 
your aquatic garden—
see page 43.) 
Water (Tap water  
is fine.)
Marimo moss ball(s)
Gravel or sand for 
the bottom of the 
container (optional, 
unless adding other 
plants with roots)
Decorations (optional)
Optional additional 
supplies:
Betta fish
Water conditioner  
(If you add a fish to 
your container, you 
must use a water 
conditioner to remove 
the harmful chemicals 
from the water, such as 
chlorine and fluoride.)
Betta food (They’re 
carnivores and don’t 
eat plants.)
Cryptocoryne plant
z
MATERIALS


42 Houseplant Party 
CARING FOR YOUR MARIMO BALL AQUATIC GARDEN 
Marimo balls can grow up to 12 inches (30 cm) 
around, but in an aquarium, they may grow to 
only 2 to 3 inches (5 to 8 cm). They grow very 
slowly and are long-lived plants that require 
minimal care.
•  Change the water occasionally and rinse the 
marimo ball to make sure no algae or dirt is 
collecting in the moss ball, especially if there 
are fish in the tank. 
•  If the water starts growing algae because it 
receives too much light, change the water, 
rinse the ball more often, and move your 
aquatic garden to lower light. 
•  Swish the bowl around occasionally so your 
moss ball keeps its shape and all sides 
receive light. 
•  Marimo balls don’t need any fertilizer  
because they get their food from the sun. 
Adding fertilizer to the water might trigger 
growth of unwanted algae. 
STEP 1 Make sure your glass container is clean. If 
you wash it or use window cleaner, make sure it’s 
well rinsed to get all the cleaning product residue 
removed. 
STEP 2 Add gravel to the bottom of the glass  
display container. 
STEP 3 Fill the container with water. 
2
3

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 43
4
AN EVEN BETTA 
ARRANGEMENT
 
If you have a container that 
holds 2˙ gallons (9.5 L) of 
water or more, you can add 
a betta fish (Betta splen-
dens), otherwise known as 
a Siamese fighting fish, for 
more interest. You should 
only have one fish at a time in 
your tank, as they will fight. If 
you want to add other plants 
in with the marimo that are 
compatible with these fish, 
look for cryptocoryne (com-
monly called “crypt”), which 
is readily found at big box pet 
stores or aquarium stores. 
Like the marimo, it’s an easy, 
low-maintenance aquatic 
houseplant. 
If you add a betta to your 
container, some of the water 
will have to be replaced every 
week. Betta fish bring added 
responsibility. They must be 
fed regularly, and the tank 
needs to be cleaned more 
often. But they also bring 
beauty and movement to your 
new water world. You decide 
what is best for you.
STEP 4 Add your marimo balls to the container. 
They may float, so squeeze them gently to  
remove any air bubbles, and they should sink  
to the bottom.
STEP 5 You can add a cover or leave it open. A 
glass plate makes a great cover and doesn’t block 
the light. 
Enjoy your marimo balls for years to come! 

44 Houseplant Party 
RECYCLED T-SHIRT PLANT HANGER
Think twice before you throw away that old t-shirt. It can be upcycled into a plant 
hanger in just a few simple steps. Maybe you’ve admired those macramé hangers 
that are all the rage and can make one from the pattern on page 48. 
If that seems too time-consuming, grab a t-shirt, 
some scissors, and a tape measure, and you can 
have a great plant hanger in a short amount of 
time. It only entails cutting up the shirt and tying 
10 knots. 
You could make a few of these in an afternoon  
and upcycle old clothes at the same time.  
Before you know it, your windows will be full  
of hanging plants!
Large (or larger) t-shirt  
(You can use a smaller  
size but will have a  
smaller hanger.)
Scissors (Make sure they  
can cut fabric easily.)
Tape measure or ruler
Pencil or pen to mark  
the cutting lines
Potted plant in a 4" to 6"  
(10 to 15 cm) container
Ceiling hook to hold the  
plant hanger
z
MATERIALS


46 Houseplant Party 
STEP 1 Lay the t-shirt on a flat surface and smooth 
it out to remove any large wrinkles. Cut the hem 
off the bottom of the shirt. 
STEP 2 Cut the t-shirt across the front directly 
under the sleeves and discard or save to use for 
another project. You now have the body of the 
t-shirt left.
STEP 3 Using a tape measure or ruler, measure up 
1˙" (3.5 cm) from the bottom of the shirt. Mark 
the spot on both sides. You may want to use a 
yardstick to draw a straight line from one mark to 
the mark on the opposite side. It doesn’t matter  
if it isn’t perfect. Cut the body of the t-shirt into  
eight strips 1˙" (3.5 cm) wide starting on the  
side edge of the shirt.
STEP 4 These pieces will be circles when first cut. 
To make them into strips, cut through the circle in 
one spot. 
STEP 5 Pull the strips to stretch them out. When 
stretched, the entire strip will curl up like a tube.
STEP 6 Gather all the strips together, making sure 
they are even at one end. The hanger is worked 
from the bottom to the top. Holding all the strips 
together, tie a large knot approximately 5" (13 cm) 
from the bottom. 
1
2
4
3
6
5

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 47
HOW TO HANG YOUR 
T-SHIRT PLANT HANGER 
Place a hook in the ceiling where you’d 
like to place your hanger. Make sure it’s in 
a spot that has an appropriate amount of 
light for the plant you are using. Nestle the 
plant into the fabric basket and hang it on 
the hook. 
7
9
8
10
STEP 7 Divide the eight strips into pairs, forming 
four pairs of two strips each. Using one pair of 
strips, tie a knot approximately 3" (7.5 cm) from 
the large bottom knot. Continue around, tying a 
knot in each set of strips. There will be four knots. 
STEP 8 Now drop down another 3" (7.5 cm), take  
one strip from one pair and one from the adjoining 
pair, and tie a knot. 
STEP 9 Continue around, tying three more knots. 
This forms the basket that the plant will be  
placed in. 
STEP 10 Now gather all eight strips back together 
and tie a large knot at the top of the hanger. Cut 
the ends off above the knot. You can adjust the 
length of your hanger by tying the knot lower 
toward the basket and cutting the long ends off,  
or you can leave them hanging.

48 Houseplant Party 
34 yards (31 m) of 4 mm 
macramé cord in your 
choice of color
4 20 to 25 mm large-hole 
macramé beads in a 
round or oblong shape
1" to 2" (2.5 to 5 cm) 
metal or plastic ring
Scissors
Measuring tape or  
yard stick 
Lighter or match 
(optional)
Ceiling hook specifically 
for hanging plants
z
MATERIALS
MACRAMÉ PLANT HANGER
Are you running out of floor and windowsill space for all your plants? Look up! By 
making a plant hanger, you can utilize the ceiling area to house your vining plants. 
Macramé has made a comeback, and it’s even more popular now than it was in
the 1970s. The technique simply involves tying 
different knots with string to form a pattern. If you 
have ever made a friendship bracelet, you can 
macramé, because they use many of the same 
knotting techniques. Making a hanger for your 
plant is fun and easy once you master a couple of 
those simple knots. The best part is, you can have  
more plants by hanging them from the ceiling, 
making the most of unused space. You only need  
a few supplies to make this hanger. 
Note: Follow the directions exactly as they are written, one step at a time, and you macramé hanger 
will be simple to make. Pay attention to the repeats.

square knot
wrap (or gathering) knot
half knot
KNOTS USED
z
15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 49

50 Houseplant Party 
STEP 1 Cut eight 4-yard (3.7 m)–long cords. Cut  
two 1-yard (91.4 cm)–long cord for wraps.
STEP 2 Thread the eight 4-yard (3.7 m) cords 
through the ring so that the ring is at the middle of 
the cords. There will be sixteen cord ends hanging 
down from the ring. Make sure they are relatively 
even at the bottom. This hanger is worked from 
the top to the bottom.
STEP 3 Tie a 1˙" (3.5 cm) wrap (or gathering) knot 
(see knot illustrations on page 49) around the six-
teen cords using one of the 1-yard (91.4 cm) cords.
STEP 4 Now you will begin to work on one arm or 
sinnet of the plant hanger. Each sinnet is worked 
separately until the basket to hold the plant pot 
is formed. Separate the sixteen cords into four 
groups of four strings each to form a sinnet. 
2
5a
3
5b

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 51
A TRICK FOR STOPPING  
THE FRAY 
If you would like to stop the cord from 
fraying, tie a knot at the bottom of each 
cord. Or if the cord used is heat fusible, 
burn the ends with a lighter or match to 
make sure they do not fray. This is done  
by quickly passing the flame over the end 
of each cord. It should be done carefully so 
the flame or the melted material doesn’t 
burn you. A knot tied at the end of each 
heat-fusible cord also keeps it from fraying 
and adds a different look to the hanger. 
Safety note: This will not work with  
cotton cord.
6
7
STEP 5 Using four cords, tie five square knots (see 
knot illustrations on page 49). 
STEP 6 Switch threads, bringing the two longer  
middle threads to the outside. (The longer cords 
will now be used to tie the knots.) Drop down  
2" (5 cm). Tie ten half knots (see knot illustrations 
on page 49). The result is a twisted stitch. 
STEP 7 Thread one bead over all four cords and 
slide it up right under the half knots you just tied. 
Tie ten half knots under the bead. 
STEP 8 Drop down 6" (15 cm) and tie two square 
knots. Repeat the process from Step 5 through 
Step 8 on each of the remaining three sinnets. The 
four arms or sinnets of the macramé hanger are 
now done, and we will start to work on the basket 
of the macramé holder that will cradle the plant 
container. 

52 Houseplant Party 
Forming the basket: 
STEP 9 By using threads from neighboring sinnets 
each time, the result will be a webbed basket that 
the plant pot sits in. Skip down 4" (10 cm). Take 
two cords from one sinnet and two cords from the 
neighboring sinnet and use them to tie two square 
knots. Repeat with the remaining sinnets. 
STEP 10 Once all four sinnets are tied, repeat the 
step above, again skipping down 4" (10 cm) before 
tying the knots. 
STEP 11 Drop down 2" (5 cm) below the last square 
knots made and tie a wrap knot with the remaining 
1-yard (91.4 cm) cord. Trim the ends of the cords 
evenly and let the ends fray naturally. 
A HELPFUL HINT
While I’m working on my 
macramé, I hang the ring from 
a wreath hanger that is over a 
door, but any over-the-door hook 
would work. You could also use a 
nail on the wall or hang the ring 
over the top of a clothes hanger 
hung from a nail or curtain rod. 
My friend uses a doorknob on 
her kitchen cupboard. The point 
is, it is easier to work on if it’s 
hung from something. Do what-
ever works best for you and use 
what you have available.
9
10

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 53
HOW TO HANG YOUR MACRAMÉ MASTERPIECE
Your macramé plant hanger is finished and ready to be hung from the ceiling. I suggest buying a  
specialized plant hook that is meant to bear the weight of the container, plant, and moist potting 
medium. Finding your plant on the floor and the pot smashed because you used a hook that was too 
small is heartbreaking. The amount of weight a hook will hold will be displayed on the packaging. 
Make a few hangers to fill your window with greenery. Because they hang from the ceiling, it leaves 
plenty of room on the floor and windowsill for more plants. Time to go shopping! 
11

54 Houseplant Party 
A HAWORTHIOPSIS ZEN GARDEN
We all need to shut down, turn off social media, and contemplate life from time 
to time. As we know, that can be hard to do. This desk-sized Zen garden is a 
perfect way to do just that. What is a Zen garden, you ask? It is a small Japanese 
rock garden or “dry landscape” garden. It is usually an outside garden, with 
purposefully arranged rocks, water features, plants, and gravel or sand to rake. 
Many of these gardens are found at temples in 
Japan, where the priests often rake the gravel to 
help with concentration. The raking of the sand 
in a ripple pattern represents water. Rocks are 
usually a part of the garden, used to represent 
mountains, but because of the small scale of our 
garden, they haven’t been included. If you would 
like to add a small stone or two to make it more 
Zen-like, feel free to do so. This is your creation 
and there are no rules that must be followed.
Though this isn’t a true Zen garden, it does give 
us the same vibe. Place it on your desk, and when 
you are feeling stressed, pick up the rake, admire 
the plants, and let calmness enter your mind.
The plants we used are succulents that can  
withstand lower light levels than most. If your  
garden is in a medium to bright light, it should 
grow well. 
Two small haworthiopsis 
(formerly haworthia) 
plants (For more on these 
plants, see page 14.)
Decorative container 
approximately 6" to 10" 
(15 to 25 cm) wide (with a 
drainage hole). A shallow 
pot is best.
Sand (colored or plain)
Mini rake 
Potting medium  
(A well-drained cactus 
and succulent potting 
medium is best.)
z
MATERIALS


56 Houseplant Party 
STEP 1 Add the cactus and succulent  
potting mix to your container. Leave 
approximately ˙" to 1" (1 to 2.5 cm) of 
space at the top of the container for  
the sand. If the potting mix is too close  
to the top, the sand will wash over the 
side of the container when you’re watering 
the plants. 
STEP 2 Plant your haworthiopsis along one 
edge of the container. Carefully snuggle 
the plants in close to each other so you 
have more room for the sand area of the 
design. Lightly firm the soil around the 
plants and across the top of the con-
tainer to make a level plane for the sand. 
Water the plants to settle them in.
STEP 3 Now it’s time to add the sand.  
I used two colors of sand, but plain- 
colored sand can also be used and is 
more in keeping with the Zen garden 
aesthetic. Use a funnel or small container 
to add the sand, being careful to keep  
the sand off the leaves of the plants, 
especially if colored sand is used. 
1
3a
2

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 57
STEP 4 If you do get some sand on the 
leaves, use a small brush, such as a paint 
or makeup brush, to carefully sweep it off. 
STEP 5 Place your Zen garden on your 
desk or somewhere you’ll be able to use 
it often to settle your thoughts and bring 
calmness to your day. 
5
3b
WATERING TIP
Be careful when watering your Zen garden 
to make sure the potting medium and  
sand aren’t mixed together. If that occurs, 
just add more sand to cover the area 
again. For more on growing haworthiopsis, 
see page 14.

58 Houseplant Party 
TEST TUBE PROPAGATOR 
If your plants become long and straggly or look like they’re in need of a trim, you 
now have a great reason to start new plants! Trimming your plants helps them stay 
full and keeps them at a manageable size. When you trim a long stem off a vining 
plant—such as a pothos—a new stem will emerge near the cut area. The cuttings 
can be rooted directly in moist potting medium or in water.
Rooting the stem pieces in water only requires a 
receptacle that holds water. You can use old spice 
bottles, small vases, or even drinking cups to root 
new plants, but why not use something that also 
doubles as artwork? These test tube propagators 
are a perfect fit. The tubes are attached to small 
pieces of wood and then hung on the wall. One is 
perfect for rooting a single cutting, but a whole 
wall of them can make a bold statement and hold 
multiple cuttings, creating a green wall. These 
propagators are simple and quick to make, and 
buying the supplies won’t break the bank. 
Test tube
Wood rounds that are 
approximately 2" to 3"  
(5 to 7.5 cm) around (I used 
birch wood found at my local 
craft store.)
Sawtooth picture hangers 1ƒ" 
(4.5 cm) wide
Clear bumper pads
Industrial-strength glue 
Rubber bands
Hammer
Nail or screw to hang it on  
the wall (A removable adhesive  
hook would also work.)
Water
Plant cuttings to be propagated
z
MATERIALS


60 Houseplant Party 
STEP 1  Gather your materials. Because 
you’ll be using glue, cover your work area 
with newspaper. Decide which side of the 
wood round you like best—this will be the 
front side, where you’ll attach the test 
tube. Turn it over and nail the sawtooth 
picture hanger at the top of the round. 
Add a bumper to the bottom of the round 
below the hanger so it will hang level on 
the wall.
STEP 2 Now turn the round over.  
IMPORTANT: Make sure you have the  
sawtooth hanger level at the top before 
your glue your test tube on. If you don’t 
check, you may have a test tube that 
doesn’t hang straight. Imagine the saw-
tooth hanger on the back is the top of a T 
and the test tube is the leg of the T. Hold 
the test tube on the front of the wood 
round, and at the same time turn it to 
look at the back to make sure the test 
tube is perpendicular to the hanger. You 
can place the test tube top edge even 
with the wood round edge or raise it up 
an inch or so, or you can center the wood 
round in the center of the test tube. The 
placement of the tube on the wood round 
is up to you.
1
3b
3a

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 61
STEP 3 Carefully lay it down, remove the 
test tube, and run a generous line of glue 
down the center of the wood round. Place 
the test tube in the glue, pressing it firmly 
but carefully to make sure it has maxi-
mum contact with the glue. Don’t press 
too hard, or you may break the glass.  
FYI: Do not use a hot glue gun. I tried  
it, and it worked for about an hour  
before the test tube fell off the wood  
and smashed into a million pieces on  
the floor. 
STEP 4 Carefully stretch the rubber bands 
around the test tube and wood piece to 
keep the test tube in place while the glue 
dries. Allow it to dry for a few hours  
(follow the directions on the glue con-
tainer) before taking the rubber bands off. 
STEP 5 Add water and plant cuttings to the 
test tube, and you are ready to hang your 
propagator on the wall. Remember to 
keep adding water as needed, especially 
as the roots start to grow and use water.  
5
4
PLANTS TO TRY 
• Pothos
• Heart leaf philodendron
• English ivy
• Tradescantia
• Lucky bamboo 
• Trailing peperomias
• Purple passion vine
• Spider plant
• Pellionia
• Aeschynanthus
•  Cissus varieties such  
as grape ivy
You don’t necessarily have 
to use a trailing plant.  
ZZ plant and aglaonema  
also work well. Make one or  
as many as you want. They  
add a lot of beauty to a wall 
while your plants are busy 
growing roots. 

62 Houseplant Party 
RECYCLED TABLE KNIVES PLANT STAKES
 
Do you name your plants? Perhaps you have Frank the fiddle-leaf or Phil the 
philodendron living in your bedroom? Or maybe you’re just looking for a way to 
remember the botanical names of your plant babies. Yes, you could keep the tag 
that comes with the plant, but sometimes plants 
don’t have tags or you tend to“misplace” them. 
Plus, let’s face it, those plastic tags aren’t all that 
attractive. This is a fun way to remember the name 
of your plant, and it includes using something that 
might otherwise be thrown away. In this project, 
you’ll upcycle table knives into decorative plant 
stakes. Thrift stores usually have bins of inexpen-
sive silverware, so you can buy multiples. When 
choosing your knife, look for the largest handle you 
can find so there’s more room to decorate. Then 
the fun begins! This is a great project to create with 
a group. Share paint and decorations with friends 
and have a fun evening crafting for your plants.  
Table knives  
(not sharp knives)
Acrylic paint*
Paintbrushes  
(assorted sizes)
Outdoor sealer (optional)
Something to stick your 
knives in so they can dry  
in an upright position  
(I used a piece of foam,  
but you could use a pot full 
of soil or a plant.)
Covering for the surface you 
are working on, such as a 
drop cloth or newspaper
Disposable gloves (optional)
Small wooden alphabet tiles 
(I used ˙" [1 cm] tiles.)
Industrial-strength adhesive 
Wire (I used 20-gauge 
beading wire.)
Assorted charms or buttons
Wire cutters
Permanent black marker 
(optional)
z
MATERIALS
* Note: Do not get the paint on your clothes. It will stain. If working 
outside, you can use spray paint specifically formulated for metal.  
If indoors, use a liquid form of acrylic paint. 

 63
GETTING FANCY . . . OR NOT
This project can be as involved or as 
simple as you choose. Leave the knife its 
original silver color and simply glue on 
letter tiles to make the word you’d like, or 
paint the handle and handwrite the words. 
Use wire, small charms, and beads to 
make more decorative knives and consider 
them jewelry for your plants!
G
R
O
W

64 Houseplant Party 
STEP 1 Paint your knife handle and allow it to dry, 
placing it in an upright position. If you’re applying 
outdoor sealer, do so at this time and let it dry. 
(Note: The outdoor sealer is not necessary, but it 
does help keep the paint from chipping off.)
STEP 2 Place your alphabet tiles on the handle first 
to ensure spacing and fit. Place a small amount of 
glue on each tile and attach it to the knife. Leave 
the knife lying flat until the glue is dry. This keeps 
the tiles from shifting or sliding off. (Note: Use 
caution when using the glue. Do not get it on your 
hands, clothes, or furniture.)
STEP 3 Cut a piece of wire approximately 24"  
(61 cm) long. Select a button or bead and string 
the wire through it until it is in the middle of the 
wire. Put a drop of glue on the button or bead and 
attach it to the handle of the knife right where the 
blade ends and the handle begins. Bring both ends 
of the wire to the back of the handle and twist it 
to keep the button in place. Let the glue dry. Now 
you are ready to crisscross the wire up the knife 
handle. Cross the ends over the front of the knife, 
bring them to the back again, and twist to secure. 
Bring the wire back to the front and crisscross it 
again. If you have written a word or glued tiles on, 
make sure your crosses occur between the letters. 
Twist the wire again on the back, and bend the 
leftover ends of the wire out to either side of  
the knife.
STEP 4 Twist one side of the extra wire around the 
handle of a small paintbrush to make a loop, add 
the charm or bead, and squeeze the loop together 
to secure the charm. 
1
3
2
4

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 65
A PAINT-ONLY OPTION
STEP 1 If you’d like to handwrite your own words on 
the plant stake, paint the knife handle a light color so 
your words will show up prominently. Let the paint 
dry completely and then handwrite your words with a 
permanent black marker. 
STEP 2 Draw an outline of the knife handle on paper 
and practice writing your word to make sure it fits 
before writing on the actual handle. 
STEP 3 After writing your words, apply the outdoor 
sealer, let it dry completely, and your stake is fin-
ished. If desired, add the wire and charms following 
the directions above.
2a
2b
5
6
STEP 5 Twist the excess wire around the paintbrush 
handle to make a spring-like decoration, and cut 
off the excess wire. (Twisting the wire around the 
paintbrush handle is for decorative purposes only; 
you could choose to attach the charm or bead and 
then cut off the excess wire.) 
STEP 6 Repeat the directions above on the wire 
from the opposite side, adding another bead or 
charm if you wish.
The fun of making these plant stakes is that you 
can use your imagination and creativity to make 
them your own, combining the paint, tiles, wire, 
and charms, or keeping them simple.

66 Houseplant Party 
WOODEN PLANT TRELLIS
Do you have a plant with long tendrils you don’t know what to do with?  
Are you tired of stepping on it or watching your cat bat at it? You could make a 
macramé hanger (see page 48) and suspend it from the ceiling. Or, you could 
use it to make a living wall. This project uses 
wooden dowels to build a trellis your plant will love 
scrambling through. It can be hung on the wall 
or even the ceiling. By using removable adhesive 
hooks, it’s possible to hang it anywhere and then 
remove it easily (carefully taking the plant off it 
first, of course!). This indoor trellis could also be 
inserted into a large container rather than being 
hung on a wall. If that’s how you’d like to use your 
trellis, use wooden dowels made of cedar that can 
better withstand the constant moisture in the soil 
without rotting. 
8 dowels 3' (91.5 cm) in 
length (I used ˚" x 36" 
[9.5 mm x 91.5 cm] square 
dowels purchased at my 
local hardware store.)
Small nails (I used  
#18 x ¬" [1.6 cm] wire 
nails.) Note: Use nails that 
are no longer than the 
thickness of the two dowels 
you are nailing together,  
or you’ll accidentally attach 
your trellis to the floor or  
work table. 
Hand saw
Sandpaper  
(medium or fine grit)
Hammer
Tape measure 
Painter’s tape 
Paint or stain (optional)
String or twine (optional)
Industrial adhesive or wood 
glue (optional)
Vining plant such as pothos, 
English ivy, or grape ivy 
Removable adhesive hooks 
or nails
z
MATERIALS

 67
WHERE TO BUILD
You’ll be hammering nails into wood, so 
construct this project on the floor or a 
sturdy table. Protect your work surface 
with a drop cloth or another material. 

68 Houseplant Party 
STEP 1 If the ends of your dowels are color-coded 
by size, use a piece of sandpaper to remove as 
much of the paint as possible. 
STEP 2 Cut the five horizontal cross bars 21∆" 
(54 cm) long. This length allows for a 5” (13 cm) 
overhang on each side and accounts for the  
˚" (9.5 mm) width of each vertical dowel. 
STEP 3 Lay three 36" (91.5 cm) dowels parallel to 
each other and 5" (13 cm) apart on your work 
surface. Make sure they are even at the top. Use 
small pieces of painter’s tape to firmly attach the 
three dowels to the surface you’re working on. 
This is a big help, especially when attaching the 
first horizontal dowel. 
STEP 4 Lay the first horizontal 21∆" (54 cm) dowel 
across the three vertical dowels 5" (13 cm) down 
from the top. The horizontal dowel will extend out 
5" (13 cm) on each side of the vertical dowels. I 
used a small amount of glue at each spot where 
the dowels intersect for added stability. It is not 
crucial but helpful. 
ADDING A SPLASH OF COLOR
You can make your trellis colorful with 
paint or stain, or you may choose to leave 
it natural and let the plant be the star of 
the show. I wrapped colorful twine around 
each intersection to add a small touch of 
color to my trellis.
4
5
3
1

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 69
STEP 5 Nail the dowels together in the three places 
where they cross each other. Make sure to center 
the nail as close as possible to the middle of the 
two intersecting dowels. Otherwise, the nail may 
come out the side or split the wood. Continue 
adding the remaining four dowels in 5" (13 cm) 
increments down the trellis’s length. 
STEP 6 Use colored twine to cover the nails and 
give the trellis the appearance of being tied 
together at the junctions. The twine isn’t neces-
sary, but it adds some color to the trellis without 
taking too much attention from the plant. Use 
different colors of twine on every intersection to 
make it really unique. 
STEP 7 Using the removable adhesive hooks, hang 
your trellis on the wall. Carefully weave the long 
plant tendrils through the openings, trying not  
to bend or break them. If you have a plant on a  
shelf, hang the trellis from the ceiling. No matter 
where you place your trellis or how you decorate 
it, I guarantee your plant will love climbing  
through it!
MORE OPTIONS
Taking into consideration the width 
of the dowels as you nail them 
together, there should be approx-
imately 9˙" (24 cm) left at the 
bottom of the trellis. You could cut  
4˙" (11 cm) off the vertical dowels 
before assembling if you’d like the 
trellis to be a perfect square. 
This trellis can be made any way 
you like. The only requirement is it 
must have openings for the plant 
to climb through. You could place 
your dowels in an abstract pattern, 
nailing them together wherever they 
cross, if you wish. 
6
7

70 Houseplant Party 
SWINGING PLANT HANGER
Have you been looking for a different kind of plant hanger to mix in 
with your macramé? This swinging hanger is a simple project to
make and a unique way to show off your 
plants. The juxtaposition of the wood, 
metal, and string is unique. You can  
create this hanger in less than an hour, 
and your plant can be displayed in no 
time. This is the perfect perch for an air  
plant or for a plant your kitty has been 
batting at. 
2 8" (20 cm) metal rings
3˙" to 4" (9 to 10 cm) wood 
round (A more oval-shaped 
piece of wood works best.)
Wooden large-hole  
macramé bead 
3 yards (2.7 m) cotton macramé 
cord or twine
4 small cup hooks (only 
need to be large enough to 
accommodate the metal rings)
Marker 
Ceiling hook 
Air plant or small potted plant
z
MATERIALS

 71

72 Houseplant Party 
STEP 1 Place the two rings together on your work 
surface. Fold the 3-yard (2.7-m) cord in half and 
bring one end through both rings, stopping with 
the center of the cord at the top of the rings.  
The two ends of the cord will be used separately. 
Using one end of the cord, wrap the cord tightly 
around the two rings for 1˙" (4 cm) along  
the rings.
STEP 2 Leaving the last wrap loose, bring the end 
of the cord around the rings, thread it through the 
loop, and pull tightly. This keeps the cord from 
loosening up on the rings. 
STEP 3 Using the other end of the cord, wrap the 
cord around the rings 11/2" (4 cm) the opposite 
way, again keeping the last wrap loose, threading 
the end of the cord through as before and pulling 
tightly. You now have 3" (7.5 cm) of wrapped cord 
across the top of the rings with the loose ends of 
the cord on each end.
STEP 4 Bring the two cords together and, using the 
large macramé bead, thread the bead over the  
two cord ends. Using the two cords, tie a knot at 
the level where you would like it to hang. Cut off 
1
2b
2a
4

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 73
MORE IDEAS
If you want to use larger rings to 
make a swing for a bigger container, 
double the rings on each side for 
added strength. Also, find cup hooks 
that are heavy duty and will be able 
to support the weight of the plant 
you are placing on the hanger. You 
don’t want the plant to bend the 
hooks and fall, injuring the plant 
and anything that may be under  
the hanger. 
This swinging plant shelf can be 
hung against a wall or from a ceiling 
hook. It’s perfect for an air plant 
or a small potted plant. The most 
important point is to choose a plant 
that will work in the light levels you 
have to offer it.
 
This is an easy, quick project to 
make, giving your plant a place to 
“hang” out and swing in the sun.
5
6
the excess cord or leave it to hang, in case you 
need to change the height of the hanger later. (If 
you would like a much longer hanger to accommo-
date a loft with tall ceilings, just use a longer piece 
of cord from the beginning.)
STEP 5 Now we are ready to add the wood round 
to the bottom of the rings. It works best if you 
first hold the wood round between the two rings 
to see where it is best to place the four hooks, as 
every piece of wood will be a different shape. The 
cup hooks need to be able to hook over the rings, 
so choose the place to attach them carefully. You 
may want to mark the spots with a marker. Screw 
the hooks into the side of the wood round, making 
sure all the hook openings are pointed down. 
STEP 6 Place the cup hooks over the rings, and 
you’re done! 

74 Houseplant Party 
KOKEDAMA 
String gardens have become popular on social media, but if you haven’t seen one 
yet, a string garden is a grouping of kokedama balls suspended from string to 
make a garden. In Japanese, kokedama means “moss ball.” It is simply a plant that 
has its roots wrapped in moss instead of being grown in a traditional container. 
Kokedama can be displayed by being hung or 
placed in a shallow dish. It’s an interesting and 
unique way to display houseplants. Any plant can 
be used for kokedama, but make sure the plant 
you want to use will grow well where you want  
to display it. Because the root system is only  
contained in moss, it will dry out more quickly 
than it would in a container. You’ll have to water 
your kokedama more often than your plants in 
containers, so using a plant in high light, where  
the plant would require more water, may not be 
the best choice. If you are someone who likes to 
water, go for it. Otherwise, choose a medium-  
to low-light plant to place in a lower light level 
so you won’t have to water as often. I hang a trio 
of these on my front porch every summer. They 
receive morning sun and are protected from the 
wind, so I only have to water them every few days. 
I take them down and soak them in a large pan of 
water until I know they have become completely 
moistened. They can drip on my porch, but when 
you water them inside, they’ll have to be left in the 
sink or shower until they’re done dripping. This 
is a project that is fun to do with friends. Gather 
all the supplies, have them bring a plant of their 
choosing, and make an evening of it!
Green sheet moss
4" to 6" (10 to 15 cm) plant 
Waxed cotton thread or  
colorful twine
Potting soil or bagged topsoil
Rubber gloves
Newspaper or plastic sheeting
z
MATERIALS


76 Houseplant Party 
THE BEST THREAD
Using twine or cotton thread that isn’t waxed or acrylic isn’t a good idea. Because your moss ball is 
wet most of the time, cotton or jute twine will rot much faster. Trust me, if your kokedama is hanging, 
it will end up on the floor. What a mess! Waxed or acrylic twine lasts for a long time. If you choose to 
display your ball in a shallow dish or on a stand, the thread choice isn't as crucial.
STEP 3 Make a firm ball of heavy potting soil  
(I use bagged topsoil) that doesn’t fall apart. Many 
kokedama sources call for something called akad-
ama soil. This is a clay soil that holds water and 
helps hold the ball shape. It’s often used in bonsai 
soils. Akadama isn’t readily available and is a bit 
costly. I have been making kokedama balls for years 
and have never had a problem with using topsoil. 
STEP 4 Squeeze the excess water out of the moss 
and lay out a circle of wet sheet moss large enough 
to cover the root ball. The green part of the moss 
1
2
4
3
6
5
STEP 1 Lay down newspapers or plastic to protect 
your work surface from mud and water. Dispos-
able gloves are a good idea to protect your hands. 
Soak your sheet moss in a bowl of water to make 
it easier to work with. Add water to the soil you are 
working with too, so that it holds together when 
you form the soil ball to wrap the roots with. 
STEP 2 Take your plant out of its pot and remove 
most of the potting medium from around the 
roots, being careful not to damage them or  
the plant. 

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 77
KOKEDAMA CARE
Check your kokedama ball often. It may dry out 
faster than your other plants. Make sure it is kept 
moist. Soak it in the sink, submerging the ball in 
water, and leave it there until the ball is completely 
moistened. Then, allow it to drain and hang it back 
up or return it to its bowl. 
Make one or make multiples to hang in a string 
garden in front of your window. Kokedama balls add 
a unique touch to your indoor garden and will mix 
well with your other hanging plants.
7
8
9
will be facing down so that when the root ball is 
wrapped, the green side will be showing. 
STEP 5 Split the soil ball in half and add one half to 
each side of the root ball of your chosen plant. 
STEP 6 Gently squeeze it back together, forming a 
sphere. 
STEP 7 Set your plant in the center of the moss 
and bring the sheet moss up around the root ball. 
Make sure the entire root ball is covered, but not 
the stems of the plant. 
STEP 8 Wrap your thread around the middle of the 
ball and tie a knot to secure it. Tuck the short end 
in as you start wrapping the long end. Wrap the 
ball, turning it as you go to make sure the ball is 
sufficiently covered. The twine should be wrapped 
snugly around the ball so that it doesn’t become 
too loose when the ball dries out, but not tight 
enough to damage the plant roots. 
STEP 9 If you’d like to hang your kokedama ball, 
cut three or four equal-length pieces of cord. Cut 
the cord long enough to be able to hang your 
kokedama at the height you would like it. Knot 
each string to the wrapping cords at different 
spots around the ball so that it hangs evenly. Knot 
the strings together toward the top, and you are 
ready to hang your kokedama.

78 Houseplant Party 
GRAFTING CACTI
A grafted cactus consists of two different cacti fused or grafted together to 
grow as one. Did you know that if you use a fast-growing cactus and graft a 
slow-growing cactus on top of it, the slow grower will grow faster? Isn’t nature 
amazing? Also, by grafting two cacti together you can make a new unique plant—
a form of botanical art. The process isn’t 
complicated but does require a high level of 
preciseness and cleanliness to make sure the cacti 
graft together well. An important point is that you 
must use two cacti, not a succulent and a cactus. 
It is easy to mistake many succulent plants (such 
as euphorbias, for example) for cacti because they 
have spines, but they won’t graft to a true cactus, 
so be aware of what you are purchasing for your 
grafted masterpiece.
GRAFTING SAFETY AND CLEANLINESS 
Because you’ll be cutting plants and using a very 
sharp instrument, there are a few important points 
to address before you start this project.
  •  This process is quite simple, but make sure  
you are careful when using a razor knife. Always 
cut away from your hands and body in case you  
slip. Hold the cacti with the tongs to prevent  
the spines from puncturing your skin. This is a  
perfect project to do with a friend as it’s much 
easier with a second set of hands.
  •  Do not use pruners or scissors. A knife or razor 
is best, because the plant needs to be cut with a 
back-and-forth motion for a clean, precise cut.  
Using pruners or scissors would pinch the end  
of the cut cactus. 
   
•  Don’t leave the “wound” or cut area open to the 
air for longer than a minute, and make sure you 
don’t touch the cut area or let it touch the surface 
you are working on. This would contaminate the 
surface of the cut. If that happens, cut a thin slice 
off the cactus again. Keeping the cuts clean and 
dirt-free is imperative. And between cuts, the knife 
should be sprayed or wiped with rubbing alcohol. 
Just make sure the excess alcohol is wiped off. 
Now that we have those important points out of the 
way, let’s get started!

2 cacti, one columnar and 
one round—monstrose or 
crested cacti work well
A sharp knife  
(I used a razor knife)
Alcohol for sterilization
Tongs to hold cacti  
while cutting
Rubber bands
Gloves (optional)
z
MATERIALS

80 Houseplant Party 
STEP 1 Choose two cacti that you think would look 
good grafted together. 
STEP 2 Carefully slice the top off the columnar 
cactus. This is called the stock plant. The stock 
plant keeps its roots and supports the plant being 
grafted to it. There is no exact place that this 
needs to be done. You decide how tall or short you 
want your grafted cactus to be. The stock plant 
cactus will only grow in girth; it will not grow taller, 
because the growing tip has been removed. 
STEP 3 The skin of the cactus needs to be cut 
around the edge, beveling it slightly. This needs to 
be done because the soft center of the cactus may 
sink in, which would leave the outside (skin) taller 
than the center, preventing the two cacti from 
attaching to each other; they need a good connec-
tion to graft together. The beveled edge allows the 
center to sink a bit and yet still have good connec-
tion with the cactus above. (Note: In the photos, 
I exaggerated the amount of edge to cut off, for 
clarity purposes. Only a small amount needs to be 
taken off.)
STEP 4 Before making your next cut, spray or wipe 
your knife with alcohol. 
STEP 5 Slice the round, crested, or montrose cactus 
off the root ball and immediately place it on the 
cut top of the columnar cactus, making sure to 
match up the growing points (5a). These should 
appear as round outlined areas in the center of 
the cut area.The top plant being grafted onto the 
bottom stock plant is called the scion (5b). 
1
2
3
5a
6
5b

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 81
STEP 6 Carefully press the scion down to get a firm connec-
tion between the two cacti. Use rubber bands to hold the 
two cacti together. This is where a friend’s help comes in 
handy. Stretch the rubber bands around the pot and cacti 
while holding them together. If you are doing it alone, tape 
the rubber bands to the bottom and sides of the container. 
Then it is easy to grab the bands and bring them up around 
the top of the cacti without them coming off. This can be 
challenging, especially with spines. 
STEP 7 If there is any shrinkage of the cacti as the cut ends 
callus over, the rubber band will contract with the plants, 
keeping them in tight contact with each other. Now it’s all 
about patience. 
AFTER-GRAFTING CARE 
The newly grafted plant needs to be in bright light to 
full sun, and it shouldn’t be moved excessively. The 
two cacti need to fuse together, and moving them too 
much could break the connection. 
It won’t take long for them to fuse together and start 
growing. Within 4 to 6 weeks, the stock and scion 
will be growing as one. 
4
7

82 Houseplant Party 
BONSAI PLANTING AND PRUNING
Bonsai is an age-old Japanese art form that involves growing plants 
in small containers and pruning and training them to look like they 
are old, full-grown trees. Often the plants 
used are hardy trees that require a winter 
rest—such as maples or beeches—and 
take many, many years to train. If, on the 
other hand, you choose a houseplant to 
train as a bonsai, you can achieve results 
much quicker. Let’s go through the pro-
cess step by step, from buying the plant 
to its long-term care. 
Suitable houseplant, preferably 
in a 4", 6", or 8" (10, 15, or  
20 cm) container. I like using 
ficus or Schefflera arboricola 
(dwarf umbrella tree). Look for 
a trunk that has some character. 
Bonsai soil 
Aluminum bonsai wire,  
2 to 2.5 gauge
Sharp pruners or scissors
Bonsai pot in the appropriate 
size for your plant 
7-hole mesh plastic canvas
Chopstick (pencil will work)
z
MATERIALS

 83

84 Houseplant Party 
STEP 1 Study your plant and decide which side 
you would like to be the front. Find the side 
that is “greeting” you. Maybe it leans a bit, or 
the branches are reaching out toward the front. 
Every plant is different. You also need to decide 
which shape you’d like to eventually end up with, 
because your plant must be trained in this shape 
from the beginning.
STEP 2 After you have studied your plant and 
decided which form you want your tree to become, 
it’s time to trim your tree. A good rule of thumb is 
to take off any branches that point straight up or 
straight down. If the trunk of your plant is thin, a 
shorter tree makes the trunk look larger. The fun 
part of this process is that it’s all up to you. You 
decide what your tree will eventually look like by 
the way it is trimmed and wired.
STEP 3 That leads us to the next step: wiring the 
tree. This is when you’ll determine the final form 
of the tree. Starting with the bottom branches, 
cut your wire long enough to go from the tip of 
one branch, around the main trunk, and up the 
opposite branch. At this time, you can remove all 
the leaves to see the branches better. This will also 
help the leaves to regrow in a smaller size, more 
proportionate to the size of the tree. Usually there 
are branches across from one another, and you 
can use one piece of wire to train both branches 
simultaneously. By going around the trunk, there’s 
more stability. Wrap your branches carefully, mak-
ing sure the wire isn’t too tight, but firm enough 
to hold the branch the way you’d like it to grow. 
Continue wiring the branches until you reach the 
top of the tree. If the branches are thin on top, you 
may have to use a smaller wire than you used on 
the bottom branches. Look down at the tree from 
the top. There should be no branches over top of 
lower branches. It should look like the spokes of a 
wheel. Check the wire often to make sure the plant 
isn’t being scarred by a too-tight wire. Remove the 
wire just before it starts cutting into the branch, 
usually after a few months. If your branch moves 
back, it needs to be rewired. 
STEP 4 Get your pot ready for the tree. Cut two 
small squares of the 7-hole mesh and cover the 
drainage holes in the bottom of the pot. This 
ensures that the bonsai soil doesn’t wash out of 
the holes. Cut a 10" to 12" (25 to 30 cm) piece of 
wire and thread it through the drainage holes so 
3a
2
3b
4a

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 85
that the ends of the wire come up into the pot. 
This wire will be used to secure the plant into  
the pot. 
STEP 5 Now it’s time to take the plant out of its 
nursery pot and get it ready to transition to its 
bonsai pot. This process may seem harsh, but 
it won’t hurt the plant. Remove the plant from 
its pot and remove all the soil from the roots. 
A chopstick works well to tease the roots from 
the soil. Rinse the roots in water to remove any 
remaining potting soil. Because it’s going into a 
5
6
4b
much shallower pot than the one it came out of, 
the roots will need to be trimmed. Trim them just 
enough to fit into the pot. Position the plant the 
way you want it, then cross two ends of the wire 
over the root ball and twist the ends together to 
hold the plant in the pot. 
STEP 6 Once your bonsai is in place, add bonsai soil 
to the pot, filling in between all the roots. Use the 
chopstick to work the bonsai soil down into the 
roots. Water it well. 
CARING FOR YOUR BONSAI
Place your finished bonsai in a bright window, such as 
an eastern exposure. Because the pot is shallow, this 
special tree needs water more often than a regular 
houseplant. The rule is to check the pot every day, but 
not necessarily water it every day. When the soil mix 
has turned a light color and is lightweight, the plant 
probably needs a drink. Make sure to water the entire 
root ball to evenly distribute the water to all the roots.
For the long term, your plant will need to be trimmed 
regularly; the frequency depends on the plant. It will 
need to be trimmed at least once a year. Fertilize your bonsai once a month while it’s actively growing in the 
spring and summer. Use a balanced fertilizer, such as 20-20-20. The plant will normally need to be root-
pruned and repotted with fresh soil every 3 to 4 years.

86 Houseplant Party 
SHADOW BOX TRIO FOR AIR PLANTS 
This trio of shadow box shelves is a perfect accent for any wall in 
your bedroom, living room, or bathroom. With a few simple steps
and the right tools and supplies, you  
can make these shadow boxes in a short 
amount of time. The boxes have twine 
strung randomly throughout the frame, 
making places for air plants (tillandsias) 
to hang out. You can paint the boxes to 
match your décor or stain them. Use your 
imagination and have fun decorating  
your shadow boxes! 
1" x 4" x 8'  
(2.5 cm x 10 cm x 2.4 m) 
pine board 
Hand saw 
Hammer
Square
Nails (I used wire nails  
#16 x 1˙" [3.8 cm].)
12 small eye screws
Twine, yarn, or string  
of your choice 
Paint or stain (optional)
Pencil
6 1ƒ" (4.5 cm) sawtooth 
picture hangers
6 clear rubber bumper pads 
Level
Air plants
z
MATERIALS

87

88 Houseplant Party 
arm of the U. After nailing the final edge together, 
you now have a box. Repeat the directions above 
twice more to create two more boxes. 
STEP 4 Paint or stain your boxes the color of your 
choice, or leave them natural. 
STEP 5 Fasten two sawtooth picture hangers to the 
back edge of the top board of each box, placing 
one on each end. If you would like to hang your 
shelves in a diamond pattern, attach one hanger 
diagonally across a corner of the box.
STEP 6 Stick two rubber bumper pads on the 
bottom back edge of the box, one on each end 
to ensure the box is level against the wall. These 
bumpers protect the wall, but they also compen-
sate for the depth of the picture hangers. There 
will be a slight space between the box and the wall 
STEP 1 Using the square, draw straight cutting 
lines across the 1" x 4" x 8' (2.5 cm x 10 cm  
x 2.4 m) board in 7-inch (18-cm) increments. 
Using a square ensures your lines are straight 
when you draw the cutting lines. If the lines aren’t 
straight, your box will not be square. For three 
boxes, cut twelve boards of the same length. 
STEP 2 Start by nailing one board to the end of 
another board, with one board overlapping the 
other. Use at least two nails on each end. Turn 
clockwise so your two boards form a backwards  
L shape. 
STEP 3 Nail the next board on top of the backwards 
L to form a sideways U, again overlapping the two 
boards. Turn the sideways U clockwise so it looks 
like a U, and again nail a board on top of the right 
2
5
3
6

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 89
PLACEMENT OF THE BOXES
Your air plant shadow boxes need to be hung where they will 
receive some bright light from a window. Hanging your boxes 
next to the window on the same wall might not be the best place 
for them, because they will never get any direct light. Instead, 
hang them on the wall across from the window (if it isn’t too far 
away) or on the neighboring wall so when the sun shines in, it 
gives the plants some light. If you don’t have enough light from 
the windows, a small clip-on LED light is the perfect solution. 
Remember, your air plants have to be removed and soaked 
often. Enjoy your living work of wall art! 
because of the hangers and bumper pads. Use a 
level when hanging the boxes if you want them 
hung straight.  
STEP 7 To make a web inside the box for your air 
plants, screw three eye screws randomly into each 
interior side of the box. 
STEP 8 Tie your twine to the first eye screw and 
then string it randomly between the other eleven 
eye screws to make a web-like design, knotting it 
to the last hook. Trim the ends of the twine. 
STEP 9 Place your air plants in the openings  
created by the twine. 
7
8

90 Houseplant Party 
PLANT SHELVES
These shelves are fun to make and even more fun to decorate. You may have a 
collection of small items that would be perfect on these shelves, side by side with 
your plants. Let your personality show, using tiny gnomes, gems, an owl collection, 
or whatever. These box shelves are made in three 
sizes; they can be hung together in a pleasing 
arrangement or on different walls individually. You 
could also make them all the same size, if you’d 
like. When you’re finished building the shelves, 
paint or stain them, or leave them natural. It’s all 
up to you! When decorating them, choose plants 
that work with the amount of light you have to 
offer. If the light you have isn’t enough for your 
plants, purchase a small clip-on or hanging grow 
light to add light to your shelf. 
z
MATERIALS
12 feet (3.7 m)  
of 1" x 4"  
(2.5 cm x 10 cm) 
wood (I used 
cedar.)
Hand saw (A 
power saw works 
better if you have 
one.)
Nails (I used 
wire nails  
#16 x 1˙"  
[3.8 cm].)
Hammer 
Paint or stain 
(optional)
Pencil
Square
6 1ƒ" (4.5 cm) 
sawtooth picture 
hangers
6 clear rubber 
bumper pads
Level
Sandpaper in 
different grits 
(coarse, medium, 
and fine)
Small plants and 
collectibles 
Small clip-on 
LED grow light 
(optional)

 91
PAINT, STAIN, OR NATURAL
Paint or stain your plant shelves any  
color you choose, or leave them natural.  
If you decide to paint or stain, allow them 
to dry completely before hanging and 
adding plants. 

92 Houseplant Party 
Using the square ensures that your lines are 
straight when you draw them. If the lines are not 
straight, the board will not be straight when it  
is cut. This would lead to an odd-shaped shelf,  
not a square. Using the sandpaper, sand the 
boards to remove any rough edges. Start with 
the coarse grit, switch to the medium, and then 
use the fine grit for a smooth, no-sliver finish. 
 
 
Assembling the shelves:
STEP 2 Using the two 12" (30 cm) and 10©" (26 cm) 
pieces and two nails per end, attach the two 
smaller pieces to the 12" (30 cm) piece to form 
a U shape. Make sure the 12" (30 cm) board is 
placed on top of the two 10©" (26 cm) boards. 
Then attach the remaining 12" (30 cm) piece to 
the bottom of the two 10©"(26 cm) pieces to  
form a square. Repeat the process using the two 
10" (25 cm) and 8©" (21 cm) pieces, and the  
two 8" (20 cm) and 6©" (16 cm) pieces. You  
now have three square box shelves. 
2
3
Cutting the boards:
STEP 1 Using the square, draw straight lines (cutting lines) across the 1" x 4" (2.5 cm x 10 cm)  
boards as follows:
For the large box shelf:
2 12" (30 cm)
2 10©" (26 cm)
For the medium box shelf:
2 10" (25 cm)
2 8©" (21 cm)
For the small box shelf: 
2 8" (20 cm)
2 6©" (16 cm)
IMPORTANT TIPS FOR  
BOARD CUTTING
The three shelves are each a 
different size, so be careful when 
cutting the boards. “Measure 
twice, cut once,” is an excellent 
mantra to keep in mind. Unlike 
the air plant frames (page 86), 
the sides are different sizes for 
each of these shelves. Each 
one has two long sides and two 
shorter sides. The two long boards 
will be on the top and bottom, 
and the two shorter boards will 
be the sides of the shelf. 

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 93
4
Finishing the shelves:
STEP 3 Fasten two 1ƒ" (4.5 cm) sawtooth 
picture hangers to the top edge of the top 
board on the back of the shelf, placing 
one on each end. 
STEP 4 Stick two rubber bumper pads to 
the bottom edge of the bottom board on 
the back of the shelf. This ensures the 
shelf will sit level against the wall. The 
bumpers protect the wall and compen-
sate for the depth of the picture hangers.
These shelves are perfect for adding 
some greenery to any room and display-
ing a few of your favorite things. 
PLACEMENT OF THE BOXES
Before hanging the shelves, consider the 
light in the room where you’re hanging 
them. They need to be hung where they’ll 
receive some bright light from the win-
dows. If you hang your boxes right next 
to the windows on the same wall, they 
most likely won’t receive any direct light. 
Instead, hang them on the wall across 
from the window (if it isn’t too far away) 
or on the neighboring wall where some 
sun may reach them. Hang the shelves in 
any pattern you choose, using a level when 
hanging them so that items won’t slide 
off. If you find your plants aren’t receiving 
enough light, you can purchase a small 
clip-on or hanging grow light that would 
boost the light your plants are receiving. 
PICKING THE BEST PLANTS 
Use plants in 2" to 4" (5 to 10 cm) pots so they fit easily on 
the shelf. Make sure to use saucers under your plants to catch 
any excess water so it doesn’t run down the wall. You can also 
take your plants to the sink to water them, let them drain, and 
return them to the shelves. Check the plants often for water 
needs. Since they may only receive light from one direction, 
turn your plants often to make sure they grow symmetrically.

94 Houseplant Party 
PROPAGATING PLANTS BY AIR LAYERING
If you have a plant so tall that it is hitting the ceiling, or one that has greenery only 
at the top, with bare, straggly stems beneath, then this is the project for you. Many 
people throw away overgrown or unsightly plants, not knowing they could easily 
save the plant with a simple propagating technique called air layering (or air
propagation). Instead of taking a cutting and root-
ing it in water or soil, this technique takes place 
directly on the plant, typically on the main stem or 
a side shoot. It’s often used on plants with woody 
stems, such as citrus, fiddle-leaf fig, dracaena, 
and rubber plant, to name just a few. Many plants 
that we use as houseplants become large trees 
in their natural habitats and have bark-covered 
stems. This tropical bark isn’t as thick as an oak 
or a maple, but it’s woodier than soft-stemmed 
houseplants such as aglaonema or dieffenbachia. 
While soft-stemmed plants are easy to propagate 
in moist potting medium or water, woody cuttings 
are tough to start in water or soil. Air layering 
works perfectly for these tougher-skinned plants. 
However, you’ll need a bit of patience. It takes a 
few months for the roots to form. 
A plant that needs to be 
shortened or has a bare stem
Sphagnum moss (often sold  
as orchid moss)
Plastic food wrap
Sharp knife
Twine
Toothpick, matchstick, or 
bamboo skewer
Patience
An appropriately sized pot  
and potting medium for the 
newly rooted plant
Disposable gloves
z
MATERIALS

 95
PICKING THE 
RIGHT SPOT
Before you begin, deter-
mine where on the trunk 
of your plant you’d like to 
perform the air-layering 
process. If the tree is 
hitting the ceiling, you 
may want to only drop 
down 1 to 2 feet (30 to 
60 cm) from the top. 
Where you choose to air 
layer determines the final 
height of the plant. 

96 Houseplant Party 
STEP 1 Soak your sphagnum moss in a bowl of 
water—it’s best to work with moistened moss. A 
large handful of moss is all that’s needed, and you 
may want to wear disposable gloves. 
STEP 2 Use a sharp knife to carefully slice with an 
upward motion, approximately one-third to halfway 
through the stem of the plant at the chosen spot. 
Do this carefully, making sure to not cut yourself 
or cut all the way through the stem. 
2
3
WHAT CAN YOU DO WITH THE MOTHER PLANT? 
If you air layer a single-stemmed plant, you can 
throw the mother plant away or cut it down to the 
soil line and see if it sends out new growth from 
the bottom. Plants have a will to live, and with a 
healthy root system still intact, quite often they will 
send out new shoots. Now you have two plants! 
If your plant has multiple stems and you only 
layered one of them, you could give the mother 
plant to a friend with higher ceilings. A better 
idea is to invite friends over, and each person 
could air layer a stem with you. Have them write 
their name on the plastic wrap so they know 
which stem is theirs. Later, after the roots have 
formed, have another gathering where each 
person pots up their own plant. It could be an 
air-layering party! And then a few months later, 
a potting party! Don’t feel bad if you have to 
discard the original plant, though. You saved 
what you could, and the plant will continue living 
in your home, just in a smaller form. You made a 
new life for your plant!
STEP 3 Wedge the toothpick or matchstick into the 
cut to keep it open. Trim the ends of the toothpick 
even with the edges of the plant stem. 
STEP 4 Wrap the moistened moss around the cut 
area. The moss ball should be about the size of an 
orange or a bit larger when you’re done, depend-
ing on the thickness of the stem being air layered. 

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 97
STEP 5 Use a piece of plastic wrap to enclose the 
moss completely. Tie the twine around the stem of 
the plant at the top and bottom of the plastic wrap 
to keep it closed and the moisture inside. Make 
sure the twine isn’t too tight, which may damage 
the stem. 
STEP 6 The key to this process is to make sure the 
moss stays moistened. Untie the top twine often 
to check the moss for moisture. If it feels dry, add 
a small amount of water and tie it back up. Keep 
checking the moss, and eventually you’ll see roots 
developing. When the roots have filled the moss 
inside the plastic wrap, it’s time to slice the newly 
rooted plant from the stem of the mother plant 
(see sidebar at left). 
4
5
PLANTING YOUR  
NEW PLANT
Remove the plastic wrap but 
don’t try to remove the moss 
because it may damage the 
roots. Cut the stem right below 
the newly formed roots, and pot 
it up in an appropriately sized 
container. Your container may be 
disproportionate to the size of 
the plant, but it’s imperative to 
choose a container that fits the 
root ball with a bit of room to 
spare. If you use a container that 
is too large, yet proportionate to 
the size of the plant, the roots 
may rot from being surrounded 
by too much wet potting 
medium. Check the pot often, 
and when the roots have taken 
off and filled the pot, it’s safe to 
up-pot to the next size pot. 

98 Houseplant Party 
TAKING LEAF AND STEM CUTTINGS
Swapping houseplants with friends is a lot of fun. Thankfully, you don’t have to 
give up your favorite plant in order to get a new one to try. Instead, learn how to 
propagate your plant babies and you’ll always have plenty to share with friends
and family. Propagation makes duplicates of your 
plants, and stem and leaf cuttings are among 
the easiest forms of plant propagation. It can 
be done with all sorts of houseplants, and it’s a 
simple process. Some plants, such as succulents 
and African violets, are easy to propagate using 
just one leaf. Vining plants and those with long 
stems are easy to propagate from a stem cutting. 
Not only does the process make more plants, 
but it also improves the look of the original plant, 
keeping it from becoming overgrown. It’s easy, but 
it does take a little courage. You’re going to have 
to snap leaves off, cut stems, and behead plants. 
I used to be afraid of doing these things too. I was 
concerned I was hurting the plant or might kill it 
altogether. Don’t worry. I’ll walk you through the 
steps and you will have more plants to share in no 
time flat. 
Plants to be propagated  
or revitalized
Sharp knife or pruners
Potting soil
Containers
Patience
z
MATERIALS

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 99

100 Houseplant Party 
STEP 2 Fill a pot with moistened potting soil. It can 
be large or small, depending on how many leaves 
you have to propagate.
STEP 3 Lay the leaves on top of the moist (but not 
wet) potting mix and forget about them for a bit. 
Do not stick the end of the leaf into the medium 
because the “snapped” end needs to heal or callus 
over before it can be planted. If they are freshly 
cut and inserted into moist medium, they will rot. 
By simply laying them on top of the soil, the ends 
will heal, and they will send out roots when they 
are ready.  
Instructions for propagating succulent leaves 
STEP 1 Begin with a succulent, such as an eche-
veria (shown) or aeonium. “Snap” a few leaves 
off the bottom of the plant. To do this, carefully 
ease your finger in between the rows of leaves 
and apply pressure to the leaf close to the stem 
of the plant, pushing in a downward motion. It 
should snap right off. Another way to do the same 
thing is to lightly hold the leaf between your finger 
and thumb and move it to the right or left until 
it breaks off. The plant needs to be well watered 
and the leaves turgid (firm) for this to work. If the 
leaves are not firm, they may not snap off easily 
and you may damage the plant. 
PATENTED PLANTS 
If a plant is patented, it may not be reproduced through propagation and sold. The plant tag will  
indicate if it’s a patented plant.
1

15 Houseplant Projects and Crafts 101
STEP 4 Roots will soon develop from the cut end of 
the leaves and grow down into the potting soil. A 
tiny new plant will appear at the base of each leaf 
in a few weeks. 
STEP 5 When they’re a good size, you can pot each 
little baby plant into its own pot. Carefully remove 
the mother leaf if it hasn’t already rotted away. 
There is nothing cuter than a tiny succulent! 
 
3
2
4a
4b

102 Houseplant Party 
Instructions for stem cuttings 
STEP 1 Cut off a 4" to 6" (10 to 15 cm)–long piece 
of vine or plant stem, making sure the piece has at 
least one set of leaves on it. 
STEP 2 Insert the cut end of the stem into a clean 
pot of moist potting soil. You can dip the cut stem 
in plant rooting hormone prior to sticking it into 
the soil. This isn’t necessary for most houseplants, 
but rooting hormone can improve your chances 
of success and speed the growth of new roots. 
Alternatively, insert the cut end of the stem cutting 
into a container of water. 
STEP 3 If you’re growing in soil, keep the cutting 
well-watered, but not sopping wet, and it should 
form roots in 4 to 6 weeks. Some of the original 
leaves may turn yellow and fall off. Don’t worry; 
new shoots will form once roots are established. 
If you’re rooting your cutting in water, when you 
see roots forming through the glass a few weeks 
later, you then can plant the rooted cutting into a 
container of potting mix.
PROPAGATING TOO-TALL SUCCULENTS 
Without enough light, succulents often develop long, leggy, bare stems. 
There is a solution. You can use one leaf to make a new plant (see page 
100), or you can cut the top of the plant off (behead it!) and use it to 
start a new plant. Allow the cut to callus over for a few days by leaving it 
sit on the kitchen counter or anywhere that’s shielded from blasting sun 
(you can leave it longer with no problem). Then insert the bottom end of 
the cut-off plant into a container of moist potting mix. The good news  
is the bare stem left behind on the mother plant may also send out a 
new little plant(s). This can be removed later and potted up individually, 
or it can be left to grow as-is.

Taking Care of Your Houseplants 103
Instructions for leaf cuttings
REX OR RHIZOMATOUS BEGONIA: Remove the leaf  
from the petiole. Cut the leaf into a wedge shape 
with the main middle vein intact and stick the 
point of the wedge into moist potting medium.  
A new plant will grow in a few weeks. 
CANE-TYPE BEGONIA: A vegetative node is needed 
for stem cutting. Place the stem cutting in moist 
potting medium. Keep it moist while the roots and 
baby plants are being formed.  
AFRICAN VIOLET: All you need is one leaf with 
approximately 1" (2.5 cm) of the petiole left. Cut 
the leaf petiole on a slant to allow for more root 
growing area and insert on an angle into a small 
container of moist potting medium. Use a stick (or 
pencil) to make a hole first so you don’t damage 
the petiole when inserting it. 
I cover the leaf with a clear deli container to main-
tain a high, consistent humidity level. This isn’t 
necessary if the potting medium is kept moist. 
New plants (yes, more than one violet) should 
appear in a few weeks. 
When your begonia and African violets are 1" or  
2" (2.5 or 5 cm) high, transplant them into new 
containers.

104 Houseplant Party 


106 Houseplant Party 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I have always been what many call a “crafty” person. I know how to knit, crochet, 
macramé, cross-stitch, embroider, and more, and I enjoy creating projects with 
all these mediums. So, I thought it would be easy to write a book with projects. It 
wasn’t as easy as I thought. Writing clear, concise, understandable step-by-step 
instructions was challenging. But with the help of an amazing team of people, it 
became easy, fun, and a great learning experience.

 107
I’m going to attempt to thank all the wonderful 
people who listened, gave me advice, and helped 
so much with this book. First, a huge shout out 
to Heather Saunders, whose expert advice on 
each and every project was immeasurable. Your 
input and photos were priceless! To her part-
ner Robert Brusseau, whose help with building 
projects, hanging plants, backdrops, and shelves, 
and acting as design coordinator with Heather 
was amazing. Thank you also to Robert and 
Heather for opening their home and garage for 
photo shoots. Thank you to all the models in the 
book, Hayley Steinkopf Bonafede, Kelly Ardito, Joy 
Crocker, TJ Williams, Christina Quirk, Lily Stotz, 
Serena Pham, and Tara Boinpally. Thank you also 
to Harrison Saunders and Kelly Ardito for open-
ing their home for a photo shoot, and to Kelly for 
her photo design assistance. Thank you again to 
Danielle Dirks for the use of her Detroit Airbnb loft 
for photos. To my brother Brian Eldred for his help 
making sure the wood projects made sense and 
the measurements were correct. To my sister-in-
law Beth Eldred for her help with the macramé 
patterns, and to her and my brother Keith for 
taking such amazing care of my mother and giving 
me peace of mind. What a blessing to me and our 
entire family. To Kurt Smith of The Flower Market 
for his help with the bonsai project and for lending 
materials. To Michael D’Arcangelo of MD Botan-
icals and the members of the Michigan Cactus 
and Succulent Society for all their expertise with 
grafting cacti. To Rachel Nisch of Graye’s Green-
house for her help with the plants for the stem and 
leaf cuttings. To my best friend Jeanine Merritt for 
her editing advice, endless support, and listening 
ear. Thank you! To my close friends Colleen Bur-
ton, Julie Smith, Susan Martin, and Jean Mancos 
for their support and prayers, and to my church 
family as well. To my good friend Nancy Szerlag 
for her editing help and advice. To the team at 
Cool Springs Press who have been exceptional, 
especially Jessica Walliser, my acquisitions editor, 
who came up with many of the project ideas. She 
has been generous with her advice and was a true 
pleasure to work with! 
As always, I give all the thanks to God, for through 
him all things are possible. And last, but never 
least, to my biggest cheerleader and support, 
my husband John. He is so understanding of the 
boxes of plants, projects, and stuff everywhere 
while I am writing (and when I’m not). I love you! 
Thank you to all my friends and family who have 
been here for me as I continue along this new path 
in life.  

108 Houseplant Party 
to her grandma’s house just down the road, where 
watching her tend to her houseplants, especially 
African violets, led to a passion for indoor plants. 
Lisa has been featured in Better Homes and 
Gardens, Real Simple, and First for Women mag-
azines. She has also written articles for HGTV-
gardens.com and is featured in the houseplant 
section of Allan Armitage’s Greatest Perennials 
and Annuals app. Being an avid outdoor gardener 
as well, she writes a regular column for Michigan 
Gardener magazine. She lectures extensively 
around the country, spreading the word about the 
importance of houseplants and how to care for 
them, and has been interviewed online, in print, 
on radio, and for podcasts such as On the Ledge, 
Bloom and Grow Radio, and Epic Gardening.
Lisa is a member of numerous plant groups, 
including the Town and Country African Violet 
Society, the Michigan Cactus and Succulent Soci-
ety, the Southeast Bromeliad Society, the Hardy 
Plant Society, and Garden Communicators. Plant 
societies are where likeminded people share their 
hands-on, personal plant knowledge with others. 
Join one! 
Lisa cares for hundreds of houseplants in her 
home in the Detroit area, where she lives with her 
husband, John, and Henry, their cat. She spends 
as much time as she can with her two daugh-
ters, Hayley and Chelsea, and their families. She 
loves to visit conservatories and gardens during 
her travels, and she volunteers at the Belle Isle 
Anna Scripps Whitcomb Conservatory in Detroit. 
Lisa feels that every home, office, apartment, and 
rental space should have a living houseplant (or 
hundreds). There is a houseplant for every situa-
tion, whether with natural light or electric. Anyone 
can have a green thumb, because we all need a 
little green in our lives!
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Lisa is The Houseplant Guru and 
features all things houseplants on her 
website www.thehouseplantguru.com. 
She is the author of Houseplants: The 
Complete Guide to Choosing, Growing, and 
Caring for Indoor Plants, and Grow in the 
Dark: How to Choose and Care for Low-
Light Houseplants. She grew up in rural 
mid-Michigan immersed every day in 
nature. She spent many days bicycling

 109
INDEX
A 
Aeschynanthus, 61
African violet potting mix, 15
African violets, propagating, 103
Aglaonema, 61, 94
Air layering, propagating plants 
by, 94–97
Air plants, 12, 70, 86–89
Airplane plant, 24
Akadama soil, 76
Algae, marimo balls and, 40, 42
Aloe vera, 13
Alphabet tiles, on plant stakes, 
62–65
Aquatic Garden, Marimo Ball, 
40–43
B
Barbadensis (aloe vera), 13
Bead(s)
macramé plant hanger, 48–51
swinging plant hanger, 70–73
Beaucarnea recurvata, 20
Begonias, propagating, 103
Betta fish, 43
Bonsai, 82–85
Bottle ponytail, 20
Brown leaf tips, 24
Burns, plant for, 13
C
Cacti plants, 32, 78–81
Carnivorous plants (Venus fly-
trap), 26
Chlorophytum comosum, 24
Cissus plants, 61
Citrus plants, 94
Container(s). See also Pots
drilling holes for drainage in, 
33
for Zen garden, 54
glass, for marimo ball aquatic 
garden, 40–43
shadow box for air plants, 
86–89
watering plants in decorative, 
32
Crassula ovata ‘Gollum,’ 22
Cryptocoryne plant, 40–43
Cutting back leaves, 37
D
Decorative containers, 32, 54
Devil’s ivy, 21
Dionaea muscipula, 26
Dowels
checking the need for water 
with, 34
for wooden plant trellis, 66–69
Dracaena, 94
Dracaena sanderiana, 15
Drainage holes, pots with, 32, 
33, 54, 84
Drainage, pot, 37
Dwarf umbrella tree, 82
E
Elephant foot, 20
English ivy, 61, 66
Epipremnum aureum, 21
ET’s fingers, 22
F
Fairy washboard, 14
Feng shui, 16, 17
Fertilizer, 34–35
about, 34–35
flowering and, 37
for bonsai, 85
marimo balls and, 42
meaning of numbers, 35
organic, 35
Ficus, 82
Fiddle-leaf plants, 94
Fish emulsion, 35
Flowers and flowering plants
aloe vera plant, 13
fairy washboard, 14
goldfish plant, 15
how to improve, 37
money tree, 17
peace lily, 19
Friendship plant, 18
Fruit salad plant, 25
G
Gesneriad family, 14
Glass containers, for marimo 
ball aquatic garden, 40–43
Goldfish plant, 15
Grafting cacti, 78–81
Grape ivy, 61, 66
Grooming plants, 37
H
Haworthiopsis limifolia, 14
Haworthiopsis plant, in Zen  
Garden, 54–57
Heart leaf philodendron, 61
Hobbit’s pipe, 22
Hooks
ceiling, 47, 53
for swinging plant hanger, 
70–73
for wooden plant trellis, 66–69
Humidity
for money tree, 17
for Venus flytrap, 26
how to raise, 36
Hydroponic plant (lucky bam-
boo), 16
J
Jade plant, 22
K
Knots. See also Macramé
for kokedama, 77
for t-shirt plant hanger, 46–47
Kokedama, 74–77

110 Houseplant Party 
L
Leaf cuttings, 98, 103
Light, 30
aloe vera, 13
fairy washboard, 14
for air plants, 12
for spider plants, 24
for Zen garden, 54
friendship plant, 18
goldfish plant, 14
improving, 36
lucky bamboo, 16
marimo ball aquatic garden, 
40, 42
money tree, 17
monstera plants, 25
peace lily, 19
placement of shadow boxes 
and, 89
plant shelves and, 40
ponytail palm, 20
pothos, 20
Shrek’s ears, 22
snake plant, 23
spider plant, 24
Venus flytrap, 26
watering and, 74
ZZ plant, 27
Lucky bamboo, 16, 61
M
Macramé
knots used for, 49
macramé plant hanger, 48–53
Macramé cord/twine, for swinging 
plant hanger, 70–73
Marimo ball aquatic garden, 
40–43
Medicine plant (aloe vera), 13
Metal rings
macramé plant hanger, 48–53
swinging plant hanger, 70–73
Money (friendship) plant, 18
Money tree, 17
Monstera plant Monstera  
deliciosa, 25
N
Names of plants, on plant 
stakes, 62–65
Nematanthus gregarious, 14
Nitrogen, in fertilizer, 35
O
Organic fertilizer, 35
P
Pachira aquatica, 15
Pancake (friendship) plant, 18
Patented plants, propagating, 
100
Peace lily, 19
Pellionia, 61
Phosphorous, in fertilizer, 35
Photosynthesis, 30
Pilea peperomioides, 18
Plant care, 8. See also Light; 
Watering
bonsai, 85
grafted cacti, 81
kokedama, 77
overview, 30–37
Zen garden, 56
Plant fertilizer, 34–35
Plant hangers
macramé, 48–53
recycled t-shirt plant hanger, 
44–47
swinging, 70–73
Plant stakes, 62–65
Plant trellis, 66–69
Plants, healthy benefits of, 8
Ponytail palm, 20
Potassium, in fertilizer, 35
Pothos plants, 21, 58, 61, 66
Pots
drainage holes in, 32, 33
for Shrek’s ears, 22
gravel or pot shards in bottom 
of, 37
improving drainage of, 37
in a decorative container, 32
succulent plants, 22
watering and types of, 32
with a saucer, 32
Potting mix, 14
Potting soil
for aloe vera, 13
for goldfish plant, 15
for kokedama, 76
for Venus flytrap, 26
Propagating
by air layering, 94–97
monstera plant, 25
pothos plants, 21
snake plant, 23
spider plants, 24
succulents, 102
taking leaf and stem cuttings, 
98–103
test tube propagator project, 
58–61
ZZ plant, 27
Purple passion vine, 61
R
Recycled t-shirt plant hanger, 
44–47
Recycled table knives plant 
stakes, 62–65
Rhizomes, 23, 27
Rubber plant, 94
S
Sansevieria trifasciata ‘Bantel’s 
Sensation,’ 23
Schefflera arboricola, 82
Shadow boxes, 86–89
Sheet moss, for kokedama, 
74–77
Shelves, plant, 90–93
Shrek’s ears, 22
Siamese fighting fish, 43
Snake plant, 22, 23
Spathiphyllum, 19
Spider plant, 24, 61
Stem cuttings, 21, 98, 102, 103
String. See Twine/thread
String gardens, 74
Succulents
aloe vera, 13
fairy washboard, 14
for Zen garden, 54–57
grafting cacti and, 78
propagating, 98, 100–101, 102

Index 111
Shrek’s ears, 22
snake plant, 23
watering, 30, 32
Swinging plant hanger, 70–73
Swiss cheese plant, 25
T
T-shirt plant hanger, 44–47
Table knives, plants stakes made 
from, 62–65
Temperature, for plants, 32
Test tube propagator project, 
58–61
Tillandsias (air plants), 12, 
86–89
Tradescantia, 61
Trailing peperomias, 61
Trellis, wooden plant, 66–69
Trumpet jade, 22
Twine/thread
for propagating plants by air 
layering, 94–97
kokedama, 74–77
shadow box for air plants, 
86–89
wooden plant trellis, 66–69
U
Upcycling
recycled t-shirt plant hanger, 
44–47
recycled table knives and plant 
stakes, 62–65
t-shirts, for plant hanger, 
44–47
V
Venus flytrap, 26
Vining plants
macramé plant hanger for, 
48–51
propagating, 98, 102
test tube propagator for, 58–61
wooden plant trellis for, 66–69
W
Watering
air plants, 12
aloe vera, 13
bonsai, 85
checking your plant and, 34
fairy washboard, 14
kodedama, 74, 77
lucky bamboo, 16
money tree, 17
monstera plants, 25
peace lily, 19
plants in a pot with a drainage 
hole, 32
plants in decorative containers, 
32
plants with a saucer beneath 
the pot, 32
ponytail palm, 20
Shrek’s ears, 22
Zen garden, 57
ZZ plant, 27
White pollen, on peace lily, 19
Window screening, for pot drain-
age, 37
Wooden plant trellis, 66–69
Y
Yellow leaves, 8, 17, 19, 37
Yellow stems, 16
Z
Zamioculcas zamiifolia, 27
Zanzibar gem, 27
Zen Garden, 54–57
ZZ plant, 27, 61

112 Houseplant Party 
Other Books by Lisa Eldred Steinkopf
Grow in the Dark:  
How to Choose and Care for 
Low-Light Houseplants
978-0-7603-6451-2
 
Houseplants:  
The Complete Guide to 
Choosing, Growing, and 
Caring for Indoor Plants
978-1-59186-690-9
 
Houseplants:  
A Guide to Choosing and 
Caring for Indoor Plants
978-0-7603-6592-2


