E-BOOK SERIES
How I Did It Stories 
From the Bumpy 
Road to Success: 
Sheryl Sandberg,  
Arianna Huffington, 
Jack Ma, and More
2017
INC. HOW I DID IT

How I Created a Billion-Dollar Company		
	
	
	
3
michael dubin | Dollar Shave Club • Men’s toiletries
How an Earthquake Led Me to a VR Startup	
	
	
	
5
bryn mooser | Ryot • Immersive media production  
How Work Helped Me Overcome Personal Tragedy 	
	
	
6
sheryl sandberg | Facebook • Social media  
How We Found Organic Food Sources—and Helped Start an Industry	
7
rachel and andy berliner | Amy’s Kitchen • Organic frozen-food entrees 
How I Weathered the Biggest Storm of My Life		
	
	
8
tom russell | Founders Entertainment • Concert promotion
How I Learned to Focus 	
	
	
	
	
	
9
arianna huffington | Thrive Global • Media and wellness
How I Lost an Arm—Then Regained My Purpose	
	
	
10
dawn halfaker | Halfaker and Associates • IT services contracting
How We Launched a Company Before We Launched a Product	 	
12
steph korey and jen rubio | Away • Luggage manufacturer
How Customers Saved Me From Conspiracy  
Nuts Who Tried to Destroy My Business  	
	
	
   	
 	
13
james alefantis | Comet Ping Pong • Pizzeria
How I Stopped Being a Jerk and Became More Creative	
15
john boiler | 72andSunny • Advertising agency
How I Created E-commerce in China	
	
	
	
16
jack ma | Alibaba • China’s largest e-tail conglomerate
How Low Sugar Took Me to a Sweet $1.7 Billion Sale	
17
ben weiss | Bai Brands • Beverages
How I Made the Tough Decisions to Get into the Black	 	
	
18
katia beauchamp | Birchbox • Beauty products sampling service
How an FDA Threat Made Me a Great Operator	 	
	
19
hayden slater | Pressed Juicery • Fresh juice retailer
2
Contents
INC. HOW I DID IT

i have a background in media, marketing, and brand  
development—and I did improv training with the Upright 
Citizens Brigade for eight years. So I did the bulk of Dollar 
Shave Club’s creative work in the beginning. I wrote the 
script for that first video spot, and a friend of mine from 
my improv days shot it in one day for $4,500. It was very 
scrappy. The day it went live, our site crashed from all the 
traffic—but within 48 hours, we received 12,000 orders.
We moved pretty quickly beyond selling just razors. Our 
members definitely let us know they wanted more, and we always knew we would do other 
products. In 2013, we came out with a shave butter. Then we launched butt wipes, some-
thing that we learned through our research that a lot of guys were secretly using already. I 
don’t think anyone saw that coming. Since 2015, we’ve launched in at least one new cate-
gory a year—shower, hair care, skin care products—and the prep for these launches starts 
years before they happen. The marketing element is critical to DSC—it’s so vital that we get 
that right. Great storytelling is why we’ve been able to grow so fast. That and the pretty low 
barriers to entry when it came to men’s grooming products.
In the beginning, you’re figuring things out on the fly and everyone is wearing many hats. 
For a good part of the first year, we were all doing the same things—responding to emails, 
printing labels, making trips to the warehouse in the middle of the night.
By late 2014, something started to shift in the company. You get to a point—usually it’s 
between 50 and 80 employees—when you need to start bringing in some process and or-
ganizational discipline. As the CEO, you have to realize you can’t do everything yourself 
anymore. And teams need strategists, but they also need the right layers above and below 
to execute in specific areas. And I don’t mean stacking people on top of one another hierar-
chically. I’m talking about ever-deeper layers of specialization and focus. 
Around this time, I started up an internal creative agency. We needed to build a really ro-
bust campaign for our first made-for-TV spots, which poked fun at how hard it can be to 
get into the “razor fortress” in most retail locations. I found some entrepreneurial creatives 
who could do more with less—we still had to be pretty scrappy—and an incredible project-
manager who could keep us on track. 
A lot of companies outsource much of their creative work. We don’t. We wanted this exper-
tise in-house precisely so we could be more nimble. This small group has grown to about 20 
people. I still lead the team, help brainstorm, and give final approval, but instead of doing 
75 percent of the work, like I did in 2013 and 2014, now I’m involved in probably about 20 
percent of the work. 
Michael Dubin conjured 
Dollar Shave Club initially
as a way to help a friend’s 
father offload a surplus 
supply of razors. The idea 
was good; the marketing, 
genius. Propelled by an
insanely viral You-Tube spot 
featuring Dubin and his dry
wit, the company took in 
more than $3.5 million 
in revenue in 2012. Sales 
topped $225 million by the 
time Unilever bought DSC, 
for a reported $1 billion,
in 2016. –As told to  
Lindsay Blakely
Michael Dubin | Dollar Shave Club • Men’s toiletries
How I Created a  
Billion-Dollar Company
3
INC. HOW I DID IT
“ As the CEO, you have 
to realize you can’t do 
everything yourself 
anymore,” says Michael 
Dubin about Dollar 
Shave’s, and his own, 
growing pains.

Our viral videos are basically our bible, and they help the team maintain our unique voice. 
The marketing has probably been the hardest thing for me to delegate as we’ve gotten 
bigger. It’s tough to realize that you need to hire people who can do things better than 
you, especially when you have some expertise in a particular area.  
Then again, it’s also challenging to hire people for positions that you have no expertise 
in. I made that mistake with my first senior engineering hire, back in 2012. I just didn’t 
understand the necessary qualifications because of my own inexperience. It became clear 
pretty quickly that it wasn’t a good fit. Ultimately, if you want to build a big company, you 
need talent for every department that matches the much higher level you see at more 
mature companies. The more experts you have, the faster you can move. Instead of doing 
the work yourself, you have to shift into a role of inspiring and motivating people to drive 
the right results. It’s one of the most important shifts a startup needs to make on the road 
to becoming a big company. 
Last year, we developed our Wanderer line of shower products. Our team had teased out a 
couple of di erent angles for the campaign, and then we settled on one we really liked. It 
was around the concept of the shower’s being the best place for your mind to, you know, 
wander. Four days before the shoot, someone on our creative team noticed that a compet-
itor had just released a campaign for a similar product— and it featured a guy daydream-
ing in a shower. There was definitely a moment when we said, “Oh, shit—what do we do?” 
Obviously, one option was to just run with our original creative anyway. 
But you can never be precious about your darlings. (I forget who gets credit for that 
quote.) The team got back in a room and immediately started working some new scripts 
that could make use of the talent and directors we’d already booked. The fact that they 
were able to scrap three months of work and redo the campaign in a matter of days had 
everything to do with the expertise on that team. I also think creativity thrives when you 
have to work within restrictions. 
I know from my days of doing improv and sketch writing that improvising makes you a 
great synthesizer of ideas. I look for people with that natural ability. You want to know 
how they deal with challenges. If you’re the right type of synthesizer and solution builder, 
you’ll find a way. 
I feel like we’re still in the process of shifting from startup to larger company. We’re al-
ways trying to build the ideal structure. We can do more, faster, now that we’re owned 
by Unilever—and now that I don’t have to spend my time fundraising every year. But we 
operate completely independently. I don’t discuss creative decisions with Unilever. DSC 
is DSC because of the decisions we have made in-house, and Unilever respects that. 
4
INC. HOW I DID IT
“Ultimately, if you want 
to build a big company, 
you need talent for 
every department 
that matches the 
much higher level you 
see at more mature 
companies. The more 
experts you have, the 
faster you can move. 
Instead of doing the 
work yourself, you have 
to shift into a role of 
inspiring and motivat-
ing people to drive the 
right results. It’s one 
of the most important 
shifts a startup needs 
to make on the road 
to becoming a big 
company.”
Michael Dubin | Dollar Shave Club • Men’s toiletries continued

as someone who’s covered humanitarian crises as a journalist and a filmmaker for years, 
I’ve always felt that traditional filmmaking and photography were limited. When you walk 
into a war zone or someplace after a natural disaster with a traditional camera or video 
recorder, you can capture only one thing. That’s frustrating. There’s nothing like actually 
standing where you can understand the scale of these things. When I saw VR for the first 
time a couple of years ago, I thought this could be an incredibly powerful medium to give 
people a totally new perspective.
We were the first group to show a VR film at the Tribeca Film Festival. It was about solitary 
confinement. At the after-party, a friend showed me a prototype of the Hero 360 rig, which 
is just a bunch of GoPros in a 3-D-printed case. That was when the light bulb went off for 
us. I knew all of our filmmakers around the world could shoot on GoPros and, more import-
ant, that they knew how to fix them in the field. I knew we could figure out the stitching 
part with our postproduction team.
Then, the next day, the Nepal earthquake happened. My business partner, David, was going 
there to provide humanitarian aid. I called up the kid who had the camera and David took 
it with him. Anytime he wasn’t delivering aid, he put the camera on. I’d worked in Haiti 
with Susan Saran-don, and she agreed to do a voiceover. About a week later, we showed the 
video outside a film festival in Telluride. We couldn’t get it programmed in the festival, so 
we just set it up on a park bench with a Samsung VR headset and we put it on people.
We called it the Nepal Quake Project. It was the first time VR had been shot in a natural 
disaster area. Every day, we’d go to the street corner to set up and there would be a line of 
people waiting, and a lot of those people, when they took o! the headset, they were crying.
Our gamble was mobile-first, 360-degree storytelling for socially distributed platforms like 
Face-book and YouTube. If we could make more 360 films than anybody else, then the sec-
ond those platforms launched, all those publishers and brands would call us. Sure enough, 
the day after Facebook launched Facebook 360, we got inundated with emails from media 
brands and advertisers.
Bryn Mooser is the co-founder 
of Ryot Films, which produces 
media for immersive formats 
like virtual reality and 
360-degree video. He started 
thinking about transforma-
tive technology while working 
as a Peace Corps volunteer 
in West Africa, living on the 
edge of the Sahel in a region 
that had cell-phone towers–
but had   never had landlines. 
Ryot initially published news
stories that enabled readers 
to take social actions, and 
then pivoted into immersive 
video. In 2016, Mooser and his 
co-founder, David Darg, sold 
Ryot to AOL. –As told to Jeff 
Bercovici
Bryn Mooser | Ryot • Immersive media production
How an Earthquake Led Me to a VR Startup
5
INC. HOW I DID IT
PHOTOGRAPH BY RYAN PFLUGER

As the company was growing and we had more interest in what we were doing, we were 
about 20 really scrappy kids in a garage in Venice, California. There were six of us at the 
time, including myself, who were sleeping on the floor of the office, because we were invest-
ing every single dollar back into the company. When our film Body Team 12 was nominated 
for an Oscar, we had no money for an apartment, no money for a tuxedo. I had worked in 
Haiti with Kenneth Cole, the designer, so I called him and he made tuxedos for David and 
me. I think I was probably the only Oscar nominee who didn’t have a home to go back to.
What AOL loved about us was that spirit. At the time, a year and a half ago, we weren’t really 
thinking about acquisition. We were focused on raising a Series A. We had a lot of options, 
but I realized I just couldn’t raise money anymore. I couldn’t go to another lunch and have 
a Cobb salad and iced tea and talk about how great my company was. It was taking me out 
of the field and out of being with my team. What we wanted to do was stop raising money 
and just put our heads down and start building big.
At Oath, which is what the merger of AOL and Yahoo is going to be called, you have two 
big companies that have their own ways of thinking about original content and branded 
content. I’m helping them rethink production and how original content is made and also 
bringing a lot of new formats to all the brands with virtual reality, augmented reality, and 
360. We still bring the same spirit to our work every day. But now I can afford a house.  
6
INC. HOW I DID IT
Bryn Mooser | Ryot • Immersive media production  continued
i’ve long believed that we have to take our whole selves 
to work, as I wrote in LeanIn. Because it’s just not the 
case that we’re professional people during the day and 
emotional people at night and on weekends. Then when 
I lost my husband suddenly, I had no choice but to take 
myself to work—but I couldn’t get through a meeting in 
the very early days without tearing up.
I feel so lucky. My boss, Mark Zuckerberg, didn’t just give 
me the time off I needed— and that’s something I think 
is really important for businesses to do—but he also built me back up. When I thought I 
couldn’t do my job, he was the one who said, “No, I think you made a good point in that 
meeting.” And so he helped me, both by acknowledging the pain I was in and by telling 
me he still believed in me.
I know that so many colleagues have faced hard things. And I think when we are there 
for one another—not pretending hard things aren’t happening, but acknowledging them 
and supporting one another explicitly—we build better communities, better companies, 
better workplaces. We need one another. I never could have gotten through this—and I’m 
still getting through this—without relying heavily on my colleagues and friends every day. 
I’m hoping that Option B can help break open conversations so we can be more of our 
authentic selves in the workplace.
What I’ve learned is that we don’t have a fixed amount of resilience. Resilience is like a 
muscle we build, but we don’t only build it in ourselves. We also build it in one another, by 
acknowledging the pain people are going through and by being there for one another.  
By early 2015, Sheryl 
Sandberg seemed to have 
it all: a powerful role as the 
chief operating officer of 
Facebook; an influential 
voice for women in corpo-
rate America as the author 
of Lean In; and a happy, 
supportive family. Then her 
husband, SurveyMonkey 
CEO Dave Goldberg, died 
suddenly while on vacation. 
Devastated, Sandberg 
started publicly chronicling 
her grief and her family’s 
struggle to resume life 
after loss. Her widely 
shared Facebook post, 
published 30 days after 
Goldberg’s death, turned 
into this spring’s Option B: 
Facing Adversity, Building 
Resilience, and Finding Joy, 
which Sandberg co-wrote 
with Wharton professor 
Adam Grant. “I’m still get-
ting through this,” she says 
now–but she’s also sharing 
what she’s learned.
–As told to Maria Aspan
Sheryl Sandberg | Facebook  •  Social media
How Work Helped Me  
Overcome Personal Tragedy
“Long before Dave died, 
I had learned that 
parenting was the most 
humbling job in the 
world—and now I had  
to relearn how to do  
it alone.” 

7
INC. HOW I DID IT
when we started, our goal was $2.5 million in sales. We 
thought we’d have enough income to live on and maybe 
help pay for Amy’s college education. We didn’t plan this 
whole thing out. It wasn’t until our fourth year, 1991, that 
we began turning a profit. We didn’t envision building a 
half-billion-dollar business. We just thought there was a 
niche to be filled. At first, Rachel’s mother helped us, and 
friends helped with the recipes. We went to natural-food 
shows; people thought our pot pies were delicious, and 
there was nothing like them in their stores. That’s how we 
got distribution. In the beginning, the biggest problem was sourcing quality ingredients. 
Nobody was doing organics. When we started, we worked with small farmers, and they 
grew with us. Today we have contracts with farmers who cover 20,000 acres.
We still make our food like we’re in our personal kitchen—it’s just on a bigger scale. Our 
chef still comes to our house to try out new recipes.
All the big food companies at one time or another have made an offer or shown interest. 
But we always knew we wanted to stay private and family owned. Andy had previously 
owned an herbal tea company and sold it early. We saw that everything we had worked for 
was pretty quickly destroyed, and that motivated our desire to keep this under our control. 
We don’t have pressure from investors, and this allows us to stay true to our core mission.
Our other main challenge has been the supermarkets. We don’t have a marketing budget. 
The grocery chains want us to do promotions and discounts. But our products sell very well 
without them. It’s a bit of a fight. We say we’re growing by double digits and the companies 
that spend money on marketing and promotions are declining; we’re doing something right. 
We’re a small family. We’ve heard stories of large families, and it gets very complex regard-
ing the next generation. Amy is very involved in the sustainability of the company and its 
culture. She and her husband, both board members, are dedicated to seeing Amy’s carry on. 
However, neither of them aspires to be a CEO or to run the business right now. They are 
interested in ensuring the culture, the values, and the mission. We can’t bear the thought of 
doing things differently.  
In 1987, Rachel and Andy 
Berliner launched their 
organic vegetarian frozen-
food empire with a single 
pot pie out of their Peta-
luma, California, kitchen. 
Rachel, then pregnant with 
their daughter, Amy, was 
told to stay off her feet–
and out of the kitchen. 
After being disappointed 
by the frozen dinners Andy 
brought home, the couple 
realized they could do 
much better. Amy’s Kitchen 
pioneered the market for 
organic vegetarian frozen 
meals. Today, it generates 
$500 million in revenue 
in the U.S., the U.K., and 
France, and is expanding 
into Asia and Australia. 
Now grandparents, the 
Berliners are determined to 
keep Amy’s a family busi-
ness, and to protect its core 
values while developing a 
chain of drive-thru outlets. 
–As told to Stacy Perman
Rachel and Andy Berliner |  Amy’s Kitchen • Organic frozen-food entrées
How We Found Organic 
Food Sources–and Helped 
Start an Industry
“ In the beginning, the 
biggest problem was 
sourcing quality ingre-
dients. Nobody was 
doing organics. When 
we started, we worked 
with small farmers, and 
they grew with us.”

8
INC. HOW I DID IT
it was a heck of a storm: a lot of rain and high winds. 
When you have 40,000 people on your festival site, which 
is grass, and you have five to six inches of water descend 
upon that site within an eight-hour period, the result is a 
field of mud. There’s not much you can really do to com-
bat that. We laid down plywood, sand, and landscaper’s hay, 
but everything just sank. Around 8 p.m. on Friday, when we 
started getting 40 mph wind gusts, we knew we had to cut 
the show. Kings of Leon had their headlining set canceled that night, and they were sched-
uled to fly to London for a gig they had on Sunday. We gathered in our trailer backstage with 
their booking agent and managers, looking at Saturday’s schedule and trying to fit them in—
which bands we could shift, who had to shorten their sets. We ended up squeezing them in 
in the middle of Saturday.
We knew a lot of the Friday single-day ticket buyers bought their tickets mostly to see Kings 
of Leon, so we messaged people to tell them Friday ticket holders could come in on Sat-
urday. In the days after the festival, we got on the phone with every person who emailed 
us asking for a refund or criticized us for the experience—a few thousand people in total. 
When you’re a small-business owner, you have to balance customer satisfaction with pro-
tecting your bottom line. We tried to give tickets for the following year to as many people 
as possible. We gave some customers their money back, but in most cases, people were OK 
with the comp tickets—or just wanted to have their voices heard.
We had to repair the park and return it in good condition. We incurred $750,000 in addi-
tional expenses because of the weather, but still finished in the black. At the time, we were 
a three-year-old business, and I wasn’t even 30. I had never been through anything like this 
before. It was a tough weekend, financially and emotionally. But you make it work, and you 
come out of it all the stronger and all the wiser.  
The New York City music 
festival market is tough to 
crack, thanks in part to the 
competition for limited real 
estate. Tom Russell started 
Founders Entertainment 
along with two friends, 
Jordan Wolowitz and Yoni 
Reisman, in NYC when 
they were in their mid-20s. 
Founders stages the Gover-
nors Ball Music Festival on 
Randall’s Island, situated 
in the East River, and the 
Meadows Music and Arts 
Festival in Queens. In 2013, 
the Gov Ball was in its third 
year and growing when a 
tropical storm threatened 
to ruin everything. “We 
were hoping the storm’s 
path would veer east or 
west,” says Russell, “but 
the day before the festival 
started, it became clear it 
was going to hit us head-
on.” Did it ever.  
–As told to Kevin J. Ryan
Tom Russell | Founders Entertainment • Concert promotion
How I Weathered the Biggest 
Storm of My Career
“ When you’re a 
small-business owner, 
you have to balance 
customer satisfaction 
with protecting your 
bottom line. ”

the big challenge has been prioritization. I’m the kind of 
person who wants to do it all and work with every compa-
ny that comes to me. Early on at Thrive, though, we need-
ed to decide what to focus on.
On the corporate side, we made the tough decision to cre-
ate what we call “below the line”—potential partners that 
we’ll get to, but only after we take advantage of the big op-
portunities. For example, we recently launched with SAP, 
which will put us in front of more than 3,000 corporations 
in one fell swoop. We are also developing a digital coach-
ing program with IBM’s virtual assistant, Watson.
On the media platform, we had to be narrow. That was a big shift for me, coming from Huff-
Post, where the goal was to cover everything: Be it James Comey’s firing or Beyoncé’s twins, 
we were supposed to be there. Our media platform, Thrive Journal, is like HuffPost in some 
ways—we encourage outside contributions, for instance. But it’s different in that we focus 
solely on this one thing: How do we reduce stress and improve well-being?
What helped was identifying the two things that resonate with our readers. The first is 
science. We bring you the latest research around recharging, and the connection between 
recharging and productivity. The second is telling stories around the data. For example, we 
got Jeff Bezos to write about why his getting enough sleep is good for Amazon sharehold-
ers. We also got Selena Gomez to write about how doing a “digital detox” helped her in her 
life. We saw that giving readers a role model makes a difference to them.
These early decisions about what to prioritize, like all decisions you make as a leader, re-
quired a combination of data and gut. It’s very important for leaders to realize that it’s not 
all data-driven. I first met Jennifer Morgan—the president of SAP—a year ago, when I was 
still at HuffPost. We had this amazing connection. Now that Thrive and SAP are partnering, 
the fact that Jennifer and I have a personal friendship is helpful. When you’re dealing with 
a big corporation, there are a lot of institutional layers that have to be brought into the pro-
cess. But when something gets stuck, I can simply pick up the phone and talk to Jennifer.
At the moment, the corporate side accounts for more than half our sales. That’s partly a 
function of what we staffed first. In the startup phase, where you hire first makes a big 
difference in where the revenue comes from. But the media platform is growing too. In less 
than six months, we’re reaching more than 20 million viewers.
It was very hard stepping down from HuffPost, because, after all, it’s like my third child. But 
once I made the decision, it was completely clear to me that it was the right one. 
Arianna Huffington, the co-
founder of the Huffington 
Post, surprised many when 
she announced last year 
that she would be stepping 
down. She is throwing her 
energy behind a second 
startup, Thrive Global. In 
just under six months, New 
York City-based Thrive has 
signed deals worth “mul-
tiple millions of dollars.” 
Clients include Uber (where 
she’s a board member), Ac-
centure, and Airbnb. Thrive 
recently doubled its sales 
targets for 2017. The com-
pany generates revenue 
primarily by charging busi-
nesses for its workshops 
and seminars focused on 
health and wellness, and 
via branded content that 
runs on its platform, the 
Thrive Journal. It also sells 
some consumer products, 
such as a $100 iPhone bed. 
The biggest challenge, 
Huffington admits, has 
been learning how to focus. 
–As told to Zoë Henry
Arianna Huffington | Thrive Global • Media and wellness
How I Learned to Focus
9
INC. HOW I DID IT
“These early decisions 
about what to prioritize, 
like all decisions you 
make as a leader, re-
quired a combination of 
data and gut. It’s very 
important for leaders to 
realize that it’s not all 
data-driven.”

from an early age, I wanted to get a scholarship to play 
basketball. I was contacted by West Point about playing 
basketball there and becoming a cadet. At first I dis-
missed it. I didn’t have a good understanding of what 
West Point was.
The minute I stepped on the West Point campus, I knew 
it was the place for me. I was drawn to the intensity and 
sense of purpose. There was nothing that set any of the 
other schools I was considering apart—they were all 
about where you were going to party and hang out.
Part of the great thing about West Point was that I didn’t 
fully understand what I was getting into. I didn’t know 
what the plebe year was all about. It was probably better 
that way. The basketball coaches paint a rosy picture. Being there was a huge surprise and 
a culture shock. It was four years of just trying to survive.
After West Point, my first duty station was in Korea. Then I went to Fort Stewart, in Geor-
gia, and deployed from there to Iraq in February 2004.
Our focus was on rebuilding the Iraqi police force. We were working hand in hand with 
Iraqis, training them, equipping them, going on missions with them. We were responsi-
ble for the security of the police station, and for protecting our area of operations from 
insurgents.
That’s where things got a little messy. We were going on missions to flush out insurgents 
who were planting IEDs, shooting rockets at the embassy, or blowing up the police sta-
tions. On one of our patrols, near Baqubah, our Humvee drove into an ambush and was hit 
by a rocket-propelled grenade. I remember being loaded into a medevac helicopter. When 
I woke up from the coma, my parents and doctors had to explain what had happened— 
and that I’d lost an arm.
I spent my 25th birthday in the hospital thinking that my life was over. It wasn’t just that 
I’d lost an arm. It was that I no longer had a career. I had been physically fit, mentally fit, 
at the top of my game, and I went from that to a state of feeling basically useless. I was 
terrified about being just cast aside while everybody else moved on. That’s what fueled 
me to go into business and to want so desperately to stay connected to the military and 
the mission.
I was constantly in pain, and I always had to think of a different way to do things. I wor-
ried about having to get in line at Starbucks and buy a coffee and get change and carry 
it back and open the door. Those were the things that plagued my mind, more than the 
bigger picture of what was going on with my life.
When you think of a wounded warrior, you think of a young male in a wheelchair. I had 
Lots of people become 
entrepreneurs because 
of an unexpected career 
shock, such as a corporate 
acquisition or layoff. Dawn 
Halfaker’s military career 
was ended by an explosion 
and a catastrophic injury, in 
Iraq, in 2004. Yet Halfaker 
would eventually recover 
and form Halfaker and 
Associates, an Arlington, 
Virginia-based contractor in 
data analytics, cybersecu-
rity, software engineering, 
and IT infrastructure for 
the federal government, 
including the Navy, the 
Department of Transporta-
tion, and the Department 
of Defense. –As told to 
Kimberly Weisul
Dawn Halfaker | Halfaker and Associates  •  IT services contracting
How I Lost an Arm—Then  
Regained My Purpose
10
INC. HOW I DID IT
“Your job as an officer is 
to continue to lead in 
not-ideal circumstanc-
es, and you’re probably 
underresourced. Being 
an entrepreneur and 
getting something 
started, you never have 
everything you need, 
and things never go 
according to plan.”

a hard time identifying as a veteran and fitting in as a fe-
male who was wounded in combat. People weren’t laugh-
ing to my face—it was mostly probably in my head. But 
I look different. Whenever you’re different, you’re kind 
of vulnerable. I did an internship on Capitol Hill. It was 
really discouraging. There were very important issues 
that Congress had to deal with. Do the soldiers have the 
right helmets? Do we have the right equipment? Are vets 
getting the right care? I was amazed at how many times the debate became partisan, and 
people were willing to ignore the common-sense solution.
Then I thought I’d maybe work as a contractor focused on supporting the military. That’s 
when I realized there was a big disconnect between what was going on in Washington 
and what was happening downrange. There were so many people who didn’t have com-
bat experience trying to make decisions and influence policy. I thought, you know what? 
I can do this better. I could start a company. I could hire people who have the right exper-
tise, and provide the support myself.
When I was at Walter Reed Army Medical Center, there was a colonel who wanted me to 
help him better understand how technology innovations could be used in the field. I was 
able to leverage that experience and other relationships to learn the industry and start 
positioning myself for a career, and to begin building the infrastructure of my company 
in the background.
There’s no question that my military training helped me become a better entrepreneur. 
You go through so much training in the military, but from that first year as a plebe, what 
the military is teaching you is how to be resilient. You plan your mission, and you exe-
cute, but nothing ever goes according to plan. Your job as an officer is to continue to lead 
in not-ideal circumstances, and you’re probably underresourced. Being an entrepreneur 
and getting something started, you never have everything you need, and things never go 
according to plan.
You also learn that the people who can make things happen are the ones who are chal-
lenging the status quo. There are people who figure out how to make the whole system 
work for them, as opposed to being a follower. From the start of my company, I recog-
nized there were other people in my situation. As my company grew, I knew I could bring 
in other wounded warriors.
Hiring other veterans affects my company in a positive way. There’s a similar value sys-
tem, a similar understanding of the mission. Then there’s the skill set to do data analytics 
and IT infrastructure. For the type of work we’re doing, we need people who understand 
the military, so that’s critical. But as the company grows, we value diversity. We need to 
make sure that employees who are not veterans can still do well here. It’s something I’m 
aware of. I don’t want to create this in-group.
Certifications help tremendously, especially in my industry, where there are hardly any 
medium-size companies. You’re not going to compete with Lockheed Martin. But you can 
leverage the set-asides to have an opportunity to show what your company can do. Once 
you’re able to do that, then eventually you can compete with Lockheed Martin. I’m not in 
any rush to do it. We’re still finding our sweet spot and trying to refine that before we say 
we’re the best at what we do and we can beat anybody. That’s the goal.  
11
INC. HOW I DID IT
Dawn Halfaker | Halfaker and Associates  •  IT services contracting continued
“Hiring other veterans 
affects my company in 
a positive way. There’s 
a similar value system, 
a similar understanding 
of the mission.”

korey: As December approached, we knew our first production run was not going to be 
ready in time for Christmas. Even so, we thought there are a lot of people who have terri-
ble luggage. They might be happy to preorder something. 
rubio: We wanted to get everyone on board in the beginning. 
korey: The whole genesis of Away was that Jen broke her suitcase. She has all these 
well-traveled friends who can recommend anything. She jokes that she could text, “Hey, I 
need a coffee shop in Bangkok,” and they would send her recommendations in an instant. 
She texted them, “Hey, I need a new suitcase,” and they were like, “I’ve got nothing.” 
rubio: We both had worked at Warby Parker, the direct-to-consumer eyeglasses brand, 
and thought we could take a similar approach with luggage. We used the same materials 
that are found in bags that cost over $700: sturdy YKK zippers, double-spinner wheels 
that are really rugged and glide over airport carpets, German polycarbonate shells that 
are both light and strong. 
korey: We thought, if people who travel heard about us from an in-the-know friend, we 
could make their travel more enjoyable. How do we put our story out in the universe in a 
way that people will repeat it? Jen had this idea of launching with a book. 
rubio: It wasn’t simply, let’s make a book because we don’t have any luggage ready. It 
was a way to assemble a bunch of people to talk about our luggage when it was available.
korey: We interviewed 40 really interesting people from the creative community—writ-
ers, artists, photographers. 
rubio: They represented a bunch of different categories, like food and fashion. These 
people aren’t necessarily household names, but within their circles, they’re very well-
known and respected. 
korey: It was a beautiful hardcover book. We called it The Places We Return To. We 
didn’t pay contributors, but we gave them a gift card for a suitcase. In November 2015, 
we sold the book with a gift card that was redeemable for a suitcase in February. It was 
essentially a preorder with a complimentary book. People wrote about this interesting 
book—and then mentioned our luggage. They were excited about it. They all had pretty 
big networks on social media. We made 1,200 books and sold out early. 
rubio: We were also in close to 100 gift guides. In our first year, we exceeded $12 million 
in sales. We’ve now sold more than 100,000 suitcases. 
korey: Storytelling is a central part of our marketing. We think about what stories we can 
feed to the press and to social media—things that make people take notice, things people 
want to share and talk about. Instead of offering traditional monogramming, Jen came up 
with this awesome idea to partner with a few hand-lettering artists. Each came up with a 
custom alphabet for Away. We took these custom alphabets, put them on our website, and 
gave customers the option to pick their style, and have artists hand-paint their initials on 
the suitcase. You don’t push your product. You create things that are fun to talk about, to 
write about, to share.  
Steph Korey and Jen 
Rubio had a problem. Their 
planned launch of Away, 
a new luggage brand, was 
fast approaching– and 
none of their suitcases 
would be ready to sell in 
time. Luckily, the two had 
a social media trick packed 
in their bags. They turned a 
proven retailing tactic, the 
preorder, and an idea for a 
book into a campaign that 
went viral on Instagram 
and beyond. –As told to 
Burt Helm
Steph Korey and Jen Rubio | Away  •  Luggage manufacturer
How We Launched a Company  
Before We Launched a Product
12
INC. HOW I DID IT

it was about 9:30 or 10 on the night of November 5 when I 
saw I had a voice mail from Will Sommer, a reporter at the 
Washington City Paper: “Do you know about this online 
conspiracy theory that you’re running a child-slavery ring 
out of Comet with Hillary Clinton?” 
It was right before the election. A lot of crazy things 
were happening. A lot of talk about conspiracies was be-
ing thrown around, and John Podesta’s emails had been 
hacked and were being leaked. Over the years, I had had email exchanges with Podesta 
about cooking for fund raisers. At first, I was like, “Oh, this is so funny. I’m in WikiLeaks.” 
We started getting weird comments on Comet’s Facebook and Instagram posts and on my 
personal accounts. I just deleted them and set my account to private. 
When Donald Trump won, I thought, now, finally, at least this crazy conspiracy theory 
will go away. But the opposite happened. It grew and grew and became more and more 
focused on Comet. I got a call from a friend who works at MIT’s Media Lab. He told me, 
this thing is out of control. 
Messages and comments poured in. At one point, I was getting about 75 personal mes-
sages on social media a day. My response was to shut everything down—delete the com-
ments, try not to respond. I thought, obviously this has to end eventually. 
But it only kept escalating. Many of the messages were violent—“I have a gun. I want you 
to die”—and gory—“I pray that someone comes in with an assault rifle and kills everyone 
inside Comet. I want to cut open your guts and watch them spill out on the floor.” I’d just 
shut my laptop and go on with my day. 
It got scary when users started performing what I’ll call “citizen’s investigations.” Users 
sifted through my social media profiles and started messaging everyone who’d ever liked 
or commented on a post of mine. I started getting calls from friends, family, and custom-
ers who said they were getting harassed online as well. 
The phone started ringing all day long. You can’t ignore phone calls when it’s part of your 
business. People call the pizza place to ask, “How busy is it? Can we get a table? We want 
to order food.” Now my staff was hearing “We know what’s going on! You should turn 
James in! You’re going to go to jail too if you don’t.” Or screaming “You’re sick!” Some 
people I knew were like, “This is stupid.” Others were terrified. I had to learn how to get 
these posts taken down, the steps you can take to reclaim your privacy. Mostly, there’s 
nothing you can do. 
The stress does weird things to your body. I was exhausted every day but never tired. I was 
Of all the bizarre turns in 
the 2016 presidential race, 
few top Pizzagate. The 
conspiracy theory, spread 
across alt-right media, 
centered on the idea that 
Hillary Clinton and John Po-
desta, one of her top aides, 
were running a secret child 
trafficking ring out of a piz-
za place, Comet Ping Pong, 
in Washington, D.C. The 
story was ludicrous, but 
for Comet’s owner, James 
Alefantis, the nightmare 
was real and terrifying– 
from the first virulent posts 
online to the day a gunman 
stormed the pizzeria. –As 
told to Burt Helm
James Alefantis | Comet Ping Pong  •  Pizzeria
How Customers Saved Me 
From Conspiracy Nuts Who 
Tried to Destroy My Business
13
INC. HOW I DID IT
“The community  
really rallied around us. 
Online, a movement 
started—’We’ll all go to 
Comet at 6 p.m. Sunday 
to show our support!’” 

on full alert, full of adrenaline. It was very intense. Then I’d go to the restaurant, and every-
thing was normal. I’d feel fear, but there’d be all these families and kids happily eating. It 
was like a parallel universe. 
Later, Cecilia Kang, a reporter for The New York Times, asked to write a piece about what 
was happening. At the time, I’d been denying media requests. Once the Times piece came 
out, it wasn’t a dirty secret—everyone knew about Pizzagate. Employees and I talked every 
day about how to field questions from customers. 
The community really rallied around us. Online, a movement started—“We’ll all go to Com-
et at 6 p.m. Sunday to show our support!” It was like, thanks, people, but can’t you just come 
in several waves— 400 people showed up at once. The managers were saying, “We are going 
to be hugged to death!” From that point on, every day was like our busiest day of the year. 
The gunman arrived on the afternoon of December 4. I wasn’t in. I was at a church fair 
when I got the call from one of my managers. She was crying and said, “A guy came in with 
an assault rifle.” 
The man with the gun, Edgar Welch, had decided to “selfinvestigate” Comet. He rushed in 
through the front door and walked toward the back, and shot open the only locked door in the 
restaurant, a closet, damaging computer systems inside. My manager told me everyone was 
safe and evacuated to a firehouse across the street. When I got there, the police had locked 
down the block. That night, we went back. It was so weird. The tables were empty, but you 
could see full beers and half-eaten pizza on the table—the moment when time stopped.
At that point, I was ready to close temporarily. The next day, the phone never stopped ring-
ing— “When are you open? Are you open tonight?” Basically, the community said, “We’re 
coming. Open your doors.” From Sunday until Tuesday evening, I did everything I could to 
get security in order. And we opened. The way people came out to support us, it was incred-
ible, an overwhelming sensation.
From that point on, though, I was fearful. I was still receiving death threats. I started wear-
ing a hat and sunglasses to leave the house. And the security people were like, “Yeah. You’re 
in danger.” 
In the days just before the gunman drove to Comet, he was texting with a friend and told 
him he’d been inspired by videos made by Alex Jones, the online con spiracy theorist who 
runs Infowars. It’s one thing if rumors swirl on 4chan or Reddit. But Jones has an audience 
of millions. He has influenced other gunmen. We’re still figuring out our legal strategy, but 
we’re keeping our options open. I was heartened to see Jones retract his stories about us 
and apologize. 
We continue to see protesters, people who still believe Pizzagate is real. On the day of the 
Women’s March, the day after Trump’s inauguration, these guys came with giant signs. 
They had megaphones and were screaming, “Your neighborhood is Sodom and Gomor-
rah, with your rainbow flags. And you’re pedophiles.” They were yelling at people going 
into the restaurant. 
What happened next was beautiful. People got up from their seats and poured out onto the 
street and rushed them, drowning out their protests. We had a PA and put on dance music, 
and everyone started dancing around them. We had a big dance party in front of the restau-
rant until they got weary and left. It was like, “Bring it on.”  
14
INC. HOW I DID IT
James Alefantis | Comet Ping Pong  •  Pizzeria  continued

my wife told me she didn’t like what I was becoming. 
God, to have somebody you love tell you that—it turns 
you inside out. But she was right. It was 16 years ago, I 
was 35, and I’d been running the Amsterdam office of 
Wieden + Kennedy, the ad agency. That night we were 
drinking wine—probably a lot—and discussing my next 
career move.
I had adopted this fixed mindset that I was really awesome 
and I didn’t need to learn—like, I’m not interested in your 
input, Mr. Client, I’m here to protect my idea because you’re going to screw it up. I was do-
ing better and better, but that cynicism had begun to creep into every part of my life.
It took me a while to examine what needed to change. I decided everything did. We 
moved to Los Angeles, where I’d try to become a commercial director with Glenn Cole, 
my creative partner from the ad agency. We had a friend who ran a production company 
and he started putting us forward for small jobs—little art projects, surf videos, and some 
commercial work.
I was a shitty director. Our producer friend said to me one time, “You know, people who 
do well in this business have return customers. The way you get return customers is by 
not telling them their ideas are lame.” It’s funny, when you own your own company, it’s 
like you’re running around naked every day. You can’t maintain the front of being a cre-
ative genius when your survival is in the balance. All of a sudden, clients’ ideas seem 
much smarter because you depend on them. Most important, it changes your outlook 
from one of having employees to one of having partners. If anyone was good enough to 
work with us for the little pay we could offer, I felt committed to making them happy. 
Because there were so few of us, we had to embrace everyone’s creativity.
That was the first big lesson for me. Once you start treating employees as more than a job 
description, suddenly they go, “Oh, wow! Maybe I should bring my whole self to work 
today!” Our secretary would be making comments on all the work. That secretary, Evin 
Shutt, is now partner and chief operating officer. Everyone got much more engaged. And 
it got way more fun. If you don’t welcome input from all your people, you narrow your 
creative product. Eyes dim. When you get people with diverse backgrounds and experi-
ences together, you get surprises. That’s when really good things happen.  
In a past life, John Boiler 
was a revered creative di-
rector at Wieden +Kennedy, 
the West Coast advertising 
agency that helped put 
Nike on the map with iconic 
campaigns such as “Just Do 
It.” He was also a cynical 
egotist. So he hit the reset 
button. Years later, he’s 
the co-founder and creative 
cochair, with Glenn Cole, 
of 72andSunny, an ad 
agency “built on optimism” 
that works for the likes of 
Google and Adidas. –As told 
to Burt Helm
John Boiler | 72andSunny  •  Advertising agency
How I Stopped Being a Jerk 
and Became More Creative
15
INC. HOW I DID IT
“Once you start treating 
employees as more 
than a job description, 
suddenly they go, ‘Oh, 
wow! Maybe I should 
bring my whole self to 
work today!’” 

i started my first internet company in 1995, after I visited Seattle. China was not con-
nected to the internet, and nobody believed there was this network. So it was difficult to 
even hire people. The first three people were me, my wife, and a guy who was a university 
lecturer with me, who had a computer background. China was starting to think about 
exporting, but small businesses couldn’t go to international trade shows. So our business 
model was to make homepages for Chinese companies, so they could promote their prod-
ucts and be found by international customers.
Nobody wanted to try it. But I had a friend, Maggie Zhou, who later became my secretary 
and now is our ambassador to Australia. She worked for a hotel called the Wanghu [Lakev-
iew], the first four-star hotel in Hangzhou. I told her manager that I could make the hotel 
a free homepage, “and if there are any people who come to your hotel through that homep-
age, you can pay me.” He agreed. And nothing happened for three months.
Then the Fourth World Conference on Women was held in Beijing. Suddenly the hotel 
got a fax from several American ladies. They were coming to the conference and using the 
internet to search for hotels—and the only one listed in China was the Wanghu Hotel. We 
had to tell them that the hotel was more than 1,000 kilometers from Beijing. But they asked, 
“Can we stay in that hotel and have meetings?” After the conference, they flew to Hangzhou 
to stay for three days. That shocked the general manager of the hotel—and then he paid us.
Even today, I still don’t know how to code. I really don’t understand how to compute. But 
as an entrepreneur, if you don’t know something, you don’t have to worry—you just have to 
find people who know about it. I didn’t know anything about financing until I found Joseph 
Tsai, Alibaba’s executive vice chairman. I don’t talk to the investors a lot, because Joe’s 
supposed to do that.
Don’t try to hire the best people at first. If you try to hire the best when you’re still a small 
company, it’s like putting a Boeing 747 engine into a poor tractor. It won’t work. But you 
can hire the right people, the people who know better than you, who are passionate about 
what they do, and who are open-minded about learning. And then when your company gets 
bigger, you have to rotate your people through different jobs. Make sure the engineers know 
about more than engineering. Work with the entire staff to make sure they are the best in 
their field. I have a great team, because they get everything done better than I could. So I 
can spend a lot of time thinking about the future.
The perception is that online, counterfeiting is big. But I would say, today, it’s so much bet-
ter than offline. With internet commerce, everything you buy, sell, deliver, manufacture—
we can trace all the data. We’re using our technology to fight against phony merchandise. 
In China, we deliver up to 57 million packages per day, and we had $547 billion in sales on 
our platforms last year. If people buy something counterfeit, that makes them unhappy and 
it makes the brand owner unhappy and unwilling to partner with us. But we’re getting more 
and more brands to partner with us. This year, we’re launching a huge campaign and work-
ing with law enforcement to fight against manufacturers that produce counterfeit products, 
to stop that at the root.
Jack Ma built one of the 
world’s biggest internet 
companies without 
learning how to code. The 
lead founder and executive 
chairman of Alibaba 
taught himself English by 
offering tours to foreign 
visitors of his hometown, 
Hangzhou, in eastern 
China. That’s where, in 
1999, Ma launched Alibaba, 
which took in nearly $23 
billion last year. Now Ma 
is hoping to expand his 
U.S. business, especially 
by encouraging more 
American companies to sell 
their goods on Alibaba’s 
platforms. –As told to 
Maria Aspan
Jack Ma | Alibaba  •  China’s largest e-tail conglomerate
How I Created  
E-commerce in China
16
INC. HOW I DID IT

We are the company dealing with 10 million small businesses in China alone. We can at 
least figure out who’s buying, who’s selling, who’s manufacturing. It is why we are chas-
ing the bad actors. It’s impossible to kill them.
Business is all about five, 10 years later. That’s why I have to travel, I have to listen, and I 
have to think a lot of things that might seem crazy. All small businesses should think out 
of their town, out of their city, out of their country. If you’re a real entrepreneur, there is 
always curiosity. If you don’t have curiosity, you’re a retired entrepreneur.
Alibaba’s existed for 18 years, and we are so influential in China, but nobody in America 
knows us. We’ve always tried to come to America. We’re not very successful, but we have 
patience. Now we say, “We do not want to make another Amazon, another eBay here—but 
we can make the small businesses go to China.” I’m not really that keen on making every 
American know about Alibaba, but I’m very keen on getting entrepreneurs to try Alibaba. 
We’re not an e-commerce company—we make other people do e-commerce. We think 
every company should be e-commerce.
If Amazon can help you, go on using Amazon. If eBay can help you, go on using eBay. 
What I’m telling everybody is, we should not globalize the Alibaba business. We should 
globalize e-commerce.  
17
INC. HOW I DID IT
if you get shelf space and think you’ve made it, you’re mistaken. On the shelf, you’re just 
inventory. The game is to get off the shelf and into the hands of the consumer.
In 2010, we noticed that customers were turning bottles to see how much sugar was in-
side of them. You’d win or lose on that basis, and I saw it coming—a growing unwilling-
ness in customers to drink sugar. This is the issue that has fueled our growth. We spent 
five years handing out samples, telling customers about coffeefruit and how Bai has only 
five calories and one gram of sugar. It wasn’t glamorous, yet it worked—no other beverage 
could make the same claims.
The longer you’re in the beverage industry, the more you realize you’re really in the dis-
tribution industry. In 2014, we signed a national distribution deal with Dr Pepper Snapple 
Group. Sixteen months later, DPSG made a $15 million investment.
I wanted to maximize the brand’s potential—we couldn’t be just another product on a 
company ’s truck; we needed to be a top priority. It was a tough decision, but I initiated 
the process and told J.P.Morgan, which had given us $50 million of financing years earli-
er, that I wanted to change the industry with a company embracing our vision. Eventually, 
DPSG said that it wanted to go where we were going, and to be part of the solution: to 
help the industry end its dependency on sugar and artificial sweeteners. That’s the bed-
rock of our relationship with DPSG.
Bai was early, but we were on to a fundamental change. This is the first year bottled water 
has surpassed soda in sales. Ten years from now, the beverage landscape is going to be 
very different, and Bai will be a big part of that change.  
Bai Brands founder 
Ben Weiss created a 
low-calorie, low-sugar, 
antioxidant-rich beverage 
based on coffeefruit–the 
bitter pulp that surrounds 
coffee beans and is usually 
discarded. After launching 
from his Princeton, New 
Jersey, basement, Weiss 
spent years giving out 
samples, and landed on the 
Inc. 500 in 2015. This year, 
Dr Pepper Snapple Group 
bought Bai for $1.7 billion. 
–As told to Will Yakowicz
Ben Weiss | Bai Brands  •  Beverages
How Low Sugar Took Me to a 
Sweet $1.7 Billion Sale
Jack Ma | Alibaba  •  China’s largest e-tail conglomerate  continued

in 2016, we saw a shift in the market. There was less 
venture capital deal activity, so it was crucial that we 
control our destiny by getting to profit and reaccelerat-
ing growth. Besides making layoffs, we reduced the cost 
of putting together a box of makeup. We developed ma-
chinery from an old French design we found in one of 
our factories. Traditionally, commerce is a pick-and-pack 
operation, but you can automate that. We reduced human touches by more than half.  
We cut millions from our monthly expenses.
We also stopped spending on marketing. We were still working on social media and PR, 
but we turned off television for almost six months. That was painful, but it was the only 
way we were going to learn what was really driving value, so we could control our invest-
ments. The most important thing for an entrepreneur to know is how much halo effect 
any marketing effort has.
At first, I tried to shelter the team from the things that were really hard, because I didn’t 
want them to be distracted. I underestimated how valuable it is to have all staff members 
feel how important their decisions are, and to let them share in the bad things. This maps 
onto what I believe as a mother. Are you going to be there every day to comfort your 
kids, or are you going to teach them how to comfort themselves? The reality of pursuing 
something exceptional is that it is always hard. There is no other side of hard. It’s about 
reframing your perspective and loving the hard. Last year, we did more than $200 million 
in revenue, and in January we turned a profit.
Emotionally, it was horrible. The only thing that keeps you going is that you love the busi-
ness more than you love yourself.   
Katia Beauchamp launched 
Birchbox, along with 
Harvard B-school classmate 
Hayley Barna, in New 
York City in 2010. They 
vaulted the beauty product 
sampling service to more 
than a million subscribers, 
and a reported $485 
million valuation, in just 
under four years. (Barna 
left in 2015, but remains 
a board member.) In 2016, 
under pressure to generate 
profits, Beauchamp had to 
cut staff by 25 percent, to 
about 230, and scale back 
plans to open additional 
retail stores. Beauchamp 
got Birchbox into the black, 
and investors responded, 
allowing the company to 
raise another $15 million. 
–As told to Zoë Henry
Katia Beauchamp | Birchbox  •  Beauty products sampling service
How I Made the Tough  
Decisions to Get Into the Black
18
INC. HOW I DID IT
“The most important 
thing for an entrepre-
neur to know is how 
much halo effect any 
marketing effort has.”

we got overly ambitious and decided to start both local 
delivery and national shipping. I didn’t do a whole lot of re-
search; we just started taking orders through our website. I 
reached out to the FDA and said I wanted to make sure we 
were doing everything by the book.
At the time, our production was inconsistent. We learned 
quickly you can’t just take a recipe and scale it using the 
same proportions. We’d have these crazy variations in flavor 
profiles. We didn’t realize how crucial the cold chain was—
from where you store the fruit to where you press it to how 
you deliver the juice. You need a consistent temperature.
When the FDA inspector arrived, I assumed that I’d just tell her about making juice, who 
I was, the history of the company, etc. I walked her through the production line. At every 
station, she took notes furiously but didn’t speak. At the end she said, “What you’re currently 
doing requires me to shut you down.”
It was like a bomb had dropped. My plea was “I called with truly good intent—I want to make 
sure that I’m doing everything the right way.” I asked if she’d be willing to work with me in-
stead of just forcing us to close. She agreed to give us 30 days as long as I kept her in the loop 
every step of the way.
We addressed the cold chain first. It was a massive investment, but it allowed us to stay open. 
With our savings and $50,000 from friends and family, we rented a refrigerated truck until 
the one we purchased arrived. We also turned the entire back of our facility into one huge 
refrigerator so we could control the temperature during the pressing process. After several 
months of back-and-forth— it felt like years—we got word that everything we had done was 
acceptable. I finally felt like we were playing with the big boys. More important, though, it 
changed the way we did business. Every step in the process became about quality.   
Hayden Slater opened 
Pressed Juicery in 2010 with 
two friends who shared 
his devotion to fresh juice. 
Each put in $30,000. They 
set up in the back of a 
Beverly Hills cupcake shop. 
Just as the company began 
to expand, things got sticky 
with a visit from the FDA. 
–As told to Lindsey Blakely
Hayden Slater | Pressed Juicery  •  Fresh juice retailer
How an FDA Threat  
Made Me a Great Operator
19
INC. HOW I DID IT
“We didn’t realize how 
crucial the cold chain 
was—from where you 
store the fruit to where 
you press it to how you 
deliver the juice. You 
need a consistent  
temperature.”

