 
 
 
 
By Igor Ledochowski
 
 
 How To Practice 
Hypnosis Without Fear 
DVD Transcript Manual 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
2 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
DVD #1 – Hypnosis Practice Foundations & How To Easily Find Practice Volunteers ..... 4 
Introduction ................................................................................................................. 4 
Introduction To Demo ................................................................................................. 6 
Demo: No Fear Induction ............................................................................................. 7 
Demo: Debriefing Process .......................................................................................... 14 
The Unconscious Mind............................................................................................... 20 
The Hypnotic Context ................................................................................................ 23 
The ABS Formula........................................................................................................ 27 
Where To Find Volunteers ......................................................................................... 29 
DVD #2 – Hypnotic Frame Control & Zero Performance Pressure Hypnosis ................. 36 
Hypnotic Frame Control ............................................................................................. 36 
No More Fear ............................................................................................................ 42 
Hypnotic Pretalk ........................................................................................................ 47 
How The Pretalk Works ............................................................................................. 49 
Demo: Sessions 1-2 “Hypnotic Focus” ........................................................................ 52 
Breakdown: Sessions 1-2 ........................................................................................... 57 
DVD #3 – Somatic Trances, Suggestion Experiments & How To Put It All Together ..... 65 
Demo: Sessions 3-4 “Somatic Trances” ...................................................................... 65 
Breakdown: Sessions 3-4 ........................................................................................... 79 
Demo: Sessions 5-6 “Suggestion Experiments” .......................................................... 87 
Breakdown: Sessions 5-6 ........................................................................................... 99 
Practice Without Fear .............................................................................................. 101 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................... 103 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
3 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
 
 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear is the sole property of Street Hypnosis Publishing (including, 
but not limited to text, content, graphics, video and audio) and is protected by copyright as a 
collective work or compilation under U.S. copyright and other laws. You must abide by all additional 
copyright notices or restrictions contained in this law. 
YOU MAY NOT POST ON A WEB SITE OR CREATE A WEB FRAME AROUND ANY PART OF THIS SERVICE 
(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, TEXT, CONTENT, PHOTOGRAPHS, VIDEO AND AUDIO). 
YOU MAY NOT COPY, REPRODUCE, DISTRIBUTE, PUBLISH, DISPLAY, PERFORM, MODIFY, CREATE 
DERIVATIVE WORKS, TRANSMIT, OR IN ANY WAY EXPLOIT ANY PART OF THIS SERVICE, EXCEPT 
THAT YOU MAY DOWNLOAD MATERIAL FROM THIS SERVICE FOR YOUR OWN PERSONAL, 
NONCOMMERCIAL USE AS FOLLOWS: YOU MAY MAKE ONE MACHINE READABLE COPY AND/OR ONE 
PRINT COPY THAT IS LIMITED TO OCCASIONAL ARTICLES OF PERSONAL INTEREST ONLY. 
WITHOUT LIMITING THE GENERALITY OF THE FOREGOING, YOU MAY NOT DISTRIBUTE ANY PART OF 
THIS SERVICE OVER ANY NETWORK, INCLUDING A LOCAL AREA NETWORK, NOR SELL NOR OFFER IT 
FOR SALE. IN ADDITION, THESE FILES MAY NOT BE USED TO CONSTRUCT ANY KIND OF DATABASE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
4 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
DVD #1 – Hypnosis Practice Foundations & 
How To Easily Find Practice Volunteers 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Welcome to Street Hypnosis. My name is Igor Ledochowski and in this training program 
I'd like to take you through something which I think is very important in any novice 
hypnosis career. You see I remember when I first started off in hypnosis, I'd go to a 
seminar or read something in a book, maybe watch a DVD, I'd be terrified going home to 
actually practice it. I had this huge amount of pressure but felt like what if it goes 
wrong? What if I do it and I get egg all over my face and I embarrass myself by failing? 
 
What I've learned of course in the years since then travelling around the world to meet 
many great hypnotists and developing myself as a hypnotist, is that all those concerns I 
had were really stuff I was creating by myself. I was putting myself in a situation where 
hypnosis stopped being easy, it stopped being fun, and a lot of fear and pressure 
resulted because of that. 
 
I would like to show you in this training program how to remove all of that fear, how to 
make hypnosis easy and fun again, and how to ensure that you can practice this 
naturally with pretty much anyone that you meet, how to entice them to become your 
subject, your volunteer, and how to do a great job with them when you're actually doing 
hypnotic sessions with them.  
 
What you’ll discover throughout this training program is that once you understand the 
principle of hypnosis, and rest assured we will go through them step-by-step, then 
expressing them hypnotically even in a more sort of conversational covert setting 
becomes very, very easy to do. Those are the things I want to take you through. 
 
So as a quick overview of the program that you'll be experiencing here, first of all we're 
going to go through the principles in hypnosis. Some like a crash course on what you're 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
5 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
trying to achieve with every session just so that when you have a real client there with 
you and you're starting to do your induction and so on you’ve got like a mental checklist 
and you realize that you don't want to move on from one point, until you've succeeded 
with the other. Once you've gone through that mental checklist for you, those principles 
in hypnosis, the next step will be to walk through a couple of different sessions that you 
can run. 
 
Now these sessions are very important. In these sessions I will teach you how to train a 
hypnotic subject so that they become very responsive to you. Now, we won’t be going 
to the whole crazy extreme into hallucinations and lots of stuff. We could do, but that's 
far too far advanced if you're having anxiety and fear even starting to practice right now.  
 
I will show you how to make sessions, and design your own session by the way, that 
they're really easy to do, they're simple, they're fun and have your volunteer sitting at 
the edge of their seat wanting more. That's exactly where you want them at the end of 
the process; they should want to volunteer or maybe even offer to pay you, to come 
back and do it again and again and again. 
 
There are many tricks on how to make this happen, and we’ll cover all of them 
throughout this program. The main thing I want you to think about as we begin these 
training sessions however, is and this is the  holy grail shall we say, the cardinal rule that 
you’re going to burn inside your mind whilst you're doing this, and that is - hypnosis is 
easy, hypnosis is fun. If hypnosis is no longer easy for you, or it's no longer fun for you 
then you have done something, you've added something to the mix that you really don't 
need to be adding. By adding those things you will increase anxiety, you will increase 
fear, you will increase that sense of pressure, you don't know what you do or how you 
do it. 
 
When you remove those things it'll become easy again, it'll become fun again. So keep 
that in the back of your mind, it's easy and it's fun. If it's not easy and it's not fun, ask 
yourself questions like what have I added? What am I trying to achieve that isn't part of 
the program that we'll be showing you here, that’s adding that extra pressure. So with 
that thought in mind, whenever you're ready, tune into the next session where we'll 
start diving into the heart of hypnosis. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
6 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Introduction To Demo 
 
Igor: 
So welcome back guys. I am here with Reanus who's volunteered to come 
up. Now Reanus and I haven't really met before, we've had a two minute 
conversation as you walked in the door, is that right?  
 
Reanus:  
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So the reason I have Reanus here again, a naive subject in that sense, is 
because I want to show you exactly what I might do if I was training 
someone, especially back in the early days where I didn't quite have the 
confidence to go straight in for a big, full blown induction.  
 
Now, I'm going to give you a quick demonstration of the kinds of things 
we'll be doing throughout this program and later on we'll revisit things and  
I’ll show you step-by-step how to do them and we'll breakdown how they 
happen and so on. Right now I just want you to have a sense of what the 
first session or the second session might actually look like. 
 
Now you may notice I've got a pen and a pad of paper or maybe one of 
those clipboards. Again I'll explain later on in this program why these are 
important. Right now it doesn't really matter what's written on here I 
don't actually need this.  
 
In fact I don't need any of this to do the practice. But this is going to be a 
very valuable prop that’s going to help change the dynamic to a certain 
degree, so that it takes pressure off you as the other person's critical 
factor actually diminishing further and further.  
 
And rest assured, we'll come onto that again, for now I just want you to 
observe that I have something to write, on like a clipboard or a block of 
paper, a clipboard looks even more official. I have a volunteer subject, and 
once again we'll show you how to get that in due course.  And then you 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
7 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
can just dive in and go through a series of experiments to set the scene for 
a full blown hypnotic affect. 
 
So with that thought in mind let's get over here.  
 
 
Demo: No Fear Induction 
 
Igor:  
So how are you doing? 
 
Reanus:  
 Fine thank you. 
 
Igor:   
Fantastic. The first thing I want to say is thank you for coming in and 
volunteering for this.  
 
Reanus:   
Thank you very much. 
 
Igor:   
Now what we're doing here is as you know I'm a hypnotist, however today 
we aren’t actually looking directly at hypnosis, we're doing a bit of a 
research program here to find out how the mind responds to different 
scenarios, different settings and so on. Does that make sense to you?  
 
Reanus:  
Absolutely. 
 
Igor:   
All right. So there's nothing huge expected of you, I just want you to relax, 
just kind of go with it and enjoy the process to see where your mind takes 
you. It's a much an exploration of yourself for you, and it shows me how 
different people react, respond and so on. Does that make sense? 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
Okay. So I'll be taking some notes along the way, is that okay for you if I 
just take stuff? 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
8 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Reanus:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
It just allows me to keep track of where we're at, right? So the first thing I 
want you to do is, before we begin any of this, I want you to just collect a 
kind of mental image a little bit. So just close your eyes. Very good and 
when you're ready come on back. How was that? 
 
Reanus:     
Relaxing. 
 
Igor:    
That's easy to do right. 
 
Reanus:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
So this is not very taxing, right? Good. Now what I’m going to ask you to 
do this time, it's exactly the same thing, I mean I'm going to guide you 
through it of course. I'm going to ask you to close your eyes. That's right. 
And now start collecting all of your attention.  
 
Collect all of your attention in the here and now. Let thoughts of the past 
be in the past, let plans for the future remain in the future for now. You 
can come back to these things later, just collect all of your attention to the 
here and now, when you have a sense that you've achieved that, then 
come on back with your eyes open. Very good.  
 
Once again that's pretty easy, isn’t it? Right? So what did you experience 
whist that was happening? 
 
Reanus:   
I got relaxed there and the feeling was from my brain down to my body. So 
my hands got a little warm... 
 
Igor:   
Beautiful. Excellent. This is great you're doing a good job. So you found 
yourself relaxing a little bit more.  
 
Reanus:   
Yeah. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
9 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:    
You found your body responding a little bit. 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
So there's some sensations changing, beautiful we'll keep a note of that, 
and tell me about your actual mental experience. Do you find your mind 
becoming more sharp, more relaxing at the same time? 
 
Reanus:   
More concentrated to the center, yeah. 
 
Igor:   
So all your attention’s coming to the center but it's also kind of relaxed, 
you're not trying to force anything, is that right? 
 
Reanus:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
Fantastic, thank you for this. So next cycle, and again go ahead and close 
your eyes, collect all your tension at the center. You'll notice it getting 
even sharper this time, a bit more refined, easier. And as you do that, 
notice how your breathing, is changing, and how that affects those 
sensations you had before, and are having right now.  
 
I want you to get a full sense of awareness of those changes in your 
breathing, your relaxed focus, your mind calming, and your body having 
sensations. Then reverse the process and bring yourself back, with your 
eyes open. Good stuff. You’re doing a great job, did you feel that? Isn't 
that pleasant? 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah this is great. 
 
Igor:   
Good man. So how was that different to the exercise you did a moment 
ago? 
 
Reanus:   
More or less, but I kept concentrating in the center of my head and my 
breath was coming automatically, subconsciously. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
10 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:   
Exactly, your breath was coming automatically, it was unconscious, 
slowing down, and if I heard you correctly, there was an intensification, we 
were here before and you kind of went a little deeper and there was  more 
of whatever there was that was happening. Beautiful, you’re doing a great 
job. Is there anything else that you experienced there that was interesting 
for you? 
 
Reanus:   
Nothing in particular, no. 
 
Igor:   
Good. Ready for the next exercise? 
 
Reanus: 
Absolutely.  
 
Igor: 
You'll love this one, if you like the ones you've done so far you’ll love this 
one. Ready for this? Close your eyes. That's right once again collect all of 
your attention, feel the sensations in the body, notice your breathing 
shifting, as you go deeper. There you go, that's it. And then find comfort or 
relaxation inside, where is your body feeling most comfortable, or relaxed. 
 
Reanus:   
Stomach. 
 
Igor:   
Your stomach right. So put all your attention on your stomach and feel 
what happens to that sensation, when your relaxed concentration goes 
there. When you're ready, bring yourself back again. Good job how was 
that? 
 
Reanus:   
Good. 
 
Igor:    
Interesting. 
 
Reanus:  
 Yes. 
 
Igor:    
Do you notice the stepping down process going even deeper than before? 
 
Reanus:   
It feels like with your stomach or belly, it’s more or less quiet.  

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
11 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:   
Right, so you felt the experience of relaxation starting to grow, is that 
right? 
 
Reanus:   
That's right.  
 
Igor:   
Like a Buddha belly, exactly, you might be enlightened by the end of this 
process, who knows. Great job, really good job. Are you enjoying this? 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah fantastic. 
 
Igor:   
 Is it valuable to you? 
 
Reanus:   
Absolutely. 
 
Igor:   
Good, alright. So here's what I'm going to do next, and this is great I'm 
really appreciating your helping me this to a little bit of research and it's 
really easy, right, because your mind is doing all the work. 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
We just sit there and just watch. 
 
Reanus:   
Just relax. 
 
Igor:    
Is it valuable to you? 
 
Reanus:  
 Absolutely. 
 
Igor:   
So now I’m going to do the whole process again. Now we're going to add a 
little bit more variety into it, so you can experience some different things, 
is that okay? 
 
Reanus:   
Okay. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
12 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:   
Now I warn you, some of those things you've experienced, some of these 
things will be a little trickier. All we're doing is we're navigating your mind 
to find out where your mind naturally has its strengths, where your mind is 
not naturally so strong.  
 
So right. It doesn't mean anything in particular, it just allows me to get a 
profile of your internal architectural, inside your mind. So go ahead and 
close your eyes. That's right, and already you're concentrating, which is 
good.  
 
And noticing your breathing, feeling the sensations in your body and 
whatever that relaxation was, is that the same place you feel most 
comfortable now, or is it somewhere else that's getting more 
comfortable? 
  
Reanus:   
It's a feeling towards my hands, feeling a little warmer. 
 
Igor:   
Beautiful, so your hands are feeling warmer and a little thicker, beautiful. 
And just enjoy that sensation growing and intensifying as we go along. 
Now I'd like for you to just be aware of your head, the tilt of your head, 
the angle in which it's being held; that's it. Can you sense whether your 
head is tilting slightly to the left or to the right. 
 
Reanus:   
Slightly forward, slightly to the left. 
 
Igor:   
Slightly to the left. Notice your breathing. And now what I’d like you to do 
is just begin to tilt your head ever so slightly more to the left and then 
back neutral. Make it such a small motion, that you can barely perceive it. 
There you go. Just barely move to the left and then bring it back to center, 
and then back to the center. That's it. And then just relax your mind for a 
moment, just stop trying anything. 
 
Now I'd like you to move it barely to the right and compare the sensations 
moving to the right to the ones you had a moment ago on the left. Barely 
moving to the right and then back to center, and then repeat it that again. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
13 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Barely to the right and back to center. And see if you can make it even 
smaller than that now, just even half that distance, barely to the right. 
There you go and back to the center, noticing the subtle changes, 
compared to when you went to the left. Now go back to the center and 
forget about that, just relax comfortably. I'd like for you to notice your 
breathing. I'd like to ask, have you asked yourself some questions, no need 
to answer out loud. Can you tell where your breathing begins? 
 
No need to answer out loud, we'll talk about this later. Yeah. Can you tell 
the path the breath takes through the nose, throat, lungs down, feel your 
diaphragm reaction at some point? That's it.  
 
Are you able to distinguish the left lung from the right lung? Does one side 
of your body feel like more air is getting into it? That's okay if you don't, 
it's a very subtle distinction. I just want you to be aware of what's 
happening inside your body. And just rest easy again, stop trying anything. 
Relax and let go.  
 
You're doing a good job, a great gob in fact. And of course you're learning 
all kinds of things about your mind and your body, many of which you may 
not even be aware of yet, but we can talk about that later. And now you 
just get to sit there and relax comfortably.  
 
Here's another type of exercise for you. I'm going to say a word and I'd like 
for you to notice what mental experience you have as a result of it. There's 
no need for you to do or try anything, just listen o the word as I repeat it 
and notice what your mind spontaneously does with it. Just nod your head 
slightly if you understand that. Very good.  
 
So, here's the word for you, it's a very common word, bathroom. 
Bathroom. Just notice the experiences your mind brings. Is there a picture 
there? That's right, bathroom. You don't have to do anything with it, 
there's no need to try and think of a bathroom or remember one. If you do 
that's just fine, the most interesting part is, what happens naturally when 
you hear the word bathroom? We'll talk about that in a moment's time. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
14 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Now clear your mind and relax again. You’re doing a very good job. Are 
you enjoying this process? Very good. Now I'm going to use a different 
kind of word. A different kind of word. Notice what happens this time.  
 
The word for you is happy or happiness. Happy. Perhaps there's a mental 
image again, perhaps there's a feeling that begins to develop, perhaps 
there's a change in your awareness. Happy. It doesn't matter what it is, 
just notice whatever happens, happy, ….happy, ….happy. That's good. And 
now stop that and let that fade away, whatever that was. You're doing a 
great job, very good job. I'd like for you just to rest for a few moments and 
just enjoy the fact that you get to be in this wonderful state, and  it is a 
good state, isn't it?  
 
Reanus:   
Lovely. 
 
Igor:   
So just enjoy that for awhile and allow these experiences to assimilate in 
the back of your mind, no need for you to do anything. It's something that 
you can learn from about yourself as a human being. No need to do 
anything in particular right now, just rest easy. Let your mind kind of 
gently wind down. You’ve done a little bit of work. Just let it rest easy and 
rebalance itself naturally. Very good. Then whenever you're ready, just 
bring yourself back with your eyes open feeling refreshed, alert, fantastic. 
Good job, well done.  
 
Reanus:  
Thank you. 
 
 
Demo: Debriefing Process 
 
Igor:    
Did you enjoy that process? 
 
Reanus:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
Yeah. Did you expect it to be quite as profound as that? 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
15 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Reanus:   
No. 
 
Igor:   
No, right? 
 
Reanus:   
Because it was special in a different way.  
 
Igor:   
 Exactly, it was special in a different way.  
 
Reanus:   
There was more time, you have sort of a session and then sort of a 
process. But this concentrated, for instance in the brain, so actually you 
can beware of movements or effects in the brain, you can feel it. 
 
Igor:    
Right. So you can kind of sense your own mind at work. 
 
Reanus:   
That's right that's what you were feeling, yeah. 
 
Igor:    
What do you think about that, having a sense of your mind? 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah unexpected.  
 
Igor:    
It's unexpected right? 
 
Reanus:   
Right. 
 
Igor:    
Did you enjoy the whole process? 
 
Reanus:   
Yes absolutely. 
 
Igor:   
You did a great job. So tell me what kind of things did you notice as you 
were going through? You went through a couple of different phases right? 
In the first phase you were basically just focusing your attention and 
noticing whatever was coming, you had sensations in your body, your 
breathing and that sort of stuff. So talk me through what kind of things can 
you remember about that phase? 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
16 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Reanus:   
What was very particular was the movement for me to the left, that was a 
conscious move, it was hardly any affect. The movement to the right was 
subconscious, it happened and it gave a sensation, it gave a warmth in the 
brain. 
 
Igor:   
Beautiful. So you notice a difference between when you're doing 
something on purpose and you're trying to do it... 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
...versus when things were just happening. And did it surprise you when 
this happened, when your head moved by itself? 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah absolutely, and especially the sensation you could sense anyway. 
 
Igor:    
Right. 
 
Reanus:   
Definitely feel a warming sensation in the location. 
 
Igor:   
So in other words, when you weren't trying to make it happen you got a 
secondary payoff as well. You not only got the movement but it was an 
extra payoff that came with it. That's fantastic you're going to make a 
great hypnotic subject once we get into hypnosis, as though we haven't 
even started yet. 
 
Reanus:   
The moving of the breath I could not... 
 
Igor:   
 Distinguish as easy. 
 
Reanus:   
Not distinguish as easy it only gave me a sensation somewhere. 
 
Igor:    
That's fine. 
 
Reanus:   
The lungs whether it was left or right, there was a sensation in the left 
lung. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
17 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Igor:    
Beautiful. 
 
Reanus:   
Which was warm and feeling bigger than the right side. 
 
Igor:   
Right. Excellent. So you're already then getting used to start having 
interaction with your unconscious mind. 
 
Reanus:   
Definitely. 
 
Igor:   
You're in a processes. What those things mean right now, well it's the first 
time we've done this, so you don’t necessarily need to know, but it's very 
interesting to actually see your own mind and body at work like that, isn't 
it? 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah that's right. Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
So let's turn to our final phase when we threw out different kind of words 
and so on. How do you experience that? 
 
Reanus:   
The bathroom was for me a clear picture, big picture wide. Like I would say 
3D, was me in the shower. 
 
Igor:    
Right. 
 
Reanus:   
A feeling of warm shower and a sensation in the whole body. 
 
Igor:   
So you had a picture, the sensational in the whole body, it was very clear 
like you were putting yourself there in and a virtual reality shower as well. 
 
Reanus:  
It was a full... 
 
Igor:    
Beautiful. 
 
Reanus:   
...shot. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
18 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Igor:    
Did you expect it to be quite as vivid and clear as that? 
 
Reanus:   
No but it was there and it just came straight to me.  
 
Igor:    
It just came. 
 
Reanus:   
It was there. 
 
Igor:   
Beautiful. Now this is again an important element here. Once we get into 
the hypnosis sections, where what you discovered is the power of not 
trying too hard, you just let it happen and when it happened then it 
surprised you with the intensity of it yes. 
 
Reanus:   
Absolutely yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Beautiful. Great job. 
 
Reanus:   
I'm getting no picture but a very pleasant sensation. 
 
Igor:    
A good feeling. 
 
Reanus:   
My face got softer and I thought, okay. 
 
Igor:   
Right. So your whole nervous system, your whole body was responding. 
Would it be fair to say that it's moving in the direction of happiness? 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah absolutely.  
 
Igor:    
So not necessarily a picture, but a feeling was aroused. 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah the emotion was there. I mean the emotion like being happy. 
 
Igor:   
Beautiful. Excellent. Is there anything else in terms of the session that you 
want to talk about or say? 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
19 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Reanus:   
No I guess it was one of those great experiences that you could actually 
sense something with your brain... 
 
Igor:    
Wonderful. 
 
Reanus:   
...which is quite... 
 
Igor:    
It's quite exciting isn't it? 
 
Reanus:   
That is exciting. 
 
Igor:    
Right.  
 
Reanus:   
Definitely need to try it again to make it work for yourself. 
 
Igor:   
For sure. Let me just have a pause here. Now for those of you at home this 
is very important. I want you to notice the way his face is lighting up as 
he's talking about these things. When we come to the next session we'll 
do a few debriefs and I'll teach you how to do these sorts of processes. I'll 
explain exactly how important this is, for now I just want you to notice 
how he's lighting up while he's talking about this, because this is a very 
exciting thing for you isn't it. 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah absolutely. 
 
Igor:   
It's a genuine discovery that is, I mean let's put it this way, are you glad 
you volunteered this morning? 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah definitely. 
 
Igor:    
Yeah and it was worthwhile. 
 
Reanus:   
Yeah. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
20 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:   
Would you want to come back and volunteer again to continue these kinds 
of explorations. Great. Well then we'll see how this thing continues and 
maybe we'll have a chance for you to return and see about having you  
back up afterwards. Okay. Good job thank you very much. 
 
Reanus:   
Thank you. 
 
 
The Unconscious Mind 
 
So welcome back again. I hope you enjoyed that demonstration that we had with our 
first volunteer. Rest assured that everything that was in that will be easy for you to do, 
we'll break that down step-by-step, show you many different variations of the things we 
put in there. I just wanted you to see what the whole package can look like and the kind 
of scope that you can have with it.  
 
Each step is simple, each step is easy, each step is progressive and turns your hypnotic 
subject into a greater and better hypnotic subject as you progress. We will talk about 
those things as we get to the sessions and how to design those sessions, what to put 
into them and how to do them step-by-step. 
 
Before we get down to that road however, I'd like to have a little word with you about 
some of the hypnotic principles that we're trying to express. Why? Because doing steps 
by themselves, doing hypnosis by numbers is really pointless, you don't learn anything 
from that. You get maybe a slight satisfaction. It's more important to me however, that 
you learn about the principles that we're using here so that these exercises are a 
demonstration of the principles and actions, and that way you get to learn the genuine 
hypnotic skill. 
 
So what are the principles? Well Principle #1 you have an unconscious mind, everyone 
has an unconscious mind. If you're human, then you have an unconscious mind, we 
know this for a fact. Ask any neural scientist, there are stuff happening in the back of 
your brain that you have no awareness of and it keeps right on happening whether 
you're thinking about it or not. Your heart will beat every day of your life and the day 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
21 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
that it stops beating for a persistent period of time, is a day you probably stop caring 
about it, because you won't be around anymore. So what's making your heart beat? 
What's keeping it beating, what's changing the rhythm of your heart based on what 
you're doing? We'll call that your subconscious mind or your unconscious mind. 
 
The same is true of memory and learning and so on, if I ask you for your phone number 
you could tell me your phone number. You weren’t thinking about your phone number 
before I mentioned it. Where was that information before you retrieved it? You might 
say it was in the back of your mind somewhere, that back of your mind is your 
unconscious mind once again, and those are the areas that we are trying to explore.  
 
Notice that any unconscious act feels easy and natural. If they have to stress, strain, 
work hard or try and do something then they're no longer using their unconscious mind 
they're now using consciousness in a different way. It's not necessarily a bad thing to 
use consciousness in that way, it has some great value and some great uses. However, 
as a hypnotist that is not the kind of thinking or the kind of mental process that we 
want, we want a genuinely unconscious one. 
 
When you think back on the session you just saw, the demonstration I just gave you, 
you’ll have noticed, actually in fact in the debrief he himself was saying some things, 
well nothing really happened, I did it on purpose and other things happened by itself 
and he had some other experience as a result. That's a classic example of the  
unconscious mind in action. Now the good news is the unconscious mind has supported 
you for your entire life. This morning you probably got dressed, you probably brushed 
your teeth or had a shower. Did you have to think about any of those things? Did you 
have to remember that¸ oh my God what do I do with this brush thing? Which way do I 
turn it to brush my teeth? 
 
Now chances are you just put the toothpaste on, you stuck in your mouth and you 
scrubbed away and thought about other things. So the fact that your unconscious mind 
is running the operation for you, means that your conscious mind is free to plan your 
day, to think ahead, and all these other things. It's a wonderful gift to have that. Also, 
you’ll have experienced hypnotic trances, pretty much every day of your life because in 
order to run a habit you go into a mini-trance so that your conscious mind is free to go 
somewhere else. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
22 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Driving a car for example, a lot of people have the experience that they leave their office 
or a place of work they're familiar with and they start driving home. The next thing they 
know is they pull into the driveway and they have no recollection of the last hour of 
their trip. All they know is they left and they arrived and they maybe kind of vaguely 
know, yeah I was driving and that's about it. That's a classic example of a driving trance 
or highway hypnosis. So you have an unconscious mind. That unconscious mind does 
things for you automatically. A trance is the medium through which the unconscious 
mind moves your consciousness mind aside, in order to be able to start doing what it 
wants to do, or needs to do, because you've asked it to. 
 
So we have those three core ideas, an unconscious mind, unconscious activity and 
trance as the medium through which the unconscious mind can express itself, therefore 
it’s simple, it's easy and it's natural. If you ever learn something, if you ever change 
something, if you've ever grown as a human being, then you have been in hypnosis at 
some point in time to be able to assimilate all this information and come back as a 
different person. And that is the whole point of doing trance to help people grow and 
learn and explore in these ways. 
 
Now the reason I'm defining it in this particular way, is because when you start doing 
these exercises, as we'll go into in future sessions. You will notice that it's actually very 
easy to do when you realize it's happening all the time. And the only thing we're doing 
with these exercises, these are actually mini inductions, the only thing we're trying to do 
is not create some magical state of mind that you've got to be terrified about, because 
my God it's so difficult to get and what if I don't get it right and I fail and I get nervous or 
the person tells me it hasn't worked, and so on, none of that. The only thing you have to 
think about is, well, this is easy and this is natural. And all I've got to do is create a 
situation in which it can arise naturally. How to create that, now that is the question? 
 
So when you tune into the next session we're going to focus specifically on how to 
create the context for hypnosis to occur. It's something I call the ABS Formula you may 
be familiar with it. We're going to look at the ABS Formula and all the principles inside of 
it because once you understand that formula, it will allow you to basically create the 
context for trance, which means the context for the unconscious mind to express itself 
freely, pretty much anywhere you go. So I hope you look forward to joining me on that 
session because I certainly look forward to meeting you there again. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
23 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
The Hypnotic Context 
 
 
Welcome back again. Now in the previous sessions we kind of communicated the setup 
and the ideas of what to expect from this program. We've given you a demonstration of 
how you're going to start creating your own hypnotic sessions, which will allow you to 
practice step-by-step how to practice hypnosis, without any fear, anxiety or any of these 
other sorts of things. What I want to do now in this session is I want to focus on 
specifically the principles for creating hypnosis, for creating trance. 
 
When you understand these principles you will realize that every single exercise you do, 
whether it's the ones that we are going to be covering here in this particular program or 
it's an induction that you already know and love from other places you've learned them 
from, or it's something you wish to invent, they will always express the exact same 
principles. If they do not express the principles then really we'll have difficulty getting 
someone into hypnosis or creating trance. When all these principles are being 
expressed, then hypnosis is easy and surprisingly fun to do as well, so with that idea in 
mind let's dive into what the actual principles are. 
 
There are only four things that you have to think about. The first thing is the Hypnotic 
Context. The second, third and fourth thing are the ABS Formula. So it's just four things 
for you to keep in mind, four things for your mind to keep track of, and honestly that's 
pretty easy to do.  
 
So let's go and have a look at that first step the Hypnotic Context. What do I mean by 
that? Well the hypnotic context is the situation, the social circumstances you find 
yourself in. Let's put it this way, if I walked up to a complete stranger on the street and 
say "Go into trance now", well it could work, might not work. Depending on the person 
I'd say probably 1 in 10 people would respond to that, four or five people would look at 
me a bit funny and if I was convincing enough they might go ahead and do it. And 
another four or five people would look at me and think, you're really not right in the 
head. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
24 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 So we want to make sure that we have a context where those latter type of people can 
be invited in and take part as well. How do we do this? Well there's a couple of things 
that you want to be thinking about.  
 
1. You want to build rapport with a person. And by rapport, I mean two specific 
feelings that they have to experience;  
 
• they need to feel comfortable around you,  
• they need to trust you.  
 
After all, you're going to ask them to do things, like close their eyes inside your 
presence. If they think you're a mad axe murder they're not going to be sitting 
there with their eyes closed, well unless of course they think that you’re going to 
murder them otherwise. Not a happy place to take people to in hypnosis of 
course.  
 
So you want to make sure they feel comfortable and trusting, that's where your 
general mannerisms are going to come into place.  
 
You want to be polite with people, you want to be inviting, you want to be 
accepting of them, so that we have a sense that whatever's going to happen will 
be interesting and it will be fun and I'm not going to be in any danger, I'm not 
going to need to feel uncomfortable, embarrassed or anything like that. That's 
the kind of bedside manner if you like. 
 
So think of someone that you know who is just a really pleasant person, someone 
you like hanging around, someone who's nice to you and nice to be around them 
and emulate those characteristics. Smile, be friendly, those sort of things.  
 
Now, if you notice that your volunteer is feeling a little bit nervous, talk to them 
about it. If it's just them being a little bit like, oh, I don't know what to do, 
reassure them a little bit and the exercises that we'll be doing, and I'll show you 
how to do it when we get to that section, they will all show you how to step-by-
step reduce those kind of simple anxieties.  

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
25 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
However, if there's some bigger things going on, if they're terrified of you for 
example, if they really don't know what's going on and they're afraid that 
something bad is going to happen, you must take care of these things or find 
another volunteer, because otherwise, well really, the whole session is not going 
to have a huge amount of point to it. 
 
The final thing I'll say here is, and this is going to be true, something we'll 
reiterate when we get into the actual processes as well, is if at any point 
something unpleasant begins to happen, I'm talking about not just a little 
discomfort like, oh yeah I just have a little crink in my neck, I'm talking about an 
emotional ride which is a little bit negative or dark. You need to pause whatever 
you're doing and then reset the scene, reset the context so that the idea's always 
something positive is going to happen here. 
 
Now the reason I say this is, for those of you who are old hands at the game and 
are already a practicing hypnotherapist, there's no problem with problems, you 
can go and dive into them and help people resolve them and so on; that's just 
fine. However we're here specifically to focus on how to practice doing hypnosis 
without fear, anxiety or pressure. What that means is we're not doing therapy, 
and in fact I strongly recommend that you totally separate those two ideas inside 
your mind. When you're practicing you're practicing, when you're doing therapy, 
you're doing therapy and the two should not mix. 
 
So if anything negative starts coming up, you need to pause whatever you're 
doing, allow it to recede again, just chat with them, reset the context, make them 
feel comfort and trust, maybe have some fun, a little humor, and then go back to 
the session. If that same thing comes back a second time, well at that point, end 
the session and find a different volunteer because on that particular day, that 
particular person is not the right person to be working with. That's just a little tip 
about safety in general, about working with people. So then you respect them, 
you're actually taking care of them in the right way. 
 
2. The second thing that comes into the hypnotic context, you have the idea of 
rapport which are the feelings of comfort and trust their general expectations. 
That general expectation is going to be very important, what are they expecting 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
26 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
is going to happen here? If they're expecting the wrong things several things are 
going to happen.  
 
• Number #1 they may resist the process, they may fight you every inch of 
the way, which is not a wonderful place to be in. Believe me, I have done 
that and it's possible, but it's not fun.  
• On the other hand, if they have the wrong expectation then they put too 
much pressure on themselves and they'll try too hard and in doing so 
they'll activate the law of reverse affect, which means the harder they try 
the more they'll fail, which means you'll have failed as a hypnotist but not 
because you aren't a good hypnotist, because you failed to set the proper 
context to allow the unconscious mind to express itself. 
 
Notice from the session of the demonstration we already showed you the 
key to making hypnosis effortless is creating this context in which the 
unconscious mind is free to  express itself automatically without 
inhibitions. It isn't something that the person's trying to do, it's just that 
they're ready to do it they're allowing it to happen. That's going to be a 
crucial thing. So how do we set that context?  
 
The key here is called Frame Control. What frame are you setting so that it 
sets the expectations and the understanding of the person before they get 
into the session? Now we'll look at frame control separately when we go 
into the next few sessions. We'll start breaking down what frames are and 
how to use them to get volunteers and set the right expectations and so 
on. For the moment I just want you to have that inside your mind. 
 
The Hypnotic Context then has two key elements, rapport and expectation. Rapport is 
made up of two key elements, you have comfort and trust. If a person's feeling comfort 
towards you and feeling trust towards you, you have rapport, that's enough in terms of 
what we're doing here.  
 
An expectation is all about controlling the frame, what is expectation inside their mind? 
What is the frame or the idea you presented to them for them to be there in the first 
place? The frame control is trying to achieve two key ideas. It takes the pressure of you, 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
27 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
it puts a little bit of pressure on them but not too much, if there's too much pressure on 
them comfort is disappeared and now you're back to Square 1 again, so a little pressure 
is good, a lot of pressure not so good. And you'll get a chance to see the different 
versions as we progress through this presenter program. 
 
The ABS Formula 
 
Next we have those three key steps, so we got the four key steps, we’ve got a context, 
A, B and S. What does that ABS stand for?  
 
The A of the ABS Formula stands for Absorb Attention. You must have someone's 
attention. Now in terms of hypnosis, the only attention you actually need is the 
unconscious attention. Technically speaking, if you have their conscious attention 
somewhere but their unconscious attention's on you, that works. When you start 
practicing hypnosis, that is almost impossible to do because the nuances, the subtly of 
that is very difficult to grasp in the beginning. 
 
So, in order to ensure that you have unconscious attention what are you going to do, 
you're going to get all their conscious attention. So if you have all of their attention, not 
just some of it, all of their attention focused in on whatever activities you're doing 
you've just opened the door into hypnosis. You haven't stepped in yet, but the door is 
wide open. And a lot of people will accidently slip in, before they've realized that.  
 
We'll show you how to get all or some of the attention as we go into the actual training 
exercises later on. For now just keep that idea in mind. The ABS formula the first Step A 
get Attention. And A is for all of their attention, no split focus, no distraction, no mind 
going everywhere.  
 
Let's turn onto the next one. The B part of the formula stands for Bypass the Critical 
Factor. What is the critical factor? What are we talking about here? Is there some 
magical little thing that hypnotist are trying to bypass?  
 
Well the answer is yes and the answer is no. The critical factor is something that we as 
hypnotists have invented to describe a variety of mental machinery, shall we say, that 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
28 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
blocks the hypnotic process. Now the simplest way of thinking of the critical factor or 
thinking about it, is the No mind.  
 
Think of it this way, imagine a house that has many different rooms, one of those rooms 
is the Yes room or one of those rooms is the No room. When you're in the yes room 
people just want to agree with you. Whatever you say they will find a reason to agree 
with, even if it's something extreme they'll reject half of the stuff without even realizing 
because they'll focus in on just the one thing they can agree on. In the no room, you get 
the opposite effect, the exact opposite effect.  
 
What do you get in the no room, well let's step inside and whatever you offer them, 
whatever you say they will find a reason to say no, to reject the idea or to disagree with 
you. Now, no matter how agreeable what you say is, they will find some tiny little 
nuance and focus in on that and disagree on that, and by doing so of course, get rid of 
everything else as well. 
 
One of the ways to think about the critical factor and the way I'm going to encourage 
you to think about the critical factor, when you start off, is that the no room is too wide 
open, there's too much no going on, too much disagreement, too much rejecting of 
ideas. And all you want to do is move in from the no room into the yes room and it's a 
very simple process of how to get there.  
 
There are many different ways of doing this, in fact most inductions you come across, 
the thing that makes an induction unique isn't the maneuvers inside of it it's the specific 
method that particular induction is using in order to bypass the critical factor, to get 
them to accept trance.  
 
More on that as we get into the actual meat of the training program actual session and 
so on. I will show you specific processes to deconstruct the critical factor, to fatigue it so 
that this guardian at the gate that is preventing your hypnotic suggestions from passing 
through, basically gets tired out and goes and has a little nap. Meanwhile, the gate's 
wide open and your suggestions just roll on in. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
29 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
The final part of the formula is the S. The S stands for Stimulate the Unconscious Mind. 
This is really the payoff for hypnosis. Hypnosis is not about getting people into trance, 
it's about using trance for a specific reason.  
 
So if you are putting people in trance and just leaving them there well it's nice, it's a 
little map, I guess you call it a hypnotic meditation and that itself can be very useful. 
However, the suggestions that you're presenting, is the payoff for hypnosis. Either 
suggestions are accepted and activated inside that person and you have to succeeded as 
a hypnotist. If the suggestions aren't accepted and unconscious mind isn't responding to 
you, well you still failed as a hypnotist.  
 
So how do we get to that point? Once again we'll have lots of exercises to make the 
suggestion phase really easy for you, really simple to do. In fact you've already seen it in 
action, although haven't necessarily pulled out all the nuances yet. And rest assured I 
will do exactly that when the time is right for it.  
 
So we have the four key principles in hypnosis, the Hypnotic Context, rapport and 
expectation, we've got the ABS Formula. A stands for Absorb Attention, B stands for 
Bypass the Critical Factor, and S stands for Stimulate the Unconscious Mind. 
 
Once you do those four things, success is guaranteed. All we have to do now is figure 
out ways of making each of those four steps actually work in practice. So when you join 
me on the next couple of videos you'll see each of those steps being broken down and 
developed into a proper little formula, a proper way of thinking about it, to express that 
principle until you can put a check in the box and move onto the next step. So go ahead 
and join me on that and I think we'll have a lot of fun when we do. 
 
Where To Find Volunteers 
 
So welcome back again to the next session. Now before the sessions we looked at all 
kinds of different things, the setup, the hypnotic process. We looked of course at the 
four key principles, the hypnotic context, the ABS Formula and so on. You had a little bit 
of a demonstration of everything we'll be doing here.  

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
30 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Before we launch into the actual sessions themselves, there are some things very 
important for you to do now, which is you've got to find volunteers. Where are you 
going to find them? Well there's lots of different places you can go to which are 
available to you right now in fact, to find volunteers to start practicing with and I want 
to share some ideas with you to do that.  
 
The first thing that you're probably thinking about, that's what most people think about, 
is working with friends and family. Now friends and family can be a very useful source 
for volunteers. Why, because they’re handy, you're hanging out with them all the time, 
they're there. If they are supportive of you then it's a great audience to have because 
they'll come in and it's free bodies, you already have the relationship there's comfort 
and trust there and so on. So moving onto the other stages can be very easy. 
 
Here's the problem with friends and family. Friends and family have grown up with you, 
they've known you since you were four or five sometimes a zero year old child, and 
they've watched you grow up and they have a certain expectation of you as a person. 
Which means if you're going to jump out of that mold now, into the mold of I'm a 
hypnotist, I do hypnosis, sometimes with certain people friends and family, they don't 
like you jumping out of that mold. They don't like you becoming this unknown factor. 
They like knowing all about you. And at that point they can resist the process because 
they're fighting who you're becoming, because they'd rather know who you are now 
and keep you there because it's well defined. 
 
Now I want to mention here that it's not an ill intent anyway at all it's just how we are as 
people, we like to be able to predict how other people are going to be. You want to 
know that when you invite Auntie Mavis she's going to turn up an hour late and she'll 
turn up an hour late each time. It may frustrate you but the minute that that same 
Auntie Mavis turns up an hour early to all events, you may be shocked and you'll go are 
you okay, are you ill, has something happened to you? Because you're no longer able to 
predict her behavior and it's safe to be able to predict people's behavior. 
 
So if you start telling people I'm a hypnotist and some people will go, oh I don't know 
maybe he's just got another crazy idea in his head, then they may push back 
unconsciously to put you back in the box that they know you in. It doesn't always 
happen, but you need to be aware of this.  

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
31 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Why am I telling you this? Well, it's because believe it or not practicing with strangers or 
people you've just met, new people, can often be easier than practicing with family 
members. Because whilst you have to work more on the rapport side, building more 
comfort and trust and so on, strangers, people you've only just met or who only know 
you up to a little limited amount, those people have no boxes of you. They have no 
preconceptions about who you are, and so redefining yourself in their eyes is actually 
very straightforward to do. It's pretty easy to do.  
 
So, to sum this all up, yes, you can work with friends and family, expect some pushback. 
I will show you some frames on how to limit that kind of pushback with the people who 
are, shall we say more scared, or more worried by seeing you grow or change. And, I 
strongly encourage you to go out there and meet strangers and meet new people, 
people who have no idea who and what you are yet, because with those people you get 
to be something more, something new, more of who you are becoming, especially as a 
hypnotist. 
 
So those are the two types of people that you can approach, strangers and family 
members. Now I'm going to presume you already know where to find your family 
members and your friends, if you don't, well you have a very strange family so we're 
going to assume that's a given.  
 
With strangers how do you find the stranger and invite them back to your home or 
wherever you do your hypnosis to stop practicing with them? That's kind of a little 
strange, isn't it? There is a brand of hypnosis called Street Hypnosis, of course the title 
of our company is the same, where you go out and you meet complete strangers and 
you do hypnosis on the streets. 
  
Now that's a tremendous form of hypnosis to use to get the ball rolling, to get yourself 
into doing hypnosis and really learning the ins and outs of hypnosis, because now you 
really have to master your environment, master the hypnotic context and all the rest of 
it.  
 
However, if you have any concerns or fear or anxiety about hypnosis, the street is the 
last place you're going to be taking yourself to. And the reason I say this is however 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
32 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
uncomfortable you may be in the past by doing hypnosis and so on, that discomfort, the 
performance anxiety that comes with hypnosis is 10 times, 100 times worse live on the 
street for the complete man and stranger.  
 
Their expectations are higher, your success rate or rather if you present yourself 
properly, what you can achieve is out of this world and because the stakes are so much 
higher, the pressure's so much higher, and also the fear can be so much higher, at least 
until you learn how to work with that environment and become more familiar with it.  
 
So whilst I encourage everyone to do street hypnosis just for the experience of it, it's a 
great learning environment. I would not encourage you to use street hypnosis as your 
first learning point because it's easy to have all kinds of social anxieties and other things 
come into the mix that increase the pressure on you and therefore the fear that you 
have. Am I saying don't do it, not at all, if you want to do it knock yourself out, have a 
blast, have a whale of a time, and if you find there's fear, anxiety or that sense of 
pressure inside of you stopping you from doing it, then come back to the content of this 
course here, which will show you a much safer and much easier way to start things. 
 
So we've got family and friends as a category, we have strangers on the street as a 
category, the one that we're going to sideline for now because of the reason we just 
talked about. There's one more category or one more place that's really easy to find 
strangers and one where you'll find the perfect volunteers to make all this life easy for 
you.  
 
To find those people simply get yourself a hobby. It's a lot of fun to do because you can 
go all kinds of different places to meet all kinds of new people and when you're meeting 
these new people and they ask you what do you do and you say "Oh I'm a hypnotist. By 
the way, I'm doing a little research program on how the mind operates, would you like 
to take part? It's a little fascinating journey through your own brain. You will learn a lot 
about yourself and of course you'll help me with my little private study too." 
 
Now you've got the perfect frame. There is no results implied, you're not going to 
hypnotize them to be chickens you never said that. What you are doing is you're helping 
them explore their own mind whilst they're helping you to do research. That's a 
tremendous frame or position to be coming from in terms of the relationship that that 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
33 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
creates. We'll talk more about different frames you can present to people in the next 
session, for now I just want to give you a sense of how meeting strangers, in a point of 
contact like a hobby, can be a wonderful resource of meeting new people, meeting 
people you actually practice with.  
 
So the next question is where do you find these strangers? What kind of hobbies would 
you be doing? Well technically speaking any hobby is good enough whether you're going 
to a cooking school or cooking classes or you're going to a martial arts dojo, or you 
decide to go running with people they're all good enough because you're meeting 
people. And I think most people are intrinsically interested in the powers of the mind 
whether they realize it at first or not.  
 
However, there are certain venues that will lend themselves to hypnosis much more. In 
other words, the people that come to these sorts of things are much more curious by 
nature, that's what appeals to them in the first place, and I'd like to run you through 
some of these areas. 
 
The first thing you want to look at is basically any place where people pay attention to 
themselves more in terms of how they're growing as person. So we’re talking about 
things like health food stores. Health food stores are wonderful place because who go 
there are more conscious about themselves, taking care of themselves physically. And 
there's a strong correlation between them and those people who are interested 
developing themselves mentally. In our society at least there's a strong correlation. A lot 
of health food stores will also allow you to do little seminars or have events going on 
and it's great to come to one of these things and invite people to take part in these 
experiments and experiences that we're discussing in this course. 
 
Another great place to find these sorts of people are things like yoga classes. Why yoga, 
yoga's more than aerobics classes, it's a lot more than just bending and stretching. 
There is that whole Indian philosophy in the background the idea of mind, body 
expansion, connecting the mind with the body and growing as a person. So when you 
offer to them a chance to explore their own minds, well, it fits the yoga mindset 
perfectly. Similar to the whole yoga class is anything where the power of the mind 
becomes an important constituent. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
34 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
So for example, if you go to meditation classes or visualization classes - perfect 
environment once again. Why, because people are already interested in developing 
their minds, they're already interested in focusing and meditating all these things. In 
fact hypnotizing a meditator can be one of these easiest things in the world because 
they have most of the things you need to do with them already in place. You just say to 
them "Start doing it" and then listen as I carry on. It's a great way of stealing the trance 
and producing the kind of hypnotic effects that you're after.  
 
Other places that might be interesting might be a martial arts class. Why, because most 
martial arts classes, at least the more traditional ones, have that strong psychological 
frame or spiritual frame that comes with it. You're not just exercising hard to learn how 
to kick people and punch people and win fights, there is that style of school too, but a 
lot of the more traditional schools are about developing yourself as a person, about 
meditating, about calming your mind and staying in that central focused place. So the 
mind is an important element in the development of your skill. Hence, you offer to 
develop their minds they will be interested once again. 
 
So I hope you're getting a sense here that there's lots of variety of places you can go to, 
whether it's a yoga class, meditation, martial arts. You can go to your gym provided it's a 
social atmosphere. If you go to the kind of gym where people basically get in their 
treadmill, put their headphones on and they never talk to anyone, it's not a great place 
to meet people, unless you're the kind of person that meet people in places like this, in 
which case go right ahead. You're looking for venues where people interact and 
especially if they interact and their mind’s being used. 
 
So art classes, creative writing classes, poetry classes or poetry clubs. Of course if your 
city or town has a hypnotic community, places where people go and practice hypnosis 
with each other, or an LP or any other related discipline drawing those groups, join 
those groups. Then you'll be able to do this stuff anyways, and then invite them back to 
your home or wherever you choose to be doing your practice and continue the 
practicing afterwards, once again great venues for it. 
 
So to summarize everything, you have two types of people that you can work with, 
friends and family is one category and complete strangers is the other category. My 
preference is to work with complete strangers at first. Why, because they have a 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
35 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
different perception of you and you can redefine yourself with them. Whereas friends 
and family very useful, especially if you're shy and nervous because you already have 
the rapport going, the downside is, you're going to have to set some more strong or 
more powerful frames with these people to bring them into your reality, to accept you 
as a hypnotist or an authority about the mind.  
 
Where do you find these people, well you know here to find your friends and family? 
Strangers, you can find them in the street. I don't recommend it because it's a lot more 
difficult to build a relationship, but it can be done. Or you simply have the pleasure of 
starting a new hobby, one that has a tangible relationship to the mind so it's meditation 
classes, yoga classes, creative writing, poetry, you name it, night school is a perfect 
place to find people like this.  
 
Once you start building these relationships, you chat about the stuff that you're doing 
and so on, and the people naturally ask you what do you do? Well actually I'm a 
hypnotist. And they go oh really? Or don't look into my eyes; these are all classic 
responses that people have. And once you kind of laugh at the silly responses and so on, 
you can start producing some of the frames we'll talk about in the next session and 
slowly reel them in, make them curious, make them think "Ooh I'd like to try some of 
this."  
 
And then when they come in, well now once you get to the actual process of the 
sessions you've already seen how powerful that can be. You’ve already seen a 
demonstration of how something really simple can make someone light up and go, 
wow, I didn't even realize how much I could learn about myself by doing this. That is a 
perfect volunteer. 
 
So join me on the next session and I'll talk to you about the frames that you can use, the 
way you can present the offer to them to come back and practice with you in such a way 
that there's no pressure on you and they get to be very excited about doing this work 
with you. 
 
 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
36 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
DVD #2 – Hypnotic Frame Control & Zero 
Performance Pressure Hypnosis 
 
 
Hypnotic Frame Control 
 
Welcome back. In this session I want to talk a little bit more about how to get your 
volunteers. We've already looked at where to find your volunteers, the most important 
part though, not so much as where to find them, that's easy, it's a question of how do 
you motivate them to want to come and work with you.  
 
Now in the past, most people who want to practice hypnosis have used a variation of 
the, I'm a hypnotist technique, let me hypnotize you. And that can work pretty well by 
the way, people get fascinated by hypnosis and they tend to polarize. Some people go 
no I'm afraid please don't do it with me, other people go really how fascinating they 
want you to work with them. Both attributes can be very useful. You tend to lose a lot of 
people when you say that sort of thing just because of the fears involved and 
misconceptions to hypnosis, you can turn them around but it's a bit of work. 
 
The reason I'm not going to recommend taking that direct approach to you like right 
now is because chances are you've already tried it and if you're feeling nervous and 
anxious or afraid it's purely because that approach creates a certain frame, an 
expectation of you, that you're not ready to live up to yet. And that's where the 
performance anxiety, the fear comes in. If you tell someone "I'm a hypnotist and I'm 
going to hypnotize you", suddenly you have to get a result, because if not, then you 
can't be a very good hypnotist and then you feel embarrassed, ashamed, you feel like 
you haven't lived up to your reputation. 
 
There's a lot of self-esteem issues involved with that. That's where the fear comes from 
and that's why people hold back and go "Oh I don't know if I should start doing or saying 
this yet. I'm not ready for it yet." If you can hear me right now if you understand what I 
am saying, then you're ready to do hypnosis, because really all it is, is a simple guided 
conversation, a guided process to let them go inside.  

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
37 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
So if I'm not recommending the hypnotist frame to begin with, in time it's a great frame 
to come into. Then what would I recommend? What I recommend is you do something 
that's going to take the pressure off you, put a little bit of performance pressure on 
them so they're more busy thinking about themselves. I'll explain why when we get to 
the idea of the critical factor more, and then as it allows you to get on with your job in a 
way where there's no specific result required of you. 
 
If I tell you I'm a hypnotist, then I'm not going to try to make your hands stick to the 
table or a chair. Well if it works great then I'm no hero, if it fails then I'm a loser that's a 
terrible place to be coming from. So what if instead you said "I'm a hypnotist but I'm not 
doing hypnosis today. Today I'm going to be doing some research. I'm doing an 
experiment on the powers of the mind. Would you care to join me?" Now I don't know 
where you mind has its strengths, so one of the things we'll have to do is take you 
through some exercises to determine where your mind's strengths are and where its 
weaknesses are. Are you willing to play around? You learn a lot about yourself while 
you're doing this. 
 
Just notice the frame we’ve presented there. I've borrowed the hypnosis frame because 
it's powerful, it sets you up as an authority, it's a great place to be. At the same time, 
however, I'm now taking that authority off myself again. So whilst I get all the authority 
of it, all the benefits of the authority, I have none of the risks that are involved with it. I 
do not have to live up to your expectation of what a hypnotist is, how they talk, what 
they should be able to do and so on. More importantly your mindset as my volunteer 
will be different now. You see, a lot of subjects have the idea that hypnosis is about 
thought control, they'll take over your mind in some ways. It can be a useful attitude at 
times and a terrible attitude at other times. 
 
So, rather than having someone sit there and try too hard, or try and resist you, to fight 
you because that's the thing that should be going on, or to prove something to 
themselves by making me fail if they think I now have a stronger mind than the 
hypnotist, that's why it's going to fail. These are all terrible frames to be coming from. 
By switching it around from an - I'm going to do something to you – framework, to - 
we're going to explore something - as a framework, that's an exploration? What does 
that require?  
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
38 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
First of all, there's a cooperative approach. You need to listen to me because I going to 
help you succeed even more. To allow that to happen of course, you are now under a 
little bit of form of anxiety, a little bit of pressure. It's all about how well you respond. I 
don't want too much of this, because if you don't respond so well you might end up 
having issues as a volunteer, or my mind might not be very good, maybe I'm not a very 
bright person, maybe I'm not this or I'm not that. That's a terrible place to leave 
someone, especially given that is not correct. 
 
So by putting it in a cooperative frame, we're going to explore your mind, we're going to 
discover where its strengths are and where its weaknesses are. These are all things that 
are actually true and there's no pressure on you now. The pressure's on them and even 
then it's a minimal pressure. They're performing, but because there's no clear result 
expected of them, how can they fail? How can you fail when there's no clear result 
expected of you? And that's what research is all about.  
 
That's why the experimental frame or the research frame is such a powerful place to be 
coming from. It takes all the risks of hypnosis away the result becomes irrelevant. No 
matter what happens, it's a good result at that point. Then it's just a question of working 
with a person and building on the strengths and encouraging them about growing 
through their weaknesses as well. 
 
So that's one idea, the experimental approach or research approach. What might be 
another approach, another frame that you can present to them?  
 
Here's a great idea, one that I even did myself when I first started, its' sneaky, it's 
beautiful. Let's just say I love this one, it's a beautiful frame to come from. I call it the 
Please Help Me Frame. Essentially you're going to say to someone I'm a hypnotist but 
I'm just starting out. So you're borrowing some of the mystique, some of the authority, 
but then you're taking the risk away. So I'm just starting out I'm just learning the ropes 
here. It would be very useful to me if I could do some exercise with you just to practice. 
And don't worry, nothing's expected of you, all I need you to do is to go along with it, 
just pretend that you're having fun or doing something interesting, and that allows me 
to do my job, just get used to it, you know what I mean? 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
39 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Now look what you’ve just done here. Would you have suggested to someone is first of 
all I'm a hypnotist that ups your authority but I'm just learning it. It diminishes the risk, 
so you’re not quite as high as before, but it still has as a wonderful impact in terms of 
the frame that you've presented. Now by inviting your volunteer to assist you, to help 
you, you have once again prevented the combat frame, the one where I have to prove 
to you that my mind is stronger than yours Mr. Hypnotist and you've created the 
cooperation frame. I will work with you; I'm going to help you out by being your practice 
partner. 
 
The third thing we’ve done is, we’ve taken once again, all performance risk out of it. 
How? Well you're not going to be hypnotizing anyone, at least as far as they're 
concerned. All I need to do is to rehearse, to do a dry run of the different procedures or 
mental warm-ups, so that when you get back to class they're easy for you if you practice 
them and so on. Now they're not going to be evil to you, they're not going to be bad 
people and try to make you mess up. If they're that kind of person, chances are they 
won't even volunteer for you, even if you ask them to. If you're asking for a volunteer to 
help you out, they will help you out, and if they're there in a mindset of, oh I'm just 
rehearsing this, I'm doing a dry run, I'm just pretending to go into a trance, well then 
consciously their mind or their attention is not fully what's going on, but you still have 
your unconscious attention and that's all that we really need. 
 
So having someone rehearse hypnosis, versus having someone pretend hypnosis will 
usually convert into full blown hypnosis if, this is the important part, if you follow your 
procedures step by step and you have your four key principles, the Hypnotic Context, 
ABS Formula, and you're following through step-by-step. Once you open the door to 
trance, invite people through that doorway and they're in this threshold and you've 
created an opportunity for the unconscious mind to present itself and express itself, you 
have hypnosis whether they realize it or not, you will have it. Hence, the rehearsal 
framework, let's pretend or help me practice frame, beautiful, another simple way of 
getting a volunteer with zero pressure. 
 
There are a couple of other approaches that you can take. These ones are still relatively 
low risk, however, there is more risk involved than in those first two. I'd like to share 
them with you now anyways just so you have a complete picture, however I don't want 
you to think that this is something you have to do, because there's a slight increase in 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
40 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
the risk. They'll be a slight increase in the pressure, which means you may have a slight 
increase in the anxiety levels. So it's something that's good for you to evolve towards 
but not necessarily a place you want to start in, especially if you already have some 
concerns or fears and so on about practicing hypnosis. 
 
So three frames I have in mind here is:  
 
• Number #1 I call the Magic Moment Frame. Essentially, you'll do a little hypnotic 
demonstration with someone, or a little mind game with someone and in doing 
so they go, wow this is amazing. Then you say "Well if you want more, come back 
and I've got a whole bunch of these things that I need you to do with people as 
part of my hypnotic practice, you'll help me and of course learn more about 
yourself as you're doing it.” It's more of a dicey way to get volunteers. The actual 
activity itself is very simple, you just find a simple psychological game you to play. 
I'll give you some examples later on and for those of you who've got the Mind 
Game Magic Cards or the Master Class and so on you'll know exactly what I'm 
talking about already. 
 
Essentially you're going to give them a simple taste of a little demonstration of 
some light, low level hypnosis like a dictionary balloon game or something like 
that. We'll cover that in the later portion. Once they've had a taste of it, you'll 
invite them back for some more. It's much more motivating than the other two 
frames because they’ve already had a taste of it, but the risk goes up a little bit 
because you're doing something.  
 
• The next one is the one that I got from a hypnotist friend of mine. It's an 
ingenuous idea, it's a fun one to do, but it depends on your personality whether 
or not you would want to do this, as a low risk approach.  
 
What he would do is he would run around university campus, he was a student at 
this time, with a book and had the word hypnosis printed in big bold letters on 
the front. Now I had no idea whether he ever read this book, personally I doubt 
he ever did. The reason for having this book was not to read what's in the book 
it's so he could stand around in the university library, the university coffee shop, 
on the university grounds with his big book and the words just hanging out. And 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
41 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
people would look at him and go, oh wow that's really fascinating. He goes yes it 
is. Do you do hypnosis? Well actually yes I do. In fact I'm doing a research project 
in hypnosis right now, if you'd like to take part, come down this day and this time 
and you can be part of that.  
 
Now think about what that does. First of all their status, their authority position 
has risen right up. Secondly, well, students are renown for being curious, 
intellectually curious about things, trying new experiences out and so on. So it's  
great, in fact those of you who've done any kind of stage hypnosis shows or 
anything like that, you'll know that working with a student, a college level 
university level student, they're some of the easiest people to do hypnosis with 
because their mindset is perfect for hypnosis, not too rigid, smart, alert and ready 
to kind of engage in the process. So with this little hypnosis book trick, you can 
get to intrigue them, pull them in, get a conversation rolling and then set up an 
actual time to practice with them later.  
 
• Now the final frame I want to present to you in this category is the seminar 
frame. It is wonderful but once again it lifts the level of anticipation, it lifts the 
risk that you're taking another little notch.  
 
What do I mean by the seminar frame? Once again let's say you're at your night 
class, you're at your art class, or maybe you're at a health food shop and you 
have a chat with them about his. You say to them "Well actually yes, I'm a 
hypnotist. I'm actually running a small seminar, a great seminar on the power of 
the mind. If you want to take part, be part of the class, it's free, it's my service to 
the local community. Come on down and enjoy yourself." 
 
Now the reason this frame is particularly powerful is because not only you’re a 
hypnotist, you're a hypnotist with so much authority you now get to teach 
seminars about the subject. Of course, because you put yourself up on that 
higher pedestal, the risks that you're running are a little bit higher as well. So now 
the pressure on you is a little bit higher.  
 
Now because you said it's a seminar rather than an hypnosis session, because 
you're going to teach them about the power of the mind, rather than hypnotizing 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
42 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
them, the pressure is lower than actually doing hypnosis because you don't have 
to deal with all of those extra issues about what is hypnosis, how does it work. 
Am I in trance now, I don't know? You do bypass all those things, because they're 
teaching you about the mind at this point.  
 
And then when they come together you have a room full of people, maybe five, 
maybe ten, maybe 100 who knows. You have your room full of people and you 
can give a little presentation. Here's the power of mind, here's some cool things 
hypnosis has done and so on, and then, this is the key part, you get to do the 
exact same sessions that you saw me do earlier on and which I will be breaking 
down for you step-by-step later on in this training sequence.  
 
You'll do exactly the same sessions with them, in exactly the same kind of order, 
learning exactly the same lessons. However, because your authority is higher, 
because you're on a higher pedestal having been a seminar leader, their 
responses will be that much more powerful because their unconscious mind has 
a greater expectation, which means it will respond with that much more power 
for you. So the risk goes up a little bit but the rewards and the results go up with 
it as well. 
 
So there you have it, you have the fundamental frames that will allow you to present 
hypnotic exercises to people, by diminishing your risk at the same time. You diminish 
the risk, that means your anxiety levels also diminish, because you have nothing to 
prove.  
 
 
No More Fear 
 
This is the key thing, if you're feeling any kind of fear, anxiety, pressure, anything like 
that at all, the only reason is because you set a bar up that is very difficult to reach. In 
other words, you're trying to achieve something specific and you don't know whether or 
not you can do it because you're lacking the experience to look back and go, oh of 
course I've done that before. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
43 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
So your job is to present a frame, an idea to people that is exciting enough for them to 
be motivated to volunteer, but at the same time has reduced the result you’re 
promising to virtually nil. When there's no results promised it's just an exploration, an 
investigation, research, you're finding out what's there, rather than go out and try to 
make something be there, well then you're fear diminishes and completely eradicates, 
because there's nothing for you to perform anymore.  
 
I want you to really press that point and press it upon your mind, because if you're still 
feeling any form of fear or doubt inside your mind at this point, it is only because at 
some level you're still holding onto the idea that you have to be this way, you must be 
this kind of hypnotist doing these kind of things and getting these kind of results, 
otherwise you're a failure. That is the only way that you can feel fearr, the only way you 
have a risk. 
 
I'll demonstrate this for you if I may. Most people if I ask them to go out on the streets 
and meet a stranger and say hello to a stranger and make friends with them, most 
people will go, well I guess I could do that, but when it comes to actually doing it social 
anxiety comes up, fear comes up. Why? It's a stranger and I don't know how they’ll react 
and how they respond and so these fears start naturally occurring. However, if I ask the 
very same person to go and look up an old friend, call up their mother, their father, their 
brother, someone they have a good relationship with. And just have a chat, they’ll go 
that’s a no brainer. Out comes the telephone, hi mom how's it going? Oh, two hours 
later I'll come back and go was that good? 
 
Well of course he was good because they had no performance anxiety, they had no 
fears or concerns, because there's nothing particular they're trying to achieve, they’re 
just reconnecting with a human being they know, who'll want to connect with them. 
You will do the same thing with your hypnosis. You're not doing hypnosis, at least 
initially, because then there's no performance anxiety, there's no pressure trying to 
achieve a specific result. All you're trying to do is investigate how the mind is working. If 
you change that mindset inside your mind then it's no longer about you, it's no longer 
about what you're doing. It's about them, it's about how they're responding. 
 
Now, you will see some of the things that I'll do here in terms of the actual warm-up 
processes in the session and so on, some of them I hope will fail. I don't know yet, I 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
44 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
don't know the people who are coming, but I sincerely hope that some of these 
exercises will not work out the way they're "meant to". Why, so that you can see it.  
 
Now unfortunately for you, I happen to be a good hypnotist so I may or may not achieve 
my failure, either way, as far as I'm concerned it’s fine. Because if it does fail I'll have 
learned something about the interaction, if it does not fail I've learned something about 
the interaction also. And neither one of those situations is a problem for the subject, the 
volunteer, because they're learning something about it too, provided you have some 
successes along the way and I will show you how to get absolutely no brainer successes. 
Then the odd failure along the way is irrelevant, it's just part of the learning process. You 
have just found one of the ways in which their particular mind does not process an idea, 
which is just fine. 
 
So to encapsulate the whole idea. The frame that you present to a volunteer to get 
them to volunteer, will make or break your session, it will either make it really easy for 
you because there's no fear anymore, you're not attached to anything, and they'll be 
happy to volunteer and be motivated and you will fill safe and secure, because you're 
not overpromising anything.  
 
At the same time, it sets the perfect context for the hypnotic context to occur and for 
you to get on with your job. So please remember those frames the experimental frame, 
vs the I'm a hypnotist frame, and the ways that you can navigate between the strong or 
the light version of those and diminish or increase risk, which of course diminishes and 
increases your own anxieties. And it's useful to start low and slowly move up to higher 
and higher levels, so that you start to realize that you’ve become more and more 
immune to feeling afraid or anything like that. 
 
The last idea I'm going to leave you with is, is to do with this right here (holds up his 
notepad). What is this? Well this is a notepad. If you can get a better version of this it's 
called a clipboard, you know those boards that re a bit of wood with the clip on the top 
and the papers inside of it. The reason that's even better than a notepad, although this 
kind of notepad will work also, is because of once again, the association's people have 
to it.  
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
45 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Remember, the main frame we’re presented to someone is that we're running some 
form of an experiment, it’s research. Well, what do researchers have? They have 
clipboards, they have forms to check and evaluate. He's a Type A person, he's a Type B 
person, he's a Type C person. This person responds well to this type of suggestion, this 
person responds well to a different kind of suggestion, oh this person did not respond 
well to that suggestion.  
 
Notice, you're no longer failing as a hypnotist. What you've done is you've discovered 
what this subject responds to and does not respond to. And the magic of the form puts 
all the attention here. It means that you don't care whether you succeed, if you haven't 
failed and you have succeeded in the experiment and you found that was actually there, 
versus trying to make something be there that's not.  
 
So, I think this little thing, a clipboard, a big notepad and a pen to be able to write notes 
down with is very useful, to support your framework that you're just doing an 
experiment here, you're doing some research here, you're investigating the mind and 
noticing how it grows or evolves or responds to different things. 
 
The other advantage you have in this clipboard, aside from how the subject will 
respond, is for you and for your learning process. You see, if you have a clipboard and 
you have the ability to take notes, why not take notes? The whole point for you to 
become a great hypnotist is to learn about how different people respond to different 
things. So, write it down, I did this exercise he responded this way, I did that exercise he 
responded this way, ooh I phrased it slightly differently today and I got a much better 
response from the same person. I guess I'm learning something about how suggestion 
works, about how presenting suggestion works and so on. 
 
 So whilst the clipboard idea is really a part of the framework you're presenting to make 
life easier for yourself it, also becomes a valuable learning tool for yourself where you 
can keep track of your progress and see how shaping suggestions in different ways 
actually becomes more useful over time. So it has a nice double value here.  
 
So now you've learned the power of frame control and the different frames you're 
presenting to diminish risk or increase risk as your skill goes through and develops and 
the power of the clipboard to support the idea of that frame. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
46 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Now I think we're ready to start diving into the different sessions so you can actually 
learn specifically, what can I learn with these people when I get them there?  
 
Join me on the next video where we'll dive into our first practice session and between 
now and that video, what I want you to think about, is how much stuff we've talked 
about to get to this point. We've actually covered a lot of ground and the reason I want 
you to really reflect on this is, everyone in hypnosis focuses on the induction. What do I 
do to do the induction? What they miss is the setup to the induction, the hypnotic 
context, everything we've been talking about up to this point, will make that induction 
either easy or hard. If you do the setup well, it will be easy, if you do your setup badly it 
will be hard and chances are you'll get all kinds of responses that you do not want. 
 
So, before you start in the practice session I would like to encourage you to reflect back 
on all the things that you've be learning in these videos. You can go back and you look at 
them again if you want and really reflect on what you've learned in terms of the 
principles, the context, the frames, the mindsets that you're trying to generate, and how 
you're diminishing your own risk and therefore your own anxiety levels whilst you're 
doing it. Because this will teach you how to create the right context to succeed with 
hypnosis, in my opinion that is where the battle is fought and won.  
 
Once you actually get a client in the chair facing you, well, if you've done this stuff that 
we've talked about well, it will be easy. If you do not, then good luck to you, you may 
succeed, you may fail, there's no way of predicting it because there's no way of knowing 
who you have in front of you. 
 
So my hope is that you've learned about the context, you've learned to set the right 
situation up in the first place so by the time they sit right next to you and they're about 
to do hypnosis with you, well guess what, you can only succeed at that point because 
you've already got the right situation ready for you. So with that idea in mind, with 
those thoughts firmly implanted in your brain, let's turn to the next video and actually 
start into the very first practical session to start exploring the power of the mind.  
 
 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
47 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Hypnotic Pretalk 
 
Welcome back again. We are now getting to the practical stages of this course, so I hope 
you're getting excited. Everything we've done to this is point is to prepare us to actually 
do the work. There's one last bit of preparation we want to do, it’s actually an activity, in 
other words, we're going to be working with a client that's why we have our friendly 
client over here or subject or volunteer or however we're going to think about it, victim 
is my preferred term.  
 
There's one other thing we're going to be doing here, which is still part of our setup and 
is going to prepare us for the actual hypnotic session. Again it's important we don't rush 
any of these stages because the better we do this preparation work the easier the other 
stuff is going to be afterwards. 
 
So this is basically restudying the framework that we've already setup ahead of time. So 
we've met somewhere say and I've invited him to come along as a volunteer. Now that 
we're about to start over again I need to check that the word frames are still in place 
and nothing's going on. So we'll go through it quickly first and have a little discussion 
about how that went. So how are you doing? 
 
Fierat:   
I'm doing alright. 
 
Igor:    
Excellent very good. You're excited to try this out. 
 
Fierat:   
Yes I am. 
 
Igor:    
Excellent. So what's your name again sorry? 
 
Fierat:   
Fierat. 
 
Igor:   
Fierat. I will apologize ahead of time if I say it wrong. So Fierat what we'll 
be doing here is we're going to go through an exploration of the mind, all 
right? There's nothing really expected of you in terms of, you don't have to 
do anything or perform anyway or anything like that. All that I need to 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
48 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
know is, how does your mind respond to different ideas, different 
situations, and so on. So there's no right or wrong way, unless you try too 
hard or you don't even try at all. So don't ignore it, don't try to hard, just 
explore where your mind takes you. Does that make sense? 
 
Fierat:  
 Yes. 
 
Igor:   
Now I’m going to take some notes as we go along with this, just to kind of 
keep on track, this helps me to do the research part, which thankfully you 
have very kindly volunteered for, and I'm presuming it's okay with you  if I 
just take notes as we go through. 
 
Fierat:   
Okay. 
 
Igor:   
Excellent. So do you have any questions for me before we get into it, any 
concerns, anything you want to chat about? 
 
Fierat:   
No. 
 
Igor:    
No. You're ready to rock and roll?  
 
Fierat:  
 Ready to rock and roll yes. 
 
Igor:   
Are you excited?  
 
Fierat: 
Very Excited. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. So that's the setup. In the next video clip, we’ll talk a little bit about 
what happened there and why we're doing that.  
 
 
 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
49 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
How The Pretalk Works 
 
I'd like to take a few moments before we continue into the actual session now, to talk 
about what we just witnessed there, what we just did. Remember, everything we talked 
about up to this point is about preparing your subject to have the right mind set, so 
there's no pressure on you. What you're going to see happening there is an example of 
a little pre-talk before we do the hypnosis, but of course we're not calling it hypnosis 
now, it's just an experiment so the pressure doesn't come up anymore. 
 
There are a couple of key things that I want to do here. Number 1, I need to reconnect 
with the person on a personal level. I need to check the levels of rapport. So I'm very 
friendly, a little chatty, how are you doing, nice of you to come, thanks for being here. I 
kind of see myself as the host of the party and my job is to put that person at ease.  
 
The next thing I want to do is, I want to flush out, or rather I want to make sure the 
frames that I presented ahead of time, are still in their mind, that there’s no deviation 
about why they are here, they have to have the same expectation that I have. The 
expectation is, in this case, we’re going to do an experiment. We're going to look at how 
the mind works, how your mind works, you'll learn some fascinating things about 
yourself and I'll get to do my research, so we both win out. 
 
That's the perfect frame because now with that research idea in mind, experimental 
idea in mind, there are no risks, there’s no failure, it's just a question of action and 
reaction. I do x let's see how you react. That's very interesting, thank you very much. I 
do y let's see how you react. Oh that's fantastic, thank you very much. If these reactions 
are more and more hypnotic, phenomenal, now I can lead towards hypnosis. If they're 
not, that's just fine too, because it's just how that person's reacting, and you can tell 
them great, you’ve had some very interesting reactions and you've been very helpful to 
me. I really appreciate you taking the time to be here. So whatever happens, it will 
always be of benefit, something would have been learned, and so the interaction has 
been worthwhile. 
 
The next thing you want to do is, so I've just checked my rapport with them, now check 
that the frames are still firmly inset, now I want to look at any questions, I want to see if 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
50 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
there are any doubts in his mind, any questions, any concerns, or if he heard the frame 
or misunderstood them maybe, I want to check these things out, so I leave it up to 
them. If you have any questions for me, is there anything you want to talk about, is 
there any concerns that you have at this stage? And I'm looking specifically at his body's 
reaction. If he’s like no, that's kind of an extreme version of the fear reaction, not a 
happy place to be. If that happens, I need to have a longer conversation before we begin 
with anything mental, because I want to flush those things out.  
 
Usually I don't expect any questions it's like, no, I'm happy to go. Sometimes they'll say 
something which alerts me to the fact that they're not in the right space yet. They might 
say "On no, I'm ready to do it, I'm ready to meet the challenge or I'm ready to see if you 
can make me do this." If I hear anything like that, which is that combative frame again, 
me against you. Do your worst, or really try hard, see if you can track me. As soon as you 
hear any language like that, I'm going to pause everything. There is no point me 
proceeding if there's a block, an obstacle between myself and the subject, the 
volunteer, the client, however you want to look at this person; no point whatsoever. 
 
I need to remove those blocks ahead of time. I say "Oh hold on a second, before we 
begin I'm just curious, you said try and crack me there, what exactly do you mean by 
that?" He goes well you were trying to crack into my mind I'm ready for you, and you go 
oh, I'm sorry, I think you misunderstood. This is not that kind of hypnosis, I'm not going 
to hypnotize you today, all I'm interested in is your natural reactions of your mind. If 
you're trying to do something you'll ruin the whole experiment and there's really no 
point of starting it. And he’ll go, oh really? Yeah, yeah this is just about how you're 
thinking happens naturally when you're not thinking about it too much, when some 
ideas arise and something pleasant happens as a result or not, that's what I'm interested 
in.   
 
If they accept the frame at this point then you can continue, if they go "No, no I want to 
hold on, I want to fight, I want to see where this takes me, then I will end this session 
and say "Oh I'm sorry it seems that we've had a misunderstanding here, what you're 
expecting from this session really has nothing to do with what I'm doing here, so I'm 
really sorry I've wasted your time. Have a nice life, go home, and I'll see you next 
Tuesday at the art class, right? 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
51 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
It is very important you do not proceed until your hypnotic context is in place. And that's 
why I threw those little questions in at the end there, to flush out anything you may 
have missed. As it happens in this case, in this setting, it was pretty good. He's curious 
about what might happen, maybe a little nervous because you're not quite sure what 
will happen, nervousness is okay, fear is not. So a little bit like oh I don't know about 
this, that's okay. (Igor demonstrated very uptight body language) What's going to 
happen? That's a very different reaction, that's a much more blocking reaction.  
 
So experience will show you which one you go with which one you don't. In this case we 
have a client or a subject who was a little bit stressed, just a little bit, it’s  unusual, I 
don’t know what's going to be expected of me, what I'm going to do. Very small, that's 
very useful because it'll actually bypass the critical factor for us, so I'm very happy with 
that. If it had been more than that once again timeout, rebuild the relationship, more 
comfort, more trust, maybe a little bit of humor, reset the frame. 
 
This is nothing that's expected of you, you don't have to try hard; you don't have to get 
a result. I'm not going to be judging you or evaluating you. This is not a psychologist 
report that's going to go on file and the insurance company's going to raise its premium 
for the next 10 years because they think you're crazy or something, nothing like that. All 
this is, is totally anonymous research, I need to find out if I meet a 100 people and I do 
the same kind of mental experiments, or you can think of them as thought experiments, 
how does each person react? Do they all go down the same path? Do they go down 
different paths? Are they similar, how are they different?  
 
So the only thing I need from you is your natural reaction. Now with that frame reset, if 
they accept it, now I can work with them. If I don't move through that fear, well then, 
just like the other person, I will excuse them and arrange to see someone else. There's 
no point, especially at this low level of working when you're starting off, you have no 
real experience in hypnosis yet, there is no point in working with someone who's mind 
already has blocks or obstacles in the way.  
 
Now it is true with more experience as you grow as a hypnotist and get more confidence 
in your techniques and skills, now you can work with more challenging clients, the 
people who are a little more combative, the people who are little more afraid and so on. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
52 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
That's just fine, once again however, there are so many good subjects there's really no 
need to limit yourself to the ones that have artificial barriers in place.  
 
So with those ideas in mind, we're going to do is go onto the next video, where you’ll 
see me with another client and we will go through the first level of the training process.  
 
 
Demo: Sessions 1-2 “Hypnotic Focus” 
 
Igor: 
Welcome back again. So now we've found all our setup we're going to dive 
into a session. I have a new subject, a new volunteer here, her name is 
Danielle. Hello Danielle, how are you doing? 
 
Danielle:   
Fine thank you. 
 
Igor:   
Very good. Now just as we talked about in the other videos I'm going to 
start my whole process again from scratch, I have to have my rapport 
checked, because this is a new person, I’ve got to have my frames checked 
after my question and answer session, so you'll seal that again. However 
it's what you do after that, that is going to be of particular importance 
now. We'll do it now and in the next video we'll debrief on what I'm doing 
and why I'm doing it. So Danielle how are you doing? Are you good? 
 
Danielle:   
I'm fine. 
 
Igor:   
First of all, thanks again for coming up here as a volunteer. I know you've 
seen a few interesting things and kind of curious and that stuff. So the 
main thing I want you to know about what we're doing right now is, it's 
really very relaxing.  
 
Your job is easy, your only job is to observe what your mind does. And it's 
going to help me by later on we'll have a little debrief or a chat about 
things. And then I'll get to notice more about how different minds operate 
through the same ideas in different ways. Make sense?  

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
53 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
So your job is really easy, it's to do nothing other than listen and become 
aware of your experience so you notice when something has changed or 
when it doesn't change. Either way is fine by me as far as I'm concerned. 
Does that make sense? 
 
Danielle:   
It definitely does. 
 
Igor:    
Good. Do you have any questions for me?  
 
Danielle:  
 No. 
 
Igor:   
 No ready to continue? 
 
Danielle:   
Ready to continue. 
 
Igor:   
All right. The first experiment's going to be real easy, it's more to help you 
kind of get your mind warmed up and so on. All I'm going to ask you to do 
is just close your eyes for a moment. When you're ready come on back. 
That was easy wasn't it? Not difficult right? All right. So did you notice 
something happening when your eyes closed to compare to how we were 
when we were chatting, was there any difference there? 
 
Danielle:   
Yes, I started going into my own world. 
 
Igor:   
You started to go into your own world a little bit, right? So you go into 
your own world a little bit and the outside world maybe fades a little bit, is 
that right? 
 
Danielle:  
 Yes. 
 
Igor:   
Very good. Excellent. So this tells me some very good things about your 
mind, you've got a good mind, naturally that's what happens, and it's 
something we can really work with here. So the next step then, is we want 
to play on the attention and see if we can do more with it. So already you 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
54 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
notice that when you sit there and you close your eyes the attention 
focuses in, correct? So now what I want to do is, go ahead and close your 
eyes again, only this time in whatever way it feels most comfortable to 
you, gather your attention. Focus it in. When you have a real sense of that 
focus, bring yourself back again. How is that? Was it pleasant? 
 
Danielle:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
So how is that different the first time you just closed your eyes? 
 
Danielle:   
You could focus on something special. 
 
Igor:   
 So you're focusing on something special? 
 
Danielle:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
And how does that feel inside? Does your mind feel different? Did your 
body feel different?  
 
Danielle:   
My body got warm. 
 
Igor:   
So your body's getting warmer and do you feel any difference in your mind 
or was it pretty much the same as before? 
 
Danielle:   
No a little bit heavier. 
 
Igor:   
Well your mind got a little bit heavier, it's more relaxed or something, yes? 
 
Danielle:  
 Yes. 
 
Igor:    
Excellent. Very good. Are you enjoying this? 
 
Danielle:  
Yes.  
 
Igor:   
 Are you learning something? 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
55 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
 
Danielle:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
Good. Okay so we'll run the whole experiment again this time, only we're 
going to add a little extra step if that's okay with you? So you already know 
the first part, so just go ahead and close your eyes and then just gather 
your attention, focus it in one special place. Now I'm curious whether the 
same sensations you had before would be here again or are they slightly 
different this time. 
  
Danielle:   
They're slightly different. 
 
Igor:    
They are slightly different aren't they? It's interesting on that isn't it.  
 
Danielle:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
So now focusing all your attention like that but still having that sense of 
relaxation which is good. I would like for you to focus specifically on your 
breathing and I just wonder if that makes your ability to focus easier or 
less easy. 
 
 
Danielle:   
Less easy. 
 
Igor:   
Less easy, right? So something else you can focus your attention on to 
make it more easy, correct? And just notice what that is, we don’t have to 
talk about it yet. There you go. And the curious part is, do you begin to feel 
more relaxed when you focus like that? Just notice whatever you do. 
 
Danielle:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
That's it, let it grow. Whenever you're ready just bring yourself back to the 
here and now. Have you learned something interesting about yourself 
haven't you? Did you enjoy that? 
 
Danielle:   
Yes I did. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
56 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Igor:    
Were you surprised by any of that? 
 
Danielle:   
Yeah. First, when you have to concentrate on it, right, and your focus has 
gone a bit less, and then you focus back on something. 
 
Igor:   
Right, so when you were focusing on your breathing, for you the focus 
became less. 
 
Danielle:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
But when you went back to focus on something else, what was that, by the 
way, that you were focused on?  
 
Danielle:   
South of France. 
 
Igor:   
Oh, so you focused on a memory, on a place, right? So that was enjoyable 
for you in a sense, your relaxation increased and so on. 
 
Danielle:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:    
And you felt it growing, did you not? 
 
Danielle:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:  
Beautiful. So when your mind focuses on certain events it enhances the 
quality and if it focuses on different things, it somehow takes away from it 
a little bit, correct? 
 
Danielle:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:    
Was it a valuable lesson for you? 
 
Danielle:   
Yes. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
57 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:    
Did you enjoy that? 
 
Danielle:   
Yes very much. 
 
Igor:   
Excellent. So that's as far as we're going to go for today, if you want to 
come back for another session of course I'm more than happy to do it, but 
for this part of the experiment you've been a real help. I really appreciate 
you helping out. Is there anything else you want to say to me in terms of 
what you experienced there or any questions you have for me? 
 
Danielle:   
Not at the moment. No questions. 
 
Igor:   
No questions. Excellent. Well thank you very much for coming. I really 
appreciate it. 
 
Danielle:   
Thank you. 
 
 
Breakdown: Sessions 1-2 
 
Okay guys welcome back. So now you've seeing the first warm up session. Those of you 
who really thought about the whole hypnotic principles and stuff we talked about 
earlier the Hypnotic Context, the ABS Formula, and so on. You may have noticed that we 
focus specifically on the one part of those principles. It's the A part of the formula the 
Attention getting.  
 
All of the things you saw me do with Danielle here were entirely about getting her 
attention to move in certain ways. Now as it happens because of that, we got the B and 
the S part of the formula as well, critical factor being bypass increasingly, we'll talk more 
about that in a later video, how that happened and why that happened, and we got 
some unconscious material being stimulated, specifically changes in physical awareness, 
the comfort in the body, the warmth in the body, the heaviness in the body, and of 
course the memory that she's putting her attention into. It's a bit of a kind of hypnotic 
revivification, totally by accident, that's what her mind chose for us. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
58 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Now why is this important? First of all, notice how there's no way I can fail. I'm just 
asking her to notice experiences and report back to them afterwards. There's really no 
risk here, no failure possible. However every single exercise, and there was an escalation 
of exercises, is designed to gather in attention, to collect attention at increasing levels.  
 
So what were the exercises? We did four different exercises here. There are no magic in 
these four, by the way, you can make as many as you want up, but I'm giving you these 
four because they're simple to do, they're easy to remember, and really they're very 
natural things that you can stack up progressively. And the key here is the progression of 
attention. 
 
1. So the first thing we do is, we have them close their eyes. Can you do hypnosis 
without eye closure? Of course you can. So why would we want to close their 
eyes? Well, the fact is, that visual part of the information that we take in from the 
world takes about 60% of the processing power of the brain. When you close 
someone's eyes a lot of things change. The first thing that changes, that visual 
processing has less input. So the more likely to go down the imagination route 
like we had here, memories become more vivid, pictures become more vivid and 
so on. And you have all this spare attention that is no longer looking like 
someone on Ritalin, around the room going, what am I going to look at next? All 
that distracting attention has been taken away. 
 
Now of course, the ears can still be distracted, the skin might still feel sensations 
that are distracting. So those are the things we need to just take into account. 
However, our primary vision or the primary point at which we lose attention 
hasn't been taken care of.  
 
Those of you who know a little bit on neural science will also know that just by 
closing your eyes you're automatically elevating the levels of alpha waves going 
on in the brain, which is a very mild shift in the direction of trance, very mild but 
also very useful. So just that one little act, close your eyes, tells us a lot about 
hypnosis and starts the process of opening the door to hypnosis up. Now if 
someone closes their eyes and says, nothing's happening it's just like normal, 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
59 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
everything’s the same, now that tells me that they’re doing something with their 
attention and it’s unstable in other ways. 
 
They're not like your normal person whose attention is based on the senses. Is 
my senses being grabbed here, is my senses being grabbed there? Their attention 
is probably being grabbed around the place by their thoughts.  
 
Now I have two choices with someone like that. I can end the experiment and say 
"Thank you very much for helping me with the experiment", no big deal, or I can 
experiment further and notice, what is their attention on? What's grabbing their 
attention so incessantly that nothing that’s happening seems to be changing 
anything? It may be the thoughts they’re having, chances are by the way, very 
high, but it is exactly that? It may be that they're being troubled by something 
else and that's looping in the back of their mind. By asking them saying, what is 
happening? What are you experiencing? Nothing. What do you mean by nothing? 
Are you thinking thoughts? What are you thinking about? What are you feeling? 
Where are your thoughts going? Where is your tension being drawn towards? 
 
These things will tell you about what's going on in there, it will also tell you how 
to hypnotize that person. So this is very useful and all we've done so far is to ask 
someone to close their eyes. It's simple and it's sneaky. So let's turn to the next 
exercise. Exercise Number # 1 was close your eyes.  
 
2. Exercise Number #2 just build that on that one simple step. Close your eyes and 
focus your attention and notice, did I tell them where to focus their attention, 
how to focus their attention? No, I'm leaving that up to them, because I'm 
curious to find out where are their natural attention points? I'm not going to 
force anything on them.  
 
Now there are certain things that we can do with attention to grab it more easily 
and to manipulate it and move it in different directions, make it more hypnotic. 
Yes, but before I get to that I want to be nonspecific, just notice what happens. 
And notice that's just an extra little step to just closing your eyes. Also notice 
when the client or the subject comes back and opens their eyes from that first 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
60 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
experiment you ask them how do I go for you, what did you experience, what did 
you notice?  
 
You do this partly for yourself to learn as a hypnotist how minds are operating, 
but you also do it for them to acknowledge the fact that something is happening. 
You see, as soon as they acknowledge that something is happening more of that 
is likely to happen again the next time. You're training them to keep responding 
in this way, so when they come back, so how do you feel? Oh my body felt this 
way and my body did that. And I threw out a very casual question, so you started 
feeling more focused, is that what you're saying? Yes, that's exactly what's 
happened.  
 
Now of course I know my next exercise is going to be about focus, so planting the 
idea already just casually, see if they pick up on it. If they say "On no, no, no it 
wasn't very focused." Well then I can just throw another question about and say 
"Oh right because something's missing isn't it?" Yes. What would you need to do 
to gather all your attention to become very focused? Well I would need to think 
about my holiday in France.  
 
Great, close your eyes and focus on your holiday in France. They've just told you 
how to complete the next exercise successfully in terms of gathering more 
attention. So you can do it either way, you can get them to focus on the things 
that will work or you can take a random experiment and focus on other things.  
 
I hope you're beginning to realize that just with these first two little exercises you have a 
lot of scope. You can take these in many different directions but they're all simple and 
they're all easy to do.  
 
Then we come back again and we debrief one more time. How did that go? Now here is 
a very important question. The first question is just generally how did that go? Yes I 
enjoyed it, it's very pleasant. And the people tend to be very general about these sort of 
things.  
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
61 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
I now want to do something specific with their mind. I'm going to ask them to make a 
comparison. The reason for that comparison will become apparent in the next session 
when we bypass the critical factor. 
 
So where is the comparison I'm asking for? Well how was that version compared to the 
first time? Oh, I had more of it that's what I'm listening for. It was more intense, more 
relaxed, more comfortable, more focused, whatever it is, guess what you've just done in 
terms of the hypnotic process. This is classically known as a deepening of trance. Here's 
your trance induction, here's your deepening, focus your attention. With those two 
simple instructions when you understand this from the point of view of the principles 
involved, well, you just make life so much easier for yourself and more profound for 
your client. 
  
Now just with these two little tools you can have a wild hypnotic experiments. You can 
change your voice, you can speed up, slow down, be kinder, be more harsh, be more 
commanding, be more permissive. You can try all these different approaches and ask 
them how does that work for you? Because all you're doing is two simple little thought 
experiments and it allows you to just massage or play with the conditions a little bit to 
get a sense of what is your style that you're good at? What are you natural with and 
how do they respond to you that way? That will build tremendous range and we haven't 
even come to the meat of this whole exercise yet. 
 
The next sequence, so we have the closing of the eyes, we have the gathering of 
attention, remember we're still at the A part of the ABS Formula.  
 
3. Now let's see if I can move their attention around. Typically I will move it first to 
the breathing. Why, because it's mechanical. It's very easy to focus on something 
that movement is related to. When you open and close your hand, you will 
naturally focus on it. When you inhale and exhale you can easily focus on that 
versus focusing on some more subtle things that may not be as easy for people to 
keep track of. Also, as a rule, focusing on someone's breathing will help them 
calm down, become more focused and more engrossed in their experience. 
 
Now guess what, exactly what I predicted right at the start of this training series has just 
happened and I'm delighted by it. It failed. I asked if she was focusing on the breathing 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
62 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
and expected that to increase the focus. Well what did it do? No, it decreased the focus, 
in other words it created a worse context for hypnosis to occur. Am I concerned about 
that failure? No, I am delighted by that failure because I now understand that my 
traditional path into hypnosis has a flaw in it and I have to be careful about that if ever I 
want to go back to this idea of breathing.  
 
Does that mean I can't do it? It just means that my setup has to be that much more 
eloquent before I can get there. As it happens, I cheated. How? Well if their focus 
doesn't want to go to the breathing, where does it want to go to? So I want to augment 
the attention, augment the focus, or by contrast if she knows this is making it worse she 
must know what will make it better. So we just go back to that or experiment with other 
versions of this. 
 
4. Next comes the final step the fourth step in this whole sequence. We've closed 
the eyes, we've gathered attention, we've moved attention to a focal point that is 
likely to increase that focus even further, and this case we had to go through a 
couple of versions of it before we found that. Now I want them to become very 
aware of their bodily sensation. I want them to become aware of specifically 
comfort and relaxation.  
 
Why those two particular feelings? Well here's why. Number one, comfort and 
relaxation are wonderful trance themes. There are experiencing that are very 
typical that people in trance will respond with or will have spontaneously, shall 
we say. It's also very useful kind of glow to present to people within the hypnotic 
process. It's better for them to be comfortable and relaxed than stress and 
agonize. You can do stress hypnosis if you want, but really that's not a very 
fruitful way of doing it, it's not very pleasant for the subject either. 
 
So let's make it enjoyable for them, so they can learn something. I mean who 
doesn't want to be more relaxed, to be more comfortable in their lives. So they're 
learning something about themselves, meanwhile of course you're getting them 
used to paying attention to their bodies so that when changes occur they can 
report back to them for you.  
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
63 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
And once again the induction is now serving several purposes. On the one side 
you're learning about what does make them more comfortable and creating that 
as an environment. On the other side, you're getting them used to paying 
attention to themselves and noticing positive changes.  
 
Now if a person says nothing feels comfortable everything's terrible and this 
really isn't working, well it tells you that this is probably not the person you're 
doing instant inductions with and crazy hypnotic affect, at least not straightaway, 
because the mind isn't even there yet. If they can't even find an area of comfort 
what are the chances that they can have a full blown hallucination? What are the 
chances that they can respond by locking out an arm and not bending it? Not as 
high so it's another covert test and an information gathering tool for yourself as 
well. 
 
So there you have it folks we have four progressive experiments to continue to gather 
more and more of their A Attention:  
 
• closing of the eyes 
• gather their attention  
• focus their breathing  
• feel an area of comfort or relaxation, and notice what happens or watch it grow 
or see if it will grow.  
 
Notice how the phrase is a little bit different. Watch it grow is a little bit more of a risk. 
It may not happen. See if it does grow, there's no risk involved because either they 
notice it growing, in which case you're a hero, or it doesn't grow in which case you 
haven't failed because you never asked for it to grow. Either way there you're learning 
something about the person, you're learning a lot about the hypnotic process, and they 
are learning about themselves which means this whole experience has been worthwhile 
to them.  
 
They come back out of this whole mini trance process and then the debrief is going to 
be important. What do you do in the debrief? How was that for you? How was that 
compared to the last exercise? Did you enjoy it? Are you learning something from this? 
Was this of value to you?  

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
64 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Why am I asking these questions? Well in part I'm curious, I want to know how mind 
responded to the various conditions we setup. In part it's for her to realize, this is 
valuable, this is fun, I am growing and learning about myself doing this, because it adds 
more fuel to the fire of motivation.  
 
The chances that they will come back for a follow-up session and another session, and 
another session, and be your trance junky volunteer for life is huge, and you'll want 
that. They learn something, they get something out of it, and you get to do the practice 
that you need to be doing as well. And all of that for really the very simple set of 
procedures. And technically speaking we haven't even started with the hypnotic 
elements we've just focused on the A part of the ABS Formula - Attention. In the next 
set of videos we're going to start looking at the B part of the formula and see if we can 
involve the same concept, the same ideas to yet another level again. 
 
Some of those B parts of the formulas have already been present in that last 
demonstration. In fact all the demonstrations I've done. They're kind of woven in, in the 
background. I will explicitly explain them to you and demonstrate them to you in 
different ways when we get to that section.  
 
It's very important for now that you understand each step of the process as a separate 
item, not because they are separate but because it helps your mind understand the 
hypnotic context, comfort, relaxation, trust, and expectation. Then you have the 
attention grab and you have four levels of attentions that you can work through.  
 
The next video we'll go right into dealing with the critical factor, that one pesky little 
part of the mind that could make everything fall apart. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
65 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
DVD #3 – Somatic Trances, Suggestion 
Experiments & How To Put It All Together 
 
 
 
Demo: Sessions 3-4 “Somatic Trances” 
 
Igor: 
Okay folks welcome back again. I'm sitting here with Romeo, now my good 
bosom buddy of course, and we're about to go into the next stage of the 
hypnotic training.  
 
So I'm going to run through the actual process here again for you and then 
on the next session we'll break it down just as we did before. So we'll start 
right from the beginning, this is a brand new person I haven't ever worked 
with him before, so I've got to check everything I've done since again, 
which means my hypnotic context has got to be in there. I'll probably start 
with the A part of the ABS Formula again just to kind of get the whole 
process, lay down the foundation set straight, and then we'll launch into 
the next portion which I think I'll really enjoy. So pay attention and we'll 
talk right afterwards.  
 
Igor:  
So how you doing Romeo, are you good. 
 
Romeo: 
  Yes. 
 
Igor:    
Having fun? 
 
Romeo:   
Absolutely. 
 
Igor:   
Fantastic. So first of all like with the other people I want to just say thank 
you very much for volunteering here today, without people like you 
there's no way we can do these experiments, we can't demonstrate the 
power of the mind and so on.  

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
66 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
And just to remind you once again, there's really nothing expected of you 
or from you. All I want from you is to do whatever comes natural. I'm 
going to present some ideas to you and just notice whatever happens as a 
result.  
 
Some observations you’ll just note, sometimes I'll ask you to respond, 
sometimes you just note them and we can talk about them afterwards. 
And really whatever comes natural instinctively whatever is there, that's 
what we're interested in. It could be one thing, it could be another, it 
doesn't matter. Does that kind of make sense? 
 
Romeo:  
 Yes. 
 
Igor:  
 Okay. If you're willing to do that, in other words just let whatever happens 
happen. Don't assist don't resist, go with the flow. I can pretty much 
promise you again this whole process you'll have learned all kinds of 
interesting things about yourself and you'll have a whole lot of a fun as 
well. So, you ready to go into that process? 
 
Romeo:  
 Looking forward to it. 
 
Igor:    
Good. Any questions you have for me, any comments before we begin? 
 
Romeo:   
No. 
 
Igor:    
Just pretty much just dive in. 
 
Romeo:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
All right. Well what we’ll do, just as kind of a warm up right now, is just 
begin by noticing how you feel right now in the room and so on, and just 
close your eyes and notice any changes that occur.  
 
Romeo:   
The changes I notice? I went inside. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
67 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:  
 You went into yourself a little more, so you're focus kind of internalize it. 
Excellent. So we'll try that again this time. Let's see if you can do a little bit 
more of that. Go ahead and close your eyes. That's it, just stay there for a 
bit. There you go, that's good. What I want you to do now is see if you can 
focus all of your attention, just gather it all in one place. Almost like a 
magnet sucking your attention in and notice what that feels like, notice 
what happens there. And when you get a full sense of your attention really 
being gathered together, then come on back and we’ll have a little chat.  
 
Romeo:   
Okay. 
 
Igor:   
Did you enjoy that? Was that pleasant? So how was that different from 
the first time you did this. 
 
Romeo:   
Well first of all, it was longer. 
 
Igor:    
It was longer. 
 
Romeo:   
First of all I was focused in a specific area. 
 
Igor:   
So you focused in one specific area. And how do your body feel as a 
result? 
 
Romeo:   
Well I was aware that I was focusing on the area... 
 
Igor:    
Right. 
 
Romeo:  
 ...in my body. 
 
Igor:   
Okay and was there a change in sensation, did the suggestion grow, 
diminish, anything like that? 
 
Romeo:   
The more I focused the more I became aware of it. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
68 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:   
So the more you focused the more aware you became of that part. Overall 
was that a pleasant experience? 
 
Romeo:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
That's good, very good. So go ahead and close your eyes again, gather all 
your attention. Notice that your body is doing the same thing as last time 
or if it's a little different this time. You don't have to tell me yet, just 
become aware of these things. And gather all your attention.  
 
Now I wonder if you’ve noticed your breathing shifted yet? Just place your 
attention on your breathing and ask yourself, does that help you increase 
your focus or not. There you go. Your breathing is continuing to shift. You 
didn't try to make that shift did you? But there it is.  
 
Just notice what physical sensations, how your body feels when your 
breathing does that. And I'm curious if you can find some area of comfort. 
There you go, somewhere comfortable, relaxing maybe. And if you can 
notice what happens when you place your attention there, would it grow 
like the other one did, would it be more comfortable, more pleasant? 
That's it. 
 
Whenever you have a full sense of all that, any distinctions between this 
experience now, how it feels, how you think in your mind and your body, 
and what happened before and bring yourself back, open your eyes and 
we'll have a little chat. How was that, did you enjoy that? 
 
Romeo:   
Partly. 
 
Igor:    
Partly, very good. 
 
Romeo:   
I enjoyed the first one better.  
 
Igor:    
You enjoyed the first one better, so talk me through it.  
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
69 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Romeo:   
Well I enjoyed the first one better because this time I had a total body 
relaxation. 
 
Igor:    
You had a total relaxation. 
 
Romeo:   
If I start relaxing too much I become aware of headaches. 
 
Igor:   
Oh okay. So you did get the relaxation, too much relaxation is not good for 
you at this point in your life. 
 
Romeo:   
Yeah, absolutely. 
 
Igor:    
I understand. That's very useful to know. 
 
Romeo:   
Yup. 
 
Igor:   
Very useful to know. You enjoyed it you actually had the result, you 
focused on relaxation and became more relaxed, and as a result we took 
you to a place that was a little less pleasant because you developed some 
kind of headaches and you're too relaxed. Is that correct? 
 
Romeo:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
Okay good. So are you suggesting that if you stay clear of relaxation too 
much, as we stay a little bit clear of relaxation it'll help you enjoy this 
process more is that correct? Good, it's good for me to know, so thank 
you. It's a wonderful thing for me to know in terms of process we're doing 
here, right? So I'm curious just curious just a question arises in my mind is 
relaxation the same as comfort to you? So in other words, if we did the 
same thing with comfort would that be a similar experience or do you 
think it will be a much more pleasant experience than what you just had? 
 
Romeo:   
I think it will be a much more pleasant experience.  
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
70 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:   
Much more pleasant? Let's give it another go, let's just find out shall we? 
Go ahead and close your eyes. Very good, so you're getting to be quite an 
expert at this now. Gather all your attention. There we go. Notice if you're 
breathing shifts by itself when your attention is gathered somewhere.  
 
Very good and this time I'd like you to just find some comfortable part of 
your body, some pleasant part and put your attention there, in a way that 
increases the comfort rather than decreases it. It makes it more pleasant, 
you know what I mean don't you? There you go. You're doing a great job. 
And notice how this is once again different to the previous experiences, all 
of them we've had so far. Whenever you're ready just bring yourself back 
and we'll have a chat about that. I can see from your face that was a lot 
better wasn't it? 
 
Romeo:   
Yeah it was a lot better. 
 
Igor:   
Yeah. Did you enjoy that? Yah? So without ignoring that last little exercise, 
the one we did the one before that, how would this compare to the one 
before that, the one that was still pleasant? 
 
Romeo:   
Better. 
 
Igor:    
This was better now. 
 
Romeo:   
Yeah because it's easier to get there. 
 
Igor:   
It's easier to get there. Your mind is getting faster in this process. I'm not 
surprised, your actually starting to learn a few things about yourself, which 
is good, right, very good. So now we're going to do some really interesting 
things, some really fun things, right?.  
 
And again just as with this last experiment please only follow the 
instructions or the ideas to the extent that there is no adverse relaxation 
going, only to the point that you're comfortable. Make sense? If at any 
point relaxation becomes too much, please just let me know and then 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
71 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
we'll go down another path, because this is about your mind not about 
anything in particular. I'm not trying to achieve anything specific I just 
want to see how your mind responds to different ideas and it should be a 
pleasant thing all around. Okay. 
 
Romeo:   
Okay. 
 
Igor:   
Go ahead and close your eyes. You're already an expert at this, your 
attention knows how to gather that much more quickly now, and how 
your breathing has already shifted.  
 
Now I wonder if the pleasantness or comfort at this time will be the same 
or different to the one earlier on, will it be more intense, more pleasant 
perhaps. That's it, there you go. And now I'd like you to just become very 
aware of the physical structure of your body, the way your head's angled 
and tilted, your shoulders, maybe your spine as it rests in that chair, your 
legs down to the ground. And ask yourself, no need to speak out loud just 
yet, but just ask yourself, can you tell which way your head is tilted? Is it 
tilted slightly to the left or slightly to the right or is it right in the middle? Is 
your head tilted slightly forward or slightly back or is it right in the middle? 
 
Notice how - comfortable your head is or is not at this point in this 
particular – location - where your neck - is comfortable at. To test the 
levels of comfort I would like for you to do something. I would like for you 
to - see if your head will tilt to the left ever so slightly, smaller than that, 
and go back to the center again.  
 
Now I'd like to see if you can repeat that process, but make it so small that 
it's barely perceptible, that’s it. Notice how you lost – you’ve actually cut 
out at least three quarters of the path. I want to see if you can half it 
again. See if you can tilt to the left and back again only even less than last 
time. That's it, you're doing a great job. And notice how that's different. 
Does your head feel more comfortable when it’s ever so slightly to the left 
or when you come back to the center?  
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
72 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Okay, stop doing that for awhile and rest for a bit. - Just rest. - That's good. 
Resting comfortably - of course. - Very good. - Now I'd like for you to pay 
attention - to the right side of your - head and see if you can repeat the 
process, going ever so slightly to the right - and back to the center. Notice 
any differences between that – and when you went to the left. Move it 
ever so slightly to the right. - So small in movement that your attention 
really zeros in on it - maybe it even moves itself. Go back to the center. 
There you go. Now I wonder which - of the two directions felt most 
comfortable to you. - Now stop trying anything and just relax, or rather, 
rest comfortably. That's it, just rest comfortably. No need to do anything in 
particular just now. -  Whenever you're ready - just bring yourself back 
again to the room - eyes opened feeling refreshed and alert, having had an 
interesting exploration. Good job. Good job. You’re very pensive there. 
Some food for thought, eh? 
 
Romeo:   
A lot. 
 
Igor:    
So just talk me through, what happened for you? 
 
Romeo:   
What happened is that again, at a certain point I went again into too much 
relaxation and started getting the headache. And I was not comfortable 
tilting it to the right. 
 
Igor:    
But what about the left? How was the left compared to the right? 
 
Romeo:   
At the beginning, I noticed that I tilted it, in my opinion, slightly one side, I 
got the instructions to tilt it, that felt a lot more comfortable. But tilting it 
to the right didn’t feel comfortable at all. 
 
Igor:    
Right, so there's something going on there, right? 
 
Romeo:  
 Yeah. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
73 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:   
So inside there's something going one way, yeah I'd go with that, the other 
way not so much. Initially more on the left hand side and doing more 
comfortable, than the right and actually doing less is more comfortable. 
 
Romeo:  
 Yeah so much so. 
 
Igor:    
That was interesting, wasn't it? 
 
Romeo:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
So you're learning some things about yourself, you're not quite sure what 
all this means yet but there's definitely something of an exploration going 
on here, right?  
 
Romeo: 
Um hm. 
 
Igor: 
Very good, you're a great person to work with because you’re having some 
very interesting insights here, right? 
 
Romeo:   
Yeah, for myself. 
 
Igor:   
Well we're both winning out on this. I get to do my little experiment and 
you get to actually learn about yourself a little bit too, right? You up for 
one more round? 
 
Romeo:   
Okay. 
 
Igor:  
 Okay. Again this is going to be more about the comfort, so if at some 
point you tip into relaxation, you already pulled yourself out the last time 
so that's a good job, we'll do the same thing again.  
 
For this one however I'm going to ask you to place your hands on your lap. 
So one on each lap, there you go. Make sure they're comfortable as well as 
they are resting right now because in a moment you're going to close your 
eyes; very good. So in a moment I'm going to ask you to close your eyes 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
74 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
again so make sure your arms are comfortable and can rest in this sort of 
position for awhile. Okay just close your eyes; very good. 
 
And already notice how your attention's gathering inside much more 
naturally than before, right? Isn't that interesting, because there's a 
learning process that's occurring. You’re getting better and better at 
navigating through your inner mind. You're doing a good job here. And as 
you did before, notice that your breathing shifted by itself and your 
comfort increases because of it. Isn't that pleasant? And let that comfort 
continue to increase without any sense of relaxation, just comfort and rest 
so it's comfortable and pleasant. 
 
 Now you have a right arm and you have a left arm - I want you to be 
aware of your right arm, - just aware of it, - and I want you to be aware of 
your left arm, - just to be aware of it. Now your right and your left arm 
may feel similar - but they'll be different because they're different arms. I 
wonder how they feel different right now? That's it. 
 
Now, if you were to lift one of those two arms ever so slightly, like you did 
with the head tilt, if you were to lift one of those two hands ever so 
slightly so it's barely not touching your leg, I wonder which of those two 
would lift most comfortably right now? That's it. Have you noticed which 
one it is yet? I'd like for you to just barely lift it and barely return it over 
and over again and notice if that comfort increases, - barely lifting and 
barely return and returning back to rest, - and barely lifting all over again. 
Maintain that cycle for awhile - and then notice the comfort levels. Now 
just rest for a bit and by rest I mean rest in a comfortable way, not in a 
relaxing way, just rest comfortably without doing anything for a while. 
 
Now I wonder if that comfort grows as you rest, without doing anything? 
Okay now return your attention to whichever of those hands made you 
feel most comfortable in lifting. I wonder if you could just lift it exactly the 
same amount as last time and increase your comfort with that? And what 
would happen, that's it, if you allowed that hand to continue. Could you 
observe the comfort growing, if it continued on its own?  

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
75 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Now I wonder at what rate that comfort would grow if the hand lifted 
faster? Could you absorb the comfort growing further? - That's it. - Now I 
wonder what that hand would have to do - to suddenly double the level of 
comfort of there. Do you know yet or do you have yet to find out? Are you 
enjoying this experiment so far, just nod your head if you are? 
 
Are you willing to take another step in this experiment? So at the moment 
I'm going to reach over and touch your left arm - I'm going to do it in a way 
that’s going to be comfortable to you, and I want you to just notice the 
sensations that you're experiencing grow or diminishes as a result. Is that 
okay with you?  
 
So here I am touching the arm, and notice what happens to the comfort 
here. Did it increase? Does that increase when it comes over to there? And 
notice how that hand over here feels different and your own comfort 
levels can change with it too. Now I wonder if that arm could kind of move 
by itself, would it move down by itself or would it move up? Which way do 
you think it wants to go? That's right. And you can tell because the 
comfort increases can you not? There you go. And you're not moving that 
arm are you? It’s kind of happening by itself? I wonder if it would choose 
an unusual path to increase that comfort, because you could move left 
and right as well as up or down could it not? And right now you have no 
idea which way it will move, do you?  But it will be more comfortable. 
 
So carry on enjoying that exploration for awhile. - That's it, step-by-step. 
There you go. - You're learning a lot about yourself are you not? So in a 
moment I'd like for you to just bring this experiment to a natural close, 
your hand can return to your lap, your breathing can return back to 
normal. Your eyes will open just like before and we’ll have a little chat. But 
because you've been doing quite a profound piece of learning, please feel 
free to take a few moments over the next few seconds to do that, so you 
don't feel too rushed. When that hand touches your lap and your eyes 
open, we'll have a little chat about that. There you go. Just mentally 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
76 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
unwind everything and let that hand return? It's okay for you to move it 
yourself as well, the lesson for now is over. 
 
Now the important bit will be the chat we have about that. There you go 
jut bring it right back now. That's it. And it takes a little bit of effort to 
reconnect the hand, doesn't it. There you go, all the way down, all the way 
down you can come all the way back. There you go. Wow. Wasn't that 
something? Wasn’t that something? 
 
Romeo:   
Weird. 
 
Igor:   
Weird. That would be the way for saying it, but comfortable, no? Was 
there comfort involved?  
 
Romeo:   
Yeah in some instances because you kept asking which way it's going to 
go, does it know? Initially I had the feeling that my hand was bouncing up 
and down all the time.  
 
Igor:    
Right. 
 
Romeo:   
And you said something about I can put it down and I was feeling it 
bouncing up and down all the time. 
 
Igor:    
Right. 
 
Romeo:   
And then you started to say that it was going to go up, and I felt like I was 
all the time dribbling a basketball. 
 
Igor:   
Right. So it would be fair to say you're hand felt like you weren't really in 
charge of it for awhile, it just kind of did its own thing, is that what you're 
suggesting? 
 
Romeo:   
Yeah. And the weird part was that I could hear you distinctly telling me 
that it was okay to put my hand down myself. And I thought my hand was 
somewhere here. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
77 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Igor:   
Right. And you didn't quite realize it hadn't actually touched your lap yet, 
right? 
 
Romeo:   
Yeah. So I'm thinking that I'm already down. 
 
Igor:    
So it’s like, what is he talking about, I'm already there. 
  
Romeo:   
Yeah exactly. 
 
Igor:    
My knee is an awfully long way, who dropped my knee to the floor? 
 
Romeo:   
That was weird yeah. 
 
Igor:    
That's strange. 
 
Romeo:  
 I thought I was already there. 
 
Igor:   
But this is the interesting part, because you have a very good mind. Did 
you notice how quickly your mind moved you from a normal reality to 
something where you had a different relationship to the way you normally 
have your hands, because you use your hands every day right. 
  
Romeo:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
And your relationship there changed very quickly. You felt it differently, 
you felt it bouncing up and down, and as people here will to tell you, there 
wasn't much bouncing going on it was pretty much stable and maybe 
every now and then it went down or up a little bit. But if I understand you 
correctly, it felt like pretty extravagant motions to you, right? 
 
Romeo:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:  
 So there's a lot of stuff that can happen inside the mind when you focus 
on it in the right way, isn't it. Are you glad you came? Are you glad you 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
78 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
volunteered and had a little bit of an exploration here? Well I certainly am 
because this has been very useful in terms of the project we're learning 
here. Is there anything else you want to tell me about that session that 
you think is interesting or important for you? 
 
Romeo:   
Well this one other thing is that before you did the tilting the head thing 
and I noticed that my head wasn't straight, but tilted to the right where I 
told you that I didn't feel comfortable, but it tilted to the right and I was 
aware there wasn’t any discomfort to the right. 
 
Igor:   
 So something inside you is fixing things, yes? 
 
Romeo:   
Yeah.  
 
Igor:      
So this is something very interesting. Although we haven't gone down that 
road,  we haven’t done hypnosis or trance officially yet or anything like 
that, notice how your body's already responding by kind of fixing things, 
healing things if you like, because you noted, oh I didn’t even notice that 
the right side was somehow feeling less pleasant than the left. And the 
very next time it seems like in your inner mind, or you're unconscious, 
however you want to call it, and was doing something to fix it whilst you 
were busy learning a separate lesson. Isn’t that a pretty powerful mind to 
have? Do you feel good about that? It’s been a real pleasure to work with 
you, we had some really good fun here.  
 
Romeo:  
 Yeah, although it was raises questions within myself. 
 
Igor:   
It does raise questions. It does raise questions, important questions too 
right. 
 
Romeo:  
 Yeah. 
 
Igor:       
Is any of those critical questions you want to raise with me right now, or is 
it something more for you to contemplate? 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
79 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Romeo:   
No, it’s all for me. 
 
Igor:      
I understand and I don't want to invade your privacy there but it's 
important that if you do have any questions about any of your experience 
you're welcome to ask me at any point. 
 
Romeo:   
Not at this stage. 
 
Igor:     
Okay great. Well, thank you so much for coming here. I really appreciate 
you taking the time.  
 
 
Breakdown: Sessions 3-4 
 
Welcome back again. And by now you will have watched the demonstrations. I want you 
to realize that although these demonstrations look a little complex like oh my God these 
things are going on I don't think I can do this, and so on. Actually the process is very, 
very easy.  
 
Now there are two reasons why I, actually there's one reason why I gave you two 
demonstrations on that and that's because I want to show you the progressive nature of 
this. You can do very small amounts with this, especially at the beginning when you're a 
little bit shyer about hypnosis and then you can start adding more and more things, and 
do some pretty sophisticated versions of hypnosis that are all based on some pretty 
simple ideas and some simple processes, but they’re stacked on top of each other. 
 
So let's just break down a little bit of what we did there. We started off once again with 
the hypnotic context as we always do, then we've moved on from hypnotic context into 
our first warm-up cycle. Remember the ABS Formula - got the hypnotic context, the A 
stands for Absorb Attention. So we went through those cycles of absorbing attention 
again just as you’ve seen me do in other demonstrations already.  
 
Now as we went through the cycle the closing of the eyes, the gathering attention, the 
breathing and the comfort and so on, I learned something of great value about my 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
80 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
client, my volunteer at this point. I learned that relaxation, which is a pretty standard 
thing to be using in hypnosis, is not a good idea in this case. Why, because for him 
relaxation or at least too much relaxation is coupled with something negative which is a 
headache. 
 
And as you recall we said right at the beginning of this training program as soon as 
anything negative begins to happen, stop it, bring them back, have a chat, and only 
bring them back into these hypnotic processes to the extent that you can avoid 
whatever the problem stimulus was.  
 
So in this case the problem stimulus is relaxation, I must avoid relaxation at all costs. 
And you'll notice that I'm so trained to relax people as part of the approach I do because 
it's a very nice thing overall, that on occasion I made a slipup. I slip into relaxation and 
then have to correct to myself and say "No actually stick with comfort instead." So it's 
actually okay to make mistakes. You can make mistakes and move on from the mistakes 
and actually focus back onto what you're doing. It can be relatively forgiving if you move 
along these processes.  
 
Now the next thing we did is, so we've got the hypnotic content setup, we had our little 
chat, we did the progressive attention gathering, and we had each step one at a time 
again. Why did I do that? Well once again it was a new client and I'm taking him through 
each of those steps so that I can judge at each step how well he's doing. I can 
fractionate the trances and make it a little bit deeper each time, and he’s slowly go on 
that journey with me and I know he's going with me because each time it's a bit deeper, 
his responses are a bit stronger. You can see him having more effort to come back each 
time, which means he will be at some level a little deeper or more removed from his 
normal state of consciousness with each iteration, which is great, it makes my life a lot 
easier. 
 
Now we get into the important part. Up to this point it's pretty much standard fare, 
we've been doing this all along already. So what is new in the next part? Well now we're 
getting into the deep part of the ABS Formula Bypass the Critical Factor. Now this is 
where it gets very interesting because there are many maneuvers you can have to 
bypass the critical factor. The one I used here is very sly and it's very subtle, however it 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
81 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
is also very powerful. The way we bypass in the critical factor here is very simply by 
overloading the critical factor with too many tasks.  
 
Let me explain what I mean by that. The mind requires energy, your body eats glucose, 
the glucose goes into your brain feeds the nerve cells, and that gets turned into the 
electrical signals, and so on. Without that glucose you start feeling sluggish, your brain 
slows down, you can't think straight anymore, and if anyone's ever had some kind of a 
glucose rush or a sugar dump you know what I'm talking about, it becomes very difficult 
to think and make clear decisions and so on. 
 
Now we can fatigue the supply of glucose temporarily by simply making the person 
make choices and focus on subtle distinctions. The more choices someone makes the 
more that critical factor; that resistance starts eroding because energy's being used up 
to make those choices.  
 
The more subtle distinction someone has to make the more the critical factor erodes 
because each little distinction has to be evaluated, judged, denied or accepted. And 
once again that tends to erode the resistance to some degree. Now these requests all 
seem very innocent. Is this more or less, does that increase it or decrease it, does it 
make you feel more comfortable or less? Is your head tilted more to the left or more to 
the right? These are all choices where he has to literally have a sense of where am I? 
And it's actually quite a delicate decision to come to, because of this it's exhausting the 
critical factor more and more and becoming more and more hypnotic as a result. 
 
So you get more attention, his critical factor is being more exhausted, which means the 
kind of things that were maybe a little bit of resistant in the beginning are eroding by 
layers and suddenly the unconscious mind has freedom to express. How do you look at 
it as expressions? Well we had two demonstrations.  
 
The first demonstration we only played with a head tilt. Notice how the first time we did 
the head tilt was a very conscious movement. He moved quite a - about a half inch or 
so, small by everyday amounts but huge in terms of trance processes. So I had him do it 
again, this time even smaller than that until you just saw a little motion. The time I was 
satisfied is when he moved his head such a small degree I could barely tell he actually 
moved it. Then I know, he's moving into a very subtle layer. More energy’s being 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
82 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
expended on the subtleties, making that evaluation, and very importantly the 
unconscious mind has freedom to start expressing itself because to make very small 
movements, what's actually very difficult to do consciously, the conscious mind likes big 
brash movements, the unconscious mind tends to make smaller jerkier, simpler 
movements. 
 
So by reducing what's required of him and increasing the amount of, shall we say 
intellectual content that he's got to evaluate, it's actually tying up his intellectual 
processes in the evaluation side of things. And by reducing the movement side of things 
it's promoting the unconscious mind to step in and take it over for him to free his 
conscious mind up to do that evaluating job, which is actually very tricky for him to do. 
 
 Now I know it succeeded, because when he came back what did he say? Well the left 
side was actually very comfortable but I didn’t like moving to my right side. And here's 
the key thing, I didn't expect that to happen. I was surprised by it. If it's surprising to him 
then by definition its unconscious, there's no conscious volition involved. We've learned 
something about this.  
 
I've also learned in terms of the hypnosis that I'm doing, that I’m going to be staying 
clear of the right head tilt for awhile and hope, as the case that it actually happened, 
that it would fix itself, but I also know that there's a contra indication that if I start 
getting into it and start having him tilting it more and more to the right, I run a risk that 
I'm going to take him into some negative place. 
 
So you may have noticed that the second time around, when we did the exercise again I 
didn't mention the right head tilt at all. Once again like the relaxation, I'm avoiding those 
situations that may cause a problem. Now if I was a hypnotherapist I might very well 
start exploring that, but we're not doing therapy here we're doing practice and in 
practice, especially when you have less experience, you want to be making sure you 
avoid any kind of context that might open up the doorway to having to do therapy. So 
by being respectful to him we shift the context. 
 
So let's just make a summary of what we've come to so far. We've had the A - Attention 
Absorbing processes and we've done a pretty good job of them. Now we're going to the 
B - Bypassing of the Critical Factor. We're going to use a specific kind of trance which a 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
83 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
friend of mine calls a Somatic Trance. Somatic means of the body. We're using a body 
trance in order to get his intellect all tied up in a way that allows his unconscious mind 
to express itself. We’re going to start exhausting the critical factor by making it do fine 
choices, fine evaluations, careful distinctions, and in exhausting it by answering these 
different questions constantly, it'll get the point where he can't quite hold onto the 
same kind of critical thinking that normally gets in the way. At that point the 
unconscious mind starts to express itself more and more. We can tell that in the quality 
of the movement, they're smaller jerkier movements versus the smoother conscious 
movements.  
 
In time, if I chose to explore that road by the way, just so you know, we could turn those 
unconscious movements into very smooth natural movements also, but it goes through 
that little jerky stage first. It's important to realize this because when you see the quality 
of movement change, you know the unconscious mind has stepped in and taken over 
for a bit. That tells me I'm ready to bring him back, to debrief him, and then move on to 
the more important process, which we'll talk about in a moment. There's one last step 
that we put into this whole process, even that very first induction, that I'd like you to 
know about, and that is we started to focus on doing certain tasks, tilt your head move 
it back, tilt your head, move it back, always coming back to the center because his body 
knows where to rebalance a little bit. 
 
The next thing we did after exhausting his critical factor, his intellect for awhile what did 
we say? Just sit back and rest for awhile. With a different client I might just say sit back 
and relax, don't do anything. You see what happens here is it becomes a natural 
deepener. He's just exhausted his mind to some extent doing something and now it's 
don't do anything. Okay. Woo what a relief? That relief is the unconscious mind taking 
over again and resetting everything. But of course now that we've got a trance context 
and we've encouraged the unconscious mind to take over more because the conscious 
mind is sitting back in relief and going enough effort now I get to rest a little bit. That is a 
perfect opportunity for the unconscious mind to reset, take over more ground, so when 
we reengage afterwards, it becomes even more active. That's exactly what you saw 
happening. 
 
So now let's turn to the second demonstration of that somatic trance, of the way that 
we bypass the critical factor by giving the conscious mind a lot of details to try to hold 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
84 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
onto and a lot of choices, fine distinctions, to exhaust this choice making or evaluating 
mechanism. The second trance was identical really, the same attention shifting process, 
the same kind of paying attention to your body and the tilt and the choice and so on, 
only this time we work with the hands. We had them rest in his lap separated, because 
normally we would start playing with our hands now. 
 
Now the instructions were to lift the hand and return it, but so slightly that he's barely 
aware he's moving it. Now we've already taught him how to do this with his head tilts, 
he's gone from big tilts to just tiny little shifts, but they feel very significant because it’s 
amplified inside.  
 
So I know the context has already been laid for this, now I'm getting him to do the same 
thing with the hand. Now those of you who've got a little more experience will realize 
I'm going for a hand levitation or a hand catalepsy. I'm looking for automatic movement. 
It's one of these deep trance phenomena’s you may have heard about, that a lot of 
people are afraid to do. It's actually very easy to get, so by training his hand to do this, 
but to do this with very small movements, so rather than having big movements like this 
they are barely perceptible movements, it re-engages the same cycle. The unconscious 
mind must take over because these are movements the conscious mind doesn't quite 
know how to handle or control. It doesn't sit there and move a tiny fraction it moves big. 
You want a glass of water, you move your whole arm you don’t just move a tiny fraction 
of something. 
 
So the unconscious mind constantly expresses itself with these tiny little movements, 
micro expression in the face, micro expressions in the body and so on. So we're 
encouraging the unconscious mind to do that. But now in a direction of an arm 
levitation or a catalepsy that we want. I am confusing his critical factor again by giving 
him a choice left hand right hand, which is going to happen which one doesn't want to 
happen. And because I've really exhausted his critical factor up until this point with lots 
of other suggestions, lots of other questions, lots of other choices at this point, he’s not 
even thinking whether to analyze or maybe not lift it at all, he is just going with it and 
going like well, I guess this is one wants to lift a little bit more. He's not even analyzing 
the question fully, he's just going with the implication of that question. This is very 
important. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
85 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
So there he is practicing lifting that hand. One of two things can happen. He can start 
lifting it and on the suggestion that he will lift it, it would have just started levitating by 
itself. That could very easily have happened. I offer the possibility, his mind didn't take 
it. Am I now suddenly afraid because I failed? No, not in the least, because I can see all 
the classic catalepsies things going on, everything's working exactly as it should.  
 
So then I give him another experiment. I’m going to touch your hand and I’m going to lift 
it and just see what happens to your experience inside. Notice, his focus is off of what 
the hand is doing and on what his experience is doing. He's off evaluating something 
else, not the hand, which means the hand will automatically rest there cataleptically 
whilst he’s trying to sort through his feelings for does this feel better or not. Now we've 
got catalepsy and he's already practiced a little bit of motion. We’re now getting 
automatic motions easy. 
 
Again, we gave him a choice, up or down, which he started choosing down. Then we 
added either left or right to make it even more choices. At this point his conscious mind 
was overwhelmed; I had no idea what's going to happen. Well of course he doesn't. 
that’s what we want, his unconscious mind to do all the work for us.  
 
So there he is, his hand’s up in the air and it’s floating around and we're coming toward 
the end of the session, so we’ll ask him to return the hand. And this is the beautiful part, 
his hand’s not moving. What does that tell me? Clearly he’s been getting the 
suggestions, we’re getting the head nods, he’s responding on that sense. He's been a 
very good subject or volunteer so far.  
 
So really what's happening is his mind thinks he's already moving his hand down. He's 
getting hypnotic hallucination of movement whilst his hand is still cataleptic. I have a 
two for one offer here, do I know that's going to happen? No. I'm just never assuming 
anything about what's happening until I ask the client afterwards.  
 
Now this is very important for you, because you could have asked and you could have 
thought to yourself maybe I'm failing by now because that hand is not returning as 
quickly. Never make any evaluation about what happened until you've checked with the 
client and then they tell you what their experience is. And very often their experience 
has been much more hypnotic than you realize from looking to the outside.  

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
86 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
This is a crucial stage of your development as a hypnotist. You’re gathering feedback 
from your clients, so you can start predicting how people are feeling, whilst you do 
trances later on, that are much more official. It'll feel like you're inside their mind then 
because you can read their signals so much more clearly than other people.  
 
So we had all that catalepsies going on, the hand came back down, and the most 
important thing happens again. I must debrief the client. I must find out what 
happened. How did you feel? How did you interpret those feelings? How did you 
evaluate the things going on? How does your mind work? How does your mind think?  
 
Now in doing that I got all kinds of extra bonus. The idea of his head tilting to the right 
and starting to heal whatever limitation was built into his neck at that point. That’s great 
because now his motivation has increased to come back and explore even more. We 
haven't had to do anything formal yet we're just exploring, we're just doing an 
experiment, he’s just helping me with my research.  
 
He's now very motivated to come back for more of this because he's learning about 
himself, he's learning about his body, he's learning about how his mind operates. He's 
fixing problems he didn't know he had and he’s very grateful about that, because he's 
very happy that those things are happening. 
 
So now I have a volunteer that's gone from being a happy volunteer to being an ecstatic 
volunteer, someone's whose going to stand in the front of the queue and say "Please 
can I be next again?" And that's what you want because you see now getting volunteers 
and doing more practice becomes easier and easier, he'll go home, he'll talk to his 
friends and say, this was the most amazing thing and my hand was there and I thought I 
put it down in my lap but it was up.  
 
Now your reputation as a hypnotist has skyrocketed. And how many risks do you take? 
None, zero. This stuff will always happen in one way or another. You just have to let go 
of the need to make it happen like this, right now. Let whatever happens emerge. Give 
them choices, but make sure something does emerge and constantly come back and 
constantly get feedback. In that fractionation process do something, experience 
something, feedback something, do something more experience something more, 
feedback something more. That cycle is going to make the hypnosis more profound as 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
87 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
you continue. Pretty soon, you'll be doing some really deep, really powerful trances and 
it'll be easy to you. That's where we'll be heading to next. 
 
Now you have almost the whole picture. We have the hypnotic context, how to set the 
scene to make it easy. We have the attention gathering processes to start focusing the 
mind and opening the doorway to trance. We now have the critical factor bypasses, 
which are basically ways of exhausting the guardian, putting him to sleep, so the gate 
stays wide open and allows things in. 
 
Now we come to the final stage in the hypnotic process, which is the S - Stimulating the 
Unconscious. In the next few videos, the finals in the sequence, we'll talk a little bit 
about that and how we can use this to explore trances, to grow yourself in your skills as 
a hypnotist.  
 
Demo: Sessions 5-6 “Suggestion Experiments” 
 
Igor:   
Welcome back, I'm here with Miranda. We’ll do the last set of 
demonstrations now, this is the final stage of the formula. We'll do the 
demonstration first and then as before, we'll debrief. So how's it going 
Miranda are you having a good time? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
You're enjoying yourself. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:     
 Very good. As with everyone else, I want to thank you very much for 
volunteering to be here today to go through these things. And you've 
heard me say this a few times but I'll mention it again because it's 
important. There’s nothing really expected of you, there’s nothing that I 
need you to do or think or say, just notice your experience and log it and 
then we can just keep a record of that and it’ll help me with the research 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
88 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
project we're doing, the experiment, and in the process you'll learn a lot 
about yourself too. Seem fair? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Do you have any questions for me yet? 
 
Miranda:   
No. 
 
Igor:   
 Excellent so shall we just dive in. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Well the starting point is really easy, you just go ahead and close your eyes 
and bring yourself back again. How was that, good? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Simple right. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah.  
 
Igor:       
How did you find that happened, did you find your mind calming down a 
little bit and you're focus internalizing and that kind of stuff? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah.  
 
Igor:   
 Did you enjoy that? 
 
Miranda:  
Yeah. 
 
Igor:      
Well let's see if we can intensify that whole process shall we? Okay so go 
ahead and close your eyes and just focus inside. Gather all your attention. 
That's right. And just notice your breathing, how it's shifting already. Now I 
wonder if you paying attention to your breathing, makes you feel more 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
89 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
focused or less. You can enjoy the sensation. That's right. I’d like you to 
find an area of comfort in your body or relaxation, whatever is most 
pleasant for you now and turn all your attention to that. Can you feel it 
grow? That's it. Is it pleasant? I wonder if focusing it further will intensify 
that even further. Let's find out. That's it. Whenever you’re ready, just 
bring yourself back and we'll have a little chat. How's that? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah, that’s nice. 
 
Igor:    
Did you enjoy that? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Nice process. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:      
You seem a little surprised at the things that happened there, just walk me 
through it, or was it just a nice little process? 
 
Miranda:   
No it was, I didn't expect it to be that relaxing. 
 
Igor:   
 Right. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah it was a happy feeling. 
 
Igor:    
It was a happy feeling. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
You didn't expect it to be quite as strong or intense as that. 
 
Miranda:  Yeah. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
90 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:     
Good. That's wonderful. That just shows me that your separation between 
consciousness and unconsciousness, you have a nice open communication 
going between the two, which is beautiful. You'll really like the next part. 
Okay. 
 
Miranda:   
Okay. 
 
Igor:   
 So let me tell you a little bit about what we're going to do next. Next it's 
all a question to find out how the mind responds to different ideas. You 
have feelings, you have thoughts, you have memories, you have all kinds 
of different things that you can experience in hypnosis and daily life, right?  
 
And everybody's a little different so what I want to do is I want to throw 
different thoughts at you, different ideas, different pictures, different 
words and notice what your response is to each one of them. Some will be 
stronger, some will be less, some not at all, and some will be like, oh my 
God, that was just amazing, and I have no idea ahead of time what it's 
going to be. It's kind of like a little exploration of what your mind likes. 
Does that make sense? 
 
Miranda:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:    
You're willing to dive into that. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:        
So start off again with your eyes closed. And already you're great at just 
letting your focus internalize, focusing on your breathing, see it change. 
There you go. Feel a change and perhaps the happiness you had last time 
can come back. We're going to begin the exercise by focusing on words. 
Different types of words can create different kinds of experiences. I don't 
care what the experience is just notice what experience you have. Just nod 
your head if you understand. There's no need for you to do anything, just 
listen, rest there, focus, and notice what happens, okay? 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
91 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
So the first word is a bathroom. Bathroom, just notice whatever happens, 
maybe an image pops into mind or an experience or memory. Bathroom, 
bathroom. And when you've gotten a sense of whatever that was, that 
experience that you got, just nod your head and we’ll move on; very good. 
How let that experience fade for a bit. 
 
Now we're going to go through a different type of word. The word for you 
now is happy, happy. Notice if you have a similar experience to the last 
one, or if it’s different. Is there a picture involved, was there a feeling, or is 
it something different? Happy, enjoy the experience. And let that fade, 
whatever that is, just internalize your attention again and rest for awhile.  
 
The next word is going to be interesting because it's going to relate to 
something specific. I'd like you to choose one of your arms your left or 
your right, it doesn't matter which. Have you chosen an arm? I like you to 
focus your attention there and see what happens or notice what happens 
when this word comes away heavy? Just pay attention to that arm heavy, 
heavy, pay attention to that arm and heavy. And nod your head when you 
have an awareness of whatever happens. To contrast it, turn your 
attention to the other arm and light is your word there, light, light. And 
you'll notice whatever sensations are there, do you not? 
 
Do you want to have some fun with this now? I'd like you to alter that 
attention from one arm to the other and when you get to the heavy arm, 
think heavy and when you get to the light arm, think light. Heavy, light, 
heavy, light and notice whatever changes occur. And when you get a full 
sense of that, bring yourself back, feeling refreshed and alert, having had a 
wonderful journey through your own mind. That's it just bring yourself 
back bit by bit, until your eyes just pop open and you come back into the 
room feeling refreshed and alert, having had a great and interesting 
experience. Whoo, that's something wasn't it? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Did you enjoy that? 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
92 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah it was cool. 
 
Igor:    
Were you surprised by that? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Yeah. It's quite something. Words can how a powerful affect can't they? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:      
 Now you may notice that you use different types of words that have 
different types of experiences. Before I go into what the experiment is 
about, I want to have your experience. So what did you notice, what did 
you experience with the different types of words and so on? 
 
Miranda:   
Well the word bathroom didn't feel big. I just saw my bathroom and I had 
no... 
 
Igor:    
No real feelings but you just saw a picture. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
So the word brought a picture to mind... 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
...but no particular feelings, right? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Very good you're ahead of the game then. Carry on. 
 
Miranda:   
And then there was happiness that was just a big golden sun. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
93 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:    
A golden sun. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah, it felt very big. 
 
Igor:    
Very big and in good emotions. Yeah. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Did you have a picture with it or was there no picture? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Just this glow. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
This glow of colors, this feeling, but no specific picture. Like the bathroom 
compared to that was a very different experience. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
And very different experiences right. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah very different yeah. 
 
Igor:       
So let’s turn to your arms then, when we said heavy on the one arm, once 
again a different experience, right?  
 
Miranda:   
Yeah, yeah. 
 
Igor:    
So how did that compare? 
 
Miranda:   
I just, I felt, oh, my arm’s about to fall off. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
94 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
Igor:   
Right. Now I want to point something out for you guys at home, you 
couldn't notice that, that probably happened, I don't know if you realized  
it once you're doing it, but she's thinking heavy, did you all notice her head 
going towards the heavy side? It's almost like part of her body's framing 
you back, did you notice that? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah I felt like I might fall. 
 
Igor:    
You might fall, right? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Because it's dragging you out of your chair. It's surprising isn't it? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
So what happened when you went to the light side instead? 
 
Miranda:   
Um I just kept feeling the heavy arm it was so heavy. 
 
Igor:   
So the heavy arm started getting heavier to you, like when you went to the 
light side? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Okay. 
 
Miranda:   
And the other arm, it was such a big contrast. 
 
Igor:    
A huge contrast, right? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
Same arms really, but suddenly there’s a big difference between them, 
right? 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
95 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Miranda:  
 Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Does it surprise you? 
 
Miranda:   
Yep and there was a moment when I felt, well what's happening, what's 
happening? And then I had so much fun and I thought, okay, it’s okay. 
 
Igor:    
That's great, just let it happen, right? 
 
Miranda:   
So yeah. 
 
Igor:       
So are you saying that your right hand felt like it was starting to lift up, is 
that what you’re suggesting? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Well how interesting. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
That's something you could explore as well, right? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
If we had more time that's exactly what we'd do. 
 
Miranda:   
Okay. 
 
Igor:       
But for now let's just focus in on a little bit of what we've done here. So we 
noticed that words can create pictures... 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
...or it can create feelings. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
96 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Miranda:  
 Yeah. 
 
Igor:     
 And words can create sensations all the way up to actually changing the 
way you move kind of unconsciously right, pretty powerful things that 
words can do. Let's do one more round of experiments now. I want you to 
notice what happens when we have pictures and what they can do for 
you, does that make sense? 
 
Miranda:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:      
So this again is just an experiment, just notice what happens. Close your 
eyes like you did before and internalize all your attention. There's your 
breathing's already shifted, that's great. Do you feel it shifting? Very good. 
And that pleasantness, is that growing again. There you go. All the way 
that's it. Now a moment ago you went through words like bathroom, 
happy, heavy, and so on, now I’m going to use words, but only to the 
extent that they're going to help you find an image inside your mind.  
 
So I want you to focus on the pictures and notice what they do to you. Is 
that useful, is that okay? So the first picture I want you to find is a picture 
of someone you love, someone you have a good relationship with. It could 
be a pet, a person, a friend, someone you love. Do you have that picture? 
Notice what happens when you have that picture in your mind. Now I 
want you to just clear your mind and rest for a little bit. 
 
Now the picture I want you to have in your mind now, or a mental movie, 
will be to have one of your arms lifting? Choose the arm? And just have 
the mental movement of lifting it over and over again, higher and higher, 
just run the mental movie, and notice whatever experience you have as a 
result. That's right, curious isn't it? Very good. (Watch the hands.) 
 
 Now just rest again for a while, let that image fade, that was an 
interesting experience was it not. Let's have another experiment shall we? 
A moment ago you pictured or ran a mental movie of the hand lifting. 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
97 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
What I'd like to do now is see if a different kind of picture will help. I'd like 
you to imagine a string of helium balloons tied to that very hand. Can you 
imagine that? You can almost feel the tug of the string on your wrist, or 
wherever it’s tied to. Feel that tug. Notice those balloons trying to lift up 
into the air, taking that arm with it. Is that an interesting sensation?  
 
The balloon's lifting right up in that hand. Now, if you were to imagine that 
a stiff breeze comes along and starts really tugging those balloons, really 
pulling them up into the stratosphere. Notice what happens to your arm. 
Is it happening even faster now? So that’s it, even pulling even further. 
That's right. What a curious experience to have, isn’t it? What a pleasant 
experience. 
 
Now I'd like for you to start to learn something about yourself. The 
thoughts you have, the words you use do matter. The pictures you use do 
matter and really learn about that and just as a thank you for coming up 
and volunteering, I'd like for you to select a word or picture that is 
something nice for you. Maybe something you'd like more in your life, 
happiness, love, success? Or maybe you can think of someone you do love 
a parent, a loved one, a friend, a boyfriend.  
 
Now only allow that hand to return to your lap as quickly as you can really 
put all your attention on that picture or that word that you selected for 
yourself and notice the changes it makes inside you, when you allow your 
emotional energy to go there, so by the time that hand touches your lap 
again you'll come back to the room feeling refreshed and alert and feeling 
fantastic, having learned something really important about how to master 
your own mind. That makes sense doesn't it?  
 
That's it, let the hand come right back down. It's a quick simple process of 
gathering your attention on a focal point, a thought, an idea, the word, the 
picture. There you go all the way back, all the way back. Notice the results 
that it gives to you. You're doing a great job, a great job. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
98 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
That's it all the way back. You know of course a very important lesson has 
been learned, has it not? There you go and all the way back to your lap, 
when it touches your lap, just bring yourself all the way back and we'll 
have a little chat. There you go. That's it, all the way back now. That's it 
bring yourself back again. Good stuff, good job. Wow, did you enjoy that?  
 
Miranda:   
That was fun. 
 
Igor:    
Wasn't that interesting?  
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
Did you expect that to happen? 
 
Miranda:   
No, I wasn’t thinking about it. 
 
Igor:    
That’s right. It just happened, right? 
  
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
You weren’t really thinking about it, you just let it happen. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:    
It was a very pleasant little journey as well, right? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah, yeah. 
 
Igor:   
So anything in particular that you want to talk about in terms of your 
experience that maybe surprised you, or you enjoyed? 
 
Miranda:  
 Prior to that, I wasn't aware of my arm, and didn’t know which way it 
went, up or down. I heard you say things and I thought, I don’t know.  
 
Igor:   
 Who knows right? 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
99 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
You weren't aware of your actual arm lifting at some point. It was just off 
doing its own thing and you were off somewhere having a different 
experience. 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:       
Beautiful. That’s a wonderful, shall we say example, of the unconscious 
mind in action, wasn’t it?  You glad you took part in this experiment? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
 Was it useful to you? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
Well I want to thank you a lot for coming and doing this. And if we ever get 
a chance to do more of these sorts of experiments, would you be willing to 
volunteer again? 
 
Miranda:   
Yeah. 
 
Igor:   
Phenomenal. Well thank you very much for coming. I really appreciate 
this. 
 
Miranda:   
Okay. 
 
 
Breakdown: Sessions 5-6 
 
Okay folks welcome back again. Hopefully you enjoyed that last set of demonstrations. 
As you can probably have worked out by now the last set of experiments is all about the 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
100 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
S stage of the ABS Formula that is the Stimulate the Unconscious Mind. There are many 
ways to stimulate the unconscious mind, but really what it comes down to is a simple 
idea.  
 
You present them with ideas, a thought, a word, or an image and they’re going to 
respond to those ideas. Here's the important part not everyone will respond to these 
ideas in the same way? We happened to have a great subject, a great volunteer, that 
responded equally powerfully to words as well as to pictures and to images, and so on. 
Sometimes they'll respond more to one and less to the other, that's fine too.  
 
The important thing here is once again, these are experiments. Sometimes people, and 
you had a very powerful arm levitation going on here, which is great, but sometimes you 
have people who will feel like their arm is lifting but nothing is actually happening 
outside. That's also great. These are all the things that come out as you debrief them, as 
you talk to them afterwards. What I hope you realize is, that it's actually very easy to 
present suggestions. 
 
Now we presented simple suggestions, I kept it purposely simple happy, bathroom, 
someone you love, balloons lifting your arm, and so on. Notice I did not say your arm will 
lift, I did not present any risky suggestions, I just got them to imagine that. When you 
notice a little bit about motion beginning to happen and encouraging it, saying yes, it 
could happen, let it happen. If the arm lifts, great, if it doesn't want to lift that's fine too. 
Once again the pressure is completely off you, all that matters is the exploration of the 
experience of how they’re responded to words or images that you're presenting to 
them, you're preparing for them. 
 
Now the reason this is important is, once again, there are no risk involved, there's a very 
simple process. We created a lot of context we talked a lot about that, we give them 
exercises to gather their attention. Once again you have lots of exercise around that. We 
skipped the stage about bypassing the critical factor, partly because we kind of did it 
already when we did the attention gathering stuff with their breathing and so on, we did 
a little bit of the bypassing critical factor. To be honest with you, it worked so well there 
was no reason to go into the full blown somatic trance to help develop that skill as well. 
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
101 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
And then finally we finished up by playing with the idea of suggestion, in the form of 
words and images that we presented to them. Now I want you realize whilst hypnosis 
can be very sophisticated you can throw out wonderful suggestions and complex 
language patterns and sophisticated double binds and reverse and double hypnotic 
binds, and whatever other words you want to come up with.  
 
The importance is, right at the root of it all, the only thing you're doing is using words or 
mental imagery to create an affect; it's as simple as that, everything else is in 
elaboration. So if you're having difficulty with the elaborations, get rid of it all and begin 
with the really simple, easy steps like this one. So hopefully you’ll have seen how the 
whole process is actually very easy to do, there’s no risk involved, it's fun and the key is 
to always keep debriefing your client.  
 
In the final session we’ll have a few more words about how do this stuff for yourself 
when you go home now with your friends, with your families, and with strangers you 
meet in the local clubs, whether it's an arts club or a gym or wherever you'd like to hang 
out. If you don't do that currently, it's a great thing to do, get out there and meet new 
people. We’re talking about how to put it all together, so that you have a nice simple 
process that you can take away with you. So until then, I hope that this session has been 
useful to you.  
 
I don't know how many of you have noticed how much can be done with relatively few 
tools and importantly, it's the mindset behind these tools that matters. It's the idea of 
the principles that you're expressing and right now, you should be very familiar with 
these already. 
 
 
Practice Without Fear 
 
Welcome back again. In this final video I want to talk a little bit about everything you've 
learned so far. Four stages of the hypnotic process, we’ve got the Creating the Hypnotic 
Context, the A - Attention Absorbing part, B-the Bypassing the Critical Factor, and S the 
Stimulating the Unconscious mind. And you have lots and lots of mechanisms to 
achieve each one of them.  

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
102 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
The Hypnotic Context is just to remind you, very simply, focus on the relationship, are 
you building a rapport, do they feel comfortable around you, do they trust you? The 
experiential point, what is the frame of mind they’re coming from when they're thinking 
about the exercises they're going to do. Is there a conflict frame? You're going to make 
me do something and I'm going to fight back. Is it a cooperation frame, I will help you do 
something, you'll help me achieve something? What is the result that you're promising? 
The fewer the results the better.  
 
Hence, experiments are phenomenal, because they're just a wonderful way to say the 
result is irrelevant it's the test itself, the journey that matters. And that's how you get 
good at hypnosis, in fact that's how you get great at hypnosis. Do not invest yourself in 
the result or the outcome, just allow whatever happens to happen and that will be your 
royal road straight into the unconscious mind and to get amazing results.  
 
Now of course you and I both realize we haven't even touched on all the breadth of 
hypnosis that's possible, there're many different styles of inductions, we haven't 
touched on all the hypnotic phenomenon and how you can achieve those, or what you 
can do for it for persuasion, or influence or therapy or self-change and so on, that is not 
important right now. The whole purpose of this training program is so that you can start 
practicing hypnosis with confidence, without anxiety or fear or stress or tension or any 
of these things that happen when you put too much pressure on yourself.  
 
And I want you to really remember this when you start going out there, because a 
couple of things will happen. Number one, as soon as you start practicing with someone 
else, especially using this method I presented to you, you'll find it so easy and so much 
fun to do. You will fall in love with hypnosis the very first time you do it. You will feel so 
good, you'll want to do it again and again and again and so will your clients. Your 
volunteers will want to volunteer again and again and again because they are genuinely 
learning so much about themselves as you do this. The key here is do not focus on 
results, suggestions that you're presenting and so on. The key is, offer them 
experiences. Well focus your attention here, what happens? Focus it there, what 
happens? Does this make it more or less? Does this make it more or less? 
 
As you’re doing these maneuvers, you already built the ABS Formula into it, their 
attention naturally holds into one direction or another. The critical factor naturally starts 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
103 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
being bypassed as it just exhausts itself trying to collect a list of details to keep track of 
and to evaluate them and make choices. Making choices, evaluating things and 
collecting details all of them exhaust that part of mind we call the critical factor. There 
are other ways to bypass it, but this is simple, easy and virtually fool proof. 
 
Next we came into the suggestion phase what do you do with your suggestions 
themselves? And once again, there is a lot of scope available, you can expand them to 
really complex, sophisticated things you can do and say, but at the heart of it all it's just 
a simple idea that you will use words and mental images to evoke different types of 
experiences. You can evoke experiences in the body, sensations, you can experience 
motion and movement, you can change the way they feel, you can change any one of 
their senses; they can see things that aren't there. They can feel things that aren't there 
and vice versa.  
 
You have examples here of people spontaneously creating analgesia and anesthesia, 
they have no concept of what their arm is doing anymore, they can’t feel it for a while. 
You’ve had examples of hypnotic hallucinations, people feeling their arm moving but it 
wasn't moving at all, or moving fractionally. These are all classic hypnotic phenomenon 
that emerged spontaneously.  
 
Do not focus on them, do not get married or attached to the idea that you must 
produce them, because when you give yourself that freedom, you will put yourself into 
a state of mind where it's all just fun and it's all just easy and then hypnosis just 
skyrockets. And I want you to experience that. It is a phenomenal field that we are in. 
We get to explore the human mind, we get to grow with it and help other people grow 
to. You get to be a tremendous force for good in people's lives. Once you understand 
how simple it is to navigate through people's minds. 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Now the last thing I want you to keep inside your mind as we're finishing this program is 
you have the four principles, the Hypnotic Context AB and S of the ABS Formula, you 
have techniques that each one of those principles gets expressed through so that you're 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
104 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
ready to actually get used to it, and you'll know when someone's ticked off that box, 
when their critical factor is less active because they're responding more fully. And if they 
are not responding as fully just throw more of these exercises in and you keep stacking 
them up. 
 
Now the key thing is, in between each little experiment pause, take a break, end the 
trance as well and talk to them. You see you as a hypnotist need that feedback, 
especially at the beginning, to have a sense of what's happening inside someone's mind. 
Don't guess at it, don't try and figure it out by looking at them and having no idea what 
you're seeing. That is not useful to you. What is useful is, whenever some things 
happened, stop the interaction, bring them back, ask them, tell me what happened, 
how do you experience it, did you enjoy it? Be encouraging them; encourage them to 
feel good about what they've done, to notice that they've learned something, to realize 
that this is worthwhile to them. Meanwhile, of course, you are also learning and that's 
phenomenal because everyone wins. 
 
You will have volunteers lining up to volunteer for future sessions because they love it 
so much and you will enjoy it so much, you will want them to come in for those future 
sessions. That sets your feet firmly on the royal road to hypnosis, to real mastery, but 
here's a warning. When you're walking on that path to mastery, do not put your mind at 
the end of the journey because then you will stumble across whatever's happening 
there in front of your path. Keep your attention firmly fixed on the path right in front of 
you and that way you'll see if there's an obstacle here you don't kick it, you don't go 
falling over it, you stop, you acknowledge its presence, and you sidestep it and move off 
in a slightly different direction, and then it's easy to navigate this path. That way you will 
reach the level of mastery long before you've even realized it and then you go back on 
the road and realize that was easy, that was fun and I'd do it again in a heartbeat, if I 
had to. 
 
You see with these things in place you can become a true master of this craft because 
the only way you can master hypnosis is by doing it, the only way you'll do it is by feeling 
comfortable about doing it. I hope that you agree with me now, that you have lots and 
lots of tools to do that.  
 

How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear – Transcript Manual 
 
105 How To Practice Hypnosis Without Fear   ©Street Hypnosis  All Rights Reserved
 
And if, at any point in your journey you lose that you become tense, stressed, fearful, 
anxious, anything where pressure's being put on top of you, it is only because you've 
added something to the mix. You said to yourself "I will achieve this" and that's made 
your life harder.  
 
Now it's okay to do that if you're willing to go through the fear and then learn through 
that lesson, but if you're not, if that fear or anxiety is too much and it prevents you from 
starting in the first place then investigate what you're attached to and then let it go, go 
back to doing your experiments, go back to having fun, and hypnosis will go back to 
being easy for you again. And then you will surprise yourself with how quickly you 
developed and just how powerful your hypnosis becomes in a very short space of time. 
 
I hope that I get a chance to meet you sometime soon in the future, when you've gone 
through this process, because I really look forward to hearing all your stories about the 
successes you've had and I know that there are many of them in your future. The only 
thing that's on your shoulder right now is you have to make a choice. The choice you 
have to make is When Do You Start? 
 

