
How to Think about 
Weird Things


How to Think about
Weird Things
Critical Thinking for a New Age
SEVENTH EDITION
Theodore Schick, Jr.
Muhlenberg College
Lewis Vaughn
Foreword by Martin Gardner

HOW TO THINK ABOUT WEIRD THINGS: CRITICAL THINKING 
FOR A NEW AGE, SEVENTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill, a business unit of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 1221 Avenue
of the Americas, New York, NY, 10020. Copyright © 2014 by The McGraw-Hill Companies,
Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions © 2007,
2004, and 2001. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by
any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic
storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to
customers outside the United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOC/DOC 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
ISBN 978-0-07-8038365
MHID 0-07-8038367
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: Michael Ryan
Executive Director of Development: Lisa Pinto
Managing Director: William Glass
Brand Manager: Laura Wilk
Managing Development Editor: Sara Jaeger
Marketing Specialist: Alexandra Schultz
Editorial Coordinator: Adina Lonn
Project Manager: Judi David
Buyer: Susan K. Culbertson
Media Project Manager: Sridevi Palani
Cover Designer: Studio Montage, St. Louis, MO
Cover Image: Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division [LC-DIG-ppmsca-09633]
Compositor: Cenveo® Publisher Services
Typeface: 10.5/13 Weiss
Printer: R. R. Donnelley
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension 
of the copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
CIP data has been applied for.
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclu-
sion of a website does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill, and 
McGraw-Hill does not guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites. 
www.mhhe.com

To Erin, Kathy, Katie, Marci, Patrick, and T. J.


Foreword
Every year, in English-speaking countries alone, more than a hundred
books that promote the wildest forms of bogus science and the para-
normal are published. The percentage of Americans today who take
astrology seriously is larger than the percentage of people who did
so in the early Middle Ages, when leading church theologians—Saint
Augustine, for example—gave excellent reasons for considering astrol-
ogy nonsense. We pride ourselves on our advanced scientiﬁc technol-
ogy, yet public education in science has sunk so low that one-fourth of
Americans and 55 percent of teenagers, not to mention a recent pres-
ident of the nation and his ﬁrst lady, believe in astrology!
Now and then a courageous publisher, more concerned with
enlightening the public than with proﬁts, will issue a book that hon-
estly assesses pseudoscience and the paranormal. Works of this sort
now in print can be counted on your ﬁngers. It is always an occasion
for rejoicing when such a book appears, and there are several ways in
which How to Think about Weird Things is superior to most books designed
to teach readers how to tell good science from bad.
First of all, this book covers an enormous range of bogus sciences
and extraordinary claims that currently enjoy large followings in Amer-
ica. Second, unlike most similar books, the authors heavily stress prin-
ciples that help you critically evaluate outlandish claims—and tell you
why these principles are so important. Third, the book’s discussions are
readable, precise, and straightforward.
I am particularly pleased by the book’s clearheaded assessment of
scientiﬁc realism at a time when it has become fashionable in New
Age circles to think of the laws of science as not “out there,” but some-
how a projection of our minds and cultures. Yes, quantum mechanics
has its subjective tinge. There is a sense in which an electron’s prop-
erties are not deﬁnite until it is measured, but this technical aspect of
quantum theory has no relevance on the macroscopic level of every-
day life. In no way does the mathematical formalism of quantum 
mechanics imply, as some physicists smitten by Eastern religions claim,
that the moon is not there unless someone looks at it. As Einstein
liked to ask, Will a mouse’s observation make the moon real?
The authors give clear, accurate explanations of puzzling physi-
cal theories. Quantum theory indeed swarms with mind-boggling 
experiments that are only dimly understood. None of them justify
thinking that E = mc2 is a cultural artifact, or that E might equal mc3
vii

in Afghanistan or on a distant planet. Extraterrestrials would of
course express Einstein’s formula with different symbols, but the law
itself is as mind-independent as Mars.
As the authors say simply: “There is a way that the world is.” It is
the task of science to learn as much as it can about how this universe,
not made by us, behaves. The awesome achievements of technology
are irrefutable evidence that science keeps getting closer and closer to
objective truth.
As the authors tell us, there are two distinct kinds of knowledge:
logical and mathematical truth (statements that are certain within a
given formal system), and scientiﬁc truth, never absolutely certain,
but which can be accepted with a degree of probability that in many
instances is practically indistinguishable from certainty. It takes a
bizarre kind of mind to imagine that two plus two could be anything
but four, or that, as the authors put it, cows can jump over the moon
or rabbits lay multicolored eggs.
The authors are to be especially cheered for their coverage of 
unsubstantiated alternative treatments, some of them weird beyond
imagining. Preposterous medical claims can cause untold harm to
gullible persons who rely on them to the exclusion of treatment by
mainstream physicians.
The authors are also to be commended for ﬁnding colorful and
apt quotations from other writers. Bertrand Russell, for instance, gave
three simple rules for curbing one’s tendency to accept what he called
“intellectual rubbish”:
1. When the experts are agreed, the opposite opinion cannot be
held to be certain.
2. When they are not agreed, no opinion can be regarded as 
certain by a nonexpert.
3. When they all hold that no sufﬁcient grounds for a positive
opinion exist, the ordinary person would do well to suspend
judgment.
“These propositions seem mild,” Russell added, “yet, if accepted, they
would absolutely revolutionize human life.”
I am under no illusions about how effective this book will be in
persuading readers to adopt Russell’s three maxims. I can say that to the
extent it does, it will have performed a service that our technologically
advanced but scientiﬁcally retarded nation desperately needs.
—Martin Gardner
viii
FOREWORD

ix
Preface
Few claims seem to arouse more interest, evoke more emotion, and
create more confusion than those dealing with the paranormal, the
supernatural, or the mysterious—what in this book we call “weird
things.” Although many such claims are unbelievable, many people
believe them, and their belief often has a profound effect on their
lives. Billions of dollars are spent each year on people and products
claiming supernatural powers. Channelers claim to communicate
with aliens from outer space, psychics and astrologers claim to fore-
tell the future, and healers claim to cure everything from AIDS to
warts. Who are we to believe? How do we decide which claims are
credible? What distinguishes rational from irrational claims? This
book is designed to help you answer such questions.
Why do you believe in any given claim? Do you believe for any
of the following reasons?
• You had an extraordinary personal experience.
• You embrace the idea that anything is possible—including
weird things.
• You have an especially strong feeling that the claim is true or
false.
• You have made a leap of faith that compels you to accept the
claim.
• You believe in inner, mystical ways of knowing that support the
claim.
• You know that no one has ever disproved the claim.
• You have empirical evidence that the claim is true.
• You believe that any claim is true for you if you believe it to be
true.
This list of reasons for belief could go on and on. But which rea-
sons are good reasons? Clearly, some are better than others; some can
help us decide which claims are most likely to be true, and some
can’t. If we care whether any claim is actually true, whether our 
beliefs are well founded (and not merely comfortable or convenient),
we must be able to distinguish good reasons from bad. We must 
understand how and when our beliefs are justiﬁed, how and when we
can say that we know that something is true or believable.
The central premise of this book is that such an understanding
is possible, useful, and empowering. Being able to distinguish good

reasons from bad will not only improve your decision-making ability;
it will also give you a powerful weapon against all forms of huckster-
ism. This volume shows you step-by-step how to sort out reasons,
how to evaluate evidence, and how to tell when a claim (no matter
how strange) is likely to be true. It’s a course in critical thinking as
applied to claims and phenomena that many people think are immune
to critical thinking.
The emphasis, then, is neither on debunking nor on advocating
speciﬁc claims, but on explaining principles of critical thinking that
enable you to evaluate any claim for yourself. To illustrate how to
apply these principles, we supply analyses of many extraordinary
claims, including conclusions regarding their likely truth or falsity.
But the focus is on carefully wielding the principles, not on whether
a given claim goes unscathed or is cut down.
Often in the realm of the weird, such principles themselves are
precisely what’s at issue. Arguments about weird things are frequently
about how people know and if people know—the main concerns of the
branch of philosophy called epistemology. Thinking about weird
things, then, brings us face-to-face with some of the most funda-
mental issues in human thought. So we concentrate on clearly
explaining these issues, showing why the principles themselves in
this book are valid, and demonstrating why many alternatives to them
are unfounded. We explore alleged sources of knowledge like faith,
intuition, mysticism, perception, introspection, memory, reason, and
science. We ask: Do any of these factors give us knowledge? Why or
why not?
Since we show how these principles can be used in speciﬁc cases,
this book is essentially a work of applied epistemology. Whether you’re a
believer or nonbeliever in weird things, and whether or not you’re
aware of it, you have an epistemology, a theory of knowledge. If you
ever hope to discern whether a weird claim (or any other kind of
claim) is true, your epistemology had better be a good one.
The principles discussed in this book can help you evaluate any
claim—not just those dealing with weird phenomena. We believe that
if you can successfully use these principles to assess the most bizarre,
most unexpected claims, you’re well prepared to tackle anything run-
of-the-mill.
NEW EDITION, NEW MATERIAL
For this seventh edition, we have revised several sections, updated
several others, and added new discussions of topics that now draw a
great deal of popular interest. These changes include:
x
PREFACE

• A new case study on climate change
• New boxes on ancient aliens, ghost hunters, precognition, the
Phoenixville and Stephenville lights, end of the world prophe-
cies, and immunization and autism
• Expanded discussion of the harm of irrational beliefs, the possi-
bility of time travel and space travel, the relationship between
magic and miracles, and the plausibility of astrology
IMPORTANT CONTINUING FEATURES
This volume also includes the following:
• Explanations of over thirty principles of knowledge, reasoning,
and evidence that you can use to enhance your problem-solving skills
and sharpen your judgment.
• Discussions of over sixty paranormal, supernatural, or mysterious
phenomena, including astrology, ghosts, fairies, ESP, psychokinesis,
UFO abductions, channeling, dowsing, near-death experiences, pro-
phetic dreams, demon possession, time travel, parapsychology, and
creationism.
• Details of a step-by-step procedure for evaluating any extraordi-
nary claim. We call it the SEARCH formula and give several examples
showing how it can be applied to some popular weird claims.
• Numerous boxes offering details on various offbeat beliefs, assess-
ments by both true believers and skeptics of extraordinary claims,
and reports of relevant scientiﬁc research. We think this material can
stimulate discussion or serve as examples that can be assessed using
the principles of critical thinking.
• A comprehensive treatment of different views about the nature
of truth, including several forms of relativism and subjectivism.
• A detailed discussion of the characteristics, methodology, and
limitations of science, illustrated with analyses of the claims of para-
psychology and creationism. This discussion includes a complete
treatment of science’s criteria of adequacy and how those criteria
should be used to evaluate extraordinary claims.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors shared equally in the work of writing this book and thus
share equally in responsibility for any of its shortcomings. But we are
not alone in the project. We’re grateful to Muhlenberg College for
PREFACE xi

the research funds and library resources made available to us, to the
Muhlenberg Scholars who participated in the course based on this
book, and to the many people who helped us by reviewing the man-
uscript for accuracy, giving expert advice, and offering insightful
commentary. 
For the seventh edition, these included the following people:
Anne Berre, Schreiner University
James Blackmon, San Francisco State University
William Holly, Modesto Junior College
Michael Jackson, St. Bonaventure University
Don Merrell, Arkansas State University
Tadd Ruetenik, St. Ambrose University
Dennis Shaw, Lower Columbia College
Weimin Sun, California State University at Northridge
Mark Vopat, Youngstown State University
Helen Woodman, Ferris State University
And we continue to thank the reviewers of the sixth edition, who 
include:
H. E. Baber, University of San Diego
Tim Black, California State University, Northridge
Douglas E. Hill, California State University, Fullerton
Rebekah Ross-Fountain, Texas State University–San Marcos
Mark C. Vopat, Youngstown State University 
xii
PREFACE

FOREWORD
vii
PREFACE
ix
Chapter 1
Introduction: Close Encounters with the 
Strange
1
THE IMPORTANCE OF WHY
2
BEYOND WEIRD TO THE ABSURD
4
A WEIRDNESS SAMPLER
6
Notes
13
Chapter 2
The Possibility of the Impossible
14
PARADIGMS AND THE PARANORMAL
15
LOGICAL POSSIBILITY VERSUS PHYSICAL IMPOSSIBILITY
16
THE POSSIBILITY OF ESP
22
THEORIES AND THINGS
24
ON KNOWING THE FUTURE
25
Summary
28
Study Questions
30
Evaluate These Claims
30
Discussion Questions
30
Field Problem
30
Critical Reading and Writing
31
Notes
32
Chapter 3
Arguments Good, Bad, and Weird
33
CLAIMS AND ARGUMENTS
34
DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS
39
INDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS
42
Enumerative Induction
42
Analogical Induction
46
Hypothetical Induction (Abduction, or Inference to the Best
Explanation)
47
Contents
xiii

INFORMAL FALLACIES
49
Unacceptable Premises
49
Begging the Question
49
False Dilemma
49
Irrelevant Premises
50
Equivocation
50
Composition
50
Division
51
Appeal to the Person
51
Genetic Fallacy
51
Appeal to Authority
51
Appeal to the Masses
52
Appeal to Tradition
52
Appeal to Ignorance
52
Appeal to Fear
53
Straw Man
53
Insufﬁcient Premises
53
Hasty Generalization
53
Faulty Analogy
54
False Cause
54
Slippery Slope
54
STATISTICAL FALLACIES
55
Misleading Averages
55
Missing Values
55
Hazy Comparisons
56
Summary
57
Study Questions
57
Evaluate These Claims
58
Discussion Questions
59
Field Problem
60
Critical Reading and Writing
60
Notes
61
Chapter 4
Knowledge, Belief, and Evidence
62
BABYLONIAN KNOWLEDGE-ACQUISITION 
TECHNIQUES
63
PROPOSITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
64
xiv
CONTENTS

REASONS AND EVIDENCE
65
EXPERT OPINION
71
COHERENCE AND JUSTIFICATION
74
SOURCES OF KNOWLEDGE
75
THE APPEAL TO FAITH
77
THE APPEAL TO INTUITION
79
THE APPEAL TO MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE
81
ASTROLOGY REVISITED
84
Summary
90
Study Questions
91
Evaluate These Claims
91
Discussion Questions
91
Field Problem
92
Critical Reading and Writing
92
Notes
93
Chapter 5
Looking for Truth in Personal 
Experience
96
SEEMING AND BEING
97
PERCEIVING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS BELIEVE 
WHAT YOU SEE
99
Perceptual Constancies
99
The Role of Expectation
100
Looking for Clarity in Vagueness
101
The Blondlot Case
104
“Constructing” UFOs
107
REMEMBERING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS TRUST 
WHAT YOU RECALL
111
CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE 
WHAT YOU BELIEVE
118
Denying the Evidence
118
Subjective Validation
121
Conﬁrmation Bias
125
The Availability Error
127
The Representativeness Heuristic
132
Anthropomorphic Bias
135
Against All Odds
138
CONTENTS xv

xvi
CONTENTS
ANECDOTAL EVIDENCE: WHY TESTIMONIALS 
CAN’T BE TRUSTED
141
The Variable Nature of Illness
143
The Placebo Effect
145
Overlooked Causes
146
SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE: WHY CONTROLLED STUDIES 
CAN BE TRUSTED
147
Summary
149
Study Questions
150
Evaluate These Claims
151
Discussion Questions
151
Field Problem
151
Critical Reading and Writing
152
Notes
153
Chapter 6
Science and Its Pretenders
158
SCIENCE AND DOGMA
159
SCIENCE AND SCIENTISM
160
SCIENTIFIC METHODOLOGY
161
CONFIRMING AND REFUTING HYPOTHESES
166
CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
171
Testability
172
Fruitfulness
174
Scope
177
Simplicity
178
Conservatism
180
CREATIONISM, EVOLUTION, AND CRITERIA 
OF ADEQUACY
181
Scientiﬁc Creationism
183
Intelligent Design
191
PARAPSYCHOLOGY
197
Summary
212
Study Questions
213
Evaluate These Claims
213
Discussion Questions
214
Field Problem
214
Critical Reading and Writing
214
Notes
215

Chapter 7
Case Studies in the Extraordinary
220
THE SEARCH FORMULA
222
Step 1: State the Claim
223
Step 2: Examine the Evidence for the Claim
223
Step 3: Consider Alternative Hypotheses
224
Step 4: Rate, According to the Criteria of Adequacy, 
Each Hypothesis
225
HOMEOPATHY
227
INTERCESSORY PRAYER
231
UFO ABDUCTIONS
234
COMMUNICATING WITH THE DEAD
248
NEAR-DEATH EXPERIENCES
253
GHOSTS
268
CONSPIRACY THEORIES
276
CLIMATE CHANGE
283
Summary
288
Study Questions
288
Evaluate These Claims
289
Field Problem
290
Critical Reading and Writing
290
Notes
290
Chapter 8
Relativism,Truth, and Reality
295
WE EACH CREATE OUR OWN REALITY
297
REALITY IS SOCIALLY CONSTRUCTED
301
REALITY IS CONSTITUTED BY CONCEPTUAL SCHEMES
306
THE RELATIVIST’S PETARD
311
FACING REALITY
313
Summary
315
Study Questions
316
Evaluate These Claims
316
Discussion Questions
316
Field Problem
316
Critical Reading and Writing
317
Notes
318
CREDITS
C-1
INDEX
I-1
CONTENTS xvii


1
ONE
Introduction:
Close Encounters
with the Strange
T
HIS BOOK IS FOR you who have stared into the night
sky or the dark recesses of a room, hairs raised on the
back of your neck, eyes wide, faced with an experience you
couldn’t explain but about which you have never stopped
wondering, “Was it real?” It’s for you who have read 
and heard about UFOs, psychic phenomena, time travel,
out-of-body experiences, ghosts, monsters, astrology, rein-
carnation, mysticism, acupuncture, iridology, incredible 
experiments in quantum physics, and a thousand other 
extraordinary things, and asked, “Is it true?” Most of all, it’s
for you who believe, as Einstein did, that the most beautiful
experience we can have is the mysterious—and who yet, like
him, have the courage to ask tough questions until the mys-
tery yields answers.
Wonder is the feeling
of a philosopher, and
philosophy begins in
wonder.
—PLATO

But this is not primarily a book of such answers, though several will
be offered. This book is about how to ﬁnd the answers for yourself—how to
test the truth or reality of some of the most inﬂuential, mysterious,
provocative, bewildering puzzles we can ever experience. It’s about
how to think clearly and critically about what we authors have
dubbed weird things—all the unusual, awesome, wonderful, bizarre, and
antic happenings, real or alleged, that bubble up out of science, pseu-
doscience, the occult, the paranormal, the mystic, and the miraculous.
THE IMPORTANCE OF WHY
Pick up almost any book or magazine on such subjects. It will tell you
that some extraordinary phenomenon is real or illusory, that some
strange claim is true or false, probable or improbable. Plenty of peo-
ple around you will gladly offer you their beliefs (often unshakable)
about the most amazing things. In this blizzard of assertions, you
hear a lot of whats, but seldom any good whys. That is, you hear the
beliefs, but seldom any solid reasons behind them—nothing sub-
stantial enough to justify your sharing the beliefs; nothing reliable
enough to indicate that these assertions are likely to be true. You may
hear naiveté, passionate advocacy, ﬁerce denunciation, one-sided
sifting of evidence, defense of the party line, leaps of faith, jumps to
false conclusions, plunges into wishful thinking, and courageous
stands on the shaky ground of subjective certainty. But the good rea-
sons are missing. Even if you do hear good reasons, you may end
up forming a firm opinion on one extraordinary claim, but fail to
learn any principle that would help you with a similar case. Or you
hear good reasons, but no one bothers to explain why they’re so
good, why they’re most likely to lead to the truth. Or no one may
dare to answer the ultimate why—why good reasons are necessary
to begin with.
Without good whys, humans have no hope of understanding all
that we fondly call weird—or anything else, for that matter. Without
good whys, our beliefs are simply arbitrary, with no more claim to
knowledge than the random choice of a playing card. Without good
whys to guide us, our beliefs lose their value in a world where beliefs
are already a dime a dozen.
We especially need good whys when faced with weirdness. For
statements about weird things are almost always cloaked in swirling
mists of confusion, misconception, misperception, and our own yearn-
ing to disbelieve or believe. Our task of judging the reality of these
weird things isn’t made any easier by one fact that humbles and inspires
every scientist: Sometimes the weirdest phenomena are absolutely
2
ONE: INTRODUCTION: CLOSE ENCOUNTERS WITH THE STRANGE
Skeptical habits of
thought are essential
for nothing less than
our survival—
because baloney,
bamboozles, bunk,
careless thinking,
ﬂimﬂam and wishes
disguised as facts
are not restricted to
parlor magic and
ambiguous advice on
matters of the heart.
—CARL SAGAN

real; sometimes the strangest claims turn out to be true. The best sci-
entists and thinkers can never forget that sometimes wondrous dis-
coveries are made out there on the fringe of experience, where
anomalies prowl.
Space aliens are abducting your neighbors. Psychic detectives
solve crimes. You were a medieval stable boy in a former life. Nos-
tradamus predicted JFK’s assassination. Herbs can cure AIDS. Levita-
tion is possible. Reading tarot cards reveals character. Science proves
the wisdom of Eastern mysticism. The moon landing was a hoax.
Magnet therapy works. Near-death experiences prove there’s life
after death. Crystals heal. Bigfoot stalks. Elvis lives.
Do you believe any of these claims? Do you believe that some or
all of them deserve a good horselaugh, that they’re the kind of hooey
that only a moron could take seriously? The big question then is why?
Why do you believe or disbelieve? Belief alone—without good
whys—can’t help us get one inch closer to the truth. A hasty rejec-
tion or acceptance of a claim can’t help us tell the difference between
what’s actually likely to be true (or false) and what we merely want
to be true (or false). Beliefs that do not stand on our best reasons and
evidence simply dangle in thin air, signifying nothing except our
transient feelings or personal preferences.
What we offer here is a compendium of good whys. As clearly as
we can, we explain and illustrate principles of rational inquiry for 
assessing all manner of weirdness. We give you the essential guides for
weighing evidence and drawing well-founded conclusions. Most of
these principles are simply commonplace, wielded by philosophers,
scientists, and anyone else interested in discovering the facts. Many
are fundamental to scientiﬁc explorations of all kinds. We show why
these principles are so powerful, how anyone can put them to use, and
why they’re good whys to begin with—why they’re more reliable guides for
discovering what’s true and real than any alternatives.
We think this latter kind of explanation is sorely needed. You
may hear that there’s no reliable scientiﬁc evidence to prove the re-
ality of psychokinesis (moving physical objects with mind power
alone). But you may never hear a careful explanation of why scien-
tiﬁc evidence is necessary in the ﬁrst place. Most scientists would say
that the common experience of thinking of a friend and then sud-
denly getting a phone call from that person doesn’t prove telepathy
(communication between minds without use of the ﬁve senses). But
why not? Only a few scientists and a handful of others bother to explain
why. Say 100 people have independently tried eating a certain herb
and now swear that it has cured them of cancer. Scientists would say
that these 100 stories constitute anecdotal evidence that doesn’t
THE IMPORTANCE OF WHY 3
Call him wise whose
actions, words, and
steps are all a clear
“because” to a clear
“why.”
—JOHANN KASPAR
LAVATER

prove the effectiveness of the herb at all. But why not? There is 
indeed a good answer, but it’s tough to come by.
The answer is to be found in the principles that distinguish good
reasons from bad ones. You needn’t take these principles (or any
other statements) on faith. Through your own careful use of reason,
you can verify their validity for yourself.
Nor should you assume that these guides are infallible and un-
changeable. They’re simply the best we have until someone presents
sound, rational reasons for discarding them.
These guides shouldn’t be a surprise to anyone. Yet, to many, the
principles will seem like a bolt from the blue, a detailed map to a
country they thought was uncharted. Even those of us who are unsur-
prised by these principles must admit that we probably violate at least
one of them daily—and so run off into a ditch of wrong conclusions.
BEYOND WEIRD TO THE ABSURD
To these pages, we cordially invite all those who sincerely believe
that this book is a gigantic waste of time—who think that it’s impos-
sible or pointless to use rational principles to assess the objective
truth of weird claims. To this increasingly prevalent attitude, in all its
forms, we offer a direct challenge. We do the impossible, or at least
what some regard as impossible. We show that there are good rea-
sons for believing that the following claims are, in fact, false:
• There’s no such thing as objective truth. We make our own
truth.
• There’s no such thing as objective reality. We make our own 
reality.
• There are spiritual, mystical, or inner ways of knowing that are
superior to our ordinary ways of knowing.
• If an experience seems real, it is real.
• If an idea feels right to you, it is right.
• We are incapable of acquiring knowledge of the true nature 
of reality.
• Science itself is irrational or mystical. It’s just another faith or
belief system or myth, with no more justiﬁcation than any
other.
• It doesn’t matter whether beliefs are true or not, as long as
they’re meaningful to you.
We discuss these ideas because they’re unavoidable. If you want
to evaluate weird things, sooner or later you’ll bump into notions that
4
ONE: INTRODUCTION: CLOSE ENCOUNTERS WITH THE STRANGE
A man is a small
thing, and the night
is very large and full
of wonders.
—LORD DUNSANY
I really think we are
all creating our own
reality. I think I’m cre-
ating you right here.
Therefore I created
the medium, there-
fore I created the 
entity, because I’m
creating everything.
—SHIRLEY MACLAINE

challenge your most fundamental assumptions. Weirdness by deﬁni-
tion is out of the norm, so it often calls into question our normal ways
of knowing. It invites many to believe that in the arena of extraordi-
nary things, extraordinary ways of knowing must prevail. It leads
many to conclude that reason just doesn’t apply, that rationality has
shown up at the wrong party.
You can learn a lot by seriously examining such challenges to
basic assumptions about what we know (or think we know) and how
we know it. In fact, in this volume you learn three important lessons
about the above ideas:
1. If some of these ideas are true, knowing anything about any-
thing (including weird stuff) is impossible.
2. If you honestly believe any of these ideas, you cut your
chances of ever discovering what’s real or true.
3. Rejecting these notions is liberating and empowering.
The ﬁrst lesson, for example, comes through clearly when we exam-
ine the idea that there’s no such thing as objective truth. This notion
means that reality is literally whatever each of us believes it to be. 
Reality doesn’t exist apart from a person’s beliefs about it. So truth isn’t
objective, it’s subjective. The idea is embodied in the popular line “It
may not be true for you, but it’s true for me.” The problem is, if there’s
no objective truth, then no statement is objectively true, including the
statement “There’s no such thing as objective truth.” The statement re-
futes itself. If true, it means that the statement and all statements—
ours, yours, or anybody else’s—aren’t worthy of belief or
commitment. Every viewpoint becomes arbitrary, with nothing to rec-
ommend it except the fact that someone likes it. There could be no
such thing as knowledge, for if nothing is true, there can be nothing
to know. The distinction between asserting and denying something
would be meaningless. There could be no difference between sense
and nonsense, reasonable belief and illusion. For several reasons,
which we’ll discuss later, people would be faced with some intolerable
absurdities. For one thing, it would be impossible to agree or disagree
with someone. In fact, it would be impossible to communicate, to
learn a language, to compare each other’s ideas, even to think.
The point of the third lesson is that if such outrageous notions
shackle us, rejecting them sets us free. To reject them is to say that
we can know things about the world—and that our ability to reason
and weigh evidence is what helps us gain that knowledge. In part,
the purpose of much that follows is to demonstrate just how po-
tent this ability is. Human reason empowers us, like nothing else,
BEYOND WEIRD TO THE ABSURD 5
Light—more light.
—JOHANN
WOLFGANG VON
GOETHE
The essence of the
independent mind
lies not in what it
thinks but in how it
thinks.
—CHRISTOPHER
HITCHINS

to distinguish between fact and fiction, understand significant
issues, penetrate deep mysteries, and answer large questions.
A WEIRDNESS SAMPLER
How many people actually care about weird things? Plenty. Book
sales, coverage in magazines and on television, movies, and opinion
polls suggest that there’s widespread interest in things psychic, para-
normal, occult, ghostly, and otherworldly. A Gallup poll published in
2005, for example, shows that:
• 55 percent of Americans believe in psychic or spiritual healing
or the power of the human mind to heal the body.
• 41 percent believe in ESP (extrasensory perception).
• 42 percent believe that people on Earth are sometimes pos-
sessed by the Devil.
• 32 percent believe that ghosts or the spirits of dead people can
come back in certain places and situations.
• 31 percent believe in telepathy, or communication between
minds without using the traditional ﬁve senses.
• 24 percent believe that extraterrestrial beings have visited Earth
at some time in the past.
• 26 percent believe in clairvoyance, or the power of the mind to
know the past and predict the future.
• 21 percent believe that people can hear from or communicate
mentally with someone who has died.
• 25 percent believe in astrology, or that the position of the stars
and planets can affect people’s lives.
• 21 percent believe in witches.
• 20 percent believe in reincarnation, that is, the rebirth of the
soul in a new body after death.
There are many, many more extraordinary things that thousands of
people experience, believe in, and change their lives because of. Sev-
eral will be discussed in this book. Here’s a sampling:
• Hundreds of people who were near death but did not die have
told of blissful experiences in the beyond. Their reports vary, but cer-
tain details keep recurring: While they were at death’s door, a feeling
of peace overcame them. They watched as they ﬂoated above their
own bodies. They traveled through a long, dark tunnel. They entered
a bright, golden light and glimpsed another world of unspeakable
beauty. They saw long-dead relatives and a being of light that com-
forted them. Then they returned to their own bodies, awoke, and
6
ONE: INTRODUCTION: CLOSE ENCOUNTERS WITH THE STRANGE
People everywhere
enjoy believing things
that they know are
not true. It spares
them the ordeal of
thinking for them-
selves and taking 
responsibility for
what they know.
—BROOKS ATKINSON

were transformed by their incredible experience. In each case, the 
experience seemed nothing like a dream or a fantasy; it seemed
vividly real. Such episodes are known as near-death experiences
(NDEs). Many who have had such experiences say that their NDEs
give undeniable proof of life after death.
• Some people report the often chilling experience known as a
precognitive dream, a dream that seems to foretell the future. Here’s
an example: “I dreamed I was walking along a steep ridge with my
father. He was stepping too close to the edge, making the dirt cas-
cade to the rocks far below. I turned to grab his arm, but the ridge
fell away under his feet, leaving him to dangle from my hands. I
pulled as hard as I could, but he grew larger and heavier. He fell, in
slow motion, crying out to me but making no sound. Then I woke up
screaming. Three weeks later my father fell to his death from a 
second-story window while he was painting the windowsill. I was in
the room with him at the time but wasn’t able to reach him fast
enough to prevent his fall. I rarely remember any dreams, and I had
never before dreamed about someone falling.” Such dreams can have
a profound emotional impact on the dreamer and may spark a ﬁrm
belief in the paranormal.
A WEIRDNESS SAMPLER 7
Pseudoteachers
Two social scientists—sociologist Ray Eve and
anthropologist Dana Dunn of the University of
Texas at Arlington—tried to ﬁnd out where
pseudoscientiﬁc beliefs might come from. They
theorized that teachers might be passing such
ideas on in school.
To test their theory, they surveyed a national
sample of 190 high-school biology and life-
science teachers. Their ﬁndings: 43 percent
thought that the story of the Flood and
Noah’s ark was deﬁnitely or probably true;
20 percent believed in communication with
the dead; 19 percent felt that dinosaurs and
humans lived at the same time; 20 percent
believed in black magic; and 16 percent
believed in Atlantis. What’s more, 30 percent
wanted to teach creation science; 26 per-
cent felt that some races were more intelli-
gent than others; and 22 percent believed in
ghosts.
Although 30 to 40 percent of the teach-
ers were doing a good job, says Eve, “it boils
down to the observation that a large number
of the teachers are either football coaches or
home-economics teachers who have been
asked to cover biology.”
Is there hope for change? “Much like the
Department of Defense,” says Eve, “the edu-
cation bureaucracy has become so intrac-
table that even when you know something
is wrong, the chances of ﬁxing it are not
great.”1

• There are probably hundreds of people claiming that they once
lived very different lives in very different places—long before they
were born. Tales of these past lives surface when people are “re-
gressed” during hypnosis back to their alleged long-hidden selves. It
all started in 1952 when Virginia Tighe, an American housewife, was
apparently hypnotically regressed back to a previous life in nine-
teenth-century Ireland. Speaking in an uncharacteristic Irish brogue,
she related an astounding account of her former life. Many others
during hypnosis have related impressively detailed past lives in early
Rome, medieval France, sixteenth-century Spain, ancient Greece or
Egypt, Atlantis, and more, all the while speaking in what often sound
like authentic languages or accents. A lot of famous people claim that
they too have been hypnotically regressed to discover earlier exis-
tences. Shirley MacLaine, for example, has said that she’s been a 
pirate with a wooden leg, a Buddhist monk, a court jester for Louis
XV, a Mongolian nomad, and assorted prostitutes. Many believe that
such cases are proof of the doctrine of reincarnation.
• Some U.S. military ofﬁcers have expressed strong interest in an
astonishing psychic phenomenon called remote viewing. It’s the alleged
ability to accurately perceive information about distant geographical
locations without using any known sense. The ofﬁcers claimed that
the former Soviet Union was way ahead of the United States in de-
veloping such powers. Remote viewing is said to be available to any-
one, as it needs no special training or talents. Experiments have been
conducted on the phenomenon, and some people have said that
these tests prove that remote viewing is real.
• A lot of people look to psychics, astrologers, and tarot card read-
ers to obtain a precious commodity: predictions about the future. You
can get this commodity through newspapers, magazines, books, TV
talk shows, 900 numbers, and private sessions with a seer. Predictions
may concern the fate of movie stars, momentous events on the world
stage, or the ups and downs of your personal life. Everywhere, there’s
word that some startling, unlikely prediction has come true. Here’s
an example: On April 2, 1981, four days after the assassination at-
tempt on President Reagan, the world was told that a Los Angeles
psychic had predicted the whole thing weeks earlier. On that April morning,
NBC’s Today show, ABC’s Good Morning America, and Cable News Net-
work aired a tape showing the psychic, Tamara Rand, offering a de-
tailed prediction of the assassination attempt. The tape was said to
have been made on January 6, 1981. She foresaw that Reagan would
be shot by a sandy-haired young man with the initials “J. H.,” that
Reagan would be wounded in the chest, that there would be a “hail
8
ONE: INTRODUCTION: CLOSE ENCOUNTERS WITH THE STRANGE
Colt Born with
Human Face—just
like his father!
—WEEKLY WORLD
NEWS

of bullets,” and that the fateful day would occur in the last week of
March or ﬁrst week of April.
• Something strange is going on in physics, something so strange,
in fact, that some people who’ve bothered to think about the strange-
ness now declare that physics is looking more and more like Eastern
mysticism. This weirdness is taking place in the branch of physics
known as quantum mechanics, which studies subatomic particles, the
tiny bits that make up everything in the universe. The notorious
weirdness is this: In the quantum realm, particles don’t acquire some
of their characteristics until they’re observed by someone. They seem not to
exist in a deﬁnite form until scientists measure them. This spooky fact
didn’t sit well with Einstein, but it has been conﬁrmed repeatedly in
rigorous tests. It has caused some people to speculate that reality is
subjective, that we as observers create the universe ourselves—that
the universe is a product of our imagination. This quantum freakiness
has prompted some people, even a physicist or two, seriously to ask,
“Is a tree really there when no one’s looking?”
• In 1894 the Society for Psychical Research published the ﬁrst sur-
vey of personal encounters with ghostly phenomena. There were hun-
dreds of ﬁrsthand accounts by people who claimed to have seen real
apparitions. A recent scholarly history of apparitions documents an un-
surprising fact: People have been reporting such encounters for cen-
turies. Today, things haven’t changed much. You’re likely to hear at
least one ﬁrsthand account yourself from somebody you know—some-
body who says it’s not a ghost story at all, but fact. Research suggests
that the experiences can happen to perfectly sane persons, appear
vividly real, and have a powerful emotional impact. There are also re-
ports of people feeling a “sense of presence,” as though another person,
invisible, is close by. There’s no end to the stories of more famous ap-
paritions, told and retold, with eerie details that raise bumps on the
skin. And you don’t have to read a tabloid newspaper (more reputable
newspapers will do) to discover that when someone wonders “Who ya
gonna call?” there are real ghostbusters ready to handle a haunting.
• The Exorcist dramatized it. The Amityville Horror reinforced aware-
ness of it. The Catholic Church endorses it. The news media eagerly
report it. It is the idea of demon possession—that people and places
can be haunted, harmed, and controlled by supernatural entities of
immense evil. A typical case: On August 18, 1986, the Associated
Press reported that demons were said to be haunting a house in West
Pittston, Pennsylvania. Jack and Janet Smurl lived there with their
four children and claimed that the demons were terrorizing them. Ac-
cording to the report: “The Smurls said they have smelled the stench
A WEIRDNESS SAMPLER 9
Fat Woman’s Bra
Snaps—13 Injured!
—WEEKLY WORLD
NEWS

of smoke and rotten meat, heard pig grunts, hoofbeats, and blood cur-
dling screams and moans. Doors have opened and shut, lights have
gone on and off, formless ghostly glows have traveled before them,
and the television set has shot across the room. Even the family dog,
a 75-pound German shepherd, has been slammed against the wall
while [Jack] Smurl said he stood nearby.”2 Later, Jack Smurl was quoted
in the New York Daily News as saying that “at least a dozen times [a fe-
male demon, or succubus] has had intercourse with me in bed. I was
awake, but I was immobile.” The Smurls invited demonologist Ed
Warren, who had been involved in the Amityville case, to investigate.
Warren declared that several demons did indeed inhabit the house.
• Long ago, Earth was visited by extraterrestrial beings who im-
parted advanced technology and learning to primitive humans. So
say many people, who ask, How else do you explain the stunning en-
gineering of the pyramids in Egypt and the New World? The ancient
designs cut into the Nazca plain in Peru that look like airﬁeld mark-
ings meant for approaching spacecraft? The highly accurate Piri Reis
map of 1513 that must have been created by some kind of aerial pho-
tography? The facts possessed by the primitive Dogon tribe of Africa
about a star that no one can see with the naked eye and wasn’t even
discovered by astronomers until the nineteenth century? In myths
and legends, they say, our ancestors told of the visitation of these
“gods.” This theme is sounded by many, most notably Erich von
Däniken in his books Chariots of the Gods, Gods from Outer Space, and Von
Däniken’s Proof. Sparks still ﬂy when somebody asserts that somebody
else’s ancestors were too primitive to have managed certain engi-
neering feats without alien help.
• Many people have turned to a method of disease treatment
shunned by mainstream medicine and at odds with modern science:
homeopathy. Around since the 1700s, it now has several hundred
practitioners in the United States and is built on two main doctrines.
One is that “like cures like”—symptoms of a sick person can be cured
by substances that actually produce the same symptoms in healthy
people. The other doctrine is that the smaller the dose of this sub-
stance, the mightier the healing effect. Homeopathic drugs are di-
luted for maximum power—and are often so watered down that not
one molecule of the original substance remains. That such dilutions
could possibly heal anything ﬂies in the face of the laws of chem-
istry. Yet in recent years there’s been an increase in homeopathic
remedies offered in drugstores and health-food stores. And growing
numbers of people believe in them (including members of the British
Royal Family).
10
ONE: INTRODUCTION: CLOSE ENCOUNTERS WITH THE STRANGE
Oh God, how did I
get into this room
with all these weird
people?
—STEWART BRAND

• The story of a strange, miraculous event has been circulating for
a number of years. It was ﬁrst told by author Lyall Watson, who, in
his 1979 book Lifetide, said he gleaned it from scientists, and it’s been
repeated by countless other writers. Watson reported that in the
1950s some wild Japanese monkeys on the island of Koshima were
given raw sweet potatoes for the ﬁrst time. One of the monkeys, Imo,
learned to wash the potatoes in a stream to remove the sand and grit.
Over the years, Imo taught this skill to other monkeys in the colony.
Then one day, when a certain number of monkeys, say 100, had
learned the washing trick, the impossible happened. Suddenly almost
all the other monkeys knew how to do it, too. “Not only that,” says
Watson, “but the habit seems to have jumped natural barriers and to
have appeared spontaneously, like glycerin crystals in sealed labora-
tory jars, in colonies on other islands.”3 With the hundredth mon-
key, a kind of “critical mass” had been reached, he says, forcing a kind
of group mind. This, then, is the hundredth-monkey phenomenon.
A WEIRDNESS SAMPLER 11
Paranormal Proﬁle
Where do you stand on these issues? Indicate
your views by writing the appropriate number
in the space provided at the end of each ques-
tion. Use the following scale: 5 = true; 4 =
probably true; 3 = neither probable nor 
improbable; 2 = probably false; and 1 = false.
After you’ve ﬁnished the book, you might want
to take the survey again to see if your views
have changed.
1. People can read other people’s minds.
______
2. People can see into the future. ______
3. People can move external objects 
solely with the power of their minds.
______
4. Poltergeists can move physical objects.
______
5. Alien spacecraft have landed on Earth.
______
6. People have been abducted by aliens from
other planets. ______
7. People have been possessed by demons.
______
8. In addition to physical bodies, people have
nonphysical astral bodies. ______
9. People can project their astral bodies out of
their physical bodies and travel to distant
places. ______
10. After the physical body dies, a person can
reincarnate in another physical body.
______
11. People can talk to the spirits of the dead.
______
12. The positions of the sun, stars, and planets
at birth can affect a person’s body, character,
and destiny. ______
13. Angels exist. ______
14. People can be cured by faith healers.
______
15. People can be cured by homeopathic 
treatments. ______
What we need is not
the will to believe,
but the will to ﬁnd
out.
—BERTRAND RUSSELL

Some believe that the story is fact and that the phenomenon is at
work in all of humanity. If so, we’re faced with an astounding impli-
cation: When enough people believe something is true, it becomes
true for everyone. Others say that it’s pointless to ask whether the
story is factual—it’s a metaphor or myth and, as such, is as true as sci-
ence. Still, we stubbornly ask, Did the incident actually happen? And
does it really matter after all?
Aliens, spirits, miracle cures, mind over matter, life after death:
wonders all. The world would be a more wonderful place, if these
things existed. We wouldn’t be alone in the universe, we would have
more control over our lives, and we would be immortal. Our desire
to live in such a world undoubtedly plays a role in the widespread 
belief in these things. But the fact that we would like something to
be true is no reason to believe that it is. To get to the truth of the
matter we must go beyond wishful thinking to critical thinking. We
must learn to set aside our prejudices and preconceptions and exam-
ine the evidence fairly and impartially. Only then can we hope to dis-
tinguish reality from fantasy.
But, you may object, what’s wrong with a little fantasy? If some-
one ﬁnds a belief comforting, does it matter whether it’s true or not?
Yes it does, because our actions are based on our beliefs. If our beliefs
are mistaken, our actions are unlikely to succeed. Nowhere is this
more obvious than in the case of alternative medicine. Each year,
Americans spend billions of dollars on bogus remedies, and often end
up paying for them with their lives. As attorney John W. Miner 
reveals, “Quackery kills more people than those who die from all
crimes of violence put together.”4
Not only can irrational beliefs cost us our lives; they can threaten
our livelihood as well. To take but one example: Tarot card readers and
psychics of every stripe are only a phone call—or a mouse click—
away, and their services don’t come cheap. Psychic hotlines have
charged $3.99 a minute. That comes to $240 an hour—more than
most psychoanalysts get paid. Psychic phone calling used to be a
multi-million-dollar industry, with one group—the Psychic Reader’s
Network—making over $300 million in phone service charges in
2002. But exposés of the industry revealed that most psychic hotlines
are staffed by unemployed housewives.5 They were not tested for psy-
chic ability, and they were not given any psychic instruction. Their
only training consisted in being told how to keep people on the line.
Tim Farley has been collecting data about the harm caused by
irrational beliefs for many years. His Web site—whatstheharm.com—
has identiﬁed over 670,000 cases in which people were injured either
12
ONE: INTRODUCTION: CLOSE ENCOUNTERS WITH THE STRANGE
The trouble with
most people is that
they think with their
hopes or fears or
wishes rather than
with their minds.
—WILL DURANT

physically or ﬁnancially because they believed things they were not
justiﬁed in believing. This lack of critical thinking, in the cases he’s
studied, has resulted in 368,379 deaths, 306,379 injuries, and over
$2,815,931,000 in economic damages. The failure of the victims to
ground their beliefs in reality ultimately cost them their lives or, in
many cases, their life savings.6
In addition to threatening our individual well-being, irrational
beliefs also threaten our social well-being. A democratic society 
depends on the ability of its members to make rational choices. But
rational choices must be based on rational beliefs. If we can’t tell the
difference between reasonable and unreasonable claims, we become
susceptible to the claims of charlatans, scoundrels, and mountebanks.
As Stephen J. Gould observes, “When people learn no tools of judg-
ment and merely follow their hopes, the seeds of political manipula-
tions are sown.”7 Political opportunists like to play upon people’s
fears, hopes, and desires. If we lack the ability to distinguish credible
claims from incredible ones, we may end up sacriﬁcing more than our
good sense—we may forfeit our freedom as well.
No one wants to be duped, conned, or ﬂeeced. Unfortunately,
our educational system spends much more time teaching people
what to think rather than how to think. As a result, many people are
unaware of the principles and procedures that should be used to min-
imize error and maximize understanding. This book is designed to
acquaint you with those principles and procedures and to explain
why any attempt to get at the truth should employ them. Under-
standing their justiﬁcation should make you more adept at wielding
them in unfamiliar situations.
The quality of your life is determined by the quality of your de-
cisions, and the quality of your decisions is determined by the quality
of your thinking. By helping improve the quality of your thinking, we
hope we can, in some small measure, improve the quality of your life.
NOTES
1. Paul McCarthy, “Pseudoteachers,” Omni, July 1989, p. 74.
2. Associated Press, August 18, 1986.
3. Lyall Watson, Lifetide (New York: Bantam Books, 1979), p. 148.
4. Cited in W. E. Schaller & C. R. Carrol, Health, Quackery, and the Consumer
(Philadelphia: Saunders, 1976), p. 169.
5. Frederick Woodruff, Secrets of a Telephone Psychic (Hillsboro, OR: 
Beyond Words, 1998).
6. Thomas Farley, http//www.whatstheharm.net
7. Stephen J. Gould, An Urchin in the Storm: Essays about Books and Ideas
(New York: Norton, 1987), p. 245.
NOTES 13
Irrationally held
truths may be more
harmful than rea-
soned errors.
—THOMAS HENRY
HUXLEY

14
TWO
The Possibility 
of the Impossible
T
HE TROUBLE WITH paranormal phenomena is that
they’re just not normal. It’s not simply that they’re rare
and unusual (which they are); it’s that they seem to violate
the natural order of things. (That’s why we sometimes call
them supernatural.) Their very existence seems to contradict
certain fundamental laws that govern the universe. Since
these laws deﬁne reality for us, anything that violates them
appears impossible. Consider, for example, the phenomena
collectively known as ESP, or extrasensory perception,
namely, telepathy (reading another’s mind), clairvoyance
(viewing a distant object without using your eyes), and pre-
cognition (seeing the future). What makes these phenomena
seem so weird is that they appear to be physically impossible.
Physicist Milton Rothman explains:
The world, dear
Agnes, is a strange
affair.
—MOLIÈRE

Transmission of information through space requires transfer of energy
from one place to another. Telepathy requires transmission of an 
energy-carrying signal directly from one mind to another. All descrip-
tions of ESP imply violations of conservation of energy [the principle
that mass-energy can be neither created nor destroyed] in one way or
another, as well as violations of all the principles of information the-
ory and even of the principle of causality [the principle that an effect
cannot precede its cause]. Strict application of physical principles 
requires us to say that ESP is impossible.1
According to Rothman, anything that violates physical principles is
impossible. Because ESP violates these principles, it is impossible.
PARADIGMS AND THE PARANORMAL
But according to the true believers (those who accept the reality of
the paranormal), nothing is impossible. As Erich von Däniken, author
of Chariots of the Gods, puts it, “nothing is incredible any longer. The word
‘impossible’ should have become literally impossible for the modern
scientist. Anyone who does not accept this today will be crushed by
the reality tomorrow.”2 What von Däniken is referring to here is the
fact that many things that scientists once considered impossible are
now considered real. The most notorious example is meteorites. For
many years, the scientiﬁc community dismissed meteorites as impossible.
The great chemist Lavoisier, for example, argued that stones couldn’t
fall from the sky because there were none up there. No less a free-
thinker than Thomas Jefferson, after reading a report by two Harvard
professors claiming to have observed meteorites, remarked, “I could
more easily believe that two Yankee professors would lie than that
stones would fall down from heaven.”3 The true believers hold that
Lavoisier and Jefferson were blinded by science. There was no place in
their worldview for stones that fell from the sky, so they 
refused to accept the reality of meteorites. Many of today’s scientists,
say the true believers, suffer from a similar myopia. They’re unable to
see beyond the narrow conﬁnes of their pet theories.
This defect is a potentially serious one, for it can block scientiﬁc
development. The historian Thomas Kuhn, in his seminal work The
Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, has shown that science advances only by
recognizing and dealing with anomalies (phenomena that don’t seem to
obey known laws). According to Kuhn, all scientiﬁc investigation
takes place within a paradigm, or theoretical framework, that deter-
mines what questions are worth asking and what methods should be
used to answer them. From time to time, however, certain phenomena
are discovered that don’t ﬁt into the established paradigm; that is,
PARADIGMS AND THE PARANORMAL
15
When nothing is
sure, everything is
possible.
—MARGARET
DRABBLE

they can’t be explained by the current theory. At ﬁrst, as in the case of
meteorites, the scientiﬁc community tries to dismiss or explain away
these phenomena. But if no satisfactory account of them is forthcom-
ing, the scientiﬁc community is forced to abandon the old paradigm
and adopt a new one. In such a case, the scientiﬁc community is said
to have undergone a paradigm shift.
There have been many paradigm shifts in the past. Galileo’s dis-
covery of the moons of Jupiter and the phases of Venus led to a shift
from a geocentric (Earth-centered) view of the solar system to a he-
liocentric (sun-centered) one. Darwin’s discovery of the strange crea-
tures of the Galápagos Islands led to the shift from creationism to
evolution. The failure to detect the “luminiferous ether” (the medium
in which light waves were supposed to travel) led to a shift from New-
tonian physics to Einsteinian physics. Similarly, say the true believers,
paranormal phenomena may lead to another paradigm shift. The re-
sulting worldview may be as different from ours as ours is from the
aborigines’. We may have to give up many of our most cherished be-
liefs about the nature of reality and knowledge. But it’s happened be-
fore, and, they claim, there’s no reason to think it won’t happen again.
As Shakespeare so eloquently put it, “There are more things in heaven
and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy.”
So whom are we to believe? Should we follow the scientist who
dismisses paranormal phenomena on the grounds that they contradict
fundamental physical principles or the true believer who sees para-
normal phenomena as a harbinger of a new age? To evaluate the rela-
tive merits of these positions, we’ll have to take a closer look at the
notions of possibility, plausibility, and reality.
LOGICAL POSSIBILITY VERSUS PHYSICAL IMPOSSIBILITY
Although it’s fashionable to claim that anything is possible, such a claim
is mistaken, for there are some things that can’t possibly be false, and
others that can’t possibly be true. The former—such as “2  2  4,”
“All bachelors are unmarried,” and “Red is a color”—are called necessary
truths, because there are no situations in which they would be false.
The latter—such as “2  2  5,” “All bachelors are married,” and “Red
is not a color” are called necessary falsehoods because there are no situa-
tions in which they would be true.4 The Greek philosopher Aristotle
(Plato’s pupil) was the ﬁrst to systematize our knowledge of necessary
truths. The most fundamental of them—the ones upon which all
other truths rest—are often called the laws of thought. They are:
The law of noncontradiction: Nothing can both have a property and
lack it at the same time.
16
TWO: THE POSSIBILITY OF THE IMPOSSIBLE
Difﬁcult things take
a long time; the im-
possible takes a little
longer.
—CHAIM WEIZMANN
One can’t believe 
impossible things.
—ALICE, IN THROUGH
THE LOOKING GLASS

The law of identity: Everything is identical to itself.
The law of excluded middle: For any particular property, everything
either has it or lacks it.
These principles are called the laws of thought because without them
thought—as well as communication—would be impossible. In order 
to think or communicate, our thoughts and sentences must have a spe-
ciﬁc content; they must be about one thing rather than another. If the
law of noncontradiction didn’t hold, there would be no way to distin-
guish one thought or sentence from another. Whatever was true of one
would be true of the other. Every claim would be equally true (and
false). Thus, those who deny the law of noncontradiction can’t claim
that their position is superior to that of those who accept that law.
One of the most effective techniques of refuting a position is
known as reductio ad absurdum: reduction to absurdity. If you can show
that a position has absurd consequences, you’ve provided a powerful
reason for rejecting it. The consequences of denying the law of non-
contradiction are about as absurd as they get. Any position that makes
thought and communication theoretically impossible is, to say the least,
suspect. Aristotle, in Book IV of the Metaphysics, put the point this way:
If all are alike both wrong and right, one who is in this condition will
not be able either to speak or to say anything intelligible; for he says
at the same time both “yes” and “no.” And if he makes no judgment
but “thinks” and “does not think,” indifferently, what difference will
there be between him and a vegetable?5
What difference indeed. Without the law of noncontradiction, we
can’t believe things to be one way rather than another. But if we can’t
believe things to be one way rather than another, we can’t think at all.
Logic is the study of correct thinking. As a result, the laws of
thought are often referred to as the laws of logic. Anything that vio-
lates these laws is said to be logically impossible, and whatever is logically
impossible can’t exist. We know, for example, that there are no round
squares, no married bachelors, and no largest number because such
things violate the law of noncontradiction—they attribute both a
property and its negation to a thing and are thus self-contradictory. The
laws of thought, then, not only determine the bounds of the rational;
they also determine the bounds of the real. Whatever is real must
obey the law of noncontradiction. That is why the great German lo-
gician Gottlob Frege called logic “the study of the laws of the laws of
science.” The laws of science must obey the laws of logic. Thus, von
Däniken is mistaken. Some things are logically impossible, and what-
ever is logically impossible cannot exist.
LOGICAL POSSIBILITY VERSUS PHYSICAL IMPOSSIBILITY 17
Why, sometimes be-
fore breakfast I’ve
believed as many as
six impossible things.
—THE WHITE QUEEN,
IN THROUGH THE
LOOKING GLASS

Rothman claims that ESP is impossible. Now if he means that ESP
is logically impossible, then, provided he’s right, we can dismiss it out
of hand, for in that case, it can’t exist. But ESP isn’t logically 
impossible. The notions of reading another’s mind, viewing distant ob-
jects, and even knowing the future are not self-contradictory in the way
that married bachelors or round squares are. Neither are such paranor-
mal phenomena as alien abduction, out-of-body experiences, or com-
municating with the dead. What, if anything, these phenomena violate
are not the laws of logic, but the laws of physics or, more generally, the
laws of science. If they violate those laws, they’re physically impossible.
Science attempts to understand the world by identifying the laws
that govern it. These laws tell us how various physical properties are
related to one another. For example, Newton’s second law of motion,
18
TWO: THE POSSIBILITY OF THE IMPOSSIBLE
Aristotle on Demonstrating the Laws of Thought
Since the laws of thought are the basis for all
logical proofs, they can’t be proven by means of
a logical demonstration. But, says Aristotle, they
can nevertheless be demonstrated negatively:
There are some who, as we said, both them-
selves assert that it is possible for the same
thing to be and not to be, and say that peo-
ple can judge this to be the case. And
among others many writers about nature use
this language. But we have now posited that
it is impossible for anything at the same
time to be and not to be, and by this means
have shown that this is the most indis-
putable of all principles. Some indeed de-
mand that even this shall be demonstrated,
but this they do through want of education,
for not to know of what things one should
demand demonstration, and of what one
should not, argues want of education. For it
is impossible that there should be demon-
stration of absolutely everything (there
would be an inﬁnite regress, so that there
would still be no demonstration); but if
there are things of which one should not
demand demonstration, these persons could
not say what principle they maintain to be
more self-evident than the present one.
We can, however, demonstrate negatively
even that this view is impossible. . . . The
starting point for all such proofs is that our
opponent shall say something which is
signiﬁcant both for himself and for another; for
this is necessary, if he really is to say any-
thing. For, if he means nothing, such a man
will not be capable of reasoning, either with
himself or with another. But if any one says
something that is signiﬁcant, demonstration
will be possible; for we shall already have
something deﬁnite. The person responsible
for the proof, however, is not he who 
demonstrates but he who listens; for while
disowning reason he listens to reason. 
And again he who admits this has 
admitted that something is true apart from
demonstration.6
In other words, the law of noncontradiction
can’t be demonstrated to someone who won’t
say something deﬁnite, for demonstration 
requires that our words mean one thing rather
than another. On the other hand, the law of
noncontradiction need not be demonstrated to
someone who will say something deﬁnite, for
in saying something deﬁnite he or she has 
already assumed its truth.
We have to live today
by what truth we can
get today, and be
ready tomorrow to
call it falsehood.
—WILLIAM JAMES

f  ma, tells us that the force of a projectile is equal to its mass times
its acceleration. Einstein’s law, E  mc2, tells us that the energy of an
object is equal to its mass times the velocity of light squared. Knowing
these laws not only helps us understand why things happen as they
do, but also allows us to predict and control what happens. Newton’s
laws of motion, for example, allow us to predict the positions of the
planets and control the trajectory of missiles.
Anything that’s inconsistent with the laws of nature is physically
impossible. A cow jumping over the moon, for example, is physically
impossible because such a feat would violate the laws governing cow
physiology and gravity. The muscles of a cow simply cannot produce
enough force to accelerate the cow to the speed required to escape
the Earth’s gravity. But a cow jumping over the moon is not logically
impossible. There is no contradiction involved in the notion of a
moon-jumping cow. Similarly, there is no contradiction involved in
the notion of a bunny that lays multicolored eggs. So physical possi-
bility is a more limited notion than logical possibility; whatever is
physically possible is logically possible, but not everything that’s log-
ically possible is physically possible.
There is yet another type of possibility that is useful to know
about: technological possibility. Something is technologically impossible
if it is (currently) beyond our capabilities to accomplish. Manned in-
tergalactic space travel, for example, is technologically impossible be-
cause we do not currently have the capability of storing enough food
and energy to travel to another galaxy. It’s not physically impossible,
however, because making such a trip does not involve breaking any
laws of nature. We simply lack the technology to perform such a feat.
What makes a thing weird or a claim extraordinary is that it
seems to be impossible. Time travel, psychokinesis, and ancient as-
tronauts, for example, are weird things—and the claims that they
exist, extraordinary—because they seem to run afoul of one or more
of the types of possibility discussed above.
Time travel seems to be logically impossible because it implies that
an event both did and did not happen. Suppose you travel back in time
to a place you’ve never been before. History records that you were not
present at that place and time, but now you are. You cannot both be
and not be at a place and time, however. So time travel seems to vio-
late the law of noncontradiction. That is why sophisticated time travel
tales, like Michael Crichton’s Timeline, have their travelers go to parallel
universes rather than their own. Science writer Martin Gardner
explains. “The basic idea is as simple as it is fantastic. Persons can travel
to any point in the future of their universe, with no complications, but
the moment they enter the past, the universe splits into two parallel
LOGICAL POSSIBILITY VERSUS PHYSICAL IMPOSSIBILITY 19

worlds, each with its own time track. Along one track rolls the world
as if no looping had occurred. Along the other track spins the newly
created universe, its history permanently altered.”7 If the universe splits
when you travel backward in time, there will be no contradiction be-
cause in neither universe will something both be and not be the case.
Psychokinesis, the ability to move external objects with the power
of one’s mind, seems to be physically impossible because it seems to
imply the existence of an unknown force. Science has identiﬁed only
two forces whose effects can be felt over long distances: electromag-
netism and gravity. The brain, however, is not capable of producing
enough of either of these forces to directly affect objects outside of the
body. So psychokinesis seems to violate the laws of science.
The notion that we have been visited by ancient astronauts or
aliens from outer space seems technologically impossible because the
amount of energy needed to travel to the stars is astronomical. Marc
Mills, project manager for NASA’s Breakthrough Propulsion Physics
Project, has calculated the fuel requirements for interstellar travel
20
TWO: THE POSSIBILITY OF THE IMPOSSIBLE
The Impossibility of Magic
Magicians regularly appear to do things that 
violate natural laws. They don’t actually violate
them, of course, but they create the illusion of
violating them. Most magicians admit that what
they’re doing is sleight of hand. There are those,
however, who maintain that what they’re doing
is real; that they’re performing supernatural feats.
One such is Uri Geller. In the 1970s, as a result
of national TV appearances, he convinced 
millions of Americans that he could bend metal
and ﬁx broken watches with his mind. He would
take a key or a spoon, for example, and without
any apparent use of physical force, bend it. On
numerous shows he invited viewers at home to
take a stopped watch and place it on their TV
set. Through an intense act of will, he claimed
he would make them work again. Remarkably,
many of them did start working again. Jewelers
claimed, however, that the repair had less to do
with Geller’s psychic ability than with the fact
that many watches stop working because their
lubricating oil becomes too thick. Putting a
watch on a hot TV set thins the oil and thus
frees the frozen gears.
A story is told of one young woman who
was convinced of Geller’s powers. It appears
that she got pregnant while watching Uri
Geller on television. The woman was using an
IUD (intrauterine device) for birth control at
the time. She claimed that her IUD failed 
because Uri Geller’s mind energy unwound its
coils. Needless to say, she did not receive any
compensation from Geller.
Geller’s metal-bending feats have been dupli-
cated by many magicians. That doesn’t prove
that he can’t bend metal with his mind, but if
that’s what he’s doing, he’s doing it the hard
way. Even trained observers can be taken in
by magicians’ sleight of hand. This is why
paranormal investigators such as the Amazing
Randi and Martin Gardner suggest that magi-
cians be present when investigating purveyors
of the paranormal. Because magicians know
even better than scientists how we can be
misled by misdirection, they are in a better
position to evaluate the veracity of such
claims.

using various types of propulsion systems, and invariably they seem
beyond our reach. For example, suppose we wanted to deliver a Space
Shuttle sized payload to our nearest star in 900 years. If we used con-
ventional (chemical) rocket fuel, the amount of fuel needed would be
greater than the mass of the entire universe. If we used ﬁssion to
power our rocket ship (ﬁssion is the process that creates atomic
bombs), we would need a billion supertanker sized propellant tanks.8
If we used fusion (fusion is the process that creates hydrogen bombs
and powers the sun), we would need a thousand such tanks. If we used
anti-matter (the most efﬁcient energy source known), we would still
need ten railway car sized propellant tanks.8 And these are just the re-
quirements for a one-way trip. They would have to be doubled for a
return journey, and multiplied many times over if we wanted to make
the trip in less time. Interstellar travel, then, looks to be beyond our
technological capabilities for many years to come, if not forever.
Contrary to what von Däniken would have us believe, it is possi-
ble to apply the word impossible to things. Some things are logically im-
possible, others are physically impossible, and still others are
technologically impossible. And as Krauss’s example of interstellar
travel shows, even if something is physically possible, it doesn’t nec-
essarily follow that it will ever become actual. The principle that
should guide our thinking in these matters, then, is this:
Just because something is logically or physically possible
doesn’t mean that it is, or ever will be, actual.
If logical or physical possibility were grounds for eventual actuality,
we could look forward to a world containing moon-jumping cows or
egg-laying bunnies. To determine whether something is actual, we
have to examine the evidence in its favor.
There are those, however, who measure the credibility of a claim
not in terms of the evidence for it, but in terms of the lack of evi-
dence against it. They argue that since there is no evidence refuting
their position, it must be true. Although such arguments have great
psychological appeal, they are logically fallacious. Their conclusions
don’t follow from their premises because a lack of evidence is no evi-
dence at all. Arguments of this type are said to commit the fallacy of
appeal to ignorance. Here are some examples:
No one has shown that Jones was lying. Therefore he must be telling the truth.
No one has shown that there are no ghosts. Therefore they must exist.
No one has shown that ESP is impossible. Therefore it must be possible.
All a lack of evidence shows is our own ignorance; it doesn’t provide
a reason for believing anything.
LOGICAL POSSIBILITY VERSUS PHYSICAL IMPOSSIBILITY 21
I have learned to use
the word “impossible”
with the greatest
caution.
—WERNER VON
BRAUN

If a lack of evidence against a claim actually constituted evidence
for it, all sorts of weird claims would be well founded. For example,
the existence of mermaids, unicorns, and centaurs—not to mention
Bigfoot, the Loch Ness monster, and the abominable snowman—
would be beyond question. Unfortunately, substantiating a claim is
not that easy. The principle here is this:
Just because a claim hasn’t been conclusively refuted 
doesn’t mean that it’s true.
A claim’s truth is established by the amount of evidence in its favor,
not by the lack of evidence against it.
In addition, the strategy of placing the burden of proof on the non-
believer is unfair in so far as it asks him to do the impossible, namely,
prove a universal negative. A universal negative is a claim to the effect
that nothing of a certain sort exists. Suppose it’s claimed that there are
no white ravens. In support of this claim, suppose it’s pointed out that
no one has ever reported seeing a white raven. From this it doesn’t fol-
low that there are no white ravens, for no one may have looked in the
right place. Or if somebody saw one, it may not have been reported. To
prove a universal negative, you would have to be able to exhaustively
investigate all of time and space. Since none of us can do that, it’s 
unreasonable to demand it of anyone. Whenever someone proposes
something novel—whether it be a policy, a fact, or a theory—the bur-
den of proof is on her to provide reasons for accepting it.
It’s not only true believers who commit the fallacy of appeal to ig-
norance, however. Skeptics often argue like this: No one has proven
that ESP exists; therefore it doesn’t. Again, this is fallacious reasoning;
it’s an attempt to get something for nothing. The operative principle
here is the converse of the one cited above:
Just because a claim hasn’t been conclusively proven 
doesn’t mean that it’s false.
Even if no one has yet found a proof of ESP, we can’t conclude that
none ever will be found. Someone could ﬁnd one tomorrow. So even
if there is no good evidence for ESP, we can’t claim that it doesn’t
exist. We can claim, however, that there is no compelling reason for
thinking that it does exist.
THE POSSIBILITY OF ESP
What about Rothman’s claim that ESP is physically impossible? Is it?
If so, is investigating it really worth our while? Let’s tackle the second
22
TWO: THE POSSIBILITY OF THE IMPOSSIBLE
Certainly nothing is
unnatural that is not
physically impossible.
—RICHARD BRINSLEY
SHERIDAN
You could claim that
anything’s real if the
only basis for believ-
ing in it is that no-
body’s proved it
doesn’t exist.
—J. K. ROWLING

question ﬁrst. Even if our best scientiﬁc theories seem to indicate that
ESP is physically impossible, investigating it still has some value, for
our best scientiﬁc theories may be wrong. The only way we can tell
whether or not they’re wrong is to test them, and investigating ESP
constitutes one such test. Failure to come up with any credible 
examples of ESP (or other paranormal phenomena) serves to conﬁrm
our current theories. But if we were to ﬁnd good evidence for ESP—
if, for example, someone were consistently to score well above the
score predicted by chance on ESP tests for a number of years under
conditions that ruled out any possibility of fraud—we would have to
rethink our current scientiﬁc theories.
But we still wouldn’t necessarily have to reject them. For what at
ﬁrst appears to be a contradiction may, upon further examination, turn
out not to be. Meteorites provide a case in point. As we’ve seen, the
scientiﬁc establishment of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries re-
fused to admit the existence of meteorites because they seemed to con-
ﬂict with the accepted model of reality. But once their existence was
veriﬁed and scientists took seriously the task of explaining them, it was
found that they violated no physical laws. None of Newton’s laws had
to be rejected in order to accommodate them. In fact, as scientists
came to understand the physics of planetary development, they found
that Newton’s laws actually predicted the existence of meteorites.
This point is particularly applicable to the study of miracles. A mir-
acle is commonly considered to be a violation of natural (physical) law.
Because only something supernatural can violate natural law, miracles
are often taken as evidence of the existence of God. But in light of the
preceding principle, it’s difﬁcult to see how we could ever be justiﬁed in
believing that a miracle occurred, for an event’s seeming impossibility
may simply be due to our ignorance of the operative forces or principles.
As the Roman Catholic theologian Saint Augustine noted, “A miracle is
not contrary to nature but contrary to our knowledge of nature.”9 The
scientiﬁc ignorance of the ancient Jews and early Christians may
explain why they reported so many miraculous occurrences.
Consider, for example, the miracle of the parting of the Red Sea.
The Bible tells us that “the Lord caused the sea to go back by a strong
east wind all the night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were
divided” (Exodus 14:21). Two oceanographers have recently shown that,
because of the geological structure of the Red Sea, a strong east wind
could make the sea dry land. They write in the abstract of their article:
[Suppose that a] uniform wind is allowed to blow over the entire gulf
for a period of about a day. . . . It is shown that, in a similar fashion 
to the familiar wind setup in a long and narrow lake, the water at the
edge of the gulf slowly recedes away from its original prewind
THE POSSIBILITY OF ESP 23
Anyone with an 
active mind lives on
tentatives rather
than tenets.
—ROBERT FROST
Nature never breaks
her own laws.
—LEONARDO
DA VINCI

24
TWO: THE POSSIBILITY OF THE IMPOSSIBLE
position. . . . It is found that, even for moderate storms . . . a receding 
distance of more than one kilometer and a sea level drop of more than
2.5 meters are obtained.10
The parting of the Red Sea, then, need not be considered a miracle
because it may not violate any physical laws. The same goes for Jesus’
walking on water. Nof has recently shown that such a feat could have
been the result of a natural phenomena: springs ice (ice from under-
ground springs).11 In both cases, there is no need to invoke a super-
natural cause, because the event can be explained in purely natural
terms. What this example shows is that:
Just because you can’t explain something doesn’t mean
that it’s supernatural.
Your inability to explain something may simply be due to your igno-
rance of the operative forces or principles. When faced with some-
thing you don’t understand, then, the most rational course of action is
to seek a natural explanation.
THEORIES AND THINGS
Skeptics who wish to maintain that paranormal phenomena are physi-
cally impossible often write as if the phenomena themselves contradict
physical law, but a phenomenon can’t contradict a law any more than
a tree can get married. Since marriage is a relation between people,
only people can get married. Similarly, since contradiction is a relation
between propositions, only propositions can contradict one another. It
isn’t the phenomena themselves that contradict physical law, but rather
our theories about them. Since these theories may be mistaken, we
must approach claims of physical impossibility with extreme caution.
The philosopher C. J. Ducasse notes that, 200 years ago, making
one’s voice heard all the way across the Atlantic would have seemed
physically impossible.12 People of that time would have assumed that
the only way to do so would be to use air as a means of transmission,
and air can’t carry a message that far. But if you use a telephone wire
or radio waves, you can make yourself heard across the Atlantic fairly
easily. The seeming impossibility of the feat, then, was based on a par-
ticular theory of what was involved. By changing the theory, the 
impossibility disappears. Similarly, the seeming impossibility of ESP is
based on a particular theory of what is involved. If that theory is mis-
taken, so may be the claim that ESP is physically impossible.
Rothman’s claim that ESP is impossible is based on the theory
that ESP is a transmission of information from one object to another
and that the information transfer has features (like the failure to 
How many things,
too, are looked upon
as quite impossible
until they have been
actually effected?
—PLINY THE ELDER

ON KNOWING THE FUTURE 25
degrade over distance) that violate physical law. If his theory is cor-
rect, his claim is justiﬁed. If not, it’s unfounded.
Adrian Dobbs, a parapsychologist, argues that there’s no good rea-
son for believing that ESP signals actually do violate physical law. In the
ﬁrst place, according to Dobbs, there’s no evidence that ESP signals
don’t degrade over distance. “We have,” he tells us, “no systematically
compiled data to test whether it has happened as frequently over long
distances as over short distances, taking into account the number of oc-
casions when it has been tried experimentally.”13 Second, even electro-
magnetic signals don’t always get weaker the farther they travel. “Every
experienced operator of radio transmitters,” he explains, “knows that
‘breakthrough’ conditions occur sporadically when signals are picked up
‘loud and clear’ over distances far in excess of those their transmitters are
designed to reach under normal working conditions.”14 Perhaps the
purported cases of long-distance ESP are caused by some such special
conditions. Third, even if a signal is picked up over a great distance, it
doesn’t mean that it has not attenuated, “for modern radio technology
has shown that it is practicable for a receiver to detect exceedingly weak
electromagnetic signals; and by using systems of Automatic Gain Con-
trol, to amplify incoming signals . . . in such a way that both strong and
weak signals appear at the output stage of the loudspeaker with subjec-
tively equal audible strengths.”15 Perhaps there’s some sort of “auto-
matic gain control” at work in ESP so that both weak and strong signals
are output at the same level. In any case, contrary to what Rothman
would have us believe, the evidence available concerning ESP doesn’t
rule out a physical explanation. ESP may well be physically possible.
ON KNOWING THE FUTURE
Precognition is even more puzzling than telepathy—because it not
only seems to be physically impossible, it also seems to be logically
impossible. To precognize an event is to know what will happen be-
fore it actually does. Precognition, then, is a form of fortune-telling—
it’s seeing into the future. Such an ability certainly appears physically
impossible, for it seems to be at odds with the principle of causality,
which states that an effect cannot precede its cause. But more impor-
tant, it also appears logically impossible, for it seems to suggest that
the future exists now, and that’s a contradiction in terms. We can per-
ceive only that which currently exists. If we perceive the future, the
future must currently exist, but the future, by deﬁnition, doesn’t cur-
rently exist. It will exist, when the time comes, but does not exist now.
So precognition seems to commit us to an existing nonexistent, which
is a logical impossibility.
I’ve gone into 
hundreds of 
[fortune-teller’s 
parlors], and have
been told thousands
of things, but nobody
ever told me I was a
policewoman getting
ready to arrest her.
—NEW YORK
CITY DETECTIVE

The problem with this view is that there are models of physical
reality, consistent with all known physical laws, in which the future
does exist now. Such models draw their inspiration from Hermann
Minkowski’s interpretation of Einstein’s special theory of relativity.
In his special theory of relativity, published in 1905, Einstein
showed that space and time are much more intimately related than
anyone had previously thought. He showed, for example, that the
faster you travel, the slower you age. At the speed of light, you don’t
age at all; time stands still, so to speak. If you were to go faster than
26
TWO: THE POSSIBILITY OF THE IMPOSSIBLE
Tachyons and Precognition
According to relativity theory, anything that
travels faster than the speed of light must go
backward in time. Furthermore, no ordinary
object (having a rest mass greater than zero)
can go faster than the speed of light for, at that
speed, it would have inﬁnite mass. By plugging
different numbers into the variables for mass in
Einstein’s equations, however, physicist Gerald
Feinberg found that if something had imagi-
nary mass (mass represented by an imaginary
number), it would be physically possible for it
to travel faster than the speed of light. Such
particles he dubbed tachyons.16
If tachyons exist, they must travel backward
in time because they travel faster than light.
Consequently, some have thought that tachyons
might be able to explain precognition. Prescient
individuals may simply have especially sensitive
tachyon receptors. According to electrical engi-
neer Laurence Beynam,
The fact that precognition involves informa-
tion transfer in the reverse time direction 
necessitates, due to the theory of relativity,
the adoption of faster-than-light (superlumi-
nal or supraluminal) processes as a possible
explanatory cause allowed for by the laws of
physics. . . . Physicist Gerald Feinberg and
mathematician Adrian Dobbs . . . have theo-
rized superluminal particles of (mathemati-
cally) imaginary mass. . . . Tachyons can be
viewed either as carrying negative energy
backwards in time or positive energy
forwards in time. This interchangeability al-
lows us to view a tachyon as a bidirectional
discontinuous ﬁeld line, microminiature
“warp,” “wormhole,” or short-circuit that car-
ries information across space-time regardless
of direction, somewhat as light photons carry
information within ordinary space-time.17
Although tachyons are physically possible, to
date no one has detected one. In fact, G. A.
Benford, D. L. Book, and W. A. Newcomb
argue in “The Tachyonic Antitelephone” that no
one ever will, because tachyonic communica-
tion involves a logical contradiction.18 Martin
Gardner explains:
Suppose physicist Jones on the Earth is in
communication by tachyonic antitelephones
with physicist Alpha in another galaxy.
They make the following agreement.
When Alpha receives a message from
Jones, he will reply immediately. Jones
promises to send a message to Alpha at
three o’clock Earth time, if and only if he
has not received a message from Alpha by
one o’clock. Do you see the difficulty?
Both messages go back in time. If Jones
sends his message at three, Alpha’s reply
could reach him before one. “Then,” as
[Benford, Book, and Newcomb] put it, 
“the exchange of messages will take place 
if and only if it does not take place . . . a 
genuine . . . causal contradiction.”19
It is easy to see,
hard to foresee.
—BENJAMIN
FRANKLIN

ON KNOWING THE FUTURE 27
the speed of light, you would go backward in time.20 But if you went
backward in time, you could get into all sorts of trouble. You could,
for example, kill your father before he met your mother. What, then,
would happen to you? In Einstein’s theory, we don’t have to worry
about such things, for nothing can travel faster than the speed of light.
Einstein’s discovery that space and time are related is often expressed
by saying that time is a fourth dimension. What this means is that time
is as much a direction of travel as are the directions up-down, right-left,
and forward-backward. Objects travel through both space and time.
The entire history of an object can be represented on a graph
where one axis stands for the three dimensions of space and another
for time. On such a graph, you would appear as a curved bar extend-
ing from the time you were born to the time that you die. (See above
ﬁgure.) Each slice of the bar would represent a moment of your life.
From a fourth-dimensional point of view, then, all the moments of
your life exist simultaneously.
Einstein’s theory of relativity provides a way of looking at the uni-
verse that makes it both logically and physically possible for the fu-
ture to exist now. This view of the universe has come to be known as
the “block universe” view because it takes the universe to be a static,
unchanging “block.” But the universe doesn’t seem static. So what cre-
ates the illusion of change? Some believe it is created by the interac-
tion between our consciousness and our four-dimensional selves.
Movie reels can create the illusion of change by being projected
onto the screen of the theater one frame at a time. Similarly, it has
been claimed, four-dimensional objects can create the illusion of
change by being projected onto the screen of consciousness one slice
at a time. Ordinarily, each slice is projected in sequence. In the case
of precognition, however, slices are taken out of order. The mind
skips ahead, so to speak. As a result, we are aware of something “be-
fore” it happens.21 So even precognition may be physically possible.
But as we’ve seen, just because something is possible doesn’t mean
that it’s real. To determine whether it is, we have to examine the 
reasons behind it. If the reasons are good ones, we have good reason
for believing in it. If not, belief in it is irrational.
Space
Space
Time
People like us, who
believe in physics,
know that the distinc-
tion between past,
present and future is
only a stubborn, per-
sistent illusion.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN

28
TWO: THE POSSIBILITY OF THE IMPOSSIBLE
Failed Psychic Predictions
Logic is the study of good reasoning. It does not tell us how peo-
ple, in fact, reason. Instead, it tells us how people should reason if they
want to avoid error and falsehood. In the next chapter, we’ll explore
the nature of good reasoning in more detail.
SUMMARY
It is not the case that anything is possible, as some people claim. Anything that
violates the laws of logic is said to be logically impossible, and whatever is log-
ically impossible can’t exist. Such things as round squares and married bache-
lors are logically impossible, for they attribute both a property and its
negation to a thing and are therefore self-contradictory. Many extraordinary
things such as ESP, alien abduction, and out-of-body experiences are logically
possible—they are not self-contradictory. But if they violate the laws of
Every year, psychics make predictions about
the year to come. And every year, most of
them fail to come true. The writers at relative-
lyinteresting.com compiled the following anno-
tated list for the year 2011: 
Psychic Craig and Jane Hamilton-Parker
• Prediction: Earthquake in California and
the famous Hollywood sign is damaged.
Looks like it’s still standing, unscathed . . .
• Prediction: Wild animal disease scare re-
sults in mass slaughter of livestock.
Nooooope.
• Prediction: Liverpool wins the FA cup.
Nope, someone else won. 
• Prediction: Leading politician dies in a
plane crash. A bit more specific, maybe? A
president? Prime minister? A cabinet minister?
Come on.
Psychic Nikki
• Prediction: The Playboy Mansion will
burn down. This would have been big news, but
alas, it did not happen.
• Prediction: A gold rush will occur in
Hawaii. Nope, didn’t happen.
• Prediction: The ﬁrst brain transplant will
take place. Seriously? Didn’t even come close.
• Prediction: A horseshoe-shaped UFO will
be spotted over Roswell, New Mexico.
Swing and a miss.
• Prediction: Hillary Clinton will win the
Nobel Peace Prize. Nope. It was awarded
jointly to Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Leymah Gbowee,
and Tawakkol Karman.
• Prediction: A big computer virus will take 
out large swathes of communication for a 
48-hour period, which could affect air
travel. Fail.
Monte the Psychic
• Prediction: North & South Korea will
continue their ﬁghting and economic col-
lapse is coming to N. Korea before late
winter which will trigger a revolt in their
country by citizens wanting change. The
leader at that time, Kim Jong Un, may not
survive the revolt, or he may go into hid-
ing in China. Completely wrong, and consider-
ing that Kim Jong Il died on December 19th, 2011,
wouldn’t Monte have tried to predict that?
• Prediction: Russia and China will sign a
major military pact that will make them a
dominant world power rivaling NATO. I
missed hearing about this in the news—perhaps it’s
a  secret.

SUMMARY
29
• Prediction: A device to allow people to
levitate will be built where you can walk
on a platform and levitate. I hoped this one
would be true, but alas, no such device exists.
• Prediction: Japan and China will have a
military standoff after more ships are sunk
near a disputed Japanese island by China,
almost bringing these countries to war.
Russia will intervene to settle the dispute.
Didn’t happen.
Sidney Friedman
• Prediction: Economically in the United
States, I sense the climate in some ways con-
tinues to improve, slowly but surely. He had a
50/50 chance of getting this right, and he got it!
• Prediction: A major league baseball player
inexplicably dies on the ﬁeld. As far I could
tell, one active MLB player died in 2011, but it
was not on the ﬁeld—it was a stabbing. Sorry,
Sidney, this doesn’t count as a hit.
• Prediction: I am not precisely certain of
what this is, but an explosion in the sky is
seen in the middle part of the country.
Could you be more speciﬁc? Seriously—this
could be a plane, a meteor, a ﬂare, a hot air balloon
. . . this is so general that it probably happened a
number of times, but was so insigniﬁcant that it
was never reported in the news.
Ooops . . . What About These Forgotten
Predictions?
The year 2011 also had some epic moments
in the news . . . and you will note that the psy-
chics above failed to predict any of them.
• Japan Earthquake and Tsunami and the asso-
ciated nuclear crisis
• Bin Laden’s Death
• Tucson, Arizona, Shooting Rampage
• Death of Amy Winehouse
• Occupy Wall Street
• Kim Jong II’s death
• Arab Spring
• Penn State abuse scandal
• Steve Job’s death
• Tornadoes across Midwest and Southeastern
United States
• EU Fiscal Crisis
Wouldn’t it have been incredibly useful for the
public to know where the tsunami would hit
Japan? What about saving the military’s 10-year
hunt for Bin Laden . . . and just let them know
where he was hiding? Maybe a little warning
about the Tucson shootings? No. Nothing.22
science, they are physically impossible. Anything that is inconsistent with the
laws of science, or nature, is physically impossible. Something can also be
technologically impossible—currently beyond our capabilities to accomplish.
Time travel seems to be logically impossible; psychokinesis, the ability to
move external objects with the mind, seems to be physically impossible; and
visitation by aliens from outer space seems to be technologically impossible.
The principle to keep in mind about such things is that just because something
is logically or physically possible doesn’t mean that it is, or ever will be, actual.
We must approach claims of physical impossibility with caution, for it
isn’t phenomena themselves that contradict physical law, but rather our the-
ories about them—and our theories may be mistaken. Precognition, for ex-
ample, seems both physically and logically impossible. But there are models
of physical reality, consistent with all known physical laws, in which the fu-
ture does now exist.

30
TWO: THE POSSIBILITY OF THE IMPOSSIBLE
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. What is the difference between logical possibility and physical
possibility?
2. Is ESP logically impossible?
3. Is ESP physically impossible?
4. Consider this argument: No one can explain how it happened. There-
fore it must be a miracle. Is this argument a good one? Why or why
not?
5. Consider this argument: You can’t prove that aliens haven’t visited
Earth. Therefore it’s reasonable to believe that they have. Is this argu-
ment a good one? Why or why not?
EVALUATE THESE CLAIMS. ARE THEY REASONABLE? 
WHY OR WHY NOT?
1. Scientists have no evidence of intelligent life on other planets. So
Earth must contain the only intelligent life in the universe.
2. The Egyptians couldn’t have built the pyramids because the precision
with which the stones are cut is far beyond their primitive capabilities.
Therefore the pyramids must have been built by extraterrestrials.
3. Ever since we moved into the house, the lights have occasionally
ﬂickered and gone dim. We’ve checked the wiring and found no prob-
lems at all. So the house must be haunted.
4. There’s nothing on record to indicate that Madame Zelda, the palm
reader, is a fake. Therefore she must be genuine.
5. You shouldn’t be skeptical of ESP because scientists have never proven
that it doesn’t exist.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Is it logically possible to travel backward in time and live in a former
era? Why or why not?
2. Is it logically possible to make a robot (a mechanical device composed
of inorganic materials) that can think, feel, and act like we do? Is it
physically possible? Why or why not?
3. In his book The Bible and UFOs, Larry Downing claims that the miracu-
lous events recounted in the Bible were actually caused by space
aliens. Is his claim as reasonable or more reasonable than the claim
that God caused them? Why or why not?
4. When are we justiﬁed in believing (i) that a law of logic has been
violated? (ii) that a law of nature has been violated?
FIELD PROBLEM
Predictions by the nation’s top psychics are a mainstay of tabloids. They are
usually published close to the beginning of a new year in which the
predictions are to be fulﬁlled. Few people ever bother to check whether any

CRITICAL READING AND WRITING
31
of the predictions are accurate. Tabloid psychics forecast the following
events for the 1990s:
•
Soviet cosmonauts will be shocked to discover an abandoned alien
space station with the bodies of several extraterrestrials aboard.
•
The ﬁrst successful human brain transplant will be performed.
•
Public water supplies will be treated with chemicals that will prevent
AIDS.
Assignment 1: Determine whether any of these predictions came true. 
If you are not sure, check the archives of some major news sites on the 
Internet.
Some psychic predictions are so vague that they can easily appear to be
accurate. For example, consider “The Pope will become ill and could die.”
Assignment 2: List at least ten events that could be considered a fulﬁllment
of this prediction. For example, “The Pope catches a cold but does not die”
or “The Pope falls and breaks his hip.”
CRITICAL READING AND WRITING
I. Read the passage below and answer the following questions:
1. What kind of argument is the writer using in this passage?
2. Do you ﬁnd the argument convincing? Why or why not?
3. Does the writer place the burden of proof on the Bigfoot skeptics
or on the believers?
4. Who should properly bear the burden of proof on this issue?
5. Would you accept the argument if the writer had argued that Big-
foot is not real because no one has conclusively proven that he 
exists? Why or why not?
II. Write a 200-word paper critiquing the argument in the passage. Explain
what kinds of reasons would give stronger support to the conclusion.
Passage 1
After attending the conference on the Bigfoot phenomenon—the possible
existence of a giant ape-man in North America—I am struck by how my be-
liefs have changed. I no longer dismiss the possibility of Bigfoot out of hand.
I don’t know exactly what is going on in the forests of western United States
and Canada, but I believe that it is mysterious and strange. I was struck by
the fact that no one has offered any proof that Bigfoot does not exist. There
are tantalizing bits of evidence suggesting that Bigfoot might be real, but
there are no knock-down arguments or volumes of evidence showing that he
deﬁnitely does not exist. No one has shown me a scientiﬁc survey of all of
North America in which Bigfoot was searched for but not detected
anywhere. There is only one conclusion that I can draw from this: However 
unlikely it might seem, Bigfoot exists—and he likely exists exactly where
eyewitnesses say he exists, in the wilderness of the West.

NOTES
1. Milton A. Rothman, A Physicist’s Guide to Skepticism (Buffalo: Prometheus
Books, 1988), p. 193.
2. Erich von Däniken, Chariots of the Gods (New York: Bantam Books,
1970), p. 30.
3. Saul-Paul Sirag, “The Skeptics,” in Future Science, ed. John White and
Stanley Krippner (Garden City, NJ: Doubleday, 1977), p. 535.
4. For a more in-depth examination of necessity, see Raymond Bradley
and Norman Swartz, Possible Worlds (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1979).
5. Aristotle, Metaphysics, Book IV, 1008b, trans. Richard McKeon (New
York: Random House, 1941), p. 742.
6. Ibid., Book IV, 1006a, p. 737.
7. Martin Gardner, Time Travel and Other Mathematical Bewilderments (New
York: Freeman, 1988) 7.
8. Marc Mills, “Warp Drive When? A Look at the Scaling,” accessed
September 1, 2012,  http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/technology/
warp/scales.html
9. Saint Augustine, The City of God, XXI, 8.
10. Doron Nof and Nathan Paldor, “Are There Oceanographic Explana-
tions for the Israelites’ Crossing of the Red Sea?” Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society 73 (1992): 304–14.
11. Doron Nof et al., “Is there a paleolimnological explanation for ‘walk-
ing on water’ in the Sea of Galilee?” Journal of Paleolimnology 35 (2006):
417–439.
12. C. J. Ducasse, “Some Questions Concerning Psychical Phenomena,”
The Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research 48 (1954): 5.
13. Adrian Dobbs, “The Feasibility of a Physical Theory of ESP,” in Science
and ESP, ed. J. R. Smythies (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1967), p. 230.
14. Ibid., pp. 230–31.
15. Ibid., p. 234.
16. Gerald Feinberg, “Particles That Go Faster Than Light,” Scientiﬁc
American, February 1970, pp. 69–77.
17. Laurence M. Beynam, “Quantum Physics and Paranormal Events,” in
Future Science, White and Krippner, pp. 317–18.
18. G. A. Benford, D. L. Book, and W. A. Newcomb, “The Tachyonic 
Antitelephone,” Physical Review D, 3d ser., 2 (1970): 63–65.
19. Martin Gardner, “Time Travel,” in Time Travel and Other Mathematical 
Bewilderments (New York: W. H. Freeman, 1988), p. 4.
20. George Gamow, One, Two, Three . . . Inﬁnity (New York: Bantam Books,
1979), p. 104.
21. Lee F. Werth, “Normalizing the Paranormal,” American Philosophical
Quarterly 15 (1978): 47–56.
22. ”Failed doomsday and apocalyptic predictions,” Rationally Interesting, May
8, 2012, accessed September 1, 2012, http://www.relativelyinteresting.
com/failed-doomsday-and-apocalyptic-predictions/
32
TWO: THE POSSIBILITY OF THE IMPOSSIBLE

33
THREE
Arguments Good,
Bad, and Weird
T
HE CENTRAL FOCUS of critical thinking is the formula-
tion and evaluation of arguments—and this is true
whether the subject matter is ordinary or as weird as can be.
Usually when we are doing critical thinking, we are trying
either to devise arguments or to assess them. We are trying
either (1) to demonstrate that a claim, or proposition, is true or
(2) to determine whether in fact a claim is true. In either case,
if we are successful, we are likely to increase our knowledge
and expand our understanding—which is, after all, the main
reason we use critical thinking in the ﬁrst place.
So in this chapter, we discuss the skills you need to make
sense of arguments—to identify arguments in different con-
texts, to distinguish arguments from nonarguments, to evalu-
ate the worth of arguments, and to avoid the entanglements
of bad arguments.

CLAIMS AND ARGUMENTS
As noted earlier, we are entitled to believe a claim when we have good
reasons to believe it. The reasons for accepting a claim are themselves
stated as claims. This combination of claims—a claim (or claims) sup-
posedly giving reasons for accepting another claim—is known as an
argument. Or to put it another way, when claims (reasons) provide sup-
port for another claim, we have an argument.
People sometimes use the word argument to refer to a quarrel or
verbal ﬁght. But this meaning has little to do with critical thinking. In
critical thinking, an argument is as deﬁned above—reasons support-
ing a claim.
To be more precise, claims (or reasons) intended to support 
another claim are known as premises. The claim that the premises are
intended to support is known as the conclusion. Take a look at these
simple arguments:
1. My instructor says that ghosts are real. Therefore, ghosts are real.
2. Because the former tenants ran out of the house screaming, and they begged 
a priest to perform an exorcism on the property, the house is obviously 
possessed.
3. When Julio reads about weird things, he always gets the shakes. Since he’s
reading about weird things now, he will get the shakes.
4. All men are mortal. Socrates is a man. Therefore, Socrates is mortal.
5. Fifty percent of the students in this class are Republicans. Therefore, 50 per-
cent of all students at this college are Republicans.
In each of these ﬁve arguments, can you distinguish the premises
from the conclusion? Try picking out the conclusions of each one,
then look for the premises. Here are the arguments again with their
parts labeled:
1. [Premise] My instructor says that ghosts are real. [Conclusion]
Therefore, ghosts are real.
2. [Premise] Because the former tenants ran out of the house screaming, and
[Premise] they begged a priest to perform an exorcism on the property,
[Conclusion] the house is obviously possessed.
3. [Premise] When Julio reads about weird things, he always gets the shakes.
[Premise] Since he’s reading about weird things now, [Conclusion] he
will get the shakes.
4. [Premise] All men are mortal. [Premise] Socrates is a man.
[Conclusion] Therefore, Socrates is mortal.
5. [Premise] Fifty percent of the students in this class are Republicans.
[Conclusion] Therefore, 50 percent of all students at this college are 
Republicans.
34
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD
Logical consequences
are the scarecrows
of fools and the bea-
cons of wise men.
—THOMAS HENRY
HUXLEY

Now consider this passage:
The house has been there for a hundred years, and it’s pretty spooky. Some
people claim that they’ve seen someone or something moving about inside the
house at night. John said that he would never go in there.
Can you ﬁnd an argument in this passage? We hope not because
there is no argument there. The passage consists of three descriptive
claims, but they are not supporting a conclusion. With a little tinker-
ing, though, we can turn this passage into an argument. For example:
There is no doubt that the house is haunted because it has been there for a
hundred years, it’s really spooky, and even John—who is normally very
brave—refuses to go anywhere near the house.
Now we have an argument. The conclusion is “There is no doubt
that the house is haunted,” and there are three premises: (1) “[the
house] has been there for a hundred years,” (2) “it’s really spooky,” and
(3) “John—who is normally very brave—refuses to go anywhere near
the house.”
Some people think that if they simply state their views on an issue,
they have presented an argument. But a string of statements asserting or
clarifying their views does not an argument make. Consider this passage:
I think that abortion is wrong. I have always believed that and always will.
Those who favor abortion on demand are just plain wrong. In fact, those
who favor any kind of abortion for any reason are wrong. They may be
sincere in their beliefs, and they may have the Supreme Court on their side,
but they’re still advocating an immoral act.
This is not an argument. It is merely a collection of unsupported
claims. It offers no reasons for believing that abortion is wrong. It is,
however, typical of the expression of views that shows up in what
many people call “arguments,” which often consist of verbal sparring
and pointless cycles of claim and counterclaim. Such exchanges may
reveal something about the participants, but they say nothing about
the grounds for believing something.
You should also keep in mind the distinction between argument
and persuasion: They are not the same thing. Through various per-
suasive ploys—fancy rhetoric, emotional appeals, deception, coer-
cion, and more—you may be able to inﬂuence people to accept a
conclusion. But if you do, you will not have shown that the conclu-
sion is worthy of acceptance, that there are good reasons for believ-
ing it. Of course, a good argument, in addition to presenting solid
grounds for accepting a claim, can also be psychologically forceful.
But these two approaches to claims should not be confused.
CLAIMS AND ARGUMENTS
35
Logic is logic.That’s
all I say.
—OLIVER WENDELL
HOLMES

Unfortunately, there is no 100-percent-reliable formula for dis-
tinguishing arguments from nonarguments. There are, however, some
ways to make the job easier. One technique is to look for indicator
words—terms that often accompany arguments and signal that a con-
clusion or premise is nearby. For example, in the haunted house argu-
ment above, notice that the word because alerts us to the presence of
the premises that follow. In arguments 1, 4, and 5 above, the word
therefore indicates that a conclusion follows.
Here are some common conclusion indicator words:
thus
hence
so
therefore
consequently
as a result
it follows that
we can conclude that
which means that
which implies that
And here are some common premise indicator words:
since
because
the reason being
in view of the fact
assuming that
given that
for the reason that
as indicated by
for
due to the fact that
Keep in mind that indicator words do not invariably point to con-
clusions or premises. Sometimes indicator words are used when no 
argument is present. For example: “Julio has been working since nine
o’clock.” Or, “Naomi works here because she wants to.” Also, occasion-
ally arguments can be stated without the use of any indicator words:
Look, there is no doubt that the house is haunted. It has been there for a
hundred years, it’s really spooky, and even John—who is normally very
brave—refuses to go anywhere near the house.
The minimum requirement for an argument is at least one prem-
ise and a conclusion. This simple structure, though, can have many
conﬁgurations. First, an argument can have one premise or many. The
haunted house argument has three premises, but it could have four, or
seven, or more. Second, the conclusion of an argument can appear
after the premises (as in arguments 1 through 5) or before the prem-
ises (as in the haunted house argument). Third, an argument can be
buried in a cluster of other statements that are not part of the argu-
ment. These other statements may be questions, exclamations, de-
scriptions, explanations, background information, or something else.
The trick is to ﬁnd the argument that’s embedded in the extraneous
material.
36
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD
If the world were a
logical place, men
would ride side 
saddle.
—RITA MAE BROWN

The easiest way to identify an argument is to ﬁnd the conclusion ﬁrst.
If you ﬁrst ﬁnd the conclusion, locating the premises becomes much
easier. To ﬁnd the conclusion, ask yourself, “What claim is the writer
or speaker trying to get me to accept?” or “For what claim is the writer
or speaker providing reasons?”
An argument can be either good or bad. A good argument demon-
strates that the conclusion is worthy of acceptance. A bad argument
fails to demonstrate that a conclusion is worthy of acceptance.
There are also different kinds of arguments. Arguments can be 
either deductive or inductive. Deductive arguments are intended to pro-
vide conclusive support for their conclusions. Inductive arguments are
intended to provide probable support for their conclusions. A deduc-
tive argument that succeeds in providing conclusive support is said to
be valid. A deductive argument that fails to provide such support is
said to be invalid. A valid deductive argument has this characteristic: If
its premises are true, its conclusion must be true. In other words, it is
impossible for a deductively valid argument to have true premises and
a false conclusion. Notice that the term valid as used here is not a syn-
onym for true. Valid refers to a deductive argument’s logical structure—
it refers to an argument structure that guarantees the truth of the
conclusion if the premises are true. If an argument is valid, we say that
the conclusion follows from the premises. Because a deductively valid argu-
ment guarantees the truth of the conclusion if the premises are true, it
is said to be truth-preserving.
Here’s a classic deductively valid argument:
All men are mortal.
Socrates is a man.
Therefore, Socrates is mortal.
And here’s another one:
If you have scars on your body, then you have been abducted by space
aliens. You obviously do have scars on your body. Therefore, you have been
abducted by space aliens.
Notice that in each of these, if the premises are true, the conclu-
sion must be true. If the premises are true, the conclusion cannot pos-
sibly be false. This would be the case regardless of the order of the
premises and regardless of whether the conclusion came ﬁrst or last.
Now here are deductively invalid versions of these arguments:
If Socrates is a dog, he is mortal.
Socrates is not a dog.
Therefore, Socrates is not mortal.
CLAIMS AND ARGUMENTS
37
What danger can
ever come from 
ingenious reasoning
and inquiry? The
worst speculative
skeptic ever I knew
was a much better
man than the best
superstitious devotee
and bigot.
—DAVID HUME

If you have scars on your body, then you have been abducted by space
aliens. You have been abducted by space aliens. Therefore, you have scars on
your body.
These arguments are invalid. In each, the conclusion does not fol-
low from the premises.
An inductive argument that succeeds in giving probable support
to its conclusion is said to be strong. An inductive argument that fails
to do this is said to be weak. In an inductively strong argument, if the
premises are true, the conclusion is probably or likely to be true. The
logical structure of an inductively strong argument can only render
the conclusion probably true if the premises are true. Unlike a 
deductively valid argument, an inductively strong argument cannot
guarantee the truth of the conclusion if the premises are true. The
best that an inductively strong argument can do is show that the con-
clusion is very likely to be true. So inductive arguments are not truth-
preserving.
Here are two inductively strong arguments:
All humans have lived less than 200 years.
Socrates is a human.
Therefore, Socrates will probably live less than 200 years.
Mysterious scars on one’s body almost always indicate an alien abduction.
You have mysterious scars on your body.
So you have probably been the victim of an alien abduction.
Look at the ﬁrst inductive argument. Notice that it’s possible for
the premises to be true and the conclusion false. After all, the ﬁrst prem-
ise says that there is no guarantee that Socrates is mortal just because
he’s a man. He’s only likely to be mortal. Also in the second argument,
there is no guarantee that you have been abducted by space aliens if
you have mysterious scars on your body. If you have mysterious scars
on your body, there’s still a chance that you have not been abducted.
Good arguments must be valid or strong—but they also must
have true premises. A good argument is one that has the proper logi-
cal structure and true premises. Consider this argument:
All dogs can lay eggs.
The prime minister is a dog.
Therefore, the prime minister can lay eggs.
This is a valid argument, but the premises are false. The conclu-
sion follows logically from the premises—even though the premises
are false. So the argument is not a good one. A deductively valid ar-
gument with true premises is said to be sound. A sound argument is a
38
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD

good argument. A good argument gives you good reasons for accept-
ing the conclusion. Likewise, a good inductive argument must be log-
ically strong and have true premises. An inductively strong argument
with true premises is said to be cogent. A cogent argument is a good 
argument, which provides good reasons for accepting the conclusion.
DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS
Whether a deductive argument is valid depends on its form or struc-
ture. We can see the form most easily if we represent it by using let-
ters to substitute for the argument’s statements. Consider this
deductive argument:
1. If the soul is immortal, then thinking doesn’t depend on brain
activity.
2. The soul is immortal.
3. Therefore, thinking doesn’t depend on brain activity.
By using letters to represent each statement, we can symbolize the 
argument like this:
If p then q.
p.
Therefore, q.
The ﬁrst line is a compound statement consisting of two con-
stituent statements, each of which is assigned a letter: p or q. Such a
compound statement is known as a conditional, or if-then, statement. The
statement following the if is called the antecedent, and the statement
after then is called the consequent. The whole argument is referred to as
a conditional argument because it contains at least one conditional
statement (If p then q.).
Conditional arguments are common. In fact, many conditional ar-
gument patterns are so common that they have been given names.
These prevalent forms are worth getting to know because they can
help you quickly judge the validity of arguments you encounter. Since
the validity of an argument depends on its form, if you know that a par-
ticular common form is always valid (or invalid), then you know that
any argument having that same form must also be valid (or invalid).
For example, the argument we just examined is cast in the com-
mon form known as afﬁrming the antecedent, or modus ponens. Any argu-
ment in this form is always valid. We may drop whatever statements
we please into this form, and the argument will remain unshakably
valid—whether or not the premises are true. Now consider this modus
ponens argument:
DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS
39
Our reason must be
considered as a kind
of cause, of which
truth is the natural
effect.
—DAVID HUME

1. If one human is made of tin, then every human is made of tin.
2. One human is made of tin.
3. Therefore, every human is made of tin.
The premises and conclusion of this argument are false. Never-
theless, this argument is valid because if the premises were true, then
the conclusion would have to be true. A valid argument can have false
premises and a false conclusion, false premises and a true conclusion,
or true premises and a true conclusion. The one thing it cannot have
is true premises and a false conclusion.
Here is another frequently occurring, conditional form:
If p then q.
Not q.
Therefore, not p.
For example:
1. If the soul is immortal, then thinking doesn’t depend on brain
activity.
2. Thinking does depend on brain activity.
3. Therefore, the soul is not immortal.
This form is known as denying the consequent, or modus tollens. Any 
argument patterned in this way—regardless of the topic or truth of
the premises—is valid.
A valid, hypothetical form that people often employ to think crit-
ically about a series of events is known as hypothetical syllogism.
(Hypothetical is a synonym for conditional; a syllogism is simply a 
deductive argument consisting of two premises and a conclusion.) In
this form, every statement is conditional. See:
If p then q.
If q then r.
Therefore, if p then r.
For example:
1. If the ﬂoor creaks, someone is standing in the hallway.
2. If someone is standing in the hallway, there’s a burglar in the
house.
3. Therefore, if the ﬂoor creaks, there’s a burglar in the house.
As you might expect, some very common argument forms are in-
valid. This one is known as denying the antecedent:
If p then q.
Not p.
Therefore, not q.
40
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD

1. If Joe is a bachelor, then Joe is a male.
2. Joe is not a bachelor.
3. Therefore, Joe is not a male.
The invalidity of this argument seems obvious. But consider this
specimen in the same form:
1. If scientists can prove the existence of ghosts, then ghosts are
real.
2. But scientists cannot prove the existence of ghosts.
3. Therefore, ghosts are not real.
The dead giveaway of invalidity here is that it’s possible for both
premises to be true and the conclusion false. Even if scientists cannot
prove the existence of ghosts, that doesn’t show that ghosts are not
real. Perhaps ghosts exist despite the failure of science to prove it.
Another popular invalid form is afﬁrming the consequent:
If p then q.
q.
Therefore, p.
1. If Chicago is the capital of Illinois, then Chicago is in Illinois.
2. Chicago is in Illinois.
3. Therefore, Chicago is the capital of Illinois.
We can see immediately that this argument is invalid because,
you will recall, it’s impossible for a valid argument to have true prem-
ises and a false conclusion—and this argument clearly does have true
premises and a false conclusion.
Of course, not all common deductive arguments are conditional.
Here’s a nonconditional valid form known as disjunctive syllogism:
Either p or q.
Not p.
Therefore, q.
1. Either Jill faked the UFO landing or Jack did.
2. Jill did not fake the UFO landing.
3. Therefore, Jack faked the UFO landing.
A statement in the p-or-q format of premise 1 is called a disjunction,
and each statement in a disjunction (p or q) is called a disjunct. In a
disjunctive syllogism, either one of the disjuncts can be denied, and
the conclusion is that the undenied disjunct must be true.
Being familiar with these six argument forms can come in handy
when you’re trying to quickly determine the validity of an argument.
DEDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS
41
Logic is the armory
of reason, furnished
with all offensive and
defensive weapons.
—THOMAS FULLER

If you come across an argument whose structure matches one of the
valid forms just discussed, then you know the argument is valid. If the
argument has a structure matching one of the invalid forms, then you
know it’s invalid. Memorizing these common forms can help make
your comparison of argument patterns more efﬁcient.
Another technique for assessing the validity of deductive argu-
ments is known as the counterexample method. This approach is based on
the aforementioned impossibility of a valid argument having true
premises and a false conclusion. So to determine the validity of an 
argument (called the test argument), you try to construct a corre-
sponding argument having the same form as the test argument but with 
unquestionably true premises and a false conclusion. Successfully construct-
ing such an argument shows that the test argument is not valid.
Suppose this is your test argument:
1. If Ester could bend spoons with her mind, then she would be
an extraordinary person.
2. Ester cannot bend spoons with her mind.
3. Therefore, Ester is not an extraordinary person.
To check for validity, you invent this corresponding argument:
1. If dogs could lay eggs, then they would be useful to humans.
2. Dogs cannot lay eggs.
3. Therefore, dogs are not useful to humans.
This argument and the test argument have exactly the same form
(which you probably already see is denying the antecedent). This
one, however, has true premises and a false conclusion. So it’s invalid,
and so is the test argument.
INDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS
Even though inductive arguments are not valid, they can still give
us good reasons for believing their conclusions provided that cer-
tain conditions are met. To get a better idea of what constitutes a
strong inductive argument, let’s examine some common forms of
induction.
Enumerative Induction
Enumerative induction is the sort of reasoning we use when we arrive
at a generalization about a group of things after observing only some
members of that group. The premise of a typical enumerative induc-
tion is a statement reporting what percentage of the observed members
of a group have a particular property. The conclusion is a statement
42
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD

claiming that a certain percentage of the members of the whole group
have that property.
In enumerative induction, we might reason that
Most of the meals you’ve had down at Joe’s Diner have been
terrible. So all the meals served at Joe’s are probably terrible.
Sixty percent of the apples from the barrel have been tasty.
Therefore, 60 percent of all the apples in the barrel are tasty.
Half of the people you’ve met at the convention are Lutherans, so
probably half of all the people at the convention are Lutherans.
Thus, enumerative induction has the following form:
X percent of the observed members of group A have property P.
Therefore, X percent of all the members of group A have property P.
Some technical terms will help here. The group under study—the
entire class of individuals we’re interested in—is known as the target
group. The observed members of the target group are the sample, and
the characteristic we’re studying is the relevant property. In enumerative
induction, then, we draw a conclusion about the relevant property (or
properties) in the target group from observations of the relevant prop-
erty in the sample. In the example about apples, the target group is the
apples in the barrel, the sample is the observed apples, and the rele-
vant property is tastiness.
As with any kind of induction, an enumerative inductive argu-
ment is good only if it is strong and its premises are true. To be strong,
it must score well on two counts: (1) sample size and (2) sample rep-
resentativeness. Consider this example:
Three of the four students Julio encountered in the quad were Democrats.
Therefore, three-fourths of the students at this college are probably Democrats.
This argument is, of course, weak. We cannot draw a reliable con-
clusion about the political afﬁliation of all the students at the college
(which we may assume has hundreds or thousands of students) based
solely on a fact about four of them. With a sample of four students,
we may reasonably conclude that some students at the college are 
Democrats, but that’s as far as we can go.
Using an inadequate sample size to draw a conclusion about a tar-
get group is a common mistake, a fallacy called hasty generalization (dis-
cussed later in the chapter). You would commit this error if you
claimed that Chevrolets are rotten cars because you used to own one
that was a lemon, or if you decided that all biology majors are boring
because the last three you met were, or if you concluded that members
INDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS
43

of a race different from your own were dishonest because you saw two
of them cheat on a test.
But how large a sample is large enough? Generally, the larger the
sample, the more reliably it signiﬁes the nature of the target group.
But sometimes even small samples can be telling. One guiding princi-
ple is that the more homogeneous a target group is in characteristics
relevant to the property being studied, the smaller the sample needs
to be. We would require, for example, a very small sample of mallard
ducks to determine whether they all have bills, because the physical
properties of mallard ducks vary little throughout the species. But if
we want to know the buying habits of Canadians, we would need to
survey a much larger sample—hundreds or thousands of Canadians.
People differ dramatically in their social or psychological properties,
so surveying a handful of them to generalize about thousands or mil-
lions is usually pointless.
Samples must not only be the right size, but also representative—
that is, they must be like the target group in all the relevant ways. A
sample that is not properly representative of the target group is
known as a biased sample. Biased samples make weak arguments. To 
reliably generalize about the paranormal beliefs of New Yorkers, we
should not have our sample consist entirely of members of the local
occult club. The members’ views on the paranormal are not likely to
be representative of those of New Yorkers generally. To draw a trust-
worthy conclusion about water pollution in Lake X, we should not
draw all the water samples from the part of the lake polluted by the
factory. That area is not representative of the lake as a whole.
A sample is properly representative of the target group if it pos-
sesses the same relevant characteristics in the same proportions 
exhibited by the target group. A characteristic is relevant if it can 
affect the relevant property. Suppose you want to conduct a survey to
ﬁnd out whether adult Hispanics believe in ghosts. Characteristics that
might affect adult Hispanics’ belief in ghosts include religion, income,
occupation, and education level. These relevant characteristics there-
fore should be included in your sample, and they should be present in
the same proportions found in the target group, adult Hispanics. This
means, for example, that if 60 percent of Hispanics are college grad-
uates, then your sample should reﬂect that—60 percent of the sample
should be college graduates.
As you may have guessed, enumerative inductions are the basis
for opinion polls, those ubiquitous surveys that describe public atti-
tudes about elections, political issues, moral debates, and consumer
preferences. Like any enumerative induction, opinion polls reckon from
samples to general conclusions about target groups. To be credible,
44
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD

they must use properly sized samples representative of the target
group in all relevant respects. Good opinion polls must also be well
conducted so they generate accurate data—numbers that truthfully
describe what they claim to describe. They can fail to generate accu-
rate data because of mathematical errors, poorly phrased questions,
faulty survey design, sampling errors, and other problems. All of
which means that an opinion poll can work from a properly sized,
representative sample and still be a weak inductive argument.
National polling organizations have perfected techniques for
generating representative samples of large target groups—all Ameri-
can adults, for example. Because of modern sampling procedures,
these samples can contain fewer than 2,000 individuals (representing
about 200 million people). Such small representative samples are pos-
sible through random sampling. This technique is based on the fact that
the best way to devise a genuinely representative sample is to select
the sample from the target group randomly. Random selection is 
assured if every member of the target group has an equal chance of
being chosen for the sample. Selecting sample members nonrandomly
produces a biased sample.
We are frequently exposed to polls created through nonrandom
sampling. Many are nonrandom because they use self-selecting samples.
Suppose a Web site or TV show asks people to respond to a simple
question—for example, “Do you believe that concealed weapons
should be banned from college campuses?” In this case, pollsters would
not randomly select the respondents; respondents would nonrandomly
select themselves for all sorts of irrelevant reasons. The sample would
be biased in favor of, say, people who have political views encouraged
by the Web site or program, who like expressing their opinions on par-
ticular issues (or any issue), or who just happen to be online or watch-
ing TV when the question is posed. These organizations will often
admit that their self-selecting surveys are unreliable, declaring (some-
times in small print) that the polls are “unscientiﬁc.”
Even the best of opinion polls cannot guarantee 100 percent reli-
ability—that their random, properly sized sample will precisely reﬂect
the views of the larger target group. No matter how careful pollsters
are, their sampling can only approach the values they would get if
they surveyed every member of the target group. This discrepancy
between the poll results and the ideal results is known as the margin of
error. An honest poll is explicit about its margin of error—stating, for
example, that the proportion of adult Americans who favor gun con-
trol is 77 percent, plus or minus 4 points (typically expressed as 
77 percent  4). This translates as “the percentage of adult Americans
who favor gun control is between 73 and 81 percent.” Because of the
INDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS
45

margin of error, small differences between two poll numbers (for ex-
ample, percentages of people who intend to vote for a particular pres-
idential candidate) mean little. So if the margin of error is  3 points,
there is no notable difference between candidate A with 43 percent of
the vote and candidate B with 45 percent—though political com-
mentators may want us to believe that candidate B is winning.
Opinion polls can be unreliable and misleading because of how
the polling questions are phrased, who asks them, or how they are
asked. Question phrasing is especially important. Think how easy it
would be to get a large percentage of people in a sample to answer no
to a question like “Are you in favor of negating the constitutional right
of citizens to bear arms by passing gun-control laws?” Or “Are you in
favor of destroying innocent human life by funding stem-cell re-
search?” Such questions are not designed to objectively gauge opinions
on an issue—they’re meant to prod the respondent to give a particular
answer. Good pollsters try to use more neutral wording that will accu-
rately and fairly measure attitudes. Pollsters bent on advocacy will ask
their questions accordingly. Sometimes pollsters create biased ques-
tions accidentally, but probably more often the slanting is deliberate.
Analogical Induction
When we show how one thing is similar to another, we draw an anal-
ogy between them. When we claim that two things that are similar in
some respects are similar in some further respect, we make an analog-
ical induction. For example, before the various missions to Mars,
NASA scientists may have argued as follows: The Earth has air, water,
and life. Mars is like the Earth in that it has air and water. Therefore,
it’s probable that Mars has life. The form of such analogical inductions
can be represented as follows:
Object A has properties F, G, H, etc., as well as the property Z.
Object B has properties F, G, H, etc.
Therefore, object B probably has property Z.
Like all inductive arguments, analogical inductions can only 
establish their conclusions with a certain degree of probability. The
more similarities between the two objects, the more probable the con-
clusion. The fewer similarities, the less probable the conclusion.
The dissimilarities between the Earth and Mars are signiﬁcant.
The Martian atmosphere is very thin and contains very little oxygen,
and the water on Mars is trapped in ice caps at the poles. So the prob-
ability of ﬁnding life on Mars is not very high. Mars was more like the
Earth in the past, however. So the probability of ﬁnding evidence of
past life on Mars is greater.
46
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD

Scientists are not the only ones who make analogical inductions.
This kind of reasoning is used in many other ﬁelds, including med-
ical research and law. Whenever medical researchers test a new drug
on laboratory animals, they are making an analogical induction. 
Essentially they are arguing that if this drug has a certain effect on
the animals, then it’s probable that the drug will have the same sort
of effect on human beings. The strength of such arguments depends
on the biological similarities between the animals and humans. Rats,
rabbits, and guinea pigs are often used in these kinds of experiments.
Although they are all mammals, their biology is by no means identi-
cal to ours. So we cannot be certain that any particular drug will 
affect us in the same way that it affects them.
The American legal system is based on precedents. A precedent
is a case that has already been decided. Lawyers often try to convince
judges of the merits of their case by citing precedents. They argue
that the case before the court is similar to one that has been decided
in the past, and since the court decided one way in that case, it
should decide the same way in this case. The opposing attorney will
try to undermine that reasoning by highlighting the differences 
between the case cited and the current case. Who wins such court
cases is often determined by the strength of the analogical argu-
ments presented.
Hypothetical Induction 
(Abduction, or Inference to the Best Explanation)
We attempt to understand the world by constructing explanations of
it. Not all explanations are equally good, however. So even though we
may have arrived at an explanation of something, it doesn’t mean that
we’re justiﬁed in believing it. If other explanations are better, then
we’re not justiﬁed in believing it.
Inference to the best explanation has the following form:
Phenomena p.
Hypothesis h explains p.
No other hypothesis explains p as well as h.
Therefore, it’s probable that h is true.
The great American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce was the
ﬁrst to codify this kind of inference, and he dubbed it abduction to dis-
tinguish it from other forms of induction.
Inference to the best explanation may be the most widely used
form of inference. Doctors, auto mechanics, and detectives—as well
as the rest of us—use it almost daily. Anyone who tries to ﬁgure out
why something happened uses inference to the best explanation.
INDUCTIVE ARGUMENTS
47
Logic is the art of
convincing us of
some truth.
—JEAN DE LA
BRUYÈRE
Science when well
digested is nothing
more than good
sense and reason.
—STANISLAS I OF
POLAND

Sherlock Holmes was a master of inference to the best explanation.
Here’s Holmes at work in A Study in Scarlet:
I knew you came from Afghanistan. From long habit the train of
thoughts ran so swiftly through my mind that I arrived at the con-
clusion without being conscious of intermediate steps. There were
such steps, however. The train of reasoning ran, “Here is a gentle-
man of a medical type, but with the air of a military man. Clearly
an army doctor, then. He has just come from the tropics, for his
face is dark, and that is not the natural tint of his skin, for his wrists
are fair. He has undergone hardship and sickness, as his haggard
face says clearly. His left arm has been injured. He holds it in a stiff
and unnatural manner. Where in the tropics would an English army
doctor have seen much hardship and got his arm wounded? Clearly
in Afghanistan.” The whole train of thought did not occupy a sec-
ond. I then remarked that you came from Afghanistan, and you
were astonished.1
Although this passage appears in a chapter entitled “The Science
of Deduction,” Holmes is not using deduction here because the truth
of the premises does not guarantee the truth of the conclusion. From
the fact that Watson has a deep tan and a wounded arm, it doesn’t
necessarily follow that he has been in Afghanistan. He could have
been in California and cut himself surﬁng. Properly speaking, Holmes
is using abduction, or inference to the best explanation, because he 
arrives at his conclusion by citing a number of facts and coming up
with the hypothesis that best explains them.
Often what makes inference to the best explanation difficult is
not that no explanation can be found, but that too many explana-
tions can be found. The trick is to identify which among all the
possible explanations is the best. The goodness of an explanation is
determined by the amount of understanding it produces, and the
amount of understanding produced by an explanation is deter-
mined by how well it systematizes and unifies our knowledge. We
begin to understand something when we see it as part of a pattern,
and the more that pattern encompasses, the more understanding it
produces. The extent to which a hypothesis systematizes and uni-
fies our knowledge can be measured by various criteria of adequacy,
such as simplicity, the number of assumptions made by a hypothe-
sis; scope, the amount of diverse phenomena explained by the 
hypothesis; conservatism, how well the hypothesis fits with what
we already know; and fruitfulness, the ability of a hypothesis to
successfully predict novel phenomena. In Chapter 6 we will see
how these criteria are used to distinguish reasonable explanations
from unreasonable ones.
48
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD

INFORMAL FALLACIES
A fallacious argument is a bogus one, for it fails to do what it purports
to do, namely, provide a good reason for accepting a claim. Unfortu-
nately, logically fallacious arguments can be psychologically com-
pelling. Since most people have never learned the difference between a
good argument and a fallacious one, they are often persuaded to believe
things for no good reason. To avoid holding irrational beliefs, then, it is
important to understand the many ways in which an argument can fail.
An argument is fallacious if it contains (1) unacceptable premises,
(2) irrelevant premises, or (3) insufﬁcient premises.2 Premises are
unacceptable if they are at least as dubious as the claim they are sup-
posed to support. In a good argument, you see, the premises provide
a ﬁrm basis for accepting the conclusion. If the premises are shaky, the
argument is inconclusive. Premises are irrelevant if they have no bear-
ing on the truth of the conclusion. In a good argument, the conclu-
sion follows from the premises. If the premises are logically unrelated
to the conclusion, they provide no reason to accept it. Premises are
insufﬁcient if they do not establish the conclusion beyond a reasonable
doubt. In a good argument, the premises eliminate reasonable grounds
for doubt. If they fail to do this, they don’t justify the conclusion.
So when someone gives you an argument, you should ask your-
self: Are the premises acceptable? Are they relevant? Are they sufﬁ-
cient? If the answer to any of these questions is no, then the argument
is not logically compelling.
Unacceptable Premises
Begging the Question
An argument begs the question—or argues in a
circle—when its conclusion is used as one of its premises. For example,
some people claim that one should believe that God exists because the
Bible says so. But when asked why we should believe the Bible, they
answer that we should believe it because God wrote it. Such people are
begging the question, for they are assuming what they are trying to
prove, namely that God exists. Here’s another example: “Jane has
telepathy,” says Susan. “How do you know?” asks Ami. “Because she can
read my mind,” replies Susan. Since telepathy is, by deﬁnition, the abil-
ity to read someone’s mind, all Susan has told us is that she believes
that Jane can read her mind because she believes that Jane can read her
mind. Her reason merely reiterates her claim in different words. Con-
sequently, her reason provides no additional justiﬁcation for her claim.
False Dilemma
An argument proposes a false dilemma when it pre-
sumes that only two alternatives exist when in actuality there are more
INFORMAL FALLACIES
49
We can easily forgive
a child who is afraid
of the dark; the real
tragedy of life is
when men are afraid
of the light.
—PLATO

than two. For example: “Either science can explain how she was cured
or it was a miracle. Science can’t explain how she was cured. So it must
be a miracle.” These two alternatives do not exhaust all the possibili-
ties. It’s possible, for example, that she was cured by some natural cause
that scientists don’t yet understand. Because the argument doesn’t take
this possibility into account, it’s fallacious. Again: “Either have your
horoscope charted by an astrologer or continue to stumble through
life without knowing where you’re going. You certainly don’t want to
continue your wayward ways. So you should have your horoscope
charted by an astrologer.” If someone is concerned about the direction
his or her life is taking, there are other things he or she can do about
it than consult an astrologer. Since there are other options, the argu-
ment is fallacious.
Irrelevant Premises
Equivocation
Equivocation occurs when a word is used in two differ-
ent senses in an argument. For example, consider this argument: “(i)
Only man is rational. (ii) No woman is a man. (iii) Therefore no
woman is rational.” The word man is used in two different senses here:
In the ﬁrst premise it means human being while in the second it means
male. As a result, the conclusion doesn’t follow from the premises.
Here’s another example: “It’s the duty of the press to publish news
that’s in the public interest. There is great public interest in UFOs.
Therefore the press fails in its duty if it does not publish articles on
UFOs.” In the ﬁrst premise, the phrase the public interest means the pub-
lic welfare, but in the second, it means what the public is interested
in. The switch in meaning invalidates the argument.
Composition
An argument may claim that what is true of the parts is
also true of the whole; this is the fallacy of composition. For example,
consider this argument: “Subatomic particles are lifeless. Therefore
anything made out of them is lifeless.” This argument is fallacious 
because a whole may be greater than the sum of its parts; that is, it
may have properties not possessed by its parts. A property had by a
whole but not by its parts is called an emergent property. Wetness, for
example, is an emergent property. No individual water molecule is
wet, but get enough of them together and wetness emerges.
Just as what’s true of a part may not be true of the whole, what’s
true of a member of a group may not be true of the group itself. For
example: “Belief in the supernatural makes Joe happy. Therefore, uni-
versal belief in the supernatural would make the nation happy.” This
argument doesn’t follow because everybody’s believing in the super-
natural could have effects quite different from one person’s believing
50
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD
The cure for a falla-
cious argument is a
better argument, not
the suppression of
ideas.
—CARL SAGAN AND
ANN DRUYAN

in it. Not all arguments from part to whole are fallacious, for there are
some properties that parts and wholes share. The fallacy lies in
assuming that what’s true of the parts is true of the whole.
Division
The fallacy of division is the converse of the fallacy of com-
position. It occurs when one assumes that what is true of a whole is also
true of its parts. For example: “We are alive and we are made out of sub-
atomic particles. So they must be alive too.” To argue in this way is to
ignore the very real difference between parts and wholes. Here’s 
another example: “Society’s interest in the occult is growing. Therefore
Joe’s interest in the occult is growing.” Since groups can have proper-
ties that their members do not have, such an argument is fallacious.
Appeal to the Person
When someone tries to rebut an argument by
criticizing or denigrating its presenter rather than by dealing with the
argument itself, that person is guilty of the fallacy of appeal to the per-
son. This fallacy is referred to as ad hominem, or “to the man.” For 
example: “This theory has been proposed by a believer in the occult.
Why should we take it seriously?” Or: “You can’t believe Dr. Jones’
claim that there is no evidence for life after death. After all, he’s an
atheist.” The ﬂaw in these arguments is obvious: An argument stands
or falls on its own merits; who proposes it is irrelevant to its sound-
ness. Crazy people can come up with perfectly sound arguments, and
sane people can talk nonsense.
Genetic Fallacy
To argue that a claim is true or false on the basis of
its origin is to commit the genetic fallacy. For example: “Juan’s idea is
the result of a mystical experience, so it must be false (or true).” Or:
“Jane got that message from a Ouija board, so it must be false (or
true).” These arguments are fallacious because the origin of a claim is
irrelevant to its truth or falsity. Some of our greatest advances have
originated in unusual ways. For example, the chemist August Kekulé
discovered the benzene ring while staring at a ﬁre and seeing the
image of a serpent biting its tail. The theory of evolution came to
British naturalist Alfred Russell Wallace while in a delirium. Archimedes
supposedly arrived at the principle of displacement while taking a
bath, from which he leapt shouting, “Eureka!” The truth or falsity of
an idea is determined not by where it came from, but by the evidence
supporting it.
Appeal to Authority
We often try to support our views by citing ex-
perts. This sort of appeal to authority is perfectly legitimate—provided
that the person cited really is an expert in the ﬁeld in question. If not,
INFORMAL FALLACIES
51

it is fallacious. Celebrity endorsements, for example, often involve fal-
lacious appeals to authority, because being famous doesn’t necessarily
give you any special expertise. The fact that Dionne Warwick is a
great singer, for example, doesn’t make her an expert on the efﬁcacy
of psychic hotlines. Similarly, the fact that Linus Pauling is a Nobel
Prize winner doesn’t make him an expert on the efﬁcacy of vitamin C.
Pauling claimed that taking massive doses of vitamin C would help
prevent colds and increase the life expectancy of people suffering
from cancer. That may be the case, but the fact that he said it doesn’t
justify our believing it. Only rigorous clinical studies conﬁrming these
claims can do that.
Appeal to the Masses
A remarkably common but fallacious form of
reasoning is, “It must be true (or good) because everybody believes
it (or does it).” Mothers understand that this argument is a fallacy;
they often counter it by asking, “If everyone else jumped off a cliff,
would you do it, too?” Of course you wouldn’t. What this response
shows is that just because a lot of people believe something or like
something doesn’t mean that it’s true or good. A lot of people used
to believe that the Earth was ﬂat, but that certainly didn’t make it so.
Similarly, a lot of people used to believe that women should not have
the right to vote. Popularity is not a reliable indication of either
reality or value.
Appeal to Tradition
We appeal to tradition when we argue that some-
thing must be true (or good) because it is part of an established tradi-
tion. For example: “Astrology has been around for ages, so there must
be something to it.” Or: “Mothers have always used chicken soup to
ﬁght colds, so it must be good for you.” These arguments are falla-
cious because traditions can be wrong. This error becomes obvious
when you consider that slavery was once an established tradition. The
fact that people have always done or believed something is no reason
for thinking that we should continue to do or believe something.
Appeal to Ignorance
The appeal to ignorance comes in two varieties:
Using an opponent’s inability to disprove a conclusion as proof of the
conclusion’s correctness, and using an opponent’s inability to prove a
conclusion as proof of its incorrectness. In the ﬁrst case, the claim is
that since there is no proof that something is true, it must be false. For
example: “There is no proof that the parapsychology experiments
were fraudulent, so I’m sure they weren’t.” In the second case, the
claim is that since there is no proof that something is false, it must be
52
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD
In questions of sci-
ence, the authority of
a thousand is not
worth the humble
reasoning of a single
individual.
—GALILEO GALILEI

true. For example: “Bigfoot must exist because no one has been able to
prove that he doesn’t.” The problem with these arguments is that they
take a lack of evidence for one thing to be good evidence for another.
A lack of evidence, however, proves nothing. In logic, as in life, you
can’t get something for nothing.
Appeal to Fear
To use the threat of harm to advance one’s position
is to commit the fallacy of the appeal to fear. It is also known as
swinging the big stick. For example: “If you do not convict this crim-
inal, one of you may be her next victim.” This argument is fallacious
because what a defendant might do in the future is irrelevant to 
determining whether she is responsible for a crime committed in the
past. Or: “You should believe in God because if you don’t you’ll go to
hell.” Such an argument is fallacious because it gives us no reason for
believing that God exists. Threats extort; they do not help us arrive
at the truth.
Straw Man
You indulge in the straw man fallacy when you misrep-
resent someone’s claim to make it easier to dismiss or reject. Instead of
addressing the actual claim presented, you concoct a weak one to 
assault—a fake, or straw, man that can be easily struck down. Suppose
Senator Brown asserts that she favors strong gun control measures,
and against her view you argue this way: “Senator Brown says she
wants to outlaw guns, an extreme position that ﬂies in the face of the
Second Amendment right to bear arms. But we should absolutely 
oppose any move to gut the Constitution.” Your argument, however,
would distort the senator’s view. She says she wants the possession of
ﬁrearms to be controlled, not outlawed altogether. You could, of
course, use the straw man fallacy just as easily on the other side of this
issue, arguing that someone opposed to strict gun control wants to put
guns in the hands of every citizen. Another distortion. Either way,
your argument would be fallacious—and irrelevant to the real issue.
Insufﬁcient Premises
Hasty Generalization
You are guilty of hasty generalization, or jump-
ing to conclusions, when you draw a general conclusion about all things
of a certain type on the basis of evidence concerning only a few things
of that type. For example: “Every medium that’s been investigated has
turned out to be a fraud. You can’t trust any of them.” Or: “I know one
of those psychics. They’re all a bunch of phonies.” You can’t make a
valid generalization about an entire class of things from observing only
one—or even a number of them. An inference from a sample of a group
INFORMAL FALLACIES
53

to the whole group is legitimate only if the sample is representative—
that is, only if the sample is sufﬁciently large and every member of the
group has an equal chance to be part of the sample.
Faulty Analogy
An argument from analogy claims that things that 
resemble one another in certain respects resemble one another in fur-
ther respects. Recall our previous example: “The Earth has air, water,
and living organisms. Mars has air and water. Therefore Mars has liv-
ing organisms.” The success of such arguments depends on the nature
and extent of the similarities between the two objects. The greater
their dissimilarities, the less convincing the argument will be. For 
example, consider this argument: “Astronauts wear helmets and ﬂy in
spaceships. The ﬁgure in this Mayan carving seems to be wearing a
helmet and ﬂying in a spaceship. Therefore it is a carving of an 
ancient astronaut.” Although features of the carving may bear a resem-
blance to a helmet and spaceship, they may bear a greater resemblance
to a ceremonial mask and ﬁre. The problem is that any two things have
some features in common. Consequently an argument from analogy
can be successful only if the dissimilarities between the things being
compared are insigniﬁcant.
False Cause
The fallacy of false cause consists of supposing that
two events are causally connected when they are not. People often
claim, for example, that because something occurred after some-
thing else it was caused by it. Latin scholars dubbed this argument
the fallacy of post hoc, ergo propter hoc, which means “After this, there-
fore because of this.” Such reasoning is fallacious, because from the
fact that two events are constantly conjoined, it doesn’t follow that
they are causally related. Night follows day, but that doesn’t mean
that day causes night. Suppose that ever since you wore crystals
around your neck you haven’t caught a cold. From this action you
can’t conclude that the crystals caused you to stay healthy, because
any number of other factors could be involved. Only if it has been
established beyond a reasonable doubt that other factors were 
not involved—through a controlled study, for example—can you
justifiably claim that there is a causal connection between the two
events.
Slippery Slope
Sometimes people argue that performing a speciﬁc 
action will inexorably lead to an additional bad action (or actions),
so you should not perform that ﬁrst action. An initial wrong step
starts an inevitable slide toward an unpleasant result that could have
been avoided if only the ﬁrst step had never been taken. This way of
54
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD

arguing is legitimate if there is good reason to believe that the chain
of actions must happen as alleged. If not, it is an example of the fal-
lacy of slippery slope. For example: “Teaching evolution in schools
leads to loss of faith in God, and loss of faith leads to the weakening
of moral values, which causes increases in crime and social disorder.
Therefore, evolution should not be taught in schools.” This argument
is fallacious because there are no good reasons to believe that the se-
quence of calamities would happen as described. If there were good
reasons, then the argument—though molded in the slippery-slope
pattern—would not be fallacious.
STATISTICAL FALLACIES
Statistical fallacies are misleading statements or arguments expressed
with numbers. Statistics can present us with good evidence for a claim
or be part of a plausible chain of reasoning. But they are frequently
used to deceive us, to get us to accept a conclusion that we should 
reject or question. Here are a few examples:
Misleading Averages
In statistics, there are three kinds of averages—mean, median, and
mode. A mean is what most people refer to as an average. The mean of
the ﬁve numbers 2, 3, 5, 8, and 12 is 6 (2  3  5  8  12  30 
divided by 5  6). The median is the middle value in a sequence of
numbers (the median of our ﬁve numbers is 5). The mode is the most
frequently appearing value in a series.
Trouble comes when people don’t specify which kind of average
they are using, or they employ the kind that will make their weak
case look strong. Imagine that the president promises a huge tax cut
for the whole country, amounting to a mean tax savings of $10,000.
But the mean has been driven upward by a few very rich people
whose tax savings will be $1,000,000 or more. Ninety-ﬁve percent of
taxpayers (who make less than $20,000 a year) will see a tax savings
of less than $400. The president’s boast of a mean tax savings of
$10,000 is technically accurate—but deceiving. More truth can be
told to the taxpayers by the median, which is $300, or even the mode
of $250.
Missing Values
Much mischief can occur when people fail to distinguish between rel-
ative and absolute statistical values. Suppose you read that in the last
year there has been a 75 percent increase in the number of muggings
in your town. This sounds serious. But the 75 percent is the relative
STATISTICAL FALLACIES
55

increase over the number of muggings last year. What you need to
know to make sense of this statistic is the absolute number that the per-
centage is based on. Were there 400 muggings last year—or just 4? If
400, the increase brings us to a shocking 700 incidents. If 4, we are
now facing only 7 muggings per year.
Sorting out relative and absolute numbers is critical in statistics
on disease risk. Suppose researchers report that daily coffee con-
sumption doubles the risk of pancreatitis in men 25 to 45 years old.
Should men in this age group worry about this? Should they stop drink-
ing coffee? You can’t tell until you know the absolute risk involved. Let’s
say the absolute risk of pancreatitis for these men is extremely low—
1 chance in 100,000. If daily coffee drinking doubles the risk, we get 
2 chances in 100,000—still a miniscule chance of being affected and
a very poor reason to give up coffee.
Hazy Comparisons
People use statistics legitimately to make comparisons, but they also
use them deceptively or recklessly when the comparisons are vague or
incomplete. Consider these advertising claims:
1. Super Pain Eraser reduces headaches 50 percent faster.
2. Fast-Energy Protein drinks can boost your performance by 
30 percent.
3. Get twice the mileage with Exxon Hi-Grade gasoline.
In Claim 1, we need more information. What does “50% faster”
mean? Fifty percent faster than the drug used to work? Fifty percent
faster than other pain relievers? If the comparison is with other med-
icines, which ones? The least effective one? The best-selling one? If
the assertion is 50 percent faster than the medicine used to work,
how fast is that? After taking the drug, does your headache go away
in 20 minutes or 20 hours? Claim 2 is equally vague. What does “per-
formance” refer to? Speed? Stamina? Strength? And how are such
things measured? The notion of performance is so fuzzy, and it can
be deﬁned in so many ways, that an advertiser can contrive almost
any statistic to sell the product. Claim 3 has the same problems that
Claim 1 does, with the additional concern that the claim of doubling
gas mileage is not credible.
Good reasoning requires good evidence. Even if your logic is 
impeccable, your conclusions can be mistaken if your evidence is
weak. In the next chapter, we examine the difference between good
evidence and bad evidence in an attempt to distinguish real knowl-
edge from false knowledge.
56
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD

SUMMARY
The combination of a claim (or claims) supposedly giving reasons for accept-
ing another claim is known as an argument. Arguments can be either deductive
or inductive. Deductive arguments are intended to provide conclusive support
for their conclusions. An inductive argument is intended to provide probable
support for its conclusion. A deductive argument that succeeds in providing
conclusive support is said to be valid; one that fails to do this is said to be
invalid. An inductive argument that succeeds in giving probable support to
its conclusion is said to be strong; one that fails in this is said to be weak. A
valid argument with true premises is sound; a strong argument with true
premises is cogent.
There are several common deductive argument forms. Some are valid:
modus ponens, modus tollens, hypothetical syllogism, and disjunctive syllogism.
Some are invalid: denying the antecedent and afﬁrming the consequent.
Being familiar with these forms can help you quickly determine the validity
of an argument. The counterexample method can also help.
Some common inductive argument forms are enumerative induction,
analogical induction, and hypothetical induction (inference to the best 
explanation). Enumerative induction is the kind of reasoning we use when
we arrive at a generalization about a group of things after observing only
some of them. The group of things—the entire class of individuals we’re 
interested in—is known as the target group. The observed members of the
target group are the sample, and the characteristic we’re studying is the rel-
evant property. An enumerative induction is strong only if the sample is
large enough and properly representative. Using an inadequate sample size
to draw a conclusion about a target group is a common mistake, a fallacy
called hasty generalization.
A fallacious argument, or fallacy, fails to provide a good reason for 
accepting a claim. An argument is fallacious if it contains (1) unacceptable
premises, (2) irrelevant premises, or (3) insufﬁcient premises. Fallacies with
unacceptable premises: begging the question and false dilemma. Fallacies
with irrelevant premises: equivocation, composition, division, appeal to the
person, genetic fallacy, appeal to authority, appeal to the masses, appeal to
tradition, appeal to ignorance, appeal to fear, and straw man. Fallacies with
insufﬁcient premises: hasty generalization, faulty analogy, false cause, and
slippery slope.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. What is an argument?
2. What are three common conclusion indicator words? What are three
common premise indicator words?
3. What is the difference between a deductive argument and an induc-
tive argument?
4. What is a valid deductive argument? A sound deductive argument?
STUDY QUESTIONS
57

5. What is a strong inductive argument? A cogent inductive argument?
6. What is the logical form of afﬁrming the antecedent (modus ponens)?
7. What is the logical form of denying the consequent (modus tollens)?
8. What is enumerative induction?
9. What is analogical induction?
10. What is the logical form of inference to the best explanation?
11. What is the argument form known as modus ponens? modus tollens?
12. How is the counterexample method used to check for validity?
13. In enumerative induction, what is the target group? the sample? the
relevant property?
14. Why is a self-selecting sample a biased sample?
15. What is the fallacy of false dilemma? appeal to ignorance? straw man?
EVALUATE THESE CLAIMS. ARE THEY REASONABLE? 
WHY OR WHY NOT?
1. Objects were moving in the house. Either someone was moving them
by psychokinesis or it was ghosts. It wasn’t psychokinesis. So it must
have been ghosts.
2. A psychic healer cheated my sister. I’m never going to a psychic.
They are all con artists.
3. Jones began taking powdered rhinoceros horn and in no time was 
enjoying great sex. It must be an effective aphrodisiac.
4. Is the following argument strong? Every day that you’ve lived has been
followed by another day that you’ve been alive. Therefore, every day
you ever will live will be followed by another day that you will be alive.
5. Is the following argument strong? Every day that you’ve lived has
been a day before tomorrow. Therefore, every day you ever will live
will be a day before tomorrow.
6. Is the following argument valid? If the alien spaceship landed, there
should be a large circular depression in the ﬁeld. There is a large cir-
cular depression in the ﬁeld. So the alien spaceship must have landed.
7. Is the following argument valid? If God created the universe, we
should live in the best of all possible worlds. But we do not live in the
best of all possible worlds. So God must not have created the universe.
8. Is the following conclusion a cogent inference to the best explana-
tion? All over the country have been found mutilated cows whose
body parts were removed by means of smooth cauterized incisions.
Aliens must be using the cows for some sort of experiments.
9. Is the following conclusion a cogent inference to the best explana-
tion? Cases of spontaneous human combustion have been reported
from around the world. People burst into ﬂame, and most of their
body and clothing is reduced to ash, but often a limb or appendage is
not burned, and the ﬁre does not affect objects near the victim. No
natural ﬁre could burn in such a way, so it must be a form of divine
punishment.
58
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD

10. Is the following conclusion a cogent analogical argument? The an-
cient Greek philosopher Plato described the lost continent of Atlantis
in two of his dialogues: Timaeus and Critias. The Atlanteans were very
advanced, both horticulturally and mechanically, and their civilization
was destroyed when Atlantis sank under the ocean. Plato must have
been talking about the Minoan island of Thera because the civiliza-
tion of Thera was very advanced, and a volcanic explosion destroyed
the civilization very quickly.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Read the following passage and answer these questions: (1) Does the
passage contain an argument? (2) If so, is the argument deductive or
inductive? (3) If it is deductive, does it have a familiar logical form? If
yes, what form? (4) If it is an argument, is it a good one?
Is there archaeological evidence for the [Biblical] Flood? If a universal
Flood occurred between ﬁve and six thousand years ago, killing all hu-
mans except the eight on board the Ark, it would be abundantly clear
in the archaeological record. Human history would be marked by an
absolute break. We would see the devastation wrought by the catas-
trophe in terms of the destroyed physical remains of pre-Flood human
settlements. . . . Unfortunately for the Flood enthusiasts, the destruc-
tion of all but eight of the world’s people left no mark on the archae-
ology of human cultural evolution.
—KENNETH L. FEDER, Frauds, Myths, and Mysteries
2. In the following argument, each statement is numbered. Read the 
argument and indicate the role that each statement plays—for 
example, premise, conclusion, question, example or illustration, back-
ground information, or reiteration of a premise or the conclusion.
[1] Is global warming a real threat? [2] Or is it hype propagated by
tree-hugging, daft environmentalists? [3] President George W. Bush
apparently thinks that the idea of global climate change is bunk. [4]
But recently his own administration gave the lie to his bunk theory. [5]
His own administration issued a report on global warming called the
U.S. Climate Action Report 2002. [6] It gave no support to the idea that
global warming doesn’t happen and we should all go back to sleep. [7]
Instead, it asserted that global warming was deﬁnitely real and that it
could have catastrophic consequences if ignored. [8] For example,
global climate change could cause heat waves, extreme weather, and
water shortages right here in the United States. [9] The report is also
backed by many other reports, including a very inﬂuential one from
the United Nations. [10] Yes, George, global warming is real. [11] It
is as real as typhoons and ice storms.
3. Consider the following two analogical arguments. Which one is
stronger? Why? (1) The universe is like a watch with its purposeful
arrangement of parts and curious adaptation of means to ends. Every
watch has a designer. So the universe must have a designer. (2) The
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
59

universe is like a living thing because there is a constant circulation of
matter and each part operates to preserve itself as well as the whole.
Living things originate through natural reproduction. So the universe
must have arisen through natural reproduction.
FIELD PROBLEM
From the “letters to the editor” section of your college newspaper or literary
magazine, select a letter that contains at least one argument. Locate the con-
clusion and each premise. Next go through the letters again to ﬁnd one that
contains no argument at all. Rewrite the letter so that it contains at least one
argument. Try to preserve as much of the original letter as possible. Stay on
the same topic.
CRITICAL READING AND WRITING
I. Read the passage below and answer the following questions:
1. What is the claim (conclusion) being argued for in this passage?
2. What premise or premises are used to support the conclusion?
3. Is the argument inductive or deductive?
4. Assuming that the premise or premises are true, is the argument a
good one?
5. Do you believe that reverse speech exists? Why or why not?
II. In a 200-word paper, answer this question: What evidence would per-
suade you to accept the proposition that reverse speech is a real phe-
nomenon and that it can be useful as a lie detector in courts of law?
Explain in detail why the evidence would justify your acceptance of
the proposition.
Passage 2
In the past several years, a researcher named David Oates has been advo-
cating his discovery of a most interesting phenomenon. Oates claims that
backward messages are hidden unintentionally in all human speech. The
messages can be understood by recording normal speech and playing it in
reverse. This phenomena, reverse speech, has been discussed by Oates in a
number of books (Oates 1996), magazines, newspapers, and radio programs,
and even on television with Larry King and Geraldo Rivera. His company,
Reverse Speech Enterprises, is dedicated to proﬁting from his discovery. . . .
We argue that there is no scientiﬁc evidence for the phenomena of 
reverse speech; and that the use of reverse speech as lie detection in courts
of law or any other forum, as advocated by Oates, is entirely invalid and 
unjust. . . .
The burden of proof for any phenomenon lies upon the shoulders of those
claiming its existence. To our knowledge there is not one empirical 
investigation of reverse speech in any peer-reviewed journal. If reverse speech
did exist it would be, at the very least, a noteworthy scientiﬁc discovery.
60
THREE: ARGUMENTS GOOD, BAD, AND WEIRD

However, there are no data to support the existence of reverse speech or
Oates’s theories about its implications. Although descriptions of “research pa-
pers” are available on the Reverse Speech Web site, there is no good indica-
tion that Oates has conducted any scholarly or empirical investigation. (Tom
Byrne and Matthew Normand, “The Demon-Haunted Sentence: A Skeptical
Analysis of Reverse Speech,” Skeptical Inquirer, March/April 2000.)
NOTES
1. Arthur Conan Doyle, A Study in Scarlet (New York: P. F. Collier and
Son, 1906), pp. 29–30.
2. Ludwig F. Schlecht, “Classifying Fallacies Logically,” Teaching Philos-
ophy 14, no. 1 (1991): 53–64.
NOTES
61

62
I
T IS WRITTEN in the Scriptures, proclaimed by Francis
Bacon, and enshrined in common sense: Knowledge is
power.1 Those in the know are more likely to get their way
than those who aren’t, because their views are based on 
reality—not on fantasy, illusion, or wishful thinking. Their
projects have a greater chance of success, because their
knowledge gives them the ability to foresee obstacles and
devise ways of overcoming those obstacles. Prediction and
control are keys to survival, and knowledge makes predic-
tion and control possible.
But knowledge is valuable not only for what we can do
with it; it is also valuable for its own sake. We all would like
to know why things are as they are. Our desire for this
knowledge, however, is not motivated by purely practical 
There exists a pas-
sion for comprehen-
sion as much as a
passion for music.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN
FOUR
Knowledge, Belief,
and Evidence

considerations. We often seek such understanding simply for the sake
of understanding—because understanding, like virtue, is its own
reward. Solving a mystery, discovering the truth, and acquiring
insight are among the most exhilarating experiences we can have.
Since knowledge is needed to help us attain our goals and to
make sense of the world, it’s in our best interest to be clear about what
knowledge is and how to acquire it.
BABYLONIAN KNOWLEDGE-ACQUISITION TECHNIQUES
Our thirst for knowledge, especially of the future, has inspired many
strange techniques for acquiring it. Among the earliest and most elab-
orate are those of the Babylonians, the inventors of astrology. But
astrology was not the Babylonians’ ﬁrst or even preferred method of
prophecy. Those distinctions belong to hepatoscopy—divination
through inspection of the liver.2 Having realized that blood is essen-
tial to life, the Babylonians apparently concluded that the organ rich-
est in blood—the liver—is where the life force is located. By offering
this valuable organ (usually taken from sheep) in sacriﬁce, they pre-
sumably believed that the gods would reward their generosity by
revealing the future. Why they thought the gods would choose this
particular means of showing their gratitude is unclear. Nevertheless,
the Babylonians were convinced that every feature of a sacriﬁced
liver—its shape, its blood vessels, its lobes, and so on—disclosed
something about the future. All manner of problems, from agricultural
to military, were settled by consulting this organ.
In Mesopotamia, hepatoscopy was considered to be such an
effective knowledge-acquisition technique that only kings and nobles
were allowed to use it. The inspection of a sheep’s liver by a seer was
considered a solemn act of state.3 The seer’s interpretation of a liver,
however, was not a purely subjective matter. Particular features of the
liver were thought to correspond to particular kinds of events. The
Babylonians systematized this knowledge in the form of stenciled clay
models of sheeps’ livers, which were used to teach aspiring hepato-
scopists their trade. Though more than 700 tablets containing
hepatoscopic prophecies have come down to us, none explains how
the correspondences between liver features and human affairs were
established.4
Hepatoscopy is no longer big business, but that other form of
divination pioneered by the Babylonians—astrology—still is. There
are more than 10,000 professional astrologers in the United States
alone. What does astrology have that hepatoscopy doesn’t? Well, for
one thing, it’s less messy. For another, dates and places of birth are
BABYLONIAN KNOWLEDGE-ACQUISITION TECHNIQUES
63
Prediction is very 
difﬁcult, especially
about the future.
—NIELS BOHR
I don’t believe in 
astrology. I’m a 
Sagittarius and we’re
skeptical.
—ARTHUR C. CLARKE

easier to come by than sheeps’ livers. Astrology differs from
hepatoscopy in another way, too. Astrology claims a causal relation-
ship between the prophetic sign (the stars and planets) and the
events to which they correspond that hepatoscopy doesn’t. In
hepatoscopy, the liver isn’t the cause of the events it foretells; it is
merely a record of them. In astrology, on the other hand, the stars and
planets supposedly help to bring about the events they portend.
The Babylonians’ view of how heavenly bodies acted upon
humans, however, is not one many would accept today. According to
the Babylonians, each of the seven “planets” that inﬂuence our lives—
the sun, the moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Saturn, and Jupiter—is the
seat of a different god, and each of these gods has a different effect on
us.5 Nowadays, astrologers are wont to explain the effects of heavenly
bodies in more scientiﬁc terms, by appeal to such forces as gravity or
electromagnetism. But neither the ancient nor the modern astrologers
explain how the purported cause-and-effect relationships between
heavenly bodies and human affairs were established. Are we to sup-
pose that the Babylonians did a statistical survey correlating personal
characteristics with star positions? If not—if it is not based on any
reliable evidence—why take it seriously? If it is just the fantasy of
some Babylonian priest (as hepatoscopy arguably is), can it really be
considered a source of knowledge? To answer these questions, we’ll
ﬁrst have to examine what knowledge involves.
PROPOSITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
We know many different types of things. We know, for example, who
raised us, which pair of shoes is our favorite, what pain feels like, how
to read, and that ducks quack. In each case, the object of our knowl-
edge (what our knowledge is about) is different. In the ﬁrst case, our
knowledge is about a person; in the second, a physical object; in the
third, an experience; in the fourth, an activity; and in the ﬁfth, a fact.
Our concern will be with the ﬁfth, for we are interested in how we
come to know the facts.
A fact, in the sense we are using it here, is a true proposition.
Thus, factual knowledge is often referred to as propositional knowledge.
One of the ﬁrst and foremost attempts to characterize propositional
knowledge can be found in the works of Plato. In his dialogue, Meno,
Socrates remarks, “It is not, I am sure, a mere guess to say that right
opinion and knowledge are different. There are few things that I
should claim to know, but that at least is among them, whatever else
is.”6 The point that Plato is trying to make here is that while hav-
ing right opinions (true beliefs) may be a necessary condition for
64
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE

knowledge, it is not sufﬁcient—there must be something more to hav-
ing knowledge than just having true beliefs.
True belief is necessary for knowledge because we can’t know
something that’s false, and if we know something, we can’t believe
that it’s false. For example, we can’t know that 2  2 equals 5 because
2  2 does not equal 5. In other words, we can’t know what isn’t so.
Similarly, if we know that 2  2 equals 4, we can’t believe that it
doesn’t. To know that something is true is to believe that it’s true.7
True belief is not sufﬁcient for knowledge because we can have
true belief and yet not have knowledge. To see this, consider the fol-
lowing situation. Suppose you believe that it’s raining in Hong Kong
right now, and suppose that it is. Does this mean that you know that
it’s raining in Hong Kong right now? Not if you have no good reason
for believing so, for, in that case, your belief is nothing more than a
lucky guess. Having knowledge, then, would seem to require having
good reasons for what you believe. Plato agrees. “True opinions,”
Socrates tells Meno, “are a ﬁne thing and do all sorts of good so long
as they stay in their place, but they will not stay long. They run away
from a man’s mind; so they are not worth much until you tether them
by working out the reason. . . . Once they are tied down, they become
knowledge.”8 For Plato, then, knowledge is true belief that is
grounded in reality. What grounds our beliefs in reality are the rea-
sons we have for them.
Not all reasons provide equally good grounds for belief, however.
Circumstantial evidence, for example, is not as good as eyewitness
testimony. So how good must our reasons be to adequately ground
our beliefs? To answer this question we’ll have to examine the eviden-
tial role of reasons.
REASONS AND EVIDENCE
Reasons confer probability on propositions. The better the reasons,
the more likely it is that the proposition they support is true. But hav-
ing reasons that make a proposition only somewhat more likely than
its denial is not enough to justify our claim to know it. Suppose a geol-
ogist discovered a rock formation indicating that it was somewhat
more likely than not that there was gold in the nearby hills. Could he
legitimately claim to know that there is gold in the hills? No, for even
if there is gold there, his claim would be little more than a guess—an
educated guess, perhaps, but a guess nonetheless. And guesses,
whether lucky or educated, don’t constitute knowledge.
Does knowledge require certainty then? To know a proposition,
must we have reasons that establish it beyond a shadow of a doubt?
REASONS AND EVIDENCE
65
The word knowledge,
strictly employed,
implies three things:
truth, proof, and 
conviction.
—RICHARD WHATELY
To doubt everything
or to believe every-
thing are two equally
convenient solutions;
both dispense with
the necessity of 
reﬂection.
—JULES HENRI
POINCARÉ

Some people think so. Suppose, for example, that you and a million
other people each purchased one lottery ticket. In such a case, your
chance of winning is one in a million, or .000001 percent. As a result,
you have a very good reason for believing that you will lose. But do
you know that you will lose? It wouldn’t seem so.
If knowledge requires certainty, however, there is little that we
know, for precious few propositions are absolutely indubitable. You
might object that you know many things for certain, such as that you
are reading a book right now. But do you? Isn’t it possible that you are
dreaming at this moment? Haven’t you, during dreams, been just as
convinced as you are right now that what you’re perceiving is real? If
so, there’s not much you can be certain of (except, as Descartes
pointed out, that you’re thinking).
There are many possibilities that, because they can’t be ruled out,
undermine our certainty. It’s possible, for example, that you’re living
in a computer-generated dream world of the sort portrayed in the
movie The Matrix. Or it’s possible that you’ve just swallowed a pill that’s
making the neurons in your brain ﬁre in exactly the same pattern that
they would have ﬁred if you were reading a book. Or it’s possible that
you’re under the control of a superbeing that is telepathically project-
ing thoughts directly into your mind. If any of these possibilities are
actual, then you’re not really reading a book right now. To demand that
a proposition be certain in order to be known, then, would severely
restrict the extent of our knowledge, perhaps to the vanishing point.
The view that we can’t know what isn’t certain is often espoused
by philosophical skeptics. According to these thinkers, most of us are
deluded about the actual extent of our knowledge. In defense of their
position, philosophical skeptics often cite examples like the lottery
case, which seem to suggest that nothing less than conclusive proof
can give us knowledge. But for each such example, there are many
that suggest otherwise. That the Earth is inhabited, that cows pro-
duce milk, that water freezes at 32 degrees Fahrenheit, and so on, are
all propositions we would ordinarily claim to know, yet none of them
is absolutely certain. In light of these counterexamples, can philo-
sophical skeptics legitimately claim to know that knowledge requires
certainty? No, for, unless they are certain that knowledge requires cer-
tainty, they can’t know that it does. (Philosophical skeptics, remem-
ber, claim that we can only know what is certain.) And they can’t be
certain that knowledge requires certainty because the counterexam-
ples just cited provide good reason for doubting that it does.
So if knowledge doesn’t require certainty, how much evidence
does it require? It doesn’t require enough to put the claim beyond any
66
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE
Great intellects are
skeptical.
—FRIEDRICH
NIETZSCHE

possibility of doubt but, rather, enough to put it beyond any reasonable
doubt. There comes a point beyond which doubt, although possible,
is no longer reasonable. It’s possible, for example, that our minds are
being controlled by aliens from outer space, but to reject the evi-
dence of our senses on that basis would not be reasonable. The mere
possibility of error is not a genuine reason to doubt. To have knowl-
edge, then, we must have adequate evidence, and our evidence is
adequate when it puts the proposition in question beyond a reason-
able doubt.
A proposition is beyond a reasonable doubt when it provides the
best explanation of something. In Chapter 6, we spell out the notion
of best explanation in some detail. For now, it’s important to realize
that a claim doesn’t have to possess any particular degree of probabil-
ity in order to be beyond a reasonable doubt. All that is required is
that it explain the evidence and account for it better than any of its
competitors.
Even though we can’t be absolutely sure that we’re not living in
the Matrix, we’re justiﬁed in believing that we’re not because the
matrix hypothesis does not provide the best explanation of our sense
experience. The hypothesis that our sensations are caused by a com-
puter that directly stimulates our brains is not as simple as the hypoth-
esis that they are caused by physical objects; it raises more questions
than it answers; and it makes no testable predictions. The acceptabil-
ity of a hypothesis is determined by the amount of understanding it
produces, and the amount of understanding produced by a hypothe-
sis is determined by how well it systematizes and uniﬁes our knowl-
edge. Since the physical object hypothesis systematizes and uniﬁes
our knowledge better than the matrix hypothesis, we’re justiﬁed in
believing that we’re not living in the Matrix.
We are justiﬁed in convicting someone of a crime if we have
established his or her guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Similarly, we
are justiﬁed in believing a proposition if we have established its truth
beyond a reasonable doubt. But being justiﬁed in believing a proposi-
tion no more guarantees its truth than being justiﬁed in convicting
someone guarantees his or her guilt. It is always possible that we have
overlooked something that undermines our justiﬁcation. Since we are
not omniscient, we can never be sure that we have considered all the
relevant evidence. Nevertheless, if we are justiﬁed in believing a
proposition, we are justiﬁed in claiming that it is true; indeed, we are
justiﬁed in claiming that we know it. Such a claim could be mistaken,
but it would not be improper, for our justiﬁcation gives us the right to
make such a claim.
REASONS AND EVIDENCE
67
Ignorance is not
bliss—it’s oblivion.
—PHILLIP WYLIE

If our belief in a proposition is not justiﬁed—if we have good rea-
son to doubt it—then we have no right to claim that we know it. We
have reasonable grounds for doubt when we have credible evidence
to the contrary. Suppose, for example, that we are looking at a surface
that appears to be pink and are told either that there is no pink sur-
face in the room or that there is a red light shining on the surface. In
such a case, as epistemologist Ernest Sosa explains:
Anyone who still believes in a pink surface before him after accepting
either testimony would lack justiﬁcation—this because we consider 
rational coherence the best overall guide. Even if the testimony is in
each case false, given only adequate reason to accept it, one still loses
one’s justiﬁcation to believe in the pink surface.9
In other words, if we have good reason for believing a proposition to be
false, we are not justiﬁed in believing it to be true, even if all of our sen-
sory evidence indicates that it is. When two propositions conﬂict with
one another, we know that at least one of them must be false. Until we
determine which one it is, we cannot claim to know either. Thus:
There is good reason to doubt a proposition 
if it conﬂicts with other propositions 
we have good reason to believe.
The conﬂict of credible propositions provides reasonable grounds for
doubt. And where there are reasonable grounds for doubt, there can-
not be knowledge.
The search for knowledge, then, involves eliminating inconsis-
tencies among our beliefs. When the conﬂict is between different
reports of current observations, as in the case of the surface that
appears to be pink, it’s easy enough to ﬁnd out which one is mistaken:
Look more closely. When the conﬂict involves propositions that can’t
be directly veriﬁed, ﬁnding the mistaken belief can be more difﬁcult.
Sometimes we observe or are informed about things that seem to
conﬂict with our background information—that vast system of well-
supported beliefs we use to guide our thought and action, much of which
falls under the heading “common sense.” When this conﬂict happens, we
have to decide whether the new piece of information is credible enough
to make us give up some of our old beliefs. When we cannot directly
verify a questionable claim, one way to assess its credibility is to determine
how much is at stake in accepting it. When all other things are equal:
The more background information a proposition conﬂicts
with, the more reason there is to doubt it.
68
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE
In all affairs it’s a
healthy thing now
and then to hang a
question mark on the
things you have long
taken for granted.
—BERTRAND RUSSELL
Doubt grows with
knowledge.
—GOETHE

The structure of our belief system can be compared to that of a
tree. Just as certain branches support other branches, so certain beliefs
support other beliefs. And just as bigger branches support more
branches than little ones, so fundamental beliefs support more beliefs
than ancillary ones. Accepting some dubious claims is equivalent to cut-
ting off a twig, for it requires giving up only peripheral beliefs. Accept-
ing others, however, is equivalent to cutting off a limb or even part of
the trunk, for it requires giving up some of our most central beliefs.
For example, suppose that after listening to the nightly weather
report you come to believe that it will be sunny tomorrow. Suppose
further that when you get to work the next morning, a trusted friend
informs you that it is going to rain that afternoon. Your friend’s report
conﬂicts with what you heard on the news last night, but given the
variability of the weather and the possibility that your friend might
have heard a more recent weather report, the claim is not altogether
implausible. You may even decide to change your belief about the
day’s weather on its basis. Such a change would have little effect on
your overall belief system, for not much hangs on your beliefs about
the weather.
Now suppose that somebody claimed to be able to walk through
walls without using doors. On the credibility scale, such a claim would
be close to zero because it conﬂicts with so much of what we believe
about the physical world. Unlike the case of the weather report, you
would be right in dismissing such a claim out of hand, for if it were
true, large portions of your belief system would be false.
But suppose your claimant offers to provide you with supporting
evidence. Suppose he proposes to demonstrate his ability by walking
through as many different walls in as many different buildings as you
choose. If he could perform this feat regularly and repeatedly, you
would have little choice but to start pruning your belief system. But if
he could perform the feat only under special circumstances controlled
by him, there would be less reason to alter your beliefs, for, in that
case, you couldn’t be sure that the feat wasn’t just a conjuring trick.
Most of the dubious claims we encounter fall somewhere between
the extremes of the weather report and wall-walker cases. They are
not so outrageous that we can simply dismiss them, but the evidence
in their favor is not compelling enough to justify their acceptance.
What should be our attitude toward such propositions? We should
believe as the evidence warrants. In other words:
When there is good reason to doubt a proposition,
we should proportion our belief to the evidence.
REASONS AND EVIDENCE
69
The beginning of 
wisdom is found in
doubting; by doubting
we come to the ques-
tion, and by seeking
we may come upon
the truth.
—PIERRE ABÉLARD
When it is not in our
power to determine
what is true, we
ought to follow what
is most probable.
—RENÉ DESCARTES

The more evidence we have for a proposition, the more credence we
should give it.
The probability of a proposition may range from close to 0 (e.g.,
“Humans can walk through walls”) to 1 (e.g., “Either it’s raining or it
isn’t”). Similarly, our belief in a proposition may range from total
incredulity to complete acceptance. Ideally, our belief in a proposition
should correspond to its probability. If there’s a good chance that the
proposition is true, we should believe it strongly. If not, we shouldn’t.
This match with probability is needed because, if the strength of our
convictions doesn’t match the strength of our evidence, we dramati-
cally increase our chances of error. As any good gambler will tell you,
the more you miscalculate the odds, the more you stand to lose.
70
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE
The Ethics of Belief
”Everybody’s entitled to their own opinion”
goes the platitude, meaning that everybody has
the right to believe whatever they want. But is
that really true? Are there no limits on what is
permissible to believe? Or, as in the case of 
actions, are some beliefs immoral? Surprisingly,
perhaps, many people have argued that just as
we have a moral duty not to perform certain
sorts of actions, so we have a moral duty not to
have certain sorts of beliefs. No one has
expressed this point of view more forcefully
than the distinguished mathematician W. K.
Clifford: “It is wrong always, everywhere, and
for anyone to believe anything on insufﬁcient
evidence.”10 Others of similar stature have
echoed this sentiment. Biologist Thomas
Henry Huxley, for example, declared, “It is
wrong for a man to say that he is certain of the
objective truth of any proposition unless he can
produce evidence which logically justiﬁes that
certainty.”11 And Brand Blanshard has
proclaimed that “where great human goods and
ills are involved, the distortion of belief from
any sort of avoidable cause is immoral, and the
more immoral the greater the stakes.”12 These
men think it wrong for belief to outstrip the
evidence because our actions are guided by our
beliefs, and if our beliefs are mistaken, our 
actions may be misguided. As Blanshard indi-
cates, the more important the decision, the
greater our duty to align our beliefs with the
evidence, and the greater the crime if we don’t.
Where not much hangs on the belief, it
might be thought that what one believes has
little importance. But Clifford claims that even
in trivial matters we have a duty to proportion
our belief to the evidence:
Every time we let ourselves believe for un-
worthy reasons, we weaken our powers of
self-control, of doubting, of judicially and
fairly weighing evidence. We all suffer
severely enough from the maintenance and
support of false beliefs and the fatally wrong
actions which they lead to. . . . But a greater
and wider evil arises when the credulous
character is maintained and supported,
when a habit of believing for unworthy rea-
sons is fostered and made permanent.”13
According to Clifford, responsible believing
is a skill that can be maintained only through
constant practice. And since responsible believ-
ing is a prerequisite for responsible acting, we
have a duty to foster that skill.

Unfortunately, many of us are not good gamblers, especially when it
comes to estimating the chances of a proposition’s truth. As a result,
we end up believing all sorts of outlandish things for no good reason.
EXPERT OPINION
Bertrand Russell was acutely aware of the difﬁculty many of us have in
getting our beliefs to correspond to the evidence. To remedy this sit-
uation, he suggested that we adopt the following principle: “It is unde-
sirable to believe a proposition when there is no ground whatever for
supposing it true.”14 Russell felt that “if such an opinion became com-
mon, it would completely transform our social life and our political
system” because it would not only require rejecting many of our most
cherished beliefs but also “tend to diminish the incomes of clairvoy-
ants, bookmakers, bishops, and others who live on the irrational
hopes of those who have done nothing to deserve good fortune here
or hereafter.”15 More to the point, adopting such a proposal would
help alleviate a good deal of unnecessary suffering.
To adopt his proposal, Russell claimed, we need only accept the
following propositions:
(1) that when the experts are agreed, the opposite opinion cannot be
held to be certain; (2) that when they are not agreed, no opinion can
be regarded as certain by a non-expert; and (3) that when they all
hold that no sufﬁcient grounds for a positive opinion exist, the ordi-
nary man would do well to suspend his judgment.16
If our beliefs were guided by these principles, he insisted, the world
would be completely transformed:
These propositions may seem mild, yet, if accepted, they would abso-
lutely revolutionize human life.
The opinions for which people are willing to ﬁght and persecute
all belong to one of the three classes which this skepticism condemns.
When there are rational grounds for an opinion, people are content to
set them forth and wait for them to operate. In such cases, people do
not hold their opinions with passion; they hold them calmly, and set
forth their reasons quietly. The opinions that are held with passion are
always those for which no good ground exists; indeed the passion is
the measure of the holder’s lack of rational conviction.17
Unfortunately, Russell seems to be right. There often appears to be an
inverse correlation between degree of conviction and evidence—the
less evidence there is for a proposition, the more fervently it is
believed. Such a situation, as Russell realized, is not conducive to har-
monious human relations.
EXPERT OPINION
71
Nothing is so ﬁrmly
believed as what we
least know.
—MICHEL
DE MONTAIGNE

To avoid holding unjustiﬁed beliefs, then, it’s important to
develop a healthy commonsense skepticism. Unlike philosophical skepti-
cism, commonsense skepticism does not consider everything that
lacks certainty suspect. Rather, it considers everything that lacks ade-
quate evidence suspect. Commonsense skeptics won’t believe some-
thing unless they have a good reason for believing it, and their belief
will be proportionate to the evidence.
Russell argues that one way to foster such commonsense skepti-
cism is to give experts their due. We should not defer to the experts
because they are always right—they aren’t. But they are more likely to
be right than we are. One reason they are usually right is that they are
usually privy to more information than we are. Another reason is that
they are usually better judges of that information than we are. They
know, for example, what kinds of observations are accurate, what
kinds of tests are valid, and what kinds of studies are reliable. Since
they are more knowledgeable than we are, their judgments are usually
more trustworthy than ours. Consequently:
There is good reason to doubt a proposition 
if it conﬂicts with expert opinion.
But the opinion of experts is superior to our own only in their
ﬁelds of expertise. Outside their specialties, what experts say carries
no more weight than what anyone else says. Unfortunately, people
have a tendency to treat the opinions of experts as authoritative even
when they’re speaking out of their depth.
For example, Clive Backster was one of the FBI’s foremost lie
detector experts. One day while sitting in his ofﬁce, he decided to see
what would happen if he put a lie detector on his philodendron. After
the machine was attached, he decided to see what would happen if he
burned one of its leaves. To his surprise, just as he formulated this
idea, the lie detector jumped off the scale. Backster concluded that his
philodendron was responding to his thoughts! After conducting a
number of other experiments, he published his results in an article
entitled “Evidence of a Primary Perception in Plant Life.”18 Backster’s
experiments and others like them were chronicled in a 1975 book by
Peter Tompkins and Christopher Bird called The Secret Life of Plants,
which became an international best-seller. As a result of the claims
made in this book, people all over the world began playing music and
talking to their plants. When scientists tried to replicate Backster’s
results, however, they failed.19 It turned out that his experiments had
not been conducted with adequate controls. Backster may have been
an expert in the use of the lie detector, but that did not make him an
72
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE
Men will cease to
commit atrocities
only when they cease
to believe absurdities.
—VOLTAIRE
The trouble with 
people is not that
they don’t know, but
that they know so
much that ain’t so.
—HENRY WHEELER
SHAW

expert in scientiﬁc method or plant physiology. What this example
shows is that:
Just because someone is an expert in one ﬁeld doesn’t
mean that he or she is an expert in another.
Just as disturbing as our tendency to treat experts in one area as
experts in others is our tendency to treat nonexperts as experts, espe-
cially when they’re famous. You may have heard the television com-
mercial for a medicine that began, “I’m not a doctor, but I play one on
TV, and I recommend . . .” Playing a doctor on television hardly qual-
iﬁes someone as a medical expert. Consequently, any medical advice
this actor offers should be taken with a grain of salt.
To cite a nonexpert as an expert is to make a fallacious appeal to
authority. It’s fallacious because it doesn’t provide the type of evidence
it purports to. Instead, it attempts to deceive us about the quality of
the evidence presented. To avoid being taken in by this kind of sub-
terfuge, we need to know what makes someone an expert.
Contrary to what the Wizard of Oz says, being an expert requires
more than having a certain piece of paper. Where the paper comes
from is also important. The opinions of people with degrees from insti-
tutions that advertise on the inside of matchbook covers are not as
credible as those of people with degrees from Ivy League institutions.
But even having a degree from a reputable institution does not neces-
sarily qualify you as an expert, especially if you have never practiced in
the ﬁeld in which you offer expert opinion. The designation expert is
something you earn by showing that your judgments are reliable. To
be considered an expert, you must have demonstrated an ability to cor-
rectly interpret data and arrive at conclusions that are justiﬁed by the
evidence. In other words, you must have shown yourself capable of
distinguishing truth from falsehood in a particular ﬁeld. If you have a
good education but make faulty judgments, you can’t be considered an
expert. A good indication of the quality of someone’s judgment is to be
found in the recognition he or she has received from his or her peers.
The views of those who have achieved positions of authority or won
prestigious awards are to be trusted more than those who have not, for
such distinctions are usually a mark of intellectual virtue.
Expert testimony, like any testimony, is credible only to the
extent that it is unbiased. If there is reason to believe that an expert is
motivated by something other than the search for truth, there is good
reason to doubt his or her testimony. If, for example, the expert has
something to gain or lose by espousing one position rather than
another, that expert’s testimony cannot be trusted. Where there is a
EXPERT OPINION
73
An expert is some-
one who knows
some of the worst
mistakes that can be
made in his subject,
and how to avoid
them.
—WERNER
HEISENBERG

conﬂict of interest, there are reasonable grounds for doubt. When
considering the opinions of others, then, we must always look for the
presence of bias.
According to Russell, any proposition that ﬂies in the face of
expert opinion cannot be certain. More important, because credible
opinion to the contrary provides reasonable grounds for doubt, any
proposition that ﬂies in the face of expert opinion cannot be known
(unless, of course, we can show beyond a reasonable doubt that the
experts are mistaken). These considerations have important implica-
tions for our beliefs about weird things. Such beliefs often conﬂict
with expert opinion. When they do, we cannot claim to know them.
We can believe them, but, without adequate evidence showing that
the experts are mistaken, we cannot know them. If we do claim to
know them, it is we who are weird.
COHERENCE AND JUSTIFICATION
Ordinarily, if a proposition fails to cohere with the rest of our beliefs,
we are not justiﬁed in believing it. So coherence is a necessary condi-
tion for justiﬁcation. But is it also sufﬁcient? If a proposition coheres
with the rest of our beliefs, are we justiﬁed in believing it? Remarkably
enough, the answer to this question is no. Just because a proposition
coheres with our beliefs, it is not necessarily likely to be true.
To see this point, consider the case of David Koresh, the former
leader of the Branch Davidians, who died when the cult’s headquar-
ters near Waco, Texas, burned down in 1993. Koresh believed that he
was Jesus Christ. He maintained that this belief was based on a coher-
ent interpretation of the Scriptures. Suppose it was. And suppose that
everything else that he believed cohered with that belief. Does that
mean that he was justiﬁed in believing that he was God? Of course
not. Just because someone consistently believes something doesn’t
mean that it’s likely to be true.
But suppose that it wasn’t only Koresh who believed he was God;
suppose (as is likely) that all his followers did, too. Does that justify
his belief that he is God? Does the number of people who believe a
proposition increase its likelihood? Again, the answer is no. When it
comes to knowledge, there is no safety in numbers. Even if a large
number of people consistently believe something, its credibility may
be negligible.
If cohering with a certain group’s beliefs justiﬁed a proposition,
then both a proposition and its negation could be equally justiﬁed
because both could be consistently believed by different groups. Do
we want to say that Koresh’s position is or could be just as justiﬁed as
74
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE
When you know a
thing, hold that you
know it; when you
know not a thing,
allow that you 
know it not; this 
is knowledge.
—CONFUCIUS

the denial of his position (as long as that denial is part of a coherent
belief system)? If we do, we must give up the notion that justiﬁcation
is a reliable indication of truth, because whatever justiﬁcation a propo-
sition had, its denial could have as well. The price for taking coher-
ence to be a sufﬁcient condition for justiﬁcation, then, is rather high.
Coherence alone is not enough for justiﬁcation because a coherent
set of propositions may not be grounded in reality. A fairy tale may be
coherent, but that doesn’t justify our believing it. Since justiﬁcation is
supposed to be a reliable guide to the truth, and since truth is grounded
in reality, there must be more to justiﬁcation than mere coherence.
SOURCES OF KNOWLEDGE
Perception has traditionally been considered our most reliable guide
to the truth. That perception is considered a source of knowledge
should not surprise us, for most of our information about the world
comes to us through our senses. If our senses weren’t reliable, we
could not have survived as long as we have. But even though senses
are reliable, they’re not infallible. The existence of illusions and hallu-
cinations demonstrates that our senses can’t always be trusted.
Illusions and hallucinations occur only under certain circum-
stances, however. Only when we, our tools, or our environment are in
a state that impedes the accurate ﬂow of information do our senses
lead us astray. For example, if we are injured, anxious, or drugged; if
our glasses are cracked, our hearing aid broken, or our measuring
devices malfunctioning; or if it is dark, noisy, or foggy, then our obser-
vations may be mistaken. But if we have good reason to believe that
no such impediments to accurate perception are present, then we
have good reason to believe what we perceive.
Just as perception is considered a source of knowledge about the
external world, introspection is considered a source of knowledge
about the internal world, that is, about our mental states. Some peo-
ple have considered this source of knowledge to be infallible. We may
be mistaken about many things, they argue, but we cannot be mis-
taken about the contents of our own minds. We may be mistaken, for
example, about whether we see a tree, but we cannot be mistaken
about whether we seem to see a tree. But we must be careful here.
While we may infallibly know what our experience is like, we may not
infallibly know that it is of a certain sort. In other words, we may mis-
categorize or misdescribe what we experience. Infatuation, for
example, may be mistaken for love, jealousy for envy, rage for anger.
So the beliefs we form through introspection about our current expe-
rience are not infallible.
SOURCES OF KNOWLEDGE
75
All our knowledge
has its origins in our
perceptions.
—LEONARDO
DA VINCI

Similarly, the beliefs we form through introspection about our
dispositional mental states are not infallible. There are certain mental
states (like believing, wanting, hoping, fearing, and so on) that we
may be in even though we are not currently feeling or doing anything
in particular. Such states are called dispositional because to be in them
is to have a tendency to feel or do certain things under certain
conditions. For example, if you are afraid of snakes, you will normally
have a tendency to feel fear and run away when you see one. Unfor-
tunately, we can deceive ourselves about our dispositional mental
states. We may believe, for example, that we are in love when we
really aren’t. Or we may believe that we don’t have a certain desire
when we really do. Since introspection is not error free, it is not an
infallible source of knowledge about our mental states.
Though introspection is fallible, it can still be trusted. Our beliefs
about our mental states are about as certain as they come. We rarely
misdescribe our current mental states, and when we do, the fault often
lies not with our faculty of introspection but with our carelessness or
inattentiveness.20 While mistakes regarding our dispositional mental
states are more common, they, too, can often be traced to our being
in an abnormal state. Normally, then, beliefs arrived at through intro-
spection are justiﬁed. As long as we have no reason to doubt what our
introspection tells us, we are justiﬁed in believing it.
Although much of what we know originates in introspection and
perception, we have to rely on our memory to preserve and retrieve
that information. So memory is also a source of knowledge, not in the
sense of generating it, but in the sense of transmitting it. Normally,
memory performs its functions without error. But, as we’ll see in
Chapter 5, situations can arise in which the information entrusted to
memory is mishandled. We may forget certain details of events we’ve
experienced, or we may embellish them with imaginative ﬂourishes.
We may even seem to remember events that never happened.
Psychologist Jean Piaget had a vivid memory of his nurse ﬁghting off
a kidnapper on the Champs-Elysées when he was only two. Years
later, his nurse confessed in a letter to his parents that she made up the
whole story about that event. Even though our memory is fallible, it’s
not totally unreliable. If we seem to clearly remember something,
then, as long as we have no good reason to doubt it, we are justiﬁed
in believing it.
Reason has also been considered a source of knowledge, for it
too can reveal how things are. Consider the proposition “Whatever
has a shape has a size.” We know that it’s true, but we don’t have to
perform any experiments or gather any data to see that it is. Through
the use of reason alone we can see that these concepts necessarily
76
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE
Everyone complains
of his memory, and
no one complains of
his judgment.
—DUC FRANÇOIS
DE LA
ROCHEFOUCAULD

go together. Reason is the ability we have to discern the logical rela-
tionships between concepts and propositions. Reason shows us, for
example, that if A is bigger than B, and B is bigger than C, then A is
bigger than C.
Some people think that reason, like introspection, is an infalli-
ble guide to the truth. History has taught us otherwise, however.
Many propositions once thought to be self-evident are now known
to be false. That every event has a cause, that every property deter-
mines a class, that every true mathematical theorem has a proof
were all thought, at one time, to be self-evident. We now know that
they’re not. Even the clear light of reason does not shine only on
the truth.
But most of the time, reason is not wrong. What seems to be self-
evident usually is. Self-evident propositions are ones whose denial is
unthinkable, like “Whatever has a shape has a size.” To understand
a self-evident proposition is to believe that it’s true. If someone denies a
self-evident proposition, the burden of proof is on them to provide 
a counterexample. If they can’t, their denial is groundless. So in the
absence of any evidence to the contrary, we are justiﬁed in believing
what reason reveals.
The traditional sources of knowledge—perception, introspec-
tion, memory, and reason—are not infallible guides to the truth, for
our interpretation of them can be negatively affected by all sorts of
conditions, many beyond our control. But if we have no reason to
believe that such conditions are present, then we have no reason to
doubt what these sources of knowledge tell us. The principle that
emerges from these considerations is this:
If we have no reason to doubt what’s disclosed to us
through perception, introspection, memory, or reason,
then we’re justiﬁed in believing it.
In other words, the traditional sources of knowledge are innocent
until proven guilty. Only if we have good reason for believing that
they are not functioning properly should we doubt them.
THE APPEAL TO FAITH
Faith, as it is ordinarily understood, is “belief that does not rest on log-
ical proof or material evidence.”21 To believe something on faith is to
believe it in spite of, or even because of, the fact that we have insufﬁ-
cient evidence for it. No one has expressed this cavalier attitude
THE APPEAL TO FAITH
77
Reason in man is
rather like God in
the world.
—ST.THOMAS
AQUINAS
I respect faith, but
doubt is what gets
you an education.
—WILSON MIZNER

toward evidence better than Tertullian: “It is to be believed,” he said,
“because it is absurd.”23 Saint Thomas Aquinas considered faith to be
superior to opinion because it is free from doubt, but inferior to
knowledge because it lacks rational justiﬁcation. In the case of faith,
the gap between belief and evidence is ﬁlled by an act of will—we
choose to believe something even though that belief isn’t warranted
by the evidence. Can such a belief be a source of knowledge? No, for
we cannot make something true by believing it to be true. The fact
that we believe something doesn’t justify our believing it. Faith, in the
sense we are considering, is unquestioning, unjustiﬁed belief, and
unjustiﬁed belief cannot constitute knowledge.
The problem with the appeal to faith is that it is unenlightening;
it may tell us something about the person making the appeal, but it
tells us nothing about the proposition in question. Suppose someone
78
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE
Mind Viruses
Biologist Richard Dawkins, author of The Selﬁsh
Gene and The Blind Watchmaker, argues that cer-
tain thoughts can function in the mind like
computer viruses in a computer, subverting its
normal functioning. The thought that faith is a
source of knowledge, he argues, is one such:
Like computer viruses, successful mind
viruses will tend to be hard for their victims
to detect. If you are the victim of one, the
chances are that you won’t know it, and
may even vigorously deny it. Accepting that
a virus might be difﬁcult to detect in your
own mind, what telltale signs might you
look out for? I shall answer by imagining
how a medical textbook might describe the
typical symptoms of a sufferer (arbitrarily
assumed to be male).
1. The patient typically ﬁnds himself impelled
by some deep, inner conviction that some-
thing is true, or right, or virtuous: a convic-
tion that doesn’t seem to owe anything to
evidence or reason, but which, nevertheless,
he feels as totally compelling and convincing.
We doctors refer to such a belief as “faith.” . . .
2. Patients typically make a positive virtue of
faith’s being strong and unshakable, in spite
of not being based upon evidence. Indeed,
they may feel that the less evidence there is,
the more virtuous the belief. . . .
3. A related symptom, which a faith-sufferer
may also present, is the conviction that “mys-
tery,” per se, is a good thing. It is not a virtue
to solve mysteries. Rather we should enjoy
them, even revel in their insolubility. . . .
4. The sufferer may ﬁnd himself behaving 
intolerantly toward vectors of rival faiths, 
in extreme cases even killing them or advo-
cating their deaths. He may be similarly 
violent in his disposition toward apostates
(people who once held the faith but have
renounced it); or toward heretics (people
who espouse a different—often, perhaps 
signiﬁcantly, only very slightly different—
version of the faith). He may also feel 
hostile toward other modes of thought that
are potentially inimical to his faith, such as
the method of scientiﬁc reason that may
function rather like a piece of anti-viral 
software.22

presses you about why you believe something and you say, “My belief
is based on faith.” Does this answer help us evaluate the truth of your
belief? No. To say that you believe something on faith is not to offer
any justiﬁcation for it; in fact, you are admitting that you have no
justiﬁcation. Since believing something on faith doesn’t help us determine
the plausibility of a proposition, faith can’t be a source of knowledge.
THE APPEAL TO INTUITION
Intuition is sometimes claimed to be a source of knowledge. “How did
you know that they would get married?” we might ask. “I knew by
intuition,” might be the reply. But what sort of thing is this intuition?
Is it a sixth sense? Are those who claim to know by intuition claim-
ing to have extrasensory perception? Perhaps they are, but to take
such a claim seriously, we would need evidence showing that there is
such a thing as ESP and that it is a reliable guide to the truth. With-
out such evidence, intuition in this sense can’t be considered a source
of knowledge.
But the claim to know by intuition need not be construed as a
claim to possess ESP. It can instead be construed as a claim to possess
what might be called HSP—hypersensory perception. Some people, like
the ﬁctional Sherlock Holmes, are much more perceptive than others.
They notice things that others don’t and consequently make infer-
ences that others may think are unwarranted but really aren’t—they
are simply based on data that most people aren’t aware of. To know
by intuition that a couple will get married, for example, you need not
have read their minds. You need only to have noticed them exhibit-
ing some of those subtle behaviors that indicate true love.
One of the most remarkable examples of HSP comes from the
animal kingdom. In 1904, a retired Berlin schoolteacher, Wilhelm von
Osten, claimed that his horse—who came to be known as “Clever
Hans”—possessed an intelligence equivalent to humans. He seemed
to be able to correctly answer arithmetic problems, tell time, and cor-
rectly recognize photographs of people he had met, among other
things. Clever Hans would answer the questions put to him by tap-
ping his hoof. He had learned the alphabet, and when he was asked a
word problem, he would spell out the answer in German by tapping
once for “A,” twice for “B,” and so on. A panel of thirteen of the best
scientists in Germany rigorously tested Clever Hans to determine
whether his master was somehow communicating the answers to him.
Since he performed almost as well without his master as with him,
they concluded in their report that Clever Hans was a genuine phe-
nomenon worthy of the most serious scientiﬁc consideration.
THE APPEAL TO INTUITION
79
The only real 
valuable thing 
is intuition.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN

One of those assisting in this investigation, however, remained
skeptical. Oskar Pfungst couldn’t believe that a horse possessed such
extraordinary intellectual powers. What made him skeptical was the
fact that Clever Hans would not get the right answer when the answer
was unknown to any of those present or when he was unable to see
those who did know the right answer. Pfungst concluded that the
horse needed some sort of visual aid. The remarkable thing was, the
aid did not have to be given intentionally.24
It turns out that Hans would get the right answer by attending to
very subtle changes in people’s posture—some of those changes were
by less than one-ﬁfth of a millimeter. Those who knew the answer, for
example, would unconsciously tense their muscles until Hans pro-
duced it. Hans perceived this tension and used it as a cue. Pfungst
learned to consciously make the same body movements that were
unconsciously made by Hans’s examiners and was thus able to elicit
from Hans all of his various reactions without asking him any ques-
tions or giving him any commands.25 Pfungst’s experiment showed
beyond a reasonable doubt that Clever Hans’s cleverness lay not in his
intellectual prowess but in his perceptual acuity.
Our ability to perceive subtle behavioral cues is no less remarkable
than Clever Hans’s. Psychologist Robert Rosenthal has studied this abil-
ity in depth. In an attempt to determine the extent to which psycho-
logical experimenters can nonverbally inﬂuence their subjects, he
devised the following experiment. Student subjects were asked to look
at photographs of ten people and rate them in terms of their success or
failure. The scale ranged from +10 (extreme success) to –10 (extreme
failure). The photographs used had been independently determined to
elicit a success rating of close to 0 from most people. The experimenters
were told that their task was to replicate the results achieved in previ-
ous experiments. They were paid one dollar an hour for conducting the
experiment, but were promised two dollars an hour if they achieved the
desired results. One group of experimenters was told that the people in
the photographs had received an average rating of 5 in previous
experiments, while the other group was told that they had received an
average rating of 5. The experimenters were not allowed to talk to
their subjects; they could read the experimental instructions to them
but could say nothing else. Without telling their subjects how to eval-
uate the people in the photographs, the experimenters who expected
high scores nevertheless received higher scores than any of those who
expected low ones.26 This result has been repeated in other, similar
experiments.27 How did the subjects know what ratings the experi-
menters wanted? By attending to subtle behavioral cues. Call it intuition
if you will, but it is really nothing more than acute sensory perception.
80
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE
Intuition comes very
close to clairvoyance;
it appears to be the
extrasensory percep-
tion of reality.
—ALEXIS CARREL

Researchers investigating ESP must be particularly wary of these
sorts of experimenter effects. Any experiment that does not eliminate
them cannot provide evidence for ESP, for the results obtained could
be due to experimenter signaling. Early telepathy experiments did not
take these effects into account, and consequently their results are
unconvincing. Simon Newcomb, ﬁrst president of the American Soci-
ety for Psychical Research and a distinguished astronomer, describes
one of these early experiments: “When the agent drew cards from a
pack one by one, and at each drawing the percipient named a card at
random, it was found that the proportion of correct guesses was much
greater than it should have been as the result of chance, which would,
of course, be 1 out of 52.”28 If the percipient could see the agent,
however, the success of the experiment could be due to hypersensory
perception rather than extrasensory perception. These experimental
results thus do not provide evidence for ESP. An experiment can pro-
vide evidence for extraordinary abilities only if its results can’t be
accounted for in terms of ordinary abilities.
THE APPEAL TO MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE
Beyond the senses, beyond the intellect, beyond these mundane
means we use to acquire knowledge lies a more direct path to truth:
mystical experience. So say many people who claim that mystical
experience bypasses our normal modes of cognition and yields a
“deeper” insight into the nature of reality. According to the physicist
Fritjof Capra, author of the best-selling The Tao of Physics, “What the
Eastern mystics are concerned with is a direct experience of reality
which transcends not only intellectual thinking but also sensory per-
ception.”29 Attaining such an experience, however, often requires
years of preparation and involves practices that are both mentally and
physically taxing. Because such practices are known to induce altered
states of consciousness, many people dismiss mystical experience as
nothing more than delusion or hallucination. As Bertrand Russell put
it: “From a scientiﬁc point of view we can make no distinction
between the man who eats little and sees heaven and the man who
drinks much and sees snakes. Each is an abnormal physical condition,
and therefore has abnormal perception.”30
But Capra argues that the mystics’ claim to knowledge can’t be so
easily dismissed because their vision of reality agrees with that of
modern physics. “The principal theories and models of modern
physics,” he says, “lead to a view of the world which is internally con-
sistent and in perfect harmony with the views of Eastern Mysticism.”31
Mystics, like scientists, are seekers after truth. But whereas scientists
THE APPEAL TO MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE
81
Intuition is reason in
a hurry.
—HOLBROOK
JACKSON
If the doors of 
perception were
cleansed, everything
would appear to
man as it is—inﬁnite.
—WILLIAM BLAKE

use their senses to explore nature’s mysteries, mystics use only their
intuition. What is remarkable, contends Capra, is that the reality
revealed by these two types of experience appears to be the same.
Psychologist Lawrence LeShan agrees:
The physicist and the mystic follow different paths: they have differ-
ent technical goals in view; they use different tools and methods; their
attitudes are not the same. However, in the world-picture they are led
to by these different roads they perceive the same basic structure, the
same reality.32
According to Capra and LeShan, although the mystic and the scien-
tist have traveled different paths, they have arrived at the same desti-
nation. Consequently, they claim, mystical experience must be
considered a privileged source of knowledge.33
But is there really such a royal road to the truth? Has modern
physics vindicated the visions of the mystics? To ﬁnd out, we’ll have to
take a closer look at what the mystics tell us about the nature of reality.
Mystical experiences are ecstatic, awesome, extraordinary experi-
ences in which you seem to enter into a mysterious union with the
source and ground of being. During this encounter, it seems as if the
deepest secrets of the universe are revealed to you. What you for-
merly took to be real seems nothing more than an illusion. You
become convinced that now, as never before, you understand the true
nature of reality. The Christian mystic, Saint John of the Cross,
described the experience this way:
The end I have in view is the divine Embracing, the union of the soul
with the divine Substance. In this loving, obscure knowledge God
unites Himself with the soul eminently and divinely. . . . This knowl-
edge consists in a certain contact of the soul with the Divinity, and it
is God Himself Who is then felt and tasted, though not manifestly
and distinctly, as it will be in glory. But this touch of knowledge and
of sweetness is so deep and so profound that it penetrates into the in-
most substance of the soul. This knowledge savors in some measure of
the divine Essence and of everlasting life.34
For some, the union appears to be almost a sexual one. Saint Theresa,
another Christian mystic, writes:
I saw an angel close by me, on my left side, in bodily form. . . . 
I saw in his hand a long spear of gold, and at the iron’s point there
seemed to be a little fire. He appeared to me to be thrusting it at
times into my heart, and to pierce my very entrails; when he drew 
it out, he seemed to draw them out also and to leave me all on fire
with a great love of God. The pain was so great that it made me
82
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE
Mysticism is just 
tomorrow’s science
dreamed today.
—MARSHALL
MCLUHAN

moan; and yet so surpassing was the sweetness of this excessive pain
that I could not wish to be rid of it. The soul is satisfied now with
nothing less than God.35
The God of which Saint John and Saint Theresa speak is the God of
the Bible: a personal being with thoughts, feelings, and desires. For
them, mystical experiences are the result of entering into a peculiarly
intimate relationship with Him. But in their view, even though you
unite with God, you don’t become God. You may be deeply moved—
even transformed—by the experience, but you’re not annihilated by
it. Through it all, you retain your personal identity.
Not all mystics describe their experience this way, however. Hin-
dus of the Advaita Vedanta school, for example, do not believe that
mystical union is a relationship between two persons, for, in their
view, the world does not contain two persons. According to them,
there is only one thing in the universe—Brahman—and mystical
experience reveals that we are identical to it. As the founder of this
school, Shankara (A.D. 686–718), relates: “Through his transcenden-
tal vision he [the mystic] has realized that there is no difference
between man and Brahman, or between Brahman and the universe—
for he sees that Brahman is all.”36 In the mystical state, according to
Shankara, all individuality, all distinctions, all boundaries disappear.
Reality is experienced as a seamless, indivisible whole. No line can be
drawn between the self and the nonself, for the self is all. You are God.
Shankara holds that Brahman, the one and only true reality, is
unchanging and eternal. The Buddha (563–483 B.C.E.), another East-
ern mystic and teacher, maintains that reality is constantly changing
and ephemeral. As he remarked to one of his followers, “The world is
in continuous ﬂux and is impermanent.”37 The Buddha, then, denies
the existence of Shankara’s Brahman. As theologian John Hick notes,
“This notion of an immutable atman [soul], without beginning or end,
which each of us ultimately is, is explicitly rejected by the Buddha’s
anatta [no soul] doctrine.”38
Capra can’t claim that modern physics vindicates the worldview
of Eastern mystics in general because the Eastern mystics don’t share
a common worldview. Hindus and Buddhists have radically different
conceptions of the nature of reality. In fact, mystical worldviews seem
to be at least as various as mystical traditions themselves. Mystics,
even Eastern ones, do not speak with a single voice. Consequently, it
can’t coherently be maintained that modern physics conﬁrms their
view of things.
Even the more limited claim that modern physics vindicates the
worldview of one particular group of mystics is problematic, for if one
THE APPEAL TO MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE
83
Not I, but the whole
world says it: Every-
thing is one.
—HERACLITUS

group of mystics is right, the others must be wrong. How, then, would
we account for the fact that Christian mystics were mistaken? Is the
answer that their experiences weren’t really mystical? But how would
we distinguish real mystical experiences from false ones? Is the answer
that the Christians didn’t interpret their experiences correctly? But
how would we distinguish correct interpretations from incorrect
ones? Once we admit that only certain mystical experiences are reve-
latory, we have abandoned the claim that all mystical experience
yields knowledge.
ASTROLOGY REVISITED
Now that we have a better idea of what’s involved in making claims
about knowledge, what are we to make of astrology? Is it reasonable
to believe that the position of the stars and planets at the time and
place of your birth controls your destiny? Let’s examine the evidence.
Astrology, as noted at the beginning of this chapter, was invented
by the Babylonians as a means of foretelling the future. Their belief
84
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE
I shall always con-
sider the best
guesser the best
prophet.
—CICERO
The Miracle of Marsh Chapel
Timothy Leary was not the only person experi-
menting with hallucinogens at Harvard in the
early 1960s. Walter Pahnke, a graduate student
in theology, was also exploring inner space by
means of drugs. His interest, however, was the
relationship between drug-induced hallucina-
tions and mystical experience. Here’s an 
account of his experiment.
Walter Pahnke was interested in the litera-
ture and experience of religious ecstasy. He
trained housewives, presumably for their
lack of bias, to identify passages in literature
that qualiﬁed as transcendental or ecstatic
accounts. Then he fed a group of divinity
students controlled doses of psilocybin on
Good Friday, 1962. The theology students
soon after described their experiences while
under the inﬂuence, and the housewives
rated those confessions, mixed in among
other narratives of religious ecstasy as well
as other nonecstatic accounts, without
knowing where they came from. The results
were remarkable. The brigade of housewife
readers identiﬁed a large proportion of the
students’ narratives as bona ﬁde mystical 
encounters, and Pahnke concluded that drugs
could simulate the transcendent ecstasy that
lay at the source of so much religious tradi-
tion. Pahnke’s work became known as the
Good Friday Experiment and the reports by
students as the Miracle of Marsh Chapel,
named after the site on Harvard’s campus
where Pahnke collected his results. The age
of scientiﬁc study of hallucinogens and their
role in religious ecstasy had begun. But
Pahnke’s research raised a storm of criticism.
If experience of God could be induced 
by a chemical, then what did that say about
all the regalia and ritual of institutional 
religion?39

ASTROLOGY REVISITED
85
was (and the belief of present-day astrologers is) that all people’s
physical and emotional makeup is caused not by their heredity and
environment but by the particular arrangement of stars and planets at
their birth. Given what the Babylonians knew about the universe at
that time, such a view was not unreasonable. Anyone can see that the
position of heavenly bodies is correlated with the seasons. The belief
that heavenly bodies cause the seasons is therefore quite a natural one.
And if heavenly bodies control the Earth’s destiny, maybe they con-
trol ours as well. Although such a view makes sense from a Babylo-
nian perspective, the question is whether it makes sense from ours.
There is no evidence that the Babylonian astrologers established
the alleged correlations between personal characteristics and star
positions by conducting statistical surveys. They do not appear to
have sent out questionnaires asking people to describe themselves
and to give the time and place of their birth. Rather, it appears that
they assumed that people born under the inﬂuence of a particular
planet or constellation would acquire the characteristics of the per-
son, god, or animal for which the planet or constellation was
named.40 Thus people born under the sign of Aries, for example, are
said to be ramlike—courageous, impetuous, and energetic—while
those born under the sign of Taurus are said to be oxlike—patient,
persistent, and obstinate.41
Saint Augustine, one of the patriarchs of the Roman Catholic
Church, realized long ago that if the stars really determined our fate,
then astral twins (people who are born at the same time and place)
should lead the same sort of lives. When he learned of a pair of astral
twins—a slave and an aristocrat—who were as different as night and
day, he gave up his belief in astrology and became an outspoken critic
of it. The twins, for him, were conclusive proof that our destiny is not
written in the stars.
In our century, many attempts have been made to statistically ver-
ify the predictions of astrology, but none has succeeded. Psycholo-
gists Zusne and Jones describe some of these studies:
In 1937, Farnsworth failed to ﬁnd any correspondence between artis-
tic talent and either the ascendant sign or the sun in the sign of Libra
for the birth dates of 2000 famous painters and musicians. Bok and
Mayall (1941) found no predominance of any one sign of the zodiac
among scientists listed in a directory of scientists, the American Men of
Science. Barth and Bennett (1973) did a statistical study on whether
more men who had chosen a military career had been born under the
inﬂuence of the planet Mars than men who had chosen non-military
careers. They found no such relationship. Very large numbers of birth
dates were used by McGervey (1977), who tabulated the number of
Science must begin
with myth and with
the criticism of myth.
—KARL POPPER

scientists and politicians (a total of 16,634 scientists and 6,475 politi-
cians) born on each day of the year, and found no astrological sign 
favoring either one of the callings. . . . In another recent study,
Bastedo (1978) tested statistically whether persons with such charac-
teristics as leadership ability, liberalism/conservatism, intelligence, and
30 other variables, many of them attributed to astral inﬂuence, would
cluster on certain birth dates—that is, according to the astrological
sign that governs the appropriate characteristics. The results for a
1000-person, cross sectional, stratiﬁed cluster sample taken from the
San Francisco Bay area were entirely negative.42
More recent research conﬁrms these ﬁndings. R. B. Culver and 
P. A. Ianna surveyed hundreds of people to determine if there is any
truth to the astrologists’ claim that there is a correlation between sun
sign (the zone of the zodiac that the sun was in when you were born)
and physical features. They studied such attributes as neck size, skin
complexion, body build, height, and weight. Contrary to what the
astrologers would have us believe, no set of physical features occurred
more in one sign than another.43
David Voas, professor of Population Studies at the University of
Manchester, recently conducted the largest study ever of the “love sign”
hypothesis, namely, that people born under certain astrological signs
are more compatible than those born under others. Using the 2001 cen-
sus data for England and Wales (which contains records of over twenty
million people), he was able to determine whether those born under
certain signs are more likely to get married or stay married than those
born under others. He found that “astrological sign has no impact on
the probability of marrying—and staying married to—someone of any
other sign.”44 It looks like that old pickup line—“What’s your sign?”—
isn’t going to help you predict whether you’re going to get lucky.
Professional astrologers might ﬁnd these studies unconvincing,
because they focus on the sun sign rather than the astrological chart.
To get an accurate prediction, they might argue, the positions of the
planets at the time of birth must also be taken into account. When this
casting is done, however, the results are still negative. For his doctoral
dissertation at North Texas State University, Jonus Noblitt tried to
determine if the angular relations among planets could predict an
individual’s personality traits. He gave 155 volunteers the 16PF per-
sonality questionnaire, which assesses personality characteristics, and
compared the results with their horoscopes. None of the predictions
of astrology were borne out by the data.45
In a study published in Nature, physicist Shawn Carlson gave
thirty prominent American and European astrologers the natal charts
of 116 subjects.46 For each subject, the astrologers were given three
86
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE
You can make a bet-
ter living in the world
as a soothsayer than
as a truthsayer.
—GEORGE
LICHTENBERG

personality proﬁles: one from the subject and two others chosen at
random. The personality proﬁles were based on the California Per-
sonality Inventory (CPI), a standard test for measuring personality
traits. The astrologers’ task was to match the subject’s natal chart with
his or her personality proﬁle. Although the astrologers predicted that
they would be able to select the correct CPI proﬁle over 50 percent
of the time, they chose the correct proﬁle only 34 percent of the time,
which is how well anyone should do if they were just guessing. So,
once again, the astrologers demonstrated no unusual knowledge.
Geoffrey Dean and Arthur Mather, after reviewing more than 700
astrology books and 300 scientiﬁc works on astrology, concluded:
Astrology today is based on concepts of unknown origin but effec-
tively deiﬁed as “tradition.” Their application involves numerous sys-
tems, most of them disagreeing on fundamental issues, and all of them
supported by anecdotal evidence of the most unreliable kind. In effect,
astrology presents a dazzling and technically sound superstructure
supported by unproven beliefs; it starts with fantasy and then proceeds
entirely logically. Speculation is rife, as are a profusion of new factors
(each more dramatically “valid” than the last) to be conveniently con-
sidered where they reinforce the case and ignored otherwise.47
There is simply no reliable data establishing any of astrology’s claims.
Not only is there no trustworthy evidence supporting astrology,
but the very notion that stars and planets determine our physical and
psychological makeup conﬂicts with a good deal of what we know
about human physiology and psychology. Research has shown that our
physical characteristics are determined by the information encoded in
our genes. All the tissues in our body are manufactured according to
this information, and all our genes are present in the fertilized egg from
which we developed. So our basic physical constitution is determined
by our genes at the moment of conception—not by the heavens at the
moment of birth, as astrologers would have us believe.
It is the difﬁculty of explaining how stars and planets could pos-
sibly inﬂuence our personalities and careers that makes the claims of
astrology so hard to swallow. To the best of our knowledge, the uni-
verse contains only four forces: gravity, electromagnetism, the strong
nuclear force, and the weak nuclear force. Everything that happens in
the world results from the action of one or more of these forces. The
range of the strong and weak nuclear forces, however, is very limited—
they can only affect things in and around atoms. So if stars and plan-
ets affect us, it cannot be by their means.
That leaves gravity and electromagnetism. Their range is poten-
tially unlimited. But the strength of these forces diminishes the farther
they get from their source. The gravitational and electromagnetic
ASTROLOGY REVISITED
87

forces reaching us from the stars and planets are extremely weak. The
book you are now reading, for example, exerts a gravitational force
about a billion times greater at the point you’re holding it than does
Mars when it is closest to Earth. Similarly, the electromagnetic radia-
tion from the radio and television transmitters all around us is hun-
dreds of millions of times greater than that from the planets.48 Thus
there is no known way that stars or planets could signiﬁcantly affect
us. That’s not to say that they don’t; it’s just to say that no one has
given us a plausible theory of how they do.
In 1975, 186 scientists published a letter alerting the public to
the fact that there is no evidence for the claims of astrology. They
proclaimed:
We, the undersigned—astronomers, astrophysicists, and scientists in
other ﬁelds—wish to caution the public against the unquestioning 
acceptance of the predictions and advice given privately and publicly
by astrologers. Those who wish to believe in astrology should realize
that there is no scientiﬁc foundation for its tenets. . . . It is simply a
mistake to imagine that the forces exerted by stars and planets at the
moment of birth can in any way shape our futures. Neither is it true
that the positions of distant heavenly bodies make certain days or 
periods more favorable to particular kinds of action, or that the sign
under which one was born determines one’s compatibility or incom-
patibility with other people.49
Unfortunately, the letter seems to have had little effect. A 2005
Gallup poll found that 25 percent of Americans believe that astrology
works. Even more ominous, during the 1980s, then-President Ronald
Reagan was making decisions regarding affairs of state on the basis of
astrological predictions.50
Why, with so little evidence to support it, do people continue to
believe in astrology? For one thing, most people are probably
unaware of the many studies that have found no substantiation for
astrology. These studies have not received much media coverage,
and newspapers running astrology columns don’t usually preface
them with caveats such as “for entertainment purposes only.” For
another, astrologers like to give the impression that it all makes per-
fectly good scientiﬁc sense. Linda Goodman, for example, writes,
“Science recognizes the Moon’s power to move great bodies of water.
Since man himself consists of seventy percent water, why should he
be immune to such forceful planetary pulls?”51 He isn’t. But, as we
have seen, the effect must be negligible given the miniscule level of
the force, and there is no reason to believe that extraterrestrial grav-
ity signiﬁcantly affects our physical or psychological development.
88
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE

Why, then, does belief in astrology persist? Some, like the scientists
objecting to its widespread acceptance, claim that its appeal derives
from the diminished sense of personal responsibility it provides:
In these uncertain times many long for the comfort of having guid-
ance in making decisions. They would like to believe in a destiny pre-
determined by astral forces beyond their control. However, we must
all face the world, and we must realize that our futures lie in ourselves,
and not in the stars.52
Others believe that its appeal derives from an increased sense of unity it
provides. Historian Theodore Roszak writes, “The modern fascination
with astrology—even in its crudest forms—stems from a growing nos-
talgia for that older, more uniﬁed sense of nature in which the sun,
moon and stars were experienced as a vast network of living conscious-
ness.”53 There is probably an element of truth in both these assessments.
Many people probably ﬁnd astrology appealing because it seems
to describe them accurately. It seems to do so because the descriptions
offered are so general that they apply to practically everybody (see
the discussion of the Forer effect in Chapter 5). One of the most dra-
matic examples of the Forer effect comes from Michel Gauquelin.
Gauquelin placed an advertisement in a French newspaper offering a
personalized horoscope to anyone who would send him their name,
address, birthday, and birthplace. About 150 people responded to the
ad, and Gauquelin sent them a ten-page horoscope, a questionnaire,
and a return envelope. The horoscope read, in part, as follows:
As he is a Virgo-Jovian, instinctive warmth of power is allied with the
resources of the intellect, lucidity, wit. . . . He may appear as someone
who submits himself to social norms, fond of property, and endowed
with a moral sense which is comforting—that of a worthy, right-
thinking, middle-class citizen. . . . The subject tends to belong 
wholeheartedly to the Venusian side. His emotional life is in the 
forefront—his affection towards others, his family ties, his home, his
intimate circle . . . sentiments . . . which usually ﬁnd their expression
in total devotion to others, redeeming love, or altruistic sacriﬁces . . .
a tendency to be more pleasant in one’s own home, to love one’s
house, to enjoy having a charming home.54
Ninety-four percent of those who returned the questionnaire said that
the horoscope described them accurately, and 90 percent said that
their friends and relatives agreed with that assessment. The horoscope,
however, was that of notorious mass murderer, Dr. Marcel Petiot, who
lured unsuspecting Nazi escapees into his home with promises of aid
only to rob them, murder them, and dissolve their bodies in quicklime
(calcium oxide). He was accused of twenty-seven murders but boasted
ASTROLOGY REVISITED
89

of sixty-three. Funny that so many ﬁne upstanding citizens of France
would claim the horoscope of a mass murderer as their own.
How, then, should we think about astrology? The ﬁrst thing to
note is that no one can legitimately claim to know that astrology is
true. Such a claim conﬂicts with expert opinion and, as we have seen,
claims that conﬂict with expert opinion cannot be known (unless it can
be shown beyond a reasonable doubt that the experts are mistaken).
Astrology also conﬂicts with a lot of our background beliefs. Accept-
ing astrology would mean rejecting large tracts of physics, astronomy,
biology, and psychology. When faced with such conﬂicts, the thing to
do is to proportion our belief to the evidence. In the case of astrology,
however, there is no evidence to proportion it to, for none of its claims
has been veriﬁed. So the degree of belief it warrants is negligible.
Although perception, introspection, reason, and memory are
sources of knowledge, they can also be sources of error. The mind is
not just a blank slate that passively records the information it receives.
Instead, it is an active information processor that manipulates that
information in an attempt to make sense of it. If that information is
inaccurate, incomplete, or inconsistent, the conclusions we draw from
it can be mistaken. In the next chapter, we will examine the myriad
ways in which our senses can fool us.
SUMMARY
Factual knowledge concerns the truth of propositions and is therefore
referred to as propositional knowledge. We possess this kind of knowledge
when we have a true belief supported by good reasons. Reasons confer prob-
ability on propositions. The better the reasons, the more likely it is that the
proposition they support is true. Some think that to know a proposition, we
must have reasons that establish it beyond a shadow of a doubt. But knowl-
edge requires only that we have reasons good enough to put the proposition
beyond a reasonable doubt. A proposition is beyond a reasonable doubt
when it provides the best explanation of something.
If we have good reasons to doubt a proposition, then we cannot be said
to know it. We have good reasons to doubt it if it conﬂicts with other propo-
sitions we have good reason to believe. We also have good reasons to doubt
it if it conﬂicts with our background information—our massive system of
well-supported beliefs, many of which we would regard as common sense.
The more background information a proposition conﬂicts with, the more
reason there is to doubt it. Likewise, since the opinions of experts are gen-
erally reliable, we have good reason to doubt a proposition if it conﬂicts
with such opinions. But we must be careful: Just because someone is an
expert in one ﬁeld doesn’t mean that he or she is an expert in another.
The traditional sources of knowledge are perception, introspection,
memory, and reason. They are not infallible guides to the truth, for our use
90
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE

of them can be distorted by many factors. But if we have no reason to doubt
what’s disclosed to us through these, then we’re justiﬁed in believing it.
Faith—unjustiﬁed belief—is often considered to be another source of
knowledge. But unjustiﬁed belief cannot constitute knowledge. Intuition
conceived as a kind of sixth sense like ESP cannot be regarded as a source of
knowledge without evidence showing that it is in fact a reliable guide to
truth. Intuition as a type of heightened sensory perception, however, has
been shown to be actual. Some people consider mystical experiences reliable
guides to deep truths. They may be correct, but we cannot simply assume
that they are—we must corroborate the experiences by applying our usual
tests of knowledge.
In light of all this, we can ask whether we have good reasons for believ-
ing in astrology. The answer is no: The claim that astrology is true is not
supported by any good evidence, and it conﬂicts with expert opinion and
with a tremendous amount of our background information.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. What besides true belief do you need in order to have knowledge?
2. When are you justiﬁed in believing a proposition to be true?
3. When do you have good reason for doubting that a proposition is
true?
4. What are the sources of knowledge?
5. Is faith a source of knowledge?
6. Are we justiﬁed in believing the claims of astrology?
EVALUATE THESE CLAIMS. ARE THEY REASONABLE? 
WHY OR WHY NOT?
1. Dr. Thomson says that crystals have no healing power. He’s just say-
ing that so you won’t go to crystal healers.
2. As a practicing physicist, I can assure you that adding ﬂuoride to our
water will cause serious mental problems.
3. Madam X said they would ﬁnd the body in the ditch and they did.
Doesn’t that prove that some psychic detectives are real?
4. Some say that love is possible only between people with the same
color aura. My aura is orange and my girlfriend’s aura is green. Orange
and green are not compatible. I guess we should break up.
5. Morey Gomez, the famous psychic, announced that the stock market
would go up by 20 percent in the next six months. So now is the time
to invest.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Suppose you are a scientiﬁcally minded person and ﬁnd yourself in a
culture that believes in astrology. What could you do to show them
the error of their ways?
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
91

2. Tarot cards are another ancient form of divination. A recent series of
television commercials claims, “Tarot cards never lie.” Is this true? Are
you justiﬁed in believing it? Why or why not? Discuss how one might
go about assessing this claim.
FIELD PROBLEM
Assignment: Do research on the Internet to determine which of the following
statements conﬂicts with expert opinion:
•
Current scientiﬁc evidence shows that “intercessory” prayer can improve
people’s medical conditions.
•
The images of ghosts (disembodied spirits) have been captured on
ﬁlm.
•
Some of the world’s ancient feats of architecture (e.g., the Great 
Pyramid, Mayan temples, etc.) could have been accomplished only
with the help of intelligent visitors from outer space.
•
Roswell, New Mexico, is the site of an actual crash of an alien 
spacecraft.
CRITICAL READING AND WRITING
I. Read the passage below and answer the following questions.
1. What is the claim being made in this passage?
2. Are any reasons offered to support the claim?
3. Does the claim conﬂict with expert opinion? Who are the experts
in this case?
4. Does the idea that extraterrestrials are visiting Earth conﬂict with
our background knowledge? If so, how?
5. What kind of evidence would convince you that extraterrestrials
are visiting Earth?
II. Write a 200-word critique of this passage, focusing on how well its
claim is supported by good reasons, whether the claim conﬂicts with
our background knowledge or other statements we have good reason
to believe, and why you think accepting the claim would be reason-
able (or unreasonable).
Passage 3
The evidence that extraterrestrials are visiting Earth and currently operating
in our skies on a regular uninterrupted basis is extensive beyond a shadow of
a doubt both in scope and detail. In its totality it comprises a body of evi-
dence so profound that it has numbed the human experience of all govern-
ment and religious leaders around the world into an absolute de facto policy
of denial. This would also include most if not all members of the mainstream
scientiﬁc community who fear the social stigma associated with the subject.
(From a UFO/alien visitation Web site.)
92
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE

NOTES
1. Proverbs 4:7–9; Francis Bacon, “De Haeiresibus,” Meditationes Sacrae.
2. Richard Lewinsohn, Science, Prophecy, and Prediction (New York: Harper
Brothers, 1961), p. 53.
3. Ibid., p. 54.
4. Ibid.
5. Ibid., p. 59.
6. Plato, “Meno,” 98b, trans. W. K. C. Guthrie, in The Collected Works of
Plato, ed. Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns (Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press, 1961), p. 382.
7. We sometimes say things that seem to suggest that knowledge doesn’t
require belief. For example, after winning a prize we might remark, “I
know that I won, but I still don’t believe it.” What we mean, though,
is not that we doubt that we’ve won the prize but that we haven’t got-
ten used to the fact that we did. Intellectually we’ve accepted the situ-
ation, but emotionally we haven’t.
8. Plato, “Meno,” 98a, p. 381.
9. Ernest Sosa, “Knowledge and Intellectual Virtue,” Monist, March 1985.
10. W. K. Clifford, “The Ethics of Belief,” in Philosophy and Contemporary 
Issues, ed. J. Burr and M. Goldinger (New York: Macmillan, 1984), 
p. 142.
11. T. H. Huxley, Science and Christian Tradition (London: Macmillan, 1894),
p. 310.
12. Brand Blanshard, Reason and Belief (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1975), p. 410.
13. Clifford, “Ethics of Belief,” p. 142.
14. Bertrand Russell, Let the People Think (London: William Clowes, 1941),
p. 1.
15. Ibid.
16. Ibid., p. 2.
17. Ibid.
18. Clive Backster, “Evidence of a Primary Perception in Plant Life,”
International Journal of Parapsychology 10 (1968): 329–48.
19. K. A. Horowitz, D. C. Lewis, and E. L. Gasteiger, “Plant ‘Primary 
Perception’: Electrophysical Unresponsiveness to Brine Shrimp
Killing,” Science 189 (1975): 478–80.
20. Sosa, “Knowledge and Intellectual Virtue,” p. 230ff.
21. The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (Boston: Houghton
Mifﬂin, 1970), p. 471.
22. Richard Dawkins, “Viruses of the Mind,” Free Inquiry 13, no. 3 (Summer
1993): 37–39.
23. Tertullian, “On the Flesh of Christ,” Apology.
24. Oskar Pfungst, Clever Hans: The Horse of Mr. von Osten, ed. Robert 
Rosenthal (New York: Rinehart and Winston, 1965), p. 261.
25. Ibid., pp. 262–63.
NOTES
93

26. Robert Rosenthal, Experimenter Effects in Behavioral Research (New York:
Irvington, 1976), pp. 143–46.
27. Ibid., pp. 146–49.
28. Simon Newcomb, “Modern Occultism,” in A Skeptic’s Handbook of
Parapsychology, ed. Paul Kurtz (Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1985), 
p. 151.
29. Fritjof Capra, The Tao of Physics (New York: Bantam Books, 1975), p. 16.
30. Bertrand Russell, Mysticism, quoted in Walter Kaufmann, Critique of 
Philosophy and Religion (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1961), p. 315.
31. Capra, Tao of Physics, p. 294.
32. Lawrence LeShan, The Medium, the Mystic, and the Physicist (New York:
Viking Press, 1974), p. 77.
33. A number of writers have made similar claims. See, for example,
Michael Talbot, Mysticism and the New Physics (New York: Bantam
Books, 1981); Amaury de Riencourt, The Eye of Shiva (New York:
William Morrow, 1981); and Gary Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters
(New York: William Morrow, 1979).
34. Cited in Paul Kurtz, The Transcendental Temptation (Buffalo: Prometheus
Books, 1991), p. 96.
35. Cited in Evelyn Underhill, Mysticism (New York: World/Meridian,
1972), p. 292.
36. Shankara, Crest-Jewel of Discrimination (Hollywood: Vedanta Press,
1975), p. 106.
37. Cited in Walpola Rahula, What the Buddha Taught (New York: Grove
Press, 1974), pp. 25–26.
38. John Hick, Death and Eternal Life (San Francisco: Harper and Row,
1976), p. 339.
39. ”A Short History of Consciousness,” Omni, October 1993, p. 64.
40. George O. Abell, “Astrology,” in Science and the Paranormal (New York:
Scribner’s, 1981), pp. 83–84.
41. Ellic Howe, “Astrology,” in Man, Myth, and Magic, ed. Richard
Cavendish (New York: Marshall Cavendish, 1970), p. 155.
42. Zusne and Jones, Anomalistic Psychology, p. 219.
43. R. B. Culver and P. A. Ianna, The Gemini Syndrome: A Scientiﬁc Evaluation of
Astrology (Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1984).
44. David Voas, “Ten Million Marriages: An Astrological Detective Story,”
Skeptical Inquirer, 32:2 (March/April 2008) 55.
45. Cited in I. W. Kelly, “Astrology, Cosmobiology, and Humanistic 
Astrology,” in Philosophy of Science and the Occult, ed. Patrick Grim 
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1982), p. 52.
46. Shawn Carlson, “A Double-Blind Test of Astrology,” Nature 318
(1985).
47. Geoffrey Dean and Arthur Mather, Recent Advances in Natal Astrology: A
Critical Review 1976–1990 (Rockport: Para Research, 1977), p. 1.
48. Abell, “Astrology,” p. 87.
94
FOUR: KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF, AND EVIDENCE

49. ”Objections to Astrology,” Humanist 35, no. 5 (September/October
1975): 4–6.
50. Donald T. Regan, For the Record: From Wall Street to Washington (San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1988).
51. Linda Goodman, Linda Goodman’s Sun Signs (New York: Bantam Books,
1972), p. 477.
52. ”Objections to Astrology.”
53. Theodore Roszak, Why Astrology Endures (San Francisco: Robert Briggs
Associates, 1980), p. 3.
54. Quoted in Michel Gauquelin, Astrology and Science (London: Peter
Davies, 1969), p. 149.
NOTES
95

96
FIVE
Looking for Truth in
Personal Experience
I
SAW IT WITH MY own eyes.” 
“I know what I heard and felt.”
”I could no longer doubt my own senses—what seemed
utterly impossible was . . . real.”
Such words have come from many of us who’ve experi-
enced, up close and personal, the extraordinary, the bizarre, the
weird. They’re often spoken with conviction, with an air of cer-
tainty. After all, we trust our own sensory experiences and the
interpretations we put on them. We trust them because relying
on our senses works, at least for most purposes. Doing so proves
accurate enough, often enough, for us to make our way in the
world. So, in the aftermath of an extraordinary personal expe-
rience, it’s no wonder when someone asks, “Can we reasonably
deny the evidence of our own senses?”—and concludes, “No!”
If you believe every-
thing, you are not a
believer in anything
at all.
—SUFI SAYING

SEEMING AND BEING
97
SEEMING AND BEING
Everard Feilding, an amateur magician and researcher of psychic phe-
nomena, was such a someone. In the ﬁrst decade of the twentieth
century, he investigated Eusapia Palladino, the world-famous medium
(a person said to contact spirits). Feilding was a skeptic concerning
such matters and had helped to expose trickery among many who
claimed paranormal powers. But he changed his tune after the unfor-
gettable experience of sitting in on several seances with Palladino.
Here’s what he said about those encounters:
All my own experiments in physical mediumship had resulted in the
discovery of the most childish frauds. Failure had followed upon 
failure. . . . The ﬁrst seance with Eusapia, accordingly, provoked
chieﬂy a feeling of surprise; the second, of irritation—irritation at
ﬁnding oneself confronted with a foolish but apparently insoluble
problem. . . . After the sixth, for the ﬁrst time, I ﬁnd that my mind,
from which the stream of events has hitherto run off like rain from 
a macintosh, is at last beginning to be capable of absorbing them. 
For the ﬁrst time I have the absolute conviction that our observation 
is not mistaken. I realize, as an appreciable fact in life, that, from an
empty cabinet I have seen hands and heads come forth, that from
behind the curtain of that empty cabinet I have been seized by living
ﬁngers, the existence and position of the very nails of which could be
felt. I have seen this extraordinary woman sitting visible outside the
curtain, held hand and foot by my colleagues, immobile except for
the occasional straining of a limb, while some entity within the cur-
tain has over and over again pressed my hand in a position clearly
beyond her reach. I refuse to entertain the possibility of a doubt that
we were the victims of hallucination.1
Such compelling stories of personal experience leading to belief
in the paranormal are numerous in past and present. Maybe you even
have one of your own. In several surveys, people who believe in the
paranormal have cited personal experience as the most important rea-
son for their belief. In one study, believers were asked their main rea-
sons for their belief in ESP. Personal experience got more votes than
media reports, experiences of friends or relatives, and laboratory evi-
dence. Even many of the skeptics in this study put a high premium on
personal experience. They said that they disbelieved because they
hadn’t yet experienced ESP.2 So Feilding’s emphasis on personal expe-
rience seems typical.
But there’s a problem here. Despite Feilding’s experience being
direct and firsthand, despite his impressive experience, despite his
In the ﬁelds of
observation chance
favors only the mind
that is prepared.
—LOUIS PASTEUR

98
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
certainty in concluding that the paranormal phenomena in ques-
tion were real, there are good reasons to believe that his conclu-
sion was in fact wrong. (We’ll return to his case later in this chapter.)
These reasons do not involve questioning Feilding’s integrity, intel-
ligence, or sanity. Neither do they involve the unjustified asser-
tion that paranormal events are impossible. More important, what
we’ve said about Feilding’s conclusion could be said about many sim-
ilar conclusions based on other equally impressive extraordinary
experiences.
The fact is, though our experiences (and our judgments about
those experiences) are reliable enough for most practical purposes,
they often mislead us in the strangest, most unexpected ways—
especially when the experiences are exceptional or mysterious. This
is because our perceptual capacities, our memories, our states of con-
sciousness, our information-processing abilities have perfectly natu-
ral but amazing powers and limits. Apparently, most people are
unaware of these powers and limits. But these odd characteristics of
our minds are very inﬂuential. Because of them, as several psycholo-
gists have pointed out, we should expect to have many natural experi-
ences that seem for all the world like supernatural or paranormal
events. So even if the supernatural or paranormal didn’t exist, weird
things would still happen to us.
The point is not that every strange experience must indicate a
natural phenomenon—nor is it that every weird happening must be
supernatural. The point is that some ways of thinking about personal
experience help increase our chances of getting to the truth of the
matter. If our minds have peculiar characteristics that inﬂuence our
experience and how we judge that experience, we need to know
about those characteristics and understand how to think our way
through them—all the way through, to conclusions that make
sense. This feat involves critical thinking. But it also requires creative
thinking—a grand leap powered by an open mind past the obvious
answer, beyond the will to believe or disbelieve, toward new per-
spectives, to the best solution among several possibilities. This chap-
ter shows you how to take the ﬁrst step. The chapters that follow tell
you how to ﬁnish the job.
That first step is to understand and apply a simple but potent 
principle:
Just because something seems (feels, appears) real 
doesn’t mean that it is.

We can’t know for sure that an event or phenomenon has objec-
tive reality—that it’s not imagination, not “all in our heads”—just
because it appears to us to have objective reality. This is simply a log-
ical fact. We can’t infer what is from what seems. To draw such a con-
clusion is to commit an elementary fallacy of reasoning. It’s clearly
fallacious to say, “This event or phenomenon seems real; therefore, it
is real.” What’s more, the peculiar nature of our minds guarantees that
what seems will frequently not correspond to what is.
Now, in our daily routines, we usually do assume that what we see
is reality—that seeming is being. And we’re generally not disap-
pointed. But we’re at much greater risk for being dead wrong with
such assumptions when (1) our experience is uncorroborated (no one
else has shared our experience), (2) our conclusions are at odds with
all known previous experience, or (3) any of the peculiarities of our
minds could be at work.
Here’s how some of these peculiarities operate and how powerful
they can be.
PERCEIVING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS 
BELIEVE WHAT YOU SEE
The idea that our normal perceptions have a direct, one-to-one cor-
respondence to external reality—that they are like photographs of the
outer world—is wrong. Much research now suggests that perception
is constructive, that it’s in part something that our minds manufacture.
Thus what we perceive is determined, not only by what our eyes and
ears and other senses detect, but also by what we know, what we
expect, what we believe, and what our physiological state is. This
constructive tendency has survival value—it helps us make sense of
and deal successfully with the world. But it also means that seeing is
often not believing—rather, the reverse is true.
Perceptual Constancies
Consider what psychologists call perceptual constancies—our ten-
dency to have certain perceptual experiences regardless of the rele-
vant input from our senses. Research has demonstrated these
constancies again and again; they’re stock items in basic psychology
texts. Psychologist Terence Hines believes that they’re some of the
best illustrations of our constructive perception at work, and he cites
three examples.3
One is color constancy. People often perceive an object as a
certain color because they know that the object is supposed to be
that color—even if the object is not that color at all. In one early
Heaven and hell
have been located
inside the human
brain.
—JOHN TAYLOR
Believing is seeing.
—JOHN SLADER
PERCEIVING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS BELIEVE WHAT YOU SEE
99

experiment, people were shown cutouts of trees and donkeys, which
they perceived as green and gray, as they should be—even though all
the cutouts were made from the same green material and lit by a red
light to make them appear gray.4 Such ﬁndings help to explain how
we sometimes can be quite wrong when remembering colors.
Then there’s the example of size constancy. If you watch a truck
rumble past you and speed into the distance, do you perceive the
truck to become smaller? Of course not. You perceive the size of
familiar objects as roughly constant no matter how far away they are.
The image on your retinas shrinks as an object gets farther away, but
you perceive the size of the object as unchanging. The reason is that
you know that distance has no effect on the actual size of physical
objects. With this knowledge your brain gives you perceptions of size
constancy, despite shrinking retinal images.
Amazingly enough, our knowledge of size constancy is learned.
We’re not born with it. And there have been reports of people in the
world who haven’t learned it. Anthropologist Colin Turnbull told of
the Ba Mbuti people who didn’t get a chance to learn about size con-
stancy because they lived in thick jungle where the only objects that
could be seen were always just a few yards away. When Turnbull took
one of these people out on an open plain, they saw several buffalo
grazing a few miles away. The Ba Mbuti asked what kind of insects
they were! Turnbull told him that they were buffalo twice the size of
the ones his people were used to. Turnbull’s companion refused to
believe him. So they drove to where the buffalo were. As they got
closer to the animals, and the buffalo appeared to get larger and
larger, the Ba Mbuti became frightened and said that it was witch-
craft. Turnbull writes, “Finally, when he realized that they were real
buffalo he was no longer afraid, but what puzzled him still was why
they had been so small, and whether they really had been small and
had so suddenly grown larger, or whether it had been some kind of
trickery.”5
The Role of Expectation
We’re usually completely unaware of our many perceptual constan-
cies—just as we’re often oblivious to all the other ways that our brains
get into the construction business. One of these other ways is based
on the power of expectancy: We sometimes perceive exactly what we
expect to perceive, regardless of what’s real.
Research has shown that when people expect to perceive a cer-
tain stimulus (for example, see a light or hear a tone), they often do
perceive it—even when no stimulus is present. In one experiment,
subjects were told to walk along a corridor until they saw a light ﬂash.
100
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
Whatever one
believes to be true
either is true or
becomes true in
one's mind.
—JOHN C. LILLY

Sure enough, some of them stopped, saying they had seen a ﬂash—
but the light hadn’t ﬂashed at all. In other studies, subjects expected
to experience an electric shock, or feel warmth, or smell certain odors,
and many did experience what they expected even though none of
the appropriate stimuli had been given. All that was really given was
the suggestion that a stimulus might occur. The subjects had halluci-
nated (or perceived, or apparently perceived, objects or events that
have no objective existence). So if we’re normal, expectancy or sug-
gestion can cause us to perceive what simply isn’t there. Studies show
that this perception is especially true when the stimulus is vague or
ambiguous or when clear observation is difﬁcult.
We’ve all had such hallucinations. Psychologist Andrew Neher
cites the common experience of looking at a clock and “seeing” the
second hand move—then realizing that the clock isn’t running.6 Have
you ever seen someone standing in the shadows on a dark night as you
walk home alone and then discovered that the person was a shrub?
Have you ever been in the shower and heard the phone ring, only to
realize that the ringing was all in your mind?
Looking for Clarity in Vagueness
Another kind of perceptual construction happens every time we’re
confronted with a vague, formless stimulus but nevertheless perceive
something very distinct in it. Take the moon, for instance. In the
United States, we see the ﬁgure of a man in it. But East Indians see a
rabbit, Samoans a woman weaving, and Chinese a monkey pounding
rice. We often look at clouds, wallpaper, smoke, ﬁre, fuzzy photos,
murky paintings, water stains on walls and see elephants, castles,
faces, demons, nude ﬁgures—you name it. This trick is technically a
type of illusion, or misperception, called pareidolia. We simply see a
vague stimulus as something it’s not. We etch meaning into the mean-
ingless. Psychologists point out that once we see a particular image in
the clouds or smoke, we often ﬁnd it difﬁcult to see anything else,
even if we want to. This tendency takes on more importance when we
consider some of the conclusions people have reached when they
failed to take it into account.
Consider: On the surface of the planet Mars, there’s a monument
of a human face, one mile wide—and this amazing artifact is clearly
revealed in a NASA photograph. This startling claim has been made
by several people in books, magazines, and on television. They have
suggested that the face is the work of an alien civilization.
The NASA photo is real enough (see next page). It was taken by
the Viking spacecraft in 1976, along with many others. But it’s an
ambiguous mixture of light and shadow, suggestive of a face but subject
PERCEIVING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS BELIEVE WHAT YOU SEE
101
Things are not always
what they seem.
—PHAEDRUS

102
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
to various interpretations. Planetary scientists have emphasized that
the photo shows a natural formation. Indeed, Mars experts who’ve
seen the photo don’t consider it to show anything unusual at all. A key
space scientist who was involved in the Viking mission said, “The
object does not even look very much like a face, but the correlating
sense of the human brain ﬁlls in the missing details to make one think
of a face.”7
Now it is possible that an alien civilization sculpted a massive
human face on Mars. But given our tendency to overlay our own pat-
terns onto vague stimuli, it’s a mistake to look at something as ambigu-
ous as the Mars photo and conclude that it is, in fact, a sculpted
human face. To do so is to ignore at least one other very good possi-
bility: our own constructive perception.
Overlooking or rejecting this possibility plays a part in countless
bizarre cases of pareidolia—like Maria Rubio, the New Mexico
housewife who in 1977 noticed the odd shape of skillet burns on one
of her tortillas. She thought that the tortilla looked like the face of
Jesus Christ with a crown of thorns—and took it as a sign of Christ’s
second coming. Pilgrims by the thousands came to see the tortilla,
encased in glass. Or what about the woman who said in 2004 that
her ten-year-old grilled cheese sandwich—with a bite taken out of
it—bore the very image of the Virgin Mary? The sandwich sold on
eBay for $28,000.
The famous face
on Mars,
photographed by
the Viking 1
orbiter in 1976, is
one mile across
and has a nose
and mouth formed
by shadows.

Similarly, in 1991, Georgia choir member Joyce Simpson saw the
face of Jesus in a forkful of spaghetti on a Pizza Hut billboard. She was
debating whether to quit the choir when she looked up and saw Christ’s
face. After the sighting was reported in a local paper, dozens of motorists
claimed to see Christ in the billboard. Jesus was not the only ﬁgure seen,
however. Others saw Willie Nelson, Jim Morrison, and John Lennon.8
Another example of pareidolia is “backward masking,” the belief
that certain messages are placed on a recording backwards to mask
their true meaning. The idea is that the brain will unconsciously deci-
pher the message and be affected by it. In 1989, the parents of suicide
victim James Vance sued the heavy metal rock group Judas Priest and
CBS Records on the grounds that a series of backward-masked mes-
sages (as well as forward subliminal ones) on the album Stained Class
caused him to commit suicide. They didn’t win their case, however,
because there was no evidence that Judas Priest had intentionally put
any subliminal messages in their album. But even if they had, there is
no evidence that backward or subliminal messages can have any effect
on people’s behavior9—something to keep in mind if you ever con-
sider investing in subliminal self-help tapes.
This photo shows
the famous face
on Mars photo-
graphed by the
Mars Global
Surveyor in 1998.
Planetary geolo-
gists say that the
feature is due to
natural processes.
PERCEIVING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS BELIEVE WHAT YOU SEE
103

104
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
At least one group has intentionally put a backward message on
one of their albums. At the end of the song “Goodbye Blue Sky” on
Pink Floyd’s album The Wall, there is some very faint mufﬂed speech.
When played backward, someone is clearly saying: “Congratulations,
you have just discovered the secret message. Please send your answer
to Old Pink, care of the funny farm. . . .”10 Not a particularly satanic
message, but a hidden one nonetheless.
The Blondlot Case
Perceptual construction, in all its forms, explains some of the strangest
episodes in the history of science. It explains why scientists in Nazi
Germany thought they could see nonexistent physical differences
between the blood particles of Jews and those of the Aryan man. It
explains why over 100 years ago the Italian astronomer Giovanni
Maria Rubio and
her tortilla image
of Jesus.
Besides learning to
see, there is another
art to be learned—
not to see what is
not.
—MARIA MITCHELL

Schiaparelli (and later the American astronomer Percival Lowell)
claimed to see canals on Mars. (Lowell even published a detailed map
of the canals.) Photos taken by Mariner 9 show nothing on Mars that
corresponds to what Schiaparelli and Lowell said they saw.11 And
perceptual construction explains the infamous case of Professor René
Blondlot.
Blondlot (1849–1930) was a member of the French Academy of
Sciences and a highly respected physicist at the University of Nancy
in France. In 1903, not long after scientists discovered X rays and other
forms of radiation, Blondlot announced the discovery of yet another
type of radiation. He called it N rays, after his university. His research
indicated that the presence of N rays could be detected by the human
eye and that they were emitted by certain metals (but not wood). They
increased the brightness of a spark. When they were directed at
objects coated with luminous paint, the objects became brighter. And
when N rays were present, they helped the eye see better in dim light.
Soon dozens of research studies conﬁrmed Blondlot’s discovery. Many
scientists reported other amazing properties of N rays.12
But all was not well. Scientists outside France weren’t able to
duplicate Blondlot’s results. Many physicists doubted the existence of
N rays because all the tests were based on subjective judgments.
Instead of using instruments to gather objective data, researchers
relied on people’s observations to determine the results. For example,
people were used to judge whether there was an increase in brightness
of an object (a standard test for the presence of N rays). Most scien-
tists knew then, as they know now, that such subjective judgments can
be affected by belief or expectancy.
One of those skeptical scientists was American physicist Robert
W. Wood. In 1904 he paid a visit to Blondlot’s laboratory. There,
without Blondlot’s knowledge, he tested Blondlot and others to see if
N rays were real or just wishful thinking. In one N-ray experiment,
Wood was to assist Blondlot by placing a sheet of lead between a
source of N rays and a card coated with luminous paint. N rays were
supposed to make the paint brighter, except when the lead sheet was
placed in their path. (Blondlot had found that lead completely
blocked N rays.) Blondlot was to observe the changes in the paint’s
brightness as the lead sheet was inserted or removed. But without
Blondlot’s knowledge, Wood tried something that revealed the truth
about N rays. Wood repeatedly told Blondlot that the lead sheet was
in place when in fact it wasn’t or that the sheet had been removed
when it was really still there. Blondlot’s observations then followed
an amazing pattern. If he believed that the lead sheet wasn’t in place,
and thus not blocking N rays, he reported that the paint was brighter.
“I can’t believe that,”
said Alice.“Can’t
you?” the Queen
said in a pitying
tone.“Try again:
draw a long breath
and shut your eyes.”
—LEWIS CARROLL
PERCEIVING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS BELIEVE WHAT YOU SEE
105

If he believed that the lead sheet was there, blocking N rays, he
reported that the paint was dimmer. His observations depended on
his belief and had nothing to do with whether the lead sheet was actually in
place.
106
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
Phoenix Lights
In the crystal-clear night skies outside of
Phoenix, AZ on March 13, 1997 there
appeared some of the most spectacular, baf-
ﬂing, and eerie aerial phenomena ever wit-
nessed. So much so that NBC’s Dateline
dubbed it “the number one UFO event caught
on tape.” There were actually two events that
night: (i) around 8:30 p.m. a mysterious
boomerang or V-shaped object (which many
described as a “mother ship”) passed overhead,
and (ii) around 10:00 p.m. a string of glowing
incandescent orbs suddenly appeared on the
horizon and then vanished. Scott Petrie
described the orbs this way: “There were three
balls of light of a type and color I will never
forget. It was like watching a cartoon as the
orbs were lit from within. They were an orange
color like ﬁre with red and yellow churning
inside each one. Once all seven were lit up one
at a time (north to south), they just hung there
about 500 ft. above the southeastern part of the
airport and river bottom.”13 Ofﬁcials at the
Davis-Monthan Air Force Base in Tucson, AZ
originally reported that there were no military
maneuvers taking place that night. They later
changed their story, claiming that they had
looked at the wrong log book. UFO enthusiasts
smelled a cover up. “How could they have
looked at the wrong log book?” they asked.
Very easily, it turns out.
The Davis-Monthan Air force Base keeps two
ﬂight logs: one for resident aircraft and another
for visiting. When asked about air trafﬁc on the
night of March 13, the ofﬁcer in charge,
Captain Eileen Bienz, only consulted the resi-
dent ﬂight log. If she would have consulted the
visitor log, she would have discovered that the
104 ﬁghter squadron of the Maryland Air
National Guard was conducting operations over
the North Tac military range.14 The Maryland
Air National Guard regularly comes to Arizona
to practice dropping ﬂares because they cannot
drop ﬂares over Maryland. And the ﬂares they
dropped were not just ordinary ﬂares; they were
parachute ﬂares which can hover or even move
upward as a result of the heat given off by the
ﬂame. Colonel Ed Jones, who piloted one of the
Thunderbolt A-10s in the squadron, said that as
they were heading for home, he reminded his
pilots to eject their leftover parachute ﬂares.15
So there’s no need to go extraterrestrial to
explain the Phoenix lights. Whatever intelligent
movement they may have appeared to exhibit
may well have been the result of the ﬂares mov-
ing up and down.
What about the v-shaped mother ship? That
certainly couldn’t have been ﬂares. But it, too,
seems to have a fairly prosaic explanation.
Tony Ortega reports that “a young man with a
10 inch Dobsonian telescope, Mitch Stanley,
spotted the vee from his backyard, and saw
that it was a formation of airplanes. Using a
magniﬁcation of 60x—which put him 60 times
closer to the vee than people only using their
eyes—could see that each light in the sky was
actually two; with one light under each squar-
ish wing. The planes still looked small in his
scope—suggesting that they were ﬂying at
high altitude—and he did not know what type
they were. But there was no doubt, he told me,
that they were planes.”16 There might have
been a mother ship in the area, but if so, you
would think that one of the many planes in the
sky that night would have spotted it.

Wood secretly manipulated other experiments in Blondlot’s labo-
ratory with similar results. If Blondlot, or some other observer,
believed N rays were present, he could see that they were—even in
situations where Wood had secretly changed the experiments so that
N rays should have been impossible to detect.
In 1904 Wood published his ﬁndings in the British scientiﬁc jour-
nal Nature. It became clear that Blondlot and other French scientists
had been victims of perceptual construction. They weren’t lying about
their observations, and they didn’t imagine their experience. Their
strong belief in N rays simply changed the way they perceived. Being
scientists didn’t protect them from a kind of perceptual distortion that
affects us all.
“Constructing” UFOs
This uncomfortable fact—that a phenomenon can be radically misper-
ceived by people who are sane, sober, honest, educated, and intelli-
gent—is seen even more clearly in UFO reports. Case in point: On
March 3, 1968, a UFO was sighted by multiple witnesses in several
states. In Tennessee, three intelligent, educated people (including the
mayor of a large city) saw a light in the night sky moving rapidly toward
them. They reported that they saw it pass overhead at about 1,000 feet
up; what they saw was a huge, metallic craft moving in silence. They
observed orange-colored ﬂames shooting out from behind it, with many
square-shaped windows lit from inside the object. In a report to the U.S.
Air Force, one of the witnesses said that the craft was shaped “like a fat
cigar. . . the size of one of our largest airplane fuselages, or larger.”
At about the same time, six people in Indiana spotted the same
UFO. Their report to the Air Force said that it was cigar-shaped, mov-
ing at treetop level, shooting rocketlike exhaust from its tail, and it
had many brightly lit windows. Around the same time, two people in
Ohio saw it too. But they said that they saw three luminous objects,
not one. One of these witnesses used her binoculars to get a good
look at the UFO. She submitted a detailed report to the Air Force that
said the objects were shaped like “inverted saucers,” ﬂying low and in
formation, silently cruising by.17
Fortunately, we know exactly what these witnesses (and many
others) saw in the sky that night. Records from the North American Air
Defense Command (NORAD) and other evidence show that at the
time of the UFO sighting, the rocket used to launch the Soviet Zond 4
spacecraft reentered the atmosphere, breaking into luminous fragments
as it sped across the sky. It zoomed in the same southwest-to-northeast
trajectory noted by the witnesses, crossing several states. The witnesses
simply saw the light show produced by the breakup of a rocket.18
It is easier to attrib-
ute UFO sightings to
the known irrationali-
ties of terres-
trials than to the
unknown efforts of
extraterrestrials.
—RICHARD FEYNMAN
PERCEIVING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS BELIEVE WHAT YOU SEE
107

108
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
So where did those interesting details come from—the giant
craft, the inverted saucers, the square-shaped windows, the metallic
cigar-shape? They were constructed. As Hines says,
These additions and embellishments were purely the creation of the
witnesses’ minds: not because they were crazy, drunk, or stupid, but
because that is the way the human brain works. It can be said that
these witnesses did perceive what they said they did. This doesn’t
mean, however, that what they perceived was the same as what was
really there. Note, too, how inaccurate was the estimate of the
object’s altitude. . . . [Witnesses] estimated about 1,000 feet while, in
fact, the reentering rocket was miles high and scores of miles away.
This type of gross inaccuracy frequently occurs when one sees a light
in the sky with no background, as is the case at night. Under these
circumstances, the many cues the brain uses to judge distance are not
present, so no accurate basis for judgment exists.19
Image of Bigfoot
from the 1967
Patterson ﬁlm.

Tracking Down Bigfoot
North America is said to be inhabited not just
by ordinary humans and familiar animals but by
a mysterious species seldom seen—an outsized
two-legged ape-man called Bigfoot, or
Sasquatch. He is thought to be a hairy and
smelly primate, standing seven to ten feet tall
and weighing in at 500 to 1,000 pounds. He is
reclusive and skittish, roaming alone or in small
family groups in the forests of North America,
especially western United States and Canada.
He’s a famous guy, the subject of movies,
books, Web sites, and news accounts, and he’s
studied and hunted relentlessly by Bigfoot
enthusiasts and investigators.
Bigfoot is unknown to science, yet his follow-
ers have amassed an enormous amount of evi-
dence for his existence. There are thousands of
eyewitness accounts, stories told by people who
claim to have seen a Bigfoot monster ﬁrst-hand.
There are also many oversized footprints (or
plaster casts of footprints) thought to belong to
the creature. (It was the gigantic footprints that
inspired the name Bigfoot.) The evidence also is
said to include photographs, ﬁlm, and sound
recordings of Bigfoot vocalizations. Among
these, the most impressive is the so-called 
Patterson ﬁlm, a short 16-mm ﬁlm shot in 1967
by Roger Patterson and Bob Gimlin showing
what they said was Bigfoot walking through a
wilderness area in northern California.
Though a tiny handful of scientists believe
that Bigfoot is real and are dedicated to Bigfoot
investigations, most scientists (anthropologists,
for example) are not impressed by claims for
his existence. Part of the reason for skepticism
is the quality of the evidence, which is gener-
ally thought to be poor.
For example, a large part of the evidence for
Bigfoot consists of eyewitness accounts. But as
discussed in this chapter, eyewitness accounts
are generally unreliable. They are unreliable
because of the inﬂuence of expectancy and
belief, the effects of stress, selective attention,
memory construction, poor observational con-
ditions (darkness, faint stimuli, etc.), and other
factors. It’s well known that in many alleged
sightings, people mistake large animals such as
elk or bear for Bigfoot. Some Bigfoot
researchers say that 70 to 80 percent of sight-
ings are hoaxes or mistakes. To establish the
existence of a previously unknown animal,
scientists insist on better evidence than eyewit-
ness reports.
Bigfoot footprints seem to be plentiful, but
they too are problematic as evidence. Count-
less Sasquatch footprints have been faked by
pranksters who strap on huge feet and tramp
around the woods. Bigfoot investigators have
sometimes disagreed about the authenticity of
footprints, and even some veteran Bigfoot
researchers have been fooled by bogus foot-
prints. All these factors raise doubts about foot-
print evidence.
There are no good-quality photos of Big-
foot. Existing photos are generally indistinct or
grainy and offer no reliable evidence for Big-
foot. The Patterson ﬁlm has been controversial
practically from the day it was made. Bigfoot
enthusiasts claim that the ﬁlm could not have
been faked. Many critics disagree. And some
scientists have argued that because of the dubi-
ous quality of the ﬁlm, it cannot provide evi-
dence either for or against the existence of
Sasquatch. All of this shows that as evidence,
the ﬁlm is dubious.
Probably the main reason scientists do not
accept the Bigfoot claim is that it conﬂicts with
what we already know. Anthropology, biology,
and other sciences give us no reason to expect
that a creature like Bigfoot exists in North
America. There simply is nothing in our experi-
ence that unequivocally shows that such a crea-
ture exists. Someday maybe we will discover
that Bigfoot does exist after all. But based on
what we know now, we must give this possibil-
ity a low probability.
PERCEIVING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS BELIEVE WHAT YOU SEE
109

110
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
Even pilots, who are presumed to be experts at accurately observ-
ing objects in the sky, can be fooled by UFO construction of the per-
ceptual kind. For example, on June 5, 1969, near St. Louis, the pilots
of two airliners and an Air National Guard ﬁghter plane had a close
encounter with what they said was a whole squadron of UFOs. It was
late afternoon when the copilot of one of the airliners ﬁrst spotted the
UFOs. A Federal Aviation Administration trafﬁc controller who hap-
pened to be riding in the cockpit as an observer later reported that it
seemed that the squadron would collide with the airliner. He said they
seemed to come frighteningly close—within several hundred feet of
the airliner! They were the color of “burnished aluminum” and shaped
like a “hydroplane.” Moments later, the crew of the other airliner
(eight miles west of the ﬁrst) radioed the tower reporting that the
UFOs had just zoomed past them. Later, the ﬁghter pilot, ﬂying
behind the second airliner at 41,000 feet, radioed a near collision with
the UFOs. “Damn, they almost got me,” he said. At the last moment
the UFOs seemed to suddenly change course and climb out of his
way, suggesting that they were “under intelligent control.”
What was going on up there? UFO investigator Philip Klass has
shown that:
The identity of this “squadron of UFO’s” not only is now known
beyond all doubt, but they were photographed by an alert newspaper
photographer in Peoria, Illinois, named Alan Harkrader, Jr. His photo
shows a meteor ﬁreball, with a long, luminous tail of electriﬁed air,
followed by a smaller ﬂaming fragment, also with a long tail, ﬂying in
trail behind. Harkrader told me that he saw another fragment break
off but was unable to get a photo of it.20
The Harkrader photo and many eyewitness reports from the
ground in Illinois and Iowa show that the ﬁreball and its fragments
were not just a few hundred feet from the planes. The actual distance
was at least 125 miles.
UFO sightings are also complicated by another kind of percep-
tual construction, called the autokinetic effect. This effect refers to how,
for most people, a small stationary light in the dark will be perceived
as moving. This perception happens even if the person’s head remains
perfectly still. Psychologists theorize that the cause of this apparent
movement is small, involuntary movements of the eyeball. So a star or
bright planet can appear to move, creating the illusion of a UFO.
Research has shown that the autokinetic effect can be inﬂuenced by
the opinion of others. If someone says a light in the dark is moving in
a certain way, others will be more likely to report similar observa-
tions.21 Klass says that no single object has been mistaken as a ﬂying

saucer more often than the planet Venus, a very bright object in the
morning sky, and the autokinetic effect helps explain why.22
Perceptual construction in UFO sightings has been documented
many times, enough to demonstrate that no one is immune to it—not
pilots, not astronomers, not reliable witnesses of all kinds, not pillars
of the community. This fact, of course, doesn’t explain every UFO
sighting. (To explain many more sightings, other facts would need to
be—and have been—brought to bear.) But it does help to show that
personal observations alone aren’t proof that UFOs—that is, space-
craft of extraterrestrial origin—are real. In fact, when clear observa-
tion is difﬁcult (which is usually the case, as in the examples above),
personal experience by itself can never tell us whether or not a UFO
is real. What seems real may not be real.
REMEMBERING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS TRUST 
WHAT YOU RECALL
Your memory is like a mental tape recorder—it whirrs day and night,
picking up your experience, making a literal record of what happens,
Robert Wilson’s
1934 photo of
Nessie.
REMEMBERING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS TRUST WHAT YOU RECALL
111

112
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
The Loch Ness Monster
For centuries, legends and eyewitness reports
have claimed that a large, mysterious creature
inhabits a deep lake called Loch Ness in the
Scottish highlands. The so-called Loch Ness
monster is said to be a plesiosaur, a beast left
over from the age of dinosaurs. Few people
take the early accounts of “Nessie” seriously,
but many stand by the alleged sightings and
other evidence accumulated since the 1930s.
In 1934 the now-famous photo of Nessie
was allegedly taken by Robert Wilson, a physi-
cian from London. The photo shows the sil-
houette of a beast with a long neck and small
head, looking very plesiosaur-like, ﬂoating on
the surface of the water. Eyewitness accounts
also suggested that the creature had a long
neck and small head.
Starting around 1960, many sonar searches
have been conducted in Loch Ness, most
notably by researchers from Cambridge and
Birmingham Universities and the Academy of
Applied Science. Most of these searches found
nothing unusual in the Loch. Some showed
large underwater moving objects, which
researchers have identiﬁed as large ﬁsh, boat
wakes, gas bubbles, lake debris, or something
simply unidentiﬁed. Most recently, a BBC
research team hoping to ﬁnd the elusive crea-
ture used 600 separate sonar beams and satellite
navigation technology to scour the entire loch
from shore to shore and top to bottom. The
team members were hoping to encounter
Nessie herself, but they found nothing out of
the ordinary.
The most dramatic evidence for the existence
of Nessie is some 1972 underwater photographs
taken in combination with sonar. The published
photos show what looks like a diamond-shaped
ﬂipper attached to a large body.
All of this evidence for the existence of the
Loch Ness monster, however, is in dispute. The
famous Wilson photograph has been reported
to be a fake, a staged picture of a model of a
sea serpent attached to a toy submarine. In
1993, one of the original hoaxers confessed
shortly before his death that the whole charade
had been hatched by his stepfather with Wil-
son as an accomplice. More recently, some
have questioned whether this story of a faked
photograph was itself faked! Many other Nessie
photos are just too indistinct to constitute reli-
able evidence. Researchers allege that the origi-
nal ﬂipper photos were too fuzzy to reveal
much of anything but that they were doctored
before publication to make the image resemble
a ﬂipper. As for eyewitness reports, critics have
pointed out the unreliability of eyewitness
accounts generally and the fact that there are
many things in Loch Ness that an honest and
sober person can mistake for a lake monster:
ﬂoating logs, boat wakes, birds, otters, and
hoaxed monsters. In addition, scientists have
proposed these possibilities: Baltic sturgeon 
(a giant ﬁsh); underwater waves caused by vol-
canic activity; and rotting, gas-ﬁlled logs that
rise from the lakebed and violently break the
surface before sinking again.
Scientists are generally very skeptical of the
notion that Nessie is a plesiosaur that time forgot.
They point out, among other things, that for
the monster to be a remnant of the dinosaur
era, there would have to be not one Nessie, but
several—and the lake habitat cannot sustain
such large creatures.
Of course, to some, the biggest sticking
point is that after hundreds of years of monster-
hunting, no one has found a shred of physical
evidence. No bones, no skin, no scales.

and letting you play back the parts you want to review. Does this
description sound about right? It’s wrong.
A lot of research now indicates that our memories aren’t literal
records or copies. Like our perceptual powers, our memories are con-
structive or, rather, creative. When we remember an experience, our
brains reach for a representation of it; then, piece by piece, they
False Memory Syndrome
Misunderstandings about how memory works
and how it can be inﬂuenced can sometimes
have tragic consequences. In recent years, the
most notable example of this misunderstanding
has been the phenomenon known as False
Memory Syndrome. John Hochman explains:
Thousands of patients (mostly women) in
the United States have undergone or are
undergoing attempted treatment by psy-
chotherapists for a nonexistent memory dis-
order. As a result, these same therapists have
unwittingly promoted the development of a
real memory disorder: False Memory Syn-
drome. To make sense of this unfortunate
situation, I need to offer a few deﬁnitions.
Some psychotherapists believe that
childhood sexual abuse is the speciﬁc cause
of numerous physical and mental ills later in
life. Some term this Incest Survivor Syn-
drome (ISS). There is no ﬁrm evidence that
this is the case, since even where there has
been documented sexual abuse during child-
hood, there are numerous other factors that
can explain physical or emotional com-
plaints that appear years later in an adult.
These therapists believe that the children
immediately repress all memory of sexual
abuse shortly after it occurs, causing it to
vanish from recollection without a trace.
The price for having repressed memories is
said to be the eventual development of ISS.
Therapists attempt to “cure” ISS by engag-
ing patients in recovered memory therapy
(RMT), a hodge-podge of techniques varying
with each therapist. The purpose of RMT 
is to enable the patient to recover into con-
sciousness not only wholly accurate recollec-
tions of ancient sexual traumas, but also
repressed body memories (such as physical
pains) that occurred at the time of the traumas.
In actuality, RMT produces disturbing
fantasies which are misperceived by the
patient and misinterpreted by the therapist
as memories. Mislabeled by the therapist
and patient as recovered memories, they are
actually false memories. . . .
The backlash against such professional
abuses is well under way, with a growing num-
ber of lawsuits and court actions against thera-
pists who implant false memories into the
minds of patients. Psychologist Elizabeth Lof-
tus, a prominent critic of the misguided therapy
techniques that often result in False Memory
Syndrome, says that the phenomenon has
taken an enormous toll:
There are still hundreds, perhaps thousands
of families who have been devastated by
repressed memory accusations. There are
elderly parents who have one wish left in
life—simply to be reunited with their chil-
dren. There are talented mental health pro-
fessionals who have found their profession
tarred by the controversy. And there are the
genuinely abused patients who have felt
their experiences trivialized by the recent
sea of unsubstantiated, unrealistic and
bizarre accusations.23
REMEMBERING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS TRUST WHAT YOU RECALL
113

114
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
reconstruct a memory based on this fragment. This reconstructive proc-
ess is inherently inexact. It’s also vulnerable to all kinds of inﬂuences
that guarantee that our memories will frequently be inaccurate.
For an example of your memory’s reconstructive powers, try this:
Remember an instance when you were sitting today. Recall your sur-
roundings, how you were dressed, how you positioned your legs and
arms. Chances are, you see the scene from the perspective of some-
one looking at it, as though you were watching yourself on television.
But this memory can’t be completely accurate because during the
experience you never perceived yourself from this perspective. You
now remember certain pieces of the experience, and your brain con-
structed everything else, television perspective and all.
For well over a half century, research has been showing that the
memory of witnesses can be unreliable, and the constructive nature of
memory helps explain why. Studies demonstrate that the recall of eye-
witnesses is sometimes wrong because they reconstruct events from
memory fragments and then draw conclusions from the reconstruction.
Those fragments can be a far cry from what actually transpired.
Further, if eyewitnesses are under stress at the time of their observa-
tions, they may not be able to remember crucial details, or their recall
may be distorted. Stress can even distort the memories of expert wit-
nesses, which is one of several reasons why reports of UFOs, seances,
and ghosts must be examined carefully: The experiences are stressful.
Because memory is constructive and liable to warping, people can sin-
cerely believe that their recall is perfectly accurate—and be perfectly
wrong. They may report their memory as honestly as they can, but
alas, it’s been worked over.
Like perception, memory can be dramatically affected by
expectancy and belief. Several studies show this effect, but a classic
experiment illustrates the point best. Researchers asked students to
describe what they had seen in a picture. It portrayed a white man and
a black man talking to each other on the subway. In the white man’s
hand was an open straight razor. When the students recalled the pic-
ture, one-half of them reported that the razor was in the hand of the black
man. Memory reconstruction was tampered with by expectancy or
belief.24
The same kind of thing can happen in our successful “predic-
tions.” After some event has occurred, we may say, “I knew that would
happen; I predicted it.” And we may truly believe that we foretold the
future. But research suggests that our desire to believe that we accu-
rately predicted the future can sometimes alter our memories of the
prediction. We may remember our prediction even though we actu-
ally made no such prediction. Apparently, such an incident can occur
Our beliefs are not
automatically
updated by the best
evidence available.
They often have an
active life of their
own and ﬁght tena-
ciously for their own
survival.
—D. MARKS AND
R. KAMMANN

Past Life Remembered or Cryptomnesia?
If, under hypnosis, you recall living 200 years
ago and can vividly remember doing and see-
ing things that you’ve never experienced in
your present life, isn’t this proof that you lived
a “past life”? Isn’t this evidence of reincarnation?
Some people would think so. There is, how-
ever, another possibility, explained by Ted
Schultz:
Beatle George Harrison got sued for rewrit-
ing the Chiffons’ “He’s So Fine” into “My
Sweet Lord.” He was the innocent victim of
the psychological phenomenon of
cryptomnesia. So was Helen Keller, the
famous blind and deaf woman, when she
wrote a story called “The Frost King.” After
it was published in 1892, she was accused of
plagiarizing Margaret Canby’s “The Frost
Fairies,” though Helen had no conscious
memory of ever reading it. But, sure enough,
inquiries revealed that Canby’s story had
been read to her (by touch) in 1888. She
was devastated. . . .
Cryptomnesia, or “hidden memory,”
refers to thoughts and ideas that seem new
and original, but which are actually memo-
ries of things that you’ve forgotten you
knew. The cryptomnesic ideas may be varia-
tions on the original memories, with details
switched around and changed, but still 
recognizable.
Cryptomnesia is a professional problem
for artists; it also plays an important role in
past-life regression. In the midst of the
hoopla surrounding the Bridey Murphy
[reincarnation] case the Denver Post decided
to send newsman William J. Barker to Ireland
to try to ﬁnd evidence of Bridey’s actual exis-
tence. [Bridey was the alleged past-life per-
sonality of Virginia Tighe.] Unfortunately
for reincarnation enthusiasts, careful check-
ing failed to turn up anything conclusive.
Barker couldn’t locate the street Bridey said
she lived on, he couldn’t ﬁnd any essays by
Bridey’s husband in the Belfast News-Letter
between 1843 and 1864 (during which time
Bridey said he was a contributor), and he
couldn’t ﬁnd anyone who had heard of the
“Morning Jig” that Bridey danced.
Research by reporters from the Chicago
American and later by writer Melvin Harris
ﬁnally uncovered the surprising source of
housewife Virginia Tighe’s past-life
memories. As a teenager in Chicago,
Virginia had lived across the street from an
Irish woman named Mrs. Anthony Corkell,
who had regaled her with tales about the
old country. Mrs. Corkell’s maiden name
was Bridie Murphy! Furthermore, Virginia
had been active in high school dramatics, at
one point memorizing several Irish mono-
logues which she learned to deliver with a
heavy Irish brogue. Finally, the 1893 World’s
Columbian Exposition, staged in Chicago,
had featured a life-size Irish Village, with ﬁf-
teen cottages, a castle tower, and a popula-
tion of genuine Irish women who danced
jigs, spun cloth, and made butter. No doubt
Virginia had heard stories of this exhibition
from many of her neighbors and friends
while growing up in Chicago in the ‘20s.
Almost every other case of “past-life
memory” that has been objectively investi-
gated has followed the same pattern: the
memories, often seemingly quite alien to the
life experiences of the regressed subject,
simply cannot be veriﬁed by historical
research; on the other hand, they frequently
prove to be the result of cryptomnesia.25
REMEMBERING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS TRUST WHAT YOU RECALL
115

116
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
despite our knowing that our memories can be checked against
records of the actual predictions.26
Research also shows that our memory of an event can be drasti-
cally changed if we later encounter new information about the
event—even if the information is brief, subtle, and dead wrong.
Here’s a classic example: In one experiment, people were asked to
watch a ﬁlm depicting a car accident. Afterward, they were asked to
recall what they had seen. Some of the subjects were asked, how fast
were the cars going when they smashed into each other? The others
were asked the same question with a subtle difference. The word
smashed was replaced by hit. Strangely enough, those who were asked
the “smashed” question estimated higher speeds than those asked the
“hit” question. Then, a week later, all the subjects were asked to recall
whether they had seen broken glass in the ﬁlm. Compared to the
subjects who got the “hit” question, more than twice as many of those
who got the “smashed” question said they had seen broken glass. But
the ﬁlm showed no broken glass at all.27 In a similar study, subjects
recalled that they had seen a stop sign in another ﬁlm of a car acci-
dent even though no stop sign had appeared in the ﬁlm. The subjects
had simply been asked a question that presupposed a stop sign and
thus created the memory of one in their minds.28
These studies put in doubt any long-term memory that’s sub-
jected to leading questions or is evoked after exposure to a lot of new,
seemingly pertinent information. Psychologist James Alcock cites the
example of reports of near-death experiences collected by Raymond
Moody in his books Life After Life (1975) and Reﬂections on Life After Life
(1977). These books contain stories of people who had been close to
death (for example, clinically dead but later resuscitated) and later
reported that while in that state they felt the sensation of ﬂoating
above their body, traveling through a dark tunnel, seeing dead loved
ones, or having other extraordinary experiences. Researchers gener-
ally agree that people do experience such things; whether their expe-
riences show that they literally leave their bodies and enter another
world is another question. Moody’s cases were based on the memories
of people who came to him with their stories, sometimes years after
the experience, frequently after they had heard Moody lecture or read
newspaper stories about his work. Alcock explains:
Since there was such great similarity in the reports, Moody argued
that these reports must reﬂect reality. (There are physiological reasons
for expecting such similarities. . . .) Considering how memory can be
shaped after the event, it is not unlikely that one’s memory of near-
death experience will conform to the pattern described in the lecture

or reading one has just experienced. Moreover, Moody’s questions to
his subjects certainly would not have been without inﬂuence.29
But our memories are more than just constructive—they’re also
selective. We selectively remember certain things and ignore others,
setting up a memory bias that can give the impression that something
mysterious, even paranormal, is going on. Our selective memories
may even lead us to believe that we have ESP. As Hines says:
A classic example is to be thinking of someone and, minutes later,
having them call. Is this sort of instance amazing proof of direct
mind-to-mind communication? No—it’s just a coincidence. It seems
amazing because we normally don’t think about the millions of tele-
phone calls made each day and we don’t remember the thousands of
times we have thought of someone when they haven’t called.30
Selective memory is also at work in many cases of seemingly pro-
phetic dreams. Research has shown that we all dream during sleep.
Most dreams occur during the four or ﬁve periods of REM—rapid eye
movement—sleep that we experience every night. These dreams do
not form one continuous narrative, however. Instead, they consist of
a number of different dream themes. In fact, if we’re normal, we expe-
rience around 250 dream themes a night. We won’t remember most of
them. But, as Hines points out, we’re likely to remember the ones that
“come true”:
If a dream doesn’t “come true” there is very little chance that it will be
remembered. We have all had the experience of awakening and not
remembering any dreams. Then, sometime later during the day, some-
thing happens to us, or we see or hear something, that retrieves from
our long-term memory a dream we had had, but which, until we were
exposed to what is called a retrieval cue, we were unable to recall volun-
tarily. Of course, if we had not been exposed to the retrieval cue, we
would never have been aware that the dream had occurred. Thus, the
nature of memory for dreams introduces a strong bias that makes
dreams appear to be much more reliably prophetic than they are—we
selectively remember those dreams that “come true.”31
When asked questions like “How can you explain that I dreamed that
my brother broke his leg, and I found out the next day that he broke his
leg at summer camp?” the late Dr. Silas White, professor of physiological
psychology at Muhlenberg College, used to respond: “How can you
explain that I’ve dreamed dozens of times that I was walking around
downtown Allentown, and I panicked when I realized I wasn’t wearing
any clothing, but it has never happened to me?” The fact that something
appears to us in a dream is no reason to believe that it is likely to happen.
REMEMBERING: WHY YOU CAN’T ALWAYS TRUST WHAT YOU RECALL
117

118
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE 
WHAT YOU BELIEVE
Our success as a species is due in large part to our ability to organize
things into categories and to recognize patterns in the behavior of
things. By formulating and testing hypotheses, we learn to predict and
control our environment. Once we have hit upon a hypothesis that
works, however, it can be very difﬁcult to give it up. Francis Bacon was
well aware of this bias in our thinking:
The human understanding when it has once adopted an opinion. . .
draws all things else to support and agree with it. And though there
be a greater number and weight of instances to be found on the other
side, yet these it either neglects and despises, or else by some distinc-
tion sets aside, and rejects, in order that by this great and pernicious
predetermination, the authority of its former conclusion may remain
inviolate.32
While this intellectual inertia can keep us from jumping to conclu-
sions, it can also keep us from seeing the truth.
Denying the Evidence
Our reluctance to give up seemingly well-conﬁrmed hypotheses was
dramatically demonstrated by psychologist John C. Wright.33 Wright
constructed a device consisting of a panel containing sixteen unmarked
buttons arranged in a circle. In the middle of the circle was a seven-
teenth button, identical to the others. Above the circle was a three-digit
counter. Subjects were told that they were participating in an experi-
ment in problem solving. Their goal was to get as high a score as pos-
sible by pushing the buttons in the circle in the right sequence. To
determine whether a button had been pushed in the correct order, the
subjects were instructed to push the button in the center after each push
of a button in the circle. If it was correct, a buzzer would sound and the
counter would be increased by one. What the subjects didn’t know is
that there was no correct sequence.
A complete run consisted of 325 consecutive button pushes
divided into thirteen blocks of 25. During the ﬁrst ten blocks (250
button pushes), the buzzer randomly indicated that the subject had
pushed the correct button a certain percentage of the time. During
the eleventh and twelfth block, the buzzer did not sound once. Dur-
ing the thirteenth block, the buzzer sounded every time. As a result,
the subjects came to believe that whatever hypothesis they were
working on at the time was correct.
When they were told that there was no correct sequence, many
couldn’t believe it. Their belief in the truth of their hypotheses was so
No man was ever so
much deceived by
another as by himself.
—LORD GREVILLE
Nothing is so easy as
to deceive one’s self,
for what we wish we
readily believe.
—DEMOSTHENES

strong that some of them didn’t believe that there was no correct
sequence until the experimenters opened the device and showed them
the wiring! Max Planck was well aware of how tenaciously we can
cling to a hypothesis when we have invested a lot of time and effort
in it. He once remarked, “A new scientiﬁc truth does not triumph by
convincing its opponents and making them see the light, but rather
because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows up
that is familiar with it.”34
The refusal to accept contrary evidence is found not only among
scientists, however. Religious groups predicting the end of the world
also have a remarkable ability to ignore disconﬁrming evidence.
Perhaps the most famous of these groups is the Millerites. In 1818,
after devising a mathematical interpretation of a certain passage in the
Book of Daniel, William Miller concluded that Christ would return
to Earth and the world would come to an end sometime between
March 21, 1843, and March 21, 1844. As news of his prediction spread,
he gained a small group of followers. In 1839, Joshua V. Hines entered
the fold and spread the word by publishing the newspaper Signs of the
Times in Boston. The Midnight Cry, published in New York City, and the
Philadelphia Alarm also contributed to the movement’s popularity.
A rumor arose in the Millerite camp that April 23, 1843, was the
exact date of the coming of Christ. Even after that day passed with-
out incident, the faith of Miller’s followers was not shaken. Attention
became focused on January 1, 1844. When that day came and went,
the Millerites eagerly awaited March 21, 1844, the ﬁnal date indicated
in Miller’s original prophecy. Christ’s nonarrival was a blow to the
faithful, but, remarkably enough, the movement did not break up.
One of Miller’s disciples did some recalculations and came up
with a new date of October 22, 1844. Although Miller was originally
skeptical of this date, he too came to accept it. Faith in this date
became greater than that in any of the others. This fourth failure
ﬁnally led to the end of the movement. But its offspring live on to this
day. Some of the disillusioned Millerites went on to found the Adven-
tist movement. Others formed the Jehovah’s Witnesses. Although
these groups refrain from giving exact dates, they both believe that
the end is near.
Reluctance to change one’s views in the face of contrary evidence
can be found in all walks of life, from doctors who refuse to change
their diagnoses to scientists who refuse to give up their theories. In
one study of student psychotherapists, it was found that once the stu-
dents had arrived at a diagnosis, they could look through an entire
folder of contrary evidence without changing their minds. Instead
they interpreted the evidence to ﬁt their diagnoses.35
CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE WHAT YOU BELIEVE
119

120
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
Failed End of the World Prophecies
The Millerites, of course, were not the ﬁrst to
establish an exact date for the end of the
world. Many different people have proposed
many different dates, but so far, none of them
has been correct. Here’s a sampling of failed
end times prophecies.
• Jan 1, 1000. Claimant: Pope Sylvester II.
• 1033.
Claimant: Various Christians.
Some believed this to be the 1,000th
anniversary of the death and resurrec-
tion of Jesus, and his second coming was
anticipated.
• 1284. Claimant: Pope Innocent III. Pope
Innocent III predicted that the world
would end 666 years after the rise of
Islam.
• 1346–1351. Claimant: Various Euro-
peans. The black plague spreading across
Europe was interpreted by many as a sign
of the end times.
• 1600. Claimant: Martin Luther. Iconic
ﬁgure of the Protestant reformation pre-
dicted the end of the world would occur
no later than 1600.
• 1658. Claimant: Christopher Colum-
bus. Columbus claimed that the world
was created in 5343 B.C.E., and would
last 7,000 years. Assuming no year zero,
that means the end would come in
1658.
• 1967. Claimant: Rev. Jim Jones. The
founder of the Peoples Temple stated he
had visions that a nuclear holocaust was
to take place in 1967.
• 1969. Claimant: Charles Manson. Man-
son predicted that an apocalyptic race war
would occur in 1969 and ordered the
Tate-Labianca murders in an attempt to
bring it about.
• July 1999. Claimant: Nostradamus. A
prediction attributed to Nostradamus stat-
ing the “King of Terror” would come from
the sky in “1999 and seven months” led to
fears of the end.
• Jan. 1, 2000. Claimant: Various. A Y2K
computer bug was predicted that would
cause computer crashes, major catastro-
phes, and the end of the world as we
know it.
• April 29, 2007. Claimant: Pat Robertson.
In his 1990 book, The New Millennium,
Robertson suggests this date as the day of
Earth’s destruction.
• Oct. 21, 2011.
Claimant: Harold
Camping. Camping predicted the rap-
ture and devastating earthquakes would
occur on May 21, 2011 with God taking
approximately 3 percent of the world’s
population into heaven, and that the end
of the world would occur five months
later on October 21. When his previous
(fifth) prediction failed to come about,
Camping revised it and said that on
May 21, a “spiritual judgment” took
place, and that both the physical rapture
and the end of the world would occur
October 21, 2011.
• Dec. 21, 2012. Claimant: Various. The
end of the Mayan calendar gives many
different scenarios including a galactic
alignment, a geomagnetic reversal of the
poles, a collision with an unknown planet
called Nibiru, an alien invasion, Earth being
destroyed by a giant supernova, the moon
exploding . . . and the list goes on.36

Subjective Validation
Our ability to ﬁt data to theory accounts for the apparent success of
many methods of divination such as palmistry, tarot cards, and astrology.
Consider the following personality proﬁle:
Some of your aspirations tend to be pretty unrealistic. At times you
are extroverted, affable, sociable, while at other times you are intro-
verted, wary and reserved. You have found it unwise to be too frank in
revealing yourself to others. You pride yourself on being an independ-
ent thinker and do not accept others’ opinions without satisfactory
proof. You prefer a certain amount of change and variety, and become
dissatisﬁed when hemmed in by restrictions and limitations. At times
you have serious doubts as to whether you have made the right deci-
sion or done the right thing. Disciplined and controlled on the out-
side, you tend to be worrisome and insecure on the inside.
Your sexual adjustment has presented some problems for you.
While you have some personality weaknesses, you are generally able
to compensate for them. You have a great deal of unused capacity
which you have not turned to your advantage. You have a tendency to
be critical of yourself. You have a strong need for other people to like
you and for them to admire you.37
Now answer this question honestly: How well does this proﬁle match
your personality? Most people, if told that the proﬁle is created
speciﬁcally for them, think that it describes them fairly well—maybe
even perfectly. Even though the proﬁle could apply to almost anyone,
people believe that it describes them speciﬁcally and accurately. This phenome-
non of believing that a general personality description is unique to
oneself, which has been thoroughly conﬁrmed by research, is known
as the Forer effect (named after the man who ﬁrst studied it). For the
Forer effect to work, people have to be told that the catchall descrip-
tion really pinpoints them speciﬁcally. If people suspect what’s really
going on, they’re less likely to fall for the phenomenon.
But why do we fall for it? Psychologists David Marks and Richard
Kammann explain it this way:
From our point of view, Forer’s result is a special case of subjective val-
idation in which we ﬁnd ways to match ourselves up with the descrip-
tion given. Our personalities are not ﬁxed and constant as we usually
imagine. Everybody is shy in one situation, bold in another, clever at
one task, bumbling at another, generous one day, selﬁsh the next,
independent in one group of people but conforming in another group.
Thus, we can usually ﬁnd aspects of ourselves that will match up with
a vague statement, although the speciﬁc examples of self will be dif-
ferent from one person to the next.38
CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE WHAT YOU BELIEVE
121
The moment we
want to believe
something, we
suddenly see all the
arguments for it, and
become blind to the
arguments against it.
—GEORGE BERNARD
SHAW

122
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
Astrology, biorhythms, graphology (determining personality char-
acteristics from handwriting), fortune-telling, palmistry (palm reading),
tarot card reading, psychic readings—all these activities generally
involve the Forer effect. So if the Forer effect is likely to be at work in
any of these systems in any instance, we can’t conclude that the system
has any special power to see into our character. Our sincere feeling that
the readings are true does not—and cannot—validate the system.
One-time palm reader and psychologist Ray Hyman learned this
the hard way. Hyman had learned palm reading to help put him-self
through college. He became quite good at it and was convinced that
there was something to it. A friend of his, however, was skeptical. He
bet Hyman that Hyman could tell his clients the exact opposite of
what the palm said and they would still believe him. Hyman took the
bet and, to his surprise, found that his friend was right. Some of his
clients even thought that his “incorrect” readings were more pro-
found than his “correct” ones.
Our ability to make sense of things is one of our most important
abilities. But we are so good at it that we sometimes fool ourselves into
thinking something’s there when it’s not. Only by subjecting our
views to critical scrutiny can we avoid such self-delusion.
Probably no prophet has a bigger reputation than Michel Nos-
tradamus (1503–1566), who composed a thousand verses that some
people believe foretold many historical events. He’s been credited with
predicting both World Wars, the atomic bomb, the rise and fall of
Hitler, and more. Now, clearly, if a prophet consistently offers unequiv-
ocal, precise predictions of events that can’t reasonably be expected, we
must take serious notice of that seer. How about Nostradamus?
In fact, his predictions are neither unequivocal nor precise, and
this fact has allowed subjective validation to convince some people
that his prophecies have come true. Nostradamus himself said that he
deliberately made his verses puzzling and cloudy. As a result, they are
open to multiple interpretations. For example:
Century I, verse XXII
That which shall live shall leave no direction,
Its destruction and death will come by stratagem,
Autun, Chalons, Langres, and from both sides,
The war and ice shall do great harm.39
Century I, verse XXVII
Underneath the cord, Guien struck from the sky,
Near where is hid a great treasure,
Which has been many years a gathering,
Being found, he shall die, the eye put out by a spring.40

What do you think these verses from Nostradamus mean?
Andrew Neher asks that people compare their own interpretations of
the verses with those of Henry Roberts, one of several authors of
books on Nostradamus’s prophecies. According to Roberts, verse XXII
is “a forecast of the use of supersonic weapons, traveling in the near
absolute zero temperature above the stratosphere.” And Roberts says
verse XXVII means “paratroopers alight near the Nazi’s plunder hoard
and, captured, they are executed.”41 Did you come to a different con-
clusion? Do you see how easy it is to come up with alternative inter-
pretations that seem to ﬁt?42
Neher also suggests a telling comparison between the interpreta-
tions offered by two Nostradamus experts commenting on the same
verses. On one verse Roberts and Erika Cheetham, also a Nostra-
damus author, had this to say:
Roberts: “A remarkably prophetic description of the role of Emperor
Haile Selassie, in World War II.”43
Cheetham: “Lines 1–2 . . . refer . . . to Henry IV. The man who troubles
him from the East is the Duke of Parma. . . . Lines 3–4 most probably
refer to the siege of Malta in 1565.”44
And on another verse:
Roberts: “The taking over of Czechoslovakia by Hitler, the resigna-
tion of President Benes, the dissensions over the matter between
France and England and the dire warning of the consequences of this
betrayal, are all remarkably outlined in this prophecy.”45
Michel de
Nostradame
(1503–1566),
from the
frontispiece of one
of his early
publications.
CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE WHAT YOU BELIEVE
123

124
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
Cheetham: “The ﬁrst three lines here may apply to the assassinations
of the two Kennedy brothers.”46
As Neher points out, “In comparing the conﬂicting interpretations of
the quatrains, it is apparent that Roberts and Cheetham are projecting
into them meanings that exist in their own minds, which leads them
to think that Nostradamus had great precognitive ability.”47
These examples are subjective validation at work. And once an
interpretation is overlaid on a vague prophecy, it may be difﬁcult to
see any other possibility.
Despite the obscure references and conﬂicting interpretations,
Nostradamus’s writings are still considered by many to be prophetic.
So much so that he was credited with predicting the 9/11 attack on
the World Trade Center. Immediately following the attack, e-mail
boxes across the country began receiving letters containing the fol-
lowing prophecy:
In the city of God there will be a great thunder,
Two brothers torn apart by Chaos, while the fortress endures, the
great leader will succumb,
The third big war will begin when the big city is burning
—NOSTRADAMUS 1654
Anyone familiar with Nostradamus would suspect that something is
amiss because Nostradamus died in 1566. Ironically, it turns out that
the foregoing prophecy was written several years earlier by Neil
Marshall, a Canadian college student who wanted to demonstrate
“just how easy it is to dupe the gullible.”48 Quite an impressive
demonstration indeed.
Of course, prediction is much easier after the fact. What Nos-
tradamus interpreters actually do is a form of retrodiction; they take a
quatrain and try to ﬁt it to an event that’s already occurred. There’s
only one quatrain that contains an unambiguous reference to a spe-
ciﬁc date, quatrain X:72:
In the year 1999 and seven months
From the sky will come the great King of Terror
He will bring back to life the great king of the Mongols
Before and after war reigns happily
Some thought that this prophesied the end of the world; others
thought it foretold a world revolution. Both camps were mistaken
because no such cataclysm occurred in July of 1999. Nostradamus’s
one speciﬁc prediction turns out to be false. When a theory’s predic-
tions are not borne out by the facts, it should be rejected. So it should
be with the theory that Nostradamus is a great prophet.

CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE WHAT YOU BELIEVE
125
Conﬁrmation Bias
Not only do we have a tendency to ignore and misinterpret evidence
that conﬂicts with our own views; we also have a tendency to look for
and recognize only evidence that conﬁrms them. A number of psy-
chological studies have established this conﬁrmation bias.
Consider the following simpliﬁed representation of four cards,
each of which has a letter on one side and a number on the other:49
A
D
4
7
Subjects were told that their task was to determine the most effective
means for deciding whether the following hypothesis were true: If a
card has a vowel on one side, it has an even number on the other.
Speciﬁcally, the subjects were instructed to indicate which cards
needed to be turned over to establish the truth of the hypothesis.
Which cards would you turn over? Most subjects thought that
only the A and the 4 cards needed to be turned over. But they were
mistaken. The 7 card also needed to be turned over, because it too
could have a bearing on the truth of the hypothesis.
Turning the A card over was a good choice, because if there were
an even number on the other side, it would support the hypothesis.
And if there were an odd number, it would refute it. Turning the 4
card over could also lend support to the hypothesis if there were a
vowel on the other side. If there were a consonant on the other side,
however, it would not refute the hypothesis, because the hypothesis
Crop Circles
Crop circles are swirled patterns of bent-over
plants, such as wheat, corn, or soybeans, that
mysteriously appear in large ﬁelds. First noticed
in southern England, crop circles have started
to appear all over the world. They range from
simple, circular shapes to elaborate pictograms.
Originally, some people thought that the
circles were produced by extraterrestrials or
some other paranormal phenomenon. Others
thought that they were produced by “plasma
vortex phenomena” that consisted of a spinning
mass of air containing electrically charged mat-
ter. Still others thought that they were
produced by clever human beings.
In 1991, two pubmates in their sixties—
Doug Bower and Dave Chorley—claimed to
have produced many of the English crop circles
by attaching a rope to both ends of a long nar-
row plank, holding it between themselves and
the plants, and stepping on the plank to bend
over the plants. To substantiate their claim,
they produced a circle for a tabloid newspaper,
which was later claimed to be of extraterrestrial
origin by one of the believers in the extra-
terrestrial hypothesis. Since then, other crop
circles thought impossible to be hoaxes have
turned out to be human-made. Apparently
there is no reliable way to distinguish crop 
circles of terrestrial origin from those of extra-
terrestrial origin. Nevertheless, people continue
to believe that crop circles are messages from
outer space.
A wise man knows
his own ignorance. A
fool knows everything.
—CHARLES SIMMONS

126
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
says that if there is a vowel on one side, there is an even number on
the other side. It does not say that if there is an even number on one
side, there is necessarily a vowel on the other side.
People were right to ignore the D card, because whatever is on
the other side is irrelevant to the truth of the hypothesis. The 7 card
was crucial, however, because, like the A card, it could refute the
hypothesis. If there were a vowel on the other side of the 7 card, the
hypothesis would be false.
This experiment demonstrates that we tend to look for conﬁrm-
ing rather than disconﬁrming evidence, even though the latter can
often be far more revealing. Disconﬁrming evidence can be decisive
when conﬁrming evidence is not.
Consider the hypothesis: All swans are white. Each white swan
we see tends to conﬁrm that hypothesis. But even if we’ve seen a mil-
lion white swans, we can’t be absolutely sure that all swans are white
because there could be black swans in places we haven’t looked. In
fact, it was widely believed that all swans were white until black swans
were discovered in Australia. Thus:
When evaluating a claim, look for disconﬁrming 
as well as conﬁrming evidence.
Our tendency to conﬁrm rather than disconﬁrm our beliefs is
reﬂected in many areas of our lives. Members of political parties tend to
read literature supporting their positions. Owners of automobiles tend
Superstitious Pigeons
The tendency to notice and look for conﬁrm-
ing instances is not unique to human beings.
The same tendency can be found in other crea-
tures as well. As a result, they, too, can appear
to be superstitious.
In an experiment with pigeons, psychologist
B. F. Skinner fed the pigeons at random inter-
vals.50 During the time between feedings, the
pigeons would engage in various behaviors:
pecking on the ground, turning their heads
from side to side, ﬂapping their wings, and so
on. If food appeared while a pigeon was per-
forming one of these behaviors, the pigeon
associated the behavior with the food and thus
produced the behavior more frequently.
Because the behavior was produced more 
frequently, however, it was rewarded more 
frequently. As a result, the pigeon seemed to
acquire a superstitious belief, namely, the belief
that the behavior caused the feeding. The same
sort of process lies behind some of our supersti-
tious beliefs. If a good thing happens to us
while we are wearing a particular item of cloth-
ing, say, we may come to associate that item
with the happy event. As a result, we may wear
it more often. And if good things only happen
to us on a statistically random basis, we may
come to believe that the item brings good luck.

CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE WHAT YOU BELIEVE
127
to pay attention to advertisements touting their make of car. And all of
us tend to hang out with people who share our views about ourselves.
One way to cut down on conﬁrmation bias is to keep a number
of different hypotheses in mind when evaluating a claim. In one
experiment, subjects were shown a sequence of numbers—2, 4, 6—
and were informed that it follows a certain rule. Their task was to
identify this rule by proposing other triplets of numbers. If a proposed
triplet ﬁt the rule—or if it did not—the subjects were informed. They
were not supposed to state the rule until they were sure of it.51
Most subjects picked sets of even numbers like 8, 10, 12 or 102,
104, 106. When told that these too followed the rule, subjects often
announced that they knew the rule: Any three consecutive even
numbers. But that rule was incorrect. This fact led some people to try
out other triplets such as 7, 9, 11 or 93, 95, 97. When told that these
triplets ﬁt the rule, some claimed that the rule was any three numbers
ascending by two. But that rule, too, was incorrect. What was the
correct rule? Any three numbers in ascending order.
Why was this rule so difﬁcult to spot? Because of conﬁrmation
bias: Subjects tried only to conﬁrm their hypotheses; they did not try
to disconﬁrm them.
If subjects were asked to keep two hypotheses in mind—such as,
any three numbers in ascending order and any three numbers not in
ascending order—they did much better. They picked a wider range of
triplets, each of which conﬁrmed or disconﬁrmed one of the rules.
Thus, keeping a number of different hypotheses in mind can help you
avoid conﬁrmation bias.
The Availability Error
Conﬁrmation bias can be exacerbated by the availability error. The
availability error occurs when people base their judgments on evi-
dence that’s vivid or memorable instead of reliable or trustworthy.
Those who buy something on the basis of a friend’s recommendation,
for example, even though they are aware of reviews that do not give
their choice high marks, are guilty of the availability error. College
students who choose courses on the basis of personal recommenda-
tions even when those recommendations contradict statistically
accurate student surveys are also guilty of the availability error.
Although anecdotal evidence is often psychologically compelling, it
is rarely logically conclusive.
Those who base their judgments on psychologically available
information often commit the fallacy of hasty generalization. To
make a hasty generalization is to make a judgment about a group of
things on the basis of evidence concerning only a few members of
Mankind, in the
gross, is a gaping
monster that loves to
be deceived and has
seldom been 
disappointed.
—HARRY MACKENZIE
Facts do not cease
to exist because they
are ignored.
—ALDOUS HUXLEY

128
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
that group. It is fallacious, for example, to argue like this: “I know
one of those insurance salespeople. You can’t trust any of them.”
Statisticians refer to this error as the failure to consider sample
size. Accurate judgments about a group can be made on the basis
of a sample only if the sample is sufficiently large and every mem-
ber of the group has an equal chance to be part of the sample.
Psychic Detectives
Psychic detectives are people thought to have
paranormal powers in solving crimes—to find
missing persons or the bodies of crime vic-
tims or to identify criminals. Their supposed
successes in helping law enforcement officials
solve cases have been widely publicized in
the media, most notably on television shows
like Court TV’s Psychic Detectives, Larry King
Live, and the drama series Medium. In Psychic
Detectives, dramatized re-creations portray
psychics as eerily on the mark in fingering
murderers and discovering the whereabouts of
missing people. Some police departments
use psychic sleuths in investigations, and
occasionally a law enforcement detective
will say that a psychic provided useful infor-
mation. Some who have seen a psychic
detective in action say they were converted
from skeptics to believers by the psychic’s
performance. And psychics themselves 
tout their track record in cracking famous
cases.
Should we conclude, then, that psychic
detectives are for real? If we did, our judgment
would be premature. The central problem is that
evidence in favor of psychic detection is weak,
and there are many ways to be fooled into think-
ing it strong. Only carefully controlled scientiﬁc
tests could conﬁrm the psychics’ claims, and
there has been no such conﬁrmation. (Tabloid
TV re-creations and observations under uncon-
trolled conditions don’t count.) No scientiﬁc
evidence demonstrates that any crime has been
solved or any missing person found through
psychic means. In fact, despite decades of scien-
tiﬁc experiments examining ESP and other psy-
chic phenomena, no good evidence shows that
any of them exist. (See the discussion of parapsy-
chology in Chapter 6.)
On the other hand, there are countless ways
people can be misled about the reality of
psychic detection. To name just a few:
• Psychic detectives and the media often over-
state the psychics’ crime-solving exploits. For
example, several years ago psychic detective
Carla Baron claimed that she had solved ﬁfty
cases and that she had worked with the Brown
family in the O. J. Simpson case. But investiga-
tors reported that both these claims were false.
The lead character in the TV series Medium is
based on the experiences of the famous clair-
voyant Allison Dubois. The Medium Web site has
stated that she was a consultant on cases for the
Glendale (Arizona) police department and the
Texas Rangers. But both organizations deny ever
using Dubois. Media reports described the case
of a psychic named Nancy Meyer who worked
with police to locate the body of an elderly man
who had been missing. She was said to have
drawn maps and homed in precisely on the
location of the body. (Meyer’s story was later
presented on Psychic Detectives.) But the police
ofﬁcers involved said later that the psychic’s

CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE WHAT YOU BELIEVE
129
information was unimpressive—too vague and
general to be of much use. She told them, for
example, that the corpse would be found near a
body of water (which could have referred to
several different objects, including ponds, lakes,
or streams) and railroad tracks (which were
everywhere).
• The media rarely report psychics’ failures,
and psychics are frequently wrong. In famous
murder or kidnapping cases, police often receive
hundreds or thousands of tips from psychics, yet
the cases are never solved (or solved by some-
one connected with the crimes). Sometimes the
police waste hours or days following up erro-
neous information from a psychic. Such dead
ends generally don’t make the news.
• Psychics (and sometimes their clients and the
police) employ retroﬁtting, a technique used after
the case is solved to match earlier vague tips
with the facts. For example, suppose the psychic
says that in a vision she sees the victim’s corpse
and the number 18, a bridge, and a body of
water. After the body is located, it would be easy
for people (including the police) to force a
match to these pronouncements—to see the
number 18 in a street address near the crime
scene, on a billboard near the victim’s home, on
a highway sign somewhere in the area, even in
the fact that it is 1.8 miles from the body to
some landmark. Or to see a bridge within a mile
or two of the body, or on a nearby store sign, or
in the name of a road. Or to see either a lake,
stream, or pond in every direction. Retroﬁtting
is often reinforced by people’s tendency to inter-
pret the psychic’s incorrect statements as correct.
If the prediction is that the missing person will
be found dead but is later discovered alive, the
investigators or family members may assert that
the person was actually dead in some other
sense, perhaps psychologically or spiritually.
The will to believe can be strong.
• Psychics often use their normal faculties—
their natural intelligence, talents, and senses—to
gather information. They may consult newspa-
per accounts, Web sites, maps, and witnesses
for clues. They may use all the skills and
resources of any good police investigator—
careful observations, hunches, inferences, and
interviews with everyone involved in the case.
They may even rely on cold reading, the old
“mind reader” trick of surreptitiously extracting
information from people by asking them ques-
tions or making statements and observing their
facial expressions and other bodily clues to the
truth.
Perhaps psychic detectives really do have
paranormal powers, but neither the available
evidence nor Medium nor Court TV’s Psychic
Detectives provide us with good reasons for
believing it.
The availability error also leads us to misjudge the probability of
various things. For example, you may think that amusement parks are
dangerous places. After all, they are full of rides that hurl people around
at high speeds, and sometimes those rides break. But statistics show that
riding the rides at an amusement park is less dangerous than riding a
bicycle on main roads.52 We tend to think that amusement parks are

130
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
dangerous places because amusement park disasters are psychologically
available—they are dramatic, emotionally charged, and easy to visual-
ize. Because they stick in our minds, we misjudge their frequency.
When conﬁrming evidence is more psychologically compelling
than disconﬁrming evidence, we are likely to exhibit conﬁrmation
bias. In cases of divination, prophecy, or fortune-telling, for example,
conﬁrming instances tend to stand out. Disconﬁrming instances are
easily overlooked. An experiment concerning prophetic dreams illus-
trates this phenomenon.53
Subjects were asked to read a “diary” of a student who had an
interest in prophetic dreams. It purportedly contained a record of the
student’s dreams as well as the signiﬁcant events in her life. Half the
dreams were followed by events that fulﬁlled them and half were not.
When subjects were asked to remember as many of the dreams as
possible, they remembered many more of the dreams that were ful-
ﬁlled than those that were not. Events that conﬁrmed the dreams were
more memorable (and thus more available) than those that did not.
Consequently, prophetic dreams were thought to be more frequent
than they actually were. To avoid the availability error, then, it’s
important to realize that the available data are not always the only rel-
evant data.
When evaluating a claim, look at all the relevant evidence,
not just the psychologically available evidence.
Conﬁrming evidence is not always more available than discon-
ﬁrming evidence. For example, losing a bet, which constitutes a dis-
conﬁrming instance, can be a very memorable experience.54 Gambling
losses are emotionally signiﬁcant and thus psychologically available.
Because we usually don’t have as much invested in other sorts of pre-
diction, other failures are not as memorable.
Our predilection for available evidence helps account for the per-
sistence of many superstitious beliefs. As Francis Bacon realized, “All
superstition is much the same whether it be that of astrology, dreams,
omens, retributive judgment or the like . . . [in that] the deluded
believers observe events which are fulﬁlled, but neglect or pass over
their failure, though it be much more common.”55 A superstition is a
belief that an action or situation can have an effect on something even
though there is no logical relation between the two. When we believe
that there is a cause-and-effect relation between things, we tend to
notice and look for only those events that conﬁrm the relation.
Take, for example, the lunar effect. It is widely believed that the
moon has an effect on our behavior. It supposedly can drive people crazy.
To be ignorant of
one’s ignorance is
the malady of 
ignorance.
—AMOS BRONSON
ALCOTT

(Hence the label lunatic.) But research has failed to bear this out. In a
review of thirty-seven studies dealing with the moon’s effect on
behavior, psychologists I. W. Kelly, James Rotton, and Roger Culver
concluded, “There is no causal relationship between lunar phenomena
and human behavior.”56 Why is the belief in the lunar effect so preva-
lent? Kelly, Rotton, and Culver suggest that it is due to slanted media
reporting, an ignorance of the laws of physics, and the sorts of cog-
nitive errors we have been discussing. Bizarre behavior during a full
moon is much more memorable—and thus much more available—
than normal behavior. So we are apt to misjudge its frequency. And
because we tend to look only for conﬁrming instances, we do not
become aware of the evidence that would correct this judgment.
The availability error not only leads us to ignore relevant evi-
dence; it also leads us to ignore relevant hypotheses. For any set of
data, it is, in principle, possible to construct any number of different
hypotheses to account for the data. In practice, however, it is often
difﬁcult to come up with many different hypotheses. As a result, we
often end up choosing among only those hypotheses that come to
mind—that are available.
In the case of unusual phenomena, the only explanations that
come to mind are often supernatural or paranormal ones. Many peo-
ple take the inability to come up with a natural or normal explanation
for something as proof that it is supernatural or paranormal. “How else
can you explain it?” they often ask.
This sort of reasoning is fallacious. It’s an example of the appeal
to ignorance. Just because you can’t show that the supernatural or
paranormal explanation is false doesn’t mean that it is true. Unfortu-
nately, although this reasoning is logically fallacious, it is psycholog-
ically compelling.
The extent to which the availability of alternate hypotheses can
affect our judgments of probability was demonstrated in the following
experiment.57 Subjects were presented with a list of possible causes of
a car’s failure to start. Their task was to estimate the probability of
each of the possible causes listed. Included on every list was a catchall
hypothesis labeled “all other problems [explanations].” Researchers
discovered that the probability the subjects assigned to a hypothesis
was determined by whether it was on the list—that is, by whether it
was available. If more possibilities were added, subjects lowered the
probability of the existing possibilities instead of changing the prob-
ability of the catchall hypothesis (which they should have done if
they were acting rationally).
Although the unavailability of natural or normal explanations
does not increase the probability of supernatural or paranormal ones,
CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE WHAT YOU BELIEVE
131

132
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
many people think that it does. To avoid this error, it’s important to
remember that just because you can’t ﬁnd a natural explanation for a
phenomenon doesn’t mean that the phenomenon is supernatural. Our
inability to explain something may simply be due to our ignorance of
the relevant laws or conditions.
Although supernatural or paranormal claims can be undercut by
providing a natural or normal explanation of the phenomenon in
question, there are other ways to cast doubt on such claims. A
hypothesis is acceptable only if it ﬁts the data. If the data are not what
you would expect if the hypothesis were true, there is reason to
believe that the hypothesis is false.
Take the case of the infamous Israeli psychic, Uri Geller. Geller
claims to have psychokinetic ability: the ability to directly manipulate
objects with his mind. But the data, psychologist Nicholas Humphrey
says, do not ﬁt this hypothesis:
If Geller has been able to bend a spoon merely by mind-power, with-
out his exerting any sort of normal mechanical force, then it would
immediately be proper to ask: Why has this power of Geller’s worked
only when applied to metal objects of a certain shape and size? Why
indeed only to objects anyone with a strong hand could have bent if
they had the opportunity (spoons or keys, say, but not pencils or pok-
ers or round coins)? Why has he not been able to do it unless he has
been permitted, however brieﬂy, to pick the object up and have sole
control of it? Why has he needed to touch the object with his ﬁngers,
rather than with his feet or with his nose? Etcetera, etcetera. If Geller
really does have the power of mind over matter, rather than muscle over
metal, none of this would ﬁt.58
Humphrey calls this sort of skeptical argument the argument from
“unwarranted design” or “unnecessary restrictions,” because the phe-
nomena observed are more limited or restricted than one would expect
if the hypothesis were true. To be acceptable, a hypothesis must ﬁt the
data: This means not only that the hypothesis must explain the data,
but also that the data explained must be consistent with what the
hypothesis predicts. If the hypothesis makes predictions that are not
borne out by the data, there is reason to doubt the hypothesis.
The Representativeness Heuristic
Our attempt to comprehend the world is guided by certain rules of
thumb known as heuristics. These heuristics speed up the decision-making
process and allow us to deal with a massive amount of information in a
short amount of time. But what we gain in speed we sometimes lose in
accuracy. When the information we have to work with is inaccurate,
incomplete, or irrelevant, the conclusions we draw from it can be mistaken.
He that is not aware
of his ignorance will
only be misled by his
knowledge.
—RICHARD WHATELY

CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE WHAT YOU BELIEVE
133
One of the heuristics that governs both categorization and pat-
tern recognition is this one: Like goes with like. Known as the repre-
sentativeness heuristic, this rule encapsulates the principles that
members of a category should resemble a prototype and that effects
should resemble their causes. While these principles often lead to cor-
rect judgments, they can also lead us astray. A baseball game and a chess
game are both games, but their dissimilarities may be greater than their
similarities. A tiny microbe can produce a big epidemic. So if we blindly
follow the representative heuristic, we can run into trouble.
To see how the representativeness heuristic can affect our think-
ing, consider the following problem:59
Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken, and very bright. She majored
in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply concerned with issues of
discrimination and social justice and also participated in antinuclear
demonstrations.
Now, based on the above description, rank the following state-
ments about Linda, from most to least likely:
a. Linda is an insurance salesperson.
b. Linda is a bank teller.
c. Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist movement.
Most people rank c as most likely, because it seems to provide a
better representation of Linda than either a or b. But c cannot possi-
bly be the most likely statement because there have to be more bank
tellers than there are bank tellers who are active in the feminist
movement. The set of bank tellers who are active in the feminist
movement is a subset of the set of bank tellers, so it cannot have
more members than the set of bank tellers. This fallacy is known as
the conjunction fallacy because the probability of two events occurring
together can never be greater than the probability of one of them
occurring alone. By taking an unrepresentative description (being a
bank teller) and adding a more representative one (being a feminist),
the description of Linda was made more representative but less likely.
The inﬂuence of the representativeness heuristic is most apparent
in the realm of medicine. In China, ground-up bats used to be pre-
scribed for people with vision problems, because it was mistakenly
assumed that bats had good vision. In Europe, the lungs of foxes used
to be prescribed for asthmatics, because it was mistakenly believed
that foxes had great stamina. In America, some alternative medical
practitioners prescribed raw brains for mental disorders. In all these
cases, the underlying assumption is that by consuming something you
will acquire some of its properties. You are what you eat.
The notion that like causes like is the basic principle behind what
anthropologist Sir James Frazer calls “homeopathic (or imitative) magic.”
Man’s mind is so
formed that it is far
more susceptible to
falsehood than to
truth.
—DESIDERIUS
ERASMUS

134
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
By imitating or simulating a desired result, people the world over
have thought that they can get their wish. For example, the Cora
Indians of Mexico attempted to increase their ﬂocks by placing wax
or clay models of the animals they wanted in caves on the side of
mountains. Barren Eskimo women placed small dolls under their
pillows in hopes of becoming pregnant. And by drawing a ﬁgure in
sand, ashes, or clay and poking it with a sharp stick, North American
Indians thought that they could inﬂict a corresponding wound on the
intended victim.60
Taboos found in many cultures are also based on the principle
that like causes like. To prevent bad luck or ill fortune, people
refrained from engaging in certain behaviors. For example, Eskimo
children were forbidden to play cat’s cradle because it was feared that,
as adults, their ﬁngers would become entangled in their harpoon lines.
Pregnant Ainos women were advised not to spin yarn or twist rope at
least two months before delivery lest the umbilical cord of their
unborn baby become twisted around the baby’s neck. Galearese ﬁsh-
ermen didn’t cut their lines after they caught a ﬁsh for fear that their
next catch would break the line and get away.61
These practices may seem silly to us now, but many modern prac-
tices are based on the same principle that like causes like. For
example, the notion that like causes like also lies behind two promi-
nent pseudosciences: astrology and graphology. Astrology, as we have
seen, claims that persons born under certain signs will have certain
mental and physical characteristics. This claim was not established
through empirical investigation because there is no signiﬁcant corre-
lation between a person’s sign and his or her features. How was it
established then? Apparently by means of the representativeness
heuristic. It is natural to assume, for example, that those born under
the sign of Taurus (the bull) should be strong-willed. Similarly, it is
natural to assume that those born under the sign of Virgo (the Virgin)
should be shy and retiring. The naturalness of these assumptions may
help explain the continuing popularity of astrology.
Graphology also makes use of the representativeness heuristic.
Graphologists claim to be able to identify personality traits by ex-
amining people’s handwriting. Again, the connections between hand-
writing characteristics and personality have not been established
empirically. Instead, they, too, seem to be based on the representa-
tiveness heuristic. For example, one graphologist claimed that the
small, neat handwriting of Gandhi showed that he was a man of peace
while the jagged, hard-edged handwriting of Napoleon showed that
he was a man of war.62 When put to the test, however, graphologists
do no better than chance at predicting occupational success.63
Superstition, which is
widespread among
the nations, has taken
advantage of human
weakness to cast its
spell over the mind of
almost every man.
—CICERO

Even trained scientists can have their thinking clouded by the rep-
resentativeness heuristic. When Barry Marshall, an internal-medicine
resident in Australia, claimed in 1983 that ulcers were caused by a
simple bacteria, Martin Blaser, director of the Division of Infectious
Medicine at Vanderbilt University, responded by calling Marshall’s
claim “the most preposterous thing I’d ever heard.”64 The received view
at the time was that ulcers were caused by stress. This view seems to
have been based on the representativeness heuristic. People thought
that ulcers were caused by stress because having an ulcer feels like being
under stress. We now know that assumption isn’t true. The only way to
avoid being misled by the representativeness heuristic is to be sure that
any claim of cause and effect is based on more than just similarity.
Anthropomorphic Bias
Not only do we have a tendency to assume that like causes like, we
have a tendency to assume that things are like us—even non-human
things. As Scottish philosopher David Hume recognized long ago:
There is an universal tendency among mankind to conceive all beings
like themselves, and to transfer to every object, those qualities with
which they are familiarly acquainted, and of which they are intimately
conscious. We ﬁnd human faces in the moon, armies in the clouds;
and by a natural propensity, if not corrected by experience and reﬂec-
tion, ascribe malice and good-will to everything that hurts or pleases
us. Hence . . . trees, mountains and streams are personiﬁed, and the
inanimate parts of nature acquire sentiment and passion.65
Hume here is describing not only the phenomena of pareidolia—
projecting human physical features onto non-human objects—but
also the phenomena of anthropomorphism—attributing human
thoughts, feelings, and desires to non-human objects.
We all anthropomorphize from time to time. How often have you
talked to (or yelled at) your computer, your car, or your cell-phone as
if it had a mind of its own? Herodotus recounts the story of King
Xerxes who, after having been prevented by a storm from crossing the
Hellespont (a strait connecting the Aegean Sea and the Sea of Mar-
mara), commanded that the waters of the Hellespont be given 300
lashes and cursed as punishment. Anthopologist Stewart Guthrie has
documented cases of people anthropomorphizing everything from
airplanes to umbrellas.66
One of the most compelling demonstrations of our tendency to
anthropomorphize comes from an experiment conducted by psychol-
ogists Fritz Heider and Simmel in 1944.67 They showed subjects a
ﬁlm of geometric shapes—circles, squares, and triangles—moving
CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE WHAT YOU BELIEVE
135
Man prefers to
believe what he
prefers to be true.
—FRANCIS BACON

136
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
around on a screen. When asked what the ﬁlm depicted, the subjects
claimed that the ﬁgures represented various types of people—bullies,
victims, and heroes—whose actions were guided by speciﬁc desires
and goals. They didn’t just see geometric ﬁgures moving around, they
saw intentional, purposeful action. Other investigators have observed
the same phenomena using moving dots and swarms or tiny squares.
These experiments indicate that humans are primed to detect
agency—conscious, purposeful action—on the basis of remarkably
little evidence. Because this tendency is universal, and because it is
possessed even by young children, psychologists believe that it’s
innate—that it’s hard-wired into our genes. From an evolutionary per-
spective, this makes perfectly good sense. The biggest threat to the
survival of early humans may well have been other humans. Those
with the ability to detect the presence of their enemies would be more
likely to live long enough to reproduce (and thus pass on their agent
detection genes). The ability to sense other agents, then, became
widespread throughout the human population.
The more sensitive our agency-detecting ability, the more likely
it is that we will survive. The price we pay for an overly sensitive
agent detector is a lot of false positives. We may jump to the conclu-
sion that an agent is present when there isn’t. This is a small price to
pay, however, because it’s better to be safe than sorry. It’s better to
falsely detect an agent who isn’t there than not to detect one that is
there. Failure to detect an agent could result in your death.
Many psychologists, however, claim that there is another price
we pay for our overly sensitive agency detection system: a belief in
supernatural beings. Justin Barrett, for example, asserts: “Part of the
reason people believe in gods, ghosts, and goblins also comes from
the way in which our minds, particularly our agency detection device
(ADD) functions. Our ADD suffers from some hyperactivity, making
it prone to ﬁnd agents around us, including supernatural ones, given
fairly modest evidence of their presence.”68 Psychologists Scott Atran
and Ara Norezayan agree. They write: ”Supernatural agents are readily
conjured up because natural selection has trip-wired cognitive schema
for agency detection in the face of uncertainty.”69 When we hear a
suspicious noise or see a mysterious ﬁgure, we don’t always assume it’s
another human being. Sometimes we assume it’s something supernat-
ural like a ghost or an evil spirit, especially if we’re in a place where
such things are supposed to exist.
When we think we’re dealing with a human agent, it’s easy enough
to conﬁrm (or disconﬁrm) our assumption: just look for physical
clues. But in those cases where we think we’re dealing with some-
thing supernatural, conﬁrmation or disconﬁrmation may be next to

impossible because such beings aren’t physical. That may be one rea-
son that the belief in supernatural beings has such staying power—
their existence can’t be disproven. So the next time you think you’re
in the presence of something supernatural, realize that it may just
be your agency-detection system playing a trick on you.
CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE WHAT YOU BELIEVE
137
Is God Just a Face in the Clouds?
The ﬁrst person to suggest that our belief in
the supernatural is a by-product of our ten-
dency to anthropomorphize was anthropolo-
gist Stewart Guthrie. In his book Faces in the
Clouds: A New Theory of Religion, he argues that
our tendency to infer the presence of an agent
when presented with only fragmentary evi-
dence led us to postulate the existence of
supernatural beings. He writes: “the progeni-
tors of religions are our perceptual uncertainty
and our need to see any people who are
present. Religions are a family in that all are
born from the search for human form and
behavior.”70 But, one might wonder, why infer
the presence of a supernatural agent, that is,
one without physical form? All the humans
we’re acquainted with have a physical body;
why assume that there are human-like crea-
tures without one? The answer comes from
recent research in developmental psychology.
It turns out that children naturally assume that
the mind is separate from the body. They rec-
ognize that the brain is important for some
mental activities, but not for all. This afﬁnity
for dualism (the view that the mind and the
body are two different things) is dramatically
displayed in an experiment conducted by J. M.
Bering and D.F. Bjorkland.71 They told 
children of different ages a story about a
mouse that was eaten by an alligator. When
asked what happened to the mouse, the chil-
dren admitted that it could no longer eat or
perform any biological functions. But they
insisted that it could still feel hunger, have
desires, and hold beliefs. Psychologist Paul
Bloom concludes: “the notion that conscious-
ness is separable from the body is not learned
at all; it comes for free.”72
This innate dualism has an evolutionary
explanation. It is in our biological best interest
not only to detect the presence of other
humans, but also to anticipate their next move.
To do that, however, we need to know what
they’re thinking, and that requires a theory of
mind—what psychologists and philosophers
call a “folk psychology.” This theory tells us
how beliefs and desires work together to create
actions. We use folk psychology to explain the
behavior of humans while we use our under-
standing of natural laws like gravity and motion
to explain the behavior of everything else. 
As a result, “we perceive the world of objects 
as essentially separate from the world of minds,
making it possible for us to envision soulless
bodies and bodiless souls.”73 We have two sep-
arate systems for understanding the world, and
that encourages us to postulate supernatural
beings.
The foregoing account of religious belief
raises the question: “If religion is generalized
and systematized anthropomorphism, can it be
said simply to be a mistake?”74 For Guthrie, the
answer is “Yes” because he believes that such
anthropomorphizing is not backed by sufﬁcient
evidence. For Barrett, however, the answer is
“No” because he believes that God would want
us to believe in him. As he puts it: “Why
wouldn’t God, then, design us in such a way as
to ﬁnd belief in divinity quite natural?”75 Who’s
right? What do you think?

138
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
Against All Odds
Consider: A woman ﬁnds herself thinking about an old friend she hasn’t
thought about for ages or seen in twenty years. Then she picks up the
newspaper and is stunned to see her friend’s obituary. Or a man reads
his daily horoscope, which predicts that he’ll meet someone who’ll
change his life. The next day he’s introduced to the woman he even-
tually marries. Or a woman dreams in great detail that the house next
door catches ﬁre and burns to the ground. She wakes up in a cold
sweat and writes down the dream. Three days later her neighbor’s
house is struck by lightning and is damaged by ﬁre. Are these stories
simply cases of coincidence? Could the eerie conjunction of events
have happened by chance?
Many would say absolutely not—the odds against mere coinci-
dence are too great, astronomical. But research shows that people—
even trained scientists—are prone to misjudge probabilities. When
we declare that an event couldn’t have occurred by chance, we’re fre-
quently way off in our estimates of the odds. Test yourself: Let’s say
you’re at a party, and there are twenty-three people present includ-
ing yourself. What are the chances that two of those twenty-three
people have the same birthday? Is it (a) 1 chance in 365, or 1/365; (b)
1/1,000; (c) 1/2; (d) 1/40; or (e) 1/2,020? Contrary to most people’s
intuitive sense of the probabilities, the answer is (c) 1 chance in 2, or
ﬁfty-ﬁfty.76 Here’s another one: You toss an unbiased coin ﬁve times
in a row. The chances of it landing heads on the ﬁrst toss is, of
course, 1 in 2. Let’s say it does land heads on the ﬁrst toss—and,
amazingly enough, on each of the other four tosses. That’s ﬁve heads
in a row. What are the chances of it landing heads on the sixth toss?
The answer is ﬁfty-ﬁfty, the same as on the ﬁrst toss. The probability
of heads (or tails) on any toss is always ﬁfty-ﬁfty. What happened in
previous tosses has no effect on the next toss; coins have no memory.
The idea that previous events can affect the probabilities in a current
random event is called the gambler’s fallacy. And most people act as
though this idea were valid.
One problem is that most of us don’t realize that because of ordi-
nary statistical laws, incredible coincidences are common and must occur. An
event that seems highly improbable can actually be highly prob-
able—even virtually certain—given enough opportunities for it to
occur. Drawing a royal ﬂush in poker, getting heads ﬁve times in a
row, winning the lottery—all these events may seem incredibly
unlikely in any instance. But they’re virtually certain to happen
sometime to someone. With enough chances for something to happen, it
will happen.

CONCEIVING: WHY YOU SOMETIMES SEE WHAT YOU BELIEVE
139
Consider prophetic dreams, mentioned earlier. If a normal person
has about 250 dreams per night and over 250 million people live in the
United States, there must be billions of dreams dreamed every night
and trillions in a year. With so many dreams and so many life events
that can be matched up to the dreams, it would be astounding if some
dreams didn’t seem prophetic. The really astonishing thing may not be
that there are prophetic dreams but that there are so few of them.
Suppose you’re reading a novel. Just as you get to the part that
mentions the peculiar beauty of the monarch butterfly, you look
up and see one on your window. Suppose you’re sitting in an air-
port, musing over the last name of an old classmate. Just then the
person sitting next to you says that very name aloud in a conver-
sation with someone else. These are indeed uncanny pairings of
What Are the Odds? You Wouldn’t Believe It
When we try to judge the probabilities
involved in events, we’re often wrong. Some-
times we’re really wrong because the true proba-
bilities are completely counter to our intuitive
“feel” for the odds. Mathematician John Allen
Paulos offers this surprising example of a coun-
terintuitive probability:
First, take a deep breath. Assume Shake-
speare’s account is accurate and Julius Caesar
gasped “You too, Brutus” before breathing
his last. What are the chances you just
inhaled a molecule which Caesar exhaled in
his dying breath? The surprising answer is
that, with probability better than 99 per-
cent, you did just inhale such a molecule.
For those who don’t believe me: I’m
assuming that after more than two thousand
years the exhaled molecules are uniformly
spread about the world and the vast major-
ity are still free in the atmosphere. Given
these reasonably valid assumptions, the
problem of determining the relevant
probability is straightforward. If there are N
molecules of air in the world and Caesar
exhaled A of them, then the probability that
any given molecule you inhale is from Cae-
sar is A/N. The probability that any given
molecule you inhale is not from Caesar is
thus 
1  A/N. By the multiplication principle, if
you inhale three molecules, the probability
that none of these three is from Caesar is 
[1  A/N]3. Similarly, if you inhale B mole-
cules, the probability that none of them is
from Caesar is approximately [1  A/N]B.
Hence, the probability of the complemen-
tary event, of your inhaling at least one of
his exhaled molecules, is 1  [1  A/N]B.
A, B (each about 1/30th of a liter, or 
2.2  1022), and N (about 1044 molecules)
are such that this probability is more than
.99. It’s intriguing that we’re all, at least in
this minimal sense, eventually part of one
another.77
It is likely that
unlikely things should
happen.
—ARISTOTLE

events, strange couplings that provoke wonder—or the idea that
psychic forces are at work. But just how likely are such pairings?
The answer is very. A demonstration of this fact by psychologists
David Marks and Richard Kammann goes something like this: Let’s
say that in an ordinary day a person can recall 100 distinct events.
The total number of pairings of these events for a single person in
a single day is thus 4,950 (99 + 98 + 97. . . + 3 + 2 + 1).78 Over a
period of ten years (or about 3,650 days), 1,000 people are thus
expected to generate over 18 billion pairs (that is, 4,950  3,650 
1,000  18,067,500,000). Out of so many pairs of events, it’s likely
that some of those 1,000 people will experience some weird,
incredible pairings.79 Thus, the seemingly impossible becomes
commonplace.
How easy it would be to gather some eerie pairings into a
book and offer them as proof that something psychic or cosmic
had transpired.
How likely is it that someone will recall a person he knew (or
knew of) in the past thirty years and, within exactly ﬁve minutes,
learn of that person’s death? More likely than you might think. In
fact, it’s possible to calculate the approximate probability of this
strange occurrence. One such calculation assumes that a person
would recognize the names of 3,000 people from the past thirty years
and that the person would learn of the death of each of those 3,000
people in the thirty years. With these assumptions and some statisti-
cal math, it can be determined that the chance of the strange occur-
rence happening is 0.00003. This is, as you would expect, a low
probability. But in a population of 100,000 people, even this low
probability means that about ten of these experiences should occur
every day.80
Now none of this discussion shows that truly prophetic dreams
or psychic connections among events can’t happen. But it does
demonstrate that our personal experience of improbabilities doesn’t
prove that they’re miraculous or paranormal. Our personal experi-
ence alone simply can’t reveal to us the true probability of a single
impressive event, despite the strong feelings that an odd conjunc-
tion of events may cause in us. When events that people view as too
much of a coincidence happen, we may be awestruck, mystiﬁed, or
frightened. We may get a sense of strangeness that invites us to
believe that something unusual is happening. But these feelings
aren’t evidence that something signiﬁcant is occurring, any more
than the feeling of dizziness means that the world is swaying from
side to side.
140
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
The mathematical
probabilities of rare
events, in particular,
often run counter to
intuition, but it is the
mathematics, not 
our intuition, that 
is correct.
—BARRY SINGER

ANECDOTAL EVIDENCE: WHY TESTIMONIALS CAN’T BE TRUSTED
141
Rationalizing Homo Sapiens
People not only jump to conclusions; they fre-
quently rationalize or defend whatever conclu-
sion they jump to. Psychologist Barry Singer
summarizes research ﬁndings that show just
how good our rationalizing skills are:
Numerous psychological experiments on
problem solving and concept formation
have shown that when people are given the
task of selecting the right answer by being
told whether particular guesses are right or
wrong, they will tend to do the following:
1. They will immediately form a hypoth-
esis and look only for examples to conﬁrm
it. They will not seek evidence to disprove
their hypothesis, although this strategy
would be just as effective, but will in fact try
to ignore any evidence against it.
2. If the answer is secretly changed in the
middle of the guessing process, they will be
very slow to change the hypothesis that was
once correct but has suddenly become wrong.
3. If one hypothesis ﬁts the data fairly
well, they will stick with it and not look for
other hypotheses that might ﬁt the data
better.
4. If the information provided is too
complex, people will cope by adopting
overly simple hypotheses or strategies for
solution, and by ignoring any evidence
against them.
5. If there is no solution, if the problem
is a trick and people are told “right” and
“wrong” about their choices at random, 
people will nevertheless form all sorts of
hypotheses about causal relationships they
believe are inherent in the data, will believe
their hypotheses through thick and thin,
and will eventually convince themselves that
their theories are absolutely correct. Causal-
ity will invariably be perceived even when it
is not present.
It is not surprising that rats, pigeons,
and small children are often better at solv-
ing these sorts of problems than are human
adults. Pigeons and small children don’t
care so much whether they are always
right, and they do not have such a devel-
oped capacity for convincing themselves
they are right, no matter what the evi-
dence is.81
ANECDOTAL EVIDENCE: WHY TESTIMONIALS 
CAN’T BE TRUSTED
Now that you know some of the mind’s peculiarities that affect per-
sonal experience, we can say more clearly how much personal experi-
ence can tell you about what’s real and what isn’t:
It’s reasonable to accept personal experience as reliable
evidence only if there’s no reason to doubt its reliability.
When there’s reason to suspect that any of the limitations discussed
above are inﬂuencing our thoughts—like when we experience some-
thing that seems to be impossible—then we should withhold judg-
ment until we gather more evidence.

142
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
When there’s reason to think that any of these limitations or con-
ditions may be present, our personal experience can’t prove that
something is true. In fact, when we’re in situations where our subjec-
tive limitations could be operating, the experiences that are affected
by those limitations not only can’t give us proof that something is real
or true; they can’t even provide us with low-grade evidence. The rea-
son is that at those moments, we can’t tell where our experience
begins and our limitations end. Is that an alien spacecraft in the night
sky or Venus, embellished for us by our own high level of expectancy?
Is that strange conjunction of events a case of cosmic synchronicity or
just our inability to appreciate the true probabilities? If subjective lim-
itations might be distorting our experience, our personal evidence is
tainted and can’t tell us much at all. That is why anecdotal evidence—
evidence based on personal testimony—carries so little weight in sci-
entiﬁc investigations. When we can’t establish beyond a reasonable
doubt that a person was not inﬂuenced by these limitations, we aren’t
justiﬁed in believing that what they report is real.
By now you probably have guessed why Everard Feilding’s
personal experience in Palladino’s seances wasn’t a good enough rea-
son for him to conclude that he had witnessed genuine paranormal
phenomena. As an eyewitness, in a darkened room, in unusual
circumstances, feeling the stress of the situation, he was open to
possible distortions of perception and judgment. The testimony of
any eyewitness—or several eyewitnesses—in similar circumstances
would be suspect. (In Palladino’s case, there are additional grounds for
doubting that she had extraordinary powers. She cheated. Like count-
less other mediums of her day, she used trickery to deceive her sitters.
Some say she used trickery only occasionally; others say, all the time.
In any case, she was caught red-handed several times. In one instance,
she was caught skillfully using her foot to reach behind her into the
spirit cabinet from which objects often appeared.)
We need not look to the annals of the paranormal, however, to
see why anecdotal evidence is so unreliable. We can ﬁnd good
examples of the problem close at hand in countless personal experi-
ments with unconventional, or alternative, treatments—acupuncture,
homeopathy, magnetic therapy, therapeutic touch, herbs, vitamins,
and the like. A large proportion of the claims made for unconven-
tional therapies are based solely on personal experience, and testi-
monials by those who believe they’ve been cured are common and
often highly persuasive. “I had multiple sclerosis,” the typical story
goes, “and the doctors could do nothing for me. So I tried megadoses
of vitamin E, and all my symptoms soon disappeared. Vitamin E
really works.” But appearances are often deceiving. There are good
Our beliefs may pre-
dispose us to misin-
terpret the facts,
when ideally the facts
should serve as the
evidence upon which
we base beliefs.
—ALAN M.
MACROBERT AND
TED SCHULTZ

ANECDOTAL EVIDENCE: WHY TESTIMONIALS CAN’T BE TRUSTED
143
reasons why personal experience generally cannot tell you if a treat-
ment really works. There are, in fact, good grounds to be guided by
this principle:
Personal experience alone generally cannot 
establish the effectiveness of a treatment 
beyond a reasonable doubt.
There are three reasons why this principle is true: Many illnesses
simply improve on their own; people sometimes improve even when
given a treatment known to be ineffective; and other factors may
cause the improvement in a person’s condition.
The Variable Nature of Illness
Human physiology is immensely complicated. Drawing conclu-
sions about what causes what inside the body is not as easy as fig-
uring out what causes a car engine to misfire or a billiard ball to
drop into the side pocket. One of the complexities that frequently
confounds efforts to discover whether a treatment works is the self-
limiting nature of illness. The fact is, most human ailments improve
on their own—whether a treatment is administered or not. Diseases
often simply disappear without any help from anybody. Plus, the
symptoms of illnesses, even serious or terminal ones, can vary
dramatically from day to day, with periods of both decline and
improvement. Some chronic diseases like rheumatoid arthritis and
multiple sclerosis (MS) can have spontaneous remissions, with
symptoms vanishing for long periods of time—MS symptoms can
disappear for years.
Even the course of cancer is variable. One cancer patient may
live a few months; another patient with the same kind of cancer may
live years. It’s possible to calculate average survival times for certain
cancers, but it’s often extremely difﬁcult to predict what will happen
to a particular patient who gets a certain treatment or no treatment.
This variability is one reason why doctors who predict how long a
speciﬁc patient has to live are often wrong. When a patient does out-
live a doctor’s prediction, people sometimes credit whatever uncon-
ventional therapy the patient was taking at the time. Spontaneous
remissions of cancer, even particularly lethal types, have also been
documented. They’re rare, and their frequency varies according to
tumor type. But because they do happen, they undermine attempts to
legitimately claim that a single instance of a cure was due to any par-
ticular treatment.
Distance Healing
Treatments: Experi-
ence positive healing
energy in the comfort
of your own home by
distance.Treatments
$35.00 per session.
Call for appt.
—CLASSIFIED AD

144
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
Firewalking to Well-Being
For a fee, you can have an amazing personal
experience and learn to do an extraordinary
feat—you can walk barefoot across a red-hot
bed of burning charcoal and not get burned! Yes,
seminars are teaching the art of ﬁrewalking.
They’re promoting the idea that the practice
requires esoteric skills and that mastering them
can increase self-conﬁdence, cure impotence and
chronic depression, heal failing eyesight, help
people stop smoking, or enhance powers of
communication and persuasion. Anthony 
Robbins has been a major advocate of ﬁrewalk-
ing, leading many seminars and asserting that
successful ﬁrewalking requires psychic or mental
energy that protects the walker from burns.
Science and health writer Kurt Butler, however,
disputes Robbins’s claims, pointing out—as
several experts have—that ﬁrewalking is actually
a matter of simple physics, not psychics:
In response to [Robbins’s] skullduggery,
some friends and I held a ﬁrewalk and
invited the public to join us for free. We
received front-page newspaper coverage as
well as coverage on local television news. In
that event and others since, our coals have
been at least as hot as Robbins’s and our ﬁre
at least as long. We have been thanked for
our demonstrations by grateful relatives for
helping to dissuade loved ones from contin-
uing to waste money on ﬁrewalking semi-
nars and experiences. One mother said her
daughter had already spent $35,000 follow-
ing her ﬁrewalking guru to seminars and
ﬁrewalks around the country. . . .
In our events we have no seminar, positive
thinking, or praying to invoke special powers
or awaken dormant parts of our brain. In fact,
following two minutes of safety instructions,
our participants chant “hot coals” as they
stride across the glowing bed. In over one
hundred individual crossings, only one per-
son was ever burned badly enough to raise a
blister. Other groups of skeptics, most
notably members of the Southern California
Skeptics, have done similar demonstrations of
ﬁrewalking. (Nevertheless, we all strongly
urge against anyone trying to do it without
advice and preferably direct supervision from
an experienced person. Several safety and
legal precautions are absolutely essential.)
Firewalking is a physical feat, not a men-
tal one. It is possible because charcoal, espe-
cially when coated with ashes, does not
transfer heat rapidly to other objects. Its
heat-transmission characteristics are similar
to those of air. You can stick your hand into
a very hot oven without burning yourself,
but if you touch metal in the oven, you can
be badly burned. The metal is no hotter
than the air, but it transfers its heat much
more quickly. . . .
Glowing hot charcoals, of course, are not
the same as hot air. The ﬁrewalkers walk
(usually rapidly) on the charcoals—they don’t
stand around. If they did so they would be
burned. Each foot is in contact with the heat
for only about a second before being lifted.
Moreover, the entire walk generally lasts less
than seven seconds. Any longer exposure and
the risk of burns is much greater.
Walking on hot coals without sustaining
injury is not a miraculous feat.82
Often a treatment is administered when the patient’s condition is
deteriorating. Due to the natural variation in illness, such bad times
are frequently followed by inevitable high points of improvement, so
the treatment may get credit that it doesn’t deserve.

The Placebo Effect
A peculiar fact about people is that sometimes even if they’re given a
treatment that’s inactive or bogus, they’ll respond with an improve-
ment in the way they feel. This response, called the placebo effect, is not
all in the mind—it can involve both psychological and physiological
changes. What exactly is behind this effect isn’t clear, but many
experts say it depends on suggestibility, operant conditioning (previ-
ous experience with healing acts), expectation, and other factors.
In many illnesses about one-third or more of patients will get bet-
ter when given a placebo. (Placebos can also cause negative side
effects, just as drugs can.) People taking placebos have experienced
relief of headaches, hay fever, tension, arthritis, nausea, colds, high
blood pressure, premenstrual tension, mood changes, cancer, and
other conditions. Many times the relief is only temporary. Placebo
effects can be induced by sugar pills, worthless injections and devices,
a practitioner’s reassuring manner, and incantations—even by the act
of walking into the doctor’s ofﬁce.83
Some people are more likely than others to get relief from place-
bos; in most cases, people don’t respond to placebos at all. But it’s dif-
ﬁcult to tell who will respond and who won’t. Having trust in the
practitioner or believing in a therapy raises the chances that a placebo
effect will happen. Even those who don’t believe in a treatment, how-
ever, may have a placebo response.
The placebo effect can be especially impressive in the relief of
pain. Psychologists Leonard Zusne and Warren H. Jones explain:
It is well-known that expectations have a profound effect on the degree
of distress that an individual will experience when in pain. Objectively
measured, the anticipation of pain can be quite literally worse than the
pain itself. . . . The placebo, a physiologically inert substance, can be as
effective as a drug if there is expectation that it will work. The placebo
effect has an obvious bearing on the relief of pain in faith healing. Clini-
cal studies show that severe post-operative pain can be reduced in some
individuals by giving them a placebo instead of a pain-killing drug, such
as morphine. Some 35% of the cases studied experienced relief. On the
other hand, only 75% of patients report relief from morphine.84
The risk of being misled by the placebo effect is why scientists
include a placebo group in medical studies. The changes shown in the
treatment group are compared to any changes in the placebo group.
To be considered effective, the treatment under study must do better
than sugar pills or sham therapies. Placebos may have a place in the
modern practice of medicine. But they can also make worthless reme-
dies look potent.
ANECDOTAL EVIDENCE: WHY TESTIMONIALS CAN’T BE TRUSTED
145
The power of sugges-
tion to alter body
function is well estab-
lished by research
with hypnosis. Blisters
have been induced
and warts made to
disappear through
suggestion.
—WILLIAM T. JARVIS
Miracle of the
Roses—Blooms from
Shrine Are Curing
Cancer,Arthritis and
Even AIDS!
—TABLOID

Overlooked Causes
You’ve had an upset stomach for two days. A friend rubs a crystal
amulet across your belly, and in a few hours your stomach settles. Did
the crystal heal you?
Maybe. But there are other possible causes of your relief, besides
the placebo effect and natural ﬂuctuations in your illness. Was there a
change in your diet in the last day that ﬁnally eased your digestion?
Was your cure caused by exercise, lack of exercise, change in bowel
habits, altered daily routine, or standing on your head in yoga class?
Was it the medication you took—or stopped taking? Was it the
tremendous relief you got when you heard that your car was not going
to be repossessed? Unfortunately, in personal experience it’s extremely
difﬁcult to rule out such possible causes for any given improvement
(or deterioration) in your condition. People, however, frequently
ignore other possibilities and adopt the explanation that suits them.
This habit is a reliable formula for reaching false conclusions.
The formula, nevertheless, is widespread. It’s sometimes used, for
example, by people who’ve undergone cancer treatment. They may
have received both conventional and unconventional treatment, but
they choose to credit only the unconventional.85
”Life would certainly be simpler if medical treatments could be
tested as easily as puddings,” says psychologist Ray Hyman.
But healing is far more complicated than cooking. If a woman says she
sleeps better after being advised to change her position, should we
accept this as evidence that a pendulum can determine “polarity”? If
two patients improve after undergoing intense emotional experiences
with Miss F [who practices “regression therapy,” believing that most
illnesses and emotional problems result from problems in previous
lives], does this argue for the reality of “previous existences”? If scar
tissue or abnormal cervical cells disappear after a patient consults a
psychic healer, does this prove that psychic forces did the job?86
It’s this whirl of possible causes that scientists try to control in
properly conducted research. By controlling these confounding fac-
tors, scientists hope to narrow the possibilities to the true cause or
causes of a condition. This task requires a systematic, objective
approach—something that personal experience, by deﬁnition, isn’t.
It’s not surprising, then, that numerous claims of the effectiveness
of treatments, though afﬁrmed by many testimonials, have been shown
to be false by controlled scientiﬁc testing. Some examples: Vitamin C
prevents the common cold; Laetrile (the trade name for a synthetic rel-
ative of the chemical amygdalin, found in apricot pits and other plants)
ﬁghts cancer; the Feingold diet can prevent or treat attention deﬁcit
disorder (hyperactivity) in children.87
146
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
Enjoy a longer and
healthier life with
Bible Healing Plants
—TABLOID

SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE: WHY CONTROLLED STUDIES CAN BE TRUSTED
147
SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE: WHY CONTROLLED 
STUDIES CAN BE TRUSTED
Science is a systematic attempt to get around the limitations of personal
experience. It is a set of procedures designed to keep us from fooling our-
selves. By performing controlled experiments, scientists seek to ensure
that what they observe is not affected by these limitations, or at least is
affected as little as possible. Thus, scientiﬁc work is largely the business
of not taking any one person’s word for it. Scientists know that the bias-
ing, distorting powers of their unaided experience work overtime, and
prestige and authority and good intentions are no protection. So they
try to remove the element of unsystematic personal experience from the
scientiﬁc process. Science requires the use of objective measurements,
not subjective judgments, wherever possible. Findings must be corrob-
orated by other scientists and must be public evidence open to public
scrutiny, not private data subject to personal conﬁrmation. Facts must
rest not on the say-so of some authority, but on objective evidence.
When scientists err (as did Professor Blondlot), it’s often because the
limitations of the subjective creep in. When science progresses, it’s in
large measure because these limitations are overcome.
Immunizations and Autism
Over a dozen years ago, a scientiﬁc paper pub-
lished in the medical journal Lancet suggested
that there may be a link between autism and the
children’s vaccine against measles, mumps, and
rubella (MMR). The study was not proof of
cause and effect; it merely hinted at a possibility.
Nevertheless a worldwide furor over the alleged
connection began, with many parents refusing
to have their children vaccinated and many
others blaming the vaccine for their children’s
autism. The number of vaccinations in Western
countries plummeted, and an increase in cases of
measles followed. (Measles can be serious; every
year tens of thousands of people, mostly chil-
dren in developing countries, die of measles.)
Eventually Lancet retracted the study; an inde-
pendent analysis of the research showed that it
was fraudulent; and a later study found no evi-
dence of an MMR-autism connection. More
recently, the U.S. Institute of Medicine
conducted a thorough review of all available
evidence and concluded that no causal relation-
ship exists between the MMR vaccine and
autism.
The most obvious lesson here is about the
perils of leaping from tenuous, preliminary
research to ﬁrm conclusions. But an equally
important moral to this story concerns the dan-
gers of the post hoc fallacy. Some parents came
to believe that MMR caused autism in their
children because autism symptoms appeared
after their children were vaccinated. This coincidence
can occur because children are usually vacci-
nated around the age that signs of autism
would appear. Post hoc reasoning led to an out-
cry against the MMR vaccine (and perhaps vac-
cines generally), an unknown number of
unvaccinated children at risk for measles, and a
dramatic surge in measles cases throughout the
Western world.

148
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
Controlled studies, then, are generally much better guides to the
truth than anecdotal evidence is. This is so even when the anecdotal
evidence is of very high quality, as it often is when it’s in the form of
medical case reports.
Case reports are accounts of a doctor’s observations of individual
patients (also called case series, case histories, and descriptive studies).
They can be extremely valuable to other doctors and to medical sci-
entists. “They are . . . invaluable documentaries that, once ﬁled, may
lead to exciting discoveries,” says epidemiologist Stephen H. Gehlbach.
Gehlbach goes on to note:
Accounts of an unusual episode of poisoning or an atypical rash 
developing after administration of a new medication are examples 
of descriptive studies at their simplest. These reports alert clinicians
about possible drug side effects, unusual complications of illnesses, 
or surprising presentations of disease.88
But, as Gehlbach points out, such accounts “do not provide detailed
explanations for the cause of disease or offer the kind of evidence we
need to evaluate the efﬁcacy of a new treatment.”89
Perhaps you’ve already guessed some of the reasons for this limi-
tation of case reports. The variable nature of disease, the placebo
effect, and overlooked causes can confound the doctor’s attempt to
draw ﬁrm conclusions about treatment efﬁcacy, just as these factors
confound attempts to pinpoint causes of symptom relief in our own
personal experience. Though doctors monitor patients and keep
records, case studies are compiled without the strict controls found in
scientiﬁc studies, so confounding factors usually can’t be ruled out.
The doctor administered a treatment; the patient got better. But
would the patient have gotten better anyway? Was it a placebo effect?
Was some other factor involved? While the patient was being treated
by the doctor, did the patient change his diet, his daily routine, his
sleep patterns, his physical activities, his stress level? Was he taking
some other treatment (maybe a self-treatment) while under the doc-
tor’s care? Case reports usually can’t help us answer all these questions.
Case reports are also vulnerable to several serious biases that con-
trolled research is better able to deal with. One is called social desir-
ability bias. It refers to patients’ tendency to strongly wish to respond
to treatment in what they perceive as a correct way. People will some-
times report improvement in their condition after treatment simply
because they think that’s the proper response or because they want to
please the doctor.
Another bias can come from doctors themselves. Called investigator
bias, it refers to the well-documented fact that investigators or clinicians
Doctors Reveal
Amazing Healing
Powers of Water
—TABLOID

SUMMARY
149
sometimes see an effect in a patient because they want or expect to
see it.
One’s investment in the results or anticipation of how subjects are
likely to respond can easily become a self-fulﬁlling prophecy. This is
not to impugn the integrity of investigators. Objectivity is difﬁcult to
master. It is difﬁcult for surgeons not to ﬁnd beneﬁts from their
favorite operative procedures to alleviate hemorrhoids or for social
workers looking for evidence of child abuse and neglect not to
uncover child maltreatment in a group known to be at high risk.90
Scientists use several techniques in medical research to try to mini-
mize the effects of such biases. In case studies, bias is harder to con-
trol, and it often has sway.
We therefore reach an inevitable conclusion about the doctor’s 
evidence:
Case studies alone generally cannot establish the 
effectiveness of a treatment beyond a reasonable doubt.
This principle and the preceding one (about personal experience) are
especially handy tools in thinking about proposed treatments because
often the only evidence such treatments offer in their favor is case
studies or personal experience.
Our senses can fool us and our minds can play tricks on us.
Unfortunately, we are often unaware of our perceptual and cognitive
errors because they come so naturally. They’re often an unintended
byproduct of the inference rules (heuristics) that served us so well in
the struggle for survival. To avoid these errors, we need a method that
will help us spot them. Science provides that method. In the next
chapter, we will examine the scientiﬁc method in an attempt to under-
stand how it can improve our search for knowledge.
SUMMARY
An important principle to use when evaluating weird phenomena is that
just because something seems real doesn’t mean that it is. Part of the rea-
son for this caution is the constructive nature of our perceptions. We
often perceive exactly what we expect to perceive, regardless of what’s
real, and we sometimes experience the misperception of seeing distinct
forms in vague and formless stimuli. These constructive processes are
notoriously active in UFO sightings, where under poor viewing condi-
tions average people mentally transform lights in a dark sky into alien
spacecraft.
There’s gold in them
thar’ hills! And the
rush is on. Pandering
publishers, manufac-
turers, drugstores,
“health food” stores,
pharmaceutical
ﬁrms, and book-
stores all proﬁt from
the misinformation
and mythology.
—KURT BUTLER

Our memories are also constructive and easily inﬂuenced by all sorts of
factors: stress, expectation, belief, and the introduction of new information.
Added to all this is the selectivity of memory—we selectively remember cer-
tain things and ignore others, setting up a recall bias. No wonder the recall
of eyewitnesses is often so unreliable.
How we conceive the data we encounter is also problematic. We often
refuse to accept contrary evidence, a reluctance that can be found in just
about everyone, including scientists and trained investigators. We have a ten-
dency to believe that a very general personality description applies uniquely
to ourselves, a phenomenon known as the Forer effect. The Forer effect is at
work in the readings of astrology, biorhythms, fortune-telling, tarot cards,
palmistry (palm reading), and psychic performances. We are often prey to
conﬁrmation bias, the tendency to look for and recognize only evidence that
conﬁrms our own views. We fall for the availability error and base our judg-
ments on evidence that’s vivid or memorable instead of reliable or
trustworthy. We are sometimes led astray by the representative heuristic, the
rule of thumb that like goes with like. And we are generally poor judges of
probabilities and randomness, which leads us to erroneously believe that an
event could not possibly be a mere coincidence.
All this points to the fact that anecdotal evidence is not a reliable guide to
the truth. Our principle should be that it’s reasonable to accept personal expe-
rience as reliable evidence only if there’s no reason to doubt its reliability. The
problems with this kind of evidence are illustrated well in people’s personal
attempts to judge the effectiveness of treatments and health regimens. The
reality is that personal experience alone generally cannot establish the effec-
tiveness of a treatment beyond a reasonable doubt—but controlled scientiﬁc
studies can.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. How might the constructive nature of your perceptions play a role in
what you experience while you’re walking at night through a grave-
yard said to be visited by spirits of the dead?
2. What are some of the factors that could inﬂuence the accuracy of
your memory of an event that happened three years ago?
3. Let’s say that an incredible coincidence occurs in your life, and your
friend argues that the odds against the occurrence are so astronomical
that the only explanation must be a paranormal one. What is wrong
with this argument?
4. How is it possible for the prophecies of Nostradamus to appear to be
highly accurate and yet not be?
5. What is the principle that explains how much trust we should put in
personal experience as reliable evidence?
6. What is conﬁrmation bias? How does it affect our thinking?
7. What is the availability error? How does it affect our thinking?
8. How do conﬁrmation bias and the availability error lead to supersti-
tious beliefs?
150
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE

9. What is the argument from unnecessary restrictions? How can it be
used to undercut supernatural or paranormal claims?
10. What is the representativeness heuristic? How does it affect our
thinking?
11. Why can’t personal experience alone establish the effectiveness of a
treatment?
12. What is the placebo effect?
EVALUATE THESE CLAIMS. ARE THEY REASONABLE? 
WHY OR WHY NOT?
1. Last night in bed, I had the experience of being transported to a
spaceship where I was placed on an examining table and probed with
various instruments. You can’t tell me that UFOs aren’t real.
2. Sometimes Chinese fortune cookies can be extremely accurate. In
January I opened one that said I would soon be starting a long and
difficult journey, and, sure enough, in May I got into medical
school.
3. I had my aura read three times and each time I learned something
new. Auras must be real.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. The only way to tell whether something is real is to see if it works for
you. Is this a legitimate principle?
2. In 1977, Maria Rubio of Lake Arthur, New Mexico, was cooking tor-
tillas in her kitchen. One of them had a burn mark that resembled a
human face. She concluded that it was an image of Jesus Christ, and,
after the word got out, 600 to 1,000 people a day visited the shrine to
the tortilla that she set up in her home. The Bible does not contain
any detailed descriptions of Jesus’ physical appearance. Is Mrs. Rubio
justiﬁed in believing that the face she sees in the tortilla is the face of
Jesus? Why or why not?
3. In a random survey, if people were asked whether one is more likely
to die from asthma or a tornado, what do you think the majority
would say? Why?
4. Jane wants to buy a new car and is deciding between a Mazda and a
Toyota. The most important factor in her decision is reliability.
Consumer surveys indicate that the Toyota is more reliable. But her
Uncle Joe owns a Toyota, and it has given him nothing but trouble. So
she buys the Mazda. Is Jane’s conclusion reasonable? Why or why not?
FIELD PROBLEM
Some people may believe certain statements so strongly that no evidence
could possibly compel them to change their minds. Are you like that? Are
any of your friends?
FIELD PROBLEM
151

Assignment: Examine the following statements. Pick one that you strongly
believe (or make up one of your own) and ask yourself: What evidence
would persuade me to change my mind about the statement? If confronted
with that evidence, would I really change my mind? Would I try to ﬁnd an
excuse to deny or ignore the evidence? Next, try this same test on a friend.
•
Heaven—a transcendent or celestial place—does exist.
•
Bill Clinton was a much better president than Ronald Reagan.
•
Ronald Reagan was a much better president than Bill Clinton.
•
Alien spacecraft have visited Earth.
•
An all-powerful, all-knowing, all-good God exists.
•
I have experienced an actual instance of ESP.
•
Some people can predict the future.
CRITICAL READING AND WRITING
I. Read the passage below and answer the following questions:
1. The speaker in the passage says that she saw the Loch Ness
monster. What is her evidence to support this claim?
2. Is her claim justiﬁed? Why or why not?
3. Are there any reasons for doubting the evidence of her personal
experience? If so, what are they?
4. Do you ﬁnd her argument convincing? Why or why not?
5. What kind of evidence when added to her observations would
make her argument stronger?
II. Write a 200-word paper critiquing the argument in the passage, stat-
ing whether you think it is strong or weak and why you think that.
Passage 4
Well, the day that I saw the [Loch Ness] monster, it was the end of
September 1990, and I was driving back from Inverness. I came up the
hill where we came in sight of the bay, glanced out across it, and saw this
large lump, is the best way to describe it. The nearest I can tell you is it
looked like a boat that had turned upside down. Pretty much like that
one out there, actually, same sort of size. If you took that boat and put it
in the entrance to the bay, which is where I saw the monster, that’s the
size of it. About 30 feet in length, and nearly 10 feet in height from the
water to the top of the back. It was a bright, sunny day, the water was
bright blue, and it really showed up against it. It was a mixture of browns,
greens, sludgy sort of colors. I looked at it on and off for a few seconds,
because I was driving. Must have seen it three or four times, and the last
time I looked, it was gone! (Val Moffat, eyewitness quoted in NOVA
Online, “The Beast of Loch Ness,” accessed December 2, 2003.)
152
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE

NOTES
153
NOTES
1. E. Feilding, W. W. Baggally, and H. Carrington, Proceedings of the SPR
23 (1909): 461–62, reprinted in E. Feilding, Sittings with Eusapia Palladino
and Other Studies (New Hyde Park, NY: University Books, 1963).
2. James Alcock, Parapsychology: Science or Magic? (Oxford: Pergamon
Press, 1981), pp. 35–37, 64.
3. The following discussion is drawn from Terence Hines, Pseudoscience
and the Paranormal (Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1988), pp. 168–70.
4. K. Duncker, “The Inﬂuence of Past Experience upon Perceptual Prop-
erties,” American Journal of Psychology 52 (1939): 255–65.
5. C. M. Turnbull, “Some Observations Regarding the Experiences and
Behavior of the Ba Mbuti Pygmies,” American Journal of Psychology 74
(1961): 304–08.
6. Andrew Neher, The Psychology of Transcendence (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1980), p. 64.
7. Conway W. Snyder, correspondence reproduced in Skeptical Inquirer
(Summer 1988): 340–43.
8. L. Guevara-Castro and L. Viele, “Dozens Say They Have Seen Christ
on a Pizza Chain Billboard,” Atlanta Journal Constitution, May 21, 1991,
p. D1.
9. John R. Vokey, “Subliminal Messages,” in Psychological Sketches, 6th ed.,
ed. John R. Vokey and Scott W. Allen (Lethbridge, Alberta: Psyence
Ink, 2002), pp. 223–46.
10. Ibid., p. 249.
11. Carl Sagan and P. Fox, “The Canals of Mars: An Assessment after
Mariner 9,” Icarus 25 (1975): 602–12.
12. The following account draws on I. Klotz, “The N-Ray Affair,” Scientiﬁc
American 242, no. 5 (1980): 168–75.
13. Scott Petrie, “The Phoenix Lights 15th Anniversary,” The UFO
Chronicles, http://www.theufochronicles.com/2012/03/phoenix-lights-
15th-anniversary_16.html
14. Scott Craven, “Intrigue Persists over Lights in Sky,” Arizona Republic,
February 25, 2007, A1
15. Scott  Craven, “Intrigue Persists over Lights in Sky.”
16. Tony Ortega, “The Phoenix Lights Explained (again),” eSkeptic,
Wednesday, May 21st, 2008, http://www.skeptic.com/eskeptic/08-05-21/
17. Philip J. Klass, UFOs Explained (New York: Random House, 1974), 
pp. 9–14.
18. Philip J. Klass, “UFOs,” in Science and the Paranormal (New York: Scrib-
ner’s, 1981), pp. 313–15.
19. Hines, Pseudoscience and the Paranormal, p. 175.
20. Klass, “UFOs,” pp. 315–16.
21. Zusne and Jones, Anomalistic Psychology, p. 336.
22. Klass, UFOs Explained, p. 77.
23. Elizabeth Loftus, “The Prince of Bad Memories,” Skeptical Inquirer 21
(March/April 1998): 24.

24. G. W. Allport and L. J. Postman, “The Basic Psychology of Rumor,”
Transactions of the New York Academy of Science, 2d ser., 8 (1945): 
61–81.
25. Ted Schultz, “Voices from Beyond: The Age-Old Mystery of Chan-
neling,” in The Fringes of Reason: A Whole Earth Catalog, ed. Ted Schultz
(New York: Harmony Books, 1989), pp. 60, 62.
26. B. Fischhoff and R. Beyth, “‘I Knew It Would Happen’: Remembered
Probabilities of Once-Future Things,” Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance 120 (1972): 159–72.
27. E. F. Loftus and J. C. Palmer, “Reconstruction of Automobile Destruc-
tion: An Example of the Interaction between Language and Memory,”
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 13, no. 5 (1974): 585–89.
28. E. Loftus, D. Miller, and H. Burns, “Semantic Integration of Verbal
Information into a Visual Memory,” Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory 4 (1978): 19–31.
29. Alcock, Parapsychology, p. 76.
30. Hines, Pseudoscience and the Paranormal, p. 52.
31. Ibid., p. 51.
32. Francis Bacon, Novum Organum, First Part, Aphorism xlvi.
33. John C. Wright, “Consistency and Complexity of Response Sequences
as a Function of Schedules of Noncontingent Reward,” Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology 63 (1962): 601–09.
34. Max Planck, Scientiﬁc Autobiography and Other Papers, trans. F. Gaynor
(New York: Philosophical Library, 1949), pp. 33–34.
35. L. J. Chapman and J. P. Chapman, “The Genesis of Popular but Erro-
neous Psychodiagnostic Observations,” Journal of Abnormal Psychology
72 (1967): 193–204.
36. “Failed Doomsday and Apocalyptic Predictions,” Relatively Interesting,
May 8, 2012, http://www.relativelyinteresting.com/failed-doomsday-
and-apocalyptic-predictions/
37. C. Snyder and R. Shenkel, “The P. T. Barnum Effect,” Psychology Today,
March 1975, pp. 52–54.
38. David Marks and Richard Kammann, Psychology of the Psychic (Buffalo:
Prometheus, 1980), p. 189.
39. Henry Roberts, The Complete Prophecies of Nostradamus (Great Neck, NY:
Nostradamus, 1969), p. 16., as cited in Neher, Psychology of Transcen-
dence, p. 188.
40. Ibid., p. 18.
41. Ibid., pp. 16, 18.
42. In these verses there is another problem, as noted by James Randi, an
expert on the Nostradamus legend: Their translation is wildly inaccu-
rate.
43. Roberts, p. 12, as cited in Neher, Psychology of Transcendence, p. 188.
44. Erika Cheetham, The Prophecies of Nostradamus (New York: Putnam’s/
Capricorn Books, 1974), p. 25, as cited in ibid.
45. Roberts, p. 17, as cited in ibid.
154
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE

46. Cheetham, p. 33, as cited in ibid.
47. Neher, Psychology of Transcendence, p. 159.
48. David Emery, “Did Nostradamus Predict the 9/11 World Trade Center
Attack?” http://urbanlegends.about.com/cs/historical/a/nostradamus.htm,
February 6, 2004.
49. P. N. Johnson-Laird, and P. C. Wason, eds., Thinking: Readings in 
Cognitive Science (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977), 
pp. 143–57.
50. B. F. Skinner, “‘Superstition’ in the Pigeon,” Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology 38 (1948): 168–72.
51. P. C. Wason, “On the Failure to Eliminate Hypotheses in a Concep-
tual Task,” Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 12 (1960): 
129–40.
52. Stuart Sutherland, Irrationality (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University
Press, 1992), p. 23.
53. S. F. Madey and T. Gilovich, “Effect of Temporal Focus on the Recall
of Expectancy-Consistent and Expectancy-Inconsistent Information,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 65 (1993): 458–68.
54. T. Gilovich, “Biased Evaluation and Persistence in Gambling,” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 44 (1983): 1110–26.
55. Francis Bacon, Novum Organum, quoted in Thomas Gilovich, How We
Know What Isn’t So (New York: Free Press, 1991), p. 178.
56. I. W. Kelly, James Rotton, and Roger Culver, “The Moon Was Full and
Nothing Happened,” in The Hundredth Monkey, ed. Kendrick Frazier
(Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1991), p. 231.
57. B. Fischoff, P. Slovic, and S. Lichtenstein, “Fault Trees: Sensitivity of
Estimated Failure Probabilities to Problem Representation,” Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 4 (1978):
330–44.
58. Nicholas Humphrey, Leaps of Faith (New York: Basic Books, 1996), p. 87.
59. A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Extensional versus Intuitive Reason-
ing: The Conjunction Fallacy in Probability Judgment,” Psychological
Review 90 (1983): 293–315.
60. Sir James Frazer, The Illustrated Golden Bough (New York: Doubleday,
1978), pp. 36–37.
61. Ibid., pp. 39–40.
62. Robert Basil, “Graphology and Personality: Let the Buyer Beware,” in
Frazier, The Hundredth Monkey, p. 207.
63. G. Ben-Shakhar, M. Bar-Hillel, Y. Blui, E. Ben-Abba, and A. Flug, “Can
Graphology Predict Occupational Success?” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy 71 (1989): 645–53.
64. T. Monmaney, “Marshall’s Hunch,” New Yorker 69 (1993): 64–72.
65. David Hume, The Natural History of Religion, ed. by H.E. Root (Palo
Alto: Stanford University Press, 1957) 29.
66. Stewart Guthrie, Faces in the Clouds: A New Theory of Religion (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1993).
NOTES
155

67. F. Heider and M. Simmel, “An Experimental Study of Apparent Behav-
ior,” American Journal of Psychology 57 (1944) 243–259.
68. Justin L. Barrett, Why Would Anyone Believe in God? (Walnut Creek, CA:
AltaMira Press, 2004) 31.
69. Scott Atran and Ara Norenzayan, “Religion’s Evolutionary Landscape:
Counterintuition, Commitment, Compassion, Communion,” Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 27 (2004) 720.
70. Steward Guthrie, Faces in the Clouds: A New Theory of Religion (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1993) 197.
71. J.M. Bering and D.F. Bjorkland, “The Natural Emergence of Afterlife
Reasoning as a Developmental Regularity,” Developmental Psychology 40
(2004) 217–233.
72. Paul Bloom, “Religion Is Natural,” Developmental Science 10 (2007) 149.
73. Paul Bloom, “Is God an Accident?” The Atlantic Monthly 296 (2005) 107.
74. Guthrie, Faces in the Clouds, 200.
75. Justin Barrett, quoted in Robin Marantz-Henig, “Darwin’s God,” The
New York Times Magazine, March 4, 2007, 20.
76. John Allen Paulos, Innumeracy (New York: Hill and Wang, 1988), p. 27.
77. Ibid., p. 24.
78. You can understand better why this formula works by considering a
smaller number of events, say ﬁve (A, B, C, D, E). Event A can be
paired with B, C, D, and E, producing four possible pairs. Event B can
be paired with C, D, and E (not A, to avoid repeating a pair), produc-
ing three pairs. Event C can be paired with D and E (not A and B, to
avoid repeats), and so on. So the total possible pairs (without dupli-
cates) of ﬁve events is given by the formula 4  3  2  1, or 10.
79. David Marks and Richard Kammann, The Psychology of the Psychic
(Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1980), p. 166.
80. L. W. Alvarez, letter to the editors, Science, June 18, 1965, p. 1541.
81. Barry Singer, “To Believe or Not to Believe,” in Science and the Paranormal,
ed. George Abell and Barry Singer (New York: Scribner’s, 1981), p. 18.
82. Kurt Butler, A Consumer’s Guide to “Alternative Medicine” (Buffalo:
Prometheus Books, 1992), pp. 182–84.
83. Howard Brody, Placebos and the Philosophy of Medicine (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1980), pp. 8–24. See also Harold J. Cornacchia
and Stephen Barrett, Consumer Health: A Guide to Intelligent Decisions
(St. Louis: Mosby–Year Book, 1993), pp. 58–59.
84. Zusne and Jones, Anomalistic Psychology, p. 54.
85. American Cancer Society, Dubious Cancer Treatment (Baltimore: Port City
Press, 1991), pp. 24, 75–76.
86. Ray Hyman, “Occult Health Practices,” in The Health Robbers, ed. Stephen
Barrett and William Jarvis (Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1993), p. 29.
87. See Charles W. Marshall, “Can Megadoses of Vitamin C Help against
Colds?” Nutrition Forum, September/October 1992, pp. 33–36; Ofﬁce of
Technology Assessment, Congress of the United States, Unconventional
Cancer Treatments (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce,
156
FIVE: LOOKING FOR TRUTH IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE

1990), pp. 102–07; and E. H. Wender and M. A. Lipton, “The
National Advisory Committee on Hyperkinesis and Food Additives—
Final Report to The Nutrition Foundation” (Washington, DC: The
Nutrition Foundation, 1980).
88. Stephen H. Gehlbach, Interpreting the Medical Literature (New York:
Macmillan, 1988), p. 14.
89. Ibid. The exceptions to this rule are rare, occurring only when cause-
and-effect relationships are clear-cut and dramatic. One example is the
effect of insulin on diabetic hyperglycemia; another is the effect of
penicillin on pneumococcal pneumonia. These effects were accepted
by scientists without demands for rigorously controlled studies.
90. Ibid., p. 90.
NOTES
157

158
SIX
Science and 
Its Pretenders
T
HE SCIENTIFIC METHOD is the most powerful tool we
have for acquiring knowledge. By its means we’ve dis-
covered the structure of the atom and the composition of the
stars, the causes of disease and cures for infection, the blueprint
for life and the mechanisms of growth. Use of the scientiﬁc
method is not conﬁned to scientists, however. Whenever we
try to solve a problem by systematically evaluating the plausi-
bility of various solutions, we are proceeding scientiﬁcally. To
improve our problem-solving ability, then, it’s useful to know
what’s involved in conducting a scientiﬁc investigation.
Scientists use the scientiﬁc method to acquire knowledge
about the nature of reality. Many people don’t think of science as
a search for the truth, however. Instead, they think of it as a means
for creating commodities. When they think of science, they think
of such things as televisions, DVDs, and microwave ovens.
Scientists are peep-
ing Toms at the key-
hole of eternity.
—ARTHUR KOESTLER

Although scientiﬁc knowledge is used in the manufacture of these
items, the production of such goods is not the goal of science. Science
seeks to understand the general principles that govern the universe—
not to produce gadgets.
Gadget production is the province of technology, which applies
scientiﬁc knowledge to practical problems. The line between science
and technology is often difﬁcult to draw, because the same persons
may engage in both pursuits. Scientists, in conducting their investiga-
tions, may fabricate special apparatus, while technologists, in design-
ing their mechanisms, may perform systematic experiments that lead
to scientiﬁc discoveries. In general, however, we may say that science
produces knowledge while technology produces goods. Scientists are
primarily interested in knowing how something works while technol-
ogists are primarily interested in making something that works. The
best indication for scientists that they know how something works is
that they can successfully predict what it will do. Thus science seeks
to understand the world by identifying general principles that are
both explanatory and predictive.1
SCIENCE AND DOGMA
It’s tempting to say that what distinguishes science from all other
modes of inquiry is that science takes nothing for granted. But this
statement is not strictly true, for there is at least one proposition that
must be accepted before any scientiﬁc investigation can take place—
that the world is publicly understandable. This proposition means at least
three things: (1) The world has a determinate structure; (2) we can
know that structure; and (3) this knowledge is available to everyone.
Let’s examine each of these claims in turn.
If the world had no determinate structure—if it were formless
and nondescript—it couldn’t be understood scientiﬁcally because it
couldn’t be explained or predicted. Only where there is an identiﬁable
pattern can there be explanation or prediction. If the world lacked a
discernible pattern, it would be beyond our ken.
But a determinate structure is not enough for scientiﬁc under-
standing; we also need a means of apprehending it. As we’ve seen,
humans possess at least four faculties that put us in touch with the
world: perception, introspection, memory, and reason. There may be
others, but at present, these are the only ones that have proven them-
selves to be reliable. They’re not 100 percent reliable, but the beauty
of the scientiﬁc method is that it can determine when they’re not. 
The scientiﬁc method is self-correcting, and as a result it is our most 
reliable guide to the truth.2
SCIENCE AND DOGMA
159
The dangers that
face the world can,
every one of them, be
traced back to sci-
ence.The salvations
that may save the
world will, every one
of them, be traced
back to science.
—ISAAC ASIMOV
It is not what the
man of science 
believes that distin-
guishes him, but 
how and why he 
believes it.
—BERTRAND RUSSELL
Science commits sui-
cide when it adopts
a creed.
—THOMAS HENRY
HUXLEY

What makes scientiﬁc understanding public is that the informa-
tion upon which it is based is, in principle, available to everyone. All
people willing to make the appropriate observations can see for them-
selves whether any particular claim is true. No one has to take any-
body’s word for anything. Everything is out in the open, and it is open
season on everything. To be accepted as true, a scientiﬁc claim must
be able to withstand the closest scrutiny, for only if it does can we be
reasonably sure that it’s not mistaken.
SCIENCE AND SCIENTISM
Some critics of science say that far from being an impartial search for
the truth, science is an imperialistic ideology that champions a par-
ticular worldview, namely, a mechanistic, materialistic, and atomistic
one. This ideology is often referred to as scientism. Scientism, they
claim, is committed to the view that the world is a great machine,
composed of minuscule particles of matter that interact with each
other like tiny billiard balls. Such a world is inimical to human ﬂour-
ishing because it treats us like machines. Stripping us of our dignity
and humanity, it denies the importance of our thoughts, feelings, and
desires. The devastating effects of this approach to reality, they claim,
can be witnessed by anyone who turns on the nightly news.3
What we need, these critics suggest, is a different worldview, one
that is more organic, holistic, and process oriented. The world should
be viewed not as a giant machine composed of isolated entities, but as
a giant organism composed of interdependent processes. Only by
adopting this sort of worldview can we regain the social, psychologi-
cal, and ecological balance necessary for continued survival on this
planet.4
While it may be true that, at any one time, a particular worldview
is dominant in the scientiﬁc community, it would be a mistake to iden-
tify science with any particular worldview. Science is a method of dis-
cerning the truth, not a particular body of truths. It is a way of solving
problems, not a particular solution to them. Just as you cannot iden-
tify science with its applications, so you cannot identify it with its
results. The worldviews held by scientists have changed radically over
the years: The worldview of quantum mechanics is far from the mech-
anistic worldview of the seventeenth century.
Those critics who believe that we should adopt a more organic
and holistic worldview do so on the grounds that it offers a more
accurate description of reality than does a mechanistic and atomistic
one. That may well be true, but the only way to ﬁnd out is to deter-
mine whether there is any evidence to that effect, and the best way
160
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
Science is the great
antidote to the 
poison of enthusiasm
and superstition.
—ADAM SMITH

to make such a determination is to use the scientiﬁc method. The
scientiﬁc method provides the best means of assessing competing
theories.
SCIENTIFIC METHODOLOGY
The scientiﬁc method is often said to consist of the following four
steps:
1. Observe
2. Induce general hypotheses or possible explanations for what we
have observed
3. Deduce speciﬁc things that must also be true if our hypothesis
is true
4. Test the hypothesis by checking out the deduced implications5
But this conception of the scientiﬁc method provides a misleading
picture of scientiﬁc inquiry. Scientiﬁc investigation can occur only
after a hypothesis has been formulated, and induction is not the only
way of formulating a hypothesis.
A moment’s reﬂection reveals that data collection in the absence
of a hypothesis has little or no scientiﬁc value. Suppose, for example,
that one day you decide to become a scientist, and having read a stan-
dard account of the scientiﬁc method, you set out to collect some
data. Where should you begin? Should you start by cataloging all the
items in your room, measuring them, weighing them, noting their
color and composition, and so on? Should you then take these items
apart and catalog their parts in a similar manner? Should you note the
relationship of these objects to one another, to the ﬁxtures in the
room, to objects outside? Clearly, there’s enough data in your room to
keep you busy for the rest of your life.
From a scientiﬁc point of view, collecting this data wouldn’t be
very useful because it wouldn’t help us evaluate any scientiﬁc hy-
potheses. The goal of scientiﬁc inquiry is to identify principles that
are both explanatory and predictive. Without a hypothesis to guide
our investigations, there is no guarantee that the information gathered
would help us accomplish that goal.
Philosopher Karl Popper graphically demonstrated the impor-
tance of hypotheses for observation:
Twenty-ﬁve years ago I tried to bring home the same point to a
group of physics students in Vienna by beginning a lecture with the
following instructions: “Take pencil and paper; carefully observe, and
write down what you have observed!” They asked, of course, what I
wanted them to observe. Clearly the instruction, “Observe!” is absurd.
SCIENTIFIC METHODOLOGY
161
How odd it is that
anyone should not
see that all observa-
tion must be for or
against some view if
it is to be of any
service!
—CHARLES DARWIN
Science is nothing but
developed perception,
interpreted intent,
common sense
rounded out and
minutely articulated.
— GEORGE
SANTAYANA

(It is not even idiomatic, unless the object of the transitive verb can
be taken as understood.) Observation is always selective. It needs a
chosen object, a deﬁnite task, an interest, a point of view, a problem.6
Scientiﬁc inquiry begins with a problem—why did something occur?
How are two or more things related? What is something made of? An
observation, of course, is needed to recognize that a problem exists,
but any such observation will have been guided by an earlier hypoth-
esis.7 Hypotheses are needed for scientiﬁc observation because they
tell us what to look for—they help us distinguish relevant from irrel-
evant information.
Scientiﬁc hypotheses indicate what will happen if certain condi-
tions are realized. By producing these conditions in the laboratory 
or observing them in the ﬁeld, we can assess the credibility of the 
hypotheses proposed. If the predicted results occur, we have reason to
believe that the hypothesis in question is true. If not, we have reason
to believe that it’s false.
Although hypotheses are designed to account for data, they
rarely can be derived from data. Contrary to what the traditional ac-
count of the scientiﬁc method would have us believe, inductive think-
ing is rarely used to generate hypotheses. It can be used to formulate
certain elementary hypotheses such as this one: Every ﬁsh ever caught
in this lake has been a bass; therefore every ﬁsh that ever will be
caught in this lake will be a bass. But it can’t be used to generate the
more sophisticated hypotheses scientists commonly use because sci-
entiﬁc hypotheses often postulate entities that aren’t mentioned in the
data. The atomic theory of matter, for example, postulates the exis-
tence of atoms. All of the data upon which the atomic theory rests,
however, can be described without mentioning atoms. Since scientiﬁc
hypotheses often introduce concepts not found in their data, there
can be no mechanical procedure for constructing them.8
Hypotheses are created, not discovered, and the process of their
creation is just as open-ended as the process of artistic creation. There is
no formula for generating hypotheses. That’s not to say that the
process of theory construction is irrational, but it is to say that the
process is not mechanical. In searching for the best explanation, sci-
entists are guided by certain criteria, such as testability, fruitfulness,
scope, simplicity, and conservatism. Fulﬁlling any one of these crite-
ria, however, is neither a necessary nor a sufﬁcient condition for being
a good hypothesis. Science therefore is just as much a product of the
imagination as it is of reason.
Even the most beautifully crafted hypotheses, however, can turn
out to be false. That’s why scientists insist on checking all hypotheses
162
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
In scientiﬁc work,
those who refuse to
go beyond fact rarely
get as far as fact.
—THOMAS H.
HUXLEY
Science is our 
century’s art.
—HORACE FREELAND
JUDSON

against reality. Let’s examine how this check might be done in a par-
ticular kind of scientiﬁc work—medical research.
In medical research, clinical studies offer the strongest and clear-
est support for any claim that a treatment is effective because they can
establish cause and effect beyond a reasonable doubt. Clinical trials
allow scientists to control extraneous variables and test one factor at
a time. Properly conducted clinical trials have become the gold stan-
dard of medical evidence, having proven themselves again and again.
In clinical trials designed to test treatment efﬁcacy, an experimental
group of subjects receives the treatment in question. A control group
that’s as similar to the experimental group as possible doesn’t get the
treatment. (Use of a control group makes the study a controlled trial.) Sci-
entists then compare pertinent differences between the two groups to
verify whether the treatment has any effect. The control group is essen-
tial. Without it, there’s generally no way to tell whether the treatment
really worked. With no control group, it’s usually not possible to know
whether the subjects’ condition would have changed even without treat-
ment, or that some factor besides the treatment (like the subjects’ life-
style) was responsible for any positive results, or that the placebo effect
was at work, or that some change in the subjects’ behavior after getting
the treatment was what made the difference. By comparing results in
the experimental group to those in the control group, researchers can
determine whether the experimental treatment was more effective than
would be expected because of these other factors alone.
To minimize confounding factors, subjects in the control group
often receive a placebo. (Such a study is then referred to as a placebo-
controlled trial.) Placebos are given as if they’re effective therapy be-
cause, as mentioned in the previous chapter, many people experience
signs of improvement even when they’re given a worthless treatment
(the placebo effect). Scientists compare the results in the experimen-
tal group with that in the placebo-control group. If the experimental
treatment is truly effective—and not merely a placebo itself—it
should perform much better than the placebo.
Frequently, especially in drug testing, the control group gets not
a placebo but an already proven treatment. The purpose of the study
is to determine if the new treatment works better than the established,
or standard, one.
Another extremely important element in clinical trials is
blinding—a practice used to ensure that subjects (and, if possible, 
researchers) don’t know which subjects are getting the experimental
treatment or the placebo. This practice is followed to avoid having
knowledge of the experiment taint the results. If subjects know which
SCIENTIFIC METHODOLOGY
163
The most important
quality of the scien-
tiﬁc method is its 
capacity to eliminate
bias.That’s what ran-
domisation, blinding,
proper sampling and
so on is all about.
That’s where almost
all non-scientiﬁc
medicine breaks
down.
—PATRICK
BRAMWELL-WESLEY

therapy is the placebo and which the true treatment, some of them
may feel better when they get the treatment whether it’s truly effec-
tive or not. Or if they know they’ve received a placebo, they may
change their health habits to compensate. Or they may even try to
obtain the true therapy on their own. Similar problems can affect the
scientists conducting the study. If researchers know who received
which treatment, they may unconsciously bias the test data. Well-
designed clinical trials are double-blind, which means that neither the
subjects nor the scientists know who’s getting which treatment.
Conducting medical research is exacting work, and many things
can go wrong—and often do. Several scientiﬁc reviews of medical
studies have concluded that a large proportion of published studies
are seriously ﬂawed. (In the words of one review: “The mere fact that
research reports are published, even in the most prestigious journals,
is no guarantee of their quality.”10 An expert on the medical literature
164
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
Benjamin Franklin and the Origin of Blind Testing
Benjamin Franklin’s most famous scientiﬁc ac-
complishment is the discovery of electricity.
But perhaps his most important is the invention
of the blind controlled experiment, which re-
mains the gold standard against which all other
experimental protocols are compared.
In 1784, King Louis XVI of France commis-
sioned a group of scientists, headed by Franklin,
to investigate the claims of Franz Anton Mesmer,
the father of hypnotism. Mesmer claimed to be
able to heal various physical and mental ailments
by manipulating an invisible magnetic ﬂuid,
known as animal magnetism, which ﬂows through
the bodies of all animals, much as traditional In-
dian doctors claim to heal their patients by ma-
nipulating the life force they call “prana” and
traditional Chinese doctors, “qi.” Mesmer be-
lieved that various illnesses were caused by the
obstruction of the ﬂow of animal magnetism
through the body. By infusing additional animal
magnetism into his patients, the obstruction
could be overcome and the natural ﬂow restored.
When working one-on-one with his patients,
Mesmer would “mesmerize” them by sitting 
directly across from them, knee to knee, holding
their thumbs in his hands and staring deeply into
their eyes. He would then direct animal magnet-
ism into their bodies, in the same way therapeu-
tic touch practitioners do today, by moving his
hands in the air over the affected region. In this
way, Mesmer could induce in his patients feelings
of heat or pain that sometimes led to a “crisis” in
which the patient would go into a convulsive ﬁt
signaling that the treatment had worked and the
blockage had been dislodged.
To determine whether this ﬂuid really existed
or was just a ﬁgment of Mesmer’s (and his pa-
tients’) imaginations, Franklin’s commission 
identiﬁed subjects who seemed particularly sen-
sitive to animal magnetism. They then blind-
folded them and had a magnetic healer direct the
ﬂuid to speciﬁc parts of their bodies. When blind-
folded, however, the subjects could not correctly
identify which part of the body it was directed
upon.9 In another series of experiments, the sub-
jects were blindfolded and made to believe that 
a healer was in the room when none in fact was.
Nevertheless, they felt the effects of being
Finding the occa-
sional straw of truth
awash in a great
ocean of confusion
and bamboozle re-
quires intelligence,
vigilance, dedication
and courage.
—CARL SAGAN

cautions, “the odds are good that the authors [of published clinical re-
search] have arrived at invalid conclusions.”12) Confounding variables
and bias may creep in and skew results. The sample studied may be
too small or not representative. The statistical analysis of data may be
faulty. In rare cases, the data may even turn out to be faked or mas-
saged. There may be many other detected or undetected inadequa-
cies, and often these problems are serious enough to cripple a study
and cast substantial doubt on its conclusions.
To minimize this potential for error, inadequacy, or fraud, medical
scientists seek replication. Several studies yielding essentially the same
results can render a hypothesis more probable than would a lone study.
“Two studies seldom have identical sources of error or bias,” says epi-
demiologist Thomas Vogt. “With three or four studies, the chance is
even less that the same ﬂaws are shared.”13 Replication means that
evidence for or against a certain treatment generally accumulates slowly.
SCIENTIFIC METHODOLOGY
165
magnetized. The commission concluded, there-
fore, that the effect was the result of the imagi-
nation, not of the actions of an invisible ﬂuid.
In their most convincing experiment, the com-
mission had Mesmer’s protégé, Charles Deslon,
magnetize a tree. According to Mesmer’s theory, a
sensitive enough person would be able to detect
its elevated magnetism. So as not to prejudice the
experiment, the commission had Deslon identify
a suitably sensitive subject (in this case, a twelve-
year-old boy). The commissioners then blind-
folded him and led him to the wooded area that
contained the magnetized tree. He was placed in
front of four different nonmagnetized trees one at
a time, and at the last one he had a crisis where
“he lost consciousness, his limbs stiffened & he
was carried to a nearby lawn where M. Deslon
gave him ﬁrst aid & revived him.” The commis-
sion concluded: “The result of this experiment is
totally contrary to magnetism. . . . Had the
young man not felt anything, even under the
magnetized tree, it could have been said that he
was not sensitive enough, at least on that day:
but the young man fell into a crisis under a 
non-magnetized tree; consequently it is an effect
which has no physical cause, & which can have
no cause other than the imagination.”11 The com-
mission’s report was widely circulated, and Mes-
mer was forced to leave Paris in 1785. He died in
relative obscurity in 1815.
In these ﬁrst “blind” controlled experiments,
the subjects were literally blind because they
had a blindfold over their eyes. Nowadays, any
experiment in which the subject doesn’t know
whether he or she has come into contact with
the object under investigation is referred to as a
blind experiment.
Although the commission’s experiments were
blind, they were not double blind, because the
commissioners themselves knew whether the
subjects were in the presence of a source of
magnetic ﬂuid. Since experimenters can give
subjects unconscious clues as to whether the
object in question is present, a double-blind ex-
periment, where even the experimenters are in
the dark about the object’s presence, are an
even more reliable form of testing.

Despite the impression often left by the media, medical breakthroughs
arising out of a single study are extremely rare.
It should be clear from this sketch of medical research why the
scientiﬁc method is such an effective means of acquiring knowledge.
Knowledge, you will recall, requires the absence of reasonable doubt.
By formulating their hypotheses precisely and controlling their ob-
servations carefully, scientists attempt to eliminate as many sources of
doubt as possible. They can’t remove them all, but often they can
remove enough of them to give us knowledge.
Not all sciences can perform controlled experiments, because not
all natural phenomena can be controlled. Much as we might like to,
there’s little we can do about earthquakes, volcanoes, and sinkholes,
let alone comets, meteors, and asteroids. So geological and astronom-
ical hypotheses can’t usually be tested in the laboratory. They can be
tested in the ﬁeld, however. By looking for the conditions speciﬁed in
their hypotheses, geologists and astronomers can determine whether
the events predicted actually occur.
Since many legitimate sciences don’t perform controlled experi-
ments, the scientiﬁc method can’t be identiﬁed with the experimental
method. In fact, the scientiﬁc method can’t be identiﬁed with any par-
ticular procedure because there are many different ways to assess the
credibility of a hypothesis. In general, any procedure that serves systemati-
cally to eliminate reasonable grounds for doubt can be considered scientiﬁc.
You don’t have to be a scientist to use the scientiﬁc method. In
fact, many of us use it every day; as biologist Thomas H. Huxley re-
alized, “Science is simply common sense at its best—that is, rigidly
accurate in observation, and merciless to fallacy in logic.”14 When
getting the right answer is important, we do everything we can to 
ensure that both our evidence and our explanations are as complete and
accurate as possible. In so doing, we are using the scientiﬁc method.
CONFIRMING AND REFUTING HYPOTHESES
The results of scientiﬁc inquiry are never ﬁnal and conclusive but are
always provisional and open. No scientiﬁc hypothesis can be conclu-
sively conﬁrmed because the possibility of someday ﬁnding evidence
to the contrary can’t be ruled out. Scientiﬁc hypotheses always go 
beyond the information given. They not only explain what has been
discovered; they also predict what will be discovered. Since there’s no
guarantee that these predictions will come true, we can never be ab-
solutely sure that a scientiﬁc hypothesis is true.
Just as we can never conclusively conﬁrm a scientiﬁc hypothesis,
we can never conclusively refute one either. There is a widespread
166
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
Science is intelligence
in action with no
holds barred.
—P.W. BRIDGMAN
Science is organized
common sense
where many a 
beautiful theory was
killed by an ugly fact.
—THOMAS H. HUXLEY

belief that negative results prove a hypothesis false. This belief would
be true if predictions followed from individual hypotheses alone, but
they don’t. Predictions can be derived from a hypothesis only in con-
junction with a background theory. This background theory provides
information about the objects under study as well as the apparatus
used to study them. If a prediction turns out to be false, we can always
save the hypothesis by modifying the background theory. As philoso-
pher Philip Kitcher notes:
Individual scientiﬁc claims do not, and cannot, confront the evidence
one by one. Rather . . . ”hypotheses are tested in bundles.” . . . We can
only test relatively large bundles of claims. What this means is that
when our experiments go awry we are not logically compelled to 
select any particular claim as the culprit. We can always save a cher-
ished hypothesis from refutation by rejecting (however implausibly)
one of the other members of the bundle.15
To see this point, let’s examine Christopher Columbus’s claim that the
Earth is round.
Both Christopher Columbus and Nicholas Copernicus rejected
the ﬂat Earth hypothesis on the grounds that its predictions were con-
trary to experience. They argued that if the Earth were ﬂat, all parts
of a ship should disappear from view at the same rate as it sails out to
sea. But that’s not what is observed. To someone on shore, the lower
part of a ship disappears before the upper part. As a result, they con-
cluded that the Earth must not be ﬂat. Furthermore, they argued, if the
Earth were round, the lower part of a ship would disappear before the
upper part. Because this is what is observed, the latter hypothesis is
the more credible one.
But if the Earth were ﬂat, all parts of a ship would fade from view
at the same rate only if light traveled in straight lines. If it traveled in
curved lines, concave upward, the lower part of a ship could well dis-
appear from view before the upper part. As a ship sailed farther out to
sea, the light from the lower part would curve into the ocean before
the light from the upper part did, thus making the lower part invisible
before the upper part.16 So we can maintain the view that the Earth
is ﬂat as long as we’re willing to change our view of the nature of light.
In general, any hypothesis can be maintained in the face of seemingly
CONFIRMING AND REFUTING HYPOTHESES
167
B
A 
In a world where
light travels in
straight lines,
Figure A shows
what we should
see if the Earth is
ﬂat, while Figure B
shows what we
should see if the
Earth is round.

adverse evidence if we’re willing to make enough alterations in our
background beliefs. Consequently, no hypothesis can be conclusively
refuted.
It is not true, however, that every hypothesis is as good as every
other. Although no amount of evidence logically compels us to reject
a hypothesis, maintaining a hypothesis in the face of adverse evidence
can be manifestly unreasonable. So even if we cannot conclusively say
that a hypothesis is false, we can often conclusively say that it’s 
unreasonable.
The ﬂat Earth hypothesis, for example, is manifestly unreason-
able—and yet it has defenders to this day. Although the voyages of
Columbus and other seafaring explorers nearly killed the theory in the
168
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
The Duhem Hypothesis
Pierre Duhem, a French philosopher of science,
was perhaps the ﬁrst to realize that hypotheses
cannot be tested in isolation. Harvard philoso-
pher Willard Van Orman Quine puts Duhem’s
insight this way: “Hypotheses meet the tribunal
of experience as a corporate body.” Here’s how
Duhem put it:
People generally think that each one of the
hypotheses employed in Physics can be
taken in isolation, checked by experiment,
then when many varied tests have established
its validity, given a deﬁnitive place in the sys-
tem of Physics. In reality, this is not the case.
Physics is not a machine which lets itself be
taken apart; we cannot try each piece in iso-
lation, and in order to adjust it, wait until its
solidity has been carefully checked; physical
science is a system that must be taken as a
whole; it is an organism in which one part
cannot be made to function without the parts
that are most remote from it being called into
play, some more so than others, but all to
some degree. If something goes wrong, if
some discomfort is felt in the functioning of
the organism, the physicist will have to ferret
out through its effect on the entire system
which organ needs to be remedied or modi-
ﬁed without the possibility of isolating this
organ and examining it apart. The watch-
maker to whom you give a watch that has
stopped separates all the wheel-works and
examines them one by one until he ﬁnds the
part that is defective or broken; the doctor to
whom a patient appears cannot dissect him in
order to establish his diagnosis; he has to
guess the seat and cause of the ailment solely
by inspecting disorders affecting the whole
body. Now, the physicist concerned with
remedying a limping theory resembles the
doctor and not the watchmaker.17
D
C 
In a world where
light travels in
curved lines, 
Figure C shows
what we should 
see if a ship is
close by, and
Figure D shows
what we should
see if the ship is
farther away.

ﬁfteenth century, it was resurrected in England in 1849 by an itiner-
ant lecturer who called himself Parallax (his real name was Samuel
Birley Rowbotham). The world, he argued, is a ﬂat disc with the
North Pole at its center and a 150-foot wall of ice—the South Pole—
encircling its perimeter. According to Parallax, those who sail around
the world simply travel in a big circle. What makes the lower part of
a ship disappear before the upper part is atmospheric refraction and
what he called the zetetic law of perspective.18
Exactly what the zetetic law of perspective is, is unclear. But its
use by Rowbotham is instructive, for it illustrates a popular method for
shielding hypotheses from adverse evidence: constructing ad hoc 
hypotheses. A hypothesis threatened by recalcitrant data can often be
saved by postulating entities or properties that account for the data.
Such a move is legitimate if there’s an independent means of verifying
their existence. If there is no such means, the hypothesis is ad hoc.
Ad hoc literally means “for this case only.” It’s not simply that a 
hypothesis is designed to account for a particular phenomenon that
makes it ad hoc (if that were the case, all hypotheses would be ad
hoc). What makes a hypothesis ad hoc is that it can’t be veriﬁed 
independently of the phenomenon it’s supposed to explain.
For example, by 1844, it was known that the planet Uranus didn’t
follow the orbit predicted by Newton’s theories of gravity and plane-
tary motion. The observed orbit differed from the predicted orbit by
two minutes of arc, a discrepancy much greater than that of any other
known planet. In 1845, the astronomer Urbain Jean Joseph Leverrier
hypothesized that the gravitational force of an unknown planet 
affected Uranus’s motion. Using Newton’s theories of gravity and mo-
tion, he calculated the planet’s position. On the basis of those calcu-
lations, he requested that astronomer Johann Gottfried Galle in Berlin
search a particular region of the sky for it. In less than an hour after
Galle began his search, he noticed something that was not on his
charts. When he checked again the next night, it had moved a con-
siderable distance. He had discovered the planet that we now call
Neptune!
If the aberrant orbit of Uranus had not been accounted for, 
Newton’s theory would have been in jeopardy. So Leverrier’s postula-
tion of another planet can be seen as an attempt to save Newton’s the-
ory from negative evidence. But his hypothesis was not ad hoc, for it
could be independently veriﬁed. If he had claimed, however, that
some unknown and undetectable (occult) force was responsible for
Uranus’s erratic behavior, that would have been an ad hoc hypothesis.
For, by deﬁnition, there would be no way to conﬁrm the existence of
such a force.
CONFIRMING AND REFUTING HYPOTHESES
169
In days of old,When
Knights were bold,
And science not 
invented,The Earth
was ﬂat,And that
was that,With no
man discontented.
—ENGLISH VERSE

When a scientiﬁc theory starts relying on ad hoc hypotheses to be
saved from adverse data, it becomes unreasonable to maintain belief in
that theory. The phlogiston theory of heat provides a case in point.
The scientiﬁc study of heat began in earnest shortly after Galileo’s
invention of the thermometer (or thermoscope, as he called it) in 1593.
Over the years it was discovered that different substances absorb heat
at different rates, that different substances change state (solid, liquid,
gas) at different temperatures, and that different substances expand at
different rates when heated. To explain these phenomena, German
chemist Georg Ernst Stahl proposed in the late seventeenth century
that all combustible substances and metals contain an invisible sub-
stance that came to be known as phlogiston.
Phlogiston was considered to be an elastic ﬂuid composed of par-
ticles that repel one another. (This explained why things expand
when heated.) These particles were thought to be attracted to parti-
cles of other substances with different strengths. (This explained why
some things heat faster than others.) When particles of phlogiston
come into contact with particles of another substance, they supposedly
170
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
The Hollow Earth
Flat and round do not exhaust the possible
conceptions of the Earth. How about hollow?
The hollow Earth theory was ﬁrst proposed by
the astronomer Edmund Halley, the discoverer
of Halley’s comet, to account for various irreg-
ularities in compass readings noted by sailors.
It has since become the property of cranks. 
Biologist Ted Schultz discusses some of its 
other proponents.
In 1913, Marshal Gardner published A 
Journey to the Earth’s Interior, or Have the Poles 
Really Been Discovered, followed in 1920 by an
enlarged edition. While Reed had proposed
that the inner earth is illuminated by sun-
light penetrating through the polar open-
ings, Gardner believed that it contains its
own miniature sun, the light from which
causes the auroras. He theorized that 
Eskimos are descended from inner-earth
races, and that the mammoths found frozen
in arctic ice originate there. . . .
In 1964 Raymond Bernard’s modestly 
titled The Hollow Earth: The Greatest Geological
Discovery in History appeared. Borrowing
heavily from the works of Reed and Gard-
ner, Bernard expanded the theory to include
ﬂying saucers.19
According to Bernard, the people who live
in the center of the earth are the survivors of a
nuclear war between the inhabitants of Atlantis
and Mu (a former island continent in the 
Paciﬁc). Their relocation to the center of the
Earth was necessary to escape the effects of 
the radiation produced by the war. From this
hypothesis, Bernard derives the following 
conclusion: The UFOs we observe are really
Atlantean spaceships sent from the center of
the Earth to keep tabs on us surface dwellers!
The real purpose of
scientiﬁc method is
to make sure Nature
hasn’t misled you
into thinking you
know something you
don’t actually know.
—ROBERT M. PIRSIG

combine to form a new state of matter. (This explained why ice turns
into water when heated.) Phlogiston also seemed to explain such mys-
teries as why a substance turns to ash when burned (it loses phlogis-
ton); why a metallic oxide turns back into a metal when heated with
charcoal (it gains phlogiston); and why pounding on a substance can
make it expand (it releases stored phlogiston). Because the phlogiston
theory seemed to explain so much, it became the dominant theory of
combustion in the eighteenth century.
It always had its detractors, however, for phlogiston was a very
mysterious substance. Not only was it colorless and odorless; it was
weightless as well. Even though phlogiston was supposed to ﬂow into
substances that were heated, careful experiments had found that in-
creases in temperature did not produce increases in weight. Phlogis-
ton was also thought to ﬂow out of substances that were burned.
What ultimately led to the theory’s demise, however, was the discov-
ery that some substances actually gain weight when burned. French
chemist Antoine Lavoisier found that when tin was burned, for ex-
ample, the resulting metallic oxide weighed more than the original
tin. If phlogiston were lost during burning, he argued, this weight gain
wouldn’t be possible.
Defenders of the phlogiston theory tried to account for this phe-
nomenon by hypothesizing that the phlogiston in tin possessed neg-
ative weight, so that when it was lost, the tin gained weight. But this
hypothesis was soon seen for what it really was—a desperate attempt
to save the theory from the facts. Unlike Leverrier’s postulation of the
existence of the planet that was named Neptune, there was no way to
independently conﬁrm or refute the negative weight hypothesis. It
was ad hoc in the truest sense of the term.
The moral of this story is that for a hypothesis to increase our
knowledge, there must be some way to test it, for if there isn’t, we have
no way of telling whether or not the hypothesis is true.
CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
To explain something is to offer a hypothesis that helps us understand
it. For example, we can explain why a penny left outside turns green
by offering the hypothesis that the penny is made out of copper and
that when copper oxidizes, it turns green. But for any set of facts, it’s
possible to devise any number of hypotheses to account for them.
Suppose that someone wanted to know what makes ﬂuorescent lights
work. One hypothesis is that inside each tube is a little gremlin who
creates light (sparks) by striking his pickax against the side of the
tube. In addition to the one gremlin hypothesis, there is the two
CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
171
The aim of science 
is not to open the
door to everlasting
wisdom, but to set 
a limit on everlasting
error.
—BERTOLT BRECHT

gremlin hypothesis, the three gremlin hypothesis, and so on. Because
there is always more than one hypothesis to account for any set of
facts and because no set of facts can conclusively conﬁrm or refute any
hypothesis, we must appeal to something besides the facts in order to
decide which explanation is the best. What we appeal to are criteria of
adequacy. As we saw in Chapter 3, these criteria are used in any infer-
ence to the best explanation to determine how well a hypothesis ac-
complishes the goal of increasing our understanding.
Hypotheses produce understanding by systematizing and unify-
ing our knowledge. They bring order and harmony to facts that may
have seemed disjointed and unrelated. The extent to which a hy-
pothesis systematizes and uniﬁes our knowledge is determined by
how well it meets the criteria of adequacy. In its search for under-
standing, science tries to identify those hypotheses that best meet
these criteria. As anthropologist Marvin Harris puts it: “The aim 
of scientiﬁc research is to formulate explanatory theories which are 
(1) predictive (or retrodictive), (2) testable (or falsiﬁable), (3) parsi-
monious [simple], (4) of broad scope, and (5) integratable or cumula-
tive within a coherent and expanding corpus of theories.”20 The
better a hypothesis meets these criteria, the more understanding it
produces. Let’s take a closer look at how these criteria work.
Testability
Since science seeks understanding, it’s interested only in those hy-
potheses that can be tested—if a hypothesis can’t be tested, there is no
way to determine whether it’s true or false. Hypotheses, however, can’t
be tested in isolation, for as we’ve seen, hypotheses have observable
consequences only in the context of a background theory. So to be
testable, a hypothesis, in conjunction with a background theory, must
predict something more than what is predicted by the background
theory alone.21 If a hypothesis doesn’t go beyond the background
theory, it doesn’t expand our knowledge and hence is scientiﬁcally
uninteresting.
Take the gremlin hypothesis, for example. To qualify as scientiﬁc,
there must be some test we can perform—other than turning on the
lights—to detect the presence of gremlins. Whether there is such a
test will depend on what the hypothesis tells us about the gremlins. If
it tells us that they are visible to the naked eye, it can be tested by
simply breaking open a ﬂuorescent light and looking for them. If it
tells us that they are invisible but sensitive to heat and capable of
emitting sounds, it can be tested by putting a ﬂuorescent light in boil-
ing water and listening for tiny screams. But if it tells us that they are
172
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
The practical effect
of a belief is the real
test of its soundness.
—JAMES A. FROUDE

CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
173
incorporeal or so shy that any attempt to detect them makes them dis-
appear, it can’t be tested and hence is not scientiﬁc.
Scientiﬁc hypotheses can be distinguished from nonscientiﬁc
ones, then, by the following principle:
A hypothesis is scientiﬁc only if it is testable, that is,
only if it predicts something more than what is predicted
by the background theory alone.
The gremlin hypothesis predicts that if we turn on a ﬂuorescent light,
it will emit light. But this action doesn’t mean that the gremlin hy-
pothesis is testable, because the fact that ﬂuorescent lights emit light
is what the gremlin hypothesis was introduced to explain. That fact is
Falsiﬁcation and Psychoanalysis
Many writers have concurred with one of 
Popper’s assertions, which is that psychoanalysis
is not a legitimate scientiﬁc theory because it
can’t be falsiﬁed. No observation or experimen-
tal test can show the theory to be false because
psychoanalysts can always invent a just-so story
to account for any possible behavior. Popper
explains his dissatisfaction with psychoanalysis
as follows:
The Freudian analysts emphasized that their
theories were constantly veriﬁed by their
“clinical observations.” As for Adler, I was
much impressed by a personal experience.
Once, in 1919, I reported to him a case
which to me did not seem particularly Adler-
ian, but which he found no difﬁculty in ana-
lyzing in terms of his theory of inferiority
feelings, although he had not even seen the
child. . . . But this means very little, I re-
ﬂected, since every conceivable case could
be interpreted in the light of Adler’s theory,
or equally of Freud’s. I may illustrate this by
two very different examples of human be-
havior: that of a man who pushes a child
into the water with the intention of drown-
ing it; and that of a man who sacriﬁces his
life in an attempt to save the child. Each of
these two cases can be explained with equal
ease in Freudian and in Adlerian terms. Ac-
cording to Freud the ﬁrst man suffered from
repression (say, of some component of his
Oedipus complex), while the second man
had achieved sublimation. According to
Adler the ﬁrst man suffered from feelings of
inferiority (producing perhaps the need to
prove to himself that he dared to commit
some crime), and so did the second man
(whose need was to prove to himself that
he dared to rescue the child). I could not
think of any human behavior which could
not be interpreted in terms of either theory.
It was precisely this fact—that they always
ﬁtted, that they were always confirmed—
which in the eyes of their admirers consti-
tuted the strongest argument in favour 
of these theories. It began to dawn on me
that this apparent strength was in fact their
weakness.22

part of its background theory. To be testable, a hypothesis must make
a prediction that goes beyond its background theory. A prediction
tells us that if certain conditions are realized, then certain results will
be observed. If a prediction can be derived from a hypothesis and its
background theory that cannot be derived from its background the-
ory alone, then the hypothesis is testable.
Karl Popper realized long ago that untestable hypotheses cannot
legitimately be called scientiﬁc. What distinguishes genuine scientiﬁc
hypotheses from pseudoscientiﬁc ones, he claims, is that the former
are falsiﬁable. Although his insight is a good one, it has two shortcom-
ings: First, the term is unfortunate, for no hypothesis is, strictly speak-
ing, falsiﬁable because it’s always possible to maintain a hypothesis in
the face of unfavorable evidence by making suitable alterations in the
background theory.23
The second weakness in Popper’s theory is that it doesn’t explain
why we hold on to some hypotheses in the face of adverse evidence.
When new hypotheses are ﬁrst proposed, there is often a good deal
of evidence against them. As philosopher of science Imre Lakatos
notes, “When Newton published his Principia, it was common knowl-
edge that it could not properly explain even the motion of the moon;
in fact, lunar motion refuted Newton. . . . All hypotheses, in this
sense, are born refuted and die refuted.”24 Nonetheless, we give cre-
dence to some and not others. Popper’s theory is hard-pressed to
explain why this is so. Recognizing that other criteria play a role in
evaluating hypotheses makes sense of this situation.
Fruitfulness
One thing that makes some hypotheses attractive even in the face of
adverse evidence is that they successfully predict new phenomena and
thus open up new lines of research. Such hypotheses possess the
virtue of fruitfulness. For example, Einstein’s theory of relativity predicts
that light rays traveling near massive objects will appear to be bent 
because the space around them is curved. At the time Einstein proposed
his theory, common wisdom was that since light has no mass, light
rays travel in Euclidean straight lines. To test Einstein’s theory, physi-
cist Sir Arthur Eddington mounted an expedition to Africa in 1919 to
observe a total eclipse of the sun. If light rays are bent by massive 
objects, he reasoned, then the position of stars whose light passes near
the sun should appear to be shifted from their true position. The shift
should be detectable by comparing a photograph taken during the
eclipse with one taken at night of the same portion of the sky. When
Eddington compared the two photographs, he found that stars near
174
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
In making theories,
always keep a win-
dow open so that
you can throw one
out if necessary.
—BELA SCHICK
Truth in science can
be deﬁned as the
working hypothesis
best suited to open
the way to the next
better one.
—KONRAD LORENZ

the sun during the eclipse did appear to have moved more than those
farther away and that the amount of their apparent movement was what
Einstein’s theory predicted. (Einstein’s theory predicted a deﬂection of
1.75 seconds of arc. Eddington observed a deﬂection of 1.64 seconds
of arc, well within the possible error of measurement.)25 Thus Einstein’s
theory had successfully predicted a phenomenon that no one had pre-
viously thought existed. In so doing, it expanded the frontiers of our
knowledge.
Since hypotheses make predictions only in the context of a larger
body of background information, Lakatos prefers to talk of research pro-
grams rather than hypotheses. According to Lakatos, what distinguishes
good (progressive) research programs from bad (degenerating) ones is
their fruitfulness.
All the research programs I admire have one characteristic in common.
They all predict novel facts, facts which had been either undreamt of,
or have indeed been contradicted by previous or rival programs. . . .
What really count are dramatic, unexpected, stunning predictions; a few
of them are enough to tilt the balance; where theory lags behind the
facts, we are dealing with miserable degenerating research programs.26
The classic case of a degenerating research program, he tells us, is
Marxism:
Has, for instance, Marxism ever predicted a stunning novel fact suc-
cessfully? Never! It has some famous unsuccessful predictions. It pre-
dicted the absolute impoverishment of the working class. It predicted
that the ﬁrst socialist revolutions would take place in the industrially
most developed society. It predicted that socialist societies would be
free of revolutions. It predicted that there will be no conﬂict of inter-
ests between socialist countries. Thus the early predictions of Marxism
CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
175
True
position
Apparent
position
Sun
Earth
The effect of
light bending
near the sun

176
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
were bold and stunning but they failed. Marxists explained all their
failures: they explained the rising living standards of the working class
by devising a theory of imperialism; they even explained why the ﬁrst
socialist revolution occurred in industrially backward Russia. They 
“explained” Berlin 1953, Budapest 1956, Prague 1968. They “explained”
the Russian-Chinese conﬂict. But their auxiliary hypotheses were all
cooked up after the event to protect Marxian theory from the facts.
The Newtonian program led to novel facts; the Marxian lagged behind
the facts and has been running fast to catch up with them.27
Marxism is a degenerating research program not only because it failed
to predict any novel facts, but also because it is riddled with ad hoc
hypotheses. The lesson is clear:
Other things being equal, the best hypothesis is the one
that is the most fruitful, that is, makes the 
most successful novel predictions.
If two hypotheses do equally well with regard to all the other criteria
of adequacy, the one with greater fruitfulness is better.
Having greater fruitfulness by itself does not necessarily make a
hypothesis superior to its rivals, however, because it might not do as
well as they do with respect to other criteria of adequacy. Velikovsky’s
theory of Venus’s genesis demonstrates this point.
In 1950 Immanuel Velikovsky published Worlds in Collision, in which
he argued that many of the ancient myths depicting worldwide catas-
trophes can be explained on the assumption that around 1500 B.C.E.
Jupiter expelled a glowing ball of hot gases toward the Earth. This
great ball of ﬁre, which looked to observers on Earth like a gigantic
comet, was later to become the planet Venus. As the Earth passed
through its tail, Velikovsky claims, showers of meteorites fell to the
Earth, exploding balls of naphtha ﬁlled the sky, and oil rained from the
heavens. The gravitational pull of the comet became so great that it
caused the Earth to tilt on its axis and slow its rate of rotation. Cities
were laid waste by earthquakes, rivers reversed their course, and a 
gigantic hurricane ravaged the planet. Before Venus ﬁnally settled into
its current orbit, it pulled Mars off course and sent that planet hurtling
toward the Earth, thus igniting a whole new wave of catastrophes.28
Because Velikovsky thought that Venus had been recently expelled
from Jupiter, he predicted that it would still be hot. This prediction ﬂew
in the face of current scientiﬁc thinking, which held that Venus was
cold and lifeless. The Pioneer space probe revealed, however, that
Velikovsky was right: Venus is hot. At the time it was offered, then,
Velikovsky’s theory could claim fruitfulness among its virtues because
He who proves
things by experience
increases his knowl-
edge; he who believes
blindly increases his
errors.
—CHINESE PROVERB

it predicted a novel fact. Many of its other claims, however, appear to
be physically impossible. Carl Sagan, for example, has calculated that
the energy necessary to eject a mass the size of Venus from Jupiter is
1041 ergs, “which is equivalent to all the energy radiated by the Sun to
space in an entire year, and one hundred million times more powerful
than the largest solar ﬂare ever observed.”29 Velikovsky does not say
how Jupiter was able to generate such energy. Nor does he explain how
the Earth was able to resume its normal rate of rotation after it slowed
down. Other claims conﬂict with well-established laws in biology,
chemistry, and astrophysics.30 These laws may be mistaken, but unless
Velikovsky can identify the correct laws and show that they explain
astronomical events better than the currently accepted laws do, there is
no reason to believe that those currently accepted laws are mistaken.
Scope
The scope of a hypothesis—or the amount of diverse phenomena 
explained and predicted by it—is also an important measure of its 
adequacy: the more a hypothesis explains and predicts, the more it uni-
ﬁes and systematizes our knowledge and the less likely it is to be false.
For example, one reason that Einstein’s theory of relativity came to be
preferred over Newton’s theories of gravity and motion is that it had
greater scope. It could explain and predict everything that Newton’s
theories could, as well as some things that they couldn’t. For instance,
Einstein’s theory could explain a variation in Mercury’s orbit, among
other phenomena.
It had been known since the middle of the nineteenth century that
the planet Mercury’s perihelion (the point at which it is closest to the
sun) does not remain constant—that point rotates slowly, or precesses,
around the sun at the rate of about 574 seconds of arc per century.
Using Newton’s laws of motion and gravity, it was possible to account
for about 531 seconds of arc of this motion. Leverrier tried to account
for the missing 43 seconds of arc in the same way he had accounted for
the discrepancies in the orbit of Uranus—by postulating the existence
of another planet between Mercury and the sun. He named this planet
Vulcan (Star Trek fans take note), but repeated observations failed to
ﬁnd it. Einstein’s theory of relativity, however, can account for the pre-
cession of Mercury’s perihelion without postulating the existence of
another planet. According to relativity theory, space is curved around
massive objects. Since Mercury is so close to the sun, the space it trav-
els through is more warped (again, Star Trek fans take note) than is the
space that the rest of the planets travel through. Using relativity the-
ory, it is possible to calculate the extent to which space is thus bent. 
CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
177
The glory of science
is that it is freeing
the soul, breaking
the mental mana-
cles, getting the
brain out of
bondage, giving
courage to thought,
ﬁlling the world 
with mercy, justice,
and joy.
—ROBERT
G. INGERSOLL

178
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
It turns out to be just enough to account for the missing 43 seconds of
arc in the precession of Mercury’s perihelion.31
The fact that Einstein’s theory had greater scope than Newton’s
was a powerful argument in its favor. As the physicist P. Langevin pro-
claimed at the Paris Academy of Sciences:
This theory is the only one that permits one actually to represent all
the known experimental facts and that possesses moreover the re-
markable power of prediction conﬁrmed in so astonishing a manner
by the deviation of light rays and the displacement of spectral lines in
the gravitational ﬁeld of the sun.32
For Langevin, Einstein’s theory is superior to Newton’s because it has
greater explanatory and predictive power. The principle he’s relying
on is this one:
Other things being equal, the best hypothesis is the one
that has the greatest scope, that is, that explains 
and predicts the most diverse phenomena.
Simplicity
Interestingly enough, even though considerations of fruitfulness and
scope loomed large in the minds of many of those scientists who 
accepted Einstein’s theory, simplicity was what Einstein saw as its main
virtue. He wrote, “I do not by any means ﬁnd the chief signiﬁcance of
the general theory of relativity in the fact that it has predicted a few
minute observable facts, but rather in the simplicity of its foundation
and in its logical consistency.”33 For Einstein, simplicity is a theoreti-
cal virtue par excellence.
Seek simplicity and
distrust it.
—ALFRED NORTH
WHITEHEAD
Star A
6 trillion
miles
(nearest
star)
More
distant
stars
Star B
Star C
Parallax
Earth
Sun
Earth
93 million
miles
93 million
miles
Position
in January
Position
in July
Parallax: As Earth
travels around the
sun, the stars that
appear to be
behind the nearest
star change.

Simplicity is notoriously difﬁcult to deﬁne.34 For our purposes,
we may say that the simpler of two hypotheses is the one that makes
the fewest assumptions.35 Simplicity is valued for the same reason
that scope is—the simpler a theory is, the more it uniﬁes and system-
atizes our knowledge and the less likely it is to be false because there
are fewer ways for it to go wrong.
Since the time of Thales (arguably the West’s ﬁrst scientist), sim-
plicity has been an important criterion of theory selection. To take but
one example: Copernicus’s heliocentric theory, which claims that the
Earth revolves around the sun, could explain no more than Ptolemy’s
geocentric theory, which claims that the sun revolves around the
Earth. In terms of scope and fruitfulness, then, Copernicus’s theory
has no advantage over Ptolemy’s. In fact, Copernicus’s theory had the
disadvantage of being inconsistent with observed data. If Copernicus’s
theory were true, opponents charged, then stars nearer to Earth
should seem to change their position relative to more distant stars as
the Earth moved around the sun. But no such apparent change in po-
sition (known as parallax) was observed. This predictive failure did not
move Copernicus and his followers to abandon the theory, however,
for they believed that stars were too far away to exhibit parallax. It
turns out that they were right: The nearest star is 6 trillion miles away.
It wasn’t until 1838, almost 300 years after Copernicus’s death, that
stellar parallax was ﬁnally observed. (The parallax was observed when
more powerful telescopes were available to observe stars more pre-
cisely.) Copernicus’s theory, however, had long since become the 
accepted explanation of the structure of the solar system.
Scientists accepted Copernicus’s theory in the face of such seem-
ingly adverse evidence because it was simpler than Ptolemy’s. One of
CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
179
Planet
Epicycle
Earth
Schematic
Deferent
Uniform
angular
motion
Observed
Multiexposure
A
C
B
The Ptolemaic
system of plane-
tary motion

180
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
the most difﬁcult features of planetary motion to account for is the
fact that certain planets, at certain times, seem to reverse their direc-
tion of travel. Ptolemy accounted for this retrograde motion by 
assuming that planets orbit their orbits, so to speak. He assumed that
they travel in a circle (known as an epicycle) around a point that is 
itself traveling in a circle around the Earth (known as a deferent).
Copernicus showed that many of these epicycles were unneces-
sary hypotheses adduced to maintain the view that planets travel in
circles around the Earth. Because Copernicus’s theory could explain
planetary motion without using as many epicycles, it was simpler than
Ptolemy’s. The criterion at work here is this:
Other things being equal, the best hypothesis is 
the simplest one, that is, the one that makes 
the fewest assumptions.
As we’ve seen, hypotheses often explain phenomena by assuming
that certain entities exist. The simplicity criterion tells us that, other
things being equal, the fewer such assumptions a theory makes, the
better it is. When searching for an explanation, then, it’s wise to
cleave to the principle known as Occam’s Razor (in honor of the medi-
eval philosopher, William of Occam, who formulated it): Do not mul-
tiply entities beyond necessity. In other words, assume no more than
is required to explain the phenomenon in question. If there’s no rea-
son to assume that something exists, it’s irrational to do so.
One of the most famous applications of this principle was made
by the French mathematician and astronomer Pierre Laplace. After
Laplace presented the ﬁrst edition of his theory of the universe to
Napoleon, Napoleon is said to have asked, “Where does God ﬁt into
your theory?” Laplace matter-of-factly replied, “I have no need of that
hypothesis.”36
Conservatism
Since consistency is a necessary condition of knowledge, we should
be wary of accepting a hypothesis that conﬂicts with our background
information. As we’ve seen, not only does accepting such a hypothe-
sis undermine our claim to know; it also requires rejecting the beliefs
it conﬂicts with. If those beliefs are well established, the chances of
the new hypothesis being true are not good. In general, then, the
more conservative a hypothesis is (that is, the fewer well-established 
beliefs it conﬂicts with), the more plausible it is.37 The criterion of
conservatism can be stated as follows:
The least questioned
assumptions are
often the most 
questionable.
—PAUL BROCA

CREATIONISM, EVOLUTION, AND CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
181
Other things being equal, the best hypothesis is the one
that is the most conservative, that is, the one that 
ﬁts best with established beliefs.
Things aren’t always equal, however. It may be perfectly reasonable to
accept a hypothesis that is not conservative provided that it possesses
other criteria of adequacy. Unfortunately, there’s no foolproof method
for determining when conservatism should take a backseat to other
criteria.
Indeed, there is no ﬁxed formula for applying any of the criteria
of adequacy. We can’t quantify how well a hypothesis does with 
respect to any of them, nor can we deﬁnitively rank the criteria in order
of importance. At times we may rate conservatism more highly than
scope, especially if the hypothesis in question is lacking in fruitful-
ness. At other times we may rate simplicity higher than conservatism,
especially if the hypothesis has at least as much scope as our existing
hypothesis. Choosing between theories is not the purely logical pro-
cess it is often made out to be. Like judicial decision making, it relies
on factors of human judgment that resist formalization.
The process of theory selection, however, is not subjective. There
are many distinctions we can’t quantify that nevertheless are perfectly
objective. We can’t say, for example, exactly when day turns into night
or when a person with a full head of hair turns bald. Nevertheless, the
distinctions between night and day or baldness and hirsuteness are as
objective as they come. There are certainly borderline cases that rea-
sonable people can disagree about, but there are also clear-cut cases
where disagreement would be irrational. It would simply be wrong to
believe that a person with a full head of (living) hair is bald. If you per-
sisted in such a belief, you would be irrational. Similarly, it would
simply be wrong to believe that the phlogiston theory is a good scien-
tiﬁc theory. In general, if someone believes a theory that clearly fails to
meet the criteria of adequacy, that person is irrational.
CREATIONISM, EVOLUTION, AND CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
Criteria of adequacy are what we appeal to when trying to decide
which hypothesis best explains a phenomenon. The best hypothesis
is the one that explains the phenomenon and meets the criteria of ad-
equacy better than any of its competitors. To make a rational choice
among hypotheses, then, it’s important to know what these criteria are
and how to apply them. Philosopher and historian Thomas Kuhn
agrees. “It is vitally important,” he tells us, “that scientists be taught to

value these characteristics and that they be provided with examples
that illustrate them in practice.”38
In recent years, a number of people (as well as a number of state
legislatures) have claimed that the theory of creationism is just as
good as the theory of evolution and thus should be given equal time
in the classroom. Our discussion of the criteria of adequacy has given
us the means to evaluate this claim. If creationism is just as good a the-
ory as evolution, then it should fulﬁll the criteria of adequacy just as
well as evolution does. Let’s see if that is the case.
The theory of evolution, although not invented by Darwin, received
its most impressive formulation at his hand. In 1859, he published The
Origin of Species, in which he argued that the theory of evolution by nat-
ural selection provided the best explanation of a number of different
phenomena:
It can hardly be supposed that a false theory would explain, in so sat-
isfactory a manner as does the theory of natural selection, the several
large classes of facts above speciﬁed. It has recently been objected
that this is an unsafe method of arguing; but it is a method used in
judging of the common events of life, and has often been used by the
greatest natural philosophers.39
Darwin found that organisms living in isolated habitats (such as 
islands) have forms related to but distinct from organisms living in
neighboring habitats, that there are anatomical resemblances between
closely related species, that the embryos of distantly related species
resemble one another more than the adults of those species, and that
fossils show a distinct progression from the simplest forms to the most
complex.40 The best explanation of these facts, Darwin argued, was
that organisms adapt to their environment through a process of natu-
ral selection. The hypothesis that all creatures were created by God
in one fell swoop, he argued, offers no explanation for these facts.
Darwin realized that many more creatures are born than live long
enough to reproduce, that these creatures possess different physical
characteristics, and that the characteristics they possess are often 
inherited from their parents. He reasoned that when an inherited char-
acteristic (like an opposable thumb) increased an organism’s chances of
living long enough to reproduce, that characteristic would be passed
to the next generation. As this process continued, the characteristic
would become more prevalent in succeeding generations. This process
Darwin called natural selection, which was the driving force behind evo-
lution. Darwin was not aware of the mechanism by which these char-
acteristics were transmitted. The discovery of that mechanism—the
science of genetics—has further bolstered Darwin’s theory, for it has
182
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
If God indeed exists,
then one of his
greatest gifts to us
was our reason.To
deny evolution is not
to be truly religious
or truly moral. . . .
There is nothing in
modern evolutionary
theory which stands
in the way of a deep
sense of religion or
of a morally worth-
while life.
—MICHAEL RUSE

been found that the number of chromosomes and their internal organ-
ization is similar among closely related species.41
Scientiﬁc Creationism
Creation science, or scientiﬁc creationism, holds that the universe, 
energy, and life were created from nothing relatively recently (around
6,000 to 10,000 years ago); that living things could not have devel-
oped from a single organism through mutation and natural selection;
that there is very little variation among members of the same species;
that humans did not develop from the apes; and that the Earth’s geol-
ogy can be explained by the occurrence of various catastrophes, in-
cluding a worldwide ﬂood.42 This account of the creation of the
universe and its inhabitants is derived primarily from the Bible’s Book
of Genesis.43
Those who espouse this view believe the theory of evolution to
be a pernicious doctrine with disastrous social consequences. Henry
Morris, president emeritus of the Institute for Creation Research, and
Martin Clark, for example, assert:
Evolution is thus not only anti-Biblical and anti-Christian, but it is 
utterly unscientiﬁc and impossible as well. But it has served effectively
as the pseudo-scientiﬁc basis of atheism, agnosticism, socialism, fas-
cism, and numerous other false and dangerous philosophies over the
past century.44
Teaching creationism, they believe, will help counter these conse-
quences by putting God back in the classroom. Promoting religion in
the public schools, however, is a violation of the establishment clause
of the First Amendment, which reads, “Congress shall make no law 
respecting an establishment of religion.” Consequently, the courts
have consistently found laws requiring the teaching of creationism to
be unconstitutional. Supreme Court Justice William Brennan explains:
Because the primary purpose of the Creationism Act is to advance a
particular religious belief, the act endorses religion in violation of the
First Amendment. . . . The act violates the establishment clause of the
First Amendment because it seeks to employ the symbolic and 
ﬁnancial support of government to achieve a religious purpose.45
Our concern, however, is not with the constitutionality of the teaching
of creationism, but with its adequacy as a scientiﬁc theory. We want to
know whether creationism really is as good a theory as evolution.
Ironically, even though creationists have taken to calling their
theory scientiﬁc in an attempt to garner public support, they openly
admit that it’s nothing of the sort. They don’t see this as a problem,
CREATIONISM, EVOLUTION, AND CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
183
The only way we can
determine the true
age of the earth is
for God to tell us
what it is.
—HENRY MORRIS

however—because they don’t believe that evolution is a scientiﬁc the-
ory either. Duane Gish, senior vice president of the Institute for Cre-
ation Research, explains, “There were no human witnesses to the
origin of the Universe, the origin of life or the origin of a single liv-
ing thing. These were unique, unrepeatable events of the past that
cannot be observed in nature or recapitulated in the laboratory. Thus,
neither creation nor evolution qualiﬁes as a scientiﬁc theory, and each
is equally religious.”47 Gish here is appealing to the principle of testa-
bility discussed earlier in this chapter. His claim is that since neither
creationism nor evolution is testable, neither can be considered a sci-
entiﬁc theory.
But is it true that neither is testable? A hypothesis is testable if it
predicts something more than what is predicted by the background
theory alone. Evolution clearly meets this criterion, for it correctly
predicts that animals inhabiting islands will be more closely related to
184
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
Creationism and Morality
On the wall of the lobby of the Museum of
Creation and Earth History run by the Institute
for Creation Research hang two posters: one
entitled “Creationist Tree” and the other, “Evo-
lutionary Tree.” The “Creationist Tree,” on the
one hand, depicts a lush, verdant tree around
whose branches ﬂoat phrases like “True Chris-
tology,” “True Gospel,” “True Faith,” “True
Morality,” “True Americanism,” “True Govern-
ment,” “True Family Life,” “True Education,”
“True History,” and “True Science.” The “Evolu-
tionary Tree,” on the other hand, depicts a
withered, barren tree around whose branches
ﬂoat phrases like “Communism,” “Nazism,”
“Atheism,” “Amoralism,” “Materialism,” “Pornog-
raphy,” “Slavery,” “Abortion,” “Euthanasia,” 
“Homosexuality,” “Child Abuse,” and “Bestiality.”
The message here is obvious: evolution is the
root of all evil. Georgia Judge Braswell Dean
agrees. As he so alliteratively put it, “This mon-
key mythology of Darwin is the cause of per-
missiveness, promiscuity, pills, prophylactics,
perversions, pregnancies, abortions, pornother-
apy, pollution, poisoning, and the proliferation
of crimes of all types.”46 This view lies at the
heart of the creation/evolution controversy. It’s
not so much about the nature of science as it is
about the nature of morality.
Creationists believe that evolution undercuts
the authority of the Bible by contradicting a
literal reading of Genesis. What’s more, they
believe that if any part of the Bible is untrue,
we cannot trust any of it. Without the Bible,
however, we have no way of distinguishing
right from wrong. So by undercutting the au-
thority of the Bible, evolution undermines the
basis of morality.
The theory of morality that lies behind this
view is known as the Divine Command Theory.
According to this view, what makes an action
right is that God wills it to be done. Remark-
ably enough, even though this view may be
widespread, very few professional ethicists or
theologians subscribe to it because they be-
lieve that it not only endorses the mistaken
view that might makes right, but also takes

those living on the nearest mainland than to those living on more
distant lands, that different types of fossils will be found in different
layers of rock, and that series of fossils exhibiting gradual change over
time will be discovered. Evolution makes numerous other predictions
that help explain facts discovered by immunology, biochemistry, and
molecular biology.49 So evolution is testable. If these predictions had
turned out to be false, evolution might well have been abandoned.
Creationism is also testable because it makes a number of claims
that can be checked by observation. It claims, for example, that the
universe is 6,000 to 10,000 years old, that all species were created at
the same time, and that the geographical features of the Earth can be
explained as the result of tidal waves created by the great Flood of
Noah. All these claims can be tested. All these claims conﬂict with
well-established scientiﬁc ﬁndings.50 So not only is creationism test-
able; it has been tested—and failed the tests.
CREATIONISM, EVOLUTION, AND CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
185
away the only reason we have for worshipping
God. Leibniz, the discoverer of modern 
calculus and one of the most God-fearing 
men in the Western intellectual tradition, 
explains:
In saying, therefore, that things are not
good according to any standard of good-
ness, but simply by the will of God, it
seems to me that one destroys without real-
izing it, all the love of God and all his
glory; for why praise him for what he has
done, if he would be equally praiseworthy
in doing the contrary? Where will be his
justice and his wisdom if he has only a cer-
tain despotic power, if arbitrary will takes
the place of his reasonableness, and if in 
according with the deﬁnition of tyrants,
justice consists in that which is pleasing to
the most powerful. Besides it seems that
every act of willing supposes some reason
for the willing and this reason, of course,
must precede the act.48
Leibniz’s point is that if actions are neither right
nor wrong prior to God’s willing them, then
God cannot choose one set over another be-
cause one is morally better than another. Thus if
God does choose one over another, his choice
must be arbitrary. But a being whose actions are
arbitrary is not a being worthy of worship.
According to Leibniz, God’s choosing an 
action to be done is not what makes it right.
Instead God chooses an action to be done be-
cause it is right. Its rightness is independent of
His will and thus can guide His choices. Moral-
ity doesn’t depend on God any more than
mathematics does. God can’t make the number
3 an even number because by its very nature, 
3 is odd. Similarly God can’t make justice or
mercy bad things because by their very nature,
they are good. So even if evolution did under-
cut the authority of the Bible—which most 
denominations say it doesn’t—it wouldn’t
thereby undermine the basis of morality.
If superior creatures
from space ever 
visit Earth, the ﬁrst
question they will
ask in order to 
assess the level of
our civilization, is:
“Have they discov-
ered evolution yet?”
—RICHARD DAWKINS

186
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
Is Evolution Just a Theory?
The most recent battle in the war between cre-
ation and evolution was fought in Dover, Penn-
sylvania. The school board there voted to have
the following statement read in biology classes:
Because Darwin’s Theory is a theory, it con-
tinues to be tested as new evidence is dis-
covered. The theory is not a fact. Gaps in
the theory exist for which there is no evi-
dence. A theory is deﬁned as a well-tested
explanation that uniﬁes a broad range of ob-
servations. Intelligent Design is an explana-
tion of the origin of life that differs from
Darwin’s view.
Eleven parents of the Dover Area School District
sued the school board on the grounds that this
statement promoted a particular religious 
belief under the guise of science education. 
Judge Jones found in favor of the parents.
What’s interesting about this statement is
not just its attempt to sneak religion into the
science classroom, but its misunderstanding of
the nature of facts and theories. Its deﬁnition of
a theory is essentially correct. Its claim that
evolution is not a fact because it continues to
be tested, however, is mistaken. What distin-
guishes a theory from a fact is not whether it’s
still being tested or even how certain we are of
it, but whether it provides the best explanation
of some phenomena.
A fact is a true statement. A theory is a state-
ment about the way the world is. If the world is
the way the theory says it is—if the theory is
true—then the theory is a fact. For example, 
if the Copernican theory of the solar system is
true—if planets revolve around the sun—then
the Copernican theory is a fact. If Einstein’s 
theory of relativity is true—if E = mc2—then
Einstein’s theory is a fact. Similarly, if the theory
of evolution is true, then it’s a fact.
So the question arises: when are we justiﬁed
in believing something to be true? We have 
already seen the answer: when it provides the
best explanation of some phenomena. Biologists
consider evolution to be a fact because, in the
words of Theodosius Dobzhansky, “Nothing in
biology makes sense except in the light of evolu-
tion.”51 Evolution is a fact because it’s the 
best theory of how biological change occurs
over time.
What often goes unnoticed in these discus-
sions is that every fact is a theory. Take the fact
that you’re reading a book right now, for ex-
ample. You’re justiﬁed in believing that to be a
fact because it provides the best explanation of
your sense experience. But it’s not the only the-
ory that explains your sense experience. After
all, you could be dreaming, you could be hallu-
cinating, you could be a brain in a vat, you
could be plugged into the matrix, you could be
receiving telepathic messages from extraterres-
trials, and so on. All of those theories explain
your sense experience. You shouldn’t accept
any of them, however, because none of them is
as good an explanation as the ordinary one.
The Intelligent Design theory is on a par
with the theory that extraterrestrials are putting
thoughts in your head. It’s a possible explana-
tion of the evidence, but not a very good one
because, like the extraterrestrial theory, it does-
n’t identify the designer nor does it tell us how
the designer did it. Consequently, it doesn’t
meet the criteria of adequacy as well as the
evolutionary theory does. In a court of law, no
one would take seriously an explanation of a
crime that didn’t identify the criminal or how
he committed the crime. Similarly, in a science
classroom, no one should take seriously an ex-
planation that doesn’t identify the cause or how
the cause brings about its effect. Evolution does
both and does it better than any competing
theory. So we’re justiﬁed in believing it to be
true.

Gish writes as if the lack of human witnesses makes the two the-
ories untestable and therefore religious. But if that lack rendered a the-
ory religious, a lot of what passes for science would have to be
reclassiﬁed as religion, for many phenomena studied by scientists can’t
be witnessed by humans. Nobody, for example, ever has seen or ever
will see the interior of the sun. But that fact doesn’t mean that any the-
ory about what goes on inside the sun is theological. Theories about
the internal structure of stars can be tested by observing their behav-
ior. Similarly, theories about the creation of the universe or living
things can be tested by observing the behavior of objects in the uni-
verse or creatures on the Earth.
One piece of evidence that Darwin cited in favor of the theory of
evolution is that there is a progression among fossils from the simplest,
in the oldest strata, to the most complex, in the most recent layers.
Creationists claim that this evidence is no evidence at all because—
they say—the age of rock strata is determined by the complexity of the
fossils it contains. In other words, creationists claim that evolutionists
argue in a circle—they date rock strata by the fossils they contain and
then date fossils by the rock strata in which they’re found.52
Creationists don’t deny that the simplest fossils are often found at
the lowest point in fossil beds. They account for this fact by assuming
that after the great Flood of Noah, the simplest forms of life (marine
life) would be the ﬁrst to be deposited on the seaﬂoor. All creatures—
dinosaurs as well as humans—came into existence at the same time.
They were all washed away in a great ﬂood, and the fossils that remain
are found in their present order not because of their relative age but
because of their relative buoyancy.
Creationists who make this argument must then explain how the
creatures alive today survived the ﬂood. Most follow the Bible and
claim that they were saved by Noah and his ark. The ark, of course,
presents a problem. To save all living creatures, according to one 
calculation, the ark had to carry at least 25,000 species of birds,
15,000 species of mammals, 6,000 species of reptiles, 2,500 species of 
amphibians, and more than 1 million species of insects.53 Moreover,
since creationists believe that men and dinosaurs walked the Earth at
the same time, the ark must have contained two of each species of 
dinosaur; that is, it included two Supersauruses (which were 100 feet
long and weighed up to 55 tons each) and two Apatosauruses (up to
70 feet long and 20 tons)—not to mention two hungry 7-ton Tyran-
nosauruses. How Noah, his wife, and three sons, and their wives could
possibly have built an ark big enough to hold all these creatures—let
alone feed and water them and clean out their stalls—is something
that creationists are curiously silent about.
CREATIONISM, EVOLUTION, AND CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
187
Religion, which
should most distin-
guish us from the
beasts, and ought
most particularly to
elevate us, as ratio-
nal creatures, above
brutes, is that
wherein men often
appear most irra-
tional, and more
senseless than
beasts themselves.
—JOHN LOCKE

The fact is that no geological or anthropological evidence indi-
cates that a worldwide ﬂood occurred during the past 10,000 years.54
Furthermore, the claim that the evolutionist’s argument from the fos-
sil record is circular is simply mistaken, for there are many ways to
date fossils independent of the rock strata they’re found in.
The age of the universe can also be calculated independently of
both fossils and rock strata. By determining how far apart the galaxies
are and how rapidly they are moving away from each other, it’s possi-
ble to determine when the outward expansion of the universe began.
Present estimates put the age of the universe at something like 15 to
20 billion years, a far cry from the 6,000 years claimed by creationists.
This disagreement about the age of the universe and living
things points out one of the major failings of creationism: It does not
cohere with well-established beliefs. In other words, it fails to meet
the criterion of conservatism. As Isaac Asimov has pointed out, cre-
ationism cannot be adopted “without discarding all of modern biol-
ogy, biochemistry, geology, astronomy—in short, without discarding
all of science.”55 That’s a pretty high price to pay for adopting a the-
ory. If the creationists can’t make up for this lack of conservatism by
demonstrating that their theory has greater fruitfulness, scope, or
simplicity than evolution, it can’t be considered as good a theory as
evolution.
Creationism is not a fruitful theory because it hasn’t predicted any
novel facts. It has made some novel claims—such as that the universe
is from 6,000 to 10,000 years old, that all creatures were created at the
same time, that there was a worldwide ﬂood, and so on—but none of
them has been borne out by the evidence. Evolution, on the other
hand, has predicted that the chromosomes and proteins of related
species should be similar, that mutations should occur, that organisms
should adapt to changing environments, and so on, all of which have
been veriﬁed. In terms of fruitfulness, then, evolution is superior to
creationism.
Evolution is also superior to creationism in terms of simplicity.
Simplicity, remember, is a measure of the number of assumptions a
theory makes. Evolution assumes a lot less than creationism. For one
thing, it doesn’t assume the existence of God. For another, it doesn’t
assume the existence of unknown forces. That creationism makes
both of these assumptions was made clear by Gish:
We do not know how the Creator created, what processes He used,
for He used processes which are not now operating anywhere in the natural universe.
This is why we refer to creation as Special Creation. We cannot dis-
cover by scientiﬁc investigation anything about the creative processes
used by the Creator.56
188
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
Nothing in biology
makes sense ex-
cept in the light 
of evolution.
—THEODOSIUS
DOBZHANSKY

Creationism, then, assumes the existence of a supernatural being with
supernatural powers. Since evolution makes neither of these assump-
tions, it is the simpler theory.
The major advantage of evolution over creationism, however, is its
scope, or explanatory power. Evolution has served to systematize and
unify discoveries from a number of different ﬁelds. “In fact,” claims
Isaac Asimov, “the strongest of all indications as to the fact of evolution
and the truth of the theory of natural selection is that all the inde-
pendent ﬁndings of scientists in every branch of science, when they
have anything to do with biological evolution at all, always strengthen
the case and never weaken it.”57 Evolution ﬁts well with what we know
about the universe. It not only explains the facts uncovered by Darwin,
but many others as well. Creationism, on the other hand, does not
ﬁt well with what we know about the universe and can’t even explain
Darwin’s data. Furthermore, it raises more questions than it answers.
How did the creator create? What caused the worldwide ﬂood? How
did creatures survive it? Why does the world seem so much older than
it is? A theory that raises more questions than it answers doesn’t 
increase our understanding; it decreases our understanding.
Moreover, appealing to the incomprehensible can never increase
our comprehension. Suppose you’re an engineer charged with explain-
ing why a bridge collapsed and someone remarks, “I know why it col-
lapsed. It collapsed because an incomprehensible being zapped it with
an incomprehensible force.” Because you are interested in exploring all
possibilities, you inquire, “Can you tell me any more about this being
or this force?” “No,” he replies. “Do you have any tangible evidence
that this occurred?” you ask. “No,” he admits. At this point you would
do well to thank him for his help and show him to the door.
Is this theory one you should take seriously? Would you be remiss
if you left it out of your ﬁnal report? Of course not. Such a theory 
explains nothing. Yet it’s just such a theory that the creationists are
pushing. The creator and his means of creation, they claim, are beyond
human comprehension. But if they are, appealing to them can’t 
increase our understanding. As a result, creationism explains nothing;
its scope is nil. If creationism met the criteria of adequacy as well as
evolution does, it would be as good a theory as evolution—but it
doesn’t. With respect to each criterion of adequacy—testability, con-
servatism, fruitfulness, simplicity, and scope—creationism actually
does much worse than evolution. Consequently, the creationists’ claim
that creationism is as good a theory as evolution is totally unfounded.
As Plato realized over 2,500 years ago, to say that “God did it” is not
to offer an explanation, but to offer an excuse for not having an expla-
nation (Cratylus 426a).
CREATIONISM, EVOLUTION, AND CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
189
It stands to the ever-
lasting credit of 
science that by act-
ing on the human
mind it has over-
come man’s insecu-
rity before himself
and before nature.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN

190
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
Did Adam and Eve Have Navels?
If the universe is only 10,000 years old, why
does it seem so much older? Why, for example,
do we ﬁnd fossils that seem to be millions of
years old? One possible response is to say that
God put them there to test our faith. This view
is not favored by modern-day creationists, how-
ever, for it puts God in a bad light. As one cre-
ationist remarks: “This would be the creation,
not of an appearance of age, but of an appear-
ance of evil, and would be contrary to Gods
[sic] nature.”58 The creationists do not want to
make God out to be a deceiver.
Nineteenth-century British naturalist Philip
Gosse, however, argued that if God created the
world, he had to create it with vestiges of a
past, so why not assume that God created it
with vestiges of a great past? Martin Gardner
elucidates Gosse’s argument:
Gosse admitted geology had established be-
yond any doubt that the earth had a long
geological history in which plants and ani-
mals ﬂourished before the time of Adam. He
was also convinced that the earth was cre-
ated about 4,000 B.C.E., in six days, exactly
as described in Genesis. How did he reconcile
these apparently contradictory opinions?
Very simply. Just as Adam was created with
a navel, the relic of a birth which never oc-
curred, so the entire earth was created with
all the fossil relics of a past which had no
existence except in the mind of God!. . . .
”It may be objected,” writes Gosse, “that
to assume the world to have been created
with fossil skeletons in its crust—skeletons
of animals that never really existed—is to
charge the Creator with forming objects
whose sole purpose was to deceive us. The
reply is obvious. Were the concentric timber-
rings of a created tree formed merely to 
deceive? Were the growth lines of a created
shell intended to deceive? Was the navel of
the created Man intended to deceive him
into the persuasion that he had a parent?”
This question of whether Adam had a
navel is by no means a forgotten one. A few
years ago North Carolina’s Congressman
Carl T. Durham and his House Military 
Affairs subcommittee objected to a cartoon
of Adam and Eve in Public Affairs Pamphlet
no. 85 (The Races of Mankind by Ruth Benedict
and Gene Weltﬁsh). The cartoon disclosed 
a pair of navels. The subcommittee thought
this had something to do with communism.
[Apparently they associated navels with 
evolution and evolution with communism.]
Their fears were somewhat allayed when it
was pointed out that Michelangelo had
painted a navel on Adam in his Sistine
Chapel Murals.
So thorough is Gosse in covering every
aspect of this question that he even discusses
the ﬁnding of coprolites, fossil excrement.
Up until now, he writes, this “has been con-
sidered a more than ordinarily triumphant
proof of real preexistence.” Yet, he points
out, it offers no more difﬁculty than the fact
that waste matter would certainly exist in
the intestines of the newly formed Adam.
Blood must have ﬂowed through his arteries,
and blood presupposes chyle and chyme,
which in turn presupposes an indigestible
residuum in the intestines. “It may seem at
ﬁrst sight ridiculous,” he confesses,”. . . but
truth is truth.”59

Creationists often object that various organs or limbs couldn’t
have evolved gradually because a half-formed organ or limb has no
survival value. “What good is half a wing?” they ask. The answer is
that half a wing is better than none. Richard Dawkins explains:
What use is half a wing? How did wings get their start? Many animals
leap from bough to bough, and sometimes fall to the ground. Especially
in a small animal, the whole body surface catches the air and assists the
leap, or breaks the fall, by acting as a crude aerofoil. Any tendency to
increase the ratio of surface area to weight would help, for example,
ﬂaps of skin growing out in the angles of joints. From here, there is a
continuous series of gradations to gliding wings, and hence to ﬂapping
wings. Obviously there are distances that could not have been jumped
by the earliest animals with proto-wings. Equally obviously, for any 
degree of smallness or crudeness of ancestral air-catching surfaces, there
must be some distance, however short, which can be jumped with the
ﬂap and which cannot be jumped without the ﬂap.60
What’s more, creatures all along the continuum are alive today.
“Contrary to the creationist literature,” Dawkins asserts, “not only are
animals with ‘half a wing’ common, so are animals with a quarter of a
wing, three quarters of a wing, and so on.”61 So intermediate stages
in the development of organs and limbs are not only possible, they
are actual.
Intelligent Design
Recently, a similar objection has been made at the molecular level.
Michael Behe, a Lehigh University biochemist, claims that a light-
sensitive cell, for example, couldn’t have arisen through evolution be-
cause it is “irreducibly complex.” Unlike the scientiﬁc creationists,
however, he doesn’t deny that the universe is billions of years old. Nor
does he deny that evolution has occurred. He only denies that every
biological system arose through natural selection.
Behe deﬁnes “irreducibly complex” this way:
By irreducibly complex I mean a single system composed of several
well-matched, interacting parts that contribute to the basic function,
wherein the removal of any one of the parts causes the system to 
effectively cease functioning. An irreducibly complex system cannot
be produced directly, (that is, by continuously improving the initial
function, which continues to work by the same mechanism) by slight,
successive modiﬁcations of a precursor system, because any precursor
to an irreducibly complex system that is missing a part is by deﬁnition
nonfunctional.62
CREATIONISM, EVOLUTION, AND CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
191
One cannot look at
this Universe with all
living productions
and man without 
believing that all has
been intelligently 
designed.
—CHARLES DARWIN

The operative phrase here is “cannot be produced directly.” Behe is
claiming that it’s physically impossible for certain biological systems
to have been produced naturally. To refute this claim, then, all one has
to show is that these systems can be produced without violating any
natural laws.
Behe’s favorite example of an irreducibly complex mechanism is a
mouse trap. A mouse trap consists of ﬁve parts: (1) a wooden platform,
(2) a metal hammer, (3) a spring, (4) a catch, and (5) a metal bar that
holds the hammer down when the trap is set. What makes this mech-
anism irreducibly complex is that if any one of the parts were 
removed, it would no longer work. Behe claims that many biological
systems, such as cilium, vision, and blood clotting, are also irreducibly
complex because each of these systems would cease to function if any
of their parts were removed.
Irreducibly complex biochemical systems pose a problem for evo-
lutionary theory because it seems that they could not have arisen
through natural selection. A trait such as vision can improve an 
organism’s ability to survive only if it works. And it works only if all
192
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
God the Extraterrestrial
When Michael Behe gives lectures on intelli-
gent design theory, he often opens the ﬂoor to
questions. During one of those question-and-
answer sessions, he was asked, “Could the de-
signer be an alien from outer space?” to which
he answered, “Yes.” The intelligent design the-
ory itself tells us nothing about the nature of
the designer. So it’s entirely possible for the 
designer to be an extraterrestrial.
Remarkably enough, this is the basic prem-
ise upon which the religion known as “Raelian-
ism” is founded. Raelianism is the brainchild of
the French journalist Claude Vorilhon. He was
moved to create this religion after he was con-
tacted by an extraterrestrial while walking
along the rim of the extinct Puy de Lassolas
volcano in central France. The extraterrestrial
told him that all life on Earth was created by
aliens from outer space using advanced genetic
engineering technology. According to the
Raelian Web site, the messages dictated to Rael
explain how life on Earth is not the result of
random evolution, nor the work of a supernatu-
ral “God.” It is a deliberate creation, using
DNA, by a scientiﬁcally advanced people who
made human beings literally “in their image”—
what one can call “scientiﬁc creationism.”63
The Raelians became internationally infa-
mous after their subsidiary, Clonaid, claimed on
December 26, 2002, to have cloned a human
being. Immediately after their announcement,
they agreed to have independent investigators
verify their claim. They later reneged on that
agreement, however, citing the need to pre-
serve the privacy of the family involved. As of
2004, they claimed to have successfully cloned
13 human beings.64 Ultimately, they hope to
use cloning to achieve eternal life. They are
currently trying to ﬁgure out how to transfer
the memory and personality of someone into
their clone.

the parts of the visual system are present. So, Behe concludes, vision
couldn’t have arisen through slight modiﬁcations of a previous system.
It must have been created all at once by some intelligent designer.
Behe tells us nothing about the intelligent designer nor the
means used to implement the design. The designer could be a super-
natural being, or it could be an alien from outer space. It could be
benevolent, or it could be malevolent. It could even be more than
one being. Perhaps irreducibly complex biochemical systems were
designed by a committee. In any event, it should be clear that even
if Behe’s argument were sound, it does not provide evidence for the
existence of God.
Most biologists do not believe that Behe’s argument is sound, how-
ever, because they reject the notion that the parts of an irreducibly
complex system could not have evolved independently of that system.
As Nobel Prize–winning biologist H. J. Muller noted in 1939, a ge-
netic sequence that is, at ﬁrst, inessential to a system may later become
essential to it. Biologist H. Allen Orr describes the processes as fol-
lows: “Some part (A) initially does some job (and not very well, per-
haps). Another part (B) later gets added because it helps A. This new
part isn’t essential, it merely improves things. But later on A (or some-
thing else) may change in such a way that B now becomes indispensa-
ble.”65 For example, air bladders—primitive lungs—made it possible
for certain ﬁsh to acquire new sources of food. But the air bladders
were not necessary to the survival of the ﬁsh. As the ﬁsh acquired
additional features, such as legs and arms, lungs became essential.
So, contrary to what Behe would have us believe, the parts of an irre-
ducibly complex system need not have come into existence all at once.
In fact, we know that some parts of the systems Behe describes are
found in other systems. Thrombin, for example, is essential for blood
clotting but also aids in cell division and is related to the digestive
enzyme trypsin.66 Because the same protein can play different roles in
different systems, the fact that it is part of an irreducibly complex system
doesn’t indicate that it couldn’t have arisen through natural selection.
Darwin himself recognized that many systems are composed of
parts that originally evolved for other purposes. He writes:
When this or that part has been spoken of as adapted for some special
purpose, it must not be supposed that it was originally always formed
for this sole purpose. The regular course of events seems to be, that a
part which originally served for one purpose, becomes adapted by
slow changes for widely different purposes.67
The process by which a structure that originally served one function
comes to serve another was dubbed “exaptation” by Stephen J. Gould
CREATIONISM, EVOLUTION, AND CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
193
The logic turns out
to be no more con-
vincing than this:‘I
[insert own name]
am personally un-
able to think of any
way in which [insert
biological phenome-
non] could have
been built up step by
step.Therefore it is
irreducibly complex.
—RICHARD DAWKINS

and Elizabeth Vrba and appears to be quite common. Darwin recog-
nized this as well: “Thus throughout nature almost every part of each
living being has probably served, in a slightly modiﬁed condition, for
diverse purposes, and has acted in the living machinery of many 
ancient and distinct speciﬁc forms.”68 Because the same structure can
perform different functions in different contexts, we do not need to
suppose that all parts of an irreducibly complex structure came into
being at the same time. Thus it is physically possible for irreducibly
complex structures to arise naturally.
Biologists do not know how all parts of every irreducibly complex
biochemical system came into being, and they may never know 
because there is no fossil record indicating how these systems evolved
over time. Nevertheless, biologists do know that it is not, in principle,
impossible for irreducibly complex systems to arise through natural
selection. So there is no need to invoke an intelligent designer.
Creationists often attack evolution by citing a speciﬁc fact that
they believe evolution can’t account for. But notice how hypocritical
this strategy is. On the one hand, they claim that evolution is untestable
(and therefore unscientiﬁc), while on the other, they claim that it fails
certain tests. They can’t have it both ways. If evolution is untestable, no
data can count against it. If data count against it, it can’t be untestable.
What’s more, two facts often cited by creationists are simply false,
namely, that there are no transitional fossils and that evolution has
never been observed. Creationists maintain that if one species evolved
into another, there should be fossil remains of intermediate or transi-
tional organisms. But, they claim, the fossil record contains gaps where
the intermediate organisms should be. So, they conclude, evolution
did not occur. Given the nature of the fossilization process, however,
gaps are to be expected. Very few of the organisms that come into
being ever get fossilized. Nevertheless, biologists have discovered
thousands of transitional fossils. The transitions from primitive ﬁsh to
bony ﬁsh, from ﬁsh to amphibian, from amphibian to reptile, from rep-
tile to bird, from reptile to mammal, from land animal to early whale,
and from early ape to human are particularly well documented.69 In
addition, there is a detailed record of the diversiﬁcation of mammals
into rodents, bats, rabbits, carnivores, horses, elephants, manatee, deer,
cows, and many others. As Harvard biologist Stephen J. Gould reports,
“paleontologists have discovered several superb examples of interme-
diary forms and sequences, more than enough to convince any fair-
minded skeptic about the reality of life’s physical genealogy.”70
Creationists also erroneously claim that no one has ever ob-
served evolution. Biological evolution, in its broadest sense, is simply
change in the genetic makeup of a group of organisms over time.
194
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
We have seen
species split, and we
continue to see
species diverging
every day.
—CHRISTIE WILCOX

This sort of change has been observed many times over. Insects that
have developed a resistance to pesticides and bacteria that have devel-
oped a resistance to antibiotics are just two examples of biological
evolution familiar to us all. These instances of biological evolution do
not impress creationists because they are examples of what they call
“micro-evolution”—genetic changes within a particular species.
What creationists say has never been observed is “macro-evolution”—
genetic changes from one species to another. But in fact, this change,
too, has been observed. Eight new species of fruit ﬂies have been 
observed in the laboratory as well as six new species of other insects.
A new species of mouse arose on the Faeroe Islands in the past 250 years,
and scientists have recently recorded a new species of marine worm.
The origin of more than a dozen new species of plants have been 
observed in the past ﬁfty years.71 So it is simply inaccurate to claim
that either micro- or macro-evolution has never been observed.
Creationists also assume that any data that count against evolution
count in favor of creationism.72 But to argue in this way is to commit
the fallacy of false dilemma; it presents two alternatives as mutually
exclusive when, in fact, they aren’t. Gish sets up the dilemma this way:
“Either the Universe arose through naturalistic, mechanistic evolution-
ary processes, or it was created supernaturally.”73 This argument is a
false dilemma for a number of reasons. In the ﬁrst place, there is no need
to assume that the universe was created even if evolution is not sup-
ported. The universe, as many non-Western peoples believe, may be
eternal, that is, without beginning or end. People who believe that the
universe was created by God usually believe that God is eternal. If God
can be eternal, why not the universe?74 Second, evolution is not the
only natural account of creation, and Genesis is not the only supernat-
ural account. Theories of creation are as varied as the cultures that con-
ceived them. Some believe that the universe developed naturally from
the void (the Vikings) while others believe that it’s the supernatural
work of the devil (the Gnostics). Thus, even if the creationists could 
totally discredit evolution, they would not thereby prove their own 
position, for there are many other alternatives. Only by demonstrating
that creationism meets the criteria of adequacy at least as well as its 
rivals can creationists hope to show that their theory is a viable one.
Given the manifest inadequacy of the theory of creationism, why
does it persist? The answer is not hard to ﬁnd. Many people believe that
evolution is incompatible with religion, for it not only contradicts the
biblical story of creation, but it suggests that our lives are purposeless
and devoid of meaning. This view is not shared by most mainline
churches, however. For example, the Roman Catholic Church, the
Lutheran World Federation, the American Jewish Congress, the
CREATIONISM, EVOLUTION, AND CRITERIA OF ADEQUACY
195

General Convention of the Episcopal Church, the United Presbyterian
Church, the Iowa Congress of the United Methodist Church, and the
Unitarian-Universalist Association all disavow scientiﬁc creationism of
the sort espoused by the Institution for Creation Research and instead
endorse evolution as a more plausible account of the origin of species.77
What’s more, there is reason to believe that evolution is the only
view that makes a meaningful relationship with God—and thus a
meaningful life—possible. Biologist Kenneth R. Miller explains:
It is often said that a Darwinian universe is one whose randomness
cannot be reconciled with meaning. I disagree. A world truly without
196
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
Are Humans Intelligently Designed?
Bertrand Russell once re-
marked, “If I were granted
omnipotence, and millions of
years to experiment in, I
should not think man much
to boast of as the ﬁnal result
of all my efforts.”75
Biologists S. Jay Olshan-
sky, Bruce A. Carnes, and
Robert N. Butler agree with
Russell that our design leaves
much to be desired:
Bulging disks, fragile
bones, fractured hips, torn
ligaments, varicose veins,
cataracts, hearing loss,
hernias and hemorrhoids;
the list of bodily malfunc-
tions that plague us as we
age is long and all too 
familiar.76
As their illustration indicates,
the human body could have
been designed to last much
longer and be much less
prone to pain. Does this cast
doubt on the intelligent 
design theory?

meaning would be one in which a deity pulled the string of every
human puppet, indeed of every material particle. In such a world,
physical and biological events would be carefully controlled, evil 
and suffering could be minimized, and the outcome of historical
processes strictly regulated. All things would move toward the 
Creator’s clear, distinct, established goals. Such control and pre-
dictability, however, comes at the price of independence. Always in
control, such a Creator would deny his creatures any real opportu-
nity to know and worship him—authentic love requires freedom, 
not manipulation. Such freedom is best supplied by the open contin-
gency of evolution.78
A life in which all our actions were determined by God would not be
a meaningful one. If what we did were not up to us, we would be little
better than robots. Our actions are our own only if they are free. And
truly free actions, says Miller, are only possible in a world that is not
manipulated by an outside force. So evolution, far from diminishing
our relationship with God, actually strengthens it.
PARAPSYCHOLOGY
Creationists do not use the scientiﬁc method to test their hypotheses,
but parapsychologists do. For this reason, among others, the Parapsy-
chological Association was granted afﬁliate status with the American
Association for the Advancement of Science in 1969.
Parapsychology is the study of extrasensory perception (ESP)
and psychokinesis. Extrasensory perception, as the name suggests, is
perception that is not mediated by an organism’s recognized sensory
organs. There are three main types of ESP: telepathy, or perception
of another’s thoughts without the use of the senses; clairvoyance,
perception of distant objects without the use of the senses; and pre-
cognition, perception of future events without the use of the senses.
Psychokinesis is the ability to affect physical objects without the use
of the body, that is, by simply thinking about them. These phenom-
ena are often grouped together under the heading psi phenomena.
One of the reasons that psi phenomena are so fascinating is that
their existence seems to call into question many of our most basic be-
liefs about the nature of knowledge and reality. All forms of ESP, for
example, seem to undermine the theory of knowledge underlying
modern science, namely, that sense experience is the only source of
knowledge of the external world. Telepathy (mind reading) seems to
undermine the theory of reality underlying modern science, namely,
that all that exists is matter in motion or mass/energy. And precogni-
tion seems to undermine the belief that an effect cannot precede 
PARAPSYCHOLOGY
197
Welcome to Tele-
pathics Anonymous.
Don’t bother intro-
ducing yourself.
—BENSON BRUNO

its cause. If it turns out that such phenomena are real, we may have to
radically restructure our worldview.
Many of us have had experiences that seem to fall into one of
these categories. We may have thought of a friend moments before
she phoned us, or sensed that a loved one was in danger only to
find out that he actually was, or dreamt about winning a jackpot
and then won it. Such experiences appear to be common. One
study of over 1,400 American adults found that 67 percent had
“experienced ESP.”81 But as we’ve seen, we can’t always take our
experiences at face value. What seems to be inexplicable often
turns out to have a rather mundane explanation. Before we accept
the reality of psi phenomena, then, we should be sure that the phe-
nomena in question can’t be explained in terms of well-understood
processes.
198
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
The Army and ESP
In 1984, the National Research Council was
asked by the Army Research Institute to inves-
tigate the possibility of using paranormal phe-
nomena to enhance human performance. The
Army was particularly interested in its potential
military applications.
In their view, ESP, if real and controllable,
could be used for intelligence gathering and,
because it includes “precognition,” ESP could
also be used to anticipate the actions of an
enemy. It is believed that PK (psychokinesis),
if realizable, might be used to jam enemy
computers, prematurely trigger nuclear
weapons, and incapacitate weapons and ve-
hicles. More speciﬁc applications envisioned
involve behavior modiﬁcation; inducing
sickness, disorientation, or even death in a
distant enemy; communicating with sub-
marines; planting thoughts in individuals
without their knowledge; hypnotizing indi-
viduals at a distance; psychotronic weapons
of various kinds; psychic shields to protect
sensitive information or military installations;
and the like. One suggested application is 
a conception of the “First Earth Battalion,”
made up of “warrior monks,” who will have
mastered almost all the techniques under
consideration by the committee, including
the use of ESP, leaving their bodies at will,
levitating, psychic healing, and walking
through walls.79
Many paranormal phenomena were studied,
including remote viewing, psychokinesis, tele-
pathy, and plant perception. The committee
drew the following conclusions:
Overall, the experimental designs are of in-
sufﬁcient quality to arbitrate between claims
made for and against the existence of the
phenomena. While the best research is of
higher quality than many critics assume, the
bulk of the work does not meet the stan-
dards necessary to contribute to the knowl-
edge base of science. Deﬁnitive conclusions
must depend on evidence derived from
stronger research designs.80

Some people think that the world would be a much more inter-
esting place if psi were a reality. On a personal level, for example,
telepathy could improve our communication skills, precognition
could help us prepare for the future, and psychokinesis could help us
achieve our goals. On the national and international level, the conse-
quences could be even more remarkable. Imagine being able to read
your enemies’ minds, examine their secret documents without break-
ing into their headquarters, and disarm their weapons by thought
alone. J. B. Rhine, one of the ﬁrst to study psi in the laboratory, had
this to say about the prospect of harnessing psi energy:
The consequences for world affairs would be literally colossal. War
plans and crafty designs of any kind, anywhere in the world, could be
watched and revealed. With such revelation it seems unlikely that war
could ever occur again. There would be no advantage of surprise.
Every secret weapon and scheming strategy would be subject to expo-
sure. The nations could relax their suspicious fear of each other’s 
secret machinations.
Crime on any scale could hardly exist with its cloak of invisibility
thus removed. Graft, exploitation, and suppression could not continue
if the dark plots of wicked men were to be laid bare.82
But would a fully developed psi capability really be such a boon?
What if there were people who could read your thoughts, see what
you’re doing every minute of the day, and control your body with
their minds? Wouldn’t that make possible a form of social control
more horriﬁc than that portrayed in either George Orwell’s 1984 or
Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World? Martin Gardner thinks so. He sees
psi powers as “tools with a far wider scope for repression and terror
than the mere tapping of a phone, opening of a letter, or electronic
eavesdropping.”83
The military potential of psi has not escaped the watchful eye of
the Pentagon. Columnist Jack Anderson reported in 1981 that the
Pentagon’s top secret “psychic task force” had spent over $6 million in
1980 alone trying to develop psi weapons. Our military leaders knew
that the Soviets had been conducting serious psychic research since
the 1930s and that Stalin had hoped to develop psychic weapons to
counter America’s nuclear threat. Apparently the Pentagon’s top brass
was anxious to close what they perceived as an ESP gap.
In the 1970s, books such as Sheila Ostrander and Lynn Schroeder’s
Psychic Discoveries behind the Iron Curtain created the impression that the
Soviets were well on the way to harnessing psychic energy. There were
stories of Russian women who could separate the white of an egg from
its yolk after it had been dropped into an aquarium (an impressive feat
because it couldn’t have been done with hidden magnets or strings)
PARAPSYCHOLOGY
199
Strange thoughts
beget strange deeds.
—PERCY BYSSHE
SHELLEY

and psychokinetically stop the heartbeat of frogs. If such energies
could be focused and ampliﬁed, no American would be safe.
But it wasn’t the military implications that got J. B. Rhine inter-
ested in psi phenomena. It was the philosophical implications. Like
the creationists, Rhine believed that a widespread acceptance of ma-
terialism would have disastrous social consequences.
The most far-reaching and revolting consequence lies in what would
happen to volitional or mental freedom. Under a mechanistic deter-
minism the cherished voluntarism of the individual would be nothing
but idle fancy. Without the exercise of some freedom from physical
law, the concepts of character responsibility, moral judgment, and de-
mocracy would not survive critical analysis. The concept of a spiritual
order, either in the individual or beyond him, would have no logical
place whatever. In fact, little of the entire value system under which
human society has developed would survive the establishment of a
thoroughgoing philosophy of physicalism.84
If psi were real, he thought, the materialist worldview would have to
be abandoned and one more in tune with traditional values could take
its place.
J. B. Rhine began his research into psi phenomena in 1930 at Duke
University. Using a deck of cards designed by his colleague Carl Zener,
Rhine tried to determine whether it was possible for a subject to cor-
rectly identify the symbols on the cards without coming into sensory
contact with them. There are twenty-ﬁve cards in a Zener deck: ﬁve
cards each of ﬁve different symbols—a cross, a star, a circle, wavy lines,
and a square. One run consists of an attempt to identify the symbol on
each card in the deck. By pure chance, in any one run, a respondent
should be able to correctly identify the symbols on ﬁve of the cards.
In Rhine’s earliest and most successful experiments, the subject and
the experimenter sat at opposite ends of a table in the middle of which
was a thin partition that prevented the subject from seeing the cards.
To test for telepathy, the experimenter would look at the cards one by
one, and the subject would try to identify the symbol the experimenter
was looking at. To test for clairvoyance, the experimenter, without
looking at the symbols on the cards, would pick them up one by one,
200
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
Symbols in a deck
of Zener cards
Here’s something to
think about: How
come you never see
a headline like “Psy-
chic Wins Lottery”?
—JAY LENO

PARAPSYCHOLOGY
201
and the subject would try to identify the symbol that was on the card
the experimenter held. Alternatively, the deck would be shufﬂed and
placed face down on the table and the subject would try to identify the
symbol on each card starting from the top and reading down through
the deck. To test for precognition, the subject would write down ahead
of time the order the cards would be in after having been shufﬂed. (A
successful outcome of this test, however, does not necessarily prove
the existence of precognition, for the subject could have used psy-
chokinesis to inﬂuence the shufﬂe.)
In 1934 Rhine published his results in a book entitled Extrasensory
Perception. (Rhine coined the term.) Out of nearly 100,000 attempts,
Rhine’s subjects averaged 7.1 correct identiﬁcations per run. Since
only ﬁve correct identiﬁcations per run would be expected by chance,
the odds against Rhine’s results being due to chance are well over a
googol to one. (A googol is a one followed by a hundred zeros.) On
the basis of his research, Rhine concluded that there must be some
form of nonphysical energy at work:
Might not the same logic that has produced the concepts of the vari-
ous energies involved in physical theory proﬁtably be followed to the
point of suggesting that psi energy be hypothesized? . . . It is no great
jump from the broad concept of energy as it now prevails in physical
theory over to the notion of a special state of energy that is not inter-
ceptible by any of the sense organs. . . . It may be tentatively pro-
posed, then, that back of the phenomena of psi must exist an energy
that interoperates with and interconverts to those other energetic
states already familiar to physics.85
But is Rhine’s conclusion really the best explanation of the evidence?
To determine whether it is, we’ll have to explore some alternative 
hypotheses and see whether any of them meet the criteria of adequacy
better than Rhine’s.
The criteria of simplicity and conservatism tell us that, when we
are attempting to explain something,
We should accept an extraordinary hypothesis 
only if no ordinary one will do.
Rhine’s early research, however, does not require an extraordinary hy-
pothesis. It can be fully explained in terms of quite ordinary forms of
information transfer. Psychologists Leonard Zusne and Warren Jones
explain:
Chance was clearly not producing Rhine’s results. It was opportunities
to establish the identity of the cards by sensory means. These were so

numerous and so readily available that much of Rhine’s work during
the 1930s may be safely ignored. Testing often occurred in a face-to-
face situation, with minimal screening between the agent and the
percipient or none at all. When an agent sits across the table from
the percipient, the latter can see the backs of the cards. At one time,
the ESP cards had been printed with such a heavy pressure that the
symbols became embossed in the card material and could be read
from the back. In 1938, it was discovered that the symbols could
also be seen through the cards, which, of course, allows room for
fingertip reading of the backs of the cards and, if they are marked,
of their sides.
The instructions that accompany the ESP cards, which were made
available to the public in 1937, indicate that an 18  24 inch piece of
plywood would be sufﬁcient for screening purposes. It is decidedly not.
A small screen still allows the percipient to see the faces of the cards if
the agent wears glasses, and even if the agent does not, because the
card faces are also reﬂected from the agent’s corneas. Changes in facial
expression give away clues that are not concealed by small screens.
Larger screens still allow the percipient to hear the agent’s voice. If the
agent also serves as the recorder, which was routine in Rhine’s experi-
ments, voice inﬂections are as useful a source of information as are 
facial expressions. Furthermore, the sound of the pen or pencil wielded
by the agent as he or she records the calls can be also utilized by a
person who is skilled at it or learns the skill when tested over a sufﬁ-
ciently large number of trials. Involuntary whispering on the part of
the recording agent cannot be excluded as an additional source of 
information. When the distance between the percipient and the cards
was increased, scores dropped.86
Given all the opportunities for sensory leakage, there is no reason to
believe that anything extrasensory was going on. The best explana-
tion of Rhine’s results, then, is that the subject, either consciously or
unconsciously, sensed the identity of the cards by ordinary means.
The reason this explanation is the best is that it’s the simplest and
most conservative one that accounts for the data.
There is something else to notice about Rhine’s hypothesis. He
tells us that there is some sort of nonphysical energy involved, but he
doesn’t tell us enough about this energy to allow for any independent
conﬁrmation of it. As a result, his hypothesis is ad hoc. It’s no better
than the hypothesis that gremlins cause ﬂuorescent lights to light up.
In fact, it’s no better than the hypothesis that gremlins (rather than
energy) cause ESP by carrying messages back and forth between the
experimenter and the percipient. Until we learn enough about Rhine’s
energy to make an independent determination of its existence, there
is no good reason to believe that it exists.
202
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS

If Rhine’s energy really existed, others should be able to detect it
in the same sorts of situations that Rhine did. But very few of the sci-
entists who have repeated Rhine’s experiments have gotten his results.
Psychologist J. Crumbaugh’s experiences are typical:
At the time [1938] of performing the experiments involved I fully 
expected that they would yield easily all the final answers. I did 
not imagine that after 28 years I would still be in as much doubt 
as when I had begun. I repeated a number of the then current Duke
techniques, but the results of 3,024 runs of the ESP cards—as much
work as Rhine reported in his first book—were all negative. In 1940
I utilized further methods with high school students, again with
negative results.88
Psychologist John Beloff was also unable to ﬁnd any positive evidence
for psi:
I recently completed a seven-year programme of parapsychological 
research with the help of one full time research assistant. No one would
have been more delighted to obtain positive results than we, but for 
PARAPSYCHOLOGY
203
The Million-Dollar Paranormal Challenge
For years, magician, educator, and MacArthur
Genius Grant recipient James Randi has offered
a reward to anyone able to demonstrate para-
normal abilities under controlled conditions.
That reward is now up to a million dollars. To
date, no one has been able to claim it. Here’s
the ofﬁcial description of the reward:
The [James Randi Educational] Foundation
is committed to providing reliable informa-
tion about paranormal claims. It both sup-
ports and conducts original research into
such claims.
At JREF, we offer a one-million-dollar
prize to anyone who can show, under proper
observing conditions, evidence of any para-
normal, supernatural, or occult power or
event. The prize is in the form of negotiable
bonds held in a special investment account.
The JREF does not involve itself in the test-
ing procedure, other than helping to design
the protocol and approving the conditions
under which a test will take place. All tests
are designed with the participation and ap-
proval of the applicant. In most cases, the
applicant will be asked to perform a rela-
tively simple preliminary test of the claim,
which if successful, will be followed by the
formal test. Preliminary tests are usually con-
ducted by associates of the JREF at the site
where the applicant lives. Upon success in
the preliminary testing process, the “appli-
cant” becomes a “claimant.”
To date, no one has ever passed the pre-
liminary tests.87
On September 3, 2001, alleged psychic Sylvia
Browne agreed on Larry King Live to take the
challenge. Randi described a test procedure
that she agreed would be a fair test of her 
abilities. As of this writing, she has not met 
the challenge.

all the success we achieved, ESP might just as well not have existed. . . .
I have not found on comparing notes with other parapsychologists . . .
that my experience is in any way out of the ordinary.89
Because there are so many ways that an experiment can go wrong,
we can’t be sure that an effect is real (rather than an artifact of the
experimental setup) unless it can be repeated by others. But in the ﬁeld
of parapsychology, there are no repeatable experiments. Even the same
researchers, using the same subjects, can’t achieve similar results every
time. Consequently, there is good reason to doubt that psi is real.
That’s not to say that psi is unreal, however. No amount of evi-
dence (or lack of it) could prove that, because it’s impossible to
prove a universal negative. What the lack of repeatable experiments
shows is that no one is justiﬁed in believing that psi exists because
the evidence available doesn’t establish that claim beyond a reason-
able doubt.
Perhaps parapsychologists haven’t been able to devise a repeat-
able experiment because they haven’t identiﬁed the relevant variables
yet. Scientists, whenever possible, perform controlled experiments 
to ensure that the relevant variables remain the same each time an 
experiment is performed. If they didn’t, the experiment would be
worthless. So one explanation of the parapsychologists’ lack of 
repeatable experiments is that the factors necessary for proper psi
functioning have not been identiﬁed.
Parapsychologists have their own explanations for the inability of
others to replicate their experiments, however. One of the most com-
mon is the sheep-goat effect, studied extensively by Gertrude Schmei-
dler.90 According to this hypothesis, the results of psi experiments are
inﬂuenced by the attitudes of the experimenter. If the experimenter
doubts the existence of psi (a goat), the experiment won’t succeed; if
the experimenter believes in the existence of psi (a sheep), the exper-
iment will succeed. But what of experimenters like J. Crumbaugh and
John Beloff who claim that they began their research as sheep? Don’t
they show that the sheep-goat effect is mistaken? Not according to
this argument, which holds that while such experimenters may have
consciously believed in psi, they must have unconsciously doubted
it. D. Scott Rogo, for example, claims that Susan Blackmore’s failure
to ﬁnd any evidence for the existence of psi in her sixteen years of 
research is due to her unconscious bias against it.91
The ad hoc character of this hypothesis should be obvious.
There’s no way to test it because no possible data could count against
it. Every apparent counterexample can be explained away by appeal
to the unconscious. Moreover, accepting it would make the whole
ﬁeld of parapsychology untestable. No unsuccessful experiments
204
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
The greatest wonder
of all is the regular-
ity of nature.
—GEORGE DANA
BOARDMAN

could count against the existence of psi because they could simply be
the result of experimenter bias. This sort of reasoning convinces many
researchers that parapsychology is a pseudoscience.
But parapsychologists need not reason this way, and many don’t.
According to Ray Hyman, over 3,000 parapsychological experiments
have been performed, many by competent investigators.92 Some 
experiments do appear to be successful. But none are consistently 
repeatable, and many of the most impressive experiments have turned
out to be fraudulent.
For example, in London between 1941 and 1943, parapsycholo-
gist Samuel Soal tested a subject named Basil Shackleton by using
cards that had brightly painted pictures of animals on them instead of
the usual Zener symbols. Soal’s theory was that subjects might do bet-
ter if they had more interesting material to work with. Although
Shackleton only scored at chance levels with the target cards, his
guesses correlated remarkably well with the card immediately follow-
ing the target card. It was estimated that the odds of that happening
by chance were greater than 1035 to 1.
Many considered Soal’s research to be the best evidence available
for psi. Whately Carrington, for example, said:
If I had to choose one single investigation on which to pin my whole
faith in the reality of paranormal phenomena, or with which to con-
vince a hardened skeptic (if this be not a contradiction in terms), I
should unhesitatingly choose this series of experiments, which is the
most cast-iron piece of work I know, as well as having yielded the
most remarkable results.93
We now know, however, that Soal fudged his data. An assistant in many
of the Shackleton experiments, Gretl Albert, told one of Soal’s col-
leagues that she had seen him altering the records. Later computer
analysis of the records has shown that Soal either altered them or didn’t
get his random numbers in the way he said he did.94
Another prominent case of experimenter fraud involves Walter J.
Levy Jr., the man Rhine picked to succeed him as head of his para-
psychology laboratory. Levy was caught unplugging an automatic
scoring machine in an attempt to have it record an abnormally high
number of hits.
Certainly not all parapsychologists (nor all parapsychological
subjects) are frauds. But because parapsychology has had more than
its fair share of them, we should not accept the results of a psi exper-
iment unless we can establish beyond a reasonable doubt that they’re
not due to fraud. One way to guard against fraud is to enlist the aid of
a professional magician. Project Alpha, described in the box, under-
scores the importance of this precaution.
PARAPSYCHOLOGY
205

The evidence currently available does not establish the existence
of psi beyond a reasonable doubt because the experiments on which
it is based are not repeatable. The inability of other researchers to
replicate the results of a psi experiment suggests that something other
than psi may be responsible for the outcome. Perhaps the original 
experimenters fell prey to one of the perceptual or conceptual errors
examined in Chapter 5. Perhaps they failed to employ adequate con-
trols to prevent other factors from producing the result. And perhaps
they are guilty of fraud. Replication is necessary to ensure that we’re
not fooling ourselves or being fooled by others. Without it, there’s no
way to know what caused the reported effect.
It has been claimed, however, that even though no particular 
experiment is repeatable, all the successful experiments taken together
establish the existence of psi beyond a reasonable doubt. John Beloff,
for example, has written:
It is not my contention that any of the aforegoing experiments were
perfect . . . or beyond criticism. . . . Moreover, unless a much higher
level of repeatability becomes possible, the skeptical option, that the
results can be attributed to carelessness or to conscious or uncon-
scious cheating on the part of one or more of the experimenters, 
remains open and valid. Nevertheless, it is my personal opinion that
these . . . investigations represent an overwhelming case for 
accepting the reality of psi phenomena.95
Everyone’s entitled to his or her opinion, of course, but the important
question from our point of view is whether Beloff’s opinion is justiﬁed.
Can individually unconvincing studies be collectively convincing?
No. What a study lacks in quality cannot be made up in quantity. The
evidence generated by questionable studies remains questionable, no
matter how many of them there are.
There is a great deal of anecdotal evidence for psi phenomena.
Many individuals have had experiences that they believe are inexpli-
cable in terms of known physical laws. But as we saw in Chapter 5,
many strange experiences can be accounted for in terms of well-
known perceptual processes, such as pareidolia, cryptomnesia, selec-
tive attention, subjective validation, the Forer effect, the autokinetic
effect, and so on. Because, outside of the laboratory, we can’t establish
beyond a reasonable doubt that these factors are not at work, we can’t
accept anecdotal evidence at face value.
One further body of evidence must be included in any examination
of psi—that obtained by gambling casinos. As Terence Hines observes,
“One can consider every spin of the roulette wheel, every throw of the
dice, every draw of the card in gambling casinos the world over as a
206
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS

single trial in a worldwide ongoing study in parapsychology.”97 If psi
were a reality, casino winnings should vary from what’s predicted by the
laws of chance. But they don’t. The billions of trials conducted each
year by casinos all over the world provide no evidence for the existence
of psi. It has been claimed that the reason for this lack of evidence is
that psi cannot be used for personal gain. Such ad hoc hypotheses,
however, should not keep us from giving this evidence its due.
There are non–ad hoc hypotheses that can explain the casino data,
however. One is that it is just too noisy in casinos for psi to operate.
Recent experiments using sensory deprivation techniques seem to lend
credibility to this hypothesis.
PARAPSYCHOLOGY
207
Project Alpha
An experiment provides evidence for ESP only
if the results cannot be accounted for in terms
of ordinary sensory perception (OSP). Unfortu-
nately, scientists are not particularly adept at
determining when a result could be due to OSP
because they are not trained in the art of decep-
tion. Professional magicians, however, are. As a
result, parapsychologists would do well to make
use of their expertise. Project Alpha, conceived
by James (the Amazing) Randi, provides a dra-
matic demonstration of the need for magicians
in the psi lab.
In Project Alpha, two young magicians, Steve
Shaw and Michael Edwards, with Randi’s ad-
vice, went to the McDonnell Laboratory for
Psychical Research at Washington University
in St. Louis, Missouri. The McDonnell 
Laboratory was probably the best-funded
psychical laboratory in the world; it had been
created with a $50,000 grant from James 
McDonnell, chairman of the board of the
McDonnell-Douglas Aircraft Corporation.
Shaw and Edwards easily convinced the
research staff at the McDonnell Laboratory
that they had genuine psychic powers. They
were tested by the laboratory for a period of
three years. They rarely failed to achieve
“psychic” feats. Metal was bent “paranor-
mally,” minds were read, the contents of
sealed envelopes were mysteriously divined,
fuses sealed in protective containers burned
out, and mysterious pictures appeared “psy-
chically” on ﬁlm inside cameras. . . . Randi 
reports in detail on the simple ways in which
these deceptions were carried out.
Before Shaw and Edwards began to be
tested at the McDonnell Laboratory, Randi
wrote to the director, Dr. Peter Phillips, a
physics professor at Washington University.
Randi outlined the type of controls that the
lab should use to guard against sleight of
hand and other such trickery. He also offered
to come to the lab, at his own expense and
without public acknowledgment, to assist in
the preparation of “trick-proof” experiments.
Randi’s offer was rejected and his advice 
ignored. The controls that were placed on
Shaw and Edwards were totally inadequate 
to prevent their use of trickery. Even when
videotapes of their feats showed fairly clearly,
to anyone watching them carefully, how the
trick had been done, the enthusiastic labora-
tory staff failed to catch on.96

Recognizing that if psi exists, it must be an extremely weak force,
parapsychologist Charles Honorton has tried to detect its presence by
reducing normal sensory input to a minimum. Subjects in his experi-
ments are put in a ganzfeld designed to block out sensory information.
The ganzfeld is produced by having the subjects close their eyes and
placing headphones over their ears. A bright red light is shone on
their faces and white noise played through the headphones. After
being in this condition for about ﬁfteen minutes, the subjects begin to
hallucinate. What they see is similar to the hypnogogic images some-
times seen right before falling asleep. Once the subjects have reached
this state, the senders—usually relatives or friends—try to transmit to
the subjects the contents of a minute-long video. The clip is chosen
randomly by a computer out of forty sets of four clips each. Thus,
even the experimenter has no way of knowing what clip is being
played at any particular time. Once the senders have viewed the 
clip, the subjects are asked to describe the images they are seeing.
Honorton’s hypothesis is that if psi exists, the images seen by the sub-
jects should match the images transmitted by the senders more often
than would be expected by pure chance. At the end of each session,
the subjects are shown all four clips in the set and asked to identify
which one most closely resembles the images they were seeing.
By chance alone, the subjects should be able to identify the correct
clip 25 percent of the time. Honorton’s 240 subjects did so 34 percent
of the time. The odds against this high rate happening by chance are
more than a million to one. Others tried to replicate his results. Some
succeeded; some didn’t. Some reported effect sizes much greater than
Honorton’s. By 1985, over forty ganzfeld studies had been reported in
the literature. Ray Hyman, professor of psychology at the University of
Washington, performed a meta-analysis of these studies in an attempt
to determine whether the results were really due to some sort of psi
functioning.98 A meta-analysis is a statistical procedure that combines
the results of similar studies after ﬁrst grading them in terms of quality.
This allows researchers to determine whether signiﬁcant results are cor-
related with poor quality. If they are, there’s reason to believe something
other than psi is responsible for the results. Hyman found that experi-
mental ﬂaws such as sensory leakage and inadequate randomization
were indeed correlated with successful outcomes. So he concluded that
the original ganzfeld experiments were not convincing evidence for the
existence of psi.99
In response to Hyman’s critique, Honorton performed his own
meta-analysis of the studies using a different set of criteria to grade
them. Contrary to Hyman, he found the studies to be quite signiﬁcant,
with odds against their being due to chance of over a billion to one.100
208
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS

His conclusion differed from Hyman’s in part because his criteria iden-
tiﬁed more ﬂaws in unsuccessful experiments and fewer in successful ones.
To improve the quality of ganzfeld research and to lessen the like-
lihood of such divergent conclusions, Honorton and Hyman wrote a
joint paper in which they outlined the criteria that any credible
ganzfeld experiment should meet.101 Using these criteria, Honorton
designed a new type of ganzfeld experiment known as the autoganzfeld,
because it partially automated the collection of data. In 1990, he pub-
lished the results of over 355 autoganzfeld sessions with over 241 vol-
unteers. The success rate was far above what would be expected by
chance alone. In 1994, Cornell University psychologist Daryl Bem
published a joint article with Honorton in one of psychology’s most
prestigious research journals, Psychological Bulletin. Their meta-analysis
of a series of ganzfeld experiments also indicated a success rate much
greater than chance. They concluded that “the replication rates and
effect sizes achieved by one particular experimental method, the
ganzfeld procedure, are now sufﬁcient to warrant bringing this body
of data to the wider psychological community.”102
A more recent meta-analysis of 30 additional studies conducted by
Richard Wiseman of the University of Hertfordshire and Julie Milton
of the University of Edinburgh, however, found no evidence of success
above chance.103 In addition, a more detailed analysis by Ray Hyman
of the studies reported in Bem’s and Honorton’s article found a number
of statistical anomalies. Speciﬁcally, he found that all of the hits were
achieved in the second or later appearance of the targets. This suggests
that something other than psi may have been responsible for the hits.
To rule that out, Hyman suggests that each video clip be run through
the machine the same number of times.104
Meta-analysis is a relatively new statistical procedure, and some
have suggested that the way it has been used in parapsychology yields
inaccurate results. To be accurate, a meta-analysis must include all stud-
ies of the type under investigation. Not all such studies are reported in
the literature, however. Publishing space is limited, and unsuccessful
studies are not as noteworthy as successful ones. So unsuccessful stud-
ies often get ﬁled away in a drawer somewhere. To counteract this “ﬁle
drawer” effect, meta-analyses usually include a calculation of how many
unsuccessful studies would have to have been conducted in order for
the success rate to be at the chance level. In his 1985 meta-analysis of
28 ganzfeld studies, Honorton concluded that there would have to have
been 423 unsuccessful, unreported studies to bring the success rate
down to the chance level. Since the number of researchers conducting
ganzfeld experiments is rather small, Honorton concluded that it would
be unreasonable to suppose that there were that many such studies.
PARAPSYCHOLOGY
209

Statistician Douglas Stokes, however, has pointed out that unsuc-
cessful studies may well have results that are below the chance level.
The number of studies below the chance level needed to explain away
the apparent success of the ganzfeld experiments is far fewer than the
number required at the chance level. Stokes has calculated that only
62 unreported studies at below the chance level are needed to nullify
Honorton’s original results, and that number is not outside of the
realm of probability.107
210
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS
Extrasensory Pornception
Daryl Bem recently shocked the psychological
establishment by publishing a study in a peer-
reviewed journal which seemed to provide evi-
dence of precognition (knowing something
before it happens). Bem claims that his experi-
ments, entitled “Feeling the Future,” show that
the future can affect the past by giving us
knowledge of what is to come.105 In one exper-
iment, the subjects (college students) sat in
front of a computer screen that displayed two
curtains side by side. They were told that one
curtain had an image behind it that was neutral,
negative, or erotic. Their task was to identify
that curtain by clicking on it. On the face of it,
the experiment appears to be a test for clairvoy-
ance (distant viewing) because the subjects are
trying to detect the presence of an object they
cannot see. But Bem arranged things so that the
computer didn’t choose which curtain to put
the image behind until after the subjects had
made their choice. So the experiment was really
testing for precognition; if the subjects were
able to guess which curtain would have the pic-
ture behind it more than 50 percent of the
time, they would seem to be feeling the future.
Bem found that when the image was neutral,
the subjects were able to identify the correct
curtain only 50 percent of the time (which is
what you would expect by chance alone). But
when the image was erotic, the subjects were
able to identify the correct curtain 53 percent of
the time, which is statistically signiﬁcant. The
subjects apparently could sense which curtain
the erotic picture would be placed behind, thus
suggesting that they possessed what Stephen
Colbert called “extrasensory pornception.”
Has science ﬁnally proven the existence of
ESP? Most psychologists think not. For one
thing, if the past is any guide to the future,
Bem’s experiment will be found to have signiﬁ-
cant methodological ﬂaws. Many parapsychol-
ogists in the past have reported statistically
signiﬁcant results only to ﬁnd them evaporate
under critical scrutiny. For another, Bem did
not follow standard scientiﬁc protocols in con-
ducting his experiments. For example, half-way
through the image guessing experiment, he al-
tered the number of erotic vs. non-erotic im-
ages he was using, and made some of them
more pornographic. Changing experimental
procedure in the middle of an experiment de-
stroys the control needed for the results to be
convincing. Finally, and most importantly,
other researchers have failed to replicate Bem’s
results. Replication is important in science be-
cause only if an experiment can be replicated
can we be sure that error dishonesty was not at
work. Three different researchers in three dif-
ferent laboratories ran Bem’s most successful
experiments to see if the effect was real.106 In
each case the results they got were no better
than chance. The failure to replicate Bem’s re-
sults suggests that something other than ESP
may have been at work.

The ganzfeld procedure remains the most promising way 
to demonstrate the existence of psi. Bem and other well-respected
psychologists remain convinced that these studies identify an anom-
aly that has not yet been adequately explained. A well-controlled
ganzfeld experiment may well turn out to be replicable. If it does, we
may have to begin changing our worldview.
There is reason to believe, however, that such a study will not be
forthcoming. Not only have ESP investigators failed to come up with
a repeatable experiment in over 75 years of research, but psychologists
at Harvard University have recently carried out a series of experiments
which, they claim, provides the strongest evidence yet that ESP does
not exist. Samuel Moulton and Stephen Kosslyn hypothesized that “If
psi exists, it occurs in the brain, and hence, assessing the brain directly
should be more sensitive than using indirect behavioral methods (as
have been used previously).”108 To detect the effect of psi stimuli on
the brain, they used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), a
type of brain scanner that records brain activity by tracking blood ﬂow
and oxygen level. The experiment was designed to detect the presence
of three types of extrasensory perception: telepathy (perceiving an-
other’s thoughts), clairvoyance (perceiving distant objects), and pre-
cognition (perceiving the future). For each run of the experiment, the
receiver was placed in the brain scanner and shown two photographs
in succession. At the same time the sender—who was either the re-
ceiver’s friend, relative, or identical twin—was shown one of the pho-
tos on a computer screen and was asked to send it to the receiver. The
receiver was then asked to guess which image was being sent and was
shown the images a second time. Having the image sent by the sender
tested for telepathy; having the image appear on the computer screen
tested for clairvoyance, and having the image appear a second time
tested for precognition. Nineteen pairs of individuals were tested and
3,687 responses were recorded. If ESP were real, the brain should have
responded differently to the psi image. But it didn’t. Nor did any of the
receivers identify the correct image more than 50 percent of the time,
which is exactly what one would expect by pure chance. So Moulton
and Kosslyn conclude: “The results support the null hypothesis that psi
does not exist. The brains of our participants—as a group and individ-
ually—reacted to psi and non-psi stimuli in a statistically indistin-
guishable manner.”109 The failure to get a positive result does not
conclusively prove the non-existence of psi because you can’t prove a
negative. You can’t conclusively prove the nonexistence of something
because it’s always possible that you haven’t looked in the right way in
the right places. Nevertheless, they believe that their experiment pro-
vides strong support for the claim that psi doesn’t exist because it 
PARAPSYCHOLOGY
211

employed variables that have traditionally been associated with psi,
such as subjects who were emotionally or genetically related to one an-
other as well as emotionally charged stimuli.
Defenders of psi, of course, can use any number of ad hoc explana-
tions to explain away the results. They can claim, for example, that psi
doesn’t affect the brain or that the people tested were not psychically
gifted. But as we’ve seen, you can explain away the results of any ex-
periment as long as you’re willing to make enough changes to our
background beliefs. The important point is that we have no com-
pelling reason to make such changes, except to save belief in psi. There
is no independent evidence that either of these possibilities are true.
The case for ESP is not yet closed, but it is getting harder to make.
Now that we have a better understanding of how science works
and what distinguishes good explanations from bad ones, let’s see how
this knowledge can help us think about weird things. In the next
chapter, we’ll examine a number of weird things in an attempt to 
determine the best explanation of them.
SUMMARY
Contrary to what some critics assert, science cannot be identiﬁed with any
particular worldview. Science is a method of discerning the truth, not a par-
ticular body of truths. The worldviews held by scientists have changed rad-
ically over the years—the worldview of quantum mechanics is far from the
mechanistic worldview of the seventeenth century.
The ﬁrst step in scientiﬁc methodology is not to begin with observations
detached from any guiding hypothesis. Scientiﬁc inquiry begins with a prob-
lem, and hypotheses are needed for scientiﬁc observation because they tell us
what to look for, helping us distinguish relevant from irrelevant information.
Although hypotheses are designed to account for data, they rarely can be
derived from data. Hypotheses are created, not discovered, and the process
of their creation is just as open-ended as the process of artistic creation.
Hypotheses must be checked against reality, and this checking involves
controlled tests and systematic observations—all of which must be as free
from subjectivity, bias, and extraneous variables as possible. For example, in
medical research, controlled clinical studies are the gold standard for dis-
covering whether a particular treatment works. Properly conducting them
requires placebo and experimental groups, blinding of both the subjects
and researchers, and replication of the results.
No scientiﬁc hypothesis can be conclusively conﬁrmed because we can’t
rule out the possibility of someday ﬁnding evidence to the contrary. Neither
can we conclusively refute a scientiﬁc hypothesis. Predictions can be derived
from a hypothesis only in conjunction with a background theory. If a pre-
diction turns out to be false, we can always save the hypothesis by modify-
ing the background theory. Constructing adjunct hypotheses is a way to
shield a hypothesis from adverse evidence. Doing so is legitimate if there’s a
212
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS

way to independently verify them. If there is no way, the hypotheses are 
ad hoc. When a scientiﬁc theory begins to rely on ad hoc hypotheses to be
saved from adverse data, holding onto the theory becomes unreasonable.
The amount of understanding produced by a theory is determined by how
well it meets the criteria of adequacy: testability (whether it can be tested),
fruitfulness (whether it successfully predicts new phenomena), scope (the
amount of diverse phenomena explained by it), simplicity (how many assump-
tions it makes), and conservatism (how well it ﬁts with established beliefs).
If we use the criteria of adequacy to judge the relative worth of evolution
and creationism, we see that the latter gets low marks. It fails the criterion of
conservatism, for it doesn’t ﬁt with well-established beliefs. It isn’t fruitful be-
cause it hasn’t predicted any new facts. It isn’t as simple as evolution: Creation-
ism assumes the existence of an unknown entity (God) and unknown forces. It
has far less scope than evolution does. Evolution explains countless phenomena
in many ﬁelds of science; creationism raises more questions than it answers.
When the criteria of adequacy are applied to the theory that ESP exists,
the theory fares poorly. No scientiﬁc evidence has established the existence
of ESP beyond a reasonable doubt, and ordinary theories (such as chance)
are simpler and more conservative.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. What is the difference between science and technology?
2. What is the function of the scientiﬁc method?
3. Why can we never conclusively conﬁrm or confute a scientiﬁc 
hypothesis?
4. What speciﬁc features of a hypothesis do each of the criteria of 
adequacy—testability, fruitfulness, scope, simplicity, and conservatism—
try to measure?
5. Is creationism as good a scientiﬁc theory as evolution?
6. Are we justiﬁed in believing that there is extrasensory perception?
EVALUATE THESE CLAIMS. ARE THEY REASONABLE? 
WHY OR WHY NOT?
1. Jane has lived in her house for ten years and has just started to see
ghosts. She also just started to read horror novels. Therefore, the
ghosts must be a ﬁgment of her imagination.
2. In order to prove that levitation is real, you’ve got to believe in it 
because unless you think it’s true, you won’t get convincing evidence.
3. Reincarnation is a fact because every person has actually been through
many lifetimes.
4. Professor Smith came up with that theory while on LSD. How can
anyone take it seriously?
5. Scientists won’t accept a paranormal claim because it conﬂicts with
their preconceived notion that all that exists is matter in motion.
EVALUATE THESE CLAIMS. ARE THEY REASONABLE? WHY OR WHY NOT?
213

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What sort of evidence would we need to justiﬁably claim that intelli-
gent life from another planet was visiting the Earth?
2. A scientist sees that the dial on the thermometer reads 105. What
background information is involved in the inference that the tempera-
ture is 105?
3. Dr. Raymond Bernard claims that the UFOs do not come from outer
space but from the center of the Earth. He believes that the citizens
of Atlantis migrated there after their continent sank. Suppose that we
had good evidence that UFOs were produced by an advanced civiliza-
tion. Is Bernard’s claim more reasonable than the claim that UFOs
come from outer space? Why or why not?
FIELD PROBLEM
Israeli psychic Uri Geller is best known for his alleged ability to bend spoons
with his mind. He has demonstrated his psychic spoon bending countless
times, in front of large audiences and small, on television shows, and in pri-
vate gatherings. Some magicians—notably James Randi—have duplicated
Geller’s feat and declared that it is nothing more than sleight of hand.
Assignment: Do research on the Internet to ﬁnd out exactly how Randi and
others do their Geller-like spoon bending. Then answer this question: What
are the implications for the Geller hypothesis (spoon bending by mind pow-
ers) of the magicians’ duplication?
CRITICAL READING AND WRITING
I. Read the passage below and answer the following questions.
1. What theory is being offered as an explanation for the existence of
crop circles?
2. According to the writer, what evidence supports the theory?
3. Is the theory conservative? Is it simple?
4. Is the theory testable? If so, how can it be tested?
5. What alternative theory could also explain the existence of crop
circles?
II. In a 250-word paper, evaluate the worth of the theory espoused in the
passage, comparing it to just one competing theory (that crop circles
are made by ordinary humans using ordinary means). Use the criteria
of adequacy in your analysis and decide which theory is best.
Passage 5
One of the great mysteries of our time is crop circles. Crop circles are large
geometric designs pressed or stamped into ﬁelds of grain. They are often cir-
cular but can be almost any shape, ranging from simple patterns to complex
pictograms or symbols. They can measure a few feet in diameter or several
hundred feet. Interest in crop circles began in the 1970s when they started
214
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS

mysteriously appearing overnight in the grain ﬁelds of southern England.
The crops would be neatly ﬂattened with the stalks pressed together. In the
1980s and 1990s, interest in the phenomenon grew as crop circles prolifer-
ated throughout the world.
But what theory best explains the existence of crop circles? The answer
is this: Crop circles are created by small whirlwinds of electriﬁed air, also called wind vor-
tices. That is, crop circles are made by columns of whirling, charged air sim-
ilar to dust devils or miniature tornadoes. These vortices form above grain
ﬁelds then plunge to the ground, discharging the electricity and ﬂattening
the grain in swirled patterns. But unlike tornadoes, wind vortices leave the
stalks of grain undamaged.
The evidence for this theory is impressive. Natural crop-circle vortices
are unknown to science, but similar vortices are reported to have been pro-
duced artiﬁcially in laboratories. A few people claim to have seen the vor-
tices in open ﬁelds. An electriﬁed vortex might produce light during
discharge, and sure enough some eyewitnesses have reported seeing “balls of
light” and other light phenomena in or near crop circles. Some people also
report hearing strange sounds near crop circles, such as humming noises.
NOTES
1. Carl Hempel, “Valuation and Objectivity in Science,” in Physics, Philos-
ophy, and Psychoanalysis: Essays in Honor of Adolf Grünbaum, eds. R. S.
Cohen and L. Laudan (Boston: Reidel, 1983), p. 91ff.
2. Charles Sanders Peirce, Collected Papers, vol. 5, eds. Charles
Hartshorne, Paul Weiss, and Arthur Burks (Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1931–1958), para. 575–83.
3. Bruce Holbrook, The Stone Monkey (New York: William Morrow, 1981),
pp. 50–52.
4. Fritjof Capra, The Turning Point (New York: Bantam Books, 1983).
5. Kenneth L. Feder, Frauds, Myths, and Mysteries (Mountain View, CA:
Mayﬁeld, 1990), p. 20.
6. Karl Popper, Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientiﬁc Knowledge
(New York: Basic Books, 1965), p. 46.
7. Ibid., p. 47.
8. Carl Hempel, Philosophy of Natural Science (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall, 1966), p. 14ff.
9. Benjamin Franklin and Antoine Lavoisier, “Report of the Commission-
ers Charged by the King to Examine Animal Magnetism,” trans. by
Danielle and Charles Salas, The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience (Santa
Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2002), p. 809.
10. P. G. Goldschmidt and T. Colton, “The Quality of Medical Literature:
An Analysis of Validation Assessments,” in Medical Users of Statistics, eds.
J. C. Bailar and F. Mosteller (Waltham, MA: New England Journal of
Medicine Books, 1986), pp. 370–91.
11. Ibid., p. 812.
NOTES
215

12. John M. Yancey, “Ten Rules for Reading Clinical Research Reports,”
American Journal of Surgery 159 (June 1990): 533–39.
13. Thomas M. Vogt, Making Health Decisions (Chicago: Nelson-Hall,
1983), p. 84.
14. T. H. Huxley, The Crayﬁsh: An Introduction to the Study of Zoology (New
York: D. Appleton and Company, 1880), p. 1.
15. Philip Kitcher, “Believing Where We Cannot Prove,” Abusing Science
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1982), p. 44.
16. Irving Copi, Introduction to Logic, 6th ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1982),
pp. 488–94.
17. Pierre Duhem, Aim and Structure of Physical Theory (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1953), chap. 6, reprinted in Readings in the Philosophy
of Science, eds. Herbert Feigl and May Brodbeck (New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts, 1953), pp. 240–41.
18. Robert Schadewald, “Some Like It Flat,” in The Fringes of Reason: A Whole
Earth Catalog, ed. Ted Schultz (New York: Harmony Books, 1989), p. 86.
19. Ted Schultz, “Jumping Geography,” in Fringes of Reason, Schultz, p. 89.
20. Marvin Harris, “Cultural Materialism Is Alive and Well and Won’t
Go Away Until Something Better Comes Along,” in Assessing Cultural
Anthropology, ed. Robert Borofsky (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994),
p. 64.
21. Hempel, Philosophy of Natural Science, p. 31.
22. Popper, Conjectures and Refutations, p. 35.
23. Popper is not unaware of this method of saving theories from negative
evidence. He calls it a conventionalist twist or a conventionalist strategem. See
Popper, Conjectures and Refutations, p. 37.
24. Imre Lakatos, “The Methodology of Scientiﬁc Research,” Philosophical
Papers (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1977), vol. 1, pp. 6–7.
25. Nathan Spielberg and Byron D. Anderson, Seven Ideas That Shook the
Universe (New York: Wiley, 1987), p. 178ff.
26. Lakatos, “The Methodology of Scientiﬁc Research,” p. 6.
27. Ibid.
28. Immanuel Velikovsky, Worlds in Collision (New York: Dell, 1969).
29. Carl Sagan, Broca’s Brain (New York: Ballantine, 1979), p. 115.
30. Sagan, Broca’s Brain, p. 113ff.
31. Spielberg and Anderson, Seven Ideas, pp. 180–81.
32. P. Langevin, C. R. Acad. Sci. 173 (1921): 831.
33. Albert Einstein, Forum Philosophicum 1, no. 173 (1930): 183.
34. Hempel, Philosophy of Natural Science, p. 40ff.
35. There is no formula for counting assumptions, but nevertheless their
number can be arrived at through various qualitative considerations.
See, for example, Paul Thagard, “The Best Explanation: Criteria for
Theory Choice,” Journal of Philosophy 75, no. 2 (February 1978): 86ff.
36. Fritjof Capra, The Tao of Physics (Boston: Shambhala, 1975), p. 46.
37. W. V. Quine and J. S. Ullian, The Web of Belief (New York: Random
House, 1970), pp. 43–44.
216
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS

38. Thomas Kuhn, “Reﬂections on My Critics,” in Criticism and the Growth 
of Knowledge, eds. Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1970), p. 261.
39. Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species (New York: Collier, 1962), p. 176.
40. I. Michael Lerner, Heredity, Evolution, and Society (San Francisco: W. H.
Freeman, 1968), pp. 35–39.
41. Ibid., pp. 39–42.
42. Section 4a of Act 590 of the Acts of Arkansas of 1981, “Balanced
Treatment for Creation-Science and Evolution-Science Act.”
43. Judge William Overton, McLean v. Arkansas Board of Education, cited in
Jeffrey G. Murphy, Evolution, Morality, and the Meaning of Life (Totowa,
NJ: Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 1982), p. 146.
44. Henry Morris and Martin Clark, The Bible Has the Answer, cited in 
Murphy, Evolution, Morality, p. 123.
45. Cited in Garvin McCain and Erwin Segal, The Game of Science (Paciﬁc
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1988), pp. 19–20.
46. Judge Braswell Dean, quoted in Time, March 16, 1981, p. 82.
47. Isaac Asimov and Duane Gish, “The Genesis War,” Science Digest,
October 1981, p. 82.
48. Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz, “Discourse on Metaphysics,” Leibniz
Selections, ed. Philip P. Wiener (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1951), p. 292.
49. Lerner, Heredity, Evolution, and Society, p. 39ff.
50. Larry Laudan, “Science at the Bar: Causes for Concern,” in Murphy,
Evolution, Morality, p. 150.
51. Theodosius Dobzhansky, “Nothing in Biology Makes Sense Except in
the Light of Evolution,” The American Biology Teacher 35, March 1973,
pp. 125–29.
52. Martin Gardner, The New Age: Notes of a Fringe Watcher (Buffalo:
Prometheus Books, 1991), pp. 93–98.
53. Feder, Frauds, Myths, and Mysteries, p. 174.
54. Ibid., pp. 176–79.
55. Asimov and Gish, “The Genesis War.”
56. Cited in Murphy, Evolution, Morality, p. 136.
57. Asimov and Gish, “The Genesis War,” p. 87.
58. Henry M. Morris, ed., Scientiﬁc Creationism (San Diego: Creation-Life
Publishers, 1974), p. 210.
59. Martin Gardner, Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science (New York:
Dover, 1957), pp. 125–26.
60. Richard Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker (New York: Norton, 1987). p. 89.
61. Ibid., p. 90.
62. Michael J. Behe, Darwin’s Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution
(New York: Free Press, 1996), p. 39.
63. ”Human Scientists from Another Planet Created All Life on Earth
Using DNA,” www.rael.org/rael_content/rael_summary.php, accessed
September 2007.
NOTES
217

64. www.clonaid.com/news.php?3.2.1., accessed September, 2007.
65. H. Allen Orr, “Darwin v. Intelligent Design (Again),” Boston Review,
December/January 1996–1997.
66. Jerry A. Coyne, “God in the Details: The Biochemical Challenge to
Evolution,” Nature, September 19, 1996.
67. Charles Darwin, The Various Contrivances by which Orchids are Fertilised by
Insects (New York: D. Appleton & Co., 1877), p. 282.
68. Ibid., p. 284.
69. Kathleen Hunt, “Transitional Vertebrate Fossils FAQ,” www.talkorigins
.org/faqs/faq-transitional/part1a.html.
70. Stephen Jay Gould, “Hooking Leviathan by Its Past,” Natural History,
May 1994.
71. Joseph Boxhorn, “Observed Instances of Speciation,” www.talkorigins
.org/faqs/faq-speciation.html.
72. Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker, p. 82.
73. Ibid., p. 90.
74. Even though the Big Bang happened only 15 billion years ago, it
could have been the result of a prior “big crunch” (gravitational 
collapse), or our universe may have “budded off” (grown out of) 
a previously existing universe.
75. Bertrand Russell, “Cosmic Purpose,” Religion and Science (New York:
Henry Holt, 1935), p. 233.
76. S. Jay Olshansky, Bruce A. Carnes, and Robert N. Butler, “If Humans
Were Built to Last,” Scientiﬁc American, March 2001, pp. 50–55.
77. National Center for Science Education, www.nateenscied.org/article
.asp?category=2, accessed September 2007.
78. Kenneth R. Miller, “Finding Darwin’s God,” Brown Alumni Magazine,
November/December 1999, p. 42.
79. Daniel Druckman and John Swets, eds., Enhancing Human Performance: 
Issues, Theories, and Techniques (Washington, DC: National Academy
Press, 1988), p. 171.
80. Ibid., p. 206.
81. A. Greeley, “Mysticism Goes Mainstream,” American Health, January/
February 1987, pp. 47–49.
82. J. B. Rhine, The Reach of the Mind (New York: W. Sloane Associates,
1947), chap. 11.
83. Martin Gardner, The Whys of a Philosophical Scrivener (New York: Quill,
1973), p. 58.
84. J. B. Rhine, “The Science of Nonphysical Nature,” in Philosophy and Para-
psychology, ed. Jan Ludwig (Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1978), p. 126.
85. Rhine, “Science of Nonphysical Nature,” pp. 124–25.
86. Leonard Zusne and Warren Jones, Anomalistic Psychology (Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum, 1982), pp. 374–75.
87. James Randi, “The Million Dollar Paranormal Challenge,” www.randi
.org/research/challenge.html, February 6, 2004.
218
SIX: SCIENCE AND ITS PRETENDERS

88.J. Crumbaugh, “A Scientiﬁc Critique of Parapsychology,” International
Journal of Neuropsychiatry 5 (1966): 521–29.
89.John Beloff, Psychological Sciences (London: Crosby Lockwood Staples,
1973), p. 312.
90.G. R. Schmeidler, “Separating the Sheep from the Goats,” Journal of the
American Society for Psychical Research 39, no. 1 (1945): 47–50.
91.D. Scott Rogo, “Making of Psi Failure,” Fate, April 1986, pp. 76–80.
92.Ray Hyman, “A Critical Historical Overview of Parapsychology,” in A
Skeptic’s Handbook of Parapsychology, ed. Paul Kurtz (Buffalo: Prometheus
Books, 1985), pp. 3–96.
93.Quoted in ibid., p. 50.
94.C. Scott and P. Haskell, “‘Normal’ Explanations of the Soal-Goldney
Experiments in Extrasensory Perception,” Nature 245 (1973): 52–54.
95.John Beloff, “Seven Evidential Experiments,” Zetetic Scholar 6 (1980):
91–94.
96.Terence Hines, Pseudoscience and the Paranormal (Buffalo: Prometheus
Books, 1988), pp. 93–94.
97.Ibid., p. 85.
98.Ray Hyman, “The Ganzfeld Psi Experiment: A Critical Appraisal,”
Journal of Parapsychology 49 (1985): 3–49.
99.Ibid.
100.Charles Honorton, “Meta-analysis of Psi Ganzfeld Research: A 
Response to Hyman,” Journal of Parapsychology 49 (1985): 51–86.
101.Ray Hyman and Charles Honorton, “A Joint Communiqué: The Psi
Ganzfeld Controversy,” Journal of Parapsychology 50 (1986): 351–64.
102.Daryl J. Bem and Charles Honorton, “Does Psi Exist? Replicable Evi-
dence for an Anomalous Process of Information Transfer,” Psychological
Bulletin 115 (1994): 4–18.
103.J. Milton and R. Wiseman, “Does Psi Exist? Lack of Replication of an
Anomalous Process of Information Transfer,” Psychological Bulletin 125
(1999): 387–91.
104.Ray Hyman, “The Evidence of Psychic Functioning: Claims vs. Real-
ity,” Skeptical Inquirer 20 (March/April 1996).
105.Daryl Bem, “Feeling the Future: Experimental Evidence for Anomalous
Retroactive Inﬂuences on Cognition and Affect,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 100 (2011): 407–25.
106.Stuart J. Ritchie, Richard Wiseman, and Christopher C. French, “Fail-
ing the Future: Three Unsuccessful Attempts to Replicate Bem’s
‘Retroactive Facilitation of Recall’ Effect,” PLoS ONE 7(3) (2012):
e33423. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0033423
107.Douglas M. Stokes, “The Shrinking File Drawer: On the Validity of
Statistical Meta-analyses in Parapsychology,” Skeptical Inquirer 25
(May/June 2001).
108.Samuel T. Moulton and Stephen M. Kosslyn, “Using Neuroimaging to
Resolve the Psi Debate,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 20 (2008) 182.
109.Moulton and Kosslyn, p. 189.
NOTES
219

220
SEVEN
Case Studies in 
the Extraordinary
L
ET’S TAKE STOCK.
In the preceding chapters, we’ve explored several 
essential principles that can empower our thinking about
weird phenomena. We’ve seen, among other things, that
even in the realms of weirdness, it’s not true that anything is
possible: Some things are logically impossible; some things
are physically impossible; some things are technically im-
possible. On the other hand, some things that people be-
lieve are impossible may be possible after all. But we’ve also
seen that just because something is logically or physically
possible doesn’t mean that it is, or ever will be, real.
We’ve examined why personal experience doesn’t al-
ways provide reliable evidence for believing something.
We’ve seen that, in themselves, strong feelings of subjective 
The pure and simple
truth is rarely pure
and never simple.
—OSCAR WILDE

certainty regarding a personal experience don’t increase the reliabil-
ity of that experience one bit. Only if we have no good reasons to
doubt a personal experience can we accept it as a reliable guide to
what’s real—and there are often many grounds for doubt. As the basis
for a claim—whether about UFOs, ghosts, witches, or the curative
power of vitamin C—personal experience is frequently shakier than
we realize.
We’ve investigated what it means to say that we know something.
We can know many things—including weird things—if we have good
reasons to believe them and no good reasons to doubt them. We have
good reasons to doubt a proposition when it conﬂicts with other
propositions we have good reasons to believe, when it conﬂicts with
well-established background information, or when it conﬂicts with
expert opinion regarding the evidence. If we have good reason to
doubt a proposition, we can’t know it. The best we can do is propor-
tion our belief to the evidence. If we don’t know something, a leap of
faith can never help us know it. We can’t make something true just by
believing it to be true. To accept a proposition on faith is to believe it
without justiﬁcation. Likewise, mystical experience doesn’t provide us
with a privileged way of knowing. Claims of knowledge based on
mystical experience must pass the same rational tests as any other kind
of experience.
We’ve explored why—even though the scientific method can
never prove or disprove anything conclusively—science is our
most reliable means of establishing an empirical proposition 
beyond a reasonable doubt. It offers us a model for assessing new
hypotheses, or claims, about all manner of extraordinary events
and entities—a model that can serve scientists and nonscientists
alike. If we want to know whether a hypothesis is true, we’ll need
to use this model in one form or another. The model requires that
we judge a new hypothesis in light of alternative, competing 
hypotheses and apply to each of these alternatives the best yard-
sticks we have—the criteria of adequacy—to see which hypothesis
measures up. Under pressure from the criteria of adequacy, some
hypotheses may collapse from the lack of sturdy evidence or
sound reasons to support them. Other hypotheses may not tumble
completely but will be shown to be built on weak and rickety
foundations. One, though, may emerge as the best hypothesis 
of them all, strong and tall because it rests on a firm base of good
reasons.
In this chapter, we bring all these analytical tools together. We try
to show how to apply coherently all our preceding principles to 
actual weird claims. This chapter, then, is the applications section of
CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
221
The path of sound
credence is through
the thick forest of
skepticism.
—GEORGE JEAN
NATHAN

this volume, which is, as we’ve mentioned before, essentially a book
of applied epistemology.
First, we’ll sketch out a procedure that can help you evaluate,
step-by-step, any extraordinary claim that you come across. It’s a for-
mula for inquiry that reminds you of the principles already discussed,
suggests when and how they come into play, and guides you toward
your own reasoned conclusions about the truth of a claim. The for-
mula isn’t carved in stone—it’s simply one way to show how to apply
the principles that we all must apply if we’re to make sense of any un-
usual (or not so unusual) claim.
The rest of the chapter demonstrates how we authors have 
already put this formula to work to assess several popular, extraor-
dinary claims and arrive at supportable conclusions. We try to show
by example how to, well, think about weird things. The conclu-
sions we reach are neither unique (many scientists and philoso-
phers have reached similar conclusions) nor infallible. We do think,
however, that they’re based on the best of reasons—which is all
anyone can ask of any conclusion worthy of acceptance. You are,
of course, free to reject our conclusions. If you do, we hope that
you do so for good reasons—and that by now you understand the
difference between good and bad reasons and why the difference is
crucial.
THE SEARCH FORMULA
Our formula for inquiry consists of four steps, which we represent by
the acronym SEARCH. The letters stand for the key words in the
four steps:
1. State the claim.
2. Examine the Evidence for the claim.
3. Consider Alternative hypotheses.
4. Rate, according to the Criteria of adequacy, each Hypothesis.
The acronym is arbitrary and artiﬁcial, but it may help you remember
the formula’s vital components. Go through these steps any time
you’re faced with an extraordinary claim.
Note that throughout this chapter we use the words hypothesis and
claim interchangeably. We do so because any weird claim, like any
claim about events and entities, can be viewed as a hypothesis—as an
explanation of a particular phenomenon. Thinking of weird claims as
hypotheses is important because effectively evaluating weird claims
222
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
Judge a man by his
questions rather
than his answers.
—VOLTAIRE

involves essentially the same hypothesis-assessing procedure used
in science.
Step 1: State the Claim
Before you can carefully examine a claim, you have to understand
what it is. It’s vital to state the claim in terms that are as clear and as
speciﬁc as possible. “Ghosts are real” is not a good candidate for exam-
ination because it’s vague and nonspeciﬁc. A better claim is “The dis-
embodied spirits of dead persons exist and are visible to the human
eye.” Likewise, “Astrology is true” is not much to go on. It’s better to
say, “Astrologers can correctly identify someone’s personality traits by
using sun signs.” Even these revised claims aren’t as unambiguous and
deﬁnitive as they should be. (Terms in the claims, for example, could
be better deﬁned. What is meant by “spirit”? What does it mean to
“correctly identify someone’s personality traits”?) But many of the ex-
traordinary claims you run into are of this caliber. The point is that
before examining any claim, you must achieve maximum clarity and
speciﬁcity of what the claim is.
Step 2: Examine the Evidence for the Claim
Ask yourself what reasons there are for accepting the claim. That
is, what empirical evidence or logical arguments are there in the
claim’s favor? Answering this question entails taking inventory of
both the quantity and quality of the reasons for believing that the
claim is true. An honest and thorough appraisal of reasons must
include:
1. Determining the exact nature and limitations of the empirical evidence. You
should assess not only what the evidence is but whether there are any
reasonable doubts regarding it. You have to try to ﬁnd out if it’s sub-
ject to any of the deﬁciencies we’ve discussed in this book—the dis-
tortions of human perception, memory, and judgment; the errors and
biases of scientiﬁc research; the difﬁculties inherent in ambiguous
data. Sometimes even a preliminary survey of the facts may force you
to admit that there really isn’t anything mysterious that needs 
explaining. Or perhaps investigating a little mystery will lead to a
bigger mystery. At any rate, attempting an objective assessment of
the evidence takes courage. Many true believers have never taken
this elementary step.
2. Discovering if any of these reasons deserve to be disqualiﬁed. As we’ve seen,
people frequently offer considerations in support of a claim that
should be discounted. These considerations include wishful thinking,
THE SEARCH FORMULA
223

faith, unfounded intuition, and subjective certainty. The problem is
that these factors aren’t reasons at all. In themselves, they can’t pro-
vide any support for a claim.
3. Deciding whether the hypothesis in question actually explains the evidence. If
it doesn’t—if important factors are left out of account—the hypoth-
esis is not a good one. In other words, a good hypothesis must be rel-
evant to the evidence it’s intended to explain. If it isn’t, there’s no
reason to consider it any further.
Step 3: Consider Alternative Hypotheses
It’s never enough to consider only the hypothesis in question and its
reasons for acceptance. If you ever hope to discover the truth, you
must also weigh alternative hypotheses and their reasons.
Take this hypothesis, for example: Rudolph the Red-Nosed Rein-
deer—Santa’s funny, ﬂying, furry headlight—is real and lives at the
North Pole. As evidence for this hypothesis we could submit these
facts: Millions of people (mostly children) believe Rudolph to be real;
his likeness shows up everywhere during the Christmas holidays;
given the multitude of reindeer in the world and their long history, it’s
likely that at some time a reindeer with ﬂying capabilities would ei-
ther evolve or be born with the necessary mutations; some people say
that they have seen Rudolph with their own eyes. We could go on and
on and build a fairly convincing case for the hypothesis—soon you
may even come to believe that we were on to something.
The hypothesis sounds great by itself, but when considered
along-side an alternative hypothesis—that Rudolph is a creature of
the imagination created in a Christmas song—it looks ludicrous. The
song hypothesis is supported by evidence that’s overwhelming; it
doesn’t conﬂict with well-established theory in biology (as the real-
Rudolph hypothesis does); and unlike its competitor, it requires no
postulations about new entities.
This third step involves creativity and maintaining an open mind.
It requires asking whether there are other ways to account for the
phenomenon at hand and, if there are, what reasons there are in favor
of these alternative hypotheses. This step involves applying step 2 to
all competing explanations.
It’s also important to remember that when people are confronted
with some extraordinary phenomenon they often immediately offer a
hypothesis involving the paranormal or supernatural and then can’t
imagine a natural hypothesis to account for the facts. As a result, they
assume that the paranormal or supernatural hypothesis must be right.
But this assumption is unwarranted. Just because you can’t think of a
224
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
No man really be-
comes a fool until 
he stops asking
questions.
—CHARLES
STEINMETZ

natural explanation doesn’t mean there isn’t one. It may be (as has
often been the case throughout history) that you’re simply unaware of
the correct natural explanation. As pointed out in Chapter 2, the most
reasonable response to a mystifying fact is to keep looking for a nat-
ural explanation.
We all have a built-in bias that urges us to latch onto a favorite
hypothesis and ignore or resist all alternatives. We may believe that
we needn’t look at other explanations since we know that our favorite
one is correct. This tendency may make us happy (at least for a while),
but it’s also a good recipe for delusion. We must work to counteract
this bias. Having an open mind means being willing to consider any
possibility and changing your view in light of good reasons.
Step 4: Rate,According to the Criteria of Adequacy,
Each Hypothesis
Now it’s time to weigh competing hypotheses and see which are found
wanting and which are worthy of belief. Simply cataloging the evidence
for each hypothesis isn’t enough. We need to consider other factors that
can put that evidence in perspective and help us weigh hypotheses
when there’s no evidence at all, which is often the case with weird
things. To command our assent, extraordinary claims must provide ex-
emplary explanations. That is, they must explain the phenomena better
than any competing explanation. As we saw in Chapter 6, the way to
determine which explanation is best is to apply the criteria of adequacy.
By applying them to each hypothesis, we can often eliminate some
hypotheses right away, give more weight to some than to others, and
decide between hypotheses that may at ﬁrst seem equally strong.
1. Testability. Ask: Can the hypothesis be tested? Is there any possible
way to determine whether the hypothesis is true or false? Many hy-
potheses regarding extraordinary phenomena aren’t testable. This does
not mean they’re false. It means they’re worthless. They are merely as-
sertions that we’ll never be able to know. What if we claim that there
is an invisible, undetectable gremlin in your head that sometimes
causes you to have headaches. As an explanation for your headaches,
this hypothesis is interesting but trivial. Since by deﬁnition there’s no
way to determine if this gremlin really exists, the hypothesis is amaz-
ingly uninformative. You can assign no weight to such a claim.
2. Fruitfulness. Ask: Does the hypothesis yield observable, surprising
predictions that explain new phenomena? Any hypothesis that does
so gets extra points. Other things being equal, hypotheses that make
accurate, unexpected predictions are more likely to be true than hy-
potheses that don’t. (Of course, if they yield no predictions, this in
THE SEARCH FORMULA
225
All is mystery; but he
is a slave who will
not struggle to pene-
trate the dark veil.
—BENJAMIN DISRAELI

itself doesn’t show that they’re false.) Most hypotheses regarding
weird things don’t make observable predictions.
3. Scope. Ask: How many different phenomena can the hypothesis
explain? Other things being equal, the more it explains, the less likely
it is to be mistaken. In Chapter 5 we discussed the well-conﬁrmed hy-
pothesis that human perception is constructive. As we pointed out,
the hypothesis explains a broad range of phenomena, including per-
ceptual size constancy, misperception of stimuli, hallucinations, parei-
dolia, certain UFO sightings, and more. A hypothesis that explains
only one of these phenomena (for example, the hypothesis that UFO
sightings are caused by actual alien spacecraft) would be much less
impressive—unless it had other things in its favor like compelling
evidence.
5. Simplicity. Ask: Is this hypothesis the simplest explanation for
the phenomenon? Generally, the simplest hypothesis that explains
the phenomenon is the best, the one least likely to be false.
Simplest means makes the fewest assumptions. In the realm of weird
things, simplicity is often a matter of postulating the existence of
the fewest entities. Let’s say you get into your car one morning,
put the key in the ignition, and try to start the engine but find that
it won’t start. One hypothesis for this phenomenon is that the car
battery is dead. Another is that a poltergeist (a mischievous spirit)
has somehow caused your car not to start. The battery hypothesis
is the simplest (in addition to being testable, able to yield predic-
tions, and capable of explaining several phenomena) because it
doesn’t require postulating the existence of any mysterious enti-
ties. The poltergeist hypothesis, though, does postulate the exis-
tence of an entity (as well as assuming that the entity has certain
capabilities and tendencies). Thus the criterion of simplicity
shows us that the battery hypothesis has the greater chance of
being right.
6. Conservatism. Ask: Is the hypothesis consistent with our well-
founded beliefs? That is, is it consistent with the empirical evidence—
with results from trustworthy observations and scientiﬁc tests, with
natural laws, or with well-established theory? Trying to answer this
question takes you beyond merely cataloging evidence for hypothe-
ses to actually assigning weight to hypotheses in light of all the available
evidence. Other things being equal, the hypothesis most consistent with
the entire corpus of our knowledge is the best bet, the one most likely
to be true.
It follows that a hypothesis that flies in the face of extremely
well-established evidence must be assigned a very low probability.
Say, for example, that someone claims that yesterday thousands of
226
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

cats and dogs rained down from the sky in Texas. This strange
happening is logically possible, of course, but it conflicts with
an enormous amount of human experience regarding objects that
fall from the sky. Maybe one fine day cats and dogs will indeed
tumble from the clouds and surprise us all. But based on a massive
amount of experience, we must assign a very low probability to such
a possibility.
What if someone claims to have built a perpetual motion ma-
chine, a device that, to work, must successfully circumvent one of the
laws of thermodynamics. (A perpetual motion machine is supposed to
function without ever stopping and without needing to draw on an
external source of power—it supplies its own energy; this concept 
violates the law of conservation of mass-energy, which says that mass-
energy can’t be created or destroyed.) The laws of thermodynamics
are supported by a massive amount of empirical evidence gathered
throughout centuries. There have also been numerous failed attempts
to build a perpetual motion machine. In light of such evidence, we’re
forced to conclude that it’s very unlikely that anyone could avoid the
laws of thermodynamics. Unless someone is able to produce good
evidence showing that it can be done, we must say that person’s claim
is highly improbable.
Likewise, if someone puts forth a hypothesis that conﬂicts with a
highly conﬁrmed theory, the hypothesis must be regarded as improb-
able until good evidence shows that the hypothesis is right and the
theory wrong. Paranormal claims then are, by deﬁnition, improbable.
They conﬂict with what we know, with mountains of evidence. Only
good evidence to the contrary can change this verdict.
HOMEOPATHY
Homeopathy is based on the idea that extremely tiny doses of sub-
stances that cause disease symptoms in a healthy person can allevi-
ate similar symptoms in a sick person. Samuel Hahnemann
(1755–1843), a German physician, was the ﬁrst to apply this notion
systematically. He also added what he called the “law of inﬁnitesi-
mals,” the proposition that—contrary to the ﬁndings of science—
the smaller the dose, the more powerful the medicine. So he treated
people with drastically diluted substances—so diluted that, in many
homeopathic medicines, not even one molecule of the substance
remained. Hahnemann admitted this fact but believed that the sub-
stances somehow left behind an imperceptible “spirit-like” essence
that effected cures. This essence was supposed to revitalize the “vital
force” in the body.
HOMEOPATHY
227
The mind is like the
stomach. It is not
how much you put
into it that counts,
but how much it 
digests.
—ALBERT JAY NOCK
There have been two
great revelations in
my life:The ﬁrst was
bepop, the second
was homeopathy.
—DIZZY GILLESPIE

Today, the theory and practice of Hahnemann’s homeopathy are
still intact. There are hundreds of homeopathic practitioners in the
United States (and hundreds more in other countries) and hundreds
of thousands of people who try homeopathic treatments.
Homeopathic remedies are derived from raw bovine testicles,
crushed honeybees, belladonna (deadly nightshade), hemlock, sulfur,
arsenic, Spanish ﬂy, rattlesnake venom, poison ivy, dog milk, and many
other substances. They are used to relieve the symptoms of a long list
of ills, from allergies and colds to kidney disease, heart trouble, and ear
infections.
Through a procedure that Hahnemann called a proving he “dis-
covered” that particular remedies could alleviate certain symptoms. In
a proving, Hahnemann and his students would simply eat various sub-
stances, then observe what symptoms they had. He believed that if a
patient complained of certain symptoms, she should be given the 
(diluted) substance that was said to cause those same symptoms in a
proving. The substance was supposed to alleviate the symptoms. The
provings became the basis of homeopathic treatments for generations
to come.
So let’s state the claim here and examine the evidence for it:
Hypothesis 1: Extremely dilute solutions of substances that produce symptoms
in a healthy person can cure those same symptoms in a sick person. This hypothe-
sis is offered as an explanation of why people taking homeopathic reme-
dies seem to get better. They get better because homeopathy works.
It should come as no surprise that homeopathic provings don’t re-
ally prove anything. As we saw in Chapter 5, personal experience and
case reports generally cannot establish the effectiveness of a treat-
ment. Because of the placebo effect, the variable nature of disease, the
possibility of unknown causes, experimenter bias, and other factors,
the provings cannot even reliably establish that a substance causes a
certain symptom effect.
But there is other evidence that proponents of homeopathy often
cite. There have been scores of scientiﬁc studies on homeopathic
treatments for a variety of conditions. To date, all the research seem-
ing to support homeopathy, however, is undermined by serious prob-
lems. One of several recent reviews of the literature explains some of
the difﬁculties:
J. Kleinjen, P. Knipschild, and G. ter Riet examined 107 controlled
clinical trials of homeopathy. They concluded that the evidence was
not sufficient to support the claims of homeopathy. C. Hill and 
F. Doyon examined 40 other clinical studies. They also concluded
that there was no acceptable evidence that homeopathy is effective.
228
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

Since the above reviews were written, four more research studies
have appeared.
In 1992 the homeopathic treatment of plantar warts (on the feet)
was examined. The homeopathic treatment was no more effective
than a placebo.
A report in May 1994 examined the homeopathic treatment of 
diarrhea in children who lived in Nicaragua. On Day 3 of treatment
the homeopathic group had one less unformed stool than the control
group (3.1 Vs 2.1; p <.05). However, critics pointed out that not only
HOMEOPATHY
229
Magnet Therapy
You can’t surf far on the Internet without 
encountering a Web site promoting magnet
therapy to ease or cure a multitude of ills—
knee pain, migraine headaches, arthritis, sports
injuries, poor circulation, back pain, even can-
cer. Magnets sold for curative purposes come in
the form of bracelets, necklaces, earrings, wrist
bands, shoe insoles, knee pads, seat cushions,
mattress pads, hair brushes, you name it. Some
of these products cost little; some cost thou-
sands of dollars. Most of them use static mag-
nets, which—like common refrigerator or
bumper-sticker magnets—create small, un-
changing magnetic ﬁelds. Pulsed electromagnets,
however, induce both magnetic and electrical
ﬁelds and are known to affect biological sys-
tems. They have been used to help mend bone
fractures that heal slowly, and researchers have
been examining their potential for treating 
depression and several forms of pain.
Do common static magnets have healing
power? Many who have used magnets claim
therapeutic beneﬁts, including some famous
athletes who have endorsed speciﬁc magnet
products. But testimonials—especially regard-
ing health remedies—prove very little. Because
of the placebo effect, the variable course of ill-
nesses, and the difﬁculties of pinpointing cause-
and-effect relationships, personal experience is
a poor guide to the efﬁcacy of treatments.
Scientiﬁc evidence is a better indicator of
effectiveness, but research on static magnet
therapy is sparse and inconclusive. Several
studies have been done, but most of them 
suffer from problems that undermine their
credibility—for example, too few subjects or
no placebo control groups. A number of trials
have tested whether static magnetic therapy
can alleviate pain, but they have produced con-
tradictory results, with some showing a degree
of pain relief and some showing none. A major
obstacle in conducting magnet studies is that
subjects often invalidate the research by ﬁgur-
ing out whether they’re getting true magnet
therapy or no-magnet placebo treatment. 
(Discovering whether an object is magnetized
is fairly easy.)
In addition, some evidence counts against
the idea of magnetic healing. Though promot-
ers of magnet therapy claim that it heals by 
increasing blood circulation, studies show that
static magnetic ﬁelds don’t affect circulation.
Some research suggests that even very powerful
magnetic ﬁelds—more powerful than those in
magnet products—have little or no effect on
living tissue. The extremely strong magnetic
ﬁelds produced by MRI machines, for example,
don’t seem to affect people at all, either for
good or ill.

were the sickest children excluded, but there were no signiﬁcant dif-
ferences on Days 1, 2, 4, or 5. This suggests that the conclusion was
not valid. Further, there was no assurance that the homeopathic rem-
edy was not adulterated (contaminated). Finally, standard remedies
which halt diarrhea were not used for comparison purposes.
In November 1994 a research report examined the effects of
homeopathic remedies in children with upper respiratory infections
(such as a cold). Eighty-four children received the placebo, and 86
received individualized homeopathic remedies. The researchers con-
cluded that the remedies produced no improvement in symptoms or
in the infections.
In December 1994 a fourth study examined homeopathic treat-
ment of allergic asthma in Scotland. The 13 patients who received the
homeopathic remedy reported feeling better and breathing easier than
the 15 patients who received the placebo. Then the researchers com-
bined these data with several earlier experiments. They concluded
that, in general, homeopathy is not a placebo and that homeopathy 
is reproducible.
However, there were too few patients for signiﬁcant analysis. Sec-
ond, personal reports of feeling better are not reliable. If a patient
feels better, is that proof of recovering from the ailment? There are
many diseases in which the patient feels good but is actually quite
sick. What is needed are several proper physiological measurements of
improvement. Third, it is inappropriate to combine this small study
with previous studies of a different disorder.
The latest study from Norway examined relief from the pain of
tooth extraction/oral surgery by homeopathic remedies or placebos.
Fourteen of the 24 subjects were students of homeopathy, and 2 of
the 5 authors were homeopaths. It is safe to say that motivation was
high to have homeopathy succeed. However, no positive evidence
was found favoring homeopathy, either in relief of pain or inﬂamma-
tion of tissue.1
But let’s consider an alternative hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2: People taking homeopathic remedies feel better because of the
placebo effect. That is, homeopathy does not work as advertised, but
people think that it does because of the well-known power of place-
bos. This hypothesis is the one favored by most medical experts. And
for good reason. As we have already seen, the placebo effect is a very
well-documented phenomenon that occurs frequently when people
try new treatments. What’s more, the failure of studies to support the
homeopathy hypothesis—speciﬁcally, research showing that home-
opathy works no better than placebo—lends credence to the notion
that homeopathy “cures” are placebos.
Now let’s examine these two hypotheses in light of the criteria of
adequacy. They are both testable, so we must turn to the other criteria
230
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

to help us judge their worth. The homeopathy hypothesis has yielded
no observable, surprising predictions, so it has no advantage in fruit-
fulness. It could be argued, though, that the homeopathy hypothesis
has more scope than the placebo hypothesis since it is offered to
explain how all symptoms are alleviated.
But in terms of simplicity, the homeopathy hypothesis is in trou-
ble. Homeopathy postulates both an undetectable essence and an
unknown mysterious force. Other things being equal, the more
unproven assumptions a hypothesis rests on, the less likely it is to be
true. These assumptions alone are serious problems for the homeopa-
thy hypothesis. The placebo hypothesis, on the other hand, assumes
no unknown forces, entities, or processes.
Even worse, homeopathy runs afoul of the criterion of conser-
vatism. It conﬂicts with a massive amount of scientiﬁc evidence in bio-
chemistry and pharmacology. There isn’t a single veriﬁed instance of
any substance having a stronger effect the more diluted it becomes.
There isn’t a single documented case of an extremely diluted solution
(one in which not one molecule of the original substance remains) 
affecting any biological system. In addition, as we have noted, all
available scientiﬁc evidence on the question gives little or no support
to homeopathy.
These points all show that homeopathy is a much weaker hy-
pothesis than the placebo hypothesis. In fact, in light of these con-
cerns, the probability of homeopathic remedies being effective seems
extremely low.
INTERCESSORY PRAYER
The practice of praying for others (called intercessory prayer) is com-
monplace and strongly believed by millions to be effective. Which of
course should not be surprising since the efﬁcacy of prayer has been
and still is an article of faith for numerous religious groups worldwide.
In recent years some people have claimed that science supports what
faith has shown to be obvious—that praying for sick people can make
them well, or at least make them feel better. Most attribute the heal-
ing effects of intercessory prayer to divine intervention; others to
unidentiﬁed energies or paranormal forces such as telekinesis. In any
case, it seems plain to many that intercessory prayer works, that it can
cause positive changes in people’s health.
Let’s examine that claim—Hypothesis 1: Intercessory prayer can alle-
viate symptoms or improve measures of health in people suffering from disease or 
disability. This hypothesis is meant to explain why some sick people
seem to get better after others pray for their recovery or improved
INTERCESSORY PRAYER
231
Pray, and let God
worry.
—MARTIN LUTHER

health. Prayers are said, the sick get better, and prayer is the best ex-
planation for the improvement.
Those who take this view usually cite as evidence their personal
experience or the experience of others. A friend or loved one was
seriously ill, people prayed for her healing, and soon she made a seem-
ingly miraculous recovery. Such stories are innumerable. Here is one
told by the famous Christian pastor Rick Warren:
One of the great evidences of God is answered prayer. I have a friend,
a Canadian friend, who has an immigration issue. He’s an intern at
this church, and so I said, “God, I need you to help me with this,” 
as I went out for my evening walk. As I was walking I met a woman.
She said, “I’m an immigration attorney; I’d be happy to take this case.”
Now, if that happened once in my life I’d say, “That is a coincidence.”
If it happened tens of thousands of times, that is not a coincidence.2
As you might expect, such anecdotal reports are subject to the
same reliability problems that so often beset most types of personal
experience: conﬁrmation bias, the availability error, constructive
memory, hasty generalization, and probability misjudgments. As evi-
dence for the efﬁcacy of prayer, then, these stories—as impressive as
they may seem—must be given a very low grade.
Other evidence comes from scientiﬁc studies on people suffering
from depression and anxiety, alcoholism, infertility, AIDS-related ill-
nesses, and other disorders. Much of the research has focused on pa-
tients with heart disease. A famous 1988 study by cardiologist
Randolph Byrd compared the extent of medical complications in
heart patients who were prayed for with heart patients in a control
group who were not prayed for. The prayed-for patients seemed to
fare better than the others. In 1999, a larger study tested whether
heart patients who were the focus of prayers “for a speedy recovery
with no complications” would do better than similar patients without
such prayers. The researchers said that the prayed-for group ended up
with fewer medical problems. In a 2001 study, researchers divided
nearly 800 heart patients into prayed-for and not-prayed-for groups
and monitored their medical conditions for six months after they left
the hospital. They reported that they could ﬁnd no signiﬁcant effect
of intercessory prayer on the patients’ health. Finally, in 2006 a study
of 1,800 people who had undergone heart surgery found that inter-
cessory prayer had no effect on their recovery. Oddly enough, people
who knew they were being prayed for had more complications than
those who weren’t sure.
Most prayer studies have been spoiled by serious design ﬂaws, or
have been too small to yield meaningful results, or had other serious
232
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

problems. So to date the research has not established that intercessory
prayer can improve anyone’s health.
Moreover, many critics (both religious and nonreligious) say this
line of research is doomed from the start. A major concern is that in-
tercessory prayer itself is neither well deﬁned nor explained: Is it com-
munication with a deity or a kind of telekinetic (mind over matter)
ability? Does it exert the sort of inﬂuence that depends on the num-
ber of people praying, or the character or faith of those involved, or
the disposition or will of a deity? Can prayers be malevolent, causing
harm to others? Can researchers safely rule out the inﬂuence of
prayers from countless people not involved in the studies? Presumably,
relatives and friends of sick people will often pray for them to get
better—whether or not the patients are part of a scientiﬁc study. And,
of course, many religious people offer up prayers on behalf of ailing
strangers. If a deity can intervene in the course of events at any time—
either in response to prayers or not—how can a scientist ever be con-
ﬁdent in study results? These issues would seem to undermine any
attempts to conduct well-controlled trials of intercessory prayer.
A leading alternative explanation is Hypothesis 2: The seeming effec-
tiveness of intercessory prayer is due to coincidence and the post hoc fallacy. That
is, people pray for someone to recover from illness; he coincidentally
does recover; and because the praying preceded the recovery, they
INTERCESSORY PRAYER
233
The Experience behind the Ouija Experience
Have you ever used a Ouija board and won-
dered what its secret was? Were you really get-
ting messages from the spirit world—or just
talking to yourself? Psychologists say the latter
is a distinct possibility. Here, psychologist 
Andrew Neher explains why:
A Ouija board is a smooth-surfaced board
printed with numbers, letters, and words
such as yes and no. Ouija players rest their
hands on a pointer, which glides easily on
felt-covered legs, and concentrate on a
question they want answered. Studies have
shown that thinking about a certain pattern
is sufﬁcient to produce small subconscious
movements in the hand in the appropriate
directions. Exaggerated, this movement 
directs the pointer to an answer, which
seems to have been arrived at mysteriously
since the Ouija player ordinarily has no
conscious awareness of having moved the
pointer and is often genuinely surprised at
the answer. From my own informal experi-
ence, it seems possible to elicit memories, 
as well as subliminal impressions, using a
Ouija board, which are otherwise lost to
consciousness. . . .
Although the Ouija board, or the plan-
chette, seems to be a handy device for tap-
ping subconscious impressions, there do 
not seem to be any studies to indicate that
Ouija is, in any way, paranormal in its 
operation.3

assume that it caused the recovery. The assumption is all the easier to
make because of the notorious incompetence of humans in judging
probabilities. When people say “This can’t possibly be a coincidence,”
they are too often dead wrong.
Judged by the criteria of adequacy, these two hypotheses are miles
apart in plausibility. For reasons already mentioned, Hypothesis 1
seems untestable. It is not simple because it assumes an unknown
entity (a deity, spirit, or force) and unknown processes. It is not con-
servative, for it conﬂicts with what we know about the physiology and
psychology of health and disease. And since it seems to be as puzzling
as it is explanatory, we must judge its scope to be nil. It is therefore not
credible. Hypothesis 2 has none of these drawbacks—it is by far the
better explanation.
UFO ABDUCTIONS
In recent years, books, magazines, movies, and television talk shows
have circulated an amazing hypothesis: Alien beings are abducting 
ordinary people, manipulating them in strange ways (performing 
experiments on them, having sex with them, or otherwise terrifying
them), and then releasing their victims and vanishing. In the best-
selling book Communion, author Whitley Strieber suggested that he was
abducted by aliens with large heads and strange eyes and that they
forced him to endure horriﬁc treatment, including having a needle 
inserted into his head and an instrument put into his anus.4 Later the
book was made into a movie with the same name. The book Intruders
by Budd Hopkins presents dramatic case histories of people who claim
to have endured UFO abductions.5 Hopkins suggests that aliens have
abducted hundreds of people and used them in disturbing genetic 
experiments, then released them. On the basis of a Roper poll, Hopkins
believes that millions of people have been abducted by aliens.
In 1991, the Roper organization polled almost 6,000 people in an
attempt to determine the extent of alien abductions. The respondents
were asked to indicate how often they had certain sorts of experi-
ences. These experiences included the following: (1) “Waking up par-
alyzed with a sense of a strange person or presence or something else
in the room,” (2) “Feeling that you were actually ﬂying through the air
although you didn’t know why or how,” (3) “Experiencing a period of
time of an hour or more, in which you were apparently lost, but you
could not remember why, or where you had been,” (4) “Seeing unusual
lights or balls of light in a room without knowing what was causing
them, or where they came from,” and (5) “Finding puzzling scars on
234
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
It is easier to attrib-
ute UFO sightings to
the known irrationali-
ties of terrestrials
than to the unknown
efforts of extrater-
restrials.
—RICHARD FEYNMAN

your body and neither you nor anyone else remembering how you
received them or where you got them.” The designers of the poll,
Budd Hopkins and Dave Jacobs, reasoned that if someone answered
yes to four or ﬁve of these questions, they had been abducted by
aliens. About 2 percent of the respondents fell into this category.
Since the sample represented 185 million people, they concluded that
about 4 million Americans have been abducted by aliens. (The authors
of this book have been informed that about 100 percent of fraternity
brothers can answer yes to four out of ﬁve of these questions. Does that
mean they’ve all been abducted by aliens?)
In many cases, before any abduction story surfaces, the victims
ﬁrst experience a vivid dream or nightmare (sometimes in childhood)
involving eerie, otherworldly creatures. Or they experience “missing
time,” the realization that they don’t remember what happened to
them during a certain period. Or they see an odd light in the night
sky that they identify as a UFO. Later, when the victims are hypno-
tized to try to learn more about these strange occurrences, an abduc-
tion experience is fully revealed. While under hypnosis, the abductees
report in stunning detail what they believe they saw or felt during 
abduction, what the aliens looked like, and, in some cases, what the
aliens said. The technique called regressive hypnosis has been the favored
method for uncovering details of an abduction and for authenticating it.
UFO ABDUCTIONS
235
This earth-
drawing, or
geoglyph, of a
monkey was con-
structed on a plain
in the Andes
Mountains by a
prehistoric people
called Nazca.
Such large-scale
drawings can be
produced with
simple tools and
require no extra-
terrestrial help.

236
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
Ancient Aliens
Although explicit reports of encounters with
extraterrestrials are a relatively recent phenom-
ena, some claim that they have been visiting us
for centuries. Never mind the technical difﬁcul-
ties of interstellar travel discussed in Chapter 2.
Writers like Eric von Däniken, author of Chari-
ots of the Gods, maintain that aliens must have
overcome those difﬁculties because they have
left behind evidence of their visits. The evi-
dence comes in two varieties: (i) physical struc-
tures that seem too sophisticated to have been
made by “primitive” people, and (ii) religious
texts, pictograms, or sculptures that seem to
depict encounters with non-human beings.
(This evidence has become the subject of a
History Channel television series called “An-
cient Aliens.”) Professional archaeologists and
theologians, however, don’t have much truck
with the ancient alien hypothesis because it
simply doesn’t explain anything. 
Recall our discussion in chapter 6 of the
person who tried to explain a bridge collapse
by attributing it to an invisible gremlin. He was
unable to tell us how or why the gremlin de-
stroyed the bridge, or what sort of a creature
the gremlin was. As a result, the gremlin hy-
pothesis doesn’t improve our understanding of
the situation. Instead, it leaves us with as big a
mystery as we started.
The same goes for the ancient alien hypoth-
esis. The ancient alien theorists can’t tell us
how or why the aliens did what they did, nor
what kind of creatures the aliens are. Conse-
quently, to say “the aliens did it” is no more 
informative than saying “a gremlin did it.” 
Neither hypothesis tells us what we need to
know in order to understand the phenomena;
both simply substitute one mystery for another.
What’s more, professional archaeologists
claim that most of the artifacts and texts cited
by ancient alien theorists have already been 
explained by more conventional means. In
many cases, the ancient alien theorists simply
underestimate the abilities of our ancestors.
Keith Fitzpatrick-Matthews, for example, 
Archaeology Ofﬁcer of the North Hertford-
shire Museums, provides the following analysis
of some of the phenomena cited on the web
site of the “Ancient Alien” television series:
The Nazca Lines are one of von Däniken’s
favourite bits of evidence, so it’s little won-
der they show up here. Situated in southern
Perú, they consist of lines, geometric
shapes and animal representations etched
into the surface of the desert by the simple
expedient of removing the oxidised pebbles
on its surface to reveal the contrasting
colour of the sand beneath. The designs 
are thus shallow, on average only 0.15 m
(5.9 inches) deep. The History Channel’s
website repeats the claim ﬁrst put forward
by Erich von Däniken that “the lines served
as runways” for the gods’ spaceships; this
conveniently ignores the fact that anything
with any weight, such as a spaceship, land-
ing on the plain would disturb the pebble
surface and reveal the lighter sand under-
neath, thus creating new lines and effacing
any designs it might pass over. This has
clearly not happened. The lines––whatever
their origin––can never have been used as
runways.
The mo’ai of Rapa Nui (Easter Island)
are the well-known monolithic stone statues
that were erected in special locations on the

UFO ABDUCTIONS
237
island between about 1250 and 1500 CE.
About 887 statues are known to exist, al-
most half of which are still in the quarry at
Rano Raraku, which appears to have been
the principal source of the stone from which
they were carved. Those that made the
journey were set up on stone platforms
(known as ahu) on the coast, with the stat-
ues facing inland over the different clan
areas of the island; each statue was carved
to represent a deceased ancestor and they
were intended to watch over their living de-
scendants. After the ﬁrst European contact
with the islanders in 1722, when all the
mo’ai on ahu were standing, ﬁghting among
the islanders resulted in the toppling of
every single statue by 1868. Archaeological
research since 1955 has revealed a great
deal about the date and purpose of the stat-
ues and it is difﬁcult to understand why
they are considered evidence for ancient as-
tronauts. Indeed, they are not ancient and
were still being erected after Columbus’s
voyage across the Atlantic.
Pumapunku is a site that forms part of
the better known Tiwanaku (Tiahuanaco)
complex in Bolivia. Although the ancient as-
tronauts proponents try to ascribe a vast age
to the complex (over 14,000 years is not un-
common), there is a radiocarbon date from a
primary deposit of 1510 ± 25 bp, which cal-
ibrates to 517–605 CE at 96% conﬁdence.
This quite clearly puts the origin of the site
in the sixth century CE; those who want an
earlier origin have to explain why no earlier
cultural material has been found at the site.
The sites are known for their stone architec-
ture, which displays features that are quite
unlike Old World building techniques. The
complex joints between the stones are so-
phisticated and designed to provide strong
wall without mortar and maximum stability
in an earthquake zone; they are not evi-
dence that aliens guided the human
builders, as the programme seems to have
claimed, and exhibit increasing sophistica-
tion with time.
The Book of Ezekiel is one of the more
bizarre works in the Hebrew Bible. Attrib-
uted to a prophet who calls himself Ezekiel
ben Buzi, who appears to have been born
around 622 BCE, it details what he refers to
as “visions of God”. This is the ﬁrst problem
for the ancient astronaut theorists, who
want him to be describing an actual Close
Encounter with a spaceship and its occu-
pants. Nor is it a straightforward eyewitness
account, as there is evidence in the text it-
self for extensive editing (indeed, there are
numerous variants of the text in existence).
The plan of the work is actually quite
straightforward: Yahweh reveals himself to
Ezekiel as a warrior god in a chariot and
pronounces a series of judgements on Jeru-
salem and Judah, followed by a series of
judgements on the gentiles (speciﬁcally the
Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites, Philistines,
Tyrians, Sidonians and Egyptians) and con-
cluding with some vague prophecies about
the return of the Jews to Judah, the rebuild-
ing of Jerusalem and the bestowing of great
blessings on the Jews. This does not sound
like the imparting of extraterrestrial wisdom
from a technologically advanced ﬂying ma-
chine. Instead, it is typical of early Jewish
apocalyptic literature.6

Some people, however, have recounted a UFO-abduction experience
or produced details about it without undergoing hypnosis.
Now let’s apply the SEARCH formula to the abduction hypothe-
sis and to some of the leading alternatives and see what happens.
Hypothesis 1: Alien beings have abducted several people, interacted with
them in various ways, and then released them. Proponents of this hypothesis
point to several pieces of evidence. First and foremost, there’s the
striking testimony elicited during hypnosis, which is thought to be a
kind of truth serum, a way to retrieve accurate details about a person’s
experience of past events. There’s also testimony that arises without
the aid of hypnosis. There’s the fact that the alleged abductees’ stories
seem to be so similar, that many abductees report the experience of
missing time, and that a few of them (including Whitley Strieber)
have passed lie detector tests. There’s also physical evidence, like
mysterious scars on abductees’ bodies and areas of dead grass on the
ground suggesting a UFO landing.
As for hypnosis, it’s not the revealer of truth that many believe it to
be. Research has shown that even deeply hypnotized people can will-
fully lie and that a person can fake hypnosis and fool even very experi-
enced hypnotists. More to the point, research also shows that when
hypnotized subjects are asked to recall a past event, they will fantasize
freely, creating memories of things that never happened. Martin T.
Orne, one of the world’s leading experts on the use of hypnosis to
obtain information about past events, sums up the situation like this:
The hypnotic suggestion to relive a past event, particularly when ac-
companied by questions about speciﬁc details, puts pressure on the sub-
ject to provide information. . . . This situation may jog the subject’s
memory and produce some increased recall, but it will also cause him to
ﬁll in details that are plausible but consist of memories or fantasies from
other times. It is extremely difﬁcult to know which aspects of hypnoti-
cally aided recall are historically accurate and which aspects have been
confabulated [made up and confused with real events]. . . . There is no
way, however, by which anyone—even a psychologist or psychiatrist
with extensive training in the ﬁeld of hypnosis—can for any particular
piece of information determine whether it is actual memory versus a
confabulation unless there is independent veriﬁcation.7
Orne and other experts have also emphasized how extremely
suggestible hypnotic subjects are and how easy it is for a hypnotist to
unintentionally induce pseudomemories in the subject:
If a witness is hypnotized and has factual information casually gleaned
from newspapers or inadvertent comments made during prior interro-
gation or in discussion with others who might have knowledge about
238
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
He that will not rea-
son is a bigot; he
that cannot reason 
is a fool; and he that
dares not reason is 
a slave.
—WILLIAM
DRUMMOND

the facts, many of these bits of knowledge will become incorporated
and form the basis of any pseudo-memories that develop. . . . If the
hypnotist has beliefs about what actually occurred, it is exceedingly
difﬁcult for him to prevent himself from inadvertently guiding the
subject’s recall so that [the subject] will eventually “remember” what
he, the hypnotist, believes actually happened.8
Orne describes a simple experiment he has repeatedly conducted
that shows the limits of hypnotism. First he veriﬁes that a subject went
to bed at a certain time at night and slept straight through until morn-
ing. Then he hypnotizes the subject and asks her to relive that night.
Orne asks the subject if she heard two loud noises during the night
(noises that didn’t, in fact, happen). Typically, the subject says that
she was awakened by the noises and then describes how she arose
from bed to investigate. If Orne asks her to look at the clock, the sub-
ject identiﬁes a speciﬁc time—at which point the subject was actually
asleep and in bed. After hypnosis, the subject remembers the non-
event as though it actually happened. A pseudomemory was thus cre-
ated by a leading question that may seem perfectly neutral.
A study has even been conducted to see if people who had never
seen a UFO nor were well informed about UFOs could, under hyp-
nosis, tell “realistic” stories about being abducted by aliens. The con-
clusion was that they can. The imaginary abductees easily and eagerly
invented many speciﬁc details of abductions. The researchers found
“no substantive differences” between these descriptions and those
given by people who have claimed to be abducted.9
Research also suggests that hypnosis not only induces pseudo-
memories, but also increases the likelihood that they’ll become ﬁrmly
established. As psychologist Terence Hines says:
What hypnosis does do—and this is especially relevant to the UFO
cases—is to greatly increase hypnotized subjects’ conﬁdence that their
hypnotically induced memories are true. This increase in conﬁdence
occurs for both correct and incorrect memories. Thus, hypnosis can
create false memories, but the individual will be especially convinced
that those memories are true. People repeating such false memories
will seem credible because they really believe their false memories are
true. Their belief, of course, does not indicate whether the memory is
actually true or false.10
Proponents of the abduction hypothesis, however, point out that a
few people have told of being abducted by a UFO before they were
hypnotized. This testimony is relevant to the issue—but it’s also subject
to all the questions of reliability that we must ask of any human testi-
mony. Given what we know about the witnesses and the circumstances
UFO ABDUCTIONS
239

of their experience (to be discussed shortly), we must rate this testimo-
nial evidence as weak.
The similarity of abductee stories also gives little support to
hypothesis 1. Critics point out that there’s little wonder that the sto-
ries have so much in common since UFO abduction has become a
universally familiar theme, thanks to books, movies, and television.
Psychologist Robert A. Baker says:
Any one of us, if asked to pretend that we had been kidnapped by
aliens from outer space or another dimension, would make up a story
that would vary little, either in details or in the supposed motives of
the abductors, from the stories told by any and all of the kidnap vic-
tims reported by [Budd] Hopkins. Our imaginative tales would be 
remarkably similar in plot, dialogue, description, and characterization
to the close encounters of the third kind and conversations with little
gray aliens described in Communion or Intruders. The means of trans-
portation would be saucer-shaped, the aliens would be small, hu-
manoid, two-eyed, and gray or white or green, and the purpose of
their visits would be to: 1) save our planet; 2) ﬁnd a better home for
themselves; 3) end nuclear war and the threat we pose to the peaceful
life in the rest of the galaxy; 4) bring us knowledge and enlighten-
ment; and 5) increase the aliens’ knowledge and understanding of
other forms of life.11
The similarities in many abduction stories can also be created by a hyp-
notist who has unwittingly cued the same pseudomemories in all his or
her subjects. This cuing is most likely to happen when the hypnotist
lacks proper training in hypnotism and has strong beliefs about what
actually happened to the subject—a state of affairs that may be the norm.
On closer inspection, the phenomenon of missing time seems to
provide little support for the abduction hypothesis either. One reason
is that the phenomenon is actually a common, ordinary experience—
especially when people are anxious or under stress:
Typically, motorists will report after a long drive that at some point in
the journey they woke up to realize they had no awareness of a pre-
ceding period of time. With some justiﬁcation, people will describe
this as a “gap in time,” a “lost half-hour,” or a “piece out of my life.”12
In addition, many cases of missing time in abduction stories have been
investigated and found to have fairly prosaic explanations.13
Passing a lie detector test doesn’t lend credence to an abduction
story either. Polygraph tests are still used in criminal investigations,
employment screenings, and elsewhere. Nevertheless, research has
established that polygraph testing is an extremely unreliable guide to
someone’s truthfulness.14
240
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

The physical evidence is equivocal. Scars or cuts on abductees
could have been caused by aliens—or they could have happened 
accidentally without the subject’s knowing how, just as we all occa-
sionally discover scratches or cuts on our bodies without remember-
ing how they got there. They also could have been intentionally
self-inﬂicted. There’s no corroborating evidence to show that they
are, in fact, alien-inﬂicted. The story is much the same with dead-
grass areas. There’s no direct evidence linking them to UFO landings.
Some of them, however, have been shown to be the work of a type of
fungus that dehydrates the grass (sometimes in a circular pattern
called a fairy ring) and makes it appear burnt.
Although hypothesis 1 doesn’t violate any laws of logic or sci-
ence, it still qualiﬁes as extraordinary because it seems technologically
impossible. As we saw in Chapter 2, traveling to the stars seems to re-
quire much more energy than anyone will ever be able to generate.
UFO ABDUCTIONS
241
Stephenville Lights
On the night of January 8, 2008, the residents
of Stephenville, Texas, witnessed a remarkable
aerial display: a series of extremely bright lights
created numerous patterns in the night sky.
Mike Odom described them this way: “They
lined up horizontally, seven of them, changing
into an arch. They lined up vertically and I saw
two rectangles of bright ﬂame. That’s when I
knew it was a life-changing experience.”15
Many, like Odom, took the lights to be of ex-
traterrestrial origin. But were they?
When asked whether the lights could have
been the result of military aircraft, a public affairs
ofﬁcer at the Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base
at Carswell Field replied, “There were no F-16s
from this unit operating.” On January 23, how-
ever, the Air Force changed their story. In a press
release, they stated: “Ten F-16s from the 457th
Fighter Squadron were performing training oper-
ations in an area which includes the airspace
above Erath County.” Why the reversal? An in-
ternal communications problem, they claimed.
To some, however, such reversals smack of a
cover up and suggest that a conspiracy is afoot.
But isn’t human error a simpler explanation?
Retired Air Force Pilot James McGaha
thinks so.
McGaha says they were ﬂying training ma-
neuvers that involved dropping extraordinarily
bright ﬂares. The LUU/2B/B ﬂare is nothing like
the standard ﬂares you might think of. These
ﬂares have an illumination of about two million
candlepower. They are intended to light up a
vast area of the ground for nighttime aerial 
attack. Once released, they are suspended by
parachutes (which often hover and even rise
due to the heat of the ﬂares) and light up a cir-
cle on the ground greater than one kilometer
for four minutes. The ﬂare casing and parachute
are eventually consumed by the heat. At a dis-
tance of 150 miles, a single ﬂare can still be as
bright as the planet Venus.16
A retired U.S. Army Pilot who was ﬂying a
helicopter that night corroborated McGaha’s
analysis, claiming that he saw multiple military
aircraft dropping ﬂares in the area of the Brown-
wood Military Operating Area. Thus there is no
need to invoke aliens to explain the
Stephenville lights. Like the Phoenix lights,
they are much better explained as the result of
military ﬂares and perceptual construction.

But beyond that, alien abduction also seems to require a very ad-
vanced transporter technology that allows the aliens to beam people
out of their beds and into their spacecraft. Scientists at IBM have re-
cently shown such a transporter is physically possible.17 Unfortu-
nately, it, too, seems to be forever beyond anyone’s technological
capability because the amount of information needed to reconstruct a
human is too great to be transferred in a reasonable amount of time.
Physicist Samuel L. Braunstein explains:
If we forget about recognizing atoms and measuring their velocities
and just scale that to a resolution of one-atomic length in each direc-
tion that’s about 1032 bits (a one followed by thirty two zeros). This is
so much information that even with the best optical ﬁbers conceivable
it would take over one hundred million centuries to transmit all that
information! It would be easier to walk! If we packed all that informa-
tion into CD ROMs it would ﬁt into a cube almost 1000 kilometers
on a side!18
The idea of a transporter capable of beaming humans from one loca-
tion to another may be good in theory, but it looks like we will never
be able to put one into practice.
Hypothesis 2: People who report being abducted by aliens are suffering from
serious mental illness. In other words, nobody has been abducted; people
who make abduction claims are just plain crazy. Actually, it wouldn’t
be surprising to ﬁnd that a few of these people were psychotic. But the
idea that a large proportion of them are crazy isn’t supported by the
evidence.
Not every alleged abductee has undergone psychological testing,
but a few have. The Fund for UFO Research asked Elizabeth Slater, a
professional psychologist, to study nine people who claimed to have
been abducted by aliens. During the study, Slater wasn’t aware of
the subjects’ abduction claims. After extensive testing of these nine,
she concluded that none of them were psychotic or crazy.19 Other
research has come up with similar ﬁndings.
Of course, psychologists and psychiatrists know that a person
needn’t be insane to exhibit extremely strange behavior or to have
very weird experiences. It is also worth noting that Slater commented
that the subjects, though sane, couldn’t be considered completely nor-
mal. She said that they “did not represent an ordinary cross-section of
the population,” that several of them could be characterized as “odd
or eccentric,” and that under stressful conditions six of the nine
showed a “potential for more or less transient psychotic experiences
involving a loss of reality testing along with confused and disordered
thinking that can be bizarre.”20
242
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

Hypothesis 3: People who report being abducted by aliens are perpetrating a
hoax. A few tales of UFO abduction are suspicious or have been found
to be hoaxes. Philip Klass, for example, has shown that the Travis
Walton abduction story (eventually made into the movie Fire in the Sky)
was a probable hoax.21 But there’s no evidence that the majority of
abduction tales are put-ons. Most observers agree that those who
make abduction claims are apparently sincere.
Hypothesis 4: Reports of alien abductions are fantasies arising from peo-
ple with “fantasy-prone personalities,” and these fantasies may be further elabo-
rated and strengthened through hypnosis. Scientists have discovered that
some people, though they appear normal and well-adjusted, fre-
quently have very realistic wide-awake hallucinations and fantasies
and often have experiences that resemble those induced by hyp-
nosis. The researchers who uncovered this phenomenon describe it
this way:
[This research] has shown that there exists a small group of individu-
als (possibly 4% of the population) who fantasize a large part of the
time, who typically “see,” “hear,” “smell,” and “touch” and fully experi-
ence what they fantasize; and who can be labeled fantasy-prone per-
sonalities. Their extensive and deep involvement in fantasy seems to
be their basic characteristic and their other major talents—their abil-
ity to hallucinate voluntarily, their superb hypnotic performances,
their vivid memories of their life experiences, and their talents as 
psychics or sensitives—seem to derive from or grow out of their 
profound fantasy life.22
When these people are deep in fantasy, they have a decreased awareness
of time and place, just as many abductees say they do (the experience of
missing time). Also, not only are they easily hypnotized, but they show
hypnotic behavior all the time, even when not hypnotized:
When we give them “hypnotic suggestions” such as suggestions for 
visual and auditory hallucinations, negative hallucinations, age regres-
sion, limb rigidity, anesthesia, and sensory hallucinations, we are 
asking them to do for us the kind of thing they can do independently
of us in their daily lives.23
Interestingly enough, some research suggests that people who
claim to have been abducted by aliens are in fact fantasy-prone per-
sonalities. In one study, a biographical analysis was done on 154 people
who said they had been abducted or had several contacts with aliens.
It was found that 132 of these subjects seemed normal and healthy but
had many fantasy-prone personality characteristics.24 Baker has sug-
gested that Whitley Strieber, author of Communion, ﬁts the fantasy-
prone personality mold:
UFO ABDUCTIONS
243
Men become civi-
lized, not in propor-
tion to their
willingness to believe,
but in proportion to
their readiness to
doubt.
—H. L. MENCKEN

Anyone familiar with the fantasy-prone personality who reads
Strieber’s Communion will suffer an immediate shock of recognition!
Strieber is a classic example of the fantasy-prone type: easily hypno-
tized, amnesiac, from a very religious background, with vivid memo-
ries of his early years and a very active fantasy life—a writer of occult
and highly imaginative novels featuring unusually strong sensory 
experiences, particularly smells and sounds and vivid dreams.
Strieber’s wife was questioned under hypnosis by Hopkins. With
regard to some of Strieber’s visions, she says, “Whitley saw a lot of
things that I didn’t see at that time.” “Did you look for [a bright crys-
tal in the sky]?” “Oh, no. Because I knew it wasn’t real.” “How did you
know it wasn’t real? Whitley’s a fairly down-to-earth guy—” “No, he
isn’t. . . .” “It didn’t surprise you hearing Whitley, that he sees things
like that?” “No.”25
There’s also evidence that sleep-related hallucinations happen
more frequently to fantasy-prone people. And there’s reason to be-
lieve that these phenomena play a role in UFO-abduction stories. We
know that many UFO abductions allegedly happen after the victim
has gone to bed and involve the feeling of being paralyzed or seem-
ing to ﬂoat outside the body. Such hallucinations seem absolutely real
and thus are referred to as waking dreams. They’re not an indication
of mental illness; they happen to normal, sane, and rational people.
Baker explains their telltale signs:
There are a number of characteristic clues that tell you whether a per-
ception is or is not a hypnogogic or hypnopompic hallucination. First,
it always occurs before or after falling asleep; second, one is paralyzed
or has difﬁculty in moving, or on the other hand, one may ﬂoat out of
one’s body and have an out-of-body experience; third, the hallucina-
tion is unusually bizarre, i.e., one sees ghosts, aliens, monsters, etc.;
fourth, after the hallucination is over, the hallucinator typically goes
back to sleep; and, ﬁfth, the hallucinator is unalterably convinced of
the reality of the entire experience.26
Strieber himself, says Baker, had such a hallucination:
Strieber’s Communion contains a classic, textbook description of a
hypnopompic hallucination, complete with the wakening from a
sound sleep, the strong sense of reality and of being awake, the paral-
ysis (due to the fact that the body’s neural circuits keep our muscles
relaxed to help preserve our sleep), and the encounter with strange
beings. Following the encounter, instead of jumping out of bed and
going in search of the strangers, Strieber, typically, goes back to sleep.
He even reports that the burglar alarm had not gone off—proof again
that the intruders were mental rather than physical. On another occa-
sion Strieber reports awakening and believing that the roof of his
244
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

house is on ﬁre and that aliens are threatening his family. Yet his only
response to this is to go peacefully back to sleep—again, clear evi-
dence of a hypnopompic dream.
Strieber, of course, is convinced of the reality of these experiences.
This, too, is expected. If he were not convinced of their reality, the
experience would not be hypnopompic nor hallucinatory.27
Finally, it’s clear that if a fantasy-prone person experiences a fan-
tasy about being abducted by aliens and then is hypnotized by a hyp-
notist who asks leading questions and believes in UFO abductions, the
fantasy is likely to be conﬁrmed or elaborated, to be very convincing
to others, and to be believed as absolutely true by the abductee.
Hypothesis 5: Reports of alien abductions arise from dreams and are then
elaborated or strengthened through hypnosis. We know that the adventures of
many people claiming to be abductees actually began with com-
pelling dreams. First they said that they dreamed that they had had
contact with a UFO or were abducted; then—while under hypnosis—
they told in detail of an actual alien abduction. Many of the abductees
featured in Hopkins’s Intruders, for example, described such a pattern of
events. As Hines says:
It is thus easy to understand how, for example, a frightening dream
about being abducted by a UFO can come to seem real to an individ-
ual who is repeatedly hypnotized to recall further details of the expe-
rience and is explicitly told by the hypnotist that the experience is
real. If the individual already has difﬁculty telling reality from fantasy,
the process of becoming convinced that the dream or fantasy was real
will occur more rapidly. It is no rare event for someone to have a
dream that, at least brieﬂy, may seem to have really happened. In fact,
almost everyone has had dreams that, upon awakening, were so vivid
that it was not possible, for a while at least, to decide whether they
really happened or not.28
Hypothesis 6: People who report being abducted are suffering from excessive
bursts of electrical activity in their temporal lobes. Neuroscientist Michael
Persinger claims that mystical experiences, out-of-body experiences,
and even abduction-like experiences are associated with some unusual
activity going on inside the brain—speciﬁcally, surges of electrical ac-
tivity in the temporal lobes. Some people have what is called high “tem-
poral lobe lability.” Their temporal lobes are “unstable” and frequently
surge with electrical activity. Persinger discovered that compared with
people who have “normal” lability, those with high temporal lobe labil-
ity more often report mystical or psychic experiences and feelings of
ﬂying or leaving the body. In experiments, Persinger has actually in-
duced such experiences—including abduction-like experiences—in
UFO ABDUCTIONS
245

people by applying magnetic ﬁelds across the brain, thereby instigating
bursts of electrical activity in the temporal lobes.29
Persinger says that people with high lability are likely to have
abduction-type experiences occasionally. The surges are likely to
occur during sleep, thus inducing a nighttime abduction experience
(which is exactly what many people have reported).
Earthquakes, which produce strong magnetic effects, could trig-
ger temporal lobe surges. So Persinger predicted that reports of UFO
abductions and sightings would correspond to the dates of seismic
activity. When he tested his prediction, he found that he was right;
there was a strong correlation between seismic events and the weird
experiences.
Now let’s apply the criteria of adequacy to these alternative hy-
potheses. All are testable, so we must rely on the other four criteria to
help us choose among the possibilities. Using these four criteria, let’s
ﬁrst see if we can eliminate some of the hypotheses.
246
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
Brigadier General
Roger M. Ramey
and Colonel
Thomas Dubose
inspecting the
debris from the
Roswell crash.

Hypotheses 4 (fantasy-prone personalities), 5 (dream material),
and 6 (electrical activity) can probably be given similar weight in
terms of fruitfulness, scope, and simplicity (except that 6 has an edge in
fruitfulness). Hypotheses 2 (mental illness) and 3 (hoaxes) are clearly
inferior to 4, 5, and 6 in conservatism. They conﬂict with existing evi-
dence; hypotheses 4, 5, and 6, on the other hand, are consistent with a
great deal of evidence.
The Roswell Incident
On July 8, 1947, the Roswell Daily Record ran the
headline, “RAAF Captures Flying Saucer on
Ranch in Roswell Region.” It seems that a local
rancher, W. W. Brazel, had discovered some un-
usual material on his ranch. The July 9 edition
of the Roswell Daily Record described the material
this way: “When the debris was gathered up the
tinfoil, paper, tape and sticks made a bundle
about three feet long and 7 or 8 inches thick
while the rubber made a bundle about 18 or 
20 inches thick. In all, he [Brazel] estimated the
entire lot would have weighed maybe ﬁve
pounds.” Although one would expect ﬂying
saucers to weigh something more than ﬁve
pounds, many people believe this debris to be
the wreckage of a crashed ﬂying saucer.
In an attempt to clear this matter up, Con-
gressman Steven H. Stiff (R-N.M.) requested the
General Accounting Ofﬁce to locate all records
relating to the Roswell incident. In support of
this effort, the Air Force published the Report of
Air Force Research Regarding the Roswell Incident. This
report revealed that the material recovered on
Brazel’s ranch was part of a top-secret program—
code named Project MOGUL—that attempted
to monitor Soviet nuclear detonations using
high-altitude weather balloons and radar reﬂec-
tors. As the report indicates:
What was originally reported to have been
recovered was a balloon of some sort, usu-
ally described as a “weather balloon,” 
although the majority of the wreckage that
was ultimately displayed by General Ramey
and Major Marcel in the famous photos in
Ft. Worth, was that of a radar target nor-
mally suspended from balloons. This radar
target, discussed in more detail later, was
certainly consistent with the description of a
July 9 newspaper article which discussed
“tinfoil, paper, tape and sticks.” Additionally,
the description of the “ﬂying disc” was con-
sistent with a document routinely used by
most pro-UFO writers to indicate a conspir-
acy in progress—the telegram from the Dal-
las FBI ofﬁce of July 8, 1947. This document
quoted in part states:” . . . The disc is
hexagonal in shape and was suspended from a
balloon by a cable, which balloon was 
approximately twenty feet in diameter. . . .
The object found resembles a high altitude
weather balloon with a radar reﬂector.”30
Charles B. Moore, one of the three surviving
Project MOGUL scientists, agrees with this 
assessment. Commenting on the markings on
the tape that are often taken to be of alien 
origin he says:
There were about four of us who were 
involved in this, and all remember that our
targets had sort of a stylized, ﬂowerlike 
design. I have prepared, in my life, probably
more than a hundred of these targets for
ﬂight. And every time I have prepared one
of the targets, I have always wondered what
the purpose of that tape marking was. But . . .
a major named John Peterson, laughed . . .
and said, “What do you expect when you
get your targets made by a toy factory?”31
UFO ABDUCTIONS
247

Now the contest is between hypotheses 1 (authentic abductions),
4, 5, and 6. We can now see that hypothesis 1 comes out the loser to
the other three on every count. Hypothesis 1 has yielded no novel
predictions. Hypotheses 4, 5, and 6 have greater scope, for they offer
explanations that can be applied to several phenomena, not just
claims of alien abductions. In terms of simplicity, hypothesis 1 must
be given less credence than the other hypotheses because it postulates
new entities—aliens.
In light of the criterion of conservatism, we see that the evidence
in favor of hypothesis 1 is extremely weak; the evidence for the other
three alternatives is much stronger. In addition, hypothesis 1 conﬂicts
with a great deal of human experience regarding visitors from outer
space; so far, we have no good evidence that anyone has ever detected
any aliens. Moreover, the probability of the Earth being visited by
aliens from outer space must be considered very low (but not zero) in
light of what we know about the size of the universe, the estimated
likelihood of extraterrestrial life, and the physical requirements of
space travel.
For all these reasons, the abduction hypothesis must be consid-
ered improbable. Hypotheses 4, 5, and 6 appear much more likely. If
there is a winner among these three, it would have to be hypothesis 6.
It excels in fruitfulness, for it has yielded a surprising prediction—
the odd correlation between abduction reports and seismic activity.
It is still possible, however, that each of our remaining three hy-
potheses is a correct explanation for a portion of alien abduction
claims. Also, these hypotheses may not be the only ones. Our list of
alternative hypotheses isn’t intended to be exhaustive. Further 
research could narrow—or widen—the ﬁeld. In the meantime, our
analysis has given us a conclusion supported by good reasons: The
abduction hypothesis is untenable, and there are indeed reasonable
alternatives.
COMMUNICATING WITH THE DEAD
In the nineteenth century, few were better at mystifying, unsettling,
and entertaining people than spiritualist mediums—occult practi-
tioners who claimed to communicate directly with the dead. In
countless darkened parlors, they held seances—gatherings in which
they would call forth departed spirits who would speak through the
mediums to loved ones present in the room. Sometimes the mediums
would levitate, or furniture around them would rise off the ﬂoor, or
strange rapping sounds would be heard in the room, or objects would
fall out of the darkness as though coming from another world.
248
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
What happened to
me was terrifying. It
seemed completely
real.
—WHITLEY STRIEBER

The heyday of the mediums, however, was not to last. Too many
of them were caught cheating. The levitations, rappings, and falling
objects were shown to be simple tricks, and the information about the
dead that the mediums produced was often shown to be obtained by
ordinary means or based on lucky guesses.
The old mediums are gone, but the new mediums are here. They
are now called psychics, and they are appearing on TV shows, writ-
ing books, and promoting their skills. Unlike the mediums of old, the
new ones do not produce physical manifestations like rappings and
levitations. But they do provide information about people’s dead loved
ones, information that often seems shockingly accurate and genuinely
otherworldly. These modern-day mediums include psychics James
Van Praagh, John Edward, and Sylvia Browne. Their promise of direct
contact with the minds of the departed has made them famous,
beloved, and well compensated. The ethereal contact provides assur-
ances that all is well with the dead on the “other side.” For many peo-
ple, the “contact” experience can be extremely emotional, reassuring,
or distressing.
What could explain these amazing performances? There are four
main hypotheses.
Hypothesis 1: The psychics are receiving information or messages from
the disembodied spirits of people who have died. That is, the psychics are
doing exactly what they say they are doing—communicating with
minds beyond the grave. The most important evidence for this
claim is the psychics’ performance. Typically, they perform before
an audience and have conversations with audience members who
have lost loved ones. The psychics seem to know facts about dead
loved ones that they could know only if they really were in contact
with the dead. They are never 100 percent right in the information
they produce, but their “hits” (instances of correct information)
occur often enough and are impressive enough to convince many
observers.
The psychics’ ability has rarely been tested in any controlled way.
Recently, however, psychologist Gary Schwartz of the University of
Arizona has claimed that his research provides evidence that mediums
can indeed communicate with the dead. In a series of small studies, he
and his colleagues had a few well-known mediums (including John
Edward) give readings to one or two participants (called “sitters”). The
mediums gave readings to the sitters about deceased friends and loved
ones, and the sitters rated the mediums’ statements for accuracy.
Schwartz claims that the mediums consistently and accurately pro-
vided specific facts and names, and that these readings cannot be
explained as cold reading or lucky guesses.
COMMUNICATING WITH THE DEAD
249
Common sense is
very uncommon.
—HORACE GREELEY
The medium is the
message.
—MARSHALL
MCLUHAN

Other scientists, though, have said that these studies are funda-
mentally ﬂawed in many respects and therefore do not prove any-
thing. They point out, for example, that the accuracy score for the
medium depends entirely on the subjective judgments of the sitter.
Given vague statements from the medium, a sitter can ﬁnd many ways
to make the statements match up with facts about departed loved
ones. In an actual reading from the research, a medium says, “The ﬁrst
thing being shown to me is a male ﬁgure that I would say as being
above, that would be some type of father image. . . . Showing me the
month of May. . . . They’re telling me to talk about the Big H-um, the
H connection. To me this is an H with an N sound.” Psychologist
Ray Hyman explains why this sitter could have easily—almost 
inevitably—judged this information to be right on target:
The sitter identiﬁed this description as applying to her late husband,
Henry. His name was Henry, he died in the month of May and was
“affectionately referred to as the ‘gentle giant.’” The sitter was able to
identify other statements by the medium as applying to her deceased
spouse.
Note, however, the huge degree of latitude for the sitter to ﬁt such
statements to her personal situation. The phrase “some type of father
image” can refer to her husband because he was also the father to her
children. However, it could also refer to her own father, her grand-
father, someone else’s father, or any male with children. It could easily
refer to someone without children such as a priest or father-like 
individual—including Santa Claus. It would have been just as good a
match if her husband had been born in May, had married in May, had
been diagnosed with a life-threatening illness in May, or considered
May as his favorite month. The “HN” connection would ﬁt just as well
if the sitter’s name were Henna or her husband had a dog named
Hank.32
This kind of judging bias is fatal to studies like this. Unfortu-
nately, this mistake is not the only one. Critics have uncovered other
fatal ﬂaws in Schwartz’s research as well.
Two facts raise doubts about the performance evidence. First, the
actual percentage of hits in a performance is probably much lower
than most people think. One investigator who observed several per-
formances by Van Praagh found that the psychic had a hit rate of only
16 to 33 percent (the proportion of accurate statements or questions
out of the total). This rate is much lower than the average number 
of hits on a roulette wheel. The low hit rate, however, may not be 
apparent on TV shows featuring the psychics because there may be
many misses that the television audience does not see in an edited
program. Second, the psychics always explain misses with ad hoc
250
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

hypotheses—explanations that cannot be independently veriﬁed. Ad
hoc hypotheses do not prove anything and are often just attempts to
save a weak explanation.
Hypothesis 2: The psychics are using telepathy to read the minds of the liv-
ing to discover facts about the dead. Perhaps the most important factor in
favor of this explanation is that the beyond-the-grave information is
always known by a person in the audience. This factor would make
sense if telepathy were at work. There is, however, no independent
evidence to suggest that the telepathy hypothesis is true.
Hypothesis 3: The psychics are doing “cold reading.” Cold reading is an
ancient art practiced by fortune-tellers and modern-day mentalists
(performers who pretend to be able to read minds). It is a clever trick
that can appear to be truly paranormal. In this technique, the “psy-
chic” reader gleans information from people (the subjects) simply by
asking them questions, making statements, and carefully noting how
people react—all the while giving the impression that the information
comes from some mysterious source.
There are several ways that a reader may get the relevant infor-
mation (or appear to have it). Here are a few of them:
1. The reader asks many questions and treats afﬁrmative answers as
though they were conﬁrming a statement the reader had made.
Reader: Who was the person with an illness, or some disease?
Subject: That was my mother.
Reader: Because I feel that the illness took a heavy toll on her, that she
wanted to get well.
2. The reader makes statements that could apply to most people.
For example, most people have some association with photographs,
jewelry, pets, antiques, illness, and other familiar themes.
Reader: I’m sensing something about a cat or a small dog. I feel this intense
image of this animal.
Subject: Yes, my brother had a cat.
Reader: I’m getting a strong impression of a favorite piece of jewelry. I’m feel-
ing that your loved one, before she passed over, had fond feelings about some
jewelry.
Subject: Oh, my mother had a brooch that she treasured.
3. The reader infers accurate—and obvious—information from
facts mentioned by the subject.
Reader: What was your (deceased) father’s occupation?
Subject: He was a farmer.
COMMUNICATING WITH THE DEAD
251
Don’t live on a fault
line. It’s a zipper.
—THE ENTITY
RAMTHA
The unity of con-
sciousness is illusory.
—ERNEST R. HILGARD

252
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
Reader: Yes, he spent many hours in the ﬁelds. He had callused hands. He
constantly fretted about the weather, and he was always worrying about the
prices for his crops.
Reader: You say your grandmother suffered from depression before her death?
Subject: Yes, a very deep depression.
Reader: I’m sensing that she was very sad about the way things had turned
out. . . . She even thought about suicide at one point.
Subject: Yes, that’s right.
4. The reader makes statements with multiple variables so that a hit
is highly probable.
Reader: I’m sensing that your (deceased) father lived with a great deal of
pain, or frustration, perhaps some mental anguish.
Subject: Yes, he was in great pain at the end.
5. The reader invites the subject to ﬁll in the blanks.
Reader: I’m feeling something about the head or the face.
Subject: Yes, my mother had terrible migraines.
Reader: I’m getting the impression of medicine, serious medication somewhere.
I don’t know why.
Subject: My father had to have chemotherapy because of cancer.
Using these cold-reading techniques, along with many others, a
reader can easily appear to be reading minds, as a good mentalist
does. With practice, almost anyone can be “psychic.” More to the
point, it is clear that most, or all, of the amazing performances of 
the professional psychics can be duplicated using cold-reading 
techniques. Van Praagh, Edward, and other psychics may indeed be
mind readers of the dead, but their performances seem to be indistin-
guishable from those that can be produced by cold reading.
Hypothesis 4: The psychics are getting information on subjects ahead of
time. Some mediums and mentalists have been known to acquire facts
about a subject before a performance. They would research their sub-
jects, looking for some bit of personal information that could make a
startling impression—perhaps a loved one’s nickname, or an old fam-
ily story, or an object with sentimental value.
There is no evidence that top psychics consistently use this ploy.
But some of them have gone out of their way to acquire information
about a subject before a performance—then produced that same in-
formation as though it had come from beyond the grave. Some top
psychics have been known to interview members of the audience 

NEAR-DEATH EXPERIENCES
253
before the performance begins or to question TV producers about sub-
jects who will be present during the psychic’s television performance.
Now, which of these hypotheses is best? All the contending hy-
potheses are testable, but they differ in how they rank according to
the other criteria of adequacy. Hypothesis 1, the psychic medium 
explanation, fares poorly on all counts. It has never yielded any novel
predictions, and its scope is limited because it does not explain any-
thing except the mediumistic performances. It assumes entities (de-
parted spirits) and a form of communication that have never been
shown to exist, so simple it is not. Finally, it is not conservative, for it
conﬂicts with everything we know about death, the mind, and com-
munication. Its lack of conservatism alone renders it improbable.
Hypotheses 2 (telepathy) is similar to the mediumistic hypothe-
sis in every way. As our analysis in Chapter 6 suggests, the telepathy
hypothesis has yielded no novel predictions, assumes unknown enti-
ties or forces, and conﬂicts with available scientiﬁc evidence. It could
be argued that it has more scope than hypothesis 1, but greater scope
cannot save it from improbability.
Hypothesis 4 (advance information) is better than either 1 or 2 in
scope, simplicity, and conservatism. But the available evidence does
not support the idea that preperformance research is widespread or
that most hits are the result of prior knowledge.
Hypothesis 3 (cold reading) is the winner. It is probably equal to
the telepathy explanation in scope and simplicity. But it ﬁts the evi-
dence better than any other hypothesis. Investigators have shown that
someone using cold reading can duplicate the amazing performances
of the psychics—and that top psychics appear to be consistently using
cold-reading techniques. We therefore have excellent reasons for
believing that Van Praagh, Edward, and other psychics are talented,
impressive, and disappointing cold readers.
NEAR-DEATH EXPERIENCES
Benjamin Franklin once remarked in a letter to Jean-Baptist Leroy, “In
this world, nothing is certain but death and taxes.” A number of re-
searchers, however, believe that Franklin was at best only half right.
Taxes may indeed be inevitable, but death—understood as the anni-
hilation of the self—may not even occur. Our physical bodies will no
doubt die. But that, they say, doesn’t mean that we will die, for there
is evidence that we can survive the death of our physical bodies. The
[Spiritualists] are
lacking not only in
criticism but in the
most elementary
knowledge of psy-
chology.At the bot-
tom they do not
want to be taught
any better, but
merely to go on 
believing.
—CARL GUSTAV JUNG

most impressive evidence for immortality, it is claimed, comes from
near-death experiences.
The term near-death experience (NDE) was coined by Dr. Ray-
mond Moody to describe a family of experiences he found common
to those who had narrowly escaped death. His initial ﬁndings were
based on in-depth interviews with some ﬁfty people who had either
clinically died (their heart and lungs had stopped functioning) and
were later revived or who had faced death as a result of an accident,
injury, or illness. What he discovered was that while no two people
had exactly the same experience, their experiences shared a number
of common elements. In 1975, he published the results of his research
in his best-selling Life after Life. There he offered the following “ideal”
or “complete” account of the near-death experience:
A man is dying and, as he reaches the point of greatest physical dis-
tress, he hears himself pronounced dead by his doctor. He begins to
hear an uncomfortable noise, a loud ringing or buzzing, and at the
same time feels himself moving very rapidly through a long dark 
tunnel. After this, he suddenly ﬁnds himself outside of his own physi-
cal body, but still in the immediate physical environment, and he sees
his own body from a distance, as though he is a spectator. He watches
the resuscitation attempt from this unusual vantage point and is in a
state of emotional upheaval.
After a while, he collects himself and becomes more accustomed
to his odd condition. He notices that he still has a “body,” but one of
a very different nature and with very different powers from the physi-
cal body he has left behind. Soon other things begin to happen. Oth-
ers come to meet and to help him. He glimpses the spirits of relatives
and friends who have already died, and a loving, warm spirit of a
kind he has never encountered before—a being of light—appears 
before him. This being asks him a question, nonverbally, to make him
evaluate his life and helps him along by showing him a panoramic,
instantaneous playback of the major events of his life. At some point
he ﬁnds himself approaching some sort of barrier or border, appar-
ently representing the limit between earthly life and the next life.
Yet, he ﬁnds that he must go back to the earth, that the time for his
death has not yet come. At this point he resists, for by now he is
taken up with his experiences in the afterlife and does not want to 
return. He is overwhelmed by intense feelings of joy, love, and peace.
Despite his attitude, though, he somehow reunites with his physical
body and lives.
Later he tries to tell others, but he has trouble doing so. In the ﬁrst
place, he can ﬁnd no human words adequate to describe these un-
earthly episodes. He also ﬁnds that others scoff, so he stops telling
other people. Still, the experience affects his life profoundly, espe-
cially his views about death and its relationship to life.33
254
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

Although none of the people Moody had interviewed for Life after Life
had experienced all the elements just described, he has since come
across a number of people who have had the complete experience.34
When it ﬁrst appeared, Moody’s account of the near-death expe-
rience was met with a good deal of skepticism. Doctors who had
resuscitated hundreds of patients said they had never encountered
it. Others claimed that his sample was too small to be signiﬁcant.35
Nevertheless it sparked a great deal of interest among both profes-
sionals and laypeople. A number of scientists and doctors began their
own studies of the phenomena. To disseminate the results of this
research, the Association for the Scientiﬁc Study of Near-Death Phe-
nomena was founded in 1977.
More extensive and better controlled research has, for the most
part, corroborated Moody’s ﬁndings. The near-death experience as
Moody described it is fairly common among those who have survived
a close brush with death. In fact, research suggests that if you come
close to death or clinically die and are resuscitated, your chances of
having such an experience are about ﬁfty-ﬁfty.
Dr. Fred Schoonmaker, chief of cardiovascular services at St.
Luke’s Hospital in Denver, had been studying near-death experiences
for over a decade before Moody published Life after Life. He published
the results of his research in 1979.36 Out of the 2,300 cases he 
examined, most of whom had suffered cardiac arrest, 60 percent 
reported having near-death experiences of the sort described by
Moody. Dr. Michael Sabom, a cardiologist in Atlanta, interviewed
seventy-eight people who were known to have nearly died. He
found that 42 percent of them had experiences like the one that
Moody described.37 A 1982 Gallup poll found that one in seven
Americans had narrowly escaped death and that one in twenty had
had a near-death experience.38 One of the most detailed studies of
the near-death experience was conducted by Dr. Kenneth Ring, a
psychologist in Connecticut. Using hospital records and newspaper
advertisements, he was able to identify 102 people who had been in
life-threatening situations. They were asked to provide a general 
description of their experience and then were questioned about the
speciﬁc details. Almost 50 percent of the people in his sample had a
near-death experience.39
Dr. Ring divided the near-death experience into ﬁve stages:
1. Peace and a sense of well-being.
2. Separation from the body.
3. Entering the darkness.
4. Seeing the light.
5. Entering the world of light.40
NEAR-DEATH EXPERIENCES
255

256
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
The Biblical View of Souls
Many people believe that the existence of a
soul capable of existing independently of the
body is a central tenet of Christian teaching.
Biblical scholars disagree. The Bible, they tell
us, presents a monistic view of the person in
which the mind and the body are inseparable
from one another. British theologian Adrian
Thatcher explains:
There appears to be a rare unanimity among
biblical scholars that the biblical picture of
the person is non-dualist, and that the Bible
gives little or no support to the idea that a
person is essentially a soul, or that the soul
is separable from the body. Dualists, of
course, may reply that, regardless of what
the Bible said about the issue then, dualism
offers a convincing framework for Christian
teaching now. Even so, they cannot get
around the fact that, from a biblical point of
view, dualism is very odd. Lynn de Silva
summarizes the position thus:
Biblical scholarship has established quite
conclusively that there is no dichotomous
concept of man in the Bible, such as is
found in Greek and Hindu thought. The
biblical view of man is holistic, not dualis-
tic. The notion of the soul as an immortal
entity which enters the body at birth and
leaves it at death is quite foreign to the
biblical view of man. The biblical view is
that man is a unity; he is a unity of soul,
body, ﬂesh, mind, etc. all together consti-
tuting the whole man. None of the con-
stituent elements is capable of separating
itself from the total structure and continu-
ing to live after death. . . .41
Why are biblical scholars unanimously
agreed that the Bible gives us no reason for be-
lieving in an immortal soul? Because the words
that get translated soul, such as “nephesh” and
“psuche,” mean living, breathing creature, and
because the story of the resurrection makes no
sense if there are such things as immortal souls.
Thatcher explains:
The resurrection and ascension of Christ
seem clearly to exclude dualistic accounts of
the human person. The death of Christ was
a real and total death, not merely the death
of his mortal body. The miracle of the resur-
rection is precisely that God raises Jesus
from the dead, not that he raises Jesus’ mor-
tal body and reunites it with his immortal
soul. What purpose does the resurrection of
Jesus serve, we may ask, if Jesus was not re-
ally dead? Was it just to convince the disci-
ples that the bonds of death were forever
loosened? Hardly, for if the disciples had
believed in immortal souls they would not
have required assurance on that point; and if
they had needed such assurance, a resurrec-
tion miracle would not have provided it; it
would merely have created confusion. The
ascension of Christ is also rendered superﬂu-
ous by a dualist account of the person; for
the soul of Christ, being alive after his phys-
ical death, would presumably have been ca-
pable of returning to the Father without its
body. What then is the ascension? A highly
visual way of saying cheerio? It is, rather,
the return of the transformed, transﬁgured,
gloriﬁed, yet still embodied, Christ to the
Father. No particular historical version of
the event is favored by arguing thus. The
point is that the theological convictions 
expressed by the resurrection and ascension
narratives make much better sense on the
assumption that all men and women are 
essentially bodily unities, after, as well as
before, their bodily deaths.42

The earlier stages were reported more frequently than the latter. Sixty
percent of his subjects reached the ﬁrst stage, 37 percent reached the
second, 23 percent reached the third, 16 percent reached the fourth,
and 10 percent reached the ﬁfth. What stage (if any) one reached was
unaffected by one’s age, sex, or religion. In fact, cross-cultural studies
have found that the core elements of the experience are the same no
matter what the person’s background. Psychologists Karlis Osis and
Erlendur Haraldsson, for example, examined the near-death experi-
ences of Indian swamis and found that they did not differ essentially
from those reported in the West.43
All of the aforementioned studies were retrospective; that is,
they were based on interviews that were conducted up to ten years
after the experience occurred. The delay makes it much more difﬁ-
cult to get an accurate assessment of the psychological or physiolog-
ical factors that may have been involved in the experience. In 2001,
however, the Dutch physician Pim van Lommel and three of his col-
leagues published a prospective study of near-death experiences in
the well-respected and peer-reviewed British medical journal,
Lancet.44 The study interviewed 344 patients from ten Dutch hospi-
tals immediately after they suffered a heart attack. To gauge the long-
term effects of this event, follow-up studies of this group were
conducted two and eight years later. Van Lommel and his colleagues
found that only 18 percent of their group reported a near-death ex-
perience. Whether one had an NDE was unrelated to the length of
the heart attack, the period of unconsciousness, the presence of med-
ications, or the fear of death. The depth of the experience, however,
was affected by sex (women were more likely to have a deep NDE),
place of resuscitation (those resuscitated outside of the hospital were
more likely to have a deep NDE), and fear of death (those with a fear
of death were more likely to have a deep NDE).
Given that near-death experiences are common and universal,
what can we conclude about them? Do they provide evidence for the
immortality of the soul? Moody thinks so. He believes that the best
explanation of these experiences is that the soul or psyche leaves the
body at death and travels to another world.45 This conclusion is un-
doubtedly what most people would like to believe, so let’s consider
this hypothesis ﬁrst.
Hypothesis 1: During a near-death experience, the soul or psyche leaves the
physical body and travels to another world. Moody cites two reasons for tak-
ing near-death experiences at face value: First, those who have them
can often accurately report what was going on around them while
they were clinically dead; and second, their personalities are often
NEAR-DEATH EXPERIENCES
257

transformed by the experience.46 They no longer fear death, and their
life becomes infused with a new sense of meaning, purpose, and value.
The fact that one is transformed by an experience doesn’t imply
its reality. One’s personality can be changed by reading a novel, but
this doesn’t mean that the characters in the novel are real. Neverthe-
less, the transforming power of the near-death experience is an im-
portant aspect of the experience, which must be accounted for by any
adequate explanation.
Moody provides the following example of knowledge supposedly
gained during the near-death experience:
A forty-nine-year-old man had a heart attack so severe that after
thirty-ﬁve minutes of vigorous resuscitation efforts, the doctor gave
up and began ﬁlling out the death certiﬁcate. Then someone noticed a
ﬂicker of life, so the doctor continued his work with the paddles and
breathing equipment and was able to restart the man’s heart.
The next day, when he was more coherent, the patient was able to
describe in great detail what went on in the emergency room. This
surprised the doctor. But what astonished him even more was the 
patient’s vivid description of the emergency room nurse who hurried
into the room to assist the doctor.
He described her perfectly, right down to her wedge hairdo and
her last name, Hawkes. He said that she rolled this cart down the hall
with a machine that had what looked like two Ping Pong paddles on
it (an electroshocker that is basic resuscitation equipment).
When the doctor asked him how he knew the nurse’s name and
what she had been doing during his heart attack, he said that he had
left his body and—while walking down the hall to see his wife—
passed right through nurse Hawkes. He read the name tag as he went
through her, and remembered it so he could thank her later.
I talked to the doctor at great length about this case. He 
was quite rattled by it. Being there, he said, was the only way 
the man could have recounted this with such complete 
accuracy.47
But the man’s body was there. Is it really inconceivable that he got this
information from his senses? Isn’t it possible that he saw Nurse
Hawkes during a prior visit to the hospital or when he came in? Per-
haps he passed her in the hall or saw her working behind a desk. And
isn’t it possible that the surgeons referred to her by name during the
procedure? Perhaps one of the surgeons said something like, “Nurse
Hawkes, please hand me the paddles.” Even if this comment was made
while the man was lying clinically dead on the operating table, he could
have heard it because the brain doesn’t cease to function at the same
time that the heart and lungs do. Hearing is the last sense to be lost.48
Since the information the patient had could have been obtained by
258
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

ordinary means, this case provides no compelling reason for believing
that his soul left his body.
Moody admits that the evidence he has gathered in his twenty-
two years of looking at near-death experience “isn’t enough scientiﬁc
proof to show conclusively that there is life after death.”49 Neverthe-
less he is convinced “that NDEers do get a glimpse of the beyond, a
brief passage into a whole other reality.”50 Our concern is whether
such a belief is justiﬁed.
Moody suggests that only conclusive proof is scientiﬁcally ac-
ceptable. But as we’ve seen, this suggestion is not feasible, for nothing
in science can be proved conclusively. The standard of justiﬁcation in
science is the same as that of common sense: A claim is justiﬁed if it
is beyond a reasonable doubt, and it is beyond a reasonable doubt if
it provides the best explanation of something. So our question is
whether the evidence from near-death experiences establishes the
belief in life after death beyond a reasonable doubt.
Moody is right that the most compelling evidence for his theory
is the fact that NDEers accurately perceive reality while in the midst
of their experience. He is right, too, that this evidence is not accept-
able evidence of the existence of the soul—though he is wrong as to
why. The problem is not that the evidence fails to prove conclusively
that the soul leaves the body but that it fails to prove the claim be-
yond a reasonable doubt. Doubt arises because the information may
have been obtained through ordinary channels. To establish that it
isn’t, more controlled observation would be required.
One way to study near-death experiences under controlled con-
ditions would be to artiﬁcially induce death (as was done in the movie
Flatliners), have the subjects try to identify speciﬁc objects chosen
through a double-blind procedure, and then revive them. Ethical con-
siderations, however, prevent us from performing such experiments.
Fortunately, it’s not necessary to kill people to check the veracity
of out-of-body perception, for out-of-body experiences can be in-
duced by other means. Meditation, stress, drugs, and exhaustion, for
example, are known to produce out-of-body experiences. There are
even people who claim to be able to produce them at will. Studies of
these people by parapsychologists have produced equivocal results,
however, leaving no solid evidence that accurate out-of-body percep-
tion occurs. After reviewing all the major studies, Susan Blackmore,
the world’s leading expert on out-of-body experiences, concludes:
All these experiments were aimed at ﬁnding out whether subjects
could see a distant target during an OBE [out-of-body experience]. At
best there are a very few properly controlled experiments (some crit-
ics would say, none) which have provided unequivocal evidence that a
NEAR-DEATH EXPERIENCES
259

subject could detect anything by other than normal means. Although
the experimental OBE may differ from the spontaneous kind, a simple
conclusion is possible from the experimental studies. That is, OBE 
vision, if it occurs, is extremely poor.52
The experimental evidence, then, does not establish beyond a rea-
sonable doubt that one can acquire knowledge of the physical world
during an out-of-body experience.
Research continues, however. To test the claim that those having
a near-death experience actually leave their bodies and ﬂoat up toward
260
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
There is a phenomenon known as “spontaneous
human combustion” (SHC), which seems to in-
volve people bursting into ﬂames and burning
so completely that nothing remains of them
but ashes. Charles Dickens was well acquainted
with this phenomenon and provides the follow-
ing description of it in his novel, Bleak House.
. . . there is a smouldering, suffocating
vapour in the room, and a dark greasy coat-
ing on the walls and ceiling. The chairs and
table, and the bottle so rarely absent from
the table, all stand as usual. . . . Here is a
small burnt patch of ﬂooring: . . . and here
is—is it the cinder of a small charred and
broken log of wood sprinkled with white
ashes, or is it coal? O Horror, he is here! . . .
Call the death by any name Your Highness
will . . . it is the same death eternally—in-
born, inbred, engendered in the corrupted
humours of the vicious body itself, and that
only—Spontaneous Combustion, and none
other of all the deaths that can be died.51
After Dickens published this account of
SHC, philosopher George Lewes chided him in
print for promoting an uneducated superstition.
Dickens responded to Lewes by revealing in
the preface of the second edition of Bleak House
that he had thoroughly researched the subject
and was aware of at least thirty well-documented
cases of SHC. Since then, many more cases
have been documented. So there is no doubt
that people burn to death in the manner de-
scribed by Dickens. The question is whether
their combustion is truly spontaneous.
Cases of alleged spontaneous human com-
bustion share a number of common features:
(1) The body, except for the extremities, is
sometimes completely reduced to ashes; 
(2) objects in the room, except those that are
in contact with the body, are usually not
burned; and (3) a greasy coating of soot covers
the ceiling and part of the walls, usually stop-
ping a few feet from the ﬂoor. What makes
cases of SHC so mysterious is that it takes a
temperature of about 1600 degrees Fahrenheit
for approximately two hours to cremate a body,
and even then the bones are not completely re-
duced to ash. (Crematoriums destroy the re-
maining bone fragments by crushing them with
a mortar and pestle.) A ﬁre that hot should de-
stroy much more than just the individual in-
volved. Since it doesn’t, spontaneous human
combustion seems physically impossible.
Given the seeming impossibility of these
ﬁres, some have invoked the supernatural to 
explain them. They view SHC as a form of di-
vine retribution. Many victims of SHC are al-
coholic and overweight, but those indiscretions
don’t seem deserving of such dramatic (and
Spontaneous Human Combustion

the ceiling, some hospitals have placed numbers inside chandeliers
that can only be viewed from the ceiling. If a patient who has had a
near-death experience can accurately report one of these numbers,
there will be reason to believe that the soul hypothesis is correct.
The soul hypothesis, however, faces a number of other difﬁcul-
ties. For example, how are we to conceive of the soul? Apparently, it
has a location in space because people report that it can ﬂoat around
rooms and travel through walls. It also apparently has a shape because
people describe it as a body with arms, legs, and so on. So it can’t be
NEAR-DEATH EXPERIENCES
261
painful) death. Others have speculated that the
intensity of the ﬁre is due to the amount of al-
cohol consumed by the victims. Experiments
conducted in 1850 by Justus von Leibig, how-
ever, showed that even ﬂesh soaked in alcohol
will not burn to ashes by itself.53 Some have
even gone so far as to postulate a new sub-
atomic particle—a “pyroton”—which can initi-
ate an internal chain reaction similar to that
which occurs in an atomic bomb.54
There is no need to invoke the supernatural
or amend the laws of physics to explain SHC,
however, because the phenomenon can be ac-
counted for in much more conventional terms.
Forensic biologists now believe that the victims
of SHC have essentially become human can-
dles. A human with clothes on is like a candle
turned inside out; clothes serve as the wick, and
body fat serves as the wax. What happens in
cases of SHC is that the victim’s clothing
catches on ﬁre, melting their subcutaneous fat.
The fat then melts onto the clothing, or onto
the chair upon which the victim is sitting, pro-
viding additional fuel for the ﬁre. In a closed
room, most of the oxygen is quickly used up,
reducing the ﬂames to a slow smolder and gen-
erating a great deal of greasy smoke. The grease
in the smoke coats the ceilings and walls. 
Objects not in contact with the burning body
do not burn because there is not enough 
oxygen to support their combustion. Objects
engulfed in the hot smoke, however, may show
signs of heat damage such as cracking or melt-
ing. Alcohol does play a role, but not the one
traditionally assumed. It doesn’t fuel the ﬁre; 
it simply impairs the victim’s ability to respond
to it.
A human candle doesn’t burn at 1600°F. But
provided it burns long enough, it doesn’t have
to burn that hot to completely reduce bone to
ash. Douglas Drysdale explains:
In a crematorium you need high tempera-
tures about 1300°C or even higher to reduce
the body to ash in a relatively short period
of time. But it’s a misconception to think you
need those temperatures within a living
room to reduce a body to ash in this way.
You can produce local, high temperatures by
means of the wick effect and a combination
of smouldering and ﬂaming to reduce even
bones to ash. At relatively low temperatures
of 500°C—and, if given enough time—
the bone will transform into something 
approaching a powder in composition.55
So you don’t need to worry about bursting
into ﬂames while you’re walking down the
street. But it is not a good idea to sit in a closed
room and have a smoke after you’ve had a lot
to drink.

totally nonphysical. What, then, is it made of? Moody is silent on this
point. Since it has some physical properties, you would expect that it
would be detectable. All attempts to detect it, however, have failed.
Investigators have used ultraviolet and infrared devices, magnetome-
ters, thermometers, and thermistors in the attempt to register the
presence of the soul.56 No attempts, however, have been successful.
If the soul can acquire knowledge about our world while it is out
of the body, it must interact with that world. But if it interacts with the
world, it must be observable. Psychologist William Rushton explains:
We know that all information coming to us normally from the outside
is caught by the sense organs and encoded by their nerves. And that a
tiny damage to the retina (for instance) or its nerves to the brain pro-
duces such characteristic deﬁciencies in the visual sensation that the
site of the damage may usually be correctly inferred. What is this
OOB [out-of-body] eye that can encode the visual scene exactly as
does the real eye, with its hundred million photoreceptors and its mil-
lion signaling optic nerves? Can you imagine anything but a replica of
the real eye that could manage to do this? But if this ﬂoating replica is
to see, it must catch light, and hence cannot be transparent, and so
must be visible to people in the vicinity.
In fact ﬂoating eyes are not observed, nor would this be expected,
for they only exist in fantasy.57
Since the soul is not observable, it’s doubtful that it can acquire
knowledge while out of the body. The problem is this: If the soul is
physical, it should be detectable. The fact that we haven’t detected it
casts doubt on its physicality. If it’s nonphysical, however, it’s unclear
how it could have a shape and a position in space or acquire knowl-
edge of our world. Without more information about the nature of the
soul and its commerce with the physical world, there is no good rea-
son to take the nonphysical soul hypothesis seriously. For in the 
absence of such information, all that this hypothesis tells us is that
something, we know not what, acquires information, we know not
how, and goes someplace, we know not where. Needless to say, this
hypothesis is not very enlightening.
What’s more, the soul theory runs counter to the ﬁndings of mod-
ern psychology. Over the last 200 years, psychologists have amassed
a huge amount of data correlating mental events and processes with
brain events and processes. Neurophysiologist Barry Beyerstein de-
scribes this data:
Phylogenetic: There is an evolutionary relationship between brain
complexity and species’ cognitive attributes.
Developmental: Abilities emerge with brain maturation; failure of the
brain to mature arrests mental development.
262
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

Clinical: Brain damage from accidental, toxic, or infectious sources,
or from deprivation of nutrition or stimulation during brain develop-
ment, results in predictable and largely irreversible losses of mental
function.
Experimental: Mental operations correlate with electrical, bio-chemical,
biomagnetic, and anatomical changes in the brain. When the human
brain is stimulated electrically or chemically during neurosurgery,
movements, percepts, memories, and appetites are produced that are
like those arising from ordinary activation of the same cells.
Experiential: Numerous natural and synthetic substances interact
chemically with brain cells. Were these neural modiﬁers unable to 
affect consciousness pleasurably and predictably, the recreational
value of nicotine, alcohol, caffeine, LSD, cocaine, and marijuana
would roughly be equal to that of blowing soap bubbles.
Despite their abundance, diversity, and mutual reinforcement, the
foregoing data cannot, by themselves, entail the truth of PNI [the
psychoneural identity theory or the identity theory for short]. Nev-
ertheless, the theory’s parsimony [simplicity] and research produc-
tivity [fruitfulness], the range of phenomena it accounts for [scope],
and the lack of credible counter-evidence are persuasive to virtually
all neuroscientists.58
This excerpt from Beyerstein is instructive not only for the informa-
tion it conveys but also for the demonstration it provides of how the
criteria of adequacy are used to decide among competing theories. He
admits that the identity theory—the theory that mental states are
brain states—is not the only theory that can explain the data. But it’s
the best theory because the explanation it provides is simpler, more
fruitful, and has greater scope than any competing explanation.
The identity theory is simpler than a dualist theory because it
doesn’t assume the existence of an immaterial substance. It’s more
fruitful because it has successfully predicted a number of novel phe-
nomena, such as the production of mental states through electronic
stimulation of the brain. And it has greater scope because it can
explain the foregoing phenomena in purely physical terms.
One of the most popular hypotheses regarding near-death expe-
riences was championed by astronomer Carl Sagan in his book Broca’s
Brain.59 First proposed by the psychologists Stanislov Grof and Joan
Halifax, this hypothesis claims that near-death experiences are vivid
recollections of the birth experience.60 This explanation can appar-
ently account for the universality of near-death experiences, for being
born is an experience that all humans share. It can also apparently 
account for the experience of traveling through a tunnel (entering the
darkness) and seeing the light, for that is what many imagine the birth
experience to be like. As a result, it deserves a closer examination.
NEAR-DEATH EXPERIENCES
263

Hypothesis 2: Near-death experiences are vivid recollections of the birth 
experience. This hypothesis assumes that we can remember our birth
and that what we remember is traveling down a long tunnel. Studies
of infant cognition, however, indicate that their brains are not fully
enough developed to remember speciﬁc details of their birth.61 And
even if they could, it’s doubtful that they would remember the expe-
rience as traveling down a long tunnel, for during birth their faces are
pressed against the walls of the birth canal. Fetuses don’t see anything
until they’ve emerged from the uterus.
Moreover, if near-death experiences were based on birth memo-
ries, then those who were born by Caesarean section should not have
tunnel experiences. Susan Blackmore tested this prediction by send-
ing a questionnaire to 254 people, 36 of whom had been born by Cae-
sarean section. She found that people born by Caesarean section were
just as likely to have tunnel experiences as those who weren’t. So the
best test we have so far of the birth memory hypothesis has turned out
negative.62
To fully explain the near-death experience, the birth memory hy-
pothesis would have to tell us why only birth in particular is relived at
death and not some other experience. One suggestion is that because
our physiological condition at death is similar to that at birth, it trig-
gers memories of it, in much the same way that smells trigger memo-
ries associated with them. But are the physiological conditions of
birth and death really that similar? Can these conditions be produced
under any other circumstances? If so, why aren’t those situations
recalled? Until these questions are answered, the birth memory
explanation can’t be considered a satisfactory one.
Hypothesis 3: Near-death experiences are hallucinations caused by chemical
reactions in the brain. Because various drugs can produce experiences of
exactly the same sort as those reported by near-death survivors, some
investigators claim that near-death experiences are simply chemically
induced hallucinations. Psychologist Ronald Siegel, for example, has
found that all the core elements of the near-death experience can be
elicited by means of drugs.63 Consequently, he hypothesizes that the
stress of being near death causes the brain to manufacture chemicals
that create the near-death experience.
Moody objects to this explanation on the grounds that people can
have near-death experiences even though they have no detectable
brain activity.64 Dr. Schoonmaker, for example, reported ﬁfty-ﬁve
cases in which subjects had a ﬂat EEG (electroencephalogram) and
nevertheless had near-death experiences. Moody’s objection is not de-
cisive, however, because an EEG measures the activity of only the out-
ermost portions of the brain. As Moody himself admits, “brain activity
264
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

can be going on at such a deep level in the brain that surface electrodes
don’t pick it up.”65 So the fact that people with ﬂat EEGs have reported
near-death experiences doesn’t rule out the hallucination hypothesis.
Furthermore, even if people with ﬂat EEGs had absolutely no
brain activity, the fact that near-death experiences were reported by
people with ﬂat EEGs wouldn’t prove that those experiences could not
result from brain activity. The near-death experience could have oc-
curred either before or after the ﬂat EEG. Since we can’t pinpoint the
exact time of a near-death experience, we can’t be sure that it hap-
pened while the EEG was ﬂat.
The biggest problem with the hallucination hypothesis is that it
doesn’t explain why the hallucinations at death are so similar. Drugs
are capable of producing all sorts of hallucinations, and the halluci-
nations they produce are usually dependent on set and setting (ex-
pectations and environment). So why do people with such different
backgrounds have such similar experiences? As Susan Blackmore asks,
“Why a tunnel and not, say, a gate, doorway, or even the great River
Styx? Why the light at the end of the tunnel? And why always above
the body, not below it?”66 Until we know what chemicals are involved
and why they have the effects they do, the hallucination hypothesis
doesn’t tell us much.
Some people have suggested that chemical changes in the brain
are responsible for near-death experiences and that those changes are
the result of cerebral anoxia, or loss of oxygen in the brain.67 When a
patient clinically dies, the heart and lungs cease to function, and con-
sequently the brain no longer receives oxygen. Those researchers who
make this argument point out that in the initial stages of oxygen dep-
rivation, a person usually experiences a sense of well-being and power.
If the condition persists, he or she often becomes deluded and may
experience hallucinations. But the hallucinations associated with oxy-
gen deprivation are not always the same as those associated with the
near-death experience. And those who recover from cerebral anoxia
usually recognize their hallucinations as hallucinations; those who’ve
had near-death experiences often maintain that their experiences were
real, even more real than those of waking life.68 Finally, it should be
noted that Dr. Schoonmaker, who often had the opportunity to meas-
ure the amount of oxygen in the blood at the time of cardiac arrest,
reported a number of subjects who had near-death experiences even
though their blood contained enough oxygen to maintain average
brain functioning.69 The cerebral anoxia hypothesis can’t adequately
account for a number of factors relating to the near-death experience.
Hypothesis 4: The near-death experience is the result of the brain trying 
to construct a stable model of reality after the normal sources of input have 
NEAR-DEATH EXPERIENCES
265

been disrupted. Susan Blackmore claims that in order to understand near-
death experiences, we have to understand how our brains distinguish
illusion from reality. Our brains, she tells us, are information-process-
ing mechanisms that try to make sense out of the information they 
receive by constructing models of reality. The model we take to be
real at any one time is the one that is the most stable, that is, the one
that ﬁts best with the available information. As she puts it:
Our brains have no trouble distinguishing “reality” from “imagination.”
But this distinction is not given. It is one the brain has to make for 
itself by deciding which of its own models represents the world “out
266
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
The Human Consciousness Project
To accept the view that we can have experiences
while our brains are not functioning is to reject
one of the most fundamental beliefs of modern
neuroscience: that sensation and perception de-
pend on the brain. The evidence for the view
that we think with our brains is overwhelming.
Alter or damage the brain and you alter or dam-
age the mind. Yet some near-death experiences
seem to suggest that this is not the case; we 
can think without having a (functional) brain. 
In an attempt to ascertain the nature of the
mind/brain relationship, the Nour Foundation,
the Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO)
section of the United Nations’ Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, and the University
of Montreal have launched the Awareness Dur-
ing Resuscitation (AWARE) study as part of the
Human Consciousness Project.
The study is led by Dr. Sam Parnia, a world-
renowned expert on the study of the human
mind and consciousness during clinical
death, and is being conducted in collabora-
tion with more than 25 major medical cen-
ters in the United States and Europe. . . .
A number of recent scientiﬁc studies car-
ried out by independent researchers have
demonstrated that 10–20 percent of people
who go through cardiac arrest and clinical
death report lucid, well-structured thought
processes, reasoning, memories, and some-
times detailed recall of events during their
encounter with death.
”The remarkable point about these expe-
riences,” according to Dr. Parnia, “is that
while studies of the brain during cardiac 
arrest have consistently shown that there is
no measurable brain activity, these subjects
have reported detailed perceptions that indi-
cate the contrary—namely, a high level of
consciousness in the absence of detectable
brain activity. If we can objectively verify
these claims, the results would bear profound
implications not only for the scientiﬁc com-
munity, but for the way in which we under-
stand and relate to life and death as a society.”
Using sophisticated technology to study
the brain and consciousness during cardiac
arrest, doctors will also be testing the valid-
ity of so-called out of body experiences and
claims of being able to see and hear during
cardiac arrest by using hidden images that
can only be seen from speciﬁc vantage
points in the hospital rooms.70
To date, no unequivocal evidence has been
found for the view that the mind can function
independently of the brain. But if it is, we 
may well have to rethink what it means to be
human.

there.” I suggest it does this by comparing all the models it has at any
time and choosing the most stable one as “reality.”71
When our normal sources of information are disrupted, as when we
are under severe stress or near death, our models of reality will be-
come unstable. In that case, the brain will try to construct a stable
model by using the only information available to it, namely, memory.
Remembered events, however, have a peculiar characteristic: They are
almost always seen from a bird’s-eye point of view. Try to remember
the last time you walked down the beach or through the woods, for
example. If you’re like most of us, you’ll see yourself from above. This
aspect of our memories, she claims, helps explain out-of-body experi-
ences. These experiences are simply the result of a memory model of
reality taking over from a sensory model.72
One advantage of Blackmore’s hypothesis is that it can account
for the perceived reality of the out-of-body experience. Since reality
is whatever our most stable model says it is, if a memory model be-
comes the most stable, then it will be taken to be real.
Extraordinary events can have a profound effect on us, especially
if they are considered to be real. The events that occur during an
NDE are, to say the least, extraordinary, and since they’re part of an
NDEer’s most stable model of reality at the time, they seem real. It’s
no wonder, then, that people often come away from an NDE with a
radically altered view of the world.
Other features of the near-death experience, Blackmore claims, can
be accounted for by appeal to the physiology of the brain. We know, for
example, that the brain produces opiumlike substances called endorphins
in response to certain types of stress. The feeling of peace and well-
being so often associated with near-death experiences, then, can be ex-
plained as the result of the brain’s production of these natural painkillers.
We also know that brain activity is kept in check by the in-
hibitory action of certain nerve cells. If this action is reduced (as it can
be during near-death experiences), then brain activity increases. If it
increases in the visual cortex, tunnel experiences are produced be-
cause of the way our visual ﬁeld is mapped onto our visual cortex.73
So the experience of moving through a tunnel can be explained as the
result of increasing noise in the visual cortex. Also, these chemical
reactions, based as they are on fundamental human biochemistry,
explain the universality of the images and sensations in NDEs.
While operating on a woman who was suffering from epilepsy, a
team of neurosurgeons in Switzerland found that out-of-body experi-
ences can be produced by stimulating an area of the brain known as
the angular gyrus. To pinpoint the source of the epilepsy, they im-
planted over 100 electrodes in her brain. When they activated the
NEAR-DEATH EXPERIENCES
267

electrode in the right angular gyrus, the patient reported the feeling
of ﬂoating above her body and watching herself. The angular gyrus is
a part of the brain that is responsible for body image and spatial
awareness. A misﬁring of neurons in this area, which could be caused
by cerebral anoxia or other brain trauma, could generate the out-of-
body experiences associated with the near-death experience.74
Blackmore’s hypothesis, then, does an admirable job of account-
ing for the major features of the near-death experience. Is it the best
hypothesis? Let’s review the bidding.
Hypothesis 1 (the soul hypothesis) has not borne any epistemo-
logical fruit, for it has not predicted any heretofore unknown phe-
nomena, nor is it testable. It is also less simple and less conservative
than any of the other hypotheses considered, for it postulates more
entities than they do, and the entities postulated are not recognized
by our current best theories. The scope of this theory is also ques-
tionable, for as we saw in the case of creationism, you can’t explain the
unknown by appeal to the incomprehensible.
Hypothesis 2 (the birth-memory hypothesis) is inconsistent with
what we know about the nature of the birth experience and has not
lived up to its predictions. Hypothesis 3 (the hallucination hypothe-
sis) has trouble explaining the similarity of the hallucinations, the per-
ceived reality of the out-of-body experience, and the transforming
effects of the near-death experience. Hypothesis 4 (Blackmore’s
memory theory), on the other hand, can explain all these aspects of
the near-death experience and many others as well. Its scope, there-
fore, is greater than that of any of the other theories.
Another of its virtues is testability. It predicts that those who are
better at imagining things from a bird’s-eye view will have more out-
of-body experiences than those who aren’t. This prediction has been
borne out by research conducted by both psychologist Harvey Irwin
and Blackmore herself.75 So her theory is fruitful as well.
Hypothesis 4 is also simpler and more conservative than the soul
hypothesis, and at least as simple and conservative as the other two,
because its assumptions don’t contradict any well-established ﬁndings.
On balance, then, it would appear that Blackmore’s theory provides
the best explanation of the near-death experience.
GHOSTS
In 1575, Gilles Delacre of Tours, France, sued his landlord on the
grounds that the house he was renting was haunted. The lawyer for
the landlord tried to get the case dismissed on the grounds that ghosts
didn’t exist. In rebuttal, Delacre’s lawyer cited a number of authorities,
268
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

including Origen, Seneca, Livy, Cicero, Plutarch, and Pliny, attesting
to the existence of ghosts. The judge found this testimony convinc-
ing and decided in favor of Delacre.76
In 1990, Jeffrey Stambovsky of Nyack, New York, sued Helen
Ackley and Ellis Reality to void his purchase agreement on the
grounds that the house he was about to buy was haunted. Mr. Stam-
bovsky had already paid Ackley $32,500 of the $650,000 asking price
for the old Victorian mansion, which bore a resemblance to the house
inhabited by the television family, the Munsters. For years, Ackley
had been telling her friends and neighbors that the house was
haunted. In a 1977 Reader’s Digest article, she claimed that one of the
ghosts was “a cheerful apple-faced man” who looked like Santa Claus.
A 1989 newspaper article on Nyack real estate described the house as
a “riverfront Victorian—with ghost.” All this was news to the Strom-
bovskys, who found out about the house’s haunted history only after
they had made their down payment. A lower court initially denied
their petition, but the Strombovskys persevered, and in 1991, the ap-
pellate division of the state supreme court ruled in their favor, ﬁnding
Ackley guilty of fraudulently concealing information from them. In
his decision, Judge Rubin wrote:
Not being a “local,” plaintiff could not readily learn that the home he
had contracted to purchase is haunted. Whether the source of the
spectral apparition seen by defendant seller are parapsychic or psy-
chogenic having reported their presence in both a national publica-
tion and the local press, defendant is estopped to deny their existence
and, as a matter of law, the house is haunted. . . . Finally, if the lan-
guage of the contract is to be construed as broadly as defendant urges
to encompass the presence of poltergeists in the house, it cannot be
said that she has delivered the premises “vacant” in accordance with
her obligation under the provisions of the contract rider.77
So the legal recognition of the existence of haunted houses is not
something relegated to ﬁfteenth-century Europe. It can be found in
twentieth-century America as well.
It’s unclear whether Justice Rubin believes in the existence of
ghosts. But according to a recent Gallup poll, 38 percent of Americans
do. Ghosts are traditionally deﬁned as the spirits or souls of people
who have died, and many claim to have experienced them. These ex-
periences may range from full-form apparitions to sudden changes in
temperature, unnatural odors, and a feeling of presence. These expe-
riences are undoubtedly real. The question is, were they caused by
disembodied spirits? To answer this question we’ll have to determine
whether the claim that they were provides the best explanation of
the evidence.
GHOSTS
269

While ghost experiences are many and varied, they can usefully
be divided into two basic categories: hauntings and apparitions.
Hauntings are characterized by ghosts that appear repeatedly at the
same place and go through the same motions time and time again. 
Apparitions, on the other hand, are ghosts that appear to interact with
the people around them. Some appear only once in an attempt to im-
part some information or complete some business. Others appear
many times.
Hypothesis 1: Ghost experiences are caused by disembodied spirits. The
easiest way to explain ghost experiences is to take them at face value:
What we seem to see is what we do see, namely, a disembodied spirit.
But if ghosts are truly immaterial, it’s difﬁcult to understand how we
could see them.
Those who believe in the existence of souls or spirits are tradi-
tionally known as dualists because they believe that there are two dif-
ferent types of things in the world: physical and nonphysical. The
most inﬂuential modern dualist was René Descartes (1566–1627),
who argues that the mind or soul must be a nonphysical thing be-
cause physical things can’t think, feel, or desire. (Many people remain
skeptical of the prospect for artiﬁcial intelligence for just this reason.)
The soul, he claims, has no physical properties whatsoever: no mass,
no charge, no extension in space. But without any of these properties,
sensing souls is a problem. They can’t be seen because photons can’t
bounce off of them; they can’t be touched because they have no mass;
they can’t be smelled because they don’t emit any molecules. How we
would ever be aware of such entities is a mystery. If ghost experiences
are caused by disembodied spirits, they cannot be of the Cartesian
variety.
Maybe ghosts are not as immaterial as Descartes thought. The
Hindus claim that human beings are composed of a number of differ-
ent bodies, including the physical body, the astral body, and the causal
body. The astral body, like the physical body, is supposedly made up of
atoms, but of a more ethereal kind than those that make up the phys-
ical world. The Hindu mystic Paramahansa Yogananda refers to these
atoms as “lifetrons” and claims that they are “ﬁner than atomic 
energies.”78 But what could this mean? What makes one sort of energy
“ﬁner” than another? Are lifetrons made out of protons, neutrons, and
electrons like ordinary atoms? Or are they made out of some totally
different kind of matter? Are there different types of lifetrons like there
are different types of ordinary atoms? Do lifetrons combine in differ-
ent ways to form different substances like ordinary atoms do? Why
can’t we detect them with our current instruments? The stuff out of
which ghosts are made is a mysterious thing.
270
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

Professor Charles Ricket, former president of the Society for Psy-
chical Research, coined another name for ghost substance: ectoplasm. It
is derived from the Greek word ektos (interiorization) and plasm
(substance). Ghosts supposedly not only leave some of this substance
behind (as in the movie Ghostbusters), but mediums also can excrete this
substance when they contact a spirit. Whenever any of the ectoplasm
produced during a séance was analyzed, however, it turned out to be
decidedly nonmysterious. Egg white, cheesecloth, and wood pulp
were the most common constituents of ectoplasm.
If ghost substance does have physical properties, it should be de-
tectable with modern measuring apparatus. That’s why present-day
ghostbusters take along equipment like electromagnetic sensors.
Sometimes these paranormal investigators will ﬁnd anamolous read-
ings at haunted sites. But as we will see, the existence of these read-
ings does not necessarily indicate the presence of a ghost.
Even if humans are composed of more than one body, a number
of questions remain: What is the function of this body? How does it
perform this function? The Hindus claim that the astral body is the
“seat of men’s mental and emotional natures.”79 Does that mean that
we think and feel with our astral body? What, then, is the purpose of
the physical body and brain? Is the brain merely an elaborate relay
station that sends signals from the astral body to the physical body
and vice versa? Are we to believe that those with serious brain dam-
age are not really cognitively or emotionally impaired? Are those suf-
fering from severe Alzheimer’s, for example, in full control of their
faculties? Have they simply lost the ability to communicate with their
bodies? Is this plausible?
Most people who see ghosts see them with clothes on, but where
do astral clothes come from? Astral bodies supposedly don’t come
with astral clothes. Are there astral clothes stores? Do they carry all
styles from ancient Greek to modern hip-hop? Why do ghosts only
wear clothes of their period? Do ghosts ever get makeovers? These are
serious questions, and the ghost theory needs to answer them if we are
to take it seriously.
In addition to the foregoing objective explanations of ghost ex-
periences, which attribute them to the actual perception of a ghost,
there are also a number of subjective explanations, which attribute
them to unusual states of mind caused by various environmental 
factors. One such theory is the “stone tape theory.”
Hypothesis 2: Ghost experiences are caused by sounds and images stored in
the stones of buildings or outcroppings. The idea is that emotionally charged
events of the sort associated with ghosts get impressed upon the stones
in the vicinity. Somehow, during a ghost experience, the event
GHOSTS
271

recorded in the stone is played back. The analogy here is that of a tape
player to a tape: the stones are the tape and the mind is the tape player.
The problem is that we know of no mechanism that could record
such information in a stone or play it back. Chunks of stone just do
not have the same properties as reels of tape. Even magnetic tape can’t
record sound or video without a special recording head. Speaking to
a magnetic tape will not record anything. Nor can one hear what’s
recorded on a magnetic tape by putting it up to one’s ear. In both
cases, a special device like a read/write head is needed, and the stone
tape theory provides no clue as to what such a device would be.
Many ghost sightings happen at night right before one goes to
sleep or in the morning, right after one wakes up. The ghosts reported
at these times often appear as faces in the dark that move through the
room and may even call out the sleeper’s name. The sleeper, though,
is usually paralyzed and not able to respond. We have encountered
the phenomenon of sleep paralysis before as an explanation for the
experience of alien abduction. It may also account for a number of
ghost sightings.
Hypothesis 3: Ghost experiences are the result of sleep paralysis. During
periods of REM (rapid eye movement) sleep when most dreams occur,
the body is paralyzed to prevent people from acting out their dreams
and possibly hurting themselves. If you fall asleep too quickly, however,
you may slip into REM sleep while still conscious. The result may be
night terrors or waking dreams where conscious experiences mix with
dream imagery, producing vivid hallucinations.
Narcoleptics are more prone to night terrors than others be-
cause they can fall asleep almost instantly anytime during the day.
Traditional therapy has involved taking various pep pills and stimu-
lants to keep them awake until it is time to go to sleep. A new drug—
modaﬁnal—promises to reduce the experience of night terrors without
the side effects of stimulants. In clinical trials, modaﬁnal helped nar-
coleptics stay awake 50 percent longer than those in the control
group.80 Since it serves to lessen the frequency of night terrors, some
are touting modaﬁnal as a chemical ghostbuster.
Houses and structures that acquire the reputation of being haunted
often have a history of producing ghost experiences, and those experi-
ences often occur in particular parts of the house or structure. 
Psychologist and parapsychological investigator Richard Wiseman of
the University of Hertfordshire wondered whether there might be
something in the environment of those haunted places that produces
the ghost experiences. To test this hypothesis, he decided to investi-
gate two of the most haunted places in Great Britain: Hampton Court
Palace in England and the South Bridge Vaults in Edinburgh, Scotland.
272
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

Hampton Court Palace served as the residence for British mon-
archs for over 500 years. Legend has it that it is haunted by the ghost
of the ﬁfth wife of Henry VIII, Catherine Howard, who was accused
of adultery and sentenced to death. When she learned of her fate, she
supposedly ran to the king to plead for her life, but was dragged away
screaming through a part of the palace known as the “haunted gallery.”
This is not the only haunted area of the palace, however. Ghost 
experiences have also been reported in other parts of the palace, 
including one known as the “Georgian rooms.”
The Edinburgh vaults are a series of small chambers and corridors
that were built under South Bridge when it was erected in the late
eighteenth century. Originally they served as workshops, storage, and
housing for the poor. By the mid-nineteenth century, however, leaks
and overcrowding had made them a public health hazard, so they
were abandoned and forgotten. The vaults were rediscovered in the
late twentieth century, and in 1996 they were opened to the public for
tours. Since then, many people have reported ghost experiences in
particular areas of the vaults.
To see whether ghost experiences are correlated with environ-
mental cues, Wiseman and his colleagues had over 600 people walk
through these structures and make note of any unusual phenomena
they experienced. At Hampton Court, Wiseman’s team placed
electromagnetic sensors at various places throughout the palace to
monitor the magnetic ﬁelds. At South Bridge, they monitored air
temperature, air movement, and light levels as well as magnetic ﬁelds.
What they found was that even when people had no prior knowledge
of what parts of these ediﬁces were haunted, they consistently re-
ported unusual experiences in those places with the highest ﬂuctua-
tions in the magnetic ﬁeld or other environmental variables. Wiseman
concludes that “the data strongly support the notion that people con-
sistently report unusual experiences in ‘haunted’ areas because of en-
vironmental factors, which may differ across locations. . . . Taken
together, these ﬁndings strongly suggest that these alleged hauntings
do not represent evidence for ‘ghostly’ activity, but are instead the re-
sult of people responding—perhaps unwittingly—to ‘normal’ factors
in their surroundings.”81
Hypothesis 4: Ghost experiences are the result of environmental factors inter-
acting with the senses and brain. Wiseman’s research corroborates that of
Michael Persinger who has found that changes in magnetic ﬁelds can
generate all sorts of paranormal experiences, including alien abduc-
tions, out-of-body experiences, and religious experiences. Other re-
searchers have noted similar correlations. In an article published in the
Journal of Psychical Research, for example, Wilkinson and Gauld found a
GHOSTS
273

link between ghost sightings and sunspot cycles, which create ﬂuctu-
ations in the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld.82 William Roll of the State Uni-
versity of West Georgia has also discovered hauntings that are
associated with ﬂuctuating magnetic ﬁelds.83 The brain is an electro-
chemical device. It makes sense that it could be affected by changes
in the electromagnetic ﬁeld around it.
Another environmental factor that may be involved is infrasound.
Infrasound is the name given to sound waves whose frequency is below
the limit of human hearing, usually 20 cycles per second or less. 
Computer specialist Vic Tandy discovered that infrasound could gen-
erate ghost experiences quite by accident. One night, while working
in his laboratory, he broke into a cold sweat and had the distinct feel-
ing that he was being watched. Then he saw a gray shape materialize
and move across the room. Sometime later, he brought his rapier to
the lab in preparation for a fencing tournament. As he held it in his
hand, it began to vibrate as if it were being shaken by some unknown
entity. Mr. Tandy knew that sound waves could create those sorts of
vibrations, so he decided to measure the sound waves in his labora-
tory. He found that the air in his laboratory was vibrating at 19 cycles
per second, which is the frequency at which eyeballs start to vibrate.
He also found that when he turned off a newly installed extractor
fan, the vibrations ceased. Fans are not the only things that create
such low-frequency vibrations. Earthquakes, thunder, and winds
blowing down chimneys or through long corridors can also produce
infrasound. Maybe that’s why ghosts are often associated with howl-
ing winds or thunderstorms.
To study the effects of infrasound under more controlled condi-
tions, Richard Wiseman and Richard Lord of England’s National Phys-
ical Laboratory had people record their feelings during a concert at
London’s Metropolitan Cathedral. At various points throughout the
show, they secretly generated infrasound by playing a bass speaker
through a 21-foot-long sewer pipe. The people at the concert did
seem to notice when the infrasound was being generated. At those
times they jotted down comments like “a tingly feeling in the back of
my neck,” “something in my stomach,” and “a sense of presence.”84
Wiseman is currently trying to buy a house so he can test these vari-
ous environmental factors under more controlled conditions. A house
equipped with ﬂuctuating magnetic ﬁelds, light levels, air currents,
and infrasound could prove to be much scarier than those encoun-
tered at amusement parks.85
What should we believe about the cause of ghost experiences?
Let’s examine the relative plausibility of the various hypotheses. The
soul hypothesis is the least simple of the bunch because it postulates
274
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

the existence of an unknown substance. And while it may seem to
explain most aspects of ghost experiences, its scope is questionable
because it raises more questions than it answers: What is the soul made
of? How does it get around? Does it possess muscles, nerves, or a brain?
How is it able to interact with the world? Why aren’t we able to detect
it? Where does it get its clothes? Until these questions are answered,
the soul hypothesis leaves us with as big a mystery as we started.
The stone tape theory doesn’t postulate any unknown entities, but
it does postulate unknown processes. We know of no way for sounds
or images to be stored in stone. What’s more, even if such a mecha-
nism were found, it would only explain hauntings, not apparitions that
seem to interact with humans. So its scope is somewhat limited.
The sleep paralysis and environmental factors hypotheses have
the advantage of simplicity over the others because they do not as-
sume the existence of any unknown entities or forces. They have more
scope than the others because, taken together, they can explain all as-
pects of the ghost experience from a feeling of presence to full-form
GHOSTS
275
An alleged ghost
photographed 
by a surveillance
camera at Hamp-
ton Court Palace.

apparitions. They can also explain why ghosts are so often seen wear-
ing clothes: Ghosts are mental constructions, not external existents.
CONSPIRACY THEORIES
Have you heard: that the world is controlled by reptilian creatures
from the fourth dimension who must consume human blood to main-
tain their human appearance? That the Apollo 11 moon landings were
faked by NASA? That a secret society known as the Bavarian Illumi-
nati has been at work since 1776 to destroy all religions, topple all
governments, and establish a new world order? If so, you have been
276
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
The Ghost Hunters
A lot of people are out there pursuing a fasci-
nating but frustratingly elusive prey—ghosts.
Many of these investigators have been inspired
by the famous spirit detectives of the Syfy
channel’s show Ghost Hunters. Unlike the ghost
stalkers of a hundred years ago, the show’s stars
and many of their imitators claim to be scien-
tiﬁc and to use scientiﬁc methods in their
hunts. But are they really scientiﬁc? Ben Rad-
ford, an author of books on critical thinking
and science literacy, asserts that they are a long
way from being scientiﬁc. And most scientists
would likely agree with him. Radford is a para-
normal investigator himself, and he draws on
this experience and his knowledge of scientiﬁc
methods to critique the ghost hunters who pre-
tend to be doing science but aren’t. Here he
catalogues some of their mistakes:
Failing to consider alternative explanations
for anomalous or “unexplained” phenomena.
Ghost hunters often over-interpret evidence
and fail to adequately consider alternative
explanations, assuming for example that
“orbs” are ghosts, EVPs (electronic voice
phenomena) are ghost voices, and so on.
Why it's a mistake: The designation of “un-
explained” or paranormal must be accepted
only when all other normal, natural explana-
tions have been ruled out through careful
analysis. The explanation that orbs are
[camera] ﬂash reﬂections of dust, insects,
mist, etc., has been widely discussed for
years. Many ghost hunters who accept the
scientiﬁc, skeptical explanation for orbs
continue to record EVPs as ghost voices de-
spite the fact that scientiﬁc evidence of the
validity of EVPs is as poor as it is for orbs.
Considering subjective feelings and emo-
tions as evidence of ghostly encounters.
Ghost hunters often report descriptions of
personal feelings and experiences like “I felt
a heavy, sad presence and wanted to cry,” or
“I felt like something didn't want me there,”
and so on. They may also describe in detail
how they got goose bumps upon entering a
room or grew panicked at some unseen
presence, assuming they were reacting to a
hidden ghost.
Why it's a mistake: Subjective experiences
are essentially stories and anecdotes. There's
nothing wrong with personal experiences,
but by themselves they are not proof or evi-
dence of anything. Most people who report
such experiences are sincere in their belief

exposed to a conspiracy theory, which attempts to explain events by
attributing them to the actions of a small but powerful group of peo-
ple working under cover behind the scenes. Usually there is no direct
evidence linking any of the alleged conspirators to their nefarious
deeds. Nonetheless, conspiracy theorists claim that the circumstantial
evidence can best be explained on the assumption that a secret group
of conspirators is at work.
Senator Joe McCarthy, for example, thought that America’s loss of
global power and prestige in the years immediately following World
War II could only be explained on the assumption that communists
had conspired to destroy America. In a speech before Congress,
he asks:
CONSPIRACY THEORIES
277
that a ghost caused their panic, but that be-
lief does not necessarily make it true. The
problem, of course, is that there is not nec-
essarily any connection between a real dan-
ger or a ghostly presence and how a person
feels. The power of suggestion can be very
strong, and a suggestible ghost hunter can
easily convince herself—and others—that
something weird is going on in a dark and
creepy house.
Using improper and unscientiﬁc investiga-
tion methods. 
Ghost hunters often misuse scientiﬁc equip-
ment and ignore good scientiﬁc research
methods. A few typical examples…. 
Investigating with the lights off
Nearly every ghost-themed TV show has
several scenes in which the investigators
walk around in a darkened place, usually at
night, looking for ghosts. Purposely con-
ducting an investigation in the dark inten-
tionally hobbles the investigation and is
completely counterproductive. Searching at
night in the dark puts investigators at an im-
mediate and obvious disadvantage in trying
to identify and understand what's going on
around them. Unless a ghost or entity has
been speciﬁcally and repeatedly reported or
photographed emitting light, there's no
valid, logical reason for ghost investigators
to work in the dark.
Using unproven tools and equipment
Many ghost hunters consider themselves
scientiﬁc if they use high-tech scientiﬁc
equipment such as Geiger counters, EMF
detectors, ion detectors, infrared cameras,
sensitive microphones, and so on. Yet for
any piece of equipment to be useful, it must
have some proven connection to ghosts. For
example, if ghosts were known to emit elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds, then a device that meas-
ures such ﬁelds would be useful. If ghosts
were known to cause temperature drops,
then a sensitive thermometer would be use-
ful. If ghosts were known to emit ions, then
a device that measures such ions would be
useful.
The problem is that there is no body of
research showing that anything these de-
vices measure has anything to do with
ghosts. Until someone can reliably demon-
strate that ghosts have certain measurable
characteristics, devices that measure those
characteristics are irrelevant.86

How can we account for our present situation unless we believe that
men high in this government are concerting to deliver us to disaster?
This must be the product of a great conspiracy on a scale so immense as
to dwarf any previous such venture in the history of man. A conspiracy
of infamy so black that, when it is ﬁnally exposed, its principals shall be
forever deserving of the malediction of all honest men.87
To root out these conspirators, McCarthy conducted open hearings in
the Senate, the infamous McCarthy hearings. His accusations tar-
nished or ruined the careers of many otherwise reputable people. But
ultimately McCarthy himself turned out to be the only one deserving
the malediction of all honest men.
McCarthy’s attitude toward the communists, however, is repre-
sentative of many conspiracy theorists’ view of the alleged conspirators.
They are often seen as extremely evil, exceedingly powerful, and ex-
ceptionally well organized. The events attributed to them are of such
magnitude, the conspiracy theorists argue, that only a group possess-
ing great powers could accomplish them. We have encountered this
style of reasoning before. It’s a version of the representativeness
heuristic: Like causes like. Big events require big causes. Psychologist
Patrick Leman of the Royal Holloway University of London believes
that this cognitive bias lies behind the psychological appeal of many
conspiracy theories.88
To test this hypothesis, Leman had sixty-four students read one of
four ﬁctional—yet seemingly authentic—newspaper accounts of an at-
tempted assassination. In the ﬁrst, a gunman shot and killed the presi-
dent of a foreign country. In the second, a gunman wounded the
president, but he survived. In the third, the gunman wounded the pres-
ident, but he later died of an unrelated cause. In the fourth, the gun-
man shot at but missed the president. When the students were asked
how likely it was that the assassination attempt was the result of a con-
spiracy, the students who read the ﬁrst account found it much more
likely than those who read the others. Why? Dr. Leman suggests that
it is our tendency to associate big effects (like the killing of a president)
with big causes (like a conspiracy). This may go some way toward ex-
plaining why so many people believe that the assassinations of Presi-
dent John Fitzgerald Kennedy, Attorney General Bobby Kennedy, and
Reverend Martin Luther King were not the work of a lone gunman.
Once one has bought into the belief system associated with a con-
spiracy theory, another cognitive error—conﬁrmation bias—often
helps reinforce those beliefs. Buying into a conspiracy theory, espe-
cially one that views the conspirators as being bent on global domina-
tion, gives one a particular set of rose-colored glasses through which
to view the world. As sociologist Donna Kossy observes:
278
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

Conspiracy theories are like black holes—they suck in everything that
comes their way, regardless of content or origin; conspiracies are por-
tals to other universes that paradoxically reside within our own.
Everything you’ve ever known or experienced, no matter how “mean-
ingless,” once it contacts the conspiratorial universe, is enveloped by
and cloaked in sinister signiﬁcance. Once inside, the vortex gains in
size and strength, sucking in everything you touch.89
Events that seem to conﬁrm one’s beliefs are noticed and remembered;
those that conﬂict with them are ignored and forgotten. In this way,
conspiracy theorists can fool themselves into thinking that a massive
amount of evidence supports their view when, in reality, the totality
of evidence may be better explained in a more mundane way.
Other psychological factors undoubtedly lie behind the accept-
ance of many conspiracy theories. In a world of accelerating change
and senseless suffering, viewing major social upheavals as the work of
a powerful yet clandestine group may seem to make sense of it all. No
longer is the world so dense, opaque, and unintelligible. Events that
formerly seemed random and unconnected are now seen as part of a
CONSPIRACY THEORIES
279
Three photo fea-
tures that have
inspired conspir-
acy theorists (and
provoked explana-
tions from anti-
hoaxers): A
“waving” ﬂag; a
starless sky; and,
on the lunar
module, a ﬂag
decal that is well
lit though
seemingly in
shadow.

master plan. The question of why bad things happen to good people
can now be answered: because the conspirators did it. Having such an
answer can also give one a sense of power and superiority—power
because one has identiﬁed the enemy and superiority because one
possesses knowledge that others don’t.
But even if you derive some psychological beneﬁt from believing
in a conspiracy theory, that doesn’t mean that it’s true. Even though
you may think you’re in the know, you may not be, because as we’ve
seen, believing something to be true doesn’t make it true. Only if a
conspiracy theory actually provides the best explanation of some-
thing are you justiﬁed in believing it to be true.
Part of the cognitive appeal of conspiracy theories is that they
seem to explain so much with so little. In other words, they seem to
280
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY
The Apollo Conspiracy: Did We Land on the Moon?
Most people take the moon landings by NASA
astronauts to be historical fact—but some don’t
buy it. Through books, Web sites, and a 2001
Fox television program called “Conspiracy 
Theory: Did We Land on the Moon?” doubters
have insisted that the lunar landings never hap-
pened and were actually staged in a movie stu-
dio. They claim that the well-known lunar
feats—Neil Armstrong’s famous “one small
step,” the ﬂag-planting, astronaut golf, moon
buggy maneuvers, and all the rest—were clev-
erly concocted on Earth because NASA didn’t
have the technology to pull off the real thing.
In other words, the Apollo program’s six moon
landings of 1969–1972 were the result of a
massive and highly successful conspiracy. The
point of this elaborate scam, the doubters say,
was to win the space race against the Soviet
Union—even if winning involved faking it.
The evidence thought to support the con-
spiracy idea consists mostly of apparent dis-
crepancies in the videos and photographs said
to have been taken on the moon. Conspiracy
theorists point to many photographic details
that seem to suggest that the pictures were 
not taken on the moon but were shot in a stu-
dio or faked by technicians. Some examples:
• In the lunar pictures, there are no stars in the
sky, which you would expect to see in the black-
ness of space if the pictures were genuine.
• The video of the astronauts planting an 
American ﬂag shows the ﬂag ﬂuttering as if blown
by the wind, but there is no wind on the moon.
• The shadows cast by objects on the lunar sur-
face should be parallel because the sun’s light
rays are parallel. But in many pictures, the shad-
ows of the astronauts and other objects fall at
nonparallel angles, just as you would expect in a
studio using multiple light sources.
• In a photo of an astronaut standing next to
the moon buggy, the letter C is clearly visible on
a nearby rock—probably a marking made by the
props department.
The list of such discrepancies is long, but 
how strong are they as evidence of a conspiracy?
They are actually fairly weak because the support
they offer is, at best, equivocal. In each case, the
discrepancy could be due to a hoax, or it could
simply be an anomaly arising from the conditions
in which the lunar pictures were taken. No cor-
roborating evidence shows that the discrepancy
must be the result of conspiracy or deception.

have wide scope while being remarkably simple. For example, the
world’s oldest conspiracy theory—that the Freemasons did it—has
been used to explain everything from the French Revolution to the
slayings of Jack the Ripper. (Freemasonry is the world’s oldest and
largest fraternal organization whose meetings, like those of all frater-
nities, are restricted to members only.) Scope and simplicity are in-
deed hallmarks of a good theory. But in the case of many conspiracy
theories, their scope and simplicity are more apparent than real.
The simplicity of a theory is measured not by its ease of compre-
hension but by the number of independent assumptions it makes.
Most conspiracy theories, while easy to comprehend, make a bewil-
dering array of assumptions. The Masonic conspiracy theory, for 
example, assumes that Freemasons are out to control the world; that 
CONSPIRACY THEORIES
281
On the other hand, experts have provided
plausible explanations for many of the photo-
graphic oddities, including most of those that
doubters focus on. For example, they point out
that stars aren’t visible in the pictures because
camera exposures were set for brightly lit lunar
scenes—camera settings that would prevent
faint objects like stars from showing on the
ﬁlm. The ﬂag ﬂutters because the astronauts
pushed and twisted the ﬂagpole into the lunar
soil, causing the horizontally supported ﬂag to
wave back and forth and, because of the lack of
wind resistance on the moon, to continue wav-
ing. Because of the nature of visual perspective,
shadows appear not to be parallel even though
there was only one source of light—a common
phenomenon both on the moon and on Earth.
And the letter C that seems to appear on 
a lunar rock is an effect of photographic 
print-making—the C (a hair, perhaps) does not
appear on the original image.
A major difﬁculty for the hoax theory is its
lack of simplicity, for it’s built on several dubious
assumptions. It assumes, for example, that hun-
dreds of thousands of people could work on the
Apollo project without one of them revealing
that the whole thing was a hoax; that such a
massive and complex conspiracy could be or-
chestrated without being exposed by whistle-
blowers, disgruntled employees, or conspirators;
that the thousands of contractors who worked
for NASA would never come forward to cry foul;
that after more than thirty-ﬁve years no deﬁnitive
evidence—no genuine documents, ﬁles, record-
ings, or anything else—would surface to reveal
the truth; that of all the scientists and engineers
from all over the world who have had access to
staggering amounts of Apollo data, none would
suspect fraud and tell all; that the Soviet Union
was not able or willing to expose the United
States’ most elaborate con job of the cold war;
and that many other countries with advanced
technology could not ﬁgure out that the Apollo
radio signals were not coming from the moon.
The hoax theory also conﬂicts with strong 
evidence suggesting that the Apollo missions 
actually happened. Among other things, there
are images taken by Earth-based telescopes of
Apollo spacecraft soaring to the moon, data
gathered from scientiﬁc experiments on the lunar
surface, the testimony of the Apollo astronauts
and countless technicians and scientists, and 841
pounds of moon rocks, which are unique to the
moon and cannot be faked by Earth technology.

a central governing body coordinates the activities of individual 
Masons; that individual Masons—no matter what their social stand-
ing—will do the bidding of their Masonic masters—no matter how
immoral, and so on. All of these assumptions are demonstrably false
and yet must be taken for granted if the Masonic conspiracy theory is
to get off the ground.
The scope of a theory is determined by the amount of diverse
phenomena it explains, and conspiracy theories seem to have almost
unlimited scope. The claim, “the Freemasons (the communists, the
CIA, the Bavarian Illuminati, the Jews, the Reptilians, and so on) did
it” can be invoked to explain almost anything. But unless the conspir-
acy theorists have sufﬁcient evidence to indicate that their group
(rather than some other) did it, and some idea of how their group did
it, their conspiracy theory explains very little. Recall the gremlin the-
ory of the bridge collapse discussed in Chapter 6. The claim that the
bridge collapse was caused by a gun-toting gremlin is not one that any
rational person would take seriously because there is no evidence that
a gremlin (rather than something else) did it, and the nature of the
gremlin’s ray gun is left completely unspeciﬁed. So to claim that a par-
ticular group of conspirators did something is no better than saying a
gremlin did it unless the evidence can best be explained on the as-
sumption that the speciﬁed group did it by means at their disposal.
What conspiracy theories seem to have going for them in terms
of simplicity and scope they usually lack in terms of conservatism.
Conservatism is ﬁt with existing knowledge. The more knowledge a
claim conﬂicts with, the less conservative it is, and thus the less likely
it is. Conspiracy theories often conﬂict with all sorts of knowledge we
have about human nature and the natural world. One thing we know
about humans, for example, is that their powers of discipline and or-
ganization are limited. Yet conspiracy theorists would have us believe
that members of certain organizations, like the Masons, are so disci-
plined and organized that they can keep secrets for centuries, even
though thousands of people know those secrets.
Not even the most powerful group is immune from leaks, how-
ever. One of the most famous of these alleged leaks—one that many
consider to be the basis of all modern conspiracy literature—turns
out to be a fraud and a hoax. Known as the “Protocols of the Elders
of Zion,” it ﬁrst appeared in print in Russia in 1903. It purports to be
an instruction manual given to new elders (members of an elite coun-
cil of Jewish leaders) on how to bring about world domination. In re-
ality, it’s a ﬁctional document created by the Okhrana—the Tsarist
secret police—that plagiarizes a political satire written by Maurice
Joly in 1864 entitled “Dialogues in Hell between Machiavelli and
282
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

Montesquieu.” Joly’s “Dialogues,” however, makes no mention of
Jews. That aspect of the “Protocols” was borrowed from the novel
Biarritz written by the German anti-Semite Herman Goedsche. The
Okhrana apparently produced the “Protocols,” not to justify the per-
secution of Jews, but to suggest that the then Minister of Finance,
Sergey Witte, was under the control of the Jews, thus undermining
his authority. It’s been known since 1921, when The Times of London
published an exposé revealing its ﬁctional sources, that the “Proto-
cols” are a fraud. Nevertheless, it continues to be a best-seller in cer-
tain Arab countries to this day. Other conspiracy theorists have used
the “Protocols” to bolster their own pet theories claiming that 
the mention of Jews is code for their conspirators of choice, be it 
Masons, Illuminati, or Reptilians.
Besides their discipline, conspirators are also often said to have
other remarkable powers such as the ability to use black magic or ad-
vanced technology to promote their cause. Some conspiracy theorists,
for example, claim that Masons have known for centuries how to make
antigravity devices but have kept that knowledge from us in an attempt
to keep us under their control. The claim that someone has developed
an antigravity device—like the claim that someone can walk through
walls without using a door—conﬂicts with our background knowledge
of how the world works. As a result, its credibility is low. The more such
claims a conspiracy theory makes, the less reason we have to accept it.
CLIMATE CHANGE
To the dismay of many and the disbelief of some, scientists have been
issuing some disturbing reports about changes in Earth’s climate. The
gist is that the planet’s global average temperature has been rising—by
more than 1.4 degrees Fahrenheit over the last century, a seemingly
tiny amount that is producing enormous, potentially catastrophic 
effects worldwide. Earth naturally cycles through eras of warming and
cooling, but experts say this hotter trend is a recent abnormality that
threatens global warming and creates calamitous patterns that cannot
be reversed. Moreover these changes are claimed to be caused not by
nature gone wrong but mostly by human behavior—behavior that hu-
mans can modify to avert or minimize planetary disaster.  
Climate scientists say this global warming happens through the
earth’s greenhouse effect, the bottling up of the sun’s radiation (and thus its
heat) in our lower atmosphere. When solar radiation strikes the earth,
some of it bounces back into space, but much of it enters Earth’s atmo-
sphere where the heat is trapped by gases (called greenhouse gases because,
like a greenhouse, they let in radiation but prevent its heat from leaving).
CLIMATE CHANGE
283

Greenhouse gases include water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane, and
others. Carbon dioxide is the most worrisome; it has been on the rise
for the past two hundred years and has surged dramatically in the last
ﬁfty. Some of this increase comes from deforestation and volcanic erup-
tions, but most is due to the combustion of fossil fuels—coal, oil, and
gas. And the result, say scientists, is rising global temperatures.
Climatologists insist that the planet has been feeling the dire ef-
fects of global warming for some time and is certain to feel even more
in the future. According to a report by the United States Global
Change Research Program, climate-related changes have already
been observed globally and in the United States. These include in-
creases in air and water temperatures, reduced frost days, increased
frequency and intensity of heavy downpours, a rise in sea level, and
reduced snow cover, glaciers, permafrost, and sea ice. A longer ice-
free period on lakes and rivers, lengthening of the growing season,
and increased water vapor in the atmosphere have also been observed. 
These climate-related changes are expected to continue while
new ones develop. Likely future changes for the United States and
surrounding coastal waters include more intense hurricanes with re-
lated increases in wind, rain, and storm surges (but not necessarily an
increase in the number of these storms that make landfall), as well as
drier conditions in the Southwest and Caribbean. These changes will
affect human health, water supply, agriculture, coastal areas, and
many other aspects of society and the natural environment.90
In some quarters the notion of manmade global warming is con-
troversial, largely because of its political implications. Many argue
that if the planet as a whole really is becoming dangerously warm, and
if the main cause is the burning of fossil fuels, then we should try to
stop or at least drastically reduce the burning. Doing so would radi-
cally reshape every economic, social, and governmental system that
now depends on fossil fuels—and to some people, these are ﬁghting
words. There is nothing inherently wrong with holding either posi-
tion, but partisans in this debate err when they let their political views
dictate their evaluation of the evidence. Too many fall prey to conﬁr-
mation bias, evidence denial, availability error, and fallacious appeals
to authority. These distractions can lead to satisfying conclusions—
which are usually unfounded.    
So let’s see if we can do better. The question is, what is the best
theory to explain the climate-change data? A common view is 
Hypothesis 1: Global climate change is due to natural variations in the earth’s
warming and cooling and has little to do with human activities. As evidence for
this view, some point to Earth’s glacial episodes—the Ice Ages (and
the warming periods between them). In the last 3.5 million years,
284
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

twenty-four such warming and cooling eras have occurred, and sci-
entists now know why. In regular phases (called Milankovitch cy-
cles), slight variations in Earth’s orbit move the planet nearer and
farther away from the sun, bringing long-lasting cold phases and
warming trends. 
In the last 10,000 years, the planet has also undergone some less
pronounced climate cycles that seem to undermine the idea of an
Earth gradually warmed by human activity. For example, between 950
and 1250 A.D., during what’s called the Mediaeval Warm Period, there
was a slight rise in temperatures—before the Industrial Revolution
began to pump carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. And more re-
cently, from 1998 to 2000, the world went into a mild cooling period
(cool relative to other years). 
How strong is this evidence? The support for Hypothesis 1 is
weaker than it seems at ﬁrst glance. Earth’s climate has indeed ﬂuctuated
through the centuries in predictable ways; Ice Ages and warming spikes
have come and gone. But these variations, scientists say, cannot explain
the relatively recent jump in Earth’s surface temperature. Over the next
thousand years or so, the planet should be easing into another Ice Age,
but it’s already warmer than in any earlier warming phase. According to
the prestigious Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 
Eleven of the last twelve years (1995–2006) rank among the twelve
warmest years in the instrumental record of global surface temperature
(since 1850). . . . The temperature increase is widespread over the
globe and is greater at higher northern latitudes. Land regions have
warmed faster than the oceans.91
A report issued by the National Academy of Sciences takes a sim-
ilar view: 
It can be said with a high level of conﬁdence that global mean surface
temperature was higher during the last few decades of the 20th cen-
tury than during any comparable period during the preceding four
centuries. This statement is justiﬁed by the consistency of the evi-
dence from a wide variety of geographically diverse proxies [indirect
evidence from tree rings, corals, ocean and lake sediments, cave de-
posits, ice cores, boreholes, and glaciers].92
Another explanation is Hypothesis 2: Global climate change is caused
by variations in the sun’s energy output, not by human activity. There is no
question that Earth’s climate system is basically propelled by the sun
and that changes in the sun’s energy can affect our climate. In fact sci-
entists have documented an 11- and 22-year cycle of ﬂuctuations in
solar radiation related to sun spots. Some take these facts as evidence
that global warming is a solar phenomenon, not a human one. 
CLIMATE CHANGE
285

But NASA scientists (and many others) reject this claim:
[S]everal lines of evidence show that current global warming cannot
be explained by changes in energy from the sun:
• Since 1750, the average amount of energy coming from the sun ei-
ther remained constant or increased slightly.
• If the warming were caused by a more active sun, then scientists
would expect to see warmer temperatures in all layers of the atmo-
sphere. Instead, they have observed a cooling in the upper atmo-
sphere, and a warming at the surface and in the lower parts of the
atmosphere. That’s because greenhouse gasses are trapping heat in
the lower atmosphere. 
• Climate models that include solar irradiance changes can’t repro-
duce the observed temperature trend over the past century or more
without including a rise in greenhouse gases.93
Now we come to Hypothesis 3: There is no worldwide climate change;
the notion of manmade global warming is a fraud perpetuated by a conspiracy of 
scientists. Like most conspiracy theories, Hypothesis 3 has only cir-
cumstantial evidence in its favor; direct evidence is scarce. And at-
tempts to marshal evidence often involve the twin blunders of
conﬁrmation error and denying the evidence.
The hypothesis also has three strikes against it: it fails the criteria
of scope, simplicity, and conservatism. It has little or no scope because
it comes with no evidence showing who the conspirators are and how
they accomplished their ends. So it explains nothing. It lacks simplic-
ity because it makes countless assumptions: that there are in fact con-
spirators (some scientists), that they can follow a partisan agenda to
promote the idea of global warming without raising suspicion, that
they can coordinate their activities, that they all can keep the con-
spiracy secret, that they would risk their careers to perpetrate a lie,
that the scientiﬁc community would not discover the deception, and
so on. The hypothesis is not conservative, conﬂicting as it does with
what we know about human nature, the conduct and attitudes of sci-
entists, and the standards and procedures used in scientiﬁc research. It
also doesn’t ﬁt with existing knowledge about climate, for it diverges
sharply from what virtually all climate scientists take to be established
fact—that manmade global warming is a reality.      
Now here’s Hypothesis 4: Global warming is taking place, and the main
cause is people’s use of fossil fuels. A multitude of climate studies show that Earth
is indeed getting warmer. Global temperatures are not only rising, but
they are rising faster than ever. Scientists have predicted that if the world
is getting hotter, certain global events should occur—warming oceans,
loss of sea ice, rising sea levels, increasing global surface temperatures,
286
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

shrinking icebergs, decreased mass of Greenland and Antarctic ice
sheets, retreating glaciers (in the Alps, the Himalayas, Alaska, the Andes,
and elsewhere), and more extremely high temperatures in the United
States. And all these changes are occurring as predicted. The consensus
of scientiﬁc opinion is summed up in an IPCC report:
Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now evident from
observations of increases in global average air and ocean temperatures,
widespread melting of snow and ice and rising global average sea level.94
A great deal of evidence also supports the conclusion that global
warming is caused mostly by carbon dioxide generated from the burn-
ing of fossil fuels. Levels of carbon dioxide in our atmosphere are
higher now than at any other time in the past 650,000 years. Before
the Industrial Revolution, the atmospheric level of this greenhouse
gas was about 280 parts per million by volume; now the levels are over
380 parts per million. And as carbon dioxide has sharply increased, so
has global surface temperature.  
By using sophisticated mathematical models, climate scientists
have found that natural processes alone (volcanic activity, solar radia-
tion, Earth’s orbit, etc.) cannot account for Earth’s warming trend in
the last hundred years. But people-generated greenhouse gases (prin-
cipally carbon dioxide) can explain it.    
Major scientiﬁc organizations around the world—including the
National Academies of Science, the IPCC, NASA, and the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration—have examined the cli-
mate-change evidence and come to the same conclusion: global warm-
ing is happening, and the human addiction to fossil fuels is to blame.  
Hypothesis 4 seems to be the clear winner here, but let’s review
all the hypotheses to see why. Hypothesis 1 (natural variability) is
testable and simple, and it has some scope, since natural variations in
Earth’s climate can also explain some climatic eras such as the Little
Ice Age of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. But it is not fruit-
ful; it has predicted no previously unknown phenomena. Worst of all,
it falls short in conservatism: it conﬂicts with established facts about
the magnitude and pattern of global warming. Variations in the earth’s
normal cycles of heating and cooling simply do not match the scien-
tiﬁc data regarding Earth’s extraordinary warming trend.
Hypothesis 2 (solar energy output) is also testable and simple.
Like Hypothesis 1, it may earn points for scope by explaining phe-
nomena related to the sun’s 11-year cycle of radiation. But it isn’t fruit-
ful, and it fails the criterion of conservatism for the same reason that
Hypothesis 1 does: the cycles of solar radiation don’t match the
known patterns of global warming.
CLIMATE CHANGE
287

As mentioned earlier, Hypothesis 3 (conspiracy of scientists) fails
the criteria of scope, simplicity, and conservatism. It also gets no
credit for being fruitful. It is the worst of the competing hypotheses. 
Hypothesis 4 wins this competition because it is testable, simple,
fruitful, and conservative. It’s fruitful because it has successfully pre-
dicted some previously unknown phenomena—everything from ris-
ing sea levels to retreating glaciers to cooling and warming of the
atmosphere. And it is conservative because it is consistent with scien-
tiﬁc laws, well supported theories, and established facts.  
Science is a search for the truth. It’s an attempt to ascertain the
way the world is. But there are those who claim that such a search is
misguided, for we each create our own reality. What’s true for you is
not true for me, they say. For them, objective truth is not only an un-
attainable goal but an outmoded myth. In the next chapter, we’ll try
to discover the truth about truth.
SUMMARY
Weird things are events or objects that seem impossible, given what we know
about the world. To explain these things, people often postulate powers or
properties that are just as weird. We’re justiﬁed in believing in these powers or
properties, however, only if they provide the best explanation of the phe-
nomena in question. We can evaluate how good competing explanations are
in relation to each other by determining how much understanding they pro-
duce. The amount of understanding produced by an explanation is determined
by the extent to which it systematizes and uniﬁes our knowledge, and that is
determined by how well it meets the criteria of adequacy: simplicity, conser-
vatism, scope, and fruitfulness. The SEARCH method highlights the steps that
should be taken when evaluating an explanation: State the claim, examine the
Evidence for it, consider Alternative explanations, and Rate, according to the
Criteria of adequacy, each Hypothesis.
These considerations should not be taken as the ﬁnal word on the mat-
ters investigated in this book. We’ve simply tried to present our best think-
ing about them. You may disagree—but if you do, we trust that it’s on the
basis of good reasons.
Now that you know the difference between good and bad reasons, you
have the basic intellectual tools necessary to evaluate all sorts of claims,
weird and otherwise. We hope that you use these tools, for the quality of
your life is determined by the quality of your decisions, and the quality of
your decisions is determined by the quality of your reasoning.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. What is the SEARCH formula?
2. What are the criteria of adequacy?
288
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

3. Hundreds of thousands of people use homeopathic remedies. Does
this fact alone show that homeopathy works?
4. How much weight would you give to the evidence for UFO abduc-
tions and why?
5. The UFO-abduction hypothesis is not a very simple explanation 
because it involves some unsupported assumptions. What are these 
assumptions?
6. In what ways is the communication with the dead hypothesis much
less conservative than the competing hypotheses?
7. What is the best explanation for near-death experiences? Why is it
best?
EVALUATE THESE CLAIMS BY USING THE SEARCH METHOD
1. There is a phenomenon known as “spontaneous human combustion”
in which most of the victim’s body, as well as the chair the person was
sitting in, is found burned to ashes but the rest of the objects in the
room are relatively unaffected. This phenomenon suggests that there
is a new type of subatomic particle—a “pyroton”—that interacts with
cells and causes the victim to burst into ﬂame.—L. Arnold, Ablaze!
(New York: M. Evans, 1995).
2. Many reported ghost sightings involve reenactments of battles,
deaths, or murders. This ﬁnding suggests that certain physical objects,
such as stones, can record emotions and events like a video
recorder.—Nigel Kneale, “The Stone Tape,” broadcast on BBC, 
December 25, 1972.
3. No one has ever actually been abducted by aliens. Instead, the experi-
ence of being abducted has been beamed into the minds of abductees
by an intelligence somewhere in the universe that is symbiotically
linked to life on this planet.—D. Scott Rogo, Beyond Reality (Welling-
borough, England: Aquarian Press, 1990).
4. People often know when others are staring at them. This shows that
perception involves not only receiving light rays from an object 
but also projecting some sort of image onto the object.—Rubert 
Sheldrake, Seven Experiments That Could Change the World: A Do-It-Yourself
Guide to Revolutionary Science (London: Fourth Estate, 1994).
5. Dreams often seem as real as waking experiences because humans are
composed of two bodies: a physical body and an astral body. When
we dream, our astral body leaves the physical body and travels to the
astral plane where the dream actually takes place.—T. Lobsang
Rampa, You Forever (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1990).
6. Food kept inside a structure with the shape of Cheops’s pyramid stays
fresher longer than food kept outside the structure. The pyramid must
serve as a lens that focuses some sort of cosmic energy onto the
food.—Max Toth and Greg Nielson, Pyramid Power (Rochester, VT:
Destiny Books, 1990).
EVALUATE THESE CLAIMS BY USING THE SEARCH METHOD
289

FIELD PROBLEM
Assignment: Recall an experience that you had that you regard as mysterious and
weird. (If you have never experienced anything that ﬁts this description, recall
a weird experience told to you by a friend or family member.) List at least three
possible explanations for the experience, including at least one paranormal or
supernatural explanation. Now apply the SEARCH formula to these hypothe-
ses. If necessary, do research on the Internet to get the facts on each one. State
your conclusion: According to your analysis, which explanation is best?
CRITICAL READING AND WRITING
I. Read the passage below and answer the following questions:
1. What is the phenomenon being explained in the passage?
2. What are the theories proposed to explain the phenomenon?
3. Are any of the proposed theories logically impossible?
4. What are the natural explanations offered?
5. What other natural theories could be proposed?
II. In a 250-word paper, evaluate the theory that the Shadow People are
ghosts. Compare the theory to this naturalistic one: The Shadow Peo-
ple phenomenon is the result of natural anomalies in visual perception
such as “ﬂoaters,” spots that drift in front of the eye due to debris in
the vitreous ﬂuid. Use the SEARCH formula.
Passage 6
You’re sitting at your computer late at night—only the dim glow of your
screen lights the room. Your cat is happily sitting on the small table beside
your desk. It’s quiet, you’re comfortable, and lost in your work. Suddenly,
your work is disturbed as you spy a black ﬁgure racing at the edge of your
vision. You jump and look around. Nothing is there.
How many times has this happened to you? If you’re honest with your-
self, I’m sure you’ll answer that it’s happened more times than you can count.
Generally, you would laugh it off as a bit of paranoia or perhaps you were
tired. If you’re part of a growing group of people, you might claim it was the
Shadow People.
Who are the Shadow People? Not much is known at this time. Maybe it
is indeed our imagination or mythology gone astray. Maybe we’re all seeing
exactly what we think we’re seeing—creatures moving through the shadows.
I’ve heard numerous stories and claims about the true identity of the Shadow
People. Are they ghosts? Aliens? Extradimensionals? (From the Web site
Shadowers.com.)
NOTES
1. Mahlon W. Wagner, “Is Homeopathy ‘New Science’ or ‘New Age’?”
Scientiﬁc Review of Alternative Medicine (Fall–Winter 1997): 7–12.
290
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

2. Rick Warren, “God Debate: Sam Harris vs. Rick Warren,” Newsweek, 
9 April 2007.
3. Andrew Neher, The Psychology of Transcendence (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1980), pp. 182–83.
4. Whitley Strieber, Communion (New York: William Morrow, 1987).
5. Budd Hopkins, Intruders (New York: Random House, 1987).
6. Keith Fitzpatrick-Matthews, “I remember why I’ve never wanted satel-
lite television,” Bad Archaeology, http://badarchaeology.wordpress.com/
2011/09/17/i-remember-why-i%E2%80%99ve-never-wanted-satellite-
television/
7. Martin T. Orne, “The Use and Misuse of Hypnosis in Court,” International
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis (October 1979): 311–41.
8. Ibid.
9. A. H. Lawson and W. C. McCall, “What Can We Learn from the
Hypnosis of Imaginary Attackers?” MUFON UFO Symposium Proceedings
(Seguin, TX: Mutual UFO Network, 1977), pp. 107–35.
10. Terence Hines, Pseudoscience and the Paranormal (Buffalo: Prometheus
Books, 1988), p. 195.
11. Robert A. Baker, They Call It Hypnosis (Buffalo: Prometheus Books,
1990), p. 247.
12. Ibid., p. 252.
13. Philip J. Klass, UFO Abductions: A Dangerous Game, updated edition 
(Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1989).
14. U.S. Office of Technology Assessment, Scientific Validity of Polygraph
Testing: A Research Review and Evaluation (Washington, DC: Office of
Technology Assessment, 1993, November) (OTA-TM-H-15); 
D. Lykken, A Tremor in the Blood (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981).
15. Phil Patton, “UFO Myths: A Special Investigation into Stephenville
and Other Major Sightings,” Popular Mechanics, December 18, 2009,
http://www.popularmechanics.com/technology/aviation/ufo/4304170
16. “The Stephenville Lights: What Actually Happened,” Skeptical Inquirer
33:1 (January/February 2009) http://www.csicop.org/si/show/
stephenville_lights_what_actually_happened/
17. Charles H. Bennett, Gilles Brassard, Claude Crepeau, Richard Jozsa,
Ashes Peres, and William K. Wootters, “Teleporting an Unknown
Quantum State via Dual Classical and EPR Channels,” Physical Review
Letters 70 (March 29, 1993): 1895–99.
18. Samuel L. Braunstein, “A Fun Talk on Teleportation,” www.research
.ibm.com/quantuminfo/teleportation/braunstein.html, accessed 
September 2007.
19. Elizabeth Slater, “Conclusions on Nine Psychologies” in Final Report on
the Psychological Testing of UFO “Abductees,” ed. R. Westrum (Mt. Rainier,
MD: Fund for UFO Research, 1985), pp. 17–31.
20. Ibid.
21. Klass, UFO Abductions, pp. 25–37.
22. S. C. Wilson and T. X. Barber, “The Fantasy-Prone Personality: Im-
plications for Understanding Imagery, Hypnosis, and Parapsychological
NOTES
291

Phenomena,” in Imagery: Current Theory, Research, and Application, ed. A.
A. Sheikh (New York: John Wiley, 1983).
23. Ibid.
24. K. Basterﬁeld and R. Bartholomew, “Abductions: The Fantasy-Prone
Personality Hypothesis,” International UFO Review 13, no. 3 (May/June
1988): 9–11.
25. Baker, They Call It Hypnosis, p. 247.
26. Ibid., p. 250.
27. Ibid., p. 251.
28. Hines, Pseudoscience and the Paranormal, p. 203.
29. Susan Blackmore, “Alien Abduction,” New Scientist (November 19,
1994): 29–31.
30. Report of Air Force Research Regarding the “Roswell Incident,” reprinted in
Skeptical Inquirer 19 (January/February 1995): 43.
31. Charles B. Moore, quoted by Dave Thomas in “The Roswell Incident
and Project MOGUL,” Skeptical Inquirer 19 (July/August 1995): 16.
32. Ray Hyman, “How Not to Test Mediums: Critiquing the Afterlife 
Experiments,” Skeptical Inquirer (January/February 2003).
33. Raymond A. Moody Jr., Life after Life (New York: Bantam Books, 1975),
pp. 21–23.
34. Raymond A. Moody Jr., The Light Beyond (New York: Bantam Books,
1988), p. 7.
35. Ibid., pp. 4–5.
36. Fred Schoonmaker, “Denver Cardiologist Discloses Findings after
Eighteen Years of Near-Death Research,” Anabiosis 1 (1979): 1–2.
37. Michael Sabom, Recollections of Death (New York: Harper and Row, 1982).
38. Susan Blackmore, “Near-Death Experiences: In or Out of the Body?”
Skeptical Inquirer 16 (1991): 36.
39. Kenneth Ring, Life at Death (New York: Coward, McCann and 
Geoghegan, 1980), p. 32.
40. Ibid., p. 40.
41. Adrian Thatcher, “Christian Theism and the Concept of a Person,”
Persons and Personality, eds. A. Peacocke and G. Gillette (Oxford: Black-
well, 1987), p. 183.
42. Ibid., p. 184.
43. Karlis Osis and Erlendur Haraldsson, “OBE’s in Indian Swamis: Sathya
Sai Baba and Dadaji,” in Research in Parapsychology 1976, eds. J. D. Morris,
W. G. Roll, and R. L. Morris (Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1980),
pp. 142–45.
44. Pim van Lommel et al., “Near Death Experience in Survivors of 
Cardiac Arrest: A Prospective Study in the Netherlands,” Lancet 358
(December 15, 2001): 2039–45.
45. Moody, Light Beyond, pp. 196–97.
46. Ibid., p. 197.
47. Ibid., pp. 170–71.
48. Blackmore, “Near-Death Experiences,” p. 43.
292
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

49. Moody, Light Beyond, p. 197.
50. Ibid.
51. Charles Dickens, Bleak House (New York: P. F. Collier & Son, 1911), 
pp. 459, 460.
52. Susan J. Blackmore, Beyond the Body (Chicago: Academy Chicago 
Publishers, 1992), p. 199.
53. Justus von Liebig, Familiar Letters on Chemistry (London: Taylor, Walton,
and Maberly, 1851), letter 22.
54. Larry E. Arnold, Ablaze! The Mysterious Fires of Spontaneous Human Combustion
(New York: M. Evans, 1995).
55. Douglas Drysdale, quoted in Jenny Randles and Peter Hough,
Spontaneous Human Combustion (London: Robert Hale, 1992), p. 43.
56. Ibid., p. 200ff.
57. William Rushton, “Letter to the Editor,” Journal of the Society for Psy-chical
Research 48 (1976): 412, cited in Blackmore, Beyond the Body, pp. 227–28.
58. Barry Beyerstein, The Hundredth Monkey and Other Paradigms of the 
Paranormal, ed. Kendrick Frazier (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books,
1991), p. 45.
59. Carl Sagan, Broca’s Brain (New York: Ballantine Books, 1979), p. 356ff.
60. S. Grof and J. Halifax, The Human Encounter with Death (New York: E. P.
Dutton, 1977).
61. C. B. Becker, “The Failure of Saganomics: Why Birth Models Cannot
Explain Near-Death Phenomena,” Anabiosis 2 (1982): 102–09.
62. Susan Blackmore, “Birth and the OBE: An Unhelpful Analogy,” Journal
of the American Society for Psychical Research 77 (1983): 229–38.
63. Ronald Siegel, “Life after Death,” in Science and the Paranormal, eds.
George O. Abell and Barry Singer (New York: Scribner’s, 1981), 
pp. 159–84.
64. Moody, Light Beyond, pp. 180–82.
65. Ibid., p. 182.
66. Blackmore, “Near-Death Experiences,” pp. 34–35.
67. Hines, Pseudoscience and the Paranormal, p. 69.
68. Dina Ingber, “Visions of an Afterlife,” Science Digest (January/February
1981): 142.
69. Ibid.
70. United Nations press release, “What Happens When We Die: World’s
Largest Scientiﬁc Study to be Launched At U.N. Symposium On
Human Consciousness,” http://esango.un.org/event/documents/
mbs_media_kit.pdf, accessed June 1, 2009.
71. Blackmore, “Near-Death Experiences,” p. 41.
72. Ibid., p. 42.
73. Ibid., p. 40.
74. O. Blanke, S. Ortigue, T. Landis, and M. Seeck, “Stimulating Own-Body
Perceptions,” Nature 419 (2002): 419.
75. Blackmore, “Near-Death Experiences,” p. 42.
NOTES
293

76. F. W. H. Myers, Human Personality vol. 2 (London: Longmans, Green,
1903), p. 19.
77. 169 A.D.2d 254, 572 N.Y.S.2d 672, Jeffrey M. Stambovsky v. Helen V.
Ackley and Ellis Realty, Supreme Court, Appellate Division, First Depart-
ment, July 18, 1991.
78. Paramahansa Yogananda, Autobiography of a Yogi (Los Angeles: Self-
Realization Fellowship, 2001), p. 56.
79. Ibid., p. 477.
80. R. J. Broughton, et al., “Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-
Controlled Crossover Trial of Modaﬁnal in the Treatment of Excessive
Daytime Sleepiness in Narcolepsy,” Neurology 49 (1997): 444–51.
81. Richard Wiseman, Caroline Watt, Paul Stevens, Emma Greening, and
Ciaran O’Keeffe, “An Investigation into Alleged ‘Hauntings,’” British
Journal of Psychology 94 (2003): 209.
82. H. P. Wilkinson and Alan Gauld, “Geomagnetism and Anomalous Experi-
ences, 1868–1980,” Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research 57 (1993).
83. Andy Coghlan, “Midnight Watch,” New Scientist 160 (December 19,
1998): 42.
84. Mick Hamer, “Silent Fright,” New Scientist 176 (December 21, 2002): 50.
85. Andy Coghlan, “Little House of Horrors,” New Scientist 179 (July 26,
2003): 30.
86. Ben Radford, “Ghost-Hunting Mistakes: Science and Pseudoscience 
in Ghost Investigations,” Skeptical Inquirer, Volume 34.6, November/
December 2010.
87. Congressional Record, 82d Cong. 1st sess. vol. 97 (June 14, 1951): pt. 5,
p. 6602.
88. Patrick Leman, “Who Shot the President? A Possible Explanation for
Conspiracy Theories,” Economist 20 (March 2003): 74.
89. Donna Kossy, Kooks: A Guide to the Outer Limits of Human Belief (Portland,
OR: Feral House, 1994), p. 191.
90. Global Climate Change Impacts in the U.S., ”United States Global
Change Research Program, 2009,” http://www.globalchange.gov/pub-
lications/reports/scientiﬁc-assessments/us-impacts/full-report/execu-
tive-summary (8 August 18).  
91. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), “Climate
Change 2007: Synthesis Report” (Fourth Assessment Report) 2007,
http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/syr/en/spms1.html (19
August 2012).
92. National Academy of Sciences, Surface Temperature Reconstructions for the
Last 2,000 Years (2006), 2012, http://dels.nas.edu/Report/Surface-
Temperature-Reconstructions-Last/11676 (19 August 2012).
93. National Aeronautics and Space Administration, “A Blanket Around
the Earth,” http://climate.nasa.gov/causes/ (3 December 2012).
94. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), “Climate
Change 2007: Synthesis Report.”
294
SEVEN: CASE STUDIES IN THE EXTRAORDINARY

295
EIGHT
Relativism,Truth,
and Reality
W
E GIVE YOU A PARABLE:
Four men came upon a duck—or what seemed a duck.
”It quacks like a duck. It waddles like a duck. It’s a
duck,” said the ﬁrst man.
”To you it’s a duck, but to me it’s not a duck, for we each
create our own reality,” said the second man.
”In your society it may be a duck, but in mine it’s not; re-
ality is socially constructed,” said the third man.
”Your conceptual scheme may classify it as a duck, but
mine doesn’t; reality is constituted by conceptual schemes,”
said the fourth.
This discussion may seem to be a strange one, but you
may have engaged in such a discussion yourself. Have you
There is nothing so
powerful as truth,
and often nothing 
so strange.
—DANIEL WEBSTER

ever been told, “What’s true for you isn’t true for me”? If so, you have
come face-to-face with the problem of relativism. The problem is this:
Does reality exist independently of our ways of representing it, or do
individuals, societies, or conceptual schemes create their own reali-
ties? Those who accept the ﬁrst alternative are called “external real-
ists,” or “realists” for short, because they do not believe that reality
depends on our thoughts about it. Those who accept the second
alternative are called “relativists” because they believe that the way
the world is depends on what we think about it.
To say that reality exists independently of how we represent it to
ourselves is not to say that there is one correct way to represent it. Re-
ality can be represented in many different ways, just as a territory can
be mapped in many different ways. Consider, for example, road maps,
topographical maps, and relief maps. These maps use different sym-
bols to represent different aspects of the terrain, and the symbols that
appear on one map may not appear on another. Nevertheless, it makes
no sense to say that one of these maps is the correct map. Each can
provide an accurate representation of the territory.
Relativism is appealing to many people because they incorrectly
assume that realism entails absolutism—the view that there is only
one correct way to represent reality. As Alan Bloom reveals:
There is one thing a professor can be absolutely certain of: almost
every student entering the university believes that truth is relative. . . .
The relativity of truth is not a theoretical insight but a moral postu-
late, the condition of a free society, or so they see it. . . . That it is a
moral issue for students is revealed by the character of their response
when challenged—a combination of disbelief and indignation: “Are
you an absolutist?” the only alternative they know, uttered in the
same tone as “Are you a monarchist?” or “Do you really believe in
witches?”1
Absolutism is considered morally objectionable because it leads
to intolerance. After all, weren’t all persecutions in history perpetrated
by those who believed in objective reality and knew that their view of
it was the correct one? Relativism, on the other hand, is supposed to
foster tolerance, implying that different views are entitled to equal
respect because they’re equally true.
We have seen that relativists are wrong in assuming that realism
implies absolutism. From the fact that reality exists independently of
our representations of it, it doesn’t follow that there is one correct way
to represent reality. It remains to be seen whether they are correct in
assuming that relativism fosters tolerance. To evaluate that claim, we’ll
have to take a closer look at the various types of relativism.
296
EIGHT: RELATIVISM, TRUTH, AND REALITY
As scarce as truth is,
the supply has always
been in excess of the
demand.
—JOSH BILLINGS

WE EACH CREATE OUR OWN REALITY
The view of the second man is that we each create our own reality.
Many people, past and present, have embraced this idea and thought
it both liberating and profound. Actress Shirley MacLaine, for ex-
ample, declared in the introduction to her book Out on a Limb:
If my search for inner truth helps give you, the reader, the gift of in-
sight, then I am rewarded. But my ﬁrst reward has been the journey
through myself, the only journey worth taking. Through it all I have
learned one deep and meaningful lesson: LIFE, LIVES, and REALITY are
only what we each perceive them to be. Life doesn’t happen to us. We
make it happen. Reality isn’t separate from us. We are creating our re-
ality every moment of the day. For me that truth is the ultimate free-
dom and the ultimate responsibility.2
Later, to the amazement of her friends, she followed this claim to
its logical conclusion—to solipsism, the idea that “I alone exist” and
create all of reality. In It’s All in the Playing, she tells how she scandal-
ized guests at a New Year’s Eve party when she expressed solipsistic
sentiments:
I began by saying that since I realized I created my own reality in
every way, I must therefore admit that, in essence, I was the only person
alive in my universe. I could feel the instant shock waves undulate around
the table. I went on to express my feeling of total responsibility and
power for all events that occur in the world because the world is hap-
pening only in my reality. And human beings feeling pain, terror, de-
pression, panic, and so forth, were really only aspects of pain, terror,
depression, panic and so on, in me! . . . I knew I had created the reality
of the evening news at night. It was my reality. But whether anyone
else was experiencing the news separately from me was unclear, because
they existed in my reality too. And if they reacted to world events,
then I was creating them to react so I would have someone to interact
with, thereby enabling myself to know me better.3
In 1970, long before MacLaine spoke of creating reality, a book
called The Seth Material was published. It was to be one of many best-
sellers based on the words of a putative entity named Seth (a person-
ality “no longer focused in physical reality”) and “channeled” by
novelist Jane Roberts. A major theme of the book is that physical 
reality is our own creation:
Seth says that we form the physical universe as unselfconsciously as we
breathe. We aren’t to think of it as a prison from which we will one
day escape, or as an execution chamber from which all escape is im-
possible. Instead we form matter in order to operate in three-dimensional
WE EACH CREATE OUR OWN REALITY
297
The mind does not
create what it per-
ceives, any more
than the eye creates
the rose.
—RALPH WALDO
EMERSON

reality, develop our abilities and help others. . . . Without realizing it
we project our ideas outward to form physical reality. Our bodies are
the materialization of what we think we are. We are all creators, then,
and this world is our creation.4
So do we each make physical reality? At one time, biologist Ted
Schultz was attracted to this idea but soon came to have doubts
about it.
I began to wonder about the logical extensions of “consensus reality,”
“personal reality,” and the power of belief. Supposing a schizophrenic
was totally convinced that he could ﬂy. Could he? If so, why weren’t
there frequent reports from mental institutions of miracles performed
by the inmates? What about large groups of people like the Jehovah’s
Witnesses, who devoutly believed that Jesus would return on a partic-
ular day? Hadn’t he failed to appear twice in that religion’s history 
(in 1914 and 1975), forcing the faithful to reset the dates? What if the
inhabitants of some other solar system believed astronomical physics
to work differently than we believe they do on earth? Could both be
true at the same time? If not, which would the universe align itself
with? Does the large number of Catholics on earth make the Catholic
God and saints a reality? Should I worry about the consequences of
denying the Catholic faith? Before Columbus, was the earth really ﬂat
because everyone believed it to be? Did it only “become” round after
the consensus opinion changed?5
What could be more appealing than the notion that if we just
believe in something, it will become true? Just the same, as Schultz
indicates, there are serious problems with the idea that belief alone
can transﬁgure reality. For one thing, it involves a logical contradic-
tion. If it’s true that our beliefs can alter reality, then what happens
when different people have opposing beliefs? Let’s say that person
A believes p (a statement about reality), and p therefore becomes true.
Person B, however, believes not-p, and it becomes true. We would
then have the same state of affairs both existing and not existing
simultaneously—a logical impossibility. What if A believes that all
known terrorists are dead, and B believes that they’re not dead? What
if A believes that the Earth is round, and B believes it’s ﬂat? Since the
supposition that our beliefs create reality leads to a logical contradic-
tion, we must conclude that reality is independent of our beliefs.
Solipsists can avoid this problem because, in their view, there is
only one person in the world and hence only one person doing the
believing. But is it reasonable to believe that there is only one person
in the world and that person creates everything there is by merely
thinking about it? Consider your own experience.
298
EIGHT: RELATIVISM, TRUTH, AND REALITY
The truth is not only
stranger than you
imagine, it is
stranger than you
can imagine.
—J. B. S. HALDANE

You have a leaking faucet. You position a bucket to catch the
drops. You leave the room. When you return, the bucket is full of
water, the sink is overﬂowing, and the carpet is soaked. Simple events
like this—and billions of other experiences—lead us to believe that
causal sequences continue whether we’re experiencing them or not, as
though they were independent of our minds.
You open a closet door, and—surprise!—books fall on your head.
The last thing on your mind was falling books. It’s as though such
events were causally connected to something outside our minds.
You fall asleep on your bed. When you awaken the next day,
everything in the room is just as it was before you drifted off. It’s as
though your room continued to exist whether you were thinking about
it or not.
You hold a rose in your hand. You see it, feel it, smell it. Your
senses converge to give you a uniﬁed picture of this ﬂower—as though
it existed independently. If it’s solely a product of your mind, this con-
vergence is more difﬁcult to account for.
Every day of your life, you’re aware of a distinction between ex-
periences that you yourself create (like daydreams, thoughts, imagin-
ings) and those that seem forced on you by an external reality (like
unpleasant smells, loud noises, cold wind). If there is an independent
world, this distinction makes sense. If there isn’t and you create your
own reality, the distinction is mysterious.
The point is that the existence of an independent world explains
our experiences better than any known alternative. We have good rea-
son to believe that the world—which seems independent of our
minds—really is. We have little if any reason to believe that the world
is our mind’s own creation. Science writer Martin Gardner, in an essay
on solipsism, puts the point like this:
We, who of course are not solipsists, all believe that other people
exist. Is it not an astonishing set of coincidences—astonishing, that is,
to anyone who doubts an external world—that everybody sees essen-
tially the same phaneron [phenomena]? We walk the same streets of
the same cities. We ﬁnd the same buildings at the same locations. Two
people can see the same spiral galaxy through a telescope. Not only
that, they see the same spiral structure. The hypothesis that there is
an external world, not dependent on human minds, made of something,
is so obviously useful and so strongly conﬁrmed by experience down
through the ages that we can say without exaggerating that it is better
conﬁrmed than any other empirical hypothesis. So useful is the posit
that it is almost impossible for anyone except a madman or a profes-
sional metaphysician to comprehend a reason for doubting it.6
WE EACH CREATE OUR OWN REALITY
299

The belief that there is an external reality is more than just a con-
venient ﬁction or a dogmatic assumption—it is the best explanation
of our experience.
While it’s ludicrous to believe that our minds create external real-
ity, it’s perfectly reasonable to believe that our minds create our beliefs
about external reality. As we have seen, the mind is not merely a pas-
sive receiver of information but an active manipulator of it. In our at-
tempt to understand and cope with the world, each of us forms many
different beliefs about it. This diversity of belief can be expressed by
saying that what’s true for me may not be true for you. Different peo-
ple take different things to be true. But taking something to be true
doesn’t make it true.
The view that each of us creates our own reality is known as sub-
jectivism. This view is not unique to the twenty-ﬁrst century, how-
ever. It ﬂourished in ancient Greece over 2,500 years ago. The
ancient champions of subjectivism are known as Sophists. They were
professors of rhetoric who earned their living by teaching wealthy
Athenians how to win friends and inﬂuence people. Because they did
not believe in objective truth, however, they taught their pupils to
argue both sides of any case, which created quite a scandal at the
time. (The words sophistic and sophistical are used to describe argu-
ments that appear sound but are actually fallacious.) The greatest of
the Sophists—Protagoras—famously expressed his subjectivism thus:
“Man is the measure of all things, of existing things that they exist,
and of non-existing things that they do not exist.” Reality does not
exist independently of human minds but is created by our thoughts.
Consequently, whatever anyone believes is true.
Plato (ca. 427–347 B.C.E.) saw clearly the implications of such a
view. If whatever anyone believes is true, then everyone’s belief is as
true as everyone else’s. And if everyone’s belief is as true as everyone
else’s, then the belief that subjectivism is false is as true as the belief
that subjectivism is true. Plato put it this way: “Protagoras, for his part,
admitting as he does that everybody’s opinion is true, must acknowl-
edge the truth of his opponents’ belief about his own belief, where
they think he is wrong.”7 Protagorean subjectivism, then, is self-
refuting. If it’s true, it’s false. Any claim whose truth implies its false-
hood cannot possibly be true.
It’s ironic that Protagoras taught argumentation, because in a 
Protagorean world, there shouldn’t be any arguments. Arguments
arise when there is some reason to believe that someone is mistaken.
If believing something to be true made it true, however, no one could
ever be mistaken; everyone would be infallible. It would be impossi-
ble for anyone to have a false belief because the mere fact that they
300
EIGHT: RELATIVISM, TRUTH, AND REALITY
I never know how
much of what I say
is true.
—BETTE MIDLER
Whoever tells the
truth is chased out
of nine villages.
—TURKISH PROVERB

REALITY IS SOCIALLY CONSTRUCTED
301
You may not be com-
ing from where I’m
coming from, but I
know that relativism
isn’t true for me.
—ALAN GARFINKEL
Facts do not cease
to exist because they
are ignored.
—ALDOUS HUXLEY
believed something would make it true. So if Protagoras’s customers
took his philosophy seriously, he would be out of a job. If no one can
lose an argument, there’s no need to learn how to argue.
That subjectivism renders disagreement futile often goes un-
noticed. As Ted Schultz observes:
Paradoxically, many New Agers, having demonstrated to their satis-
faction that objective truth is the unattainable bugaboo of thick-
headed rationalists, often become extremely dogmatic about the
minutiae of their own favorite belief systems. After all, if what is 
“true for you” isn’t necessarily “true for me,” should I really worry
about the exact dates and locations of the upcoming geological up-
heavals predicted by Ramtha or the coming of the “space brothers” 
in 2012 predicted by Jose Arguellas?8
If the New Agers are right, no one should worry about such things,
for if everyone manufactures their own truth, no one could ever be
in error.
Much as we might like to be infallible, we know that we aren’t.
Even the most fervently relativistic New Ager must confess that he or
she dials a wrong number, bets on a losing racehorse, or forgets a
friend’s birthday. These admissions reveal that reality is not consti-
tuted by our beliefs. The operative principle here is:
Just because you believe something to be true 
doesn’t mean that it is.
If believing something to be so made it so, the world would contain a
lot fewer unfulﬁlled desires, unrealized ambitions, and unsuccessful
projects than it does.
REALITY IS SOCIALLY CONSTRUCTED
The basic idea behind the third man’s claim in our parable is that if
enough people believe that something is true, it literally becomes true
for everyone. We don’t each create our own separate realities—we all
live in one reality, but we can radically alter this reality for everybody if
a sufﬁcient number of us believe. If within our group we can reach a kind
of consensus, a critical mass of belief, then we can change the world.
Probably the most inﬂuential articulation of this idea was a book
called The Crack in the Cosmic Egg by Joseph Chilton Pearce.9 In it,
Pearce asserted that people have a hand in shaping physical reality—
even the laws of physics. We can transform the physical world, or
parts of it, if enough of us believe in a new reality. If we attain a group
consensus, we can change the world any way we want—for everyone.

In recent years, this extraordinary thesis—that if enough peo-
ple believe in something, it suddenly becomes true for everyone—
has been enormously influential. It got its single biggest boost from
the hundredth-monkey phenomenon (mentioned in Chapter 1),
a story told by Lyall Watson in his book Lifetide. This tale has
been told and retold in a best-selling book by Ken Keyes called
The Hundredth Monkey, in a film with the same name, and in several
articles.
Here’s the story: Watson tells of reports coming from scientists in
the 1950s about wild Japanese monkeys on the island of Koshima. After
the monkeys were given raw sweet potatoes for the ﬁrst time, one of the
monkeys, named Imo, learned to wash the sand and grit off the pota-
toes by dunking them in a stream. In the next few years, Imo taught this
302
EIGHT: RELATIVISM, TRUTH, AND REALITY
On Good Myth and Bad Myth
Psychologist Maureen O’Hara was the ﬁrst to
publish a skeptical analysis of Lyall Watson’s
hundredth-monkey story of a paranormal criti-
cal mass of consciousness. She’s aware that
many people have embraced the tale as a sig-
niﬁcant myth. She acknowledges the impor-
tance of myth in our lives but contends that, as
a myth, the Watson story is “profoundly non-
humanistic” and a “betrayal of the whole idea
of human empowerment”:
There are major contradictions in the pres-
ent idealization of critical mass—seen not
only in the Hundredth Monkey story, but in
the ideologies of such organizations as est,
Bhagwan Rajneesh, and the “Aquarian con-
spirators.” In promoting the idea that, al-
though our ideas are shared by only an
enlightened few (for the time being), if we
really believe them, in some magical way
what we hold to be true becomes true for
everyone, proponents of the critical mass
ideal ignore the principles of both human-
ism and democratic open society. The basis
for openness in our kind of society is the
belief that, for good or ill, each of us holds
his or her own beliefs as a responsible par-
ticipant in a pluralistic culture. Are we really
willing to give up on this ideal and promote
instead a monolithic ideology in which
what is true for a “critical mass” of people
becomes true for everyone? The idea gives
me the willies. . . .
My objection to the Hundredth Monkey
Phenomenon, then, is not that it is a myth,
but that it is bad myth, and that it draws its
force not from the collective imagination,
but by masquerading as science. It leads us
(as I have tried to show) in the direction of
propaganda, manipulation, totalitarianism,
and a worldview dominated by the powerful
and persuasive—in other words, business as
usual. . . .
. . . This is not a transformation myth
impelling us toward the fullest development
of our capacities, but one that reduces us in-
stead to quite literally nothing more than a
mindless herd at the mercy of the “Great
Communicators.” The myth of the Hun-
dredth Monkey Phenomenon is more chill-
ingly Orwellian than Aquarian.10

skill to other monkeys in the colony. “Then something extraordinary
took place,” says Watson.
The details up to this point in the study are clear, but one has to gather
the rest of the story from personal anecdotes and bits of folklore among
primate researchers, because most of them are still not quite sure what
happened. And those who do suspect the truth are reluctant to publish
it for fear of ridicule. So I am forced to improvise the details, but as near
as I can tell, this is what seems to have happened.
In the autumn of that year [1958] an unspeciﬁed number of monkeys on
Koshima were washing sweet potatoes in the sea, because Imo had made
the further discovery that salt water not only cleaned the food but gave it
an interesting new ﬂavor. Let us say, for argument’s sake, that the number
was ninety-nine and that at eleven o’clock on a Tuesday morning, one
further convert was added to the fold in the usual way. But the addition 
of the hundredth monkey apparently carried the number across some sort
of threshold, pushing it through a kind of critical mass, because by the
evening almost everyone in the colony was doing it. Not only that, but
the habit seems to have jumped natural barriers and to have appeared
spontaneously, like glycerin crystals in sealed laboratory jars, in colonies
on other islands and on the mainland in a troop at Takasakiyama.11
Watson uses the story to support the consensus-truth thesis. But
you might ask at this point, “Is the story true? Did these events really
happen?” (Many people who retold the story in books and articles
never bothered to ask this question.)
If it did happen, it would be of enormous scientiﬁc interest. But it
still wouldn’t constitute proof of the thesis that a critical mass of
humans can make something true for everyone else. For one thing, the
evidence could easily support alternative hypotheses—perhaps the
potato-washing habit wasn’t really spread, but resulted from inde-
pendent experimentation and learning by different monkeys (in other
words, other monkeys learned it the way Imo did).
On the other hand, if the story didn’t happen, this wouldn’t prove
that the consensus-truth thesis was false, either. It would simply mean
that one potential piece of empirical evidence that would justify our
believing in the thesis was not valid.
As it turns out, the story didn’t happen, at least not as told by Watson
and others. Regardless of the literal truth of Watson’s story, though,
we can still scrutinize his thesis. In Lifetide he says, “When enough of
us hold something to be true, it becomes true for everyone.”12 If by
this he means that consensus belief by groups of people can literally
alter physical reality (Pearce’s notion), he’s mistaken.
It’s just as implausible to believe that the thoughts of a group of
people (or monkeys) create external reality as it is to believe that the
REALITY IS SOCIALLY CONSTRUCTED
303
It is proof of a base
and low mind for
one to wish to think
with the masses or
majority merely be-
cause the majority is
the majority.Truth
does not change be-
cause it is, or is not,
believed by a major-
ity of the people.
—GIORDANO BRUNO

304
EIGHT: RELATIVISM, TRUTH, AND REALITY
Most men live like
raisins in a cake of
custom.
—BRAND BLANSHARD
The exact contrary
of what is generally
believed is often the
truth.
—JEAN DE LA
BRUYÈRE
thoughts of an individual person create external reality. But it is not at
all implausible to believe that social forces inﬂuence individual
thoughts. What we believe is largely a function of the society in which
we were brought up. For example, if we were raised in a Hindu society,
we may believe that God is an impersonal force. If we were raised in a
Buddhist society, we may believe that there is no God. And if we were
raised in a Christian society, we may believe that God is an immaterial
person. But the fact that society believes something to be true doesn’t
make it true. If it did, societies would be infallible, and we know that’s
not the case. Societies used to believe that the Earth was ﬂat, that the
sun orbited the Earth, and that storms were caused by angry gods. In
each case, society was wrong. We must conclude, then, that:
Just because a group of people believe that something 
is true doesn’t mean that it is.
Groups are just as prone to error as individuals are—perhaps more so.
We can’t justify our beliefs by claiming that everyone shares them, for
everyone may be mistaken. To attempt to do so is to commit the fal-
lacy of appeal to the masses.
What’s more, if society were infallible, it would be impossible to
disagree with society and be correct. Since truth is whatever society
says it is, any claim that society is wrong would have to be false. Thus
social reformers could never justiﬁably claim that truth is on their side.
According to social constructivism, then, scientists are deluded in
believing that there are truths that apply universally to all people re-
gardless of what society they belong to—truths like f=ma (force
equals mass times acceleration) and E=mc2 (energy equals mass times
the velocity of light squared). If truth is relative to society, no such
universal truths exist. Whatever society says, goes. Here’s tyranny of
the majority with a vengeance.
But suppose (as may well be the case) that our society agrees
with scientists that not all truth is socially constructed. Does this
conclusion mean that social constructivism is false? According to the
constructivist doctrine, it does. You see, social constructivism faces
the same problem that subjectivism does: If every society’s belief is as
true as every other’s, then a society’s belief that reality is not socially
constructed is also true. Just as a subjectivist must recognize the truth
of another individual’s opposing view, so a social constructivist must
recognize the truth of another society’s opposing view.
Social constructivists would have us believe that no one can 
legitimately criticize another society. As long as a society is acting on
what it believes to be true, no one can defensibly claim that what it’s

REALITY IS SOCIALLY CONSTRUCTED
305
Let’s Resonate Together
Related to the hundredth-monkey idea is the
extraordinary theory of morphic resonance put
forth by biologist and author Rupert Sheldrake.
His notion is that all organisms and structures
in the universe have the form (morph) that
they do because they exist in “morphic ﬁelds”
that shape them. These energy ﬁelds contain the
form or pattern of objects, with every type 
of object being determined by its own ﬁeld.
The ﬁelds “have a kind of built-in memory 
derived from previous forms of a similar kind,”
Sheldrake says. “The liver ﬁeld is shaped by the
forms of previous livers and the oak tree ﬁeld
by the forms and organization of previous oak
trees.”13 The liver forms and the oak-leaf forms
resonate, or communicate, with each other to
create their respective ﬁelds. Morphic ﬁelds 
impose patterns on both animate and inanimate
objects—cells, crystals, protein molecules,
atoms, and everything else.
According to Sheldrake, the behavior of an-
imals and people also creates morphic ﬁelds,
which in turn shape future behavior. Thus if
you teach mice in London to navigate a maze,
the morphic ﬁeld for the species changes, and
suddenly mice in Paris can navigate the same
maze much easier.
Sheldrake cites several phenomena that he
says are best explained by his theory of mor-
phic resonance. These include alleged instances
of spontaneous animal learning (similar to the
hundredth-monkey phenomenon), cases in
which humans seem to learn something faster
after other humans learn it ﬁrst, and the ability
of some organisms (such as ﬂatworms) to re-
generate parts and repair physical damage. Sci-
entists question whether some of Sheldrake’s
phenomena have even occurred, and much of
the relevant research is controversial.
Nevertheless, we can ask, is it reasonable
to accept Sheldrake’s theory of morphic reso-
nance? Well, not yet. Scientists judge the
worth of theories according to certain key cri-
teria, and Sheldrake’s theory falls short on at
least two of them. One criterion is simplicity,
the number of unproven assumptions a theory
makes. The more assumptions, the less likely
the theory is to be true. Sheldrake’s theory 
assumes both unknown entities and unknown
processes—morphic fields and their vast influ-
ence on just about everything. These assump-
tions alone render the theory suspect. The
other criterion is conservatism, how well a
theory fits with what we already know. Theo-
ries that conflict with our well-founded beliefs
are less likely to be true. Other things being
equal, the theory most consistent with the en-
tire corpus of our knowledge is the best. Shel-
drake’s theory is not conservative. It conflicts
with a massive amount of scientific evidence
regarding fields, energy, biochemistry, genet-
ics, human behavior, and much more. There
simply is no good evidence that morphic
fields exist and exert an influence on the
world. This lack of conservatism renders the
theory unlikely.
We should accept an extraordinary theory
only if no ordinary one will do. And in this
case we have no good reason to believe that no
ordinary one will do. In the history of science,
scientists have often been confronted with as-
tonishing phenomena that they could not ex-
plain in natural terms at the time. But they
didn’t assume that the phenomena must be
paranormal or supernatural. They simply kept
investigating, and they eventually found natural
explanations.

306
EIGHT: RELATIVISM, TRUTH, AND REALITY
doing is wrong. Suppose, for example, that during World War II the
German people agreed with the Nazis that the Jews were a plague on
humankind and needed to be eradicated. If so, then according to so-
cial constructivism, the Holocaust was justiﬁed. Since the Nazis were
acting on what their society believed to be true, they were doing the
right thing. Like Protagoras, social constructivists have to consider
the Nazis’ view as true as everyone else’s.
If you disagree—if you believe that the Nazis were wrong about
the Jews even if they had the support of the German people—then
you can’t be a social constructivist, for you have admitted that society
can be mistaken. Given the history of civilization, such a conclusion
seems unavoidable. Society has been wrong about many things: that
kings have a divine right to rule, that letting blood cures disease, or
that women are inferior to men, just to name a few. So the doctrine of
social constructivism has little to recommend it.
Since social constructivism holds that what makes a proposition
true is that society believes it to be true, it follows that whenever
individuals disagree about the truth of a proposition, what they must
really disagree about is whether their society believes it or not. But are
all our disputes really about what society believes? Suppose we dis-
agree about whether the universe contains black holes. Can we really
resolve this dispute by simply polling the members of our society?
Of course not. Even disagreements about the truth of various moral
principles can’t be settled by opinion surveys. Whether abortion is
morally justiﬁed, for example, can’t be determined by simply canvass-
ing the populace. So truth must be more than just social consensus.
Even if truth were manufactured by society, it wouldn’t be any
easier to ﬁnd, for there is no single society to which each of us clearly
belongs. Suppose, for example, that you were a black Jewish commu-
nist living in Bavaria during the 1940s. Which would be your real 
society? The blacks? The Jews? The communists? The Bavarians?
Unfortunately, there is no way to answer this question because we all
belong to a number of different societies, none of which can claim to
be our real society. So not only is social constructivism not a very rea-
sonable theory, it’s not a very useful one either.
REALITY IS CONSTITUTED BY CONCEPTUAL SCHEMES
Common sense tells us that neither individuals nor societies are 
infallible. Both can believe things that are false, and something can
be true even if no individual or society has ever believed it. To pre-
serve these insights, some relativists, like the fourth man in our para-
ble, have claimed that truth is relative not to individuals or societies
The idea of cultural
relativism is nothing
but an excuse to 
violate human rights.
—SHIRIN EBADI
Truth has no special
time of its own. Its
hour is now—always.
—ALBERT
SCHWEITZER

but to conceptual schemes. A conceptual scheme is a set of concepts
for classifying objects. These concepts provide categories into which
the items of our experience can be placed. Just as the post ofﬁce uses
pigeonholes to sort mail into deliverable piles, so we use conceptual
schemes to sort things into meaningful groups. Different people may
sort things differently, however. One person may believe that an item
falls under one concept, while someone else may believe that it falls
under another. So even though two people share the same concepts,
they may apply them differently.14
To account for individual and social fallibility, the conceptual rel-
ativist must maintain that simply believing something to fall under a
certain concept isn’t enough to make it so. There must be a fact of the
matter as to how it should be classiﬁed, and that fact can’t be deter-
mined solely by belief. What, then, is it determined by? According to
the conceptual relativist, it is determined, at least in part, by the
world. So the conceptual relativist must admit that the world plays a
role in determining what’s true.15
Although the world constrains the truth, conceptual relativists do
not believe that the world uniquely determines the truth, for, in their
view, there is no one way that the world is. Rather, different concep-
tual schemes create different worlds.
For the conceptual relativist, the relationship between conceptual
schemes and the world is analogous to that of a cookie cutter and
cookie dough. Just as cookie dough takes on whatever shape is imparted
to it by a cookie cutter, so the world takes on whatever properties are
imputed to it by a conceptual scheme. The world has some properties
that are not affected by the conceptual scheme, just as the dough has
some properties that are not affected by the cookie cutter. These prop-
erties allow the conceptual relativist to account for mistaken classiﬁca-
tions. Nevertheless, in an important sense, the world is a product of a
conceptual scheme. As philosopher Nelson Goodman puts it, concep-
tual schemes are ways of making worlds.16 So people with different
conceptual schemes live in different worlds.
One of the most inﬂuential proponents of this view is philoso-
pher and historian Thomas Kuhn. His preferred term for a conceptual
scheme is paradigm. In his book The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions (see
Chapter 2), Kuhn uses the word paradigm to refer to particular scien-
tiﬁc theories as well as the concepts, methods, and standards used to
arrive at those theories. Paradigms tell scientists what’s real and how
to go about investigating reality. They indicate what sorts of puzzles
are worth solving and what sorts of methods will solve them.
Normal science, says Kuhn, involves trying to solve the puzzles
generated by a paradigm. Good theories make predictions that go
REALITY IS CONSTITUTED BY CONCEPTUAL SCHEMES
307

beyond the data they were intended to explain. Scientists investigate
these predictions to see if they are borne out by the facts. If not, they
have a puzzle on their hands. Scientists try to solve these puzzles by
using the conceptual resources provided by the paradigm. But some-
times no solution can be found. In that case, the scientiﬁc community
enters a state of crisis and begins to look for a new paradigm that
would explain the anomaly. When such a paradigm is found, the sci-
entiﬁc community undergoes what Kuhn calls a paradigm shift. Since
paradigms deﬁne reality, undergoing a paradigm shift is like being
transported to an alien universe. Kuhn describes it this way:
Examining the record of past research from the vantage of contemporary
historiography, the historian of science may be tempted to exclaim that
when paradigms change, the world itself changes with them. Led by a
new paradigm, scientists adopt new instruments and look in new places.
Even more important, during revolutions scientists see new and differ-
ent things when looking with familiar instruments in places they have
looked before. It is rather as if the professional community had been
suddenly transported to another planet where familiar objects are seen
in a different light and are joined by unfamiliar ones as well. Of course,
nothing of quite that sort does occur: there is no geographical trans-
plantation; outside the laboratory everyday affairs usually continue as
before. Nevertheless, paradigm changes do cause scientists to see the
world of their research engagement differently. In so far as their only
recourse to that world is through what they see and do, we may want 
to say that after a revolution scientists are responding to a different
world.17
Although Kuhn’s statements here are highly qualiﬁed, he seems to be
saying that people who accept different paradigms effectively live in
different worlds.
But why talk this way? Why say that those who accept different par-
adigms live in different worlds instead of simply saying that they have
different beliefs about the world? Apparently because Kuhn believes that
the immediate content of our perceptual experience is determined by the
beliefs we hold and that the world is the sum of our experiences. After
discussing some of the differences between Aristotle’s and Galileo’s the-
ory of motion, he remarks: “the immediate content of Galileo’s experi-
ence with falling stones was not what Aristotle’s had been.”18 Because
Galileo had a different theory of motion than Aristotle, Kuhn claims that
what Galileo saw when he looked at a moving body was different from
what Aristotle saw.
The assumption behind the view that different paradigms create
different worlds is that all observation is theory-laden. What we ob-
serve is determined by the theory we accept. For example, those who
308
EIGHT: RELATIVISM, TRUTH, AND REALITY
A harmful truth is
better than a use-
ful lie.
—THOMAS MANN

believe that the Earth is the center of the solar system see a sunrise
very differently from those who believe that the sun is the center of
the solar system. Because each paradigm manufactures its own data,
there are no neutral data that can be used to make objective compar-
isons between paradigms. As a result, no paradigm can be considered
to be objectively better than any other.
Even if we grant that all observation is theory laden, however, it
doesn’t follow that there are no paradigm-neutral data because two
paradigms may share some theories in common. For example, propo-
nents of the geocentric (Earth-centered) view of the solar system as
well as those of the heliocentric (sun-centered) view could agree that,
during a sunrise, the perceived distance between the sun and the hori-
zon gets larger. They could also agree on other observationally rele-
vant theories like the theory of the telescope, the compass, and the
sextant. So the dependence of data on theory doesn’t rule out objec-
tive comparisons between paradigms.
What’s more, there is reason to believe that at least some obser-
vations are not theory laden. If our paradigm determined everything
that we observed, then it would be impossible to observe anything that
didn’t ﬁt our paradigm. But if we never observed anything that didn’t
ﬁt our paradigm—if we never perceived any anomalies—there would
never be any need to undergo a paradigm shift. So Kuhn’s theory un-
dermines itself—if we accept his theory of observation, we must reject
his history of science.
Neurophysiological research into the nature of perception pro-
vides further reason for believing that not all observation is theory
laden. Psychologist Edward Hundert explains:
If someone loses the primary visual cortex (say, because of a tumor),
they lose their vision; they go almost totally blind. But if they just lose
the secondary or tertiary visual cortex, they manifest an unusual condi-
tion called visual agnosia. In this condition, visual acuity is normal (the
person could correctly identify the orientation of the “E’s” on the eye
chart). But they lose the ability to identify, name, or match even simple
objects in any part of their visual ﬁeld. . . . This model can be translated
into psychological terms as endorsing a functional distinction between
“perception” (input analysis) and “cognition” (central processing). . . .
It is easy to see the evolutionary advantage of this whole scheme,
with its “upward” input analysis: if our transducers were hooked di-
rectly to our central systems, we would spend most of our time seeing
(hearing, etc.) the world the way we remember, believe, or expect the
world to be. The recognition of novelty—of unexpected stimuli—has
extremely obvious evolutionary advantage, and is made possible only
by the separation of transducers and central systems by “dumb” input
analyzers.19
REALITY IS CONSTITUTED BY CONCEPTUAL SCHEMES
309
Facts are facts and
will not disappear on
account of your likes.
—JAWAHARLAL
NEHRU

If all observation were theory laden, we would never be able to
observe anything new. Since we can observe new things, some obser-
vations must be theory free. Hundert suggests that there are two types
of observation: recognition and discrimination. Recognition may in-
volve the use of theory, but discrimination does not. By keeping these
two functions separate, the brain allows us to deal with the unex-
pected. Access to an objective reality, then, seems to be a necessary
condition of survival.
It also seems to be a necessary condition of communication. If the
world really was constituted by conceptual schemes, it would be dif-
ﬁcult to account for the fact that people with different conceptual
schemes can understand and communicate with one another. Philoso-
pher Roger Trigg explains:
The result of granting that “the world” or “reality” cannot be con-
ceived as independent of all conceptual schemes is that there is no
reason to suppose that what the peoples of very different communities
see as the world is similar in any way. Unfortunately, however, this
supposition is absolutely necessary before any translation or compari-
son between languages of different societies can take place. Without
it, the situation would be like one where the inhabitants of two plan-
ets which differed fundamentally in their nature met each other and
tried to communicate. So few things (if any) would be matters of
common experience that their respective languages would hardly 
ever run parallel.20
Because translation is possible among all the different conceptual
schemes we know of, the world must not be constituted by conceptual
schemes.
Translation requires a common point of reference. Consequently,
some people argue that the very notion of an alternate conceptual
scheme makes no sense. Philosopher Donald Davidson, for example,
claims that if we can translate an alien’s utterances into our own, our
conceptual schemes must be essentially the same. And if we can’t
translate their utterances, we have no reason to suppose that they
even have a conceptual scheme.21
As long as we don’t consider truth to be relative to conceptual
schemes, however, we do not need to reject the notion of alternate con-
ceptual schemes. Without getting too technical, we can say that people
who use different concepts have different conceptual schemes. We can
even say that people with different conceptual schemes experience the
world in different ways. What we can’t say is that people with different
conceptual schemes live in different worlds, because that statement gen-
erates all the problems already discussed. Different conceptual schemes
represent the world differently; they don’t create different worlds.
310
EIGHT: RELATIVISM, TRUTH, AND REALITY
Reality is that which,
when you stop be-
lieving in it, doesn’t
go away.
—PHILIP K. DICK

Instead of viewing conceptual schemes as cookie cutters, we can
view them as maps. A territory, as mentioned earlier, can be mapped
in many different ways, and each map, provided that it is an accurate
one, can be considered true. Each science, for example, can be con-
sidered a different map of reality. The map provided by biology may
contain very few of the concepts contained in the map provided by
physics, just as a topographical map may contain very few of the sym-
bols contained in a road map. But both biology and physics can be
considered to be maps of the same reality just as topographical and
road maps can be considered maps of the same territory, and both can
be considered to be true. Whether you consult a biologist or a physi-
cist will depend on what you want to do, just as whether you consult
a topographical or a road map will depend on where you want to go.
Different theories, like different maps, are good for different things.
So there is no one best theory just as there is no one best map. What
we must not forget is that, as mathematician Alfred Korzybski fa-
mously noted, “the map is not the territory.”22 People using different
maps are not necessarily traversing different territories, and, contrary
to what Kuhn seems to suggest, changing the map we’re using doesn’t
change the territory we’re traversing. The territory is what it is and is
not affected by our representations of it.
THE RELATIVIST’S PETARD
The considerations presented in this chapter weigh heavily against
relativism. But the most serious ﬂaw of relativism in all its forms is a
purely logical one: It’s self-refuting because its truth implies its falsity.
According to the relativist—whether a subjectivist, a social con-
structivist, or a conceptual relativist—everything is relative. To say
that everything is relative is to say that no unrestricted universal gen-
eralizations are true (an unrestricted universal generalization is a state-
ment to the effect that something holds for all individuals, societies,
or conceptual schemes). But the statement “No unrestricted universal
generalizations are true” is itself an unrestricted universal generaliza-
tion. So if relativism in any of its forms is true, it’s false. As a result, it
cannot possibly be true.
To avoid such self-contradiction, the relativist may try to claim
that the statement “Everything is relative” is only relatively true. But
this claim won’t help, because it just says that relativists (or their so-
ciety or their conceptual scheme) take relativism to be true. Such a
claim should not give the nonrelativist pause, for the fact that rela-
tivists take relativism to be true is not in question. The question is
whether a nonrelativist should take relativism to be true. Only if
THE RELATIVIST’S PETARD
311
All generalizations
are dangerous, even
this one.
—ALEXANDRE
DUMAS FILS

relativists can provide objective evidence that relativism is true should
a nonrelativist believe that it’s true. But this evidence is precisely the
kind that relativists can’t provide, for, in their view, there is no objec-
tive evidence.
Relativists, then, face a dilemma: If they interpret their theory ob-
jectively, they defeat themselves by providing evidence against it. If
they interpret their theory relativistically, they defeat themselves by
failing to provide any evidence for it. Either way, relativists defeat
themselves.
Philosopher Harvey Siegel describes the dilemma this way:
First the framework relativist must, in order to join the issue with the
nonrelativist, defend framework relativism non-relativistically. To 
“defend” framework relativism relativistically (i.e., “according to my
framework, framework relativism is true (correct, warranted, etc.)”) 
is to fail to defend it, since the nonrelativist is appropriately unim-
pressed with such framework-bound claims. But to defend framework
relativism non-relativistically is to give it up, since to defend it in this
way is to acknowledge the legitimacy of framework-neutral criteria of
assessment of claims, which is precisely what the framework relativist
must deny. Thus to defend framework relativism relativistically is to
fail to defend it; to defend it non-relativistically is to give it up. Thus
framework relativism is self-defeating.23
And anything that is self-defeating cannot be true.
The problem with relativists is that they want to have their cake
and eat it too. On the one hand, they want to say that they or their
society or conceptual scheme is the supreme authority on matters of
truth. But, on the other hand, they want to say that other individu-
als, societies, or conceptual schemes are equally authoritative. Rela-
tivists can’t have it both ways. As philosopher W. V. O. Quine
explains:
Truth, says the cultural relativist, is culture-bound. But if it were,
then he, within his own culture, ought to see his own culture-
bound truth as absolute. He cannot proclaim cultural relativism
without rising above it, and he cannot rise above it without giving
it up.24
If individual, social, or conceptual relativism were true, there
would be no standpoint outside yourself, your society, or your con-
ceptual scheme from which to make valid judgments. But if there were
no such standpoint, you would have no grounds for thinking that rel-
ativism is true. In proclaiming that truth is relative, then, relativists
hoist themselves on their own petard; they blow themselves up, so
to speak.
312
EIGHT: RELATIVISM, TRUTH, AND REALITY
One must accept the
truth from whatever
source it comes.
—MAIMONIDES

FACING REALITY
313
FACING REALITY
The arguments presented in the previous section indicate that truth
isn’t relative to individuals, societies, or conceptual schemes. Belief
can be relative because different individuals, societies, and conceptual
schemes often have different beliefs. But the existence of relative 
beliefs doesn’t mean that truth is relative, for, as we’ve seen, you can’t
make something true by simply believing it to be true. The upshot,
then, is that:
There is an external reality that is independent 
of our representations of it.
In other words, there is a way that the world is. We can represent the
world to ourselves in many different ways, but that which is being
represented is the same for all of us.
The concept of objective reality is not optional, something we
can take or leave. Each time we assert that something is the case or we
think that something is a certain way, we assume that there is objec-
tive reality. Each time relativists deny objective reality, they entangle
themselves in self-refutation and contradictions. In the very argument
over the existence of objective reality, both those who accept it and
those who deny it must assume it or the argument would never get off
the ground.
”But wait,” you say. “Still, there must be some things that are ‘true
for me’ and ‘not true for you.’ If I say that I hate opera, isn’t that state-
ment true for me? If I love Bart Simpson, have a pain in my left leg, or
am bored silly by discussions of politics, aren’t these assertions true
for me?”
Clearly there are things about ourselves that are relative—that
are a certain way to us and a different way to others. Personal charac-
teristics—peculiarities of psychology and physiology—are relative to
persons (Jane likes pizza, but Jack doesn’t; Jane has a mole on her nose
and Jack doesn’t). The effects that anything might have on a person
are also relative to that person (Jane is intrigued by quantum mechan-
ics, but Jack isn’t; loud music gives Jane a headache, but not Jack).
Certain states of affairs, then, may be relative to individuals.
But the truth about those states of affairs isn’t relative. Let’s say that Jane
loves white wine and Jack doesn’t. On their ﬁrst dinner date, Jane says,
“I love white wine.” Is Jane’s statement true for her but not true for
Jack? No. Her statement reports a fact about herself, and because she
does love white wine, her statement is true. It’s not true for her and
false for Jack; it’s just true. If Jack says, “I don’t love white wine,” his
The truth may not
be helpful, but the
concealment of it
cannot be.
—MELVIN KONNER

statement refers to a fact about himself and is also true for both of
them. In each statement, the “I” refers to a different person, and so the
statements correctly report on different states of affairs.
Now we can consider the question raised at the beginning of this
chapter: Does realism lead to intolerance and arrogance? The answer
is no. The realist believes that when there’s disagreement, it’s theoret-
ically possible to determine the truth through rational argument. After
all, if there is a way that things are, then the only way to resolve dis-
putes is by appeal to the way things are. But, as Trigg points out,
. . . there is no reason why someone who believes that basic disagree-
ment can admit of solution ﬁrstly should arrogantly assume that he 
himself has a monopoly of truth, and secondly should then make others
accept his views by force. The mere fact that a disagreement is capable
of solution does not of itself suggest which side is right. When two
sides contradict each other, whether in the ﬁelds of morality, religion 
or any other area, each will recognize (if they are objectivists) that at
least one side must be mistaken. There need be no contradiction be-
tween strongly believing that one is right and yet realizing that one
could be wrong. Arrogance is not entailed by any objectivist theory.25
True, realists might indeed be tempted to force their views on
others. But so might relativists. Relativists might use force to get a per-
son to agree with them because they have no other recourse. After all,
relativists can’t persuade anyone by appealing to objective standards
or using rational argument. Since relativists don’t believe that’s possi-
ble, if they want to persuade someone, what is left besides force and
manipulation?
Certainly, dogmatism isn’t ruled out by relativism. It crops up
among relativists just as it does among some realists. It’s apparent, for
example, among some people who have espoused New Age subjec-
tivism. So relativism doesn’t entail tolerance any more than realism
entails intolerance.
Also, relativists who do embrace the virtue of tolerance once
again get themselves stuck in contradictions. Is their statement that
tolerance of other views is a good thing an objectively true statement
or not? If it’s objectively true, the relativists are denying their rela-
tivism because they regard something as objectively true. If their
statement means that it’s only relatively true that tolerance is a good
thing, then they must admit that the opposite view could be equally
justiﬁed. Consequently, relativists can’t consistently claim that every-
one should be tolerant.
There’s no contradiction at all for the realist who says all of the fol-
lowing: Statements are objectively true or false; it’s often difﬁcult to tell
314
EIGHT: RELATIVISM, TRUTH, AND REALITY
Truth is a great ﬂirt.
—FRANZ LISZT
Truth does not do 
so much good in the
world as the appear-
ance of it does evil.
—DUC FRANÇOIS
DE LA
ROCHEFOUCAULD

whether statements are true or false; we may be mistaken about their
truth or falsity; and because of our fallibility, we must be tolerant of
those who have opposing views and uphold their right to disagree.
Understand this as well: Just because there is an objective reality
(and thus objective truth) doesn’t mean that people can’t view this ob-
jective reality differently. In fact, some people are tempted by relativism
precisely because they are aware that there are different perspectives on
reality—and plenty of disagreements about those perspectives. But it
doesn’t follow from the existence of differing perspectives and dis-
agreements that there is no objective reality or objective truth.
SUMMARY
Relativists believe that reality does not exist independently of our ways of
representing it, that individuals, societies, or conceptual schemes create
their own realities by representing it in different ways. Many people have
embraced the idea that we each create our own reality, and they have wel-
comed the implication that if we just believe something, it will come true.
But this notion involves us in contradictions, with people’s beliefs causing
something to exist and not exist at the same time. Solipsists can try to avoid
this problem, but only by ignoring the fact that the best explanation of our
experiences is that there is an independently existing world.
If reality is created by one’s thoughts (the view known as subjectivism),
then whatever anyone believes is true. But if whatever anyone believes is
true, then everyone’s belief is as true as everyone else’s. And if everyone’s be-
lief is as true as everyone else’s, then the belief that subjectivism is false is as
true as the belief that subjectivism is true. Subjectivism, then, is self-refuting.
Some believe that if enough people believe that something is true, it lit-
erally becomes true for everyone—truth is socially constructed. But just be-
cause a group of people believe that something is true doesn’t mean that it
is. If this social constructivism were true, society would be infallible, an im-
plausible result. The doctrine is also self-refuting in the same way that sub-
jectivism is.
A related view is that reality is constituted by conceptual schemes. An
assumption often lurking behind it is that all observation is theory laden. But
there are reasons to believe that at least some observations are not theory
laden. If all observation were theory laden, we would never be able to ob-
serve anything new. Access to an objective reality seems to be a necessary
condition of survival and of communication.
According to the relativist—whether a subjectivist, a social construc-
tivist, or a conceptual relativist—everything is relative. To say that every-
thing is relative is to say that no unrestricted universal generalizations are
true. But the statement “No unrestricted universal generalizations are true” is
itself an unrestricted universal generalization. So if relativism in any of its
forms is true, it’s false. So it cannot possibly be true.
SUMMARY
315

STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Can an individual make a statement true simply by believing it to be
true? Why or why not?
2. Can a society make a statement true simply by believing it to be true?
Why or why not?
3. Can a statement be true in one conceptual scheme and false in another?
Why or why not?
4. Consider this statement: No universal generalizations are true. Can
this statement be true? Why or why not?
5. Is it reasonable to believe that everything we experience (including the
people we meet) is a creation of our own minds? Why or why not?
EVALUATE THESE CLAIMS. ARE THEY REASONABLE? 
WHY OR WHY NOT?
1. Don’t pick up that toad. Toads cause warts. Everyone knows that.
2. Recent polls indicate that 90 percent of Americans believe in angels.
Therefore, angels must exist.
3. Millions of people use psychic hot lines. So there must be something
to them.
4. The tax system in this country is unfair and ridiculous. Just ask anyone.
5. The people of Ireland have believed in leprechauns for centuries.
Leprechauns must be real.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. A person can’t make something true by simply believing it to be true.
Can a person make something morally right by simply believing it to
be right? Can a culture or society make something right by simply
believing it to be right? Evaluate your answers to these questions by
examining their implications.
2. Identify as many as possible of the different cultural or societal groups
that you belong to. Is there any objective way to determine which of
these groups is your real group? If so, which group is it? If not, what
are the implications for social constructivism?
3. Suppose that two people have different beliefs about something they
are looking at. Does it follow that they perceive it differently? Does 
it follow that they are perceiving different things? Is there any way 
to tell which, if either, of these alternatives is correct? Explain your
answers by means of speciﬁc examples.
FIELD PROBLEM
In June 1989, the prodemocracy movement in China had captured the atten-
tion of people all over the world. Thousands of students gathered in the famed
Tiananmen Square to demand greater freedom and democratic reforms in the
316
EIGHT: RELATIVISM, TRUTH, AND REALITY

Chinese government. The government responded with a massive military
crackdown on the dissidents in the square, wounding and killing several of
them. People who believed in universal human rights (ethical objectivists) con-
demned the killings as a tragic, immoral act. People in the Chinese government
who rejected the notion of universal human rights (ethical relativists) said that,
according to the values of Chinese society, the crackdown was morally right.
Assignment: Pretend for a moment that you are a Chinese ofﬁcial who uses
moral relativism to defend the crackdown. In one paragraph, state your case.
Then take the other side and pretend that you are a citizen of a Western na-
tion who uses the concept of universal moral rights to condemn the crack-
down. In one paragraph, present your argument. Compare the arguments.
Which do you think is strongest?
CRITICAL READING AND WRITING
I. Read the passage below and answer the following questions:
1. What is the claim being made in this passage?
2. Are any reasons offered to support the claim?
3. Are morphic ﬁelds physically possible? Why or why not?
4. Would the existence of morphic ﬁelds lend support to the notion
that reality is socially constructed? Why or why not?
5. What kind of evidence would convince you that morphic ﬁelds exist?
II. Write a 200-word critique of this passage, focusing on how well its
claim is supported by good reasons and why you think accepting the
claim would be reasonable (or unreasonable).
Passage 7
Related to the hundredth-monkey idea is the extraordinary theory of “mor-
phic resonance” put forth by biologist and author Rupert Sheldrake. His no-
tion is that all organisms and structures in the universe have the form
(morph) that they do because they exist in “morphic ﬁelds” that shape them.
These energy ﬁelds contain the form or pattern of objects, with every type
of object being determined by its own ﬁeld.
According to Sheldrake, the behavior of animals and people also creates
morphic ﬁelds, which in turn shape future behavior. Thus if you teach mice
in London to navigate a maze, the morphic ﬁeld for the species changes, and
suddenly mice in Paris can navigate the same maze much easier. “Within the
present century,” he says, “it should have become progressively easier to
learn to ride a bicycle, drive a car, play the piano, to use a typewriter, owing
to the cumulative morphic resonance from the large number of people who
have already acquired these skills.”
Sheldrake cites several phenomena that he says are best explained by his
theory of morphic resonance. These include alleged instances of sponta-
neous animal learning (similar to the hundredth-monkey phenomenon),
cases in which humans seem to learn something faster after other humans
learn it ﬁrst, and the ability of some organisms (such as ﬂatworms) to regen-
erate parts and repair physical damage.
CRITICAL READING AND WRITING
317

NOTES
1. Allan Bloom, The Closing of the American Mind (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1987), p. 25.
2. Shirley MacLaine, Out on a Limb (New York: Bantam Books, 1983).
3. Shirley MacLaine, It’s All in the Playing (New York: Bantam Books,
1987), pp. 171–72.
4. Jane Roberts, The Seth Material (New York: Bantam Books, 1970), p. 124.
5. Ted Schultz, “A Personal Odyssey through the New Age,” in Not 
Necessarily the New Age (Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1988), p. 345.
6. Ibid., p. 15.
7. Plato, “Theaetetus,” 171 a, trans. F. M. Cornford, in The Collected Dia-
logues of Plato, eds. Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1961), p. 876.
8. Schultz, “Personal Odyssey,” p. 342.
9. Joseph Chilton Pearce, The Crack in the Cosmic Egg (New York: Julian
Press, 1971).
10. Maureen O’Hara, “Of Myths and Monkeys: A Critical Look at Criti-
cal Mass,” in Schultz, Fringes of Reason, pp. 182–85.
11. Lyall Watson, Lifetide (New York: Bantam Books, 1979), pp. 147–48.
12. Ibid., pp. 148–49.
13. Rupert Sheldrake, “Mind, Memory, and Archetype Morphic Reso-
nance and the Collective Unconscious,” Psychological Perspectives 18
(Spring 1987): 9–25.
14. Israel Schefﬂer, Science and Subjectivity (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill,
1967), p. 36ff.
15. Chris Swoyer, “True For,” in Relativism: Cognitive and Moral, eds. Jack W.
Meiland and Michael Krausz (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre
Dame Press, 1982), p. 97.
16. Nelson Goodman, Ways of World Making (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1978).
17. Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1970), p. 111.
18. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, 125.
19. Edward Hundert, “Can Neuroscience Contribute to Philosophy?” in
Mindwaves, eds. Colin Blakemore and Susan Greenﬁeld (Oxford: Black-
well, 1987), pp. 413, 420–21.
20. Roger Trigg, Reason and Commitment (London: Cambridge University
Press, 1973), pp. 15–16.
21. Donald Davidson, “Presidential Address” (speech made to the seventi-
eth annual eastern meeting of the American Philosophical Association, 
Atlanta, December 28, 1973).
22. Alfred Korzybski, Science and Sanity, 4th ed. (Lakeville, CT: Interna-
tional Non-Aristotelian Library, 1933), p. 58.
23. Harvey Siegel, Relativism Refuted (Dordrecht, Netherlands: D. Reidel,
1987), pp. 43–44.
24. W. V. O. Quine, “On Empirically Equivalent Systems of the World,”
Erkenntnis 9 (1975): 327–28.
25. Trigg, Reason and Commitment, pp. 135–36.
318
EIGHT: RELATIVISM, TRUTH, AND REALITY

C-1
TEXT CREDITS
Page 18: Aristotle, excerpts from Metaphysics, Book IV, translated by Richard McKeon.
Copyright 1941 by Richard McKeon. Reprinted with the permission of Clarendon
Press/Oxford University Press, Ltd. Page 78: Richard Dawkins, excerpt from “Viruses
of the Mind” from Free Inquiry 13, no. 3 (Summer 1993). Copyright © 1993 by
Richard Dawkins. Reprinted with the permission of Free Inquiry, published by the
Council for Secular Humanism. Pages 85–86, 146, 201–202: Leonard Zusne and
Warren H. Jones, excerpts from Anomalistic Psychology. Copyright © 1982 by Leonard
Zusne and Warren H. Jones. Reprinted with the permission of Routledge and the 
authors. Page 88: Excerpts from “Objections to Astrology” from The Humanist 35, no. 5
(September/ October 1975). Reprinted with the permission of the American Humanist
Association. Pages 99: Terence Hines, excerpts from Pseudoscience and the Paranormal.
Copyright © 1988 by Terence Hines. Reprinted with the permission of Prometheus
Books. Pages 113: John Hochman, excerpt from “Recovered Memory Therapy and
False Memory Syndrome,” Skeptic 2, no. 3 (1994). Copyright © 1994 by Skeptics 
Society. Reprinted with the permission of Skeptic magazine. Page 115: Ted Schultz,
excerpts from “Voices from Beyond: The Age-Old Mystery of Channeling” and
“Jumping Geography” from The Fringes of Reason: A Whole Earth Catalog, edited by
Ted Schultz (New York: Harmony Books, 1989). Copyright © 1989 by Ted Schultz.
Reprinted with permission. Page 120: “Failed Doomsday and Apocalyptic Predic-
tions,” Relatively Interesting, May 8, 2012, Pages 122–126: Nostradamus, Century I,
Verse XXII; and Century I, Verse XXVII from Henry Roberts, The Complete Prophecies of
Nostradamus. Copyright 1947, 1949, © 1962, 1964, 1966, 1968, 1969 by Henry C.
Roberts, Copyright © 1982 by Lee Roberts Amsterdam and Harvey Amsterdam.
Reprinted with permission. Page 145: Kurt Butler, excerpt from A Consumer’s Guide to
“Alternative Medicine”: A Close Look at Homeopathy, Acupuncture, Faith-healing, and Other 
Unconventional Treatments. Copyright © 1992 by Kurt Butler. Reprinted with the permission
of Prometheus Books. Pages 161–162, 173–174: Karl Popper, excerpts from Conjecture
and Refutations: The Growth of Scientiﬁc Knowledge (New York: Basic Books, 1965). 
Copyright © 1962 by Karl Popper. Reprinted with the permission of the Estate of
Karl Popper. Page 190: Martin Gardner, excerpts from Fads and Fallacies in the Name of
Science. Copyright © 1957 by Martin Gardner. Reprinted with the permission of
Dover Publications, Inc. Page 192: Raelian Movement, excerpt from www.rael.org/
english/index.html. Reprinted with the permission of the USA Raelian Movement.
Page 196: “Person Designed for a Healthy Old Age” Illustration by Patricia J.
Wynn. Reprinted by permission. Page 196–197: Kenneth R. Miller, excerpt from
“Finding Darwin’s God” from Brown Alumni Magazine (November/December 1999).
Reprinted with the permission of the author. Page 203: James Randi, excerpt from
“The Million Dollar Paranormal Challenge” from www.randi.org/ research/challenge.html
(February 26, 2004). Copyright © 2004 by James Randi. Reprinted with the permis-
sion of The James Randi Educational Foundation. Pages 228–230: Mahlon W. Wag-
ner, excerpt from “Is Homeopathy ‘New Science’ or ‘New Age’?” from Scientiﬁc Review
of Alternative Medicine (Fall/Winter 1997). Reprinted with the permission of the Scientiﬁc
Review of Alternative Medicine. Pages 236: Keith Fitzpatrick-Matthews, “I remember
why I’ve never wanted satellite television,” Bad Archaeology, September 17, 2011.
Copyright © 2011 by Bad Archaeology. Reprinted by permission. Page 237: Martin
T. Orne, excerpt from “The Use and Misuse of Hypnosis in Court” from International
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis (October 1979). Reprinted with the permis-
sion of the publishers. Page 240: Robert A. Baker, excerpt from They Call It Hypnosis.
Credits

Copyright © 1990 by Robert A. Baker. Reprinted with the permission of Prometheus
Books. Page 250: Ray Hyman, excerpt from “How Not to Test Mediums: Critiquing
the Afterlife Experiments” from Skeptical Inquirer (January/February 2003). Reprinted
with the permission of the Skeptical Inquirer, www.csicop.org. Page 256: Adrian
Thatcher, excerpt from “Christian Theism and the Concept of a Person” from Persons
and Personality, edited by Arthur Peacocke and Grant Gillette. Copyright © 1987.
Reprinted with the permission of Blackwell. Pages 257–258: Raymond A. Moody
Jr., excerpt from Life After Life (New York: Bantam, 1975). Copyright © 1975 by Ray-
mond A. Moody Jr. Reprinted with the permission of the author. Page 262: William
Rushton, excerpt from “Letter to the Editor” from Journal of the Society for Psychical
Research 48 (1976). Copyright © 1976. Reprinted with permission. Page 276: Ben
Radford, “Ghost-Hunting Mistakes: Science and Pseudoscience in Ghost Investiga-
tions,” Skeptical Inquirer, Volume 34.6, November/December 2010. Used by permis-
sion. Page 302: Maureen O’Hara, excerpt from “Of Myths and Monkeys: A Critical
Look at Critical Mass” from Whole Earth Review 52 (1989). Copyright © 1989 by Mau-
reen O’Hara. Reprinted with the permission of the author.
PHOTO CREDITS
Title page: © John Wang/Getty RF; Chapter Opener 1: © Brand X Pictures/Punch-
Stock RF; Chapter Opener 2: © Blend Images/Getty RF; Chapter Opener 3: © TRB-
foto/Getty RF; Chapter Opener 4: Stockbyte/PunchStock RF; Chapter Opener 5: ©
Ann Burgraff/Corbis RF; p. 102 & 103: Courtesy NASA; p. 104 & 108: ©
Bettmann/Corbis; p. 111: Possible photograph of the Loch Ness Monster taken 19
April 1934 by London surgeon R.K. Wilson; p. 123: © Chris Hellier/Corbis; Chapter
Opener 6: Steve Cole/Getty RF; p. 196: © Patricia J. Wynne; Chapter Opener 7:
© Corbis RF; p. 235: © Bates Littlehales/National Geographic; p. 246: ©
Bettmann/Corbis; p. 275: © AP/Wide World Photos; p. 279: © Corbis; Chapter
Opener 8: © Corbis RF
C-2
CREDITS

I-1
Index
Abduction, 47–48
Abélard, Pierre, 69
Absolute values, 55
Absolutism, 296
Ackley, Helen, 269
Ad hoc hypotheses, 169, 170
Ad hominem fallacy, 51
Adam, 190
Adequacy criteria, 172–173
Adler, Alfred W., 173
Advaita Vedanta school, 83
Afﬁrming the antecedent, 39
Afﬁrming the consequent, 41
Agency detection system, 136–137
Albert, Gretl, 205
Alcock, James, 116–117
Alcott, Amos Bronson, 130
Alien abductions. See UFO abductions
Alternative hypothesis, SEARCH, 224
Alternative medicine
belief in, 12
representativeness heuristic, 133
American Association for the Advancement of
Science, 197
American Society for Psychical Research, 81
Amityville Horror, The, 9
Analogical induction, 46–47
Ancient aliens, 10, 235, 236–237
Anderson, Jack, 199
Anecdotal evidence
overlooked causes, 146
personal experience, 141–144
placebo effect, 145
Angular gyrus, 267–268
Animal magnetism, 164
Anomalies, 15
Antecedent, 39
Anthropomorphic bias, 135–137
Anthropomorphism, 135
Apollo 11 landing, 276, 279, 280–281
Apparitions, 270
Appeal to authority
climate change, 284
irrelevant premises, 51–52
nonexpert testimony, 73
Appeal to fear, 53
Appeal to ignorance
irrelevant premises, 52–53
logical fallacy, 21
Appeal to the masses
group consensus, 304
irrelevant premises, 52
Appeal to the person, 51
Appeal to tradition, 52
Applied epistemology, x, 221–222
Aquinas, St. Thomas, 77, 78
Archimedes, 51
Arguellas, Jose, 301
Arguments
and claims, 34–36
evaluation, 33
fallacious, 49
formulation, 33
identiﬁcation of, 37
minimum requirements, 36
types of, 37
Aristotle, 16, 17, 139
laws of thought, 18
Armstrong, Neil, 280
Asimov, Isaac, 159, 188, 189
Association for the Scientiﬁc Study of Near-
Death Phenomenon, 255
Astral body, 270, 271
Astrology
and force ﬁelds, 20, 87–88
invention of, 63, 84
and knowledge, 90
and predictability, 64, 84–85
popular belief, vii, 6, 88, 89
as representativeness heuristic, 134
statistical investigations, 85–87, 88
Atkinson, Brooks, 6
Atman (soul), 83
Atran, Scott, 136
Authority, appeal to, 51–52, 73
Autism, 147
Autoganzfeld, 209
Autokinetic effect, 110
Automatic Gain Control, 25
Availability error, 127–130, 284
Index

Awareness During Resuscitation (AWARE) 
study, 266
Ba Mbuti, 100
Babylonians, 63–64, 84–85
Backster, Clive, 72–73
“Backward masking,” 103
Bacon, Francis, 62, 118, 130
Baker, Robert A., 240, 243, 244–245
Barker, William J., 115
Baron, Carla, 128
Barrett, Justin, 136, 137
Bavarian Illuminati, 276
Begging the question, 49
Behe, Michael, 191–193
Beloff, John, 203, 204, 206
Bem, Daryl, 209, 210
Benedict, Ruth, 190
Benford, G. A., 26
Bering, J. M., 137
Bernard, Raymond, 170
Beyerstein, Barry, 262–263
Beynam, Laurence, 26
Biarritz (Goedsche), 283
Biased sample, 44
Bible and UFOs, The (Downing), 30
Bienz, Captain Eileen, 106
Bigfoot, 108, 109
Billings, Josh, 296
Bird, Christopher, 72
Birth experience, 263–264
Bjorkland, D. F., 137
Blackmore, Susan, 204, 259–260, 264, 265,
266–267, 268
Blake, William, 81
Blanshard, Brand, 70, 304
Blaser, Martin, 135
Bleak House (Dickens), 260
Blind Watchmaker, The (Dawkins), 78
Blinding clinical trials, 163, 164–165
“Block universe,” 27
Blondlot, René, 105–107
Bloom, Alan, 296
Bloom, Paul, 137
Boardman, George Dana, 204
Bohr, Niels, 63
Book, D. L., 26
Book of Ezekiel, 237
Bower, Doug, 125
Brahman, 83
Brand, Stewart, 10
Braunstein, Samuel L., 242
Brave New World (Huxley), 199
Brazel, W. W., 247
Breakthrough Propulsion Physics Project, 
20–21
Brecht, Bertolt, 171
Brennan, Justice William, 183
Bridgman, P. W., 166
Broca, Paul, 180
Broca’s Brain (Sagan), 263
Brown, Rita Mae, 36
Browne, Sylvia, 203, 249
Buddhism, 83
Bush, George W., 359
Butler, Kurt, 144, 149
Butler, Robert N., 196
Byrd, Randolph, 232
California Personality Inventory (CPI), 87
Camping, Harold, 120
Canby, Margaret, 115
Cancer, 143–144
Capra, Fritjof, 81–82, 83
Carlson, Shawn, 86–87
Carnes, Bruce A., 196
Carrel, Alexis, 80
Carrington, Whately, 205
Carroll, Lewis, 105
Categorization, 133
Catholic Church, 9
Cerebral anoxia, 265
Certainty, 66–67
Chariots of the Gods (Von Däniken), 10, 15, 236
Cheetham, Erika, 123, 124
Chinese proverb, 176
Chorley, Dave, 125
Cicero, 84, 134
Claim
and arguments, 34–36
reasonable doubt, 67–68
substantiating, 21–22
truth demonstration, 33
Clairvoyance, 6, 14, 197, 200–201
Clark, Martin, 183
“Clever Hans,” 79–80
Clifford, W. K., 70
Climate change, 283–285, 286–288, 359
Clinical trials, 163–166
Clonaid, 192
I-2
INDEX

Cogent argument, 39
Coherence, 74
Coincidences, 138–140
“Cold reading,” 251–252
Color constancy, 99–100
Columbus, Christopher, 120, 167, 
168–169
Commonsense skepticism, 72
Communication with the dead, 248, 249–253
Communion (Strieber), 234, 240, 244
Composition, 50–51
Conceptual relativist, 307
Conceptual schema, 307
Conceptual schemas, 308–311
Conclusion, 34, 37
Conclusion indicator words, 36
Conditional argument/statement, 39–40
Conﬁrmation bias
alternative hypotheses, 131
availability error, 127–128
cards/number sequences, 125–127
climate change, 284, 286
conspiracy theories, 278–280
lunar effects, 130–131
probability misjudgments, 129–130
prophetic dreams, 130
Confucius, 74
Conjunction fallacy, 133
Consensus-truth thesis, 303
Consequent, 39
Conservatism criterion, 180–181, 226
Conspiracy theories, 278–283
Contradictions, 24
Controlled studies, 148
Controlled trial, 163
Copernicus, Nicholas, 167, 179–180
Cora Indians, 134
Corkell, Mrs. Anthony, 115
Counterexample method, 42
Crack in the Cosmic Egg, The (Pearce), 301–302
Creation theories, 195
Creationism. See Scientiﬁc creationism
Crichton, Michael, 19
Critias (Plato), 58
Critical mass, 302
Critical thinking, 33
Crop circles, 125
Crumbaugh, J., 203, 204
Cryptomnesia (hidden memory), 115
Culver, R. B., 86, 131
Darwin, Charles, 161, 182–183, 187, 
193, 194
Davidson, Donald, 310
Da Vinci, Leonardo, 23
Dawkins, Richard, 78, 191
Dean, Geoffrey, 87
Deductive arguments, 37, 39–42
Deferent, 180
Delacre, Gilles, 268–269
Demosthenes, 118
Denying the antecedent, 40–41
Denying the consequent, 40
Descartes, René, 69, 270
de Silva, Lynn, 256
Deslon, Charles, 165
“Dialogues in Hell between Machiavelli and
Montesquieu,” 282–283
Dick, Philip K., 310
Dickens, Charles, 260
Disjunctive syllogism, 41
Dispositional mental states, 76
Disraeli, Benjamin, 225
Distance healing treatments, 143
Division premises, 51
Dobbs, Adrian, 25, 26
Dobzhansky, Theodosius, 186, 188
Dogon tribe, 10
Double-blind trials, 164
Doubt, 68–69
Downing, Larry, 30
Drabble, Margaret, 15
Dreams
REM sleep, 117
UFO abductions, 245
Drummond, William, 238
Drysdale, Douglas, 261
Dualists, 270
Dubois, Allison, 128
Dubose, Colonel Thomas, 246
Ducasse, C. J., 24
Duhem, Pierre, 168
Dumas, Alexandre ﬁls, 311
Dunn, Dana, 7
Durant, Will, 12
Durham, Carl T., 190
Earth, 169–170
Easter Island monoliths, 236–237
Ebadi, Shirin, 306
Ectoplasm, 271
INDEX
I-3

Eddington, Sir Arthur, 174–175
Edward, John, 249, 252, 253
Edwards, Michael, 207
Einstein, Albert, vii, 1, 9, 16, 19, 26–27, 62, 79,
174–175, 177, 178
Ektos (interiorization), 271
Electromagnetism, 20, 87–88, 229
Emergent property, 50
Empirical evidence, 223
End of world predictions, 119, 120
Endorphins, 267
Enumerative induction, 42–45
Epicycle, 180
Epistemology, x
Equivocation, 50
Erasmus, Desiderius, 133
Eskimos, 134
Eve, Ray, 7
Evidence
appeal to ignorance, 21, 22
and belief, 69–71
denying, 118–119, 284, 286
disconﬁrming, 126
SEARCH, 223–224
Evolution, 16, 183, 184–186, 188, 189
“Exaptation,” 193
Excluded middle law, 17
Exorcist, 9
Expectations
and memory, 114
and perceptual construction, 100–110
Expert knowledge, 72–73
Expert testimony, 73–74
Explanation, 48
“External realists,” 296
External reality, 313
Extrasensory perception (ESP)
as collective phenomenon, 14–15
and HSP, 81
and popular belief, 6
and psi phenomena, 197–199
scientiﬁc investigations, 22–26, 201–202,
203–212
and selective memories, 117
Extrasensory Perception (Rhine), 201
“Extrasensory pornception,” 210
Extraterrestrial visitors, 6, 10, 21
Faces in the Clouds (Guthrie), 137
Fact, 64
Faith, 77–79
Fallacies
appeals to..., 51–53
conjunction, 133
gambler’s, 138
insufﬁcient premises, 49, 53–55
irrelevant premises, 49, 50–53
statistical fallacies, 55–56
structure of, 49
unacceptable premises, 49–50
False cause, 54
False dilemma, 49–50, 195
False memory syndrome, 113
Falsiﬁable theories, 174
“Fantasy-prone personalities,” 243–245
Farley, Tim, 12–13
Faulty analogy, 54
Fear, appeal to, 53
Feder, Kenneth L., 59
Feilding, Everard, 97–98, 142
Feinberg, Gerald, 26
Feynman, Richard, 234
Firewalking, 144
Fitzpatrick-Matthews, Keith, 236
Flat Earth theory, 167, 168, 169
“Folk psychology,” 137
Forer effect, 89, 121–122
Fourth dimension, 27
Franklin, Benjamin, 26, 164, 253
Frauds, Myths, and Mysteries (Feder), 59
Frazer, Sir James, 133
Freemasons, 281–282, 283
Frege, Gottlob, 17
Freud, Sigmund, 173
Friedman, Sidney, 29
Frost, Robert, 23
Froude, James A., 172
Fruitfulness
hypotheses, 174–177
SEARCH, 225–226
Fuller, Thomas, 41
Fund for UFO Research, 242
Galápagos Islands, 16
Galilei, Galileo, 16, 52, 170
Galle, Johann Gottfried, 169
Gallop poll (2005), 6, 88, 255
Gambler’s fallacy, 138
Ganzfeld, 208, 211
Gardner, Marshal, 170
I-4
INDEX

Gardner, Martin, vii–viii, 19–20, 26, 190, 199, 299
Gauld, Alan, 273–274
Gauquelin, Michel, 89
Gbowee, Leymah, 28
Gehlbach, Stephen H., 148
Geller, Uri, 20, 132
Genetic fallacy, 51
Genetics, 182–183
Geocentric view, 16
Ghost Hunters (television show), 276–277
Ghosts
historical belief in, 268–269
popular belief, 6, 9, 269
SEARCH, 270–276
Gillespie, Dizzy, 227
Gimlin, Bob, 109
Gish, Duane, 184, 187, 188, 195
Global Change Research Program, 284
Gods from Outer Space (Von Däniken), 10
Goedsche, Herman, 283
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang, 5, 68
Good arguments, 37–39
Good Friday Experiment, 84
“Goodbye Blue Sky,” 104
Goodman, Linda, 88
Goodman, Nelson, 307
Gosse, Philip, 190
Gould, Stephen J., 13, 193–194
Graphology, 134
Gravity, 20, 87–88
Greeley, Horace, 249
Greenhouse effect, 283
Greenhouse gases, 283–284, 287
Grof, Stanislov, 263
Guthrie, Stewart, 135, 137
Hahnemann, Samuel, 227, 228
Haldane, J. B. S., 298
Halifax, Joan, 263
Halley, Edmund, 170
Hallucinations
and knowledge, 75
and NDE, 264
and UFO abductions, 243, 244
perceptual construction, 100
Hamilton-Parker, Craig and Jane, 28
Hampton Court palace, 272–273, 275
Haraldsson, Erlendur, 257
Harkrader, Alan, Jr., 110
Harris, Marvin, 172
Harris, Melvin, 115
Hasty generalization
availability error, 127
insufﬁcient premises, 53
sample size, 43–44
Hauntings, 270
Hazy comparisons, 56
Heider, Fritz, 135
Heisenberg, Werner, 73
Heliocentric solar system, 16
Hepatoscopy, 63, 64
Heraclitus, 83
Herodotus, 135
Heuristics, 132
Hicks, John, 83
Hilgard, Ernest R., 251
Hinduism, 270, 271
Hines, Joshua V., 119
Hines, Terence, 99–100, 108, 117, 206–207, 
239, 245
Hochman, John, 113
Hollow Earth, The (Bernard), 170
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 35
“Homeopathic magic,” 133
Homeopathy
belief in, 10
current practice, 228
“discovery” of, 227, 228
SEARCH, 228–231
Honorton, Charles, 208, 209
Hopkins, Budd, 234, 235, 245
Howard, Catherine, 273
Human Consciousness Project, 266
Hume, David, 37, 39, 135
Humphrey, Nicholas, 132
Hundert, Edward, 309, 310
Hundredth monkey tale, 11, 302–304
Hundredth Monkey, The (Keyes), 302
Huxley, Aldous, 127, 199, 301
Huxley, Thomas Henry, 13, 34, 70, 162, 166
Hyman, Ray, 122, 146, 205, 208, 209, 250
Hypersensory perception (HSP), 79
Hypnotism, 8, 238–239, 240
Hypothesis. See also Claim
acceptability determination, 67
adequacy criteria, 171–172
and claims, 222–223
conﬁrming/refuting, 166–171
conservatism, 180–181
fruitfulness, 174–177
INDEX
I-5

Hypothesis—(Cont.)
and scientiﬁc method, 161–163
scope of, 177–178
simplicity, 178–180
testability, 172–174
Hypothetical syllogism, 40
Ianna, P. A., 86
Identity, law of, 17
If-then statement, 39
Ignorance, appeal to, 21, 52–53
Illness, 143–144
Illusions, 75, 101
Immunization, 147
Incest Survivor Syndrome (ISS), 113
Indicator words, 36
Inductive argument, 37, 38
Inductive arguments
analogical, 46–47
enumerative, 42–45
hypothetical, 47
Inference to the best explanation, 47–48
Information, 68
Information theory, 14, 18, 24–25
Infrasound, 274
Innocent II, Pope, 120
Inquiry formula, 222
Institute for Creation Research, 183, 184, 196
Insufﬁcient premises, 49, 53–55
Intelligent Design theory, 186, 191–193
Intercessory prayer, 231–233
Introspection, 75–76, 77
Intruders (Hopkins), 234, 240, 245
Intuition, 79–80
Invalid deductive argument, 37
Investigator bias, 148–149
Irrational beliefs, 12–13
Irreducibly complex, 191–194
Irrelevant premises, 49, 50–53
It’s All in the Playing (MacLaine), 297
Jacobs, Dave, 235
James, William, 18
James Randi Educational Foundation, 203
Jarvis, William T., 145
Jefferson, Thomas, 15
Jehovah’s Witnesses, 119
Jesus, 24
Joly, Maurice, 282–283
Jones, Colonel Ed, 106
Jones, Rev. Jim, 120
Jones, Warren H., 145, 201
Journey to the Earth’s Interior, A (Gardner), 170
Judas Priest, 103
Judson, Horace Freeland, 162
Jung, Carl Gustav, 253
Justiﬁcation, 75
Kammann, Richard, 114, 121, 140
Karman, Tawakkol, 28
Kekulé, August, 51
Keller, Helen, 115
Kelly, I. W., 131
Kennedy, John Fitzgerald, 278
Kennedy, Robert, 278
Keyes, Ken, 302
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 278
Kitcher, Philip, 167
Klass, Philip, 110–111, 243
Knowledge
and certainty, 66–67
and coherence, 74–75
expert, 72–73
and memory, 76, 77
and mystical experience, 81–84
and perception, 75, 76
propositional, 64–65
sources of, 75–77
and true belief, 64–65
and truth, 301, 303
Knowledge-acquisition techniques, 63
Knowledge is power, 62
Koestler, Arthur, 158
Koresh, David, 74–75
Korzybski, Alfred, 311
Kosslyn, Stephen, 211
Kossy, Donna, 278–279
Kuhn, Thomas, 15, 307–309
La Bruyère, Jean de, 47, 304
Lakatos, Imre, 174, 175
Langevin, P., 178
Laplace, Pierre, 180
Lavater, Johann Kaspar, 3
Lavoisier, Antoine, 15, 171
Law of identity, 17
“Law of inﬁnitesimals,” 227
Law of noncontradiction, 16, 17, 18
Law of the excluded middle, 17
Laws of logic, 17
I-6
INDEX

Laws of thermodynamics, 227
Laws of thought, 16–17
Leary, Timothy, 84
Legal system, 47
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 185
Leman, Patrick, 276
Leno, Jay, 200
Leroy, Jean-Baptist, 253
LeShan, Lawrence, 82
Leverrier, Urbain Jean Joseph, 169, 171, 177
Levy, Walter J., 205
Lewes, George, 260
Lichtenberg, George, 86
Life After Life (Moody), 116, 254, 255
Lifetide (Watson), 11, 302, 303
“Lifetrons,” 270
“Like cures like,” 10
Lilly, John C., 100
Liszt, Franz, 314
Little Ice Age, 287
Loch Ness monster, 111, 112
Loftus, Elizabeth, 113
Logic, 17, 28
Lord Dunsany, 4
Lord Greville, 118
Lord, Richard, 274
Lorenz, Konrad, 174
Lowell, Percival, 104–105
“Luminiferous ether,” 16
Luther, Martin, 120, 231
Mackenzie, Harry, 127
MacLaine, Shirley, 4, 8, 297
“Macro-evolution,” 195
MacRobert, Alan M., 142
Magic, 20
Magnet therapy, 229
Magnetic ﬂuctuations, 273–274
Maimonides, 312
Mann, Thomas, 308
Manson, Charles, 120
Margin of error, 45–46
Marks, David, 114, 121, 140
Mars, 101, 102, 103
Marshall, Barry, 135
Marshall, Neil, 124
Marxism, 175–176
Maryland Air National Guard, 106
Masons, 281–282, 283
Masses, appeal to, 52
Mather, Arthur, 87
McCarthy, Joseph, 277–278
McDonnell Laboratory for Psychical 
Research, 207
McGaha, James, 241
McLuhan, Marshall, 82, 249
Mean, 55
Median, 55
Medical research
analogical reasoning, 47
clinical studies, 163–165
Medieval Warm Period, 285
Medium, 128, 129
Mediums, 248–249
Memory
constructive perceptions, 113–114, 115, 116
and knowledge, 76, 77
as selective, 117
Mencken, H. L., 243
Meno (Plato), 64–65
Mercury’s perihelion, 177–179
Mesmer, Franz Anton, 164–165
Metaphysics (Aristotle), 17
Meteorites, 15, 16, 23
Meyer, Nancy, 128–129
Michelangelo, 190
“Micro-evolution,” 195
Midler, Bette, 300
Milankovitch cycle, 285
Military research, 198, 199
Miller, Kenneth R., 196–197
Miller, William, 119
Millerites, 119
Milton, Julie, 209
Miner, John W., 12
Minkowski, Hermann, 26
Miracle, 23
Miracle of Marsh Chapel, 84
Misleading averages, 55
Missing values, 55–56
Mitchell, Maria, 104
Mizner, Wilson, 77
MMR vaccine, 147
Modaﬁnal, 272
Mode, 55
Modus ponens, 39
Modus tollens, 40
Montaigne, Michel de, 71
Moody, Raymond, 116–117, 254–255, 257–259,
264–265
INDEX
I-7

Moon effects studies, 131
Moore, Charles B., 247
Morphic resonance, 305
Morris, Henry, 183
Moulton, Samuel, 211
Muller, H. J., 193
Murphy, Bridey, 115
Museum of Creation and Earth History, 184
Mystical experience, 81–84
Narcoleptics, 272
Nathan, George Jean, 221
National Academy of Science, 285, 287
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis-
tration, 287
National Research Council, 198
Natural selection, 182–183
Nazca plain, 10, 235, 236
Near death experiences (NDE)
constructive perceptions, 116–117
popular belief, 6–7
research on, 255
SEARCH cases, 253, 257–268
stages, 256
term, 254
Necessary falsehoods, 16
Necessary truths, 16
Neher, Andrew, 101, 123–124, 233
Nehru, Jawaharlal, 309
Neptune, 169, 171
Newcomb, Simon, 81
Newcomb, W. A., 26
Newton, Sir Isaac, 16, 18–19
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 66
Noah, 187
Noblitt, Jonus, 86
Nock, Albert Jay, 227
Nof, Doron, 24
Noncontradiction, law of, 16, 17, 18
Norezayan, Ara, 136
North American Air Defense Command
(NORAD), 107
Nostradamus, Michel, 120, 122–124
Nour Foundation, 266
Oates, David, 60
Objective reality, 313
Objective truth, 5
Observation, 308–310
Occam’s Razor, 180
Odom, Mike, 241
O’Hara, Maureen, 302
Olshansky, S. Jay, 196
Opinion polls, 44–46
Ordinary sensory perception (OSP), 207
Origin of Species (Darwin), 182
Orne, Martin T., 238–239
Orr, H. Allen, 193
Ortega, Tony, 106
Orwell, George, 199
Osis, Karlis, 257
Ostrander, Shelia, 199
Ouija board, 233
Out on a Limb (MacLaine), 297
Pahnke, Walter, 84
Palladino, Eusapia, 97
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 285, 287
Paradigm, 15, 307, 308–309
Paradigm shift, 16, 308
Parallax, 169, 179
Paranormal phenomena
and paradigms, 15
and personal experience, 97–98
trouble with, 14–15, 18
Paranormal proﬁle, 11
Parapsychological Association, 197
Parapsychology, 197
Parbuam, Dr. Sam, 266
Pareidolia, 101, 102–103, 135
Parsimony, 172
Past lives, 7
Pasteur, Louis, 97
Pattern recognition, 133
Patterson, Roger, 108, 109
Pauling, Linus, 52
Paulos, John Allen, 139
Pearce, Joseph Chilton, 301–302
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 47
Perception
and constructed reality, 99–101
and knowledge, 75, 76
Perceptual constancies
and expectations, 100–106
types of, 99–100
Perceptual construction
backward masking, 103–104
Bigfoot, 108, 109
Loch Ness monster, 111, 112
Mars canals, 104–105
I-8
INDEX

Mars face, 101–102, 103
memories, 113–114, 116
N rays, 105–107
NDE, 116–117
religious faces, 102, 103, 104
UFOs, 107–108, 110–111
Perihelion, 177
Perpetual motion machine, 227
Persinger, Michael, 245–246, 273
Person, appeal to, 51
Personal experience, 142–143, 
220–221
Persuasive ploys, 35
Peterson, Major John, 247
Petoit, Dr. David, 89–90
Petrie, Scott, 106
Pfungst, Oskar, 80
Phillips, Dr. Peter, 207
Philosophical skeptics, 66
Phlogiston theory, 170–171
Phoenix lights, 106
Piaget, Jean, 76
Pigeons, 126
Pink Floyd, 104
Pirsig, Robert M., 170
Placebo, 163–164
Placebo effect, 145, 230–231
Planck, Max, 119
Plant perception, 198
Plasm (substance), 271
Plato, 1, 49, 64–65, 300
Pliny the Elder, 24
Poincaré, Jules Henri, 65
Popper, Karl, 85, 161–162, 173, 174
Possession (demonic), 6, 9
Possibility, 17–19
Possibility principle, 21
Post hoc, ergo propter hoc, 54
Precedents, 47
Precognition
belief in, 8
deﬁned, 14
and future time, 25–27
and psi phenomena, 197–198
scientiﬁc investigations, 201, 210
Precognitive dreams, 7
Premise indicator words, 36
Premises
deﬁned, 34
insufﬁcient, 49, 53–55
irrelevant, 49, 50–53
unacceptable, 49–54
Probability, 138, 139–140
Project Alpha, 205, 207
Project MOGUL, 247
Prophetic dreams, 130, 139
Proposition, 33
Propositional knowledge
and best explanation, 64
and coherence, 74–75
and contradictory propositions, 68–69
Protagoraean subjectivism, 300–301
“Protocols of the Elders of Zion,” 282, 283
Proving, 228
Pseudoteachers study, 7
Psi phenomena investigations, 197–198, 200
Psychic Detectives, 128, 129
Psychic Discoveries behind the Iron Curtain
(Ostrander/Schroeder), 199
Psychic healing, 6
Psychic hotlines, 12
Psychic Reader’s Network, 12
“Psychic task force,” 199
Psychics, 28–29, 249
Psychoanalytic theory, 173
Psychokinesis, 20, 197, 198
Psychoneural identity theory (PNI), 263
Ptolemy, 179, 180
Pumapunku, 237
“Pyroton,” 261
Quantum mechanics, vii, 9
Quine, Willard Van Orman, 168, 312
Radford, Ben, 276
“Raelianism,” 192
Rajneesh, Bhagwan, 302
Ramey, General Roger M., 246
Ramtha, 251, 301
Rand, Tamara, 8–9
Randi, James (the Amazing), 20, 203, 207
Random sampling, 45
Rapa Nui monoliths, 236–237
Rapid eye movement (REM), 117, 272
Rationalization, 141–142
Reagan, Ronald, 8–9, 88
Realists, 296, 313–314
Reality
and objective truth, 5
and personal experience, 98–99
INDEX
I-9

Reason
and knowledge, 76–77
empowerment of, 5–6
rejection of, 4–5
Reasonable doubt, 66–67
Recovered memory therapy (RMT), 113
Red Sea, 23–24
Reductio ad absurdum (reduction to absurdity), 17
Reﬂections on Life After Life (Moody), 116
Regressive hypnosis, 235–236
Reincarnation, 6, 8
Reis, Piri, 10
Relative values, 55
Relativism
appeal of, 296
as self-refuting, 311–312
and truth, 312, 313–314
“Relativists,” 296
Relativity theory, 26
Relevant property, 43, 44
Religion
and anthropomorphic bias, 137
and evolution, 185–196
Remote viewing, 8, 198
Replication, 165–166
Report of Air Force Research Regarding the Roswell
Incident, 247
Representativeness heuristic, 133–135, 278
Retroﬁtting techniques, 129
Reverse Speech Enterprise, 60
Rhine, J. B., 199, 200–202, 203
Ricket, Charles, 271
Ring, Dr. Kenneth, 255
Robbins, Anthony, 144
Roberts, Henry, 123, 124
Roberts, Jane, 297–298
Robertson, Pat, 120
Rochefoucauld, Duc François de la, 76
Rogo, D. Scott, 204
Roll, William, 274
Roper Poll, 234–235
Rosenthal, Robert, 80
Roswell Incident, 247
Roszak, Theodore, 89
Rothman, Milton, on ESP, 14, 18, 24–26
Rotton, James, 131
Rowbotham, Samuel Birley, 169
Rowling, J. K., 22
Rubio, Maria, 102, 104
Ruse, Michael, 182
Rushton, William, 262
Russell, Bertrand, viii, 68, 71, 72, 74, 81, 
159, 196
Sabom, Dr. Michael, 255
Sagan, Carl, 2, 164, 177, 263
Saint Augustine, vii, 23, 85
Saint John of the Cross, 82
Saint Theresa, 82–83
Sample, 43
Sample representativeness, 43, 44
Sample size, 43–44, 127–128
Santayana, George, 161
Sasquatch, 109
Schiaparelli, Giovanni, 104–105
Schick, Bela, 174
Schmeidler, Gertrude, 204
Schoonmaker, Dr. Fred, 255, 264, 265
Schroeder, Lynn, 199
Schultz, Ted, 115, 142, 170, 298, 301
Schwartz, Gary, 249
Schweitzer, Albert, 306
Science
goal of, 159
and physical laws, 19
publicly understandable principle, 159–160
Scientiﬁc creationism, 16, 183–185, 186, 187–195
Scientiﬁc evidence, 147–148
Scientiﬁc hypothesis, 173
Scientiﬁc method
four steps, 161
general application, 166
medical research, 163–165
research aims, 172
as tool, 158
Scientism, 160–161
Scope, 177–178, 226
SEARCH cases
climate change, 284–287
communication with the dead, 248, 249–253
conspiracy theories, 276–283
evidentiary value, 148–149
ghosts, 270–276
homeopathic medicine, 228–231
intercessory prayer, 231–234
NDE, 253, 257–268
UFO abductions, 238–248
SEARCH steps
alternative hypotheses, 222, 224–225
claim statement, 222, 223
I-10
INDEX

evidence examination, 222, 223–224
rate for adequacy criteria each hypothesis,
222, 225–227
Secret Life of Plants, The (Tompkins/
Bird), 72
Self-contradictory propositions, 17
Self-evident propositions, 77
Self-selecting samples, 45
Selﬁsh Gene, The (Dawkins), 78
Seth Material, The (Roberts), 297–298
Seventh Day Adventists, 119
Shackleton, Basil, 205
Shakespeare, William, 16
Shankara, 83
Shaw, George Bernard, 121
Shaw, Henry Wheeler, 72
Shaw, Steve, 207
Sheep-goat effect, 204
Sheldrake, Rupert, 305, 317
Sheridan, Richard Brinsley, 22
Sherlock Holmes, 48, 79
Siegel, Harvey, 312
Siegel, Ronald, 264
Simmel, M., 135
Simmons, Charles, 125
Simplicity, 178–180, 226
Simpson, Joyce, 103
Singer, Barry, 140, 141
Sirleaf, Ellen Johnson, 28
Size constancy, 100
Skinner, B. F., 126
Slader, John, 99
Slater, Elizabeth, 242
Sleep paralysis, 272, 275–276
Slippery slope, 54–55
Smith, Adam, 160
Smurl family, 9–10
Soal, Samuel, 205
Social constructivism, 304, 306
Social desirability bias, 148
Society for Psychical Research, 9, 271
Solipsism, 297, 298–299
Sophists, 300
Sosa, Ernest, 68
Souls
Biblical view, 256
NDE, 257, 261–263
Sound argument, 38–39
South Bridge Vaults, 272–273
Spiritual healing, 6
Spontaneous human combustion (SHC), 260–261
Stahl, Georg Ernst, 170
Stained Glass album, 103
Stambovsky, Jeffrey, 269
Stanislas I, King of Poland, 47
Stanley, Mitch, 106
Static magnets, 229
Statistical fallacies, 55–56
Steinmetz, Charles, 224
Stephenville lights, 241
Stiff, Steven H., 247
Stokes, Douglas, 210
“Stone tape theory,” 271–272, 275
Straw man, 53
Strieber, Whitley, 234, 238, 243, 244–245, 248
Strong probability, 38
Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, The (Kuhn), 15, 307
Study in Scarlet, A (Doyle), 48
Subjective validation
conﬁrmation bias, 125–131
Forer effect, 121–122
prophecies of Nostradamus, 122–124
Subjectivism, 300–301
Substantiation principle, 22
Suﬁsaying, 96
Sunspots, 273–274
Supernatural beliefs
agency detector, 136–137
deﬁned, 130
as explanations, 23–24
and lunar effect, 130–131
Syllogism, 40
Sylvester II, Pope, 120
Taboos, 134
“Tachyonic Antitelephone, The” (Benford et al.),
26
Tachyons, 26
Tandy, Vic, 274
Tao of Physics, The (Capra), 81
Target group, 43
Taylor, John, 99
Technological possibility, 19
Technologists, 159
Telepathy
deﬁned, 14
popular belief, 6
and psi phenomena, 197, 198
and psychics, 251
scientiﬁc investigations, 200
INDEX
I-11

“Temporal lobe labiality,” 245–246
Tertullian, 77–78
Test argument, 42
Testability, 172–173, 225
Testimonials, 141–143
Thales, 179
Thatcher, Adrian, 256
Theory, 186
Thermoscope (thermometer), 170
Tighe, Virginia, 8, 115
Timaeus (Plato), 58
Time, 27
Timeline (Crichton), 19
Time travel, 19–20
Tolerance, 314
Tompkins, Peter, 72
Tradition, 52
Trigg, Roger, 310, 314
True belief, 64–65
Truth, 301, 303
Truth claims, 21–22
Truth-preserving, 37
Turkish proverbs, 300
Turnbull, Colin, 100
UFO abductions
popular belief, 234–235, 238
SEARCH, 238–248
UFO’s, 107–108, 110
Unacceptable premises, 49–51
Unconventional therapies, 142–144
Universal negative, 22
“Unnecessary restrictions,” 132
“Unwarranted design,” 132
Uranus, 169
U.S. Climate Action Report 2002, 59
Valid deductive argument, 37
Van Praagh, James, 249, 250, 252, 253
Vance, James, 103
Velikovsky, Immanuel, 176–177
Venus, 176–177
Vibrations, 274
Viking 1 orbiter, 101, 102
“Vital force,” 227
Voas, David, 86
Vogt, Thomas, 165
Voltaire, 72, 222
Von Braun, Werner, 21
Von Däniken, Erich, 10, 15, 21, 236
Von Däniken’s Proof, 10
von Leibig, Justus, 261
von Osten, Wilhelm, 79–80
Vorilhon, Claude, 192
Vrba, Elizabeth, exaptation, 193–194
Vulcan, 177
Wall, The, album, 104
Wallace, Alfred Russell, 51
Walton, Travis, 243
Warren, Ed, 10
Warren, Rick, 232
Warwick, Dionne, 52
Watson, Lyall, 11, 302–303
Weak probability, 38
“Weird things,” 2
Weizmann, Chaim, 16
Weltﬁsh, Gene, 190
Whately, Richard, 65, 132
whattheharm.com, 12–13
White, Dr. Silas, 117
Whitehead, Alfred North, 178
Why, 2–4
Wilde, Oscar, 220
Wilkinson, H. P., 273–274
William of Occam, 180
Wilson, Robert, 111, 112
Wiseman, Richard, 209, 272, 273, 274
Witches, 6
Witnesses, 114
Witte, Sergey, 283
Wood, Robert W., 105–107
World Trade Center, 124
Worlds in Collision (Velikovsky), 176–177
Wright, John C., 118
Wylie, Phillip, 67
Yogananda, Paramahansa, 270
Zener, Carl, 200
Zener cards, 200
Zetetic law of perspective, 169
Zond 4 spacecraft, 107
Zusne, Leonard, 145, 201
I-12
INDEX


