PVC DOWNPIPES 
How to install pvc downpiping 
 
 
 
PVC is most common form of downpipes installed by the home handyman or 
'DIYer'. Below are intallation instructions for Marley brand downpipes. 
 
You will require a hammer, hacksaw, cloth, ladder or trestles and planks, measuring 
tape, pencil and rule.  
 
Marley spouting and downpipe can cope with a peak rainfall of 200 mm per hour 
providing they are correctly installed.  
 
 
Plan area of roof served by downpipe (in square metres). 
ROOF PITCH 
RP65/MC16 
RP80/MC140 
0 - 25° 
60 
100 
25 - 35° 
50 
80 
35 - 45° 
40 
70 
45 - 55° 
35 
60 
 
 
 
When more than two angles occur in a system the recommended roof area served 
by a downpipe should be reduced by 5 square metres for each additional spouting 
angle. 
 
 
Notes:  

• 
Rectangular downpipes should not be used in a horizontal application, or 
when subjected to head pressure (for example, connected to a water tank).  
• 
Downpipes should not be used in wall or ceiling cavities.  
• 
If a round downpipe is being installed horizontally, care should be taken 
that all joints are sealed.  
 
 
Downpipe installation. 
Assemble downpipe, using angles if there are soffits. Where a downpipe has a 
socket on it the socket on the long section of the bend can be sawn off. This will 
enable the remaining spigot to fit into the downpipe socket. 
 
By cutting the socket off the long end of a downpipe bend, a tight offset can be 
made. 
 
Pipe and fittings should be solvent welded together with Marley MCS Welding 
Solvent Cement; but do not solvent weld the downpipe socket or top bend to the 
rainwater head outlet. 
 
The downpipe should be fixed to the wall using three pipe clips per length. By using 
non-corrosive screws to fix the downpipe clips, the downpipe can be removed in the 
future.  
 
Painting 
After installation, Marley downpipes can be painted to any desired colour. 
To prepare the surface, wipe down with a bath cleaner, and thoroughly wash. Once 
dry, apply two coats of acrylic paint ensuring the first coat is dry prior to applying the 
second coat.  
 
Maintenance 
To ensure your new Marley downpipes maintain their good looks for years and 
years, an annual cleaning using warm soapy water and a car cleaning cloth is all 
that is required. Simply rinse off with clean water.  
 

