
How to update your PC BIOS in 3 easy steps
 
Wim Bervoets
 
This book is for sale at http://leanpub.com/update-bios-in-3-easysteps
This version was published on 2015-05-01
*   *   *   *   *
This is a Leanpub book. Leanpub empowers authors and publishers with the Lean
Publishing process. Lean Publishing is the act of publishing an in-progress ebook using
lightweight tools and many iterations to get reader feedback, pivot until you have the right
book and build traction once you do.
*   *   *   *   *
© 2015 Wim Bervoets

Table of Contents
Copyright 2014
Disclaimer
Preface
Chapter 1: What is a BIOS?
Chapter 2: Why update your BIOS?
Chapter 3: How to update your BIOS
Risk free BIOS update via BIOSAgentPlus
Chapter 4: Update your BIOS - manual procedure
Identify the motherboard manufacturer
Award (Phoenix) BIOS syntax
Updating the BIOS
Chapter 5: Conclusion

Copyright 2014
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
scanning, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Disclaimer
All the material contained in this book is provided for educational and informational purposes
only. No responsibility can be taken for any results or outcomes resulting from the use of
this material.
While every attempt has been made to provide information that is both accurate and
effective, the author does not assume any responsibility for the accuracy or use/misuse of
this information.

Preface
Thanks for downloading our free guide on how to update the BIOS of your PC!
In this guide we will show you why you would want to update your BIOS and how you can
do it in a secure and safe manner! At the end of the guide you’ll be on your way to become
a BIOS Master!

Chapter 1: What is a BIOS?
BIOS is an abbreviation for the basic input/output system. It is a piece of software built into
the PC motherboard, which gets executed at bootup. The BIOS initializes the hardware and
then starts the operating system. (eg. Windows, Linux, …).
The BIOS additionally provides an abstraction layer for the hardware, i.e. a consistent way
for application programs and operating systems to interact with the keyboard, display, and
other input/output devices. Variations in the system hardware are hidden by the BIOS from
programs that use BIOS services instead of directly accessing the hardware. Modern
operating systems ignore the abstraction layer provided by the BIOS and access the
hardware components directly.
BIOS software is stored on a non-volatile ROM chip on the motherboard. It is specifically
designed to work with each particular model of computer, interfacing with various devices
that make up the complementary chipset of the system.
In modern computer systems, the BIOS contents are stored on a flash memory chip so that
the contents can be rewritten without removing the chip from the motherboard. This allows
BIOS software to be easily upgraded to add new features or fix bugs.
Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI), the successor of BIOS, is a specification that
defines a software interface between an operating system and platform firmware. It
resolves many PC BIOS limitations and is rapidly becoming more widely used.

Chapter 2: Why update your BIOS?
Often people will say that you shouldn’t update your BIOS unless you really need the new
version. If it ain’t broke, don’t try to fix it they say.
It is true, you don’t always need a BIOS update if your current system is running fine. The
advice is also rooted in the possibility that if a BIOS update fails, you could end up with a
non booting system. This can happen, but this really only happens when you’re trying to
install an incorrect BIOS which was not written for your motherboard or PC these days.
And as we will explain there are some nifty scan tools which identify the correct BIOS
update automatically.
So what are good reasons to update your BIOS? Below we list the most common reasons
for a BIOS update:
Better stability of your PC
Improved recognization of peripherals. (like hard disks, video cards, memory sticks)
Support for newer CPUs which were not yet available at the time you bought your
motherboard / PC
Improve the performance of
hard disk
memory
SSD
CPU
Better Overclocking support (eg. more stable, more features)
Improved support for new operating systems (Windows 7, Windows 8, Linux, …)
Improved support for battery savings (eg. on laptops)

Chapter 3: How to update your BIOS
In this section we will show you how to update your BIOS using the paid service
BIOSAgentPlus. In the section that follows, we will explain how to update your BIOS the
manual way.
Risk free BIOS update via BIOSAgentPlus
Here is in a nutshell the process of updating your BIOS with the BIOSAgentPlus service:
Download and run BIOSAgentPlus - it safely checks your PC to see if a newer BIOS is
available for your computer.
After it has scanned your system you are given instant access to a detailed BIOS and
driver report. (this is a free report)
If there is a BIOS update available you can choose to sign up with the service to be
able to download the BIOS update
Below we’ll explain in more detail the exact steps to follow.
1. Go to BIOSAgentPlus website. If needed you can change the site language in the drop
down at the right top of the website

2. Now click on the green FREE BIOS SCAN button. On the next page the BIOS Agent
Download will start. (depending on the browser you are using, you’ll be shown the
exact next steps to take)
3. Execute the downloaded BIOSAgent Scan executable. The BIOSAgent will now scan
your system and show you the results after a few seconds.
For our test system, BIOSAgentPlus automatically identified the motherboard used in our
PC: a Microstar MS-7583. It also detected the BIOS is not the latest version.

This automatic identification of your motherboard is really handy and a timesaver. It takes
the risks out of a BIOS update because incorrectly identifying your motherboard is the most
common cause for a failed BIOS Update.
Ordering the BIOS
After getting the free report you can order the BIOS, by clicking the See Full Report button
and secondly the Fix It button.
To order the BIOS you need to enter your name and email address to begin your
registration.

At this moment FileCleaner is included for free when buying BIOSAgentPlus. Click on “Add
to Shopping Cart” to order your BIOS.

On the last page you enter your address & payment options. Finally click the green Buy
now button.

After clicking “Buy”, you will receive an order confirmation screen. On this screen will be
among others, the summary of your order, a receipt, the username/password for the
BIOSAgentPlus website and links to Technical Support if help is needed.


Receiving the BIOS
To receive the BIOS, you can login via the username/password on the BIOSAgentPlus
website and go to the BIOS Firmware Request form.
The form submits all the technical details to BIOSAgentPlus. From there, the support
people of BIOSAgentPlus will match up the proper BIOS based on the technical details and
revision of the motherboard.

BIOSAgentPlus support will then email the customer with the link to download the BIOS, as
well as documentation on how to Flash their PC.

SCAN FOR BIOS UPDATES

Chapter 4: Update your BIOS - manual procedure
The first step to update your BIOS is to identify your motherboard manufacturer and model.
Many users don’t know the name of their clone motherboard. This is because the company
name is not mentioned anywhere in the manual, or on the motherboard.
If you want to upgrade your BIOS you really have to know the motherboard manufacturer,
because if you flash the wrong BIOS upgrade your system could stop booting.
Identify the motherboard manufacturer
One way of identifying your motherboard, is using the BIOS ID which is displayed on most
computers at bootup.
The BIOS ID syntax differs between the different BIOS vendors: AMI, Award, Phoenix, …
With the screenshots below for the different BIOS vendors you should be able to find the
BIOS ID.
AMI (American Megatrends) BIOS syntax
In the screenshot below you can see where to find the AMI BIOS ID during bootup:
 
Two different syntaxes are used:
AMI BIOS from 1986 - 1990: Example BIOS ID: DINT-1123-04990-K8
AMI BIOS from 1991: Example BIOS ID:
51-0722-001169-00111111-071595-SIS5571-007_66_SIS5571
66-3047-009999-00101111-100709-TYLSBURG-10006000-Y2KC

Let’s analyze the AMI BIOS ID: 51-0722-001169-00111111-071595-SIS5571-
007_66_SIS5571
To find your motherboard manufacturer, please look at the third (3) set of numbers in your
BIOS string. In this case it’s 1169 and by matching this with the AMI BIOS ID list on Wim’s
BIOS; it indicates the manufacturer is Microstar.
Now that we know the manufacturer it is time to search for the model. You can try looking
for markings on the motherboard or you can see if Wim’s BIOS has listed the full BIOS ID
string 51-0722-001169-00111111-071595-SIS5571-007_66_SIS5571
Go to our BIOS Updates page and choose Microstar. Next click on the AMI BIOS ID tab:
Our AMI BIOS id is listed:
So the motherboard is a Microstar MS-5144 or MS-5146 model. To know which
motherboard you have, you could * look for model markings on the motherboard * look for
the model in the motherboard manual
To download the BIOS you’ll need to go the official site of your motherboard manufacturer.
(if it exists). For your convenience we have added links to motherboard manufacturer sites
on Wim’s BIOS:
Award (Phoenix) BIOS syntax
Locating the Award BIOS ID syntax is similar to the AMI BIOS ID procedure above. Below
are some Award BIOS bootup screenshots.

The syntax is as follows:
11/08/1999-i440BX-W83977-2A69KA1UC-PL
09/23/2003-i865PE-W83627-6A79AA1IC-11
Let’s show you an example of an Award BIOS id: 09/23/2003-i865PE-W83627-
6A79AA1IC-11
09/23/2003 is the release date of the BIOS
i865PE is the chipset used on the motherboard - in this case an Intel i865PE chipset
W83627 is the IO Controller used on your motherboard (used for connecting SATA
HDDs, SSDs, etc.)
The first 5 characters of the 6A79AA1IC, 6A79A, identify a particular chipset. At Wim’s
BIOS Award BIOS Ids page, we have the most complete list of these chipsets on the
internet.
The sixth & seventh character identify the manufacturer: in this case it’s A1. If you look
at the Award Hardware Vendors list on Wim’s BIOS you’ll find that the manufacturer is
Abit
The 8th character (most of the times, not always!) identifies the motherboard model. I
say ‘most of the times’ because the manufacturer can use the same 8th character for
all models based on a particular chipset!
As we now know the motherboard is made by ABIT, you can visit our Abit BIOS updates
page at Wim’s BIOS to see if there is a full match with an Award BIOS ID we have listed.

We’re lucky as a complete match is present:
Now you can try locating your BIOS for the Abit AI7 motherboard on the official Abit
websites we have listed on our Abit BIOS Update page.
Updating the BIOS
Download the correct bios
As explained in the previous section we have now identified the motherboard make and
model and downloaded the correct BIOS on the official motherboard manufacturer website.
We advise you to follow the instructions provided by the motherboard manufacturer on how
to update your BIOS. If none are provided we will show you a generic flash procedure via a
DOS USB boot disk below.
To flash your BIOS you’ll need two items:
1. a flasher program (DOS, Windows, Linux based)
2. a data-file - the BIOS code itself
Normally when you download the BIOS data file, the manufacturer also includes the correct
flasher to use in the archive. If it is not included, you can always download the correct
flasher for AMI, Award and Phoenix BIOS on our website for different operating systems.
The flasher programs the data-file into the BIOS chip. After the flasher has done its work, a
reboot is all that is needed to boot with the new BIOS version
Most of the time the flasher that you have downloaded will be DOS based. This means you
can’t flash the new BIOS from within Windows. Instead a bootable disk has to be prepared.
All recent motherboards support booting from a variety of devices: Floppy disk, USB
Memory stick, CD-ROM. We recommend USB or CD-ROM flashing if possible due to the
fact that a floppy disk is more prone to bad sectors which could make your motherboard

inoperable. Recent BIOSs are also too big to fit on a floppy-disk.
Create a bootable USB memory stick
Here is how to create a bootable USB memory stick:
Download the Hiren Generic USB Format tool
Download the Win98SE_bootdisk.iso at All Boot disks
Unzip the iso file (eg. with 7Zip)
Start the USB format tool. Choose the following options:
Device: USB Stick you want to use (keep in mind that it’ll be formatted and you’ll
lose any data on it)
File system: FAT or FAT32
Check “Create a DOS Bootable Disk” using DOS system files located at the
directory where you have unzipped the ISO
Click on Start
Your boot disk has now been created. Now you just need to copy the flasher and the BIOS
data file on it. Reboot your PC and change the Boot Sequence in the BIOS to boot from the
USB Memory stick.
Flashing the new BIOS
After booting the USB stick you’ll execute the flasher and supply the name of the bios data
file on the DOS commandline interface:

awdflash xxx.bin (for Award BIOSs)
amiflash xxx.rom (for AMI BIOSs)
Notes:
The names of the flasher can be different (eg. afudos). The name of the data-file
extension can also be different.
Most flashers will ask you to save the current BIOS. Choose Yes, so that you can
always flash back to the original version if you’re having problems with the new one.

Chapter 5: Conclusion
We have come to the end of our quick BIOS update guide explaining two ways to update
your BIOS: via the BIOSAgentPlus service (automatic identification + support) or the self
service way in the second section.
We hope you liked it, please let us know your comments on our forum at
http://www.wimsbios.com/forum/ ! There is also a lot more content online at
http://www.wimsbios.com which we couldn’t cover in this guide, so please check it out!
See you next time!
Wim Bervoets
wb@wimsbios.com
Founder of Wim’s BIOS
Disclosure of Material Connection: Some of the links in the post above are affiliate links.
This means if you click on the link and purchase the item, I will receive an affiliate
commission. Regardless, I only recommend products or services I use personally and
believe will add value to my readers.

