How to wire a plug 
 
Wiring a plug is not difficult but you would be surprised how often people get it 
wrong. They put themselves and their families at risk from electric shock or fire by 
not following six simple rules:  
1. Strip off the outer cable sheathing to expose 4cm of the insulated wires. 
Remove the insulation to leave about 1cm of exposed metal core on each wire. 
Twist the strands of wire together neatly.  
2. Connect the wires to the correct terminals. The brown Live wire to the 
terminal on the fuse holder marked L, the blue Neutral wire to the terminal 
marked N and the green and yellow Earth wire to the terminal at the top of the 
plug marked E or 
.  
Some appliances do not have an earth wire because they are double insulated 
and have no exposed metal parts - marked 
 
3. Depending on the design of the plug, fit the exposed metal core of each wire 
through or around each terminal and tighten the terminal screws. Ensure that 
the insulation reaches right up to each terminal and that there are no loose 
strands of wire.  
4. Fit the flex firmly into the cord-grip making sure that the grip fastens on the 
outer insulating sleeve of the flex.  
5. Read the instructions on the appliance to see what rating of fuse is required 
and fir the correct fuse in the plug  
6. Fit the plug cover - make sure that none of the outer insulation is cracked or 
chipped.  
Plug errors - check you have not made any of these! 
 

 
Blue wire connected to the Live 
terminal. What's wrong with this?  
Green and Yellow cable connected to Live 
terminal. Any problems with this?  
 
Plenty of bare wire here - but the plug is 
connected correctly - isn't it?  
These are the old wiring colours but they are 
connected properly  
 
The earth wire is not connected, but the 
appliance will work won't it?  
Perfectly wired, no problem. Is something 
missing?  
 
 
 
A correctly wired plug 

Always make sure that your plugs are wired and fused correctly. If in 
douAngliaCampus, always check with a qualified electrician. 

