How to Make 
Your Home a 
Smart Home 
 
 Smart Home  
Professor 
 
 
Stuart Hamilton
www.ebook3000.com

 
 
 
Copyright © 2017 by Stuart Hamilton 
 
 
Manufactured in the United States of America by createspace, an 
Amazon Company 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means without the 
prior written permission of the author, not be circulated in any form of 
binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar 
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser. 
 
Available in the United States and Canada in paperback and kindle  
e-book formats 
 
The author has made every effort to ensure the accuracy of the information 
within this book was correct at time of publication. The author does not assume 
and hereby disclaims any liability to any party for any loss, damage, or 
disruption caused by errors or omissions, whether such errors or omissions result 
from accident, negligence, or any other cause.  All budget estimates are in US 
Dollars. Cover Illustration istock.com/Shai-Halud 
 
www.smarthomeprofessor.com

 
 
 
 
This book is dedicated to all those people who wander into 
stores or browse online and see all kinds of cool electronics and 
think that it’s too complicated for them to learn how to use or 
install themselves.  I empathize with you one hundred per cent 
because I am married to a wonderful person who might be just like 
you.  Having spent a twenty plus years in the complex and ever-
changing world of computer networking, I made a career out of 
simplifying complicated matters so anyone could understand them.  
I did the dry runs and made the mistakes myself so that others 
would be spared both the time and the expense. 
 
It is my hope that the purchase of this book will save you both 
time and money as you begin or continue your Smart Home 
journey.  Because many things will change over time, there is a 
website at www.smarthomeprofessor.com where you can get 
updates on new developments. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

Acknowledgements 
Writing a book like this is truly a team effort and I deeply 
appreciate all the interest and input from a wide variety of people. 
The best advice on authoring a book often comes from those 
who have done it before and have a proven track record.  I would 
like to thank book authors Jim Doherty, Curt Pesmen, and Andrew 
Friedman for taking the time to talk with me and offer their 
valuable advice. I also appreciate the time with Mary Beth Ray 
from Pearson Publishing for her advice on the publishing side. 
It's sometimes hard to know where to find people willing to give 
industry insider advice, and so thanks to the people who helped 
point me in their direction.  Mary Gorges, Jack Neary, Matt Van 
Tuinen, and Jim Doherty. 
A book can’t really be reviewed enough and I truly valued the 
input I got from Gene Arantowicz, Curt Pesmen, Mitchell Allen, 
Liza Ruff, Steve Haber, and my wife, Joanne Hamilton, who 
always drives me to keep things simple, puts up with all my 
technology tinkering, chose the color scheme for the cover, and 
most importantly provides her ongoing encouragement and moral 
support. 
Lastly, and most importantly, a huge debt of gratitude to 
Michael Redhill, an accomplished author and wonderful editor who 
took my rather mundane and repetitive prose and made the words 
dance and sing. I even left in some of your jokes! 

Table of Contents 
Introduction 
7 
How to Use this Book .......................................................... 10 
What a Smart Home Should Do .......................................... 11 
Part A - The Basics 
15 
Chapter 1 – Internet Access ............................................... 17 
Chapter 2 – Setting Up Your Router ................................... 27 
Chapter 3 – Computers and Smartphones ......................... 43 
Chapter 4 – Measuring the Network ................................... 57 
Chapter 5 – Security and Passwords .................................. 63 
Part B - Music & Photos 
69 
Chapter 6 – Streaming Music ............................................. 71 
Chapter 7 – Enjoying your Photos ...................................... 79 
Part C - Smart Home Solutions 
95 
Chapter 8 – Lighting ............................................................ 97 
Chapter 9 – Thermostats .................................................. 129 
Chapter 10 – Smoke Detectors ......................................... 135 
Chapter 11 – Outdoor Sprinklers ...................................... 141 
Chapter 12 – Door Locks .................................................. 149 
Chapter 13 – Garage Door Opener .................................. 157 
Chapter 14 – Pool Equipment ........................................... 163 
Chapter 15 – Video Door Bell ........................................... 169 
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 16 – Motorized Window Blinds ............................ 177 
Chapter 17 – Home Security System ................................ 183 
Chapter 18 – Things Working Together ............................ 199 
Chapter 19 – Moving with a Smart Home ......................... 215 
Summary 
223 
Appendix 1 – More Tech Details ....................................... 225 
Appendix 2 – Evaluating What to Buy ............................... 231 

Introduction 
 
Do you have a smartphone? If you do, then you already 
have the most important component of your Smart Home in 
your pocket. (If you don’t, you should really think of getting 
one!) This book is for people who are thinking about making 
their home a Smart Home, might not know exactly what that 
means, but can use their smartphone as more than a 
telephone or a paperweight.  
I had the inspiration for writing this book about a year ago 
when I was wandering in a local hardware store. There was 
a beautiful display of Smart Home products as cool and 
appealing as anything you’d see in an Apple store.  Products 
for automatic lighting, robot vacuums, video cameras, 
security systems, and just about everything else you could 
think of, and they all had one thing in common: you could 
fully operate all of these home systems through your 
smartphone.  These new gadgets connected to the Internet 
through your home network and you could operate them 
from your smartphone whether you were at home or in 
Timbuktu.    
This is an awesome and daunting opportunity for a 
homeowner. Imagine automating your home! Until now, this 
was a futuristic sort of fantasy, but as I could see from 
scanning the shelves, it was finally possible.  I wondered, 
however, how easy it would really be to set up your house 
out and get it all to work together in a way that you, your 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
8
spouse and others could use without becoming a tech 
expert?  So, I set out to do what you may not have the time 
or expertise to do: make it really easy to transform your 
home into the most modern and efficient house on the block. 
I made some mistakes along the way, but you won’t make 
the same ones.  And you don’t need a professional installer, 
either. All that is needed is you, a smartphone, the products 
you want to install and you will be off to the races.    
The other twist is that during the writing of this book we 
sold our Smart Home and moved into another house that 
could best be described as a clean slate, technology-wise.  
In the process of transferring my old Smart Home setup to 
the buyer of our house, I learned some hard lessons about 
what not to do and I also made some different decisions in 
my selections for the new house.  You may not be thinking of 
moving any time soon, but I learned a few tricks to make the 
transfer of Smart Home control much simpler, and all of 
these techniques appear as asides throughout the book, and 
chapter 19 treats the subject fully. 
 
The book is divided into three parts.  Part A covers the 
basics of setting up a home network so that it’s ready for 
Smart Home products.   I explain how to easily test your 
network for every location you want to put a Smart Home 
product, and also simple ways to deal with passwords and 
regular backups.  

Introduction 
 
 
9
Part B shows a couple of practical uses of your home 
network for streaming music and managing your photos.  
I’ve had multiple people who visited my Smart Home ask 
how we’re doing that so I included a short section to help 
you easily enjoy both of those. 
Part C covers ten different Smart Home solutions with 
some strategies for how to make them work together. In this 
part, I also discuss how to make moving into or out of a 
Smart Home a smooth experience.  
If you want quick answers to any of these Smart Home 
solutions, you can skip to the end of each chapter to read  
“The Bottom Line” on each technology area.  It tells you what 
I bought, how much to budget, and the end result.    
Because I actually installed and use everything that is 
described in this book, and I have an iPhone, many of the 
examples involve the inherent simplicity of using Apple 
products and Apple HomeKit compatible devices.  That said, 
there is plenty of information in this book about what options 
an Android user has to achieve similar goals. 
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
10
How to Use this Book 
Most people have home networks and can probably start 
to put in some of the cool technology solutions described in 
Part C of the book right away. Please feel free to jump 
ahead and do this knowing that with a properly built network 
in place, all of these Smart Home solutions can work along 
with all the other things you are probably already doing on 
your home WiFi network. 
If you want to get all the basics in place, start at Part A. 
People who have had poor experiences with Smart Home 
products are likely to have a poor or inadequate network in 
place.  Setting up your network properly may not be the most 
exciting part of this book, but it is the foundation of your 
Smart Home.   
 
All of the products and technology mentioned in this 
book are subject to a rapidly changing market. I’ll keep you 
up 
to 
date 
on 
the 
latest 
through 
my 
website, 
www.smarthomeprofessor.com.  
Although I have chosen specific products to use as 
examples in this book, I paid for everything myself and did 
not receive any payment, compensation or input from any of 
the companies mentioned.   
If you decide to copy everything that is covered in this 
book, it is likely, but not guaranteed, that you will get the 
same results that I did.  I encourage you to use the 
techniques that you will learn in this book to customize your 

Introduction 
 
 
11
Smart Home experience to your specific needs.  Whether 
you decide to tackle it all, add on slowly, or just do the parts 
that are relevant to you, this book will provide valuable 
money and time-saving tips.  Always remember that 
products, software, and entire companies change, so always 
consult the online resources available to make sure you 
have the latest information. 
 
What a Smart Home Should Do 
It should be automatic, at home or away 
When you add a Smart Home device, you should be able 
control it from inside the home when your smartphone is on 
your home WiFi network, or from anywhere else, as long as 
you have a cellular signal. Automation is a key component of 
Smart Home systems, and you should be able to set 
automatic timers for lighting, heating and cooling, window 
coverings, or any other Smart Home product. 
 
It works the old way too 
Even though you’ll want to use your smartphone to make 
your Smart Home perform, it’s always nice to also be able to 
walk up to a light switch or thermostat and use it the 
traditional way.  When you have guests over, it might not 
even be apparent to them that you have a Smart Home and 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
12
that’s a good thing because it will save you time explaining 
how to download an app to go the bathroom.  
  
It should be easy to install  
All devices should be simple to install for anybody, even if 
they have no technical experience.   You may still choose to 
hire an electrician if you are not comfortable with wiring for 
example, but all the setup and programming is easily within 
any smartphone owner’s ability. 
 
It should function on a simple network 
The first part of this book is dedicated to setting up your 
home network.  If you follow the steps with the same 
products that I used or similar ones from other vendors, your 
network will be ready for the Smart Home products used in 
this book.  You don’t have to know anything about 
networking to be successful getting your network up and 
running, and you can do it yourself. 
 
Use a minimum number of smartphone apps 
In an ideal world, you’d only have to download one phone 
app to set up and run all of the Smart Home products that 
you want to use.  But this is not an ideal world, so for now 

Introduction 
 
 
13
you will need to download and run the app that is 
appropriate for the installation of each device, but you should 
be able to operate your home system through a much 
smaller number of apps. The trickiest part of the Smart 
Home project is that the technology is constantly evolving 
and a one-app solution, while getting closer, is still in the 
future. But it will arrive, and when it does, life will only get 
simpler. For the time being, there exists only a next-to-
perfect but highly functional solution for full-home automation.   
 
Your family should love it 
A Smart Home should be intuitive and easy to use for 
your entire family. Remember, they live there, too! Luckily, 
once you’re finished reading this book and installing your 
devices, the family cat should be able to dim the lights.  The 
goal of this book is to make your Smart Home fun and 
accessible for everyone. 
 
Minimal or no monthly fees 
Some vendors want to charge you a monthly fee to 
operate a device, for instance to retrieve video snippets.  
With the exception of paying a (low) monthly fee for your 
security system monitoring, your goal should be to minimize 
or eliminate any monthly ongoing fees.  I offer in this book a 
good range of products and manufacturers who do not 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
14
charge on-going fees. If you want to go beyond what I 
suggest here, you may encounter fees for use.  
 
It should be reliable 
Any time new technology comes out, early adopters run 
the risk of paying steeply for products that will likely need to 
be upgraded until it reaches a more stable state.  I have 
aimed to point the reader toward products that will not need 
to be frequently upgraded and will just work day-to-day. 
 
It should be secure 
It is impossible to take every device and every service you 
buy and evaluate how hackable it is.  The only thing you can 
do is practice good online hygiene by setting up your 
network in the most secure way possible, choosing difficult 
passwords and buying from vendors who have a lot to lose if 
their products are hacked.  
As we go through the different sections of the book, you 
may want to refer back to these set of goals.  I will be 
forthright with you about my assessment of whether these 
goals are met with the solutions that I chose for my Smart 
Home.  Also, your goals may be different, so take a moment 
to write them down and it will make it easier to select which 
products to become the foundation of your Smart Home. 

 
Part A - The Basics 
 
 
 
If you have some Smart Home devices working 
already or just can’t wait to try some, it is fine to jump ahead 
to Part C and add more.  If you run into trouble with 
connectivity or stability, you can come back to this section 
and make adjustments to your Internet and home network to 
ensure you have a stable platform for your Smart Home 
investment. 
I know that I have certainly been in this situation before 
and maybe you have too: I once laid down some interlocking 
patio stones in the pre You-Tube days and spent quite a bit 
of time leveling the dirt below before placing the bricks.  It 
looked great for the first month or so, but things like rain, 
frost, and weeds made me go back, rip it out and start over 
again, this time doing it the correct way with the proper 
foundation in place.  We don’t want to repeat this mistake 
with your Smart Home Project.   
In the Smart Home world, things like video cameras, 
doorbells, devices tucked away in far corners, and even 
what your neighbors have set up, can all influence the 
overall success of your project in ways you may not 
anticipate.  The contents of this section will go through in 
detail how to set up your underlying network and security 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
16
environment to ensure that you don’t run into any of these 
road bumps.   

 
Chapter 1 – Internet Access 
 
 
 
 
 
Without Internet access in your home, you won’t have a 
functioning Smart Home. The type of Internet access we are 
talking about is the one used in your home, usually provided 
by either your phone or cable company.  (This is different 
than the data on your smartphone which only serves your 
smartphone) The home Internet access will be used and 
shared by all of the Internet-aware devices in your home 
including your smartphone and Smart Home products, so it’s 
important — although not difficult — to get this set up 
correctly, securely, and reliably. 
There are three distinct segments to your Internet access, 
two of which you have some control over and one that you 
don’t, but you can measure them together to get a pretty 
good indication of how well your overall network is working.   
To break Internet access into its three segments, imagine 
you’re 
connecting 
over 
your 
WiFi 
to 
smarthomeprofessor.com on your laptop. The first part of 
that connection is between your laptop and the wireless 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
18
router in your home.  You have a great amount of control 
over this segment of the connection and the next chapter will 
cover this in detail.  The second segment is from your router 
to your Internet Service Provider (ISP).  You also have 
control 
over 
this 
segment, 
as 
this 
represents the service you order from 
your ISP.  That is the subject of this 
chapter.  The third and final segment is 
from 
your 
ISP 
to 
smarthomeprofessor.com — or anywhere 
else on the Internet you might be going.  
You have no control over this third 
segment, and unless there is a major 
Internet malfunction, it will rarely be the 
source of a bad connection.  
If you 
remember only 
one thing from 
this chapter, 
remember that 
your overall 
performance is 
determined by 
the WORST of 
the three 
segments. 

Internet Access 
 
 
19
Each of the three segments can be thought of 
independently, so if you set things up the best way you can 
on the segments you control, you’ll get the best overall 
experience and throughput, often referred to as speed or 
data rate.  You can have great Internet service from your 
home to the ISP and the Internet itself is performing well but 
if your wireless network is running poorly, your Smart Home 
will reflect that. By controlling the two segments you can 
control, you will maximize your Smart Home experience.  
Later I’ll explain how to measure performance and how to 
get the network in your home to possibly outperform your 
ISP’s service. 
When shopping for Internet access, the main thing to look 
at are the possible upload and download speeds available 
from the provider.  Upload speed is the speed at which data 
from your home leaves your house and goes somewhere on 
the Internet.  Download speed is the 
opposite; it measures the speed at 
which data comes from the Internet 
into your home.  Most often people 
have much higher download speeds 
than upload and that’s because 
doing things like watching Netflix, 
checking e-mail, and visiting web 
sites all bring data into your home 
rather than sending it to the Internet, such as when you 
upload a picture to Instagram. 
Mbps means Megabits 
per second. To put 
this in perspective, 
streaming a High 
Definition Netflix 
movie to play on your 
TV would require a 
download speed of 
about 5Mbps. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
20
How much is enough?  As an example, I have Comcast 
Internet service from the cable company and although 
multiple service offerings were available, ours has a 
measured download speed of 110Mbps and an upload 
speed of 6Mbps.  It is interesting to note that my service is 
called “Performance Pro” and is rated for (guaranteed to 
have) 75Mbps down and 5Mbps up so I am getting better 
than the stated specifications. 
Obviously the higher the download and upload speeds, 
the better, but it does come at a cost.  If you can get it in 
your area, I would try to keep the download speeds well 
above 10Mbps (50Mbps or above is ideal) and upload 
speeds of 2Mbps or greater (5Mbps or more is ideal).  If you 
plan on having Internet cameras in your home, you will want 
the upload speed to be even higher. Of course, it is always 
good to know for yourself that you are getting what you’re 
paying for, so I’ll show you later how to test this.  
There are three kinds of wiring that come into your house 
that can be used to provide Internet service.  The cable 
company will typically use coaxial cable, which makes very 
high speeds possible. (Coaxial is the round cable with one 
wire sticking out of the middle which screws into your TV 
cable connection.) The phone company can use the same 
phone wires that your traditional home phone is plugged into 
(they call these wires “twisted pair”), and the speeds will vary 
quite a bit depending on how far away your house is from 
the other end of those wires.  Just because someone on 
your street gets great service, doesn’t mean you will, so 

Internet Access 
 
 
21
check and verify with the service provider before signing any 
kind of contract.  This technology is typically called DSL (or 
Digital Subscriber Line).   Often the speed with DSL is lower 
than with cable but the ISP will tell you that you have a 
dedicated connection.  Cable is a shared connection with 
your neighbors.  Again, I have used cable for many years 
and DSL before that, so it usually boils down to price and 
performance.  The third option that may be available in your 
area is fiber and this will almost always offer the highest 
speeds.  If the price is reasonable, you should definitely look 
at this option but make sure that you have the option to use 
your own router to set up WiFi. 
I am a strong advocate of buying and owning your own 
router rather than renting one from the service provider.  I 
know this can sound kind of scary if you don’t know the first 
thing about routers and WiFi, but read on and not only will 
you see why this is a good idea but you will also be able to 
install it and make it work yourself.  Most importantly, it will 
give you superior stability, a much smaller physical device, 
the ability to do complete home WiFi coverage, and probably 
save you on monthly fees. 
A newer trend for ISPs is to count the amount of data 
used by adding both the data coming in and going out over 
your monthly service period.  These so-called data caps 
usually mean that you have to pay extra if you go over the 
limit (which can vary depending on the speed of Internet 
service).  Many of the Smart Home devices won’t contribute 
too much towards that data limit with the notable exception 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
22
of anything to do with video, like cameras and video 
doorbells.  Watching a lot of Netflix or other streaming 
services can also be a big contributor.  It’s important to 
monitor your data use so you can stay within your limits, or 
to learn that you need to increase them.   Later in the 
security system section, some detail is provided on how 
much of an impact video cameras can have on your data 
usage. 
 
All the technical knowledge you need … 
No matter what your level of technical knowledge or ability, 
by the time you’ve read this section, you’ll have everything 
you need to know to make all your network equipment work. 
 
WiFi 
You have probably heard of this since every computer, 
smartphone, tablet and many other devices have WiFi.  But 
what is it and what do you need to know about it?  Strangely, 
no one can agree on what “WiFi” stands for. It’s generally 
understood that the “wi” is for wireless, but apparently, the “fi” 
doesn’t stand for anything. Most people think it’s just meant 
to rhyme with “HiFi,” in which the “fi” stood for fidelity. But 
“wireless fidelity” is not a thing. Suffice it to say that WiFi is 
the standard method of connecting to the Internet at home, 
at work, and in public. A small WiFi radio in your phone, 

Internet Access 
 
 
23
computer, or other device that uses the internet connects 
wirelessly to another radio, which you know as a router, but 
may also be called an “access point”.   
 
WiFi Frequency Bands and Channels 
WiFi supports two radio frequencies: 2.4GHz and 5GHz. 
This is analogous to the AM and FM bands on most car 
radios.  Just as there are different stations or “channels” on 
AM and FM radios, the 2.4GHz band of WiFi has several 
channels available for use as well, numbered 1 through 11.  
For the purposes of home use, we use only the channels 1, 
6, and 11 because they do not interfere with each other.  
Importantly, the 5GHz band has many more channels 
available for use, but this is not the only difference. 
Just as you can’t have two different radio stations 
broadcasting on the same channel 
or too close together on the radio 
dial, similar issues can affect your 
WiFi. All routers should be tuned to 
one of the three available 2.4 GHz 
WiFi channels, and if your neighbor 
is using the same channel on her 
router as you are, you’ll both have 
performance issues. Luckily, you 
can change the channel! (I’ll tell 
you how later.)   
Virtually every 
smartphone, tablet, 
Mac, and PC will 
support both the 2.4 
and 5GHz frequency 
bands.  Other types of 
devices that connect to 
WiFi may not support 
5GHz.  Your home 
network will be set up 
to use both, just like 
having an AM/FM 
radio. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
24
You may have noticed in your car that AM radio stations 
typically keep playing much further away from where the 
signal originates than FM stations do.  This is a function of 
the way that radio waves pass through different objects and 
materials (like dirt, concrete, and air, for instance). In 
technical terms, we call this “propagation characteristics”. In 
general, lower frequencies travel further and through more 
solid objects than higher frequencies.   
The lower frequency of the WiFi 2.4GHz band will cover 
the average sized home, penetrating most walls and ceilings 
and will often leak out onto the street and into neighbors’ 
homes. (Certainly, in an apartment complex it’s not 
uncommon to have a list of several dozen available networks 
in the 2.4GHz band).  The higher frequency 5GHz radio 
band channels do not penetrate walls as well as the 2.4GHz 
channels do, and generally speaking you’re likely to have 
more dead spots using the 5GHz band.  But: the 5GHz band 
comes with the significant advantage of having dozens of 
non-interfering channels available for use, meaning that if 
you can get decent coverage at 5GHz in your home, it’s 
advantageous to use it.  
 
WiFi Network Name or SSID 
There is one more important concept to understand about 
WiFi that is called the SSID, (Service Set Identifier) also 
known as the WiFi Network Name.  This is important 
because the SSID is the name of the WiFi network that you 

Internet Access 
 
 
25
see on your smartphone or computer when you connect to 
WiFi.  An SSID can represent either a 2.4GHz frequency 
channel or a 5GHz frequency channel or both (meaning a 
single SSID can represent both 2.4 and 5GHz WiFi networks 
at the same time, but we won’t be doing it this way).  Later in 
the router chapter, I’ll cover how to set these up and how to 
name them optimally so that connecting new Smart Home 
devices is simple. 
 
Encryption 
Encryption means that all of the data that you send and 
receive from your computer or Smart Home device to the 
Router using WiFi is jumbled in such a way that nobody 
(within reason) can snoop in on it. 
The best and most easily configured 
encryption type is called “WPA2 
Personal”. You’ll have to remember a 
password, but that is a small price to 
pay for reasonable security.  On your 
smartphone or computer, when you 
see a little lock icon next to a WiFi 
network you want to join, it means 
that the network is encrypted and you 
will need a password to join in.  This is in contrast to many 
public WiFi networks at hotels and hotspots that do not have 
the lock but offer a temporary login page that asks for a 
This is a long and 
complicated subject 
but the only thing 
you really need to 
know is that all of 
your data — 
uploaded and 
downloaded — 
should be encrypted 
when using WiFi. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
26
password.  In this case you are not on an encrypted link and 
some people call this type of connection a hacker’s delight.   
Now, that wasn’t so bad, was it?  Feel free to refer back to 
these terms as you read on.  Now it is time to set up your 
router. 

 
Chapter 2 – Setting Up Your Router  
 
 
 
 
 
The thought of getting a router might already be giving 
you the shivers, but not to worry - just carefully follow the 
steps and you’ll be up and running in no time. 
By now, you have selected your Internet service provider 
and told them that you want to install your own router and 
WiFi, and the segment of the network we are working on 
here is the network inside your home.  Designing this with 
Smart Home in mind, there is one big difference in the way 
you’ll approach this task from what you used to do when you 
just stuck the router provided by your ISP in a corner and 
turned it on. In the past, if there was a place in your home 
that didn’t have WiFi connectivity (a dead spot), you just 
moved around until you got better signal, since it only meant 
moving your laptop or phone.  
With a Smart Home, a new approach is needed.  Once 
you install a light switch, door lock, thermostat, video 
doorbell, sprinkler controller, window shade, and so on, 
those devices aren’t going to be moved.  For a Smart Home, 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
28
your network wireless signal must cover the whole house 
and be strong enough everywhere you want to install a 
Smart Home device.  You also have to be able to easily 
measure this before you go out and buy something so you 
know up front it’s going to work.  As mentioned earlier, there 
are two WiFi networks (2.4GHz and 5GHz) and you will need 
to set up both. This is not as difficult as it may sound, but this 
chapter will go into some detail just to make sure everything 
is done correctly. 
What kind of router should you buy?  If you go into the 
store or online, there seems to be a limitless choice of 
products from the likes of Netgear, Belkin, Linksys, Apple, 
and others.  Having worked in this industry and spending 
time at Linksys and being loyal to that brand while I worked 
at Cisco (who used to own Linksys), I can honestly tell you 
that you can pick any of these and get them to work for basic 
connectivity.  It might not be fun to sort through all the jargon 
on the boxes and the techno-talk that many of the sales 
people in the stores will send your way, though.   
Several years ago, I broke from my tradition of buying the 
brand of the company I worked for and I am glad I did.  In 
about 2008, I made the strategic decision to move from the 
world of PC’s to the world of Apple, starting with my laptop 
and then later iPhones and Apple TV.  I will go into the 
reasons for that later on (hint: simplicity and a MUCH more 
stable environment) but at the same time I took a chance 
and bought an Apple Airport Extreme Router for my home 
networking (about US $200 on the Apple Store). 

Setting up Your Router 
 
 
29
This by far, has been the most stable, simplest WiFi router 
I have ever used and I have not had to reboot it a single time 
in the many years since I got it.  It may seem kind of 
expensive, but whether or not you have any other Apple 
products, this is still what I would buy.  It also has the added 
advantage of being able to centralize the ultrasimple 
computer backups that we should all be doing, which I will 
go into detail later on.   
Importantly, a single router in your home may or may not 
get you the coverage you need for both 2.4GHz and 5GHz in 
all the locations you can anticipate installing a Smart Home 
device.  It is therefore critical to have a plan on what to do if 
you need to extend that network.  In almost all cases, that 
requires adding another router or two broaden the WiFi 
range and get rid of dead spots. In the case of Apple, 
another Airport Extreme or the lesser expensive Airport 
Express (about US $100) performs that function, wirelessly 
connecting (or with Ethernet if you happen to have home 
wiring) to the main router and extending both WiFi networks 
to further flung regions of the home.   
In fact, there are quite a number of new home wireless 
systems becoming available from both established vendors 
and startups that perform this so called “mesh WiFi”.  Since 
this is a new area that is changing so rapidly, I’ve made an 
overview 
of 
these 
possibilities 
available 
online 
at 
www.smarthomeprofessor.com/wifi.  The example in this 
chapter will use the Apple router products, but all the same 
settings and principles apply to any of the alternatives. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
30
From a home router WiFi perspective, these are the main 
requirements I would strongly recommend and why. 
Feature or Function 
Why? 
Dual band simultaneous 2.4GHz 
and 5GHz radios with the ability 
to assign different SSIDs to each 
network 
You will need them both for optimal 
performance especially as more 
and more devices get connected 
Gigabit 
Ethernet 
(1000Mbps) 
WAN (Wide Area Network) port 
You probably don’t need it yet but 
Internet speeds are increasing so 
be prepared 
Several Gigabit Ethernet LAN 
(Local Area Network) ports – 
four is ideal 
If you want to plug other stuff in 
that is near the router (and you 
will), this comes in handy 
No ugly antennas sticking out 
They will break, they are ugly and 
there is no need for them to be 
external anymore 
A single light that will tell you if 
all is well 
Simple is better and there is a 
better 
chance 
for 
optimal 
placement in your home 
An 
Ultra 
simple 
way 
of 
configuring, typically done with 
a phone App and/or computer 
app 
Otherwise you will get mad at me 
for telling you to buy your own 
router 
Optional – A USB port that 
supports a shared storage drive 
Very handy when doing centralized 
backups for multiple computers 
 

Setting up Your Router 
 
 
31
I won’t provide detailed installation guides for all possible 
scenarios but I’ll show you how my setup works and yours 
will likely be similar. 
Physically, this is how a router (left) connects to a modem 
(right) that in turn plugs into the cable or phone outlet.  Cable 
and 
DSL 
Modems 
are 
about 
US $50-$70 
and can be 
bought 
at 
any 
electronics 
store. 
It 
doesn’t really matter what brand you buy, but make sure it is 
compatible with your Internet service. There is no 
configuration required on most modems so just plug it in and 
it is all set to go.  The router shown on the left of the diagram 
plugs into the modem using the 
included Ethernet cable.  From 
there, you may have some devices 
plugged into the router but the vast 
majority of devices will connect 
wirelessly using WiFi. 
The devices supplied by your ISP 
are often combinations of modem 
and router all in one.  This might 
seem attractive at first but the 
Some ISPs insist that 
you use their modem 
and router 
combination.  If you are 
stuck with this, I would 
still get your own 
router and plug it in 
through the one 
supplied by the ISP.  If 
you do this, turn off all 
the WiFi settings on the 
ISP router. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
32
downside is that they usually rent them to you for upwards of 
$10/month and there is not much control to configure things 
the way you will need to for proper Smart Home coverage. 
Below is a picture of my network from the Apple Airport 
setup utility.  It shows the main Airport Extreme plugged into 
the 
Internet 
connection 
(it doesn’t 
show 
the 
modem).  
When 
setting up 
the router, 
there 
aren’t too many things that you need to worry about but you 
will want to get them right. I’ll illustrate how the Apple Router 
is set up and which settings are important and which are 
optional and you can apply these same principles to 
whichever product you choose.   
The first thing to do is decide physically where to put the 
main router.  The first choice is that it be near either a 
coaxial cable outlet for cable service, or a phone jack for 
DSL.  Often you will have multiple locations available so you 
should try to pick the one that is most centrally located in the 
home so you get the best WiFi coverage possible.  
Depending upon the size of your home, you may need to 
extend your wireless coverage by using another router, a 

Setting up Your Router 
 
 
33
set-up I explain in a few pages.  In general, it is worth trying 
to see if you get good enough coverage with just one router 
and then only add more if you need them. This is somewhat 
counter to the marketing strategies of the new wave of WiFi 
mesh networking vendors who like to sell you two or three 
routers at a time, insisting that you will need them all.  It will 
certainly work, but you may be paying way too much by not 
trying a single router first. 
Router setup 
We’ll continue to use the example of an Apple Airport 
Extreme router.  All configuration is done using the Airport 
Utility program that is included on every Mac, iPhone, and 
iPad and is also downloadable for a Windows PC.  Each of 
the major settings will be shown with a screenshot and 
explained what they should be set to and why. 
 
Base Station – Router name and password 
Pick anything for the 
name but pick a good 
password 
and 
when 
prompted to remember 
the 
password 
in 
Keychain, accept. (I’ll talk 
more 
about 
Mac’s 
Keychain function when I 
discuss 
System 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
34
Preferences in Chapter 3) This password is for changing 
settings on your router.  Do not give this out to anyone.  It is 
not the password that you use to get on the wireless network 
from your phone or computer.  That comes later.    
 
Internet setting 
Check with your Internet provider but usually choose 
DHCP if you 
have Cable 
and PPPoE 
if 
you 
are 
using 
DSL.  
This is how 
the Internet 
side of your 
network will 
know about 
your router.  
The Router 
address 
(blacked 
out) 
and 
other things in grey should automatically fill in. You don’t 
need to change anything in the “Internet Options…” button 
on the bottom. 
 

Setting up Your Router 
 
 
35
Wireless Setup 
This is the tab where you create your main 2.4GHz WiFi 
network and, optionally, a guest network for guests and 
visitors.  Pick 
a 
wireless 
network name 
(aka 
SSID) 
that you will 
be 
able 
to 
identify 
as 
your network.  
Your 
neighbors will 
see it too, so 
use 
clean 
language.  In 
this example, 
if my name is Smith, I might pick smith2 to denote my 
2.4GHz network and smithguest for a guest network.  In both 
cases, choose WPA2 Personal for network security.  The 
main wireless password will be used by you and your family, 
so pick something you can remember but not the same 
password as the router or ones you use for other purposes 
online or on your personal hard drives.  The guest network 
password should be different yet again, and you can post 
this password on the fridge for guests to see.  Also, click the 
box to save the password in your keychain. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
36
Wireless options 
Apple puts the 5GHz WiFi network configuration under 
this tab.  Set it up as shown in the illustration and pick a 
different network name than you gave your 2.4GHz network.  
This will be important later when you want to test to see 
whether you have enough signal strength and you have to 
test a specific network.  If the names are the same, then you 
won’t 
know 
which 
network you 
are 
testing, 
the 2.4GHz 
or 
5GHz, 
and 
many 
devices only 
connect 
to 
the 2.4 GHz 
network.  
Some of the 
newer WiFi 
mesh 
products 
don’t allow you to have different network names in their effort 
to simplify things, but I think this is a mistake and hopefully 
they will add this level of flexibility down the road.  Do not 
check the ‘create hidden network’ box, and set both of the 
radio channels to “Automatic”.  You may or may not see the 
radio mode selection. If you do, it gets a bit nerdy but it turns 
out there are many variants of both 2.4GHz and 5GHz WiFi 

Setting up Your Router 
 
 
37
networking so you always want to pick the latest one that is 
available which is usually at the top of the list. OK, enough of 
that! Don’t give up yet.  You’re almost done!  
 
Network 
On the main router, use a router mode of “DHCP and 
NAT”.  The 
DHCP range 
is the range 
of addresses 
that will be 
assigned 
to 
the 
devices 
on 
your 
network.  In 
general, 
you 
would 
leave 
this at their 
default values 
for the router 
Get your geek on!  
 
The term 802.11a refers to the 5GHz network and if you have 
the latest access point or router it will probably say 
802.11a/n/ac.   
 
The 802.11b/g/n network is the 2.4GHz network.   
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
38
which would allow for over 250 connected devices on your 
network.  I changed mine by clicking on the Network options 
button, but you won’t need to do that. 
 
Disks 
This is a setting specific to the Apple Airport Extreme 
router and requires a third-party USB disk drive to be 
plugged in to the USB port on the router.  This is most useful 
as your one 
disk 
to 
backup 
all 
your 
computers.  
There 
is 
more detail 
on this in 
the Backup 
section 
in 
the 
next 
chapter on 
Computers 
but this is 
the 
main 
reason that I am sticking with the Apple router products until 
I can find another vendor who has this extremely valuable 
feature.  The name of the disk will likely be different than 
what I have here but any name is fine.  Make sure you click 

Setting up Your Router 
 
 
39
on the update button when you are complete.  The router will 
reset itself and you will temporarily disconnect, but when the 
green light comes back on solid, reconnect to one of the new 
WiFi networks you just created and you are done with the 
main router. 
 
Extending your WiFi range 
In a later section, you’ll learn how to easily test whether or 
not you have WiFi dead spots in your house, and if you 
discover some, remember to come back to this section so 
you can learn how to set up an Airport Express (cheaper and 
smaller than the main Airport Extreme, but you can still use 
the Extreme as an extender) as a wireless extender off the 
main router.  This diagram, courtesy of the Apple support 
site, shows the main Airport Extreme router in the middle 
and the new Airport Express on the right.  The key to 
success is the physical placement of the Express router so 
that it is within wireless range of the main router but extends 
that WiFi range to areas of poor coverage.  All you need is 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
40
an AC plug in the wall and a place to put the tiny Express 
router.   
The configuration of this extender router is trivial because 
all of this gets filled in for you if you ask it to simply extend 
your wireless network. Follow the directions that come with 
the router and choose “Extend a wireless network”. All of the 
same settings that you had on the main router automatically 
get carried over to the new router configured as a network 
extender. 
In my case, I was having difficulty getting enough wireless 
signal to a video doorbell (video requires higher data 
throughput than other devices) so I ended up using Velcro to 
attach the extension router out of sight and inside the bottom 
of a grandfather clock.  The newer generation of WiFi mesh 
routers (discussed on www.smarthomeprofessor.com/wifi) 
also make configuration of the second and third routers 
simple, by taking the settings of the main unit and using the 
appropriate network names and passwords so that you can’t 
make a mistake.  Some models, however, don’t allow 
different network names for the 2.4GHz and 5GHz networks 
and as of mid-2017, none of them allow you to plug in a USB 
drive to do centralized backups. 
That’s it for setting up your WiFi networks.  There may be 
some adjustments later as you start to test out specific spots 
for wireless signal strength, but this is a good starting point 
and a thorough foundation for your Smart Home.  
Remember that later on, if you do find dead spots, you can 

Setting up Your Router 
 
 
41
physically move routers to different locations or add another 
router off of the main unit just like we did with this one.  After 
doing this with an AirPort Express, the network looks like 
this: The dotted line between the 2 routers indicates a 
wireless connection.  If your home happens to be wired with 
Ethernet wiring, use it to connect the 2 routers and you will 
get better performance. 
www.ebook3000.com

 

 
Chapter 3 – Computers and Smartphones 
 
 
 
 
 
Your new digital, automated lifestyle can be run from any 
number of devices, and most likely you’ll be operating it from 
your smartphone. You can also operate your Smart Home 
from your computer, PC, tablet, and with some products, 
your watch, too.  Since almost everyone has a laptop or 
desktop computer, I’ll start with that set-up first. 
I was once a dedicated PC guy, but after the iPhone came 
out in the mid-2000s, I started a gradual switch to Apple 
products. Your preference is personal, of course, but my 
reasons for switching to Apple were that they were 
developing a leading-edge product line that already had 
consistent technical design, similarity in use between Apple 
products and overall stability compared to the PC 
environment. The ease-of-use with Apple is reason alone to 
switch, but whether you’re Mac or PC, the same principles 
apply to using your computer to operate your Smart Home.  
The minimum amount of memory (as of late 2017) I would 
put in a Mac is eight Gigabytes.  If you can upgrade it 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
44
inexpensively, it’s probably the place I would put any extra 
money.  The amount of disk storage and the type of drive is 
directly a function of the kinds of things you will be doing.  If 
you expect to take a lot of pictures or videos, you will want 
more storage.  Generally, starting with 250 Gigabytes is the 
minimum and the less moving parts the better, so a solid-
state drive (while more expensive) is a bit more robust, 
faster and longer lasting for a laptop.  I recently bought 
Apple MacBooks on sale in their default configuration (eight 
Gigabytes of memory and 250 Gigabytes of solid state hard 
drive) and have been quite happy with them on price and 
performance.  For my desktop iMac, I have 1 Terabyte of 
disk and that is the main repository of my photos and videos.  
 
Important settings for your Mac 
All 
of 
the 
system 
settings 
on a Mac can be 
found in System 
Preferences, 
which 
you 
will 
find 
under 
the 
Apple menu in 
the 
upper 
left-
hand corner of 
the screen.    

Computers and Smartphones 
 
 
45
Start with the General Tab in Security and Privacy. Make 
sure that you have a login password set for your computer.  
This is the 
password 
that unlocks 
the 
computer 
when 
you 
open the lid 
and start to 
use 
it.  
Remember 
it and don’t 
give 
it 
to 
anyone else.  I have my computer set to sleep at one minute 
and I have to re-enter my password again after that. I 
recommend you keep your sleep time at one minute or less 
for security reasons. 
Select 
the 
FileVault tab so 
that all your files 
are 
encrypted 
on 
your 
computer.  You 
won’t notice any 
difference 
in 
performance but 
if your machine 
is 
stolen, 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
46
nobody will be able to get the files off of your machine, even 
if they remove the hard drive. 
Turn your computer’s firewall on.  It makes it harder to 
hackers to access your computer and again, only in rare 
occasions 
will 
you 
notice 
anything 
different. 
 
 
 
 
The Trackpad setting is not that important but if your Mac 
has one, spend some time learning the different finger 
movements that 
are so eloquently 
illustrated 
when 
you choose the 
Trackpad setting 
in 
System 
Preferences. 
It 
can save you lots 
of time as you 
get better using 

Computers and Smartphones 
 
 
47
the machine.  If you don’t like a change you made, you can 
just change it back.   
iCloud settings are very important and will make life so 
simple, especially when you have more than one Apple 
device of any kind.  The “cloud” is not actually a collection of 
ice crystals thirty thousand feet in the air somehow keeping 
your files safe (and cold!). There are many clouds and 
they’re all 
data 
centers. 
They’re 
designed 
not 
just 
for extra 
security 
and 
back-up 
but 
so 
you can access whatever’s in it across all of your registered 
Apple devices.  If you don’t have an Apple ID, you can 
create one easily. You can do it on your iPhone or iPad by 
tapping “iCloud” in Settings and then clicking on “Create a 
new Apple ID.” To do this on your computer, go to apple.com 
and search “Apple ID” for easy instructions. 
Your Apple ID password is another one of the important 
ones that you need to remember as you will use this to link 
all your Apple devices in iCloud.  Check all of the boxes as 
shown on the screenshot above and click on the options 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
48
button for photos and set it as shown. I don’t usually click on 
the first one because I have a huge photo library that would 
take days 
to upload 
but 
feel 
free 
to 
use this if 
you want.  
Keep 
in 
mind that 
you get 5GB of free storage with your iCloud account and 
then you can upgrade to something larger if you have a 
photo library bigger than 5GB (approximately 1000-1500 
photos taken with an iPhone). The cost to upgrade to 50GB 
is currently only 99¢ a month. 
Scroll down to the bottom of the iCloud settings to find the 
Keychain. The keychain is where passwords are stored for 
anything done on your computer including most applications 
and most web browsing.  When you are prompted to save a 
password 
in 
the 
Keychain 
you should 
always do 
so (unless 
the 
password 
didn’t 
work!)  

Computers and Smartphones 
 
 
49
Keychain also securely stores all of your passwords in 
iCloud. Once you pick a password on one Apple device, it is 
automatically recalled on all your other devices. So, if you 
log into a website on your computer using a password and it 
was saved in the Keychain, you can use your iPhone or iPad 
to log into the same site without remembering that password. 
The Apple app Store is where you will get most of your 
programs that you run on the Mac.  Every time you install a 
program it leaves you with the burden of having to update it 
on a regular 
basis. 
 
It 
can 
be 
annoying to 
get 
interrupted 
constantly 
about 
upgrades so 
I check the 
boxes 
as 
shown 
so 
that 
it 
happens automatically.  I was afraid to do this at first 
because I was worried about downloading a bad update and 
wrecking something, but my experience on the Mac has 
been very positive with updates, so unless you were to 
research each one in detail before updating, it really makes 
a lot of sense to let the computer do the work so that you 
can focus on doing more useful things.  
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
50
The final set-up is for Time Machine, Apple’s backup 
system.  When I had a PC, I never did backups because it 
was too hard and it slowed my machine down to a snail’s 
pace.  With Time Machine, it’s extremely easy and it also 
works!  If something goes wrong with your Mac or if it’s 
stolen or lost, you can restore it to the exact state it was in, 
or to any date since Time Machine was installed.  Also, it’s 
so important to encrypt your backups so that nobody can 
ever steal your backup hard drive and get the files.  Again, 
this backup encryption will require a password that you have 
to remember. 
There are a couple of hardware options for backing up 
your Mac.  You can buy individual USB disks (at virtually any 
electronics store) for each of your Macs and plug them in 
and run Time Machine.  I used to do this, but I simplified 
things recently when I bought one larger drive and plugged it 
into the USB port of the Airport Extreme router I mentioned 

Computers and Smartphones 
 
 
51
earlier in the book.  By centralizing the backup drive, I use it 
to back up all of the Macs that we have in the house.  
 Remember the lesson on WiFi, where I talked about 
having separate 2.4GHz and 5GHz networks?  When you do 
backups with the centralized backup disk drive on the Airport 
Extreme router, you are using the wireless network to get the 
data to the router so you want the fastest possible 
transmission which most frequently happens on the 5GHz 
network.  So, I normally run all the Mac computers in the 
house on the 5GHz network largely for that reason but also 
because there are many older devices that only run on the 
2.4GHz network and I don’t want computer backups to 
interfere with those devices. 
 
Adding Smartphones and Tablets 
 
Once again, there are only two viable choices in the 
smartphone world, Apple iPhones or Android phones.  In the 
Apple world, there are new iPhone models every year to 
choose from but from a software perspective, Apple is in 
control of the software and updates.  It is pretty normal in the 
iPhone world to keep your phone and apps automatically 
and regularly updated.  In the Android world, updates are 
usually done through your carrier so over time the number of 
versions of software floating around in Android phones can 
become rather large.  Application developers find it easier to 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
52
build and test their applications in the iPhone world since it is 
a more homogeneous environment.  
This is important when choosing Smart Home products 
and looking at reviews.  It is fairly common for the Android 
version of an app to arrive after the iPhone version and the 
quality of the Android version may take a while to catch up, 
too.  I’ve used both, but choose to use an iPhone for its 
simplicity and also because many functions get better when 
you are using all Apple products, as you’ll see later.  The 
examples I use will be for the iPhone but similar principles 
apply for Android. 
 
Choosing a Wireless Carrier 
Carrier plans are ever changing and expensive, so it pays 
to shop around at least once a year to make sure you’re 
getting the best deal.  Always start with evaluating the 
cellular coverage in the areas you mainly use your phone. 
On an iPhone, look on the top left of your phone at the 
number of dots or bars you have. This is an indication of the 
strength of the voice network for making voice calls. Now 
turn WiFi off temporarily. You should always see LTE right 
after the dots/bars on the top left of the phone screen.  LTE 
is the latest high-speed data network, faster than 4G, 3G, 
Edge or any other that you might see.  Make sure you can 
get LTE data in the areas you use the phone most.  If you 
are thinking of switching, look at the coverage on other 

Computers and Smartphones 
 
 
53
people’s phones with other carrier networks before switching 
to another provider. 
For the most part, in the US, all local, long distance calling 
and texting are included in your plan along with a certain 
amount of data.  But how much data do you need?  2GB per 
month is almost the minimum now with some plans in the 4-
6GB per month and many are now unlimited.  None of the 
data you use while on WiFi counts towards this limit 
(although, when you are at home it does count towards your 
home Internet data limits, if you have them). The main thing 
to look for on the data plan is that you don’t get an overage 
charge if you use more than your allotment.  Also watch for 
international data roaming charges that can literally add 
hundreds if not thousands of dollars to your monthly bill if 
you are not careful - one of the huge rip-offs the cellular 
companies have enjoyed for years that thankfully is starting 
to be replaced by all-inclusive plans and travel packages, 
some of which load automatically when you leave the 
country. 
After that, it boils down to cost, so shop around.    When 
the iPhone 7 came out, there was a period of 2-3 weeks 
where I could upgrade my two-year-old iPhone 6 for free, but 
you have to jump on these quickly to take advantage of the 
savings.  Also, if you have a family plan with more than two 
devices, there are often pretty good deals, especially for the 
third phone and beyond. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
54
There are a number of key settings on the iPhone that you 
will want to make life easier and facilitate an easy Smart 
Home experience.  I will cover the important ones here. 
 
iCloud Settings 
Some of the most useful features of the iPhone are 
enabled when you use iCloud similar to the example shown 
earlier for the Mac computer. (On iPhone, go to Settings and 
iCloud).  Use your Apple ID and password to log into iCloud 
and I would recommend that you set all the of the functions 
in the iCloud settings to “on”.  Among other things, you will 
be able to get pictures taken on your iPhone onto other 
devices like your computers, AppleTV, or tablet, and easily 
share them with others.  Phone backups to iCloud happen 
automatically when your phone is plugged in and is on WiFi.    
All your passwords that you use on your Mac computer are 
now automatically filled in on the phone when using Safari 
as a browser so you don’t have to remember them.  Files 
stored in your iCloud drive are there and available on the 
phone.  These are just a few of the reasons that you’ll want 
to do this and there are many more that you will discover. 
 
WiFi Settings 
It is important that you can connect to both your 2.4GHz 
and 5GHz home networks from your phone, so make sure 

Computers and Smartphones 
 
 
55
you can use them both and know how to switch between 
them using the settings button and then WiFi.  Even though 
they need a password, if you have it stored in your iCloud 
keychain you won’t have to enter it. If you do have to enter 
the password for the first time, you will only need to do it 
once.   
Your phone will be the primary measurement device to 
help you figure out whether a new Smart Home device is 
going to work or not at a specific location. It will also 
determine if you need to extend your WiFi network to far 
flung areas of your home.   If somewhere in your home, your 
5GHz WiFi network is not showing up on your phone, move 
within sight of the main router and try it again since 5GHz 
WiFi networks won’t have as far a reach as their 2.4GHz 
equivalents. 
 
Password and Touch ID 
You absolutely MUST have a password on your phone.  
You can use only numbers or a regular alphanumeric 
keyboard to create a password.  Remember this password 
and don’t use it on your other devices.  I would also highly 
recommend enabling Touch ID so you can use your 
fingerprint to log onto your phone and even some apps, 
which is very handy.  Even though this has nothing to do 
with Smart Home, you can also use it for Apple Pay which 
you will love once you start to use it. In the future, Apple may 
come up with more advanced techniques to uniquely identify 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
56
you, so keep an eye on this and use fingerprint technology if 
it's available to you. 
Voice Control – Siri 
 
Siri allows you to talk to your phone and give it commands 
which will be used later when controlling your Smart Home 
devices (e.g. “Hey Siri, turn on the kitchen lights”).  It’s 
trained to your voice so, unlike some other voice recognition 
devices, when I ask Siri to do something in the presence of 
several iPhones, only mine will be triggered. Go to Settings 
and Siri on your iPhone to turn this on and follow the 
directions. 
 
 
These are the main functions you’ll use regularly on your 
iPhone along with apps that you will need to control the 
Smart Home devices you will be installing in your home.  It is 
probably a good idea to also enable automatic app updates, 
since keeping all these up to date is not something to spend 
your precious time doing manually.  
The next chapter will show you how to measure your 
network performance using your computer and smartphone. 
You will see from my results what kind of a difference in 
speed can result from the two different WiFi networks. 

 
Chapter 4 – Measuring the Network 
 
 
 
 
 
At this point you have your own router programmed for two 
wireless networks (2.4GHz and 5GHz), each with their own 
network name; you have a computer and smartphone that 
are each wirelessly connected to the router with Internet 
access working.  Now, you want to find out if your network is 
working up to snuff!  Let’s do that. 
1) Situate yourself within sight of your router so that you 
get the best possible wireless signal. 
2) Using your computer or smartphone, connect yourself 
to the WiFi network that corresponds to your 5GHz 
wireless network. 
3) Open a browser on your computer and go the web site 
www.speedtest.net.  On your phone, download and 
use the “Speedtest by Ookla” app. 
Ignore all the ads all over the page and hit the “run test” 
button. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
58
The first thing measured is the delay between you and the 
test site.  This is shown under PING and it should be well 
under 100ms (100 milliseconds) typically.  Next, the 
download speed is measured (data coming from the network 
to you) and in this case, we are cruising along at 101.59 
Mbps (Megabits per second) which is pretty good since I 
signed up for a 75Mbps service.   
After the final download speed is determined, it does an 
upload speed test followed by the final results. 

Measuring the Network 
 
 
59
Ignoring all the nonsense at the bottom, my final results 
for the 5GHz wireless network, through the router and to the 
test point in the Internet were: 102.59Mbps Down and 
6.17Mbps Up.  As mentioned earlier, it might seem odd that 
there is such a difference in the service speeds but it is quite 
normal to have this type of mismatch as most often you are 
pulling in data from the network.  However, if you choose to 
do massive backups from your computers to the Cloud (like 
Apple iCloud, Google Drive, Box, Dropbox, etc.) then having 
a faster upload speed will make a measurable improvement.  
The only way to do this is to pick an Internet plan that offers 
the speeds you desire. 
When I switch to my 2.4GHz network (the one that is 
typically busier and more utilized by neighbor’s interfering 
networks), the speedtest results are quite different. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
60
The download speed dropped from 102.59Mbps to 
65.67Mbps.  Why?  When you do these tests, you are 
measuring the speed from the test point on the Internet, 
through the Internet, from the ISP to your home, and back to 
your computer over WiFi. The maximum speed you get is 
determined by the weakest link in the chain.  In this example, 
the upload speeds are virtually the same because the 
weakest upload link is my Internet provider who throttles my 
service at 6Mbps.  So, in my case, both wireless networks 
inside the home are faster than that, so the 6Mbps choke 
point is indicative of the segment between my home and the 
Internet Provider being the slowest part of the path for 
uploads.   
The download speed is different though.  What we can 
see here is that on the 2.4GHz wireless network, the choke 
point is my wireless network inside the home, between the 
router and my computer/smartphone, since we know that the 

Measuring the Network 
 
 
61
rest of the path can achieve at least 102Mbps, as seen on 
the 5GHz network. 
If you didn’t follow all of that, it’s okay. What you need to 
know is that the 2.4GHz wireless network is only about 60% 
as fast as the 5GHz network in my house.  In my case, part 
of the reason for the slower 2.4GHz connection is the 
number of strong network signals coming from nearby 
homes that interfere with my network.  Remember, the 
2.4GHz network only has 3 channels that should be used (1, 
6, or 11) which don’t interfere with one another. Also, some 
people like to think they are clever by deciding to use a 
channel number like 3 or 4 but all that does is interfere with 
both channel 1 and 6 at the same time.  There is not much 
you can do about this except to create a good 5GHz network 
that has broad coverage in your home.   
Doing this test will be a normal task when deciding to 
install a new Smart Home device, and it’s best to do it with 
your smartphone. Download the speedtest app for your 
smartphone and get good at doing this test from various 
points on both 2.4GHz and 5GHz networks. 
Your results will vary from mine and will even vary at 
different times of the day as networks are being used by 
other people both in your home and your neighbor’s. But it’s 
good to get a handle on how your system normally performs 
to compare it to performance levels when you have a 
problem with speed. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

 

 
Chapter 5 – Security and Passwords 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you were around before the Internet became a thing in 
the mid 1990’s, you probably remember doing things like 
mailing paper checks. If someone decided to steal your letter 
with the check in it, they would have your full name, address, 
phone number, bank account number and signature.  With 
that information of course, you could be vulnerable to all 
kinds of fraud and theft, but thankfully banks would 
reimburse you if funds were stolen through no fault of your 
own.    
Nowadays, 
with 
most 
transactions 
happening 
electronically, we are also at risk of fraud and theft, and to 
minimize that risk, there are some important steps that we 
must take in our electronic lives to do our best to prevent 
these things from happening.  Some techniques are 
peppered throughout the book like encrypting your hard 
drives, doing encrypted backups, encrypting and password 
protecting your WiFi network and others.  This chapter 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
64
focuses mostly on passwords, your multiple points of entry 
into your digital world which encompass e-mail, social media, 
banking, Smart Home, bill paying, investments, and just 
about everything you do with your phone or computer.  
It is almost an annual occurrence with me now that there 
is a fraudulent charge on a credit card and I have to get a 
replacement card. It likely will happen to you too, so while 
we do everything to minimize risk, we also have to realize 
that bad things happen and we have to be prepared for how 
to deal with them. Thinking of glossing over this chapter?  
Take a deep breath and read on.  It will be worth it. 
You will have hundreds of passwords over time, and as 
tempting as it is to use the same password for all your logins, 
don’t do it.  We obviously can’t remember that many unique 
complex passwords though, so there must be a better way.  
It turns out that there are a small handful of passwords that 
you will have to remember but with the use of a password 
manager (like iCloud Keychain), you don’t have to know any 
of the other ones, although you’ll be able to look them up if 
you need to. 
These are the passwords that you have to remember and 
they should all be different: 
• Computer password(s) 
• Smartphone password 
• Apple ID password 
• FileVault Encryption password 

Security and Passwords 
 
 
65
• WiFi passwords are handy to remember but not 
absolutely necessary - remember the 2.4GHz and 
5GHz passwords should be the same, but different 
from your guest network password 
The passwords above should be ones that contain 
uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and special 
characters in some form that is not easily guessed.  You just 
have to do this and remember them.  So far, that isn’t too 
bad, but what about the rest of the passwords? 
First, we’ll look at the case of using mostly Apple devices. 
Your best bet is to use the Apple provided iCloud Keychain 
which allows you to sign in on any web site with a username 
and password and have it remembered across all your Apple 
devices if using Safari as your web browser.  Safari also can 
recommend very long and complicated passwords if you 
don’t feel like thinking of one.  It also allows you to store 
credit and debit card information, e-mail and message 
account info, and WiFi passwords, all encrypted both on 
Apple servers and while in transit to your devices.   
Let’s pause for a moment and digest this a bit.  Access to 
all of your website passwords, including banking, are stored 
by Apple in their servers, accessible to you on your Apple 
devices.  This is why you need a solid, impossible to guess, 
but easy for you to remember, password on your phone, 
computer, iPad, and for your Apple ID, which is your key to 
logging into Apple’s iCloud service where these passwords 
are stored and retrieved.  
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
66
To some, this may sound risky, but the alternative is likely 
worse, like using the same password for everything or 
writing them all down on a piece of paper which can get lost 
or stolen. I also don’t recommend the easy option of “logging 
in with Facebook, Google or Linked-in” in order to log onto 
another site.  If this password were ever hacked, you’ll have 
a hard time knowing which other services are now also 
vulnerable.  It is much better to have a username and 
password for each web site and store them in iCloud 
Keychain.  The list of passwords can be seen on your 
iPhone or Mac computer should you ever need to look one 
of them up, like in the next example. 
There is one caveat to using iCloud keychain. Currently, if 
you were to log into an account on your computer using 
Safari and then use the same app on your smartphone, you 
will have to put in the password at least once in the app to 
log you in.  More and more phone apps however are using 
the Touch ID feature (where a fingerprint is the password) to 
log in, so if your app supports that, using Touch ID for apps 
on your phone is a great way to go and is one of many 
biometric security techniques likely in the future.  More 
innovation is certain to come in this very important area. 
It may be the case that you have non-Apple phones or 
computers and want to use a password manager that works 
across multiple platforms. Two popular ones are LastPass 
and 1Password, both of which have some cost associated 
with their use but work across Mac, PC, iPhone, Android, 
and Windows.  I would encourage you to do your own 

Security and Passwords 
 
 
67
evaluation of these products before choosing one.  I use 
iCloud Keychain because I am currently using all Apple 
products.  
Security is now and always will be a never-ending game 
of cat and mouse.  Hackers usually target vulnerable, high 
value, or celebrity targets so try not to be one, and make 
good common-sense decisions.  
 
Bottom Line - Basics 
Set up your Internet service, using your own router 
and modem with both 2.4GHz and 5GHz networks, 
each with their own unique name, and have your 
computer and smartphone set up to connect to either 
one of the networks.  Use WPA Personal security for 
WiFi using the same password for both networks. 
Run speedtests on your computer on speedtest.net 
and with your smartphone using the Ookla speedtest 
app and know what your upload and download results 
are.  Make sure that the upload and download 
measurements are at least what you are paying for 
from your ISP. 
Using speedtest on your smartphone, evaluate any 
location in your home you anticipate putting a Smart 
Home device to ensure you have good WiFi service.  
If you find dead-spots, you’ll have to move the router 
around or extend the network with another router 
acting as a wireless extender.  
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
68
To manage and keep track of the usernames and 
passwords you have accumulated, use a password 
manager like iCloud Keychain to create unique 
complex passwords for each site.  Do not log on with 
Facebook or other services as a shortcut.  There are 
only a handful of passwords you will have to commit to 
memory.  
If you set up a guest wireless network for friends 
who pop over, the password should be different than 
the one you use for your primary WiFi network.  If you 
have a mixed environment of PC’s or Android phones, 
you’ll probably want to pick a third party trusted 
password manager with similar functionality to iCloud 
Keychain. 
 
 
 
Congratulations for making it to this point! It’s not so hard, 
is it?  Laying the groundwork for the cool things to come will 
pay great dividends because when you start installing the 
things that you really care about, they’ll actually work!   
 

 
Part B - Music & Photos 
 
 
If any of the following items are still a part of your home 
experience, then this part of the book is for you: 
• Huge expensive complicated music playback 
systems 
• Music CDs 
• Cassette tapes 
• 35mm negatives or slides 
• Printed photos stored in shoe boxes 
• Stacks of photo albums 
Now that you have built the foundation for a Smart Home, 
you can also use it to simplify and declutter both your Music 
and Photo libraries. 
If you just can’t wait to move on to the Smart Home 
section, that’s OK too.  You can come back to this section 
any time. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

 

 
Chapter 6 – Streaming Music 
 
 
 
 
Of all things digital, music and photography have changed 
the most over the past twenty years.  Where now you can 
store massive amounts of music, or stream it, on just about 
any device, the days of heavy duty hardware don’t feel that 
far in the past. It feels like yesterday that I set up the ultimate 
music system to play my albums (also known as vinyl 
records or LPs), Compact Disks (CD) and cassette tapes.  
For that I needed a record player, a CD player, a cassette 
tape player, a tuner (for radio stations), and a nice big 
amplifier all in one stack next to the collection of albums and 
CDs so that I would have an amazing sound system that’d 
be the envy of the neighborhood. And all that stuff was 
dwarfed by the massive speaker set that somehow felt 
necessary to justify the amplifier stack. 
If you still have any of this, then this chapter should help 
you free up some precious real estate in your home.  (If you 
want to! I’m not talking down to the modern turntable set 
here!) Music moved from vinyl and cassette to a digital 
format with CDs in the 1990s but with the advent of the 
Internet and digital music players, the older forms of music 
playback have become obsolete. The next major shift 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
72
happened in the early 2000s — people could buy individual 
songs online rather than buying complete albums.  Most 
people are still familiar with doing something like this on 
iTunes and then putting the songs onto their iPod or phone 
for playback.  But that is quickly becoming old school, too.   
Music rental is replacing music ownership.  Why bother 
buying a thousand songs for $1000 when you can rent thirty 
million songs for $10 per month?  Music services like 
Pandora, Spotify, Apple Music and others have negated the 
need to buy music and if you are lazy like me when it comes 
to putting together playlists, you can let the music services 
do it for you. 
That is a lot of change for twenty years, and many people 
wonder how their music setup should look to best take 
advantage of this transformation.  The first thing to note is 
that virtually every song you ever had in your LP, CD, or 
cassette collection is now available from a music service.  
You can throw them all away or sell them and still have 
every song and album you want, on any of your devices by 
subscribing to something like Apple Music or Spotify. 
Subscription to Pandora, a service that curates your music 
based on your tastes, are free or without ads for  about $55 
per year. 
 
 
 

Streaming Music 
 
 
73
Music inside the home 
Remember the towering stack of equipment and 
speakers?  Gone.  Now you can enjoy music in every room, 
virtually an unlimited selection, and control it all simply from 
your smartphone or computer.   The sound quality is 
incredible, it’s so easy to operate that every member of your 
family will use it all the time without any instruction. 
There is more than one way to do this but I will share my 
setup with you that I have had for well over seven years and 
is probably the best money I have spent on any kind of 
electronics. There is a very ordinary looking and nondescript 
music system that you will see in a bunch of stores called 
Sonos, a company based out of Southern California.  When I 
saw the system in the store, it didn’t jump out at me as being 
all that impressive but a smart friend of mine had it and when 
I was describing my music challenges, he said, “Trust me.  
Just get it.  It is the best thing ever.”  So, I did, and he was 
right.  I am using Sonos as an example here but there are 
other wireless sound systems from the likes of Bose and 
Sony with similar capabilities. 
First, let’s assume you have nothing at all in the house for 
music (no speakers, no wiring, no tuner, etc.)  There are a 
series of “all in 1” speakers that you just plug into an 
electrical outlet.  They all connect over the WiFi network that 
you’ve already set up in your home, and they’re controlled 
with the Sonos app that you download on your phone, tablet, 
or computer.  With Sonos and other similar systems, you get 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
74
virtually every radio station on earth from a service called 
TuneIn.  Just select your station and it plays.  You also have 
the option of subscribing to music services like Pandora, 
Satellite Radio, Spotify, Apple Music, and many others.  It is 
so intuitive and simple that there’s no point in even 
describing how to do it since you will figure it out on your 
own in sixty seconds.  The various speaker systems come in 
three sizes (small, medium, large) which roughly correspond 
to how much you want pay and the size of the rooms you 
want to put the speaker(s) in.  It’s dead simple to pair two or 
more of these to create stereo or even surround sound 
should you wish.  You can play something different in each 
room you set up, or you can group places in your house 
together to play music perfectly in synch across multiple 
rooms. Walk out of the kitchen singing and enter the living 
room without missing a beat. 
If you already have a set of speakers that you want to use, 
Sonos also offers an amplifier unit that physically wires to 
those speakers and transforms them into a room zone.  I 
wired a couple of all-weather outdoor speakers in the back 
yard and use the Sonos Amplifier to drive those as my 
outdoor zone.  They also have sound bars for wall mount 
TVs and a base stand for TVs on a stand, and subwoofers if 
you really want your house to shake.  Software updates are 
as simple and elegant as I have seen in the industry.  The 
price may seem expensive but, the equipment lasts forever 
and there is a solid resale market should you choose to 
upgrade.  There are other top name brands that now have 

Streaming Music 
 
 
75
similar systems, so of course research and choose what is 
best for you. 
Most importantly, you can do all this yourself and it’s all 
wireless so you don't need to pay anyone to rummage in the 
attic with a spool of speaker wire. 
 
Music on the go 
Again, there are a couple of different ways to listen to 
music when you’re not in the home, using the same music 
services that you have running through a Sonos or 
equivalent system.  The easiest way to explain how to do 
this is by example.  In my case, I have an old library of songs 
that I had purchased either on CD or through iTunes that sits 
on my Mac at home and is accessible through the iTunes 
application on my computer.  Since I always synch my 
iPhone with my Mac, the songs that are in my iTunes library 
on my computer are also available on my iPhone.  So, by 
pressing the Music button on my phone, I can listen to all the 
music that I own through earbuds or some other device that 
it’s plugged into. For example, our car has a USB jack and 
by plugging in my iPhone in the car, it not only charges the 
phone but also acts as the playback for any music played 
from the phone.  But you don’t have to physically plug in 
your phone if your car supports Bluetooth.  If so, wirelessly 
pair your phone with the Bluetooth in your car and it has the 
same music streaming capability as plugging your phone 
into the USB port. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
76
Many newer cars support Apple CarPlay or Android Auto 
that fully integrates smartphone functions with the car’s in 
dash display.  This makes music playback simpler but also 
many other functions that you shouldn’t be doing on your 
phone while driving anyway.  If your car supports this, you 
should use it.  If you are shopping for a new car, look 
carefully at the fine print and consider adding this feature to 
your next set of wheels. 
The second example are the music streaming services 
that you subscribe to using your Sonos system at home like 
Pandora, Apple Music, Spotify, and SiriusXM.  By simply 
downloading those respective apps onto your iPhone, and 
logging into the same accounts as you use on Sonos, you 
have access to all the same music on your phone as you 
travel.  Some services like Spotify and Apple Music also 
allow you to listen in “offline” mode whereby you can 
download songs of your choice to your iPhone and listen to 
them locally when you have no Internet connection, such as 
when you’re on an airplane and you don’t want to pay for 
WiFi.  And, when you are in the car, playing music from any 
of the streaming services you have access to on your phone 
works the same way either through a physical USB 
connection or Bluetooth. 
Your smartphone is the hub of your music experience 
when you are outside the home.  It contains the songs you 
own plus access to all the libraries from all of the streaming 
services you subscribe to, and you can play them on 
anything your smartphone can connect to.  What’s the 

Streaming Music 
 
 
77
catch? As you know by now, when data goes into or out of 
your smartphone, it may count against your cellular monthly 
data limits.  Sometimes, music streaming will not count 
against your data plan depending on your carrier and there 
are trends towards higher capacity data plans where it 
becomes almost impossible to hit your data limits or you may 
even have an unlimited data plan.  So, make sure you know 
what kind of data plan you have and what the rules are for 
streaming music.  These plans tend to change like the 
seasons, so keep checking back to make sure your plan 
meets your needs.  As an example, I have a data plan that 
allows me 10GB per month per phone.  Even in months 
when I have been traveling and not using WiFi, I’ve barely 
used 2GB, but everyone will be different. Be aware that 
streaming video over a cellular phone can get eat up a lot of 
data, so keep tabs on it through your service provider’s 
website.  Remember that when you use your smartphone on 
your WiFi, no data charges will apply against your cellular 
data plan. 
 
Bottom Line - Music 
What to do 
For your in-home music, if you want it, you won’t 
have to deal with any more LPs, CDs, cassettes, or 
towers of expensive gear. Only a few Sonos (or 
equivalent) room speakers controlled by an app on 
your phone, and you can play just about any song 
ever recorded as well as listen to any radio station in 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
78
the world. All this across your WiFi network and 
Internet connection that you have already installed for 
your Smart Home.  And yes, if you do have songs still 
on your iPhone or Android, you can play them, too. 
The music hub for outside the home is your 
smartphone.  All of the music services that you can 
stream through your in-home system are available on 
your phone, so whether you play music off the Internet 
or from your own playlists, it’s all there.  Your output 
device can be ear pods, connecting through your 
Car’s wireless Bluetooth (or wired USB) or even at 
someone else’s home, through their wireless system. 
Budget 
The lower end smart speaker models start at about 
$200 with the higher end in the $400 to $700 range.  
The amount you spend is really dictated by the 
number of places in and around the home that you 
want hear your music in. 
$400-700 seemed like a lot of money to spend on a 
sound system until I stumbled on a receipt from 1997 
for a tuner/amplifier that I bought for $1200 to pair with 
an equally expensive set of speakers. 
As with most aspects of your Smart Home project, 
it makes sense to start small, get comfortable, and 
then expand when the desire and budget permits. 

 
Chapter 7 – Enjoying your Photos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Once upon a time, to get your picture taken, you had to go 
to a studio and sit still in some good lighting for a couple of 
minutes as a professional photographer took your likeness. 
After bathing the negative in a series of chemical baths, the 
image was finished. At the very beginning, the result was 
just a single positive, printed on glass or tin. Now your phone 
can take fifty pictures in one second of your kid making a 3-
pointer. And five seconds later, you can send any number of 
them anywhere in the world. 
Now, as a species of avid digital photographers, we have 
new challenges. We don’t develop our photos and put them 
in albums very much anymore, which is a pity, because we 
probably took more pleasures in our photographs when we 
didn’t take fifty a day. (Or in the case of the SnapChat/selfie-
obsessed younger generation, fifty an hour.)  
It may not be uncommon to have almost 20,000 digital 
photos that are organized and another 20,000 that are in a 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
80
digital “pile” still waiting for some structure so you can 
actually look at them...  An unorganized set of digital photos 
is pretty much useless because if nobody is enjoying them, 
they might as well not have been taken in the first place.  
The goal of this chapter, then, is to find easy and creative 
ways to bring new life to your photo collection and to enjoy 
them in ways that made all those hours of picture-taking 
worthwhile. 
People typically fall into two eras when it comes to taking 
pictures.  If you started taking photos only in the past few 
years, it’s likely that all of your pictures are digital. (I know 
there are still legions of camera fans and pros who still use 
film, but even you folks can make and keep digital back-ups 
of your photographs.) 
When you take a photo with your smartphone, it 
automatically attaches its location, date and time taken, 
along 
with 
other 
so-called 
metadata 
information.  
Photographs taken with a smartphone are automatically 
organized.  If you were taking photographs any time before 
2002, though, you probably have shoeboxes of printed 
pictures, negatives, and slides which may be nice and 
organized but more likely in a state of total chaos.  If you 
want to include those photos in your new digitally organized 
world, it’s possible, but it’s certainly more work and expense.   
Let’s start with the first kind of photographer, the one who 
can talk to his mother on his camera, and I’ll use an iPhone 
as an example.  

Enjoying your Photos 
 
 
81
 
Keeping Photos in Sync 
By far, the easiest way to manage your photos is to let 
your phone and computer do all the work.  If you let the 
Photos app built into your iPhone organize your pictures, you 
should have them in neat order, synchronized across all your 
devices (smartphone, tablet, computer). The Photos app 
uses the data attached to each picture and organizes it into 
something called “moments”.  Experiment with this and you 
will see how powerful it is to be able to find photos, tag them 
with people’s faces, automatically have them plotted on a 
map of where they were taken, etc.  Your phone, however, 
has a limited amount of memory and at some point, you’ll 
exhaust it and you won’t be able to take any more photos.  
Fortunately, there is an easy solution for this, too, and it’s the 
reason you enabled iCloud earlier when you set up your 
phone and computer.   
On your iPhone settings under iCloud and Photos, make 
sure you have “My Photo Stream” and “iCloud Photo Sharing” 
turned on.  There is another setting for “iCloud Photo Library” 
that I would leave off until you get a good handle on the 
overall size of your photo library. If you have a large 
collection of photos, you may use up the free 5GB of storage 
Apple gives you on the iCloud. (Not to mention that 
uploading a 20,000 picture library on a 5Mbps Internet uplink 
would take some twenty-nine hours while using your entire 
Internet connection).  When you turn on those two settings, 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
82
every picture you take on your iPhone is automatically 
uploaded (when connected to WiFi) to your very own storage 
space in Apple’s iCloud.  When you open the included 
Photos app on your Apple computer, these photos 
automatically show up in your photos app so that everything 
taken on your phone is also available on the computer.  No 
removing memory cards, e-mailing pictures to yourself, or 
any other tricks.  Note that this linkage of photos and the 
storage space in Apple’s iCloud is directly connected to your 
Apple ID, so make sure that every device you want to auto-
feed photos into is logged into the same Apple ID.  Of course, 
since you are regularly backing up your computer using 
Time Machine, you have a double backup copy of the photos 
taken on your phone.  
Now, what happens when your phone is full of photos?  
Since all of these photos are on your computer (please 
check first), you can delete photos on your phone to make 
more memory available.  I encourage you to experiment with 
the Photos app on the computer.  It’s very easy to create 
albums, movies, and picture books as gifts, as well as to tag 
photos with people’s names and faces, making it easy to 
create customized collections.   
 
Photos from the Shoebox 
This is a hard-core undertaking. But if you have years of 
photographs and/or slides, this will be the last time you’ll 
ever have to sort them. The onerous part of the job is finding 

Enjoying your Photos 
 
 
83
all your old photos, negatives, and slides, and converting 
them to a digital format that you can import into Photos on 
your Mac. This methodology also applies if you are using 
another type of photo organization application on the Mac or 
PC. 
There are multiple ways of getting these older photos into 
a digital format.  If you just have a few you want to do, any of 
the following ways will work fine although they are all fairly 
labor intensive. 
If you have printed photos, and you can take a picture of 
the photo with your phone, this is probably the easiest and 
fastest way.  Pay careful attention try to avoid glare from 
overhead lighting or the sun, and don’t cast your own 
shadow on the photo either.  Once you have mastered the 
technique for getting these shots straight on and you like the 
look, they essentially become photos taken from your phone 
and will automatically show up in Photos on the Mac.  Note 
that these will likely require some editing and the date and 
location will be tagged incorrectly, so you’ll want to fix that as 
well, which I’ll cover in a bit. 
Again, for printed photos, if you have a scanner and an 
easy way to get the scanned photos into your computer from 
the scanner, this is another option.  These scanned photos 
will likely end up in a digital pile somewhere in a folder on 
your computer so there is an extra step (an easy one) to 
import the photos into the Photos Application which will then 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
84
also require the same editing that the first conversion 
method does. 
If you have 35mm negatives, you can purchase a 
machine to scan these and put them in digital format but a 
much better choice is to go to a Photo service that will do 
this for you.  If you used Advanced Photo System (APS) film, 
you have little choice but to use a service since that film type 
is long obsolete and buying a conversion device is cost 
prohibitive. 
However you choose to convert from physical format to 
digital, the two pieces of information that you’ll want to carry 
across are the date the photo was taken and the location. I 
mentioned earlier about needing to edit the photos when 
they are brought into the Photos Application.  Here are the 
considerations around editing that may influence how you go 
about getting them converted.  
If you took pictures of pictures or scanned them, you will 
likely have to edit every picture (one by one) in two ways, all 
in the Photos app on the Mac.  The picture will likely need 
the edges cropped and perhaps a slight rotation to align it 
properly.  This is very easily done in the app along with 
doing touchups to get rid of artifacts if you so choose.  While 
this is easy and even fun, it is VERY time consuming so if 
you have hundreds or thousands of photos to do, you will 
probably want to skip this step by choosing to use a photo 
conversion service that will align and crop for you. 

Enjoying your Photos 
 
 
85
You might remember reading about metadata information 
contained with each digital photo, in particular the date and 
location that the photo was taken.  Whether self-converted or 
done by a service, both of these are initially going to be 
wrong.  If using a service, ask them what date they will be 
tagged with, or you may be able to specify a date so that 
when imported, they will be easy to find and change once in 
Photos.  With the service I used, I was able to ask them to 
do the following: 
• Put the digital scans of each set of negatives in 
their own folder with a name that corresponded to 
what I wrote on the sheet of negatives.  If I knew 
the approximate date or year the photos were 
taken, I wrote that on the envelope.  This way, 
each set of negatives was grouped together and it 
made it easier to change the date and location 
once in Photos on the Mac. 
• For negatives that were scattered or not part of a 
known set, I had them labelled as “untagged” but 
still grouped in the piles that I found them in.  The 
hope was that they were related to each other and 
would be easier to sort later. 
• For APS photos, the date of processing is recorded 
in the cartridge, so I had them use that to date the 
digital versions. 
• I chose a resolution that would yield similar results 
as if I took the photo with my iPhone today.  Those 
numbers are represented differently by the various 
photo services but you want them in the range of 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
86
3000 dpi (dots per inch) or 10MP (megapixels).  
Use the JPEG format as that’s the format your 
phone uses.  Sometimes TIFF formats are offered 
but unless you know why you would want that, you 
probably don’t. 
If you send in negatives, there are going to be some duds 
that you wish you hadn’t paid them to scan.  Many services 
offer you the option of previewing the scanned photos online 
before committing to the ones that you will actually get and 
allow you to delete and not pay for a bunch (some have 
limits in the 20% range - read the fine print).  This is a nice 
option if you are not sure of the content of your negatives. 
When it is all said and done, you will end up with a disk drive 
or some kind of set of files that should be organized by 
folders, possibly with dates the pictures were taken on the 
folders.  Now is the job of getting these photos into your 
Photos application and organized with dates and location 
tags. 
There are many ways to do this, but I would recommend 
importing one folder at a time and once that folder is 
imported all the photos from that folder show up on the 
screen and are ready for editing for date and location.  You 
can edit for exact date and time to the second, but it is 
probably more important just to have them in the correct 
order so approximate dates to the month are probably good 
enough.  It’s possible to select multiple photos at once to 
change the date and location. Just use the “Image” pulldown 
and choose “Adjust date and time”. Make sure you use the 

Enjoying your Photos 
 
 
87
latest version of Photos before changing the date because it 
was quite awkward in the first version of the product and 
much easier now.  The location is changed by first choosing 
“Info” under the “Windows” pulldown and then clicking on the 
“add a location” field.  You can type addresses or places just 
like you were using Google Maps or similar.  Again, if 
multiple photos were taken at the same place, you can 
select them all and set their location all at once. 
So, why bother with all of this manual work?  Well, if you 
are going to the trouble and expense of converting all these 
photos, you might as well take the extra time to organize 
them by date and location because Photos will use that 
information to automatically organize them.  The way Photos 
structures your library makes it very easy to put together 
albums and slideshows. You’ll thank yourself later for doing 
it! 
What does it cost to get your photos converted?  First, I 
would encourage you to explore different services but in 
general, pricing is in the 20¢ to 40¢ range per image that you 
want to keep.  Like I said earlier, this is a project in and of 
itself, but once done, you have these in digital format forever. 
 
 
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
88
Enjoying your Photos 
The whole purpose of taking photos is to enjoy them at a 
later date, so now that they’re organized, our computers will 
do most of the work to present them to us in a simple and 
usable fashion.  I am not going to cover how to show people 
pictures on your phone because you already know how to do 
that, nor how to post them on your favorite social media 
accounts for sharing.  What we will cover are a couple of 
new and easy ways to display and share that may not be so 
obvious. 
 
Making Movies from Photos 
My wife and I went on a long cycling trip a few years back 
and at the end of each week, one of the people on the trip 
sent out a “picture movie” of the week complete with a nice 
music track that lasted 4-5 minutes.  We were all so 
impressed with his technical prowess that he became 
somewhat of a movie-making tech genius.  I asked him 
about this one evening and he laughed and said that it only 
took him a few minutes using Photos on his Mac to put the 
whole thing together.   
Here is how you can do this too.  When you open Photos, 
you will see all your pictures organized by date, along with 
any shared libraries and albums that you may have created.  
To create a movie, simply select “Create Slideshow” under 
the File menu and then select a bunch of pictures that you 

Enjoying your Photos 
 
 
89
want to be part of the slideshow.  That’s it!!  Now preview it 
and see what it looks like.  Change any pictures, the order of 
pictures, music, timing etc. by clicking on the various icons to 
the right of the screen.  This slideshow movie is saved in 
your Photos app on the left side under the heading of 
“Projects” so you can always come back and edit it later and 
create a new version.  When you are satisfied with it, click on 
the Export button on the top right to save it as a movie that 
you can then share, post on YouTube, or just put on your 
phone for personal enjoyment. 
If you have already created albums inside your photo 
library, it is also pretty easy to create a movie from an album.  
Just click on the album, select the pictures you want and 
then use “create slideshow” and those pictures will be used 
to start off the video.  It literally takes seconds to do this, so 
it’s ok to make mistakes as they are easily fixed.   
 
Playing Photos on your TV 
I’d been wanting for years to put a nice flat screen TV 
right above the fireplace in the living room but it didn’t pass 
muster with my wife until one day she had the idea to use it 
as a giant picture frame to view photos from our photo library.   
A long time ago, we had a small digital picture frame that 
used a SD memory card to load photos for viewing.  I 
dutifully added a bunch of pictures to the card after one of 
our trips, stuck it in the picture frame and it played over and 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
90
over again.  Once bored with that picture loop, I put it on my 
list to load some new photos on the card, but for some 
reason I never did.  There had to be something less 
cumbersome than transferring photos to a picture frame on 
an SD card.  It took a few more years, but now there is a 
very easy way to do it, and it involves using something that 
we’ll want later for our Smart Home project (if we choose to 
use Apple’s HomeKit):  A 4th generation Apple TV or Apple 
TV 4K if you have a 4K TV.  You may be used to using 
Apple TV for renting movies, watching Netflix, YouTube, or 
any number of other video, music, sports, and news services 
that are available, but there is a Photos app on Apple TV as 
well.   
In the Photos app on either your iPhone or Mac computer, 
you’ll see a folder called “Shared”. Anything in this folder will 
be stored in Apple’s iCloud, and can be viewed on any Apple 
device logged into the same Apple ID, or by any user you 
have shared the pictures with.  The easiest way to do this is 
to create a new shared album on your phone or computer 
and add at least one other user to it (I add my wife) and then 
you will both see that shared album on your devices.  You 
can both add pictures to the albums, and you can add other 
users, like far flung family members, if you want to share and 
build your photo albums with them as well.   
Now that you have these shared albums created (kids, 
Europe trip, Christmas Photos, Pet photos, etc.), you want to 
be able to view them on your TV.  With your Apple TV 
logged into the Apple ID that you used to create the shared 

Enjoying your Photos 
 
 
91
albums, you can now see all of them by selecting the Photos 
app on Apple TV and looking for the albums under “My 
Albums”.  Select one and run slideshow and you now have 
your pictures playing on your TV.  You can play with the 
settings to adjust the timing and transitions to your liking.  
Also, if someone else initially created the shared album but 
they added you, you will find those pictures in albums under 
the “Shared Albums” heading in the Photos app on Apple TV.  
And, all these shared albums will also appear on all your 
Apple devices allowing you to view or add to the libraries as 
you see fit. 
So, if Grandma lives far away and you want to surprise 
her with all the latest grandkid’s photos and perhaps she is 
not so tech savvy, a simple Apple TV, a few clicks and she 
can view all the latest photos just by adding her as another 
subscriber to your shared albums.  You add the pictures, 
and she turns on the TV to view them! 
Feel free to experiment with the slideshow settings on 
AppleTV.  The rectangular shape of pictures is a different 
size than the flat screen TV so they will not fit exactly.  If you 
choose Classic mode, none of the picture will get cut off, but 
you won’t fill the screen widthwise.  If you choose the Ken 
Burns effect, your pictures will fill the whole screen and 
transition with the Burns’ scroll-and-zoom effect.    There is 
always a setting that will work for the type of pictures you 
have so don’t be afraid to experiment. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
92
 
 
Bottom Line - Enjoying your Photos 
What to Do 
Use a program like Photos on your Mac to organize 
and synchronize all the photos you’ve taken with your 
smartphones and tablets.  Make sure all the Apple 
devices that you use to view the photos are signed on 
to the same Apple ID.  For older photos, negatives, 
and slides, choose a photo conversion service that will 
convert them all to digital, and then import the files into 
Photos to add you your library.  You will likely need to 
edit the date and location of the photos imported to 
organize them properly. If you only have a small 
number to convert, you can do this yourself by taking 
a picture of the picture or using a scanner. 
Once you have a working library, use the Photos 
app on your computer to create simple photo movies 
to share with others.  Also, create shared albums with 
others and use Apple TV or Apple TV 4K (if you have 
a 4K TV) to display your photos on the big screen. 
 
Budget 
 The Photos app on the Mac is free as is the first 
5GB of storage in iCloud for photos.  Photo conversion 
will cost about 20¢ to 40¢ per photo or negative.  A 
fourth generation (or later) Apple TV is in the $150 
range and it will be the same product used later in the 
Smart Home part of the book for using the Apple 

Enjoying your Photos 
 
 
93
HomeKit app to control and schedule many of your 
smart devices. 
 
Result 
Most people are pretty impressed to see photos 
playing on the TV and since most of this was done 
with things already part of the Smart Home project, it 
was an easy and fun thing to do involving all the family 
members. 
www.ebook3000.com

 

 
Part C - Smart Home Solutions 
 
This part of the book is broken into ten Chapters, each 
detailing how to add another piece of Smart Home 
technology to your house.  The end of each chapter provides 
a “Bottom Line” or summary, so if you are anxious to get 
going quickly, jump to the end of the chapter to get started. 
An important part of building a Smart Home with many 
different product types is figuring out an elegant way to use it 
on a day-to-day basis with all of the app choices available.  
Each chapter introduces some of these choices and makes 
recommendations of how to keep things simple.  Chapter 18 
dives more into the app choices and strategies and Chapter 
19 gives some tips on what to do if you move out of or into a 
Smart Home. 
Speaking of moving, it might 
be the last thing on your mind, 
but when it does happen, there's 
an easy way to keep the Smart 
Home part of the move low 
stress. See the sidebar on this 
page for a quick to-do before you 
tackle the next set of chapters. 
Have fun with this. I am 
certain that you will impress 
yourself with what you create. 
Do This Now 
 
Create a new e-mail 
address that you will only 
use for the Smart Home 
project. Use it as the e-
mail account on all Smart 
Home Products.  When 
you move, you will give it 
away to the new buyer 
and save hours of time 
not having to un-install 
and re-install your Smart 
Home products. 
www.ebook3000.com

 

 
Chapter 8 – Lighting 
 
 
 
 
 
Lighting used to be simple. There was a bulb and there 
was a switch and there were two settings: on and off. 
Occasionally, if things got fancy, a lamp might have a bulb 
with three different levels of brightness or the chandelier 
above the dining room table would have a dimmer switch 
installed so you could set the mood.  Maybe you had one of 
those vacation timers (that box with the big dial you’d plug 
into the wall to operate your lights when you went away).   
Outside landscape lighting would run off a low voltage 
lighting system with an automatic timer that you’d go out and 
adjust for the changing sunset times throughout the season.  
Light bulbs were easy to buy with 90% of them being the 
frosted white incandescent type at either 40, 60 or 100 watts. 
But then things started changing.  Electricity rates started 
to take a bigger chunk out of the pocketbook and people 
began to compare the costs of running these relatively high 
wattage incandescent bulbs with some of the newer options, 
initially Compact Fluorescent Lights (CFL) and later Light 
Emitting Diode (LED) bulbs. At the same time, with new 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
98
Smart Home technology, the possibility of automating many 
or all of the switches and plugs is another enticing option.   
It can be a daunting task to figure out a cost effective, 
simple to use, and practical solution for your lighting needs.  
It begins the moment you start shopping for light bulbs.  A 
task that was once so simple — you could buy lightbulbs at 
the grocery store! — these days can be a genuine challenge 
when you’re confronted with the choices you have. 
This chapter will cut through the guesswork when it 
comes to putting together an integrated solution for lighting 
that is simple to buy, easy to set up yourself, and sets the 
stage for other aspects of your Smart Home design in 
subsequent chapters. 
 
Lighting Strategy 
Starting with inside lighting, there are a few things to 
consider from a design perspective.  As described near the 
beginning of the book, we want anything automated to be 
controlled both from the wall switch and from a smartphone. 
The smartphone control allows for simple programming of 
moods, light levels, and timing and it means that if anyone 
walks into a room and doesn’t have a clue that they’re in a 
Smart Home, they’ll still be able to control the lights from the 
wall switches with no special instruction.  With that in mind, 
we need to cover a few things about the light bulbs 
themselves. 

Lighting 
 
 
99
Consider that any or all of your bulbs can be either 
dimmable or not.  We’ll assume for all practical purposes 
that we’ll be using LED bulbs and that dimmable bulbs are 
more expensive than non-dimmable ones, but not by much. 
If you’re going the budget route, plan to use all non-
dimmable bulbs except for the couple of spots in the house 
where they’d really make a difference, like the dining room. I 
chose to get all dimmable bulbs to simplify sparing and also 
because the slight cost increase still amounts to very little. If 
there are situations where you want colored lighting, it’s 
possible, but if you want them as part of your Smart Home 
system, 
they’re 
expensive: 
around 
$50 
each. 
The 
implications of these so called smart bulbs are covered in a 
few pages. 
Now comes a major decision. Which lights in your home 
do you want to be part of your Smart Home system? This will 
determine how many Smart Home switches you need. As of 
this writing, normal light switches cost about $5 while a 
Smart Home switch is about $50.  Automating your entire 
home can be an expensive proposition, but you can start 
small and grow as the budget permits. 
 
Buying an LED Light Bulb 
Whoever would have imagined that this was a subject 
worth writing about?  But it is, because with LED bulbs, there 
are many more choices than we’ve ever had in the past. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
100 
We’re used to buying regular incandescent light bulbs that 
offer us two choices: wattage (brightness) — and bulb shape. 
Newer LED bulbs add a few more things including some 
differences in terminology:    
• LED brightness is measured in lumens, although 
LED bulbs are still sold by “wattage equivalent” for 
comparison’s sake. A “60W” LED bulb should give 
you the same brightness as a 60W incandescent 
bulb. 
• The color temperature of the bulb (e.g. soft white, 
daylight, measured in Kelvins) 
• Dimmable or non-dimmable 
• Switch 
compatibility 
for 
dimming 
(not 
all 
dimmable LEDs work with all dimmers) 
• Smart bulbs or not 
 
Brightness 
When replacing incandescent bulbs with LEDs, match the 
wattage if you want to keep lighting levels where you’re used 
to them being, but note that there are some minor 
differences (like 800 or 815 lumens) when you look at 
different LED brands. If you want uniformity of lighting, stick 
with one brand. 
One thing to note here is that the higher wattage 
equivalent LED bulbs are quite a bit more expensive than 

Lighting 
 
 
101 
lower wattage ones.  For example, my outdoor lights had 
100W bulbs in them but because 100W LED bulbs were so 
much more expensive than their 60W versions, I went with 
60W LED for the replacement and really couldn’t tell much 
difference overall.  
 
Light color temperature   
“Temperature” is a relatively new attribute that became 
popular with LED bulbs.  Simply put, the temperature, 
measured in Kelvins (e.g. 2700K, 5000K) determines the 
color of the light.  Incandescent bulbs labeled as soft white 
(which is most of them) are 2700K and if you pick an LED 
bulb rated at 2700K, it will look the same as the 
incandescent bulbs you are used to. I would recommend that 
if you are buying replacement bulbs, get the 2700K variety 
and then even if you mix and match new LED with old 
incandescent or compact fluorescent light (CFL) bulbs, you 
won’t notice the difference in color.  The higher color 
temperature bulbs like 5000K may be appropriate for rooms 
where you want to simulate daylight.  Please experiment but 
keep your receipts just in case. 
 
Dimmable or non-dimmable 
Every LED should be marked to tell you whether it is 
dimmable or not.  Non-dimmable bulbs are less expensive, 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
102 
but dimmable ones are reasonably priced in the $4 or less 
range. I suspect that, over time, the price difference between 
dimmable and non-dimmable will converge even more, 
rendering non-dimmable LEDs obsolete.  In my case, I 
chose to use all dimmable bulbs because I would never 
remember where each type was installed and it requires 
fewer bulb types to store as replacements.  Also, when it 
comes to installing the smart switches to control the bulbs, 
the price of the smart dimmer switches is almost the same, if 
not less than non-dimmable smart switches.  In a modest 
sized home, I would have all of the switches as smart 
dimmable switches so having all the bulbs as dimmable just 
simplifies everything. 
 
Switch Compatibility for Dimming 
When dimmable LED bulbs first came out, certain 
combinations of bulbs and dimmer switches did not work 
well together.  There were lots of instances of light flickering 
and loud buzzing sounds when the lights were dimmed.  
There are plenty of combinations that will work just fine and 
often the bulb and dimmer manufacturers will provide lists of 
compatible products.  In my case, I chose Caséta dimmers 
from Lutron (more detail in the next section) and use both 
Cree and Ecosmart LED bulbs available from Home Depot, 
Satco (most lighting stores and online) and Utilitech LED 
bulbs and fixtures from Lowes with no issues.  Generally 
speaking, the generic-sized bulbs are more compatible with 

Lighting 
 
 
103 
dimmers and I only had problems with fancy chandelier LED 
bulbs, some of which would not work with my chosen 
dimmer.  Sometimes at full strength on the dimmer, LED 
lights of some manufacturers make a loud buzz — this is a 
brand problem; try another.    
In general, if you have an issue with LED bulbs and 
dimmers, it’s usually the fault of the bulb.  You can verify this 
by testing the socket with a regular incandescent bulb and 
seeing if it works.  The bottom line is, buy LED bulbs at a 
store that takes returns and if they don’t work, take them 
back and try another brand.  Once you find a brand or two 
that works well with your dimmers, stick to it. 
 
Smart Bulbs (or not) 
What exactly is a smart bulb?  Some light bulbs (Philips 
Hue is a good example) have wireless technology built in 
and they can connect directly to a network or through a 
bridge to be controlled individually.  The power to the light 
needs to be on in order for the bulb to be controlled.  
Because each bulb is individually controlled, you can set the 
color of the light one bulb at a time. (Red, green, etc.)  The 
price of these bulbs is about 5-10x the price of regular 
dimmable LED bulbs, so in my opinion this makes them 
more of a novelty item and impractical for use through your 
entire house.   
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
104 
There may be a room or perhaps an outdoor light that you 
want to use a colored light in.  Because its switch has to be 
on for these bulbs to work, you may have to manually check 
the on/off status of your switches if the bulbs disappear from 
your app.  Also, if you have a switch that controls a number 
of bulbs, you would need to replace them all with smart 
bulbs in order to use them.  This gets pretty expensive for 
even a moderate sized home so dimmer switches are a 
much more cost-effective strategy. 
 
Dimmers and Timers 
Before changing to a Smart Home, our home lighting 
inadvertently evolved into a fairly complicated setup.  I 
installed four light timers (about $20 each) in place of wall 
switches in order to turn lights on and off at certain 
programmed times.  Of course, I always forgot how to 
program these when the time changed or when the battery 
needed replacing. We had several lamp timers (forgot how 
to program those too) that I would plug into outlets and use 
for lamps and Christmas tree lights.  I also had a couple of 
exterior plug-in switches with small remote controls that were 
used for outdoor lighting.  Finally, we had two hanging 
chandelier lights with a couple of dimmer switches.  What a 
mess! If this all sounds like a familiar starting point, you are 
not alone. 
Our goal is to integrate all this into one system that would 
allow us to turn lights on and off, or dim them with a wall 

Lighting 
 
 
105 
switch or a smartphone but also to be able to program a 
schedule centrally from any smart device using an elegant 
and simple interface.  I also wanted to be able to do this 
while in my home or away.  I also hoped to get maximum 
integration between the lighting system and other systems, 
like heating, fire detection, blinds, garage door, cameras, 
and so on.  You’ll see later that while it’s an admirable goal, 
it’s not simple to achieve fully.  I’ll walk you through the 
complexities of that installation, as well as the final result, 
which while not perfect, ended up being totally serviceable. 
There are two kinds of companies that have products for 
lighting automation.  First are the companies that have been 
making lighting products for years, like Lutron, Leviton, and a 
few others.  The others are technology companies that 
started in Smart Home design like WeMo (Belkin), iDevices, 
Insteon and others.   
In order to be connected and controllable by a 
smartphone, these devices (switches, dimmers, etc.) need to 
be able to communicate to the Internet in some way.  Many 
of these small Internet appliances don’t talk the same 
language as your smartphone and so they need to be 
“bridged” into your home network with a special purpose 
network appliance called, oddly enough, a bridge!  Some of 
these special languages or protocols you will see on labels 
are names like ZigBee, Z-wave, ClearConnect, and others.  
Some devices also use WiFi and do not need any kind of 
bridge.  In the end, it really doesn’t matter too much as long 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
106 
as it works reliably and that you don’t end up with a huge 
stack of bridges to put somewhere near your router. 
As mentioned before, each vendor is going to have its 
own app and while many are vying to be the “king of the 
castle” app that you will use every day, many apps allow 
other devices to integrate into it as well as allowing its 
devices to integrate into other apps.  One of the candidate 
apps to be “king of the castle” if you are an iPhone user is 
the Home app that works on every iPhone running version 
10.1 or later (October 2016).  Any product that works with 
the Apple Home app is called “HomeKit compatible” and 
since we are iPhone users, I want to select quality products 
that are HomeKit compatible to evaluate whether the Apple 
app is a good one to use at the top of the app hierarchy.  
Before solving that, we’ll take a quick diversion into some 
lighting terminology so the rest of this chapter makes sense. 
 
Light Switch Terminology 
If you’ve never opened up a light switch and looked at the 
wiring, this section will be new to you.  If you have, then 
consider it a refresher.  There are a few different types of 
light switches so it is important to know what you have 
before you replace them with smart switches. 
 
 

Lighting 
 
 
107 
Single Pole Switches 
This is the simplest 
setup. A single switch 
controls a light or a set of 
lights.  There is a total of 
three physical wires going 
to this switch (ground, 
plus two others).  The 
majority 
of 
the 
light 
switches in a house will be of this type. 
 
Three-way Switch 
This setup allows 
a set of lights to be 
controlled by either 
of 
two 
different 
switches.  In this 
switch, there are a 
total of four wires 
(ground plus three 
others) going to each of the two switches.  The switches look 
the same on the outside but are physically different inside in 
order to accommodate the extra wires needed to do three-
way switching. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
108 
Multi-location switch 
If there are three or more switches controlling the same 
set of lights, 
you’ll see a 
minimum of 
five 
wires 
(one 
ground and 
four others).  
Again, this 
is yet a different switch type than the previous two. 
These are all things that electricians need to think about 
when devising a wiring plan for your home.  They have to 
select the correct switches, install a wire with the right 
number of conductors, and hook it all up correctly. Luckily — 
presuming you’re not in the process of rewiring your home 
— this part of the process is complete and all you have to do 
is identify which type of switch you have at each location so 
that you know what to replace it with.  Fortunately, you don’t 
have to open them up to do this - just figure out how many 
different switches can turn each set of lights on and off. 
When replacing the old switches with some new 
programmable smart dimmers, you can use the same 
dimmer in all three cases and just follow along the 
instructions from the manufacturer on how to deal with the 
three-way and multi-location scenarios.  This one of the 
reasons that I chose the Lutron Caséta wireless products for 

Lighting 
 
 
109 
the lighting part of my Smart Home.  In addition to elegantly 
handling all of these scenarios, they are Apple HomeKit 
compatible, have extensive 
testing 
with 
LED 
bulb 
manufacturers, 
and 
have 
been in the lighting business 
for a long time.  They also 
have a very clever solution for 
three-way and multi-location 
switching that uses a wireless 
remote control, called a Pico 
Remote, that also mounts 
nicely into the second or third 
switches.   
One other decision is how to handle indoor lamps, 
Christmas lights etc. that are plugged into an interior outlet.  
The choice is to replace the electrical outlet with a smart 
outlet, or use a lamp adapter that plugs into a regular outlet 
that can then be controlled in a similar manner as the smart 
dimmer switches described earlier.  I chose to use the lamp 
adapter also from the Lutron Caséta line of products as it 
integrates seamlessly, but more importantly, when lamps get 
moved around the house, I don’t have to rewire plugs.  It just 
takes one minute to rename the lamp adapter and anyone 
can move them around.  Also, if for whatever reason the 
lamp plugs into a Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter (GFCI) 
outlet in a bathroom, kitchen, laundry room, or other indoor 
room, will work just fine. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
110 
GFCI outlets are the ones that have 
the red and black test and reset buttons 
on the front of them.  These are installed 
in areas near where you can touch water 
and in all outdoor sockets. They are 
there for safety reasons so you don’t get 
electrocuted if you dry your hair over a 
full sink of water and drop the running 
dryer into the water. (Don’t do this! Just 
take my word for it.)   
 
Outdoor devices 
If your house is safely wired, all your outdoor outlets will 
be of the GFCI type so if you want to control landscape 
lighting, outdoor Christmas lights, or other outdoor electrical 
plugs, the best bet is to find and use an exterior device 
similar to the indoor lamp dimmer that can plug into an 
existing outlet and then be controlled for on/off.  In my case, 
I needed three of these for landscape lighting, Christmas 
lights, and some other lights we have in the backyard 
hanging in a Pergola. 
Ideally, I would have liked to get the Lutron Caséta 
models but they don’t make them, so as I pointed out in the 
beginning of this book, the more devices you connect, the 
more vendors become part of the mix and then integrating 
the products becomes a challenging part of the project.  
Because I anticipate using Apple’s Home app, I looked for 

Lighting 
 
 
111 
something that was HomeKit compatible, operating under 
the theory that using the Home app would negate the 
multivendor concern.  I found a HomeKit enabled outdoor 
switch from iDevices on sale and ordered three of them. 
From an integration perspective, it worked out the way I had 
hoped. I’ll explain those details after a quick safety reminder. 
 
Electrical wiring and safety 
You may have guessed by now that if 
you are replacing wired light switches 
with dimmers (the Lutron Caséta dimmer 
in my case), it requires exposing, 
disconnecting and reconnecting electric 
wires (of the 120-Volt variety).  So, it is 
extremely important that you read and 
follow the manufacturer’s directions so 
that you can perform this safely.  In order 
to prepare you, a quick simplified primer on electricity is in 
order. 
 
Electricity 101 
If you take the face plate off a light switch or plug 
receptacle and look at the wires, you will see a black, a white, 
and a bare copper wire (sometimes green).  In more 
Nobody likes to 
read safety 
information, but I 
hope you take a 
minute to read the 
Electricity 101 
section.  It might 
be shocking if you 
don’t. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
112 
complicated situations like three-way or multi-way switches, 
there will also be a red and/or blue wire. 
At least one of these wires is going to be “hot”, which 
means that if you touch it, you’ll get shocked.  The only thing 
a hot wire wants to do is to find a path to ground, so if any 
conductor gives it a pathway, the electrical current will take it. 
If you’re that conductor, it will flow through you.  This is not 
something you want to experience.  To prevent that, here 
are some basic safety steps that you should always take 
when working with electrical wiring. 
• Always turn off the power at the breaker panel if 
you are going to open up a switch or plug and 
expose the wires.  This will take the hotness out of 
all the wires in that circuit. 
• Buy a voltage detector from the store you can use 
to double check if there any hot wires.  Always test 
it first on a plug that you know is hot so that you 
know the detector is working. If you know how to 
use a digital voltmeter, you can use this for testing 
as well. 
• While it is most often the black wire that is hot, 
assume all are hot since wires often get painted or 
sprayed and may all look white. 
• If you open up a receptacle with multiple switches 
inside, do not assume that all of the other switches 
are cold even if you turned the breaker off for the 
one you are working on.  Turn all the switches on 

Lighting 
 
 
113 
inside the box and turn all of the breakers off for all 
of the lights. Test them all with your voltage tester. 
• Wear insulated shoes (not bare feet) and if you are 
on a ladder, try to avoid using a metal ladder.  This 
is an extra safety measure in the event you didn’t 
read the last page and there are hot wires in the 
box you are working on. 
• Wearing insulating gloves is also not a bad idea if 
you can still manipulate tools and wires.  Doing this 
has saved me a few times from getting shocked. 
While all this might scare you, it is really not all that 
difficult to do the wiring yourself.  Once again, read the 
manufacturer directions carefully.  Lutron’s directions are 
excellent and there are some advanced scenarios on their 
web site for more complicated situations like three-way and 
multi-way switches. 
If at all in doubt while working with electrical wires, turn off 
the main breaker in your house to ensure no power is 
flowing to any outlets while you’re working. Also, any 
electrician will be able to do this work if you decide you want 
nothing to do with wires. 
 
Putting it all together 
After the physical installation of the lamp dimmers and in-
wall dimmers, you will have followed all the instructions for a 
standalone installation. This means that you can use the 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
114 
lights from the switch but not from the phone yet.  Again, the 
instructions are simple and self-explanatory with the Lutron 
devices but I would add one tip that could save you some 
time.  When you initially test each dimmer, start with regular 
incandescent bulbs just to make sure the dimmer works 
properly.  The reason is that if you have CFLs, chances are 
that they are not dimmable and it might look like the switch 
isn’t working when it probably is.  Also, although you will 
ultimately find dimmable LED’s that are compatible with your 
dimmer, some are not and you could be fooled into thinking 
the switch isn’t working. If you don’t have any incandescent 
bulbs lying around, it’s OK to use LED bulbs to test but if you 
have problems, it can be tough to figure out what went 
wrong. 
After you’ve ensured the dimmer is working, install the 
final bulb type that you desire and test the dimmer again, 
running it from fully off to fully on and then dimming it in 
increments to off.  If you are using LED bulbs, listen for an 
annoying buzzing sound, and if you hear one and it bothers 
you, return the bulbs and try a different brand. (Don’t worry, 
you will find one) When you are dimming the bulb and it is on 
very low light, it may flicker or not dim enough for you.  
Follow the Lutron directions about how to “trim” the dimmer 
so that you can set the dimming range just right.  You will 
only have to do this once when you put different brands of 
bulbs in; after that just leave it alone. Next, we want to make 
this work on the phone. 

Lighting 
 
 
115 
First, we’ll focus on the Lutron devices being controlled on 
your phone.  In order to make this work, you need to buy a 
Lutron bridge that plugs into your home router.  The reason 
you need one is that the Lutron switches (like many other 
Smart Home devices) do not speak the same wireless 
language that your smartphone does.  Your smartphone 
connects to your network using WiFi, but the Lutron devices 
connect wirelessly using something called Clear Connect.  
The Lutron bridge speaks both.  When you buy this, it’s best 
to get it with one of the bundles that also includes a dimmer 
switch as it is a fair bit cheaper that way. 
Again, follow the directions that come with the bridge 
which will instruct you to install the Lutron app on your phone.  
Follow all the steps in the app and in a few minutes, your 
bridge will be up and running.  You only have to install the 
bridge once and then never touch it again.  
You’ll use the Lutron phone app to add each of the 
switches, lamp dimmers, and Pico remotes that you’ve 
installed. Use the new e-mail address that you created (see 
page 95) to register the app. Install each device one at a 
time and give them all names, assign them to rooms as per 
the instructions on the app.  You can also play around and 
set schedules and I’d encourage you to explore it a bit but 
don’t go crazy with scheduling and creating lighting scenes 
just yet, because there is a better way to do it when you start 
to include some of the other devices from other 
manufacturers. But at this point, using the Lutron app for the 
Lutron switches, you can operate them while inside the 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
116 
home on your home network as well as while you’re away 
from home.  We’ll go into this in more detail after we install a 
few more things. 
Next is the installation of the iDevices outdoor switches.  
Initially, do this indoors in clear view of your router.  These 
devices are WiFi enabled and so there is no need to install a 
bridge to get them to work on your phone.  Again, you have 
to use the app that iDevices specifies to do the installation 
and more than likely the devices will also need to a firmware 
update, so do that too as instructed by the app.  It may take 
two to three repeats of each device for them to get properly 
installed, but be patient and persistent.  Once they are 
working with your phone, unplug and move them to where 
you want to use them outdoors.  Since they are WiFi 
(2.4GHz), they are looking to make a wireless connection to 
your home router(s) in order to work.  If it doesn’t seem like 
they’re working, take your phone and connect it to the 
2.4GHz network in your home and move it to the same 
location as you are going to place the iDevices switch.  
Check that you are still on WiFi and run a speedtest from 
your phone to see if you have Internet connectivity. If your 
phone cannot keep the WiFi connection, there is a pretty 
good chance that the iDevices plug won’t connect either.  
The only thing you can really do is to try to get a better line 
of sight (fewer walls) between it and the router or go back to 
Part A that talks about how to properly set up a home 
wireless network and how to extend it. 

Lighting 
 
 
117 
Because this is an on/off switch there should be no 
compatibility issues with any LED or other type of bulb.  
Using the iDevices app will allow you to control from both 
inside and outside the home network.  A nice feature of the 
app is that you can look at the power draw (and therefore, 
cost) of operating the set of lights you are controlling.   
Now, if you have an Apple TV installed and logged into 
your Apple ID, run the Apple Home app on your iPhone, 
you’ll notice that both the Lutron and iDevices products show 
up automatically and are controllable through this one app 
making them look like they are from the same vendor. This 
how I run the system day-to-day and you’ll probably want to 
do the same. 
In my experience, I have had some stability issues with 
the iDevices outdoor switches.  It is fairly common to get a 
“No response” notation on the button in the Apple Home app 
rather than its on or off state.  Most times, you can just hit 
the button on the app and it will tell you whether it’s on or off 
and then it works properly.  There were two occasions in the 
first month of use where two different units were just not 
showing up online and I had to unplug them and plug them 
back in.  This is not the level of reliability that I think is 
acceptable for the price but it doesn’t annoy me enough to 
return them at this point, as it still works greater than 95% of 
the time.  The Lutron Devices have been 100% reliable. I do 
not have any of the iDevices outdoor switches in my new 
home because the outdoor plugs that I intend to use 
happened to be controlled by indoor light switches.  I will just 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
118 
use a Lutron switch on those and treat them like indoor 
lighting. 
 
Applications to Run the System 
As mentioned earlier, you’ll need to download and install 
whatever app the manufacturer recommends to install a 
given product.  But it doesn’t mean that you need all of these 
to run things on a day-to-day basis.  And to make things 
more interesting, you may have observed that while using 
the iDevices app that not only are all of the iDevices 
switches showing, but you can also see and control all of the 
Lutron devices too.  The converse, however is not true in 
that the Lutron app cannot see the iDevices products and 
cannot control them.  As mentioned previously, if you are 
running the Apple Home app on your iPhone or iPad, you 
will also see all of the devices from both Lutron and iDevices. 
So, what should you do and why?  We’ll start by going 
through the functionality of the apps one by one and then 
recommend the best way forward. 
 
Lutron app 
The Lutron app is really top notch and so self-explanatory, 
that you just need to follow the directions and then start to 
play with it a bit as you add more devices.  I have dozens of 
in-wall and lamp dimmers, Pico remotes, and motorized 

Lighting 
 
 
119 
blinds (also made by Lutron – see Chapter 16). The Pico 
remote is a hand held remote that is handy for lamp dimmers 
that are in hard to reach places like the night lamps beside 
the bed, and they are also used mounted in the wall plates 
for three-way lights.  They are assigned to whatever lamps 
or lights you want using the Lutron app. I set one as an 
overall master remote to turn everything on and off all at 
once and keep it in the nightstand by the bed. It is also pretty 
obvious how to turn on and off lights and how to dim them 
using the Lutron app on the phone.  You can do this both 
inside and outside the home.   
You can also add scenes, grouping a set of lights set at a 
specific level.  For example, you can easily create all-on or 
all-off scenes where a group of lights are turned on or off 
with one touch of a button.  You can also set schedules for 
turning lights on and off at certain times, including sunrise 
and sunset times (which will change as the seasons change).  
Again, these are very easy and self-explanatory and I 
suggest you experiment and if you make a mistake, you can 
just delete a scene or schedule and start over. 
Lutron also allows you to add certain other devices to 
control within the Lutron app.  These include the Lutron 
Serena motorized blinds but also non-Lutron devices such 
as thermostats.  It’s important to note that if you add 
thermostats to the Lutron app (for example), only the basic 
thermostat functionality is available within it, and in this 
specific case is not available to add to scenes or schedules.  
So, is this a bad thing?  Not really, and we’ll see later that 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
120 
one of the complexities of all these apps talking to one 
another is to try to figure out which one is really the boss and 
how many apps you really need to run things day-to-day. 
There is one limitation with the Lutron bridge that you may 
stumble upon. It was something that I ran across when I 
added a number of smart blinds and Pico remotes.  Your 
Lutron bridge can handle a total of fifty devices before you 
have to get another bridge to add more.  Each switch, 
dimmer, Pico remote and blind counts as one, so for my 
situation, I have a total of over sixty devices.  
If that happens to you, get another bridge, create another 
account with Lutron (one per bridge) and assign your 
devices to one bridge or the other.  It would be extremely 
awkward to have to flip back and forth between two Lutron 
accounts to operate this on a day-to-day basis, so using the 
Apple Home app is the simple way to go.  In this case, all 
devices from both bridges just show up in the Home app and 
you would use it to set scenes and schedules on a day-to-
day basis. 
Alternatively, Lutron has a higher end professionally 
installed system called RadioRA 2 that is designed for larger 
homes if you want to go that route. 
 
 
 

Lighting 
 
 
121 
iDevices app 
The iDevices app is needed to get the outdoor on/off 
switches into the system.  As mentioned earlier, all of the 
Lutron devices show up automatically (but not the third-party 
devices that were added to the Lutron app like Sonos for 
music or a smart thermostat), so now it is possible to control 
all of the lighting devices from just one app, namely the 
iDevices app.  It has roughly the same functionality with 
slightly different terminology, but before going much further, 
it is a good time to pause and catch our breath a bit. 
We now have two ways 
to set up groups of switches 
and set schedules.  Which 
one should we use?  And 
what happens if we use both 
and they create conflicting 
schedules? 
 
The 
short 
answer is that this is why 
you 
bought 
this 
book.  
Sometimes more choice is a 
good thing but the reality is 
that it is pretty easy to trip 
over your own feet with all 
these 
apps. 
 
Before 
simplifying this, there is one 
more thing to discuss. 
 
Simple Set of Rules for Apps 
 
Always use the app that comes 
with the device you bought to 
install or add new devices of 
that type. 
 
Use the app that pulls in the 
most devices to control a wider 
set of products for day-to-day 
use (example:  the Apple Home 
app). 
 
If you have a very specialized 
device that is rather complex, 
chances are you’ll have to use 
that vendor’s app day-to-day 
even though the goal is to have 
fewer of them. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
122 
Apple Home app 
If you have an iPhone or iPad running IOS 10.1 or greater 
(approximately October 2016), there is an app called Home 
that is available to install in the App Store (search for 
“Home”).  If you were to click it now, without any setup or 
configuration, all of the Lutron and iDevices products will 
show up and can be turned on and off and grouped together 
into scenes. In fact, the scenes you created in the other apps 
show through in the Apple app.  This is what Apple HomeKit 
compatibility is all about.  If all the devices you installed in 
your Smart Home were HomeKit compatible, then they 
would all be controllable from one place, namely the Apple 
Home app.   
One more thing about the Apple Home app. If you do 
have a 4th generation or later Apple TV, it enables both the 
scheduling, remote access and automation capabilities of 
the Apple Home app.  The only configuration on the Apple 
TV to make this work is to enable two factor authentication. 
The Apple Home app will prompt you if you need to do this 
and although it sounds intimidating, you have probably seen 
this before when you log on to a secure site and it sends you 
a text with a code to make sure it is you. Just follow the 
directions online about how to do that with the Apple TV. 
If you are on the Apple train and you do all of those things, 
then you can now control all of the lighting devices on 
demand with one app, both inside and outside the home.  
That includes full functionality for dimming, setting schedules, 

Lighting 
 
 
123 
and scenes for controlling multiple devices at the same time 
both Lutron and iDevices.  Later, as more devices are added, 
you can control them as well from the Apple Home app if the 
devices are HomeKit compatible. 
Back to an earlier question: what would happen if you set 
up scenes and schedules in all three apps at the same time?  
They would all be executed by each of the apps and you will 
probably never figure out what is going on. Using the 
example earlier, I use the Apple Home app to control all the 
Lutron and iDevices products and remove any scenes and 
schedules from the Lutron and iDevices app.  If I didn’t have 
an Apple TV, then the next choice would be to use the 
iDevices app since it controls both iDevices and Lutron.  
Keep in mind that more Smart Home devices are going to be 
added later and it is anticipated that things like thermostats, 
door locks, garage door openers, etc. are more likely to fall 
under the Apple Home hierarchy rather than either Lutron or 
iDevices, so that is why I am choosing to use the Apple 
Home app wherever possible. 
Also, later we’ll run through some examples of a 
specialized device, like an outdoor sprinkler controller, that 
may never make sense to pull into the Apple Home app.  
There are other vendors out there who also strive to make 
the app that sits at the top of the hierarchy (Wink, for 
example) and while you can theoretically pull in a sprinkler 
controller integration, the functionality is so watered down 
(pun intended) that it is effectively useless to do so.  But 
don’t worry about that now - it will become much clearer later. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
124 
Bottom Line - Lighting 
What to Do 
LED bulbs are the way to go due to their low power 
usage, non-toxic nature, dimmability and now, more 
reasonable prices. Make sure you choose dimmable 
vs. non-dimmable even at the slightly higher prices 
unless you are counting every penny. 
Pick a wattage equivalent and bulb size that 
matches what you currently have.  Choosing a light 
temperature of 2700K (soft white) is a good starting 
point if you're not sure what to do.   Only buy a few to 
test them with your new dimmers and make sure they 
are easily returnable.  Be patient.  Once you find some 
that work, you are all set. 
Also, with LED bulbs, higher wattage bulbs (over 
60W) are quite a bit more expensive, so when 
replacing some 100W incandescent bulbs, I chose 
60W equivalent LED bulbs and was quite pleased with 
the results. 
I standardized my home with mostly Ecosmart 
bulbs from Home Depot because they are reasonably 
priced, there is a wide selection of different shapes 
and sizes, and there are plenty of Home Depot stores 
around.  I also used Cree bulbs with success and 
experimented with Sylvania bulbs, but had to return 
them to Lowes due to a loud buzz when the lights 
were on at any level.  I did have success with Utilitech 
(Lowes) and Satco (lighting stores and online).   
If you want to experiment a bit, you can also try 
different light temperatures other than 2700K and see 

Lighting 
 
 
125 
if you like them.  5000K bulbs will give you a broad 
daylight feel but will definitely not match the rest of 
your bulbs.  I have mixed incandescent, CFL, and 
2700K LED all in the same room and nobody notices 
the difference. 
If you want to try color (red, blue etc.), pick up a few 
smart bulbs and see if you like them.  Once you see 
the cost, you will likely agree that these are more of a 
novelty item as opposed to something that you would 
put all over the house. (Unless you’re planning on 
turning your whole house into a dance hall!) Philips 
HUE bulbs are a good place to start experimenting. 
For light switches, replacing them with the Lutron 
Caséta in-wall dimmer is a simple, solid, and elegant 
solution.  If you have three-way or multi-way switches, 
pay the extra $5 and get the small remote (called Pico 
remote) that will mount in the wall and function like the 
second switch. 
For lamps, the Lutron Caséta wall dimmer is a 
great solution.  Again, if the dimmer is hard to access, 
there is a kit that includes a Pico remote for $5 extra.  
Remotes are easily repurposed and programmable to 
any or multiple dimmers. 
For outdoor lights that are plugged into GFCI 
outlets, the iDevices outdoor switch worked but try to 
get them on sale and keep your eyes open for other 
models from other vendors. 
Get the Lutron bridge so that all the Lutron devices 
can talk to your home network and therefore your 
smartphone. The Lutron bridge is also Apple HomeKit 
compatible that enables use of the Apple Home app.  
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
126 
The iDevices product is WiFi so no bridge is needed 
for that.  Use the vendor specific apps to do the 
installation of each device.  Once everything is 
installed, iPhone users will want to use the Apple 
Home app (requires a 4th Generation Apple TV to 
remotely run the system) to set up lighting scenes and 
program on and off times. 
If you don’t want to use the Apple app, the iDevices 
app will allow you to control both Lutron and iDevices 
from local and remote. (The Apple app is better in my 
opinion as is the Lutron app, but as of this writing, the 
Lutron app did not allow for control of the iDevices 
products).  Keep in mind that of any aspect of the 
Smart Home, the app part of it will change the most so 
always be open to experiment a bit. 
Budget 
Budget about $4.00 per bulb for dimmable LEDs 
that are 60W equivalent or less. Non-dimmable LED 
are approaching $1.00 each but of course they won’t 
work with dimmer switches. 
Colored bulbs (Philips Hue) are about $50 each 
and also require a bridge (another $50), hence my 
rationale that these are really more of a novelty as 
opposed to something you would put in every light 
socket.  There are also smart bulbs with speakers built 
in that start in the order of $30 and up.  Again, you 
would have to experiment with these if you think this is 
something you would want. 
Budget about $50-$60 for the Lutron Caséta in-wall 
dimmers and Pico remote control.  The same pricing 
applies for the lamp dimmers.  The Lutron Bridge is in 

Lighting 
 
 
127 
the $80 range when purchased alone but also 
available in a kit along with one in-wall dimmer and a 
Pico Remote for about $100 (a $40 savings from 
buying in pieces).  There is also a Pico Remote wall 
plate bracket for $5 that you will need for each 
instance of a three-way switch installation. 
The iDevices outdoor switch is a bit pricier than the 
$50 per switch industry price point but is often on sale 
so it may be worth waiting for a deal on that. 
The Lutron, iDevices, and Apple Home apps are all 
free and none of them charge a monthly fee to 
remotely access your devices inside the home. You 
will need to download them all to install their 
respective devices but only the Apple Home app is 
needed to run all of those devices since they are 
HomeKit compatible.   
Result 
It was a lot of work researching, testing and 
returning products, but since you now have the benefit 
of having that done for you, I would say that this is 
probably the most important part of the Smart Home 
design and definitely worth it all! Of course, you had 
work to do on your end, too.  So, what do we get for all 
this? 
Direct electricity bill savings by switching from 
incandescent bulbs to LED bulbs.  If you have ten, 
60W bulbs on for 5 hours a day and switch to LED, 
you can save at least $150 per year.  If you have kids 
who leave a trail of light everywhere they go, you can 
double or triple that. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
128 
CFL (Compact Fluorescent Bulbs) bulbs take time 
to warm up and achieve full brightness and also 
happen to be toxic waste due to the small amounts of 
mercury used.  LED bulbs are instant on and they’re 
nontoxic. 
Setting moods with dimmers not only saves more 
electricity but makes certain family members happy. (It 
can also help you get family members if you don’t 
have any!) 
Automated timing makes your home looked lived in 
whether you are there or not and you can see the 
status and change it when you are away. 
Using your phone to control lights is very cool to 
show other people as well as being very handy more 
times than you would think. 
The Lutron devices have been 100% reliable for me 
and iDevices have worked at least 95% of the time 
with occasional reboots needed.  The Apple Home 
app and using the Apple TV as the remote gateway 
has been extremely reliable as well, with no issues to 
date.

 
Chapter 9 – Thermostats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I’m not sure many people thought there would be much of 
a market for a Smart Home thermostat but one group of 
people called Nest did, and they were later validated by 
building a great product and being acquired by Google for a 
few billion dollars.  Hmm.  Maybe there is something to it 
after all. 
If you go back to one of the basic Smart Home goals of 
having a minimum number of apps to run the system, then 
logic would say that I would pick a HomeKit-enabled 
thermostat and it would just feed into the Apple Home app.  
That’s not a bad plan, but it’s not what I ended up doing the 
first time around.  Maybe it was the $50 off sale on Nest 
Thermostats or maybe it was because a recent visit to a 
friend’s house who had one made me a bit envious, but I 
decided to use the Nest thermostat and use the Nest app to 
run it.  I made the decision to go with the Nest product first 
because of the reviews on Amazon and also because Nest, 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
130 
and therefore Google, are vying to be a key player in the 
Smart Home area. Given that there is no clear winner yet, I 
wanted to have a foot in both the Apple and Google Smart 
Home plans. 
Even though I know next-to-nothing about thermostats or 
their wiring, the whole installation was very well illustrated 
and simple, even to the point of having a very cool looking 
screwdriver included in the box.  Before buying any Smart 
thermostat, always check their web site for compatibility with 
your current model. Normally that means opening up your 
existing thermostat and taking a picture of the wires and 
comparing it with the choices on the web site.  
I replaced a rectangular thermostat with a round one, so I 
was concerned that I would have to fill holes and do paint 
touchups which aren’t difficult but always seem to be the last 
thing on my list of fun things to do. Luckily though, Nest 
includes an optional rectangular faceplate to cover up the 
spot where the old one was.  
The Nest thermostat is WiFi enabled so there is no need to 
buy a separate bridge in order to get it working on your 
network.  It offers a choice of 2.4GHz or 5GHz WiFi 
networks and, in keeping with my convention of putting low 
volume Smart Home traffic on the 2.4GHz network, this is 
how I connected it.  You will need to download the Nest app 
to set it up and run it day-to-day.  Since the Nest is not Apple 
HomeKit enabled, it does not show up in the Apple Home 
app.  Nest does have a pretty extensive set of “Works with 

Thermostats 
 
 
131 
Nest” partners so it is likely that you will have some other 
app that you can use to also control the Nest.  For example, 
if you followed my lead and used Lutron products for lighting, 
the Lutron app can control Nest thermostats.   But just 
because you can do something doesn’t always mean that 
you should!  I did import the Nest thermostat into the Lutron 
app but will choose not to do this moving forward for two 
reasons. 
First, only a subset of the Nest thermostat functionality of 
is available when using the Lutron app.  As I pointed out 
before, this will be a common theme throughout the 
challenge of integrating Smart Home apps. 
Second, if you recall, the Lutron app, while a nice design 
and easy to use, feeds the Apple Home app which is what I 
use on a day-to-day basis for lighting and other things (not 
the Lutron app).  And even if you import the Nest 
functionality into Lutron, only the Lutron devices carry 
through into the Apple app.  I had this moment of 
hopefulness that perhaps the Nest could also be managed 
with the Apple Home app using this method, but it was not to 
be. 
The Nest app for thermostats (and smoke detectors - see 
the next chapter), operates both inside and outside the home 
with no monthly fees.  It’s also very easy to add family 
members so that you don’t have to set up multiple accounts.  
You can also manage everything right at the thermostat itself 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
132 
by turning the outer ring and pressing on the center.  Once 
again, nobody would need a manual to use this. 
Having said all this about Nest, it turns out that we used the 
Nest app quite a bit to adjust the heat and as such it would 
be much more convenient to have that functionality inside 
the Apple Home app.  As we moved into a new home and 
made these decisions all over again, the second time around 
I used the Ecobee 3 thermostat, which is Apple HomeKit 
enabled, and also supports multiple room temperature 
sensors and displays the outside temperature.  This is one of 
those situations where choosing the Apple Home app route 
could have a large influence over which product is the right 
one for you. 
 
Bottom Line - Thermostats 
What to Do 
Nest has really set the industry standard and 
makes an excellent product although it is not Apple 
HomeKit enabled.  I first chose Nest and use the free 
Nest app that comes with it to manage the thermostat 
inside and outside the home. There are HomeKit 
enabled 
thermostats 
available 
from 
Honeywell, 
Ecobee and others, so if you want to stay true to 
HomeKit, there are a number of choices available.  My 
next install was the Ecobee 3, which has a nice 
feature that includes the use of temperature sensors 
placed in other rooms to get a more accurate read on 
the average temperature of the whole house rather 

Thermostats 
 
 
133 
than just where the main thermostat is located.  In the 
winter, this will keep the rest of the house warm even 
if you have a fireplace on blasting out heat in the same 
room as the thermostat.  
Make sure you check the compatibility with your 
existing system before buying a smart thermostat, but 
it is designed to work with most furnace and air 
conditioning systems.  Every Smart thermostat maker 
has a simple tool on their web page that walks you 
through how to check this. 
Budget 
Budget about $200 to $250 per thermostat.  There 
are occasional sales and promotions from most 
vendors, and you can also look at rebates from your 
utility company as well. 
Result 
Any kind of product that lowers ongoing utility costs 
is a candidate for automation because in all likelihood, 
the efficiencies of the product will pay for itself over 
time in utility costs savings alone.  This applies to 
lighting (electricity costs), thermostats (gas, oil, 
propane or electricity costs), and outdoor sprinkler 
systems (water costs). 
Also, because it is so easy to use, we actually use 
it to set temperatures for different times of day and 
conserve by lowering the heat while we are out.  My 
wife especially likes it on cold winter mornings where 
the heat goes on and warms everything up before 
popping out of bed. That would be her main reason for 
saying it is worth it. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
134 
On the other side, I underestimated how important 
HomeKit integration would be for our setup.  Since we 
use the Apple Home app for lighting, door locks, blinds 
and a garage door opener, family members naturally 
gravitate to the Apple app even when wanting to turn 
up the heat.  It turns out that we use the thermostat 
function quite a bit more than I would have thought, so 
my unless Nest comes out with a HomeKit version 
(unlikely in my opinion), I am sticking with Ecobee. 

 
Chapter 10 – Smoke Detectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
While considering the idea of putting a Smart Home book 
together a few years back, I am pretty sure that a connected 
smoke detector was the last thing on my mind.  On the other 
hand, I did like the idea of not waking up in the middle of the 
night to silence a chirping smoke detector battery. Yes, I am 
admitting that I didn’t change the batteries every year like 
you are supposed to. 
Smart smoke detectors started to show up on the market 
and they also included carbon monoxide detection.  The 
question is, do we bother with this or not?  To me, a smoke 
detector falls into the category of having insurance. I hate to 
pay extra for them because most of the time you don’t need 
it, but when you do need it, it can save your life. 
As with thermostats, there are a couple of choices to 
make when deciding which product to buy.  There are smoke 
detectors from First Alert that are HomeKit enabled and will 
work with the Apple Home app.  There is also the Nest 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
136 
Protect smoke detector that falls under the Nest part of 
Google that works with the same Nest app as the Nest 
thermostat. 
I chose the Nest Protect mostly because of its online 
reviews and also since works with same Nest app that I 
initially used for the thermostat.  Since the smoke detector is 
something that I won’t be interacting with on a day-to-day 
basis, I don’t think it’s as important to be integrated with the 
things that the Apple Home app is controlling.  I am really 
more interested in being loudly wakened if I am in the house 
and there is smoke, and notified if I am not at home should 
one of them go off.  Later, when we cover security systems, 
it will be more advantageous to tie into that system. 
When you buy smoke detectors, it’s important to know 
whether they are wired into the home’s electrical wiring or if 
they are standalone and operate on battery only.  The 
easiest way to check this is to remove one of your existing 
smoke detectors with a simple twist and it will be obvious if it 
is wired in or not.  Every vendor has two different models 
and always choose the wired version if you can.  It still has 
batteries for backup but these smoke detectors will last a lot 
longer than if it only runs on battery.  Don’t be afraid of the 
wiring either even though it 120V.  Take all the same safety 
precautions used when working with wiring for your lighting.  
It is even easier than doing light switches and most often 
there is a single circuit breaker for all of the smoke detectors 
to shut off when you are rewiring for the new product. 

Smoke Detectors 
 
 
137 
Read all of the directions before installing.  For example, it 
is much easier to do all the installing with the Nest app when 
all the smoke detectors are lined up on the counter rather 
than when they are physically installed.  The whole process 
is very painless but there are a few tips to offer you. 
The Nest smoke detector is connected using WiFi so have 
your WiFi password handy as you will need it for the first unit 
you install.  Most often, you are replacing a round smoke 
detector which leaves a round mark on the ceiling depending 
on how long it has been up there.  The Nest is square with 
rounded corners and doesn’t cover up the round mark 
completely, so depending on the paint situation on the 
ceiling, you may want to do some touchups before mounting 
the Nest bracket.  In my case, a damp cloth did the trick and 
since nobody else noticed the slight marks, I chalk it up as 
an esthetic success.  Lastly, if you test the smoke and 
carbon monoxide alarms, you might want to wear earplugs 
and let the dog out first.  They are amazingly loud. 
Once they are installed and running, there isn’t really 
much to do with them on a daily basis.  You can monitor 
them from the Nest app (the same one that also has the 
Nest thermostat) and about the only thing you can do is play 
with the white ring light that acts as a motion sensing night 
light when it’s dark.  You can also check on the status of all 
aspects of each smoke detector, including the battery 
percentage, which will conveniently alert you by phone when 
they need replacing rather than waking you up chirping at 
3am. 
www.ebook3000.com

How to Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
138 
Although I did not choose the Nest Thermostat for my new 
home, I still installed the Nest Protect Smoke Detector 
mainly because it consistently has the best ratings.  See 
Appendix 2 at the end of this book for tips on how to use 
online ratings to quickly assess the quality of each Smart 
Home product. 
 
Bottom Line – Smoke Detectors 
What to Do 
There are at least two choices for Smart Home 
smoke detectors.  First Alert makes one that is Apple 
HomeKit enabled and Nest makes one that can be 
managed by the same app that is used for the Nest 
Thermostat.  I chose the Nest model mostly because I 
don’t anticipate needing to use an app on a day-to-day 
basis to interact with the product. 
Budget 
Budget about $120 per smoke detector.  It is 
surprising how many are needed even in a small 
home (one per bedroom, hallway and some on each 
floor) so when I went around and counted nine in total, 
the bill came to just over $1000.  A normal smoke 
detector costs about $30-$50 so the incremental cost 
was about $400-$600.  A typical three-bedroom home 
would still have five to six of them. 
The Nest smoke detector has a lifespan of ten 
years and I replaced some old ones that had been in 
the home twenty years, so maybe they were dead 

Smoke Detectors 
 
 
139 
anyway.  There are no monthly fees to use the Nest 
app remotely to check on the status of the smoke 
detectors. 
Result 
For me, not having batteries chirping at me in the 
middle of the night, and being able to see if anything 
bad is happening when I am away, are enough reason 
to spend the extra money on this type of product. If 
you really want to see how it works, let the dog out 
and burn a piece of toast under one of the units. You’ll 
be impressed with the warnings you get. I am certainly 
happy with the Nest product and don’t think it is 
important to have that type of product as part of the 
Apple Home app since you don’t interact with it on a 
day-to-day basis.  Typically, an integration into the 
home alarm system makes more sense.  Also, I have 
come to love the built-in night light that comes on 
when you enter a dark room. 
www.ebook3000.com

 

 
Chapter 11 – Outdoor Sprinklers 
 
 
 
 
 
This type of automation is for your outdoor watering 
system for lawns, trees, garden, etc., not your indoor fire 
sprinkler system to put out fires.  You may or may not 
already have one of these sprinkler systems in place with an 
existing control box typically made by companies like 
RainBird. These are either mounted on the outside wall of 
your home or perhaps in the garage or other indoor location.  
If you don’t have this type of system already, you can 
probably skip this chapter because there is a lot more 
involved installing this from scratch than simply replacing an 
older controller with a new smart controller. 
If you simplify what is happening behind the scenes (or 
more accurately, buried underground) in a sprinkler system, 
it boils down to a fresh water source being split into several 
directions, more commonly known as zones, each with a 
control valve that can turn the flow of water on or off for that 
zone.  If you follow the pipes after the valves, they physically 
spread out into different parts of your yard to cover a certain 
area for watering.  For example, you may have one or more 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
142 
zones for the front lawns with popup sprayers, one or more 
for the back lawns, one for the garden that is on a drip 
system, one for trees, etc.  The valves don’t know or care 
what lies beyond since they only know that they are either on 
or off.  It is up to the landscape designer to put the zones in 
the right places and not to have too many taps or sprayers 
that overrun the capacity of a valve being in the on position.  
These valves are often located near the control box, 
sometimes above ground or sometimes buried in the ground 
in protective landscape housings. 
As you can imagine, setting up all that pipe and doing all 
the trenching and cleaning up is quite a big and expensive 
job, so this chapter is all about making the most of your 
existing system by replacing the sprinkler controller. Again, 
the controller’s only real job is to turn the valves on and off at 
the right times so that your plants and grass get the right 
amount of water.  The obvious question is: why take a 
perfectly good controller and replace it with one that is smart 
and connected? Here’s a handful of reasons: 
• Considering that a controller’s only real job is to 
turn valves on and off, it’s astounding just how 
complicated these can be to program.  It is one of 
the pieces of gear that you probably need to adjust 
four times per year for seasonal changes and every 
time I had to do mine, I had to re-read the manual.  
If you are like some of the people in my 
neighborhood, you don’t even bother with that and 
you are paying a landscaper to handle it, or you 

Outdoor Sprinklers 
 
 
143 
massively 
overwater 
things. 
An 
expensive 
proposition either way. 
• If rain is forecast or it’s raining when the sprinklers 
are set to run, it’s a waste of water to let that cycle 
run.  Smart controllers know the weather and will 
take care of that automatically, directly saving in 
water costs. 
• Where we live we don’t get snow, but there are 
nights that are below freezing. A smart controller 
will stop the sprinklers in freezing temperatures. 
• Depending on your property size, the largest 
contributor to your water bill is landscape water.  
Mine varies from $80 per month in the winter (when 
there is minimal watering) to about $200 in the heat 
of the summer.  We have also had water rationing 
during our recent drought in Northern California 
and we have to adjust for that too.  With a smart 
controller, you can set your water cycles once 
without using a manual (it’s that simple), and the 
system will automatically scale the amount of water 
based on the seasons. 
• Anyone who has a sprinkler system also has repair 
parts because they always sprout leaks.  To fix a 
system the old way, you have to turn on a zone at 
the controller, walk over and find the leak(s), run 
back and turn the zone off, go back and fix the leak, 
go back to the controller to turn it on again, walk 
back to where the leak was to make sure it is fixed 
and then run back to the controller and turn it off 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
144 
again.  I so dreaded that dance that I had the 
leakiest system on the block.  With a smart 
sprinkler controller, you can roam around the yard 
with your smartphone and turn on and off zones 
and do repairs on the spot. 
What do you need to know to replace your existing 
sprinkler controller?  First, figure out the number of zones 
you currently have.  New systems are typically eight or 
sixteen zones so if you have eight zones or fewer, you can 
buy the less expensive eight-zone model but you’ll need the 
sixteen-zone unit if you have between eight and sixteen 
zones.  If you have exactly eight zones, you probably don’t 
need to buy the sixteen-zone model to have spare capacity 
unless you know you are going to expand or redo your 
system which involves lots of digging for new pipes. 
Next, these controllers are normally connected to your 
home network using WiFi so take your smartphone to the 
location of your existing sprinkler controller, put it on your 
2.4GHz WiFi network and perform a speedtest to make sure 
that you have connectivity.  Do this before purchasing a new 
unit.  The only way to remedy a situation of no connectivity is 
adjusting or extending your wireless network to include this 
spot as a coverage area.  Go back and re-read the chapter 
on setting up your home WiFi network if you are not sure 
how to do this.  You will not be able to move the location of 
the sprinkler controller easily since all the wires from each of 
the valves controlling the flow of water to each zone all come 

Outdoor Sprinklers 
 
 
145 
back to exactly where your current sprinkler controller is 
installed. 
The only other consideration is whether the controller is 
located indoors or outside in the elements.  If it is located 
outside, be sure to get the outdoor enclosure to match the 
new controller unit that you purchase.   
Considering the controller, there are a number of vendors in 
this space, namely Rachio, GreenIQ, Skydrop, and Rainbird.  
I chose the Generation 2 Rachio unit back in April of 2016 
when it first came out.  Rachio was one of the first smart 
sprinkler controllers on the market and has excellent reviews. 
It’s available at most major hardware retail outlets.  Rachio is 
a US based company with local support and very responsive 
to questions or issues that you may have. This is something 
that you can easily install yourself with a few helpful tips 
below. 
Depending on the physical size of your previous controller, 
you may need some paint touchups for the house once you 
remove the old unit, since the new one will likely be a 
different size. 
If you can decipher your current watering schedule from 
the existing system, write down the times and dates for 
watering in each zone so that you have a starting point.  
Remember though that just because it is running this way 
now, doesn’t mean it’s correct.  If you have dead grass or 
trees you may need to turn it up.  If water gushes through 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
146 
your toes when you walk across the lawn every day, you are 
overwatering. 
You will need to turn off the circuit breaker before 
removing the old controller. The wiring may seem 
intimidating, but Rachio has excellent directions so read 
them carefully and you shouldn’t have any issues.  For most 
systems, there are three wires for the main power, one 
common ground wire for all of the sprinkler valves, and one 
wire for each valve.  It’s not really that big a deal if you mix 
up the zones moving from the old system to the new system 
because you are going to be naming the new zones instead 
of remembering numbers. 
From then on, setup is either on the Rachio app on your 
smartphone or from the Rachio web site.  Both use the same 
account and it will be self-explanatory how to set it all up.  I 
suggest you name all your zones with something meaningful 
and if you were able to record your existing watering times, 
input those as a starting point.  Remember that if you have 
wide variations in watering times with the seasons, pick 
watering times that are appropriate for whatever today’s date 
is.  When you set up a schedule use the smart cycle and 
weather intelligence features.  This is what makes the 
system so great along with the ease of use from your phone 
and computer.  I also enabled notifications on my phone so 
that I am able to see when watering occurred and just keep 
tabs on things, especially in the early days when I was 
getting used to the system. 

Outdoor Sprinklers 
 
 
147 
None of the systems are Apple HomeKit compatible so 
this function of controlling sprinklers pretty much has to 
standalone in terms of day-to-day usage.  Rachio does have 
a Nest integration that you can try out although it doesn’t 
really do anything useful for me.  Also, if you use Wink, you 
can integrate with Rachio as well, but you only get a subset 
of functionality.  There is no need for any type of bridge to 
connect Rachio to your network since it uses WiFi, which 
your home network already supports. 
 
Bottom Line - Outdoor Sprinklers 
What to Do 
I had a ten-zone watering system and replaced an 
overly complicated Rain Bird controller with a sixteen 
zone Rachio Generation 2 WiFi connected outdoor 
unit and installed it myself quite easily using Rachio’s 
instructions having never set eyes inside one of these 
before.  The iPhone app is excellent as is the web 
interface and all of the weather sensing features work 
(skipping on rainy days, not watering when it is below 
freezing, auto adjusting run times for seasonal 
changes, etc.)  It works using your 2.4GHz WiFi so 
you have to make sure that you have coverage where 
the unit is going to be installed.  It’s very simple to test 
the Rachio system using your smartphone just by 
walking around the yard and turning the different 
zones on and off and making sure it works without any 
leaks or gushers.   
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
148 
Budget 
Budget between $200 to $250 for the larger sixteen 
zone models – about $50 less if you only need eight 
zones. Outdoor enclosures run in the $30 range and 
are available for the controllers that require them.  
There are no monthly fees to use the app or web 
interface from inside or outside your home. 
Result 
This was one of the first things I bought when I 
started moving towards Smart Home technologies.  
Water is only going to get more expensive over time 
and seeing it pour down the street drains is not only 
akin to burning dollar bills, it is a waste of our precious 
resources.  Even if I didn’t save a penny in water costs 
or have a landscaper set up my watering, it is worth it 
just for the ease of use and finally being able to take 
simple control of my outdoor watering system. 

 
Chapter 12 – Door Locks 
 
 
 
 
 
The door locks being referred to in this chapter are your 
home’s deadbolt locks on exterior doors and not the inside 
doors like the ones to the bathroom.  Of course, if you feel 
you need a deadbolt on your bathroom door, there is nothing 
stopping you! (Some people really cherish their privacy!)  A 
regular deadbolt has a manual turn piece on the inside and 
opens with a key from the outside.  Newer smart deadbolts 
can be locked and unlocked manually on the inside but have 
several options to open from the outside. Among these are 
using a key, a security code entered on a keypad, and an 
electronic key fob. You can even use your phone to open the 
door with certain brands! (Hint: you want this!)  
Some locks have several of these possibilities and some 
have only a few.  The question is, what do you need and 
what are the considerations when trying to find the right one 
for you? 
The first thing to do is find out what brand you already 
have installed.  If you keep the same brand when moving to 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
150 
a smart lock, it’s probable that you will have a simple 
physical installation because all the holes and cutouts line up.  
Also, some doors have the deadbolt integrated with the door 
handle.  I had this on one of my doors, and rather than an 
elaborate effort to patch holes and touch up paint, I chose to 
leave that door alone for now and focus on the ones that 
have a physically separate deadbolt.   
Going back to my earlier ease-of-use requirements, I still 
want to be able to use a key to get in, which would be 
necessary should the batteries die or the motor fail for any 
reason.  I also like the numbered keypad so that I can assign 
codes to guests or workers who may need temporary codes, 
or for the kids to use.  Since I have an iPhone and use 
HomeKit and Siri, I also looked for something that is Apple 
HomeKit compatible.  I specifically don’t want someone to be 
able to just touch the lock and open it since phones can be 
lost and it would be pretty easy for someone to unlock the 
door that way just by having your phone in their possession. 
There are dozens of brands of deadbolt manufacturers 
but three that I will mention are Kwikset, Schlage, and 
August.  Kwikset and Schlage both make smart locks with 
the Kwikset Premis and Schlage Sense being HomeKit 
compatible.  August also adapts onto an existing deadbolt by 
installing a different part on the inside of the door that you 
can turn manually, has the motor and batteries to turn the 
lock remotely, and is also HomeKit enabled.  Since August 
uses your existing exterior key deadbolt, there would not be 
a touch keypad for locking and unlocking from the outside 

Door Locks 
 
 
151 
but you get to keep the same key that you used before. 
Kwikset also has a simple re-key feature that lets you use 
your old key as well and you can do it yourself in about five 
seconds. 
I chose the Schlage Sense Deadbolt in the first house 
since I already had Schlage locks, and Kwikset Premis in the 
new one. They are both HomeKit enabled, and I have the 
newer generation 4 Apple TV (to be able to control it 
remotely).  Both have key entry and one-touch locking from 
the outside, a programmable keypad to unlock from the 
outside (don’t use your phone number as your secret code!), 
and can also be unlocked using the vendor’s app or the 
Apple Home app.  Once again, I only use the vendor app for 
installation, checking on battery life, and updating firmware 
on the lock.  The Apple Home app (or Siri) is more 
convenient to use on a day-to-day basis and it also makes it 
easy to include the lock as part of a scene like a good night 
scene where all the lights go out and the door locks.   
The reason for the Apple TV is that this is how the 
Schlage and Kwikset models I chose, connect to the network.  
They both use Bluetooth Low Energy (BTLE) to connect, 
which means that is has to be forty feet or less from the 
Apple TV.  Another reason for buying these locks at a local 
hardware store:  it is either going to work or it isn’t, and if it 
doesn’t, you somehow have to bring the Apple TV closer 
because the door is staying where it is.  Bluetooth extenders 
also exist and that may be worth a try but I have not used 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
152 
them myself. If it turns out to be impossible, luckily you kept 
your receipt because you’ll need to return them. 
From a physical installation perspective, as long as your 
current deadbolt opens and closes without having to force 
the key or jiggle the door, the motorized one will work just 
fine.  The physical deadbolt that installs in the door and the 
strike-plate that installs in the wall matched up perfectly with 
my old same-brand unit, so that part was easy.  This does 
involve some screwdriver work so allocate about 30-45 
minutes to install your first one. 
The Schlage and Kwikset directions are pretty straight 
forward, but read them in their entirety before starting as 
there is a temptation to jump ahead.  Installation is done 
using the vendor app on your phone, which provides step by 
step instructions.  Once set up, this model will automatically 
show up in the Apple Home app and be ready to use with 
that app as well.  There are some caveats to be aware of: 
On an iPhone, by default, with no password, there is a 
control panel that can be accessed by swiping up from the 
bottom of the screen that allows for shortcuts to several 
functions (airplane mode, calculator, flashlight, etc.) but also 
HomeKit buttons for lights, locks, or whatever you have as 
Favorites in the Home app. Only nine of the favorite home 
icons are there, but if one of them is the door lock icon, it 
means that without putting in your phone password, you can 
unlock the door.  This is very convenient but not very secure.  
There are two ways around this:  In IOS 10 or 11, go into the 

Door Locks 
 
 
153 
home app, find the door lock button, click on details and 
uncheck “Include in favorites”.  It will take the button off the 
Home tab in the home app and the control panel, but it will 
still be available in the Rooms tab in the app itself.  The 
other way, in IOS 10, is to go into the iPhone settings, go to 
Control Center and uncheck the “access on lock screen” 
setting.  This means that you won’t be able to swipe up at all 
when your iPhone is locked.  More secure, but less 
convenient. In IOS 11, it is much cleaner because you can 
configure what items are in the control panel so you can 
remove the Home App by customizing the controls in the 
Control Center settings and still swipe up with the lock 
screen on for other functions. 
With both models, the only way to access the lock 
remotely (like checking to see if it is locked after you left on a 
trip), is by using Apple TV as a connection point into the 
network.  If you don’t plan on using Apple HomeKit, you will 
not have remote access to the lock, only when you are close 
and within Bluetooth range.  Instead, both Kwikset and 
Schlage have different models that uses Z-Wave for remote 
access.  Read Appendix 1 to understand what this means 
and what you would need to make it work. 
By default, the app sends you a phone notification every 
time the door is locked or unlocked whether manually, 
through the app, or touchpad.  This is really cool at first, but 
then you'll probably want to turn off the notifications so you 
don't get them every seven minutes. 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
154 
Bottom Line - Door Locks 
What to Do 
Automating the deadbolts on exterior doors can be 
done from a number of vendors, notably Schlage, 
Kwikset, and August.  Most allow for keyed entry, 
number touchpad locking and unlocking, as well as 
using your smartphone app/voice control from local or 
remote.  Some are Apple HomeKit compatible but 
carefully check the model names to get the right one if 
you want that compatibility.   
It is often easier to change out an existing lock with 
one of the same brand so that all of the holes and 
cutouts line up and the physical installation challenges 
are minimized. I replaced a manual Schlage lock with 
the Schlage Sense which is Apple HomeKit enabled 
meaning I can use Siri to lock and unlock it as well as 
the Apple Home app. The newer house replaces a 
Kwikset model so I used a Kwikset Premis HomeKit 
compatible lock. 
Budget 
Budget between $200 - $250 for each smart lock.  
There is no monthly fee to use the app from inside or 
outside the home.  Using it outside the home does 
require an Apple TV as part of the Apple HomeKit 
system. 
Result 
If you can install it yourself, it’s handy to have a 
smart lock on your main entry door.  It’s nice to be 
able to go out for a walk or bike ride without having to 
bring keys along.  It’s also handy to be able to warm 

Door Locks 
 
 
155 
up the car while waiting for family members to join me 
without having to shut the car off to lock the door with 
the key.  Also, it is always reassuring to know the 
current state of your door lock when you are away.  In 
the event of emergency, a trusted neighbor could be 
let in with the touch of your phone. If you have a 
worker coming to the house, you can let them in 
without being home. Both have been reliable and I 
haven’t had any issues or unexpected things happen. 
www.ebook3000.com

 

 
Chapter 13 – Garage Door Opener 
 
 
 
 
 
There are two fundamental approaches to being able to 
open and close your garage door locally and remotely from 
your smartphone.  The first one is to replace your existing 
garage door opener, which means the motor, with one that is 
Smart Home enabled.  The second approach, and less 
expensive one, is to get an adapter that works with your 
existing garage door opener, allowing you to use both a 
smartphone app or your existing garage door remotes.  For 
the purposes of this chapter, I will focus on the adapter style.  
Of course, if you are building a new home or replacing your 
garage door opener, you would choose the former and just 
pick a motor that is Smart Home enabled. 
There aren’t that many systems in the market, so we’ll use 
the Chamberlain MyQ Garage system as our example. 
Chamberlain (aka LiftMaster and Craftsman) has a few 
different products to choose from, mostly determined by your 
starting point.  So, job one is to go into your garage and 
figure out the brand and model of your current garage door 
opener.  Look specifically for the “MyQ” logo or a “WiFi” 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
158 
symbol, as those are the main determining factors as to what 
product you will need. Your best bet is to then go to the 
Chamberlain web site under smartphone control products 
and run the MyQ compatibility tool to determine what type of 
model you should get.  The first question asks you if you 
have an existing Chamberlain model, so remember to 
answer yes even if it is labelled LiftMaster or Craftsman, 
since they are all the same company. 
Essentially, the older the model you have, the more 
expensive the upgrade will be.  If you have a very old model, 
or if you're starting from scratch, a new garage door opener 
sells for approximately $250 before installation costs. 
Using the adapter approach, there is typically a main unit 
needing AC power that mounts on the ceiling, near one of 
your garage door motors.  This unit requires WiFi 
connectivity to your home network so the first job before 
buying one of these is to get a ladder, bring your smartphone 
to where you would install the unit and run a speed test on 
your 2.4 GHz WiFi network.  If you did your network correctly 
as detailed at the beginning of the book, you will be fine to 
proceed.  If not, go back and read Chapter 2 to revisit this 
topic and make any necessary corrections to your network.   
If your garage door opener does not have MyQ capability, 
then you will be directed to a product that includes both a 
main unit and door sensors. The main unit talks with the 
sensor mounted on the garage door so that it can tell 
whether the door is open or closed.  Essentially the main unit 

Garage Door Opener 
 
 
159 
(Chamberlain in this case) is signaled through your app and 
over your home network to send out the same remote-
control signals that your car remote would use to open or 
close the door.  This means you can still use your existing 
car remote if you want, as well as the doorbell buttons that 
are often mounted inside the small door into the garage.  If 
you want to add a second garage door to the system, you 
just need an additional sensor on the second door plus 
programming it for its unique set of trigger codes. 
In my case, I happened to have a LiftMaster garage door 
opener that is MyQ enabled.  I want to use the system day-
to-day using the Apple Home App so I needed a HomeKit 
enabled version of the Chamberlain MyQ Home Bridge.  
Fortunately, Chamberlain just released such a product in 
September of 2017 so I was able to proceed with this 
installation. 
The MyQ Home Bridge screws into the ceiling near the 
garage door motor and plugs into the other half of the AC 
Power outlet used by the motor. It is connected to your 
Smart Home using your 2.4GHz WiFi network and then will 
talk the “MyQ” language to nearby Chamberlain garage door 
openers and accessories. Download the Chamberlain MyQ 
app and use that to install the bridge. With the bridge 
installed, you might think you are ready to raise and lower 
the door, but there is one more step to do. 
Remember that the bridge only acts as a conduit between 
your smartphone and the opener, so the opener (motor) 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
160 
itself needs to be added in the app. It was not an obvious 
step, but by navigating to the “Places” section on the app 
you should see your MyQ bridge that you just installed, so 
select it and hit the “+” button on the top right.  Then, click on 
the MyQ again (under MyQ Places) and then choose to add 
a Garage Door opener.  You will then have to press a button 
on the opener (the motor) as described in the app, so have a 
ladder handy and the car out of the way. Once you have the 
opener installed, you are ready to impress family and friends 
by lowering and raising the garage door with the 
Chamberlain app. 
If you did the HomeKit part of the installation when you 
installed the bridge (and you should), then both the bridge 
and the garage door opener will show up in the Apple Home 
app.  The bridge icon is not used day-to-day so I normally 
uncheck the “include in favorites” button. Ask Siri to open or 
close the garage door.  Create schedules that automatically 
close the door before you go to bed to ensure that it is 
closed at night. 
The Chamberlain MyQ home bridge costs about $50 - $60 
so if you were lucky enough to have a MyQ enabled opener, 
then this is a very cost-effective way to bring your Garage 
Door into the Smart Home world.  And if you have multiple 
garage door openers, the same bridge will work for all of 
your openers. 
 
 

Garage Door Opener 
 
 
161 
Bottom Line – Garage Door Opener 
What to Do 
Automated garage door openers are available as 
add-ons for most existing openers or as a new motor 
that replaces the one you currently have.  The main 
vendor is Chamberlain (aka LiftMaster or Craftsman).  
The Chamberlain MyQ Garage product is the one to 
look at to work with an existing garage door opener.  
The exact product to buy will depend on your existing 
model.  The Chamberlain website will guide you in 
detail, but if you have an opener (the motor mounted 
on the ceiling) that has the MyQ logo on it, then you 
can use the less expensive MyQ Home Bridge. If your 
motor is a generic model or older, Chamberlain also 
has adapters for those types of doors. 
I used the MyQ Internet Gateway (sometimes 
called MyQ Home Bridge) with our existing MyQ 
garage door opener. As of September 2017, this is 
Apple HomeKit enabled so it will integrate into the 
Apple Home app.   
Budget 
Set aside between $50 and $250 for a single 
garage door opener application.  The amount you 
spend is largely determined by your existing model. 
Result 
This is a simple installation and very useful day-to-
day. The HomeKit compatible bridge product works 
with the existing MyQ opener is nicely integrated with 
all the other HomeKit compatible products. 
www.ebook3000.com

 

 
Chapter 14 – Pool Equipment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This chapter only applies if you already have a swimming 
pool or if you are thinking about getting one.  If you don’t 
have a pool yet but are looking into it, there are a few 
choices to make when it comes to controlling the pumps, fill 
lines, spa, heater etc.  I will also point out here that when it 
comes to pool equipment, using the terminology “Do It 
Yourself” is a bit of a stretch.  These systems are almost 
always made for pool guys to setup so if you are anticipating 
making any changes, get your pool guy involved.  He/she 
will probably have to do the install or make the changes. 
The most manual method of pool control has all the 
controls right outside next to pool equipment.  All the valves 
are manual, the pump is on or off and can be put on a timer 
that you’d manually adjust for the various seasons by 
walking out to the pool equipment.  This type of setup is the 
least expensive and really only appropriate for the simplest 
of pools where there is no heater, solar, spa, or other 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
164 
changing water features.  Again, your pool guy will be able to 
tell you what you’d need to automate a system like this. It 
would be extensive because you’d likely have to add basic 
computer control of all the functions (pump, valves etc.) and 
that could get pricey. 
The Professor’s situation started from a pool built in about 
2005 that had a Jandy Aqualink RS control system with a 
remote panel that was physically wired from the pool 
equipment to a location in the kitchen.  This was where all 
the programming for the pool equipment was done.  We 
were fortunate when this was built that it was possible to 
physically install this wire from the pool, but it did take a 
pretty skinny guy who wasn’t claustrophobic to crawl under 
the house to do it.  If we had a concrete slab, I’m not even 
sure how they would have done it.  The keypad is functional 
but it’s not intuitive to program and although I always 
manage to figure it out, my family won’t touch it. 
But now, there is a better way.  Jandy has an upgrade to 
the pool controller called iAqualink 
2.0 that removes the old computer 
outdoors at the pool equipment and 
puts a new one in along with a WiFi 
Pod that is the pool equipment’s link 
back to your home network.  It uses 
2.4 GHz WiFi, so again, using your 
phone at that location, connect to 
your 2.4 GHz WiFi and do a speedtest to determine if you 
have connectivity before making any purchases.  Once the 
Your WiFi network 
can extend outside 
the home to connect 
with your pool 
equipment and other 
outdoor automation. 

Pool Equipment 
 
 
165 
new board is installed and connected to your WiFi network, 
programming is done using a web interface typically on a 
larger screen like a laptop or iPad.  The pool guy will do 
most of this and get your settings moved over to the new 
system, too.  There is also a smartphone app called 
iAqualink that you’ll need to download onto your phone and 
this will be used day-to-day if you need to turn the pool on or 
off, or switch to the spa.  It replaces the controller that is 
wired onto the wall that you used to use.  Our old controller 
is still there, however, and it’s your choice whether you leave 
it or remove it and go exclusively with the phone.   
This upgrade doesn’t change any of the features that you 
previously had, it only changes the device you use to do the 
programming.  I will say that the web interface is much 
easier to navigate, but the terminology is still in pool-guy 
language so you may have to play around a bit to figure out 
the right changes.  The phone app works both when you are 
on your local network and when you are remote, so if you 
are thinking of jumping in the spa when you get home from 
work and want to fire it up before leaving, now you can do 
that.  I found it handy to use when the pump went on at night 
for freeze protection on those chilly winter nights. I was able 
to turn the pump off during the day on its normal cycle to 
save on electricity.  The iAqualink phone app doesn’t offer 
any advanced functionality (as of late 2017) like notifications 
or any different programming choices, which is disappointing 
but it works as advertised in terms of being able to control all 
of the functions from my phone or on the web that I could 
only previously do from the kitchen. 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
166 
Jandy isn’t the only manufacturer of pool equipment 
control, so if you have another brand, now is the time to 
know your pool guy and see if he/she knows of a migration 
for the equipment that you have.  Other major players are 
Hayward and Pentair.  
In our new home, we are using the Pentair product line 
and the Screenlogic2 system that can be accessed on 
computer, smartphone, or even Apple Watch. It works a little 
differently than the Jandy system in that the wireless pod 
mounted by the pool equipment does NOT use WiFi to 
connect back to your home network. This means that you 
don’t need to do the WiFi test at the pool equipment but 
something different instead. Pentair uses their own wireless 
technology to connect to a small antenna and a “protocol 
adapter” that will physically be installed near your home 
router. The protocol adapter plugs into one of the Ethernet 
ports on the router to connect the Pentair system to your 
network.  
At press time, the system was not yet up and running so 
updates 
with 
full 
details 
will 
appear 
on 
the 
smarthomeprofessor web site. 
Bottom Line -  Pool Equipment 
 
What to Do 
Step one is to get your pool guy involved to find out 
whether it is an easy transition from the pool controller 
you have, to one that can be controlled by the 
smartphone.  Jandy makes the iAqualink 2.0 system 

Pool Equipment 
 
 
167 
which was a board swap and reprogram operation for 
me. (actually the pool guy with me looking over his 
shoulder)  If you are putting in a new pool, it is much 
easier since you need some kind of pool controller 
anyway.  Other popular brands are the Pentair 
Screenlogic2 and the Hayward OmniLogic. The brand 
you choose will likely be determined by the type of 
equipment you already have, as that is the least 
expensive way to do the transition. For the new pool 
install, we used the Pentair Screenlogic2 system. 
Budget 
The Jandy iAqualink 2.0 upgrade kit was selling for 
about $600 on Amazon and my pool guy charged 
$180 to install it and set it up.  Your cost may vary 
depending on what equipment you are starting with. 
Save the board that gets removed as there is a viable 
resale market on eBay so you may be able to pick up 
$100-$200 for the old controller board if you do an 
upgrade. If you are upgrading a Hayward or Pentair 
system, call your pool guy as your pricing will always 
depend on the details of your existing setup. 
Result 
From a functionality perspective, 
the Jandy 
iAqualink2 does everything as advertised.  Pool 
equipment is just plain expensive so I would have felt 
much better about the overall value if the price came 
in around $300 for the upgrade. For the new pool 
install that we are in the middle of, we are using 
Pentair 
equipment, 
so 
full 
updates 
are 
on 
www.smarthomeprofessor.com
www.ebook3000.com

 

 
Chapter 15 – Video Door Bell 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Starting in 2012 the first of the Smart Home video 
doorbells started to arrive on the market.  The idea is that 
the doorbell now has a camera, speaker, and microphone 
inside and is connected to your WiFi network.  When 
someone rings the bell, your phone is notified and you can 
answer the door with one way video (you can see them) and 
two-way audio from wherever you are.  The doorbells also 
have motion detection so you can capture package thieves, 
kids ringing and running, deliveries, etc.  While sometimes 
included as part of an overall home security system, the 
doorbells are mostly marketed and sold as standalones in 
the $200 - $250 range.  They can either replace your 
doorbell by using its existing wiring or there are battery 
powered versions if you don’t have wires.  As of late 2017, 
notable vendors are Ring, Skybell, and August.   
One thing to note here is that all of the main players in the 
video doorbell space are startup companies and none of the 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
170 
products to date come from established players in the 
doorbell industry.  This is not necessarily a negative thing, 
only that there are certain characteristics frequently 
observed from startups.  For the most part, startups are 
often under great pressure to push products out to market 
fast to satisfy their investors.  There is always a fine line 
between rushing a product to market and releasing a quality 
product.  Even though the first version of the product has to 
be good enough to gain market traction, often the second or 
third generation of the product is the one that will take over 
the mainstream market and be the one that everyone wants 
for the long term.   
If you are buying version one of a startup product, you are 
probably an early adopter of new technology, love tinkering, 
and don’t mind doing regular upgrades of both hardware and 
software.  If you just want something that works, don’t mind 
letting others be first, then you might be inclined to wait for 
the next version of the product. 
I say all this because choosing which video doorbell to 
buy gave me great heartache. Roughly, from a functionality 
perspective they are comparable in terms of advertised 
capabilities.  I have an issue with Ring because in order to 
retrieve all of the stored video clips from rings and motion 
detection, they charge a monthly ($3) or yearly fee ($30) 
which goes against my criteria of not wanting to pay monthly 
fees for any of this technology.  In looking at the reviews on 
Amazon, Ring certainly has many more reviews than their 

Video Door Bell 
 
 
171 
competitors indicating much higher sales and the higher 
rating of the three.  (See Appendix 2.) 
So, once again, I violated my own rules, this time about 
no monthly fees, and got the Ring Video Pro doorbell.  I got 
the newer Pro version even though it was more expensive 
simply because it was their latest model and I don’t want to 
live with the mistakes of the older models.  It turns out that 
wiring for doorbells is way more complicated than I could 
have imagined. Combinations of mechanical chimes, 
electronic chimes, or in my case no chimes, and a bit of a re-
wire job from an old intercom system, made this a more 
advanced type of installation.   
The lesson here is that whichever model or brand you buy, 
only buy it at a retail location that accepts returns because 
there are reasonable odds that something in your doorbell 
world will be incompatible with these products, whether it be 
the wiring, physical installation, or just missed expectations.  
Some vendors have rather nasty return policies if you buy 
them directly online.  I was a bit lucky and unlucky at the 
same time, in that my specific wiring scenario was not the 
normal way of doing things so I had to get a hold of Ring 
support to have them ship me the missing part which turned 
out to be a fuse and some wire all neatly packaged up.  They 
did so free of charge and a few days later, I was all set to 
install the doorbell. 
Before you even buy or unbox the doorbell, you will want to 
do the 2.4GHz and 5GHz WiFi speed test again with your 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
172 
phone from the exact location you plan on installing the 
doorbell.  If you can’t get the recommended bandwidth at 
that spot, your options are to move the doorbell, which is as 
unlikely as moving the door, or adjust your WiFi network so 
that location is covered.  Remember that it will be more 
important to have a good uplink bandwidth since it is video 
captured by the doorbell that needs to find its way up to the 
Internet for storage.  I measured about 5Mbps uplink 
bandwidth (my service is maxed out at 6) and I got 
acceptable video.  If you are measuring less than 1 Mbps 
and you can’t get it any higher, this product might not be for 
you. 
Of all the Smart Home products, this one is probably the 
most intensive physical installation.  Unless you want to 
guess about the voltage of the wires at your doorbell (most 
use 24 Volts), you will need a voltmeter and know how to 
use it.  Also, a little bit of creativity is required for the physical 
installation of the doorbell on the outside of the house.  
Although this wiring challenge might scare you into buying 
and running a battery-only doorbell, I’d recommend that only 
as a last resort.  Batteries do not fare well in cold weather 
and some functions such as live view may not function the 
same as with a wired unit.  If you choose Ring, follow the 
instructions very closely knowing that the Ring and Ring Pro 
have vastly different installation and wiring instructions.  The 
documentation is good but quite often they mix the two units 
up which makes things confusing.  I suspect this will get 
better over time.  The rest is set up using the Ring app on 
the phone and is pretty straightforward.  When the doorbell 

Video Door Bell 
 
 
173 
rings, the person ringing will hear a sound right at the 
doorbell so they know that they have pressed the button 
properly.  Also, you will get a notification on your phone and 
anyone else whom you have invited, in my case, my wife’s 
phone. If you wired it the normal way to your old doorbell 
chime, you will also hear that indoors as well.  In my case, I 
didn’t have a doorbell chime, so I bought the Ring Chime 
that plugs in to an outlet and connects with your WiFi 
network and is triggered by the ringing of the doorbell.  It is 
also installed using the Ring app and works okay for both 
motion detection and ringing of the bell. 
Reluctantly, I also purchased the $30 per year video cloud 
storage, where every ring or motion detection is stored by 
Ring for thirty days for later inspection by you using the Ring 
app.  If you didn’t get this option, you would only be able to 
do live views of someone ringing the bell or moving around 
the area but nothing stored to prove to the police that 
someone stole your package.   
Skybell does not charge for cloud storage so there are 
other options if you feel more strongly than I do about not 
paying for ongoing usage of the product. Realistically you 
need the storage of events since most times you won’t be 
available to respond to the notification on your phone.  It is 
configurable, but every time there is movement or a ring of 
the bell, this event is recorded.  There are settings to create 
your “motion zone” where motion will be detected and this 
has worked well for me with only a few false positives when 
it is very windy and a nearby tree moves.  Our rather large 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
174 
cat thankfully does not trigger it when he takes his perch on 
our welcome mat.  If your front door is really close to the 
road, you might have to adjust the sensitivity and trigger 
zones to make it less sensitive. 
The Ring Pro camera leaves a bit to be desired in terms 
of actually being able to identify people, even in broad 
daylight.  Even at its highest resolution, it is very difficult to 
capture clear images and zooming in is somewhat pixelated. 
Time will tell if this gets better or if somebody else comes 
along with a superior product. 
 
Bottom Line - Video Door Bell 
What to Do 
There are a number of choices for replacing a 
standard doorbell with a video doorbell.  The initial set 
of products to date have come from startup companies 
so remember that often the first-generation products 
are the ones you want your neighbor to try first.  If at 
all possible, use the wired version of the doorbell and 
remember that the point of the product is to collect 
video, which needs a good WiFi network uplink 
connection from the doorbell location.  Many of the 
vendors charge an ongoing fee for storing video clips 
of motion and doorbell rings.  I am not a fan of paying 
this but I did it anyway with the Ring Video Doorbell 
Pro that I bought.  The installation is a bit more 
involved than others and deals with low voltage wiring 
(typically 24V), so you probably need a voltmeter and 

Video Door Bell 
 
 
175 
know how to use it to tackle this install yourself.  If you 
don’t connect this to an existing doorbell chime, you 
will probably want to get the Ring Chime so people 
inside are alerted to movement and doorbell rings. 
Budget 
You should plan on spending between $250 to 
$300 total for these products assuming you install 
them yourself.  Some have an annual fee for video 
storage on the order of $30 per year. 
Result 
I was a little unsure at first whether this would be a 
good spend, so far it has been mostly neutral to 
positive.  There are an awful lot of motion notifications 
since we exit the front door frequently when walking 
the dog, but it does no harm and it just means we 
have a lot of recordings.  The app has been stable but 
the recording quality is so low that you can only see 
that someone is there, not who they are in detail. You 
get full color recordings when it's light enough out and 
black and white even when it's pitch black.  
Early on, I had some issues with videos being 
recorded as all black and I was told that the WiFi 
signal wasn’t good enough.  This led me back to the 
chapter on extending a WiFi network to add another 
small router to boost the signal to where the doorbell 
is located.  Thankfully, this worked and as mentioned 
earlier, I found a spouse-approved place to tuck the 
new router unit away inside a grandfather clock.   
Did I get one of these for the new house?  The 
answer is not yet.  I am still inclined to wait until the 
overall quality gets a bit better before investing in this 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
176 
again.  It is certainly useful for people whose home is 
empty most of the time and need to respond to people 
at the door. 

 
Chapter 16 – Motorized Window Blinds 
 
 
 
 
 
Window coverings in the form of pleated shades or roller 
shades are candidates for home automation, allowing you to 
automate and control the ambiance in each room.  Whether 
you want the blinds down at night for privacy, for shade on 
hot summer days on sun-facing windows, or if the window is 
in a hard to reach place, this type of solution may be right for 
you.  Because these types of blinds are controlled with your 
phone, with voice commands, or with the vendor supplied 
remote controls, it means that they have a small motor to 
move the blinds up and down which, of course, means they 
also need power.  In my home, the only real option is to use 
the battery power option since we don’t have outlets near the 
tops of the windows.  Motorized blinds are expensive so pay 
close attention to the example costs in the Bottom Line 
section at the end of this chapter. 
Window blinds, like lighting, are typically things that you 
would use on a daily basis, so it makes sense to see if there 
is an opportunity to integrate the app you are already using 
for lighting to also schedule the blinds.  This would steer me 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
178 
in the direction of two options: using the same vendor you 
are using for lighting or second, using something that is 
HomeKit compatible if you have chosen to use the Apple 
Home app.   
There are more than a few vendors that have viable 
products for Smart Home blinds.  Established blind vendors 
like Bali and Hunter Douglas both have motorized solutions 
with in-room control units as well as their own apps. Another 
solution is called Serena shades, which is a product of 
Lutron, the same Lutron that makes the Caséta Wireless 
lighting discussed in detail in the lighting section.  This 
means that if you have gone the Lutron route for lighting, you 
can just add the Serena shades using the same Lutron app 
you’re already using and the same Lutron bridge you 
installed for the lighting.  You can also easily program the 
Pico remotes to control one or more blinds along with lights 
using the Lutron app. 
Earlier, we discussed whether to use the Lutron app or 
the Apple Home app to control your home lighting and 
setting of all the schedules and groupings.  If you chose the 
Apple Home app, the great news is that the Serena shades 
are also HomeKit compatible, so when you start adding them, 
they will automatically show up in the Apple Home app as 
well as the Lutron app.  This also means that you can use 
Siri voice control on your Apple devices as well as 
integration to Amazon’s Alexa should you enjoy barking out 
commands and seeing things move. For example, at night, I 
just say “Hey Siri, good night,” and she dutifully closes all the 

Motorized Window Blinds 
 
 
179 
blinds, turns off all the lights, and makes sure all the doors 
are locked. A luxury to be sure, but one that has quickly 
been taken for granted. 
In our first house, we had fairly simple window coverings 
with neutral color pleated shades, some having room 
darkening and some just light filtering.  We also had more 
than forty windows, so when I calculated the cost of a basic 
fabric (using a super fancy fabric can easily double the cost), 
my total cost for doing motorized blinds would have been 
about $14,000 - $16,000 which is about triple what I spent 
on everything else combined.  For comparison purposes, a 
basic Levelor blind that you can get from Home Depot would 
cost about $3,000 to $4,000 to do the whole house.  So, this 
Smart Home Professor also likes to be realistic and decided 
that in that house we would be pulling on strings to open and 
close blinds.   
The new house has only about twenty windows in total, so 
we did end up putting motorized shades on all of them.  It 
was still pricy but somehow, I felt better about it when the 
neighbor started telling me about the window covering 
consultant they hired to do designer coverings.  
The serenashades.com web site is excellent and self-
explanatory for all the different kinds of mountings, fabrics, 
and other options.  Even though we use the Apple Home 
app and incorporate scenes and opening-and-closing 
schedules into this new design, we also made it possible to 
open and close them using a wall switch in each room. This 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
180 
is easily done by ordering the Lutron Pico remotes and 
installing them behind a wall plate anywhere on the wall.  In 
the kitchen, for example, we have three windows that will all 
likely be opened or closed at the same time, so we just need 
one remote to program and control all three at once. In other 
rooms, we chose to go with one remote per blind. 
We ordered the battery-operated version, which I suspect 
is what the vast majority of people do simply because there 
is no easy way to wire these in. Changing batteries is easy 
without having to remove the blind. Self-installation is simple, 
yet time consuming, so invest in an electric screwdriver. 
 
Bottom Line – Motorized Window Blinds 
What to Do 
Installing 
motorized 
blinds 
is 
an 
expensive 
undertaking but if you chose to do it, I would pick 
something that uses the same apps that you use to 
control lighting, since the two are somewhat linked 
both in function and frequency of use.  I chose Serena 
shades from Lutron due to its integration with many of 
my 
lighting 
choices 
and 
its 
Apple 
HomeKit 
compatibility. This is an easy method for combining 
lighting and blinds into the same schedules and use 
voice control. If you chose Lutron Caséta products for 
lighting, the same bridge is used for communicating 
with the blinds. 
  

Motorized Window Blinds 
 
 
181 
Budget 
There are a lot of variables, not the least of which is 
the fabric type, that have a huge impact on the overall 
cost.  For purposes of comparison, I chose the window 
right in front of me which is 70” wide and 40” high, 
inside mount. 
The battery powered Serena blind, with the lowest 
end fabric priced at just over $500.  A simple corded 
blind from Levelor and priced at Home Depot came in 
at $150 If you have a keen eye for design and want to 
upgrade the fabric, it is not difficult to double these 
prices.  The best way for you to see if this is an 
investment you want to make is to price your own 
windows online on the respective web sites. 
Result 
I did not do this in my first home due to the high 
cost and the large number of windows, but I did go 
ahead and buy a much smaller number for the house 
we just moved into.  Because all the Lutron equipment 
is Apple HomeKit compatible, I use the Apple Home 
app to program all the blind and lighting automations 
as well as to control individual blinds.  In addition, in 
each room, I installed a Pico remote on the wall near 
the blinds to be able to easily raise or lower the blinds 
without needing a smartphone.  The remotes install 
anywhere and without wiring and look just like a light 
switch.  They are easily programmable with the Lutron 
app so you can change their function whenever you 
choose.  
This is a luxury, but if you are looking to replace or 
buy new blinds, it's definitely something worth 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
182 
considering. It would be difficult to go back to the days 
of tangled strings and kids yanking them so hard that 
they broke off and had to be replaced… 

 
Chapter 17 – Home Security System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Home security systems have been around for a long time.  
Often, we receive ads in the mail from security companies 
offering to give you a bunch of equipment for free in return 
for a 2-3 year commitment to their monitoring service, 
usually in the neighborhood of $40 - $60 per month. Reading 
all the fine print is mind numbing and often the free package 
is not really free because of all the add-on costs. 
Recent entrants to this market — your phone and cable 
providers — will also provide a complete solution for some 
sort of commitment and an equally complex set of terms and 
conditions. To muddy the waters further, some of these 
packages will include home automation devices like many of 
the ones that have been discussed in previous chapters in 
this part of the book.  
What should be part of a home security system and what 
should you do on your own?  There is no one-size-fits-all 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
184 
answer for this, but hopefully you will get some pointers here 
that will steer you in a good direction. 
 
If you already have a security system 
Traditional home security systems typically offer the 
following as standard features: 
• Perimeter protection (sensors) for doors and 
windows 
• An indoor siren alarm 
• Indoor control pad to arm and disarm 
• Monitoring at a central facility via a cellular 
connection 
• Motion sensors 
• Glass break sensors 
• Other bells and whistles that you probably didn’t 
need 
Typically, the system is armed when you are inside for the 
night so that it will go off immediately in case any door or 
window is opened. When out of the house, the system arms 
on a delay through your main door entrances. If any of the 
perimeter security is breached, the alarm company is notified, 
they call you and if you don’t give them the correct code or 
don’t answer, the authorities are called.   
This isn’t very useful if the notification to the alarm 
company goes over a standard phone line or wired Internet 

Home Security System 
 
 
185 
connection since those are only a pair of wire cutters away 
from being disabled by even amateur bad guys.  Now, it’s 
pretty much standard that the connection back to the 
monitoring site is done over the cellular network.  As noted 
before, you would pay your $50 per month for this over a two 
to three-year contract in return for a “free” install of the 
equipment.  This type of system qualifies you for the home 
insurance discount which varies, but is typically in the 10-
20% range. 
What happens at the end of two to three years after all the 
equipment is paid for?  Does the alarm company call you 
and offer you a lower monitoring price or a batch of new 
gear?  Probably not.  But if you call and tell them you want to 
cancel your service, you might find that magically, your 
monthly fee gets reduced to something in the order of $20 
per month.  Don’t accept their first offer either.  There are 
systems out there in the $15 per month range and they have 
to remain competitive.  I bring this up because this is a viable 
strategy for handling your home security system if you 
already have a system in place and are happy with it.  The 
only thing you might want to add on is the ability to control 
arm/disarm and receive alerts on your mobile device.  Many 
of the existing systems will offer this upgrade so check and 
see the one-time cost of doing this as well as what the new 
monthly charge will be.  Most of the other fancy features like 
video cameras and other Smart Home products are easily 
installed by you and don’t need to be part of a system that 
just drives up your monthly cost. 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
186 
If you have a relationship with a phone or cable company 
(and you probably do if you have Internet, a cell phone, or 
TV), you are likely to be offered up a so-called bundle 
package that will combine things like TV, Internet, and home 
security.  Often this comes with an introductory pricing offer 
that resets to a much higher price after one or two years.  
Again, read the fine print on all these offers so you know 
your overall financial obligation.  If you like your service 
provider and think you will stay with them for a while, this 
option may be appealing to you. 
 
Starting with a new system 
The other scenario is that you don’t have any home 
security system in place, or want to replace your current 
system, and you want to do this yourself for a reasonable 
price.  There are dozens of systems out there so it is always 
best to start with a list of what you really need. My list was: 
• Door and window sensors for perimeter security 
• Indoor siren and main control unit (these are often 
together in one unit) 
• Indoor control pad to arm and disarm 
• Connection to a central monitoring facility via 
cellular 
• Motion sensors (if no large indoor pets) 
• Glass break sensors 
• Smartphone control in and out of the home 
• Easy integration with other sensors 

Home Security System 
 
 
187 
This is the same list as before with the addition of 
smartphone control and the integration with other sensors. 
There are always other options like signage, key fobs etc., 
that you can add on but the obvious missing thing is video 
cameras. That will be covered later in the chapter since they 
have their own unique challenges.  Before sharing a couple 
of options with you, remember that no security system will 
make your home burglar proof.  Your goal is to keep loved 
ones’ safe, maximize the likelihood the bad guys get caught 
or better yet, make your house look less attractive to break 
into.   
At the old house, I already had a system with a traditional 
security company, so I chose to get the lower monitoring 
price and just live with what I have for the time being, 
including no control with my smartphone.  There are a 
couple of systems that I did consider for the new house, 
which was a clean slate for security. 
The first one is from a company called SimpliSafe.  You 
buy the gear that you need from them, install it yourself, and 
then choose the monitoring plan that suits your needs.  
Tucked away in their website is a choice of a basic 
monitoring fee of $15 per month, but it goes up to $25 per 
month if you want to use the phone app.  Since that is a 
requirement for us, the monthly fee would be $25 with no 
commitment period.   
For equipment cost, we’ll use an example of a moderate 
sized bungalow with three door entries and fifteen windows.  
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
188 
If you have a big dog like we do, motion sensors are not of 
much use but a few glass break sensors would make sense.  
If you price this out from SimpliSafe, the cost would come to 
about $500 not including tax.  If you look at the reviews on 
Amazon, which are plentiful and very good overall, you will 
also hear complaints that the main siren is not very loud so 
you might want the optional louder siren for another $60.  
There is a system maximum of forty-one sensors so make 
sure you figure out what you need before buying this system.  
It’s been around for over five years now and gets excellent 
reviews from customers and evaluation websites.  If there is 
any negative, it’s that the company has been slow to come 
out with new products and capabilities and that the system is 
closed so that you can’t integrate it with other vendor’s 
products.  Of course, this can change so make sure you 
make good use of Amazon reviews and the vendor websites 
to get the latest. 
The other system has not been around as long but also 
has great reviews on Amazon, is more modular and open to 
integrations like Nest and sensors for things like leak 
detection. The Abode system has free self-monitoring with a 
smartphone app and offers two levels of central monitoring, 
one that has a cellular backup for $96 per year, or full 
professional monitoring, including the cellular backup for 
$240 per year (they also offer monthly rates).  The unique 
thing on the monitoring side is that you can choose to get 
professional monitoring a la carte in three or seven day 
increments should you only need it for that period of time.  
The cost of the same system with Abode is a bit more 

Home Security System 
 
 
189 
expensive and comes in at over $900.  It is not exactly an 
apples-to-apples comparison though, as it also includes an 
indoor motion sensor with camera that you have to get but 
costs $115 if purchased separately.  Abode is constantly 
adding new capabilities and does frequent updates on their 
website to keep you informed.  If you also have Nest 
products, it is worth also checking out how those integrations 
work on the Abode web site. For example, if your Nest 
Protect smoke detector goes off, it will trigger an alarm to the 
monitoring center who then call the fire department.   
I chose the more expensive system from Abode, along 
with the annual monitoring that averages out to $20 per 
month.  I like the smaller low-profile window sensors that I 
was able to just fit on all the windows and clear the blinds 
that are inside-mounted.  Installation was easy and I would 
recommend that you use your computer to do the install and 
then your smartphone to run things day-to-day.  Everything 
is configurable (like each sensor can be on a delay or not, 
make a chime or not, etc.) so it will take you some time to 
figure out what you want, but once you do, it's a 
straightforward process.  I chose not to have each 
door/window make a chime when it was opened or closed, 
and to have the two main entry doors on a delay so we can 
enter and have sixty seconds to get to the keypad to disarm 
when we arrive home. 
The keypad is an optional accessory which we don’t use 
all that much, since we can do everything from our 
smartphones, but it's useful if you're having someone come 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
190 
in to house-sit when you're away and you just want to keep 
things simple for them. There is an extensive notifications 
function for both e-mail and smartphone that could use some 
ease-of-use makeover.  For each account you create, you’ll 
have to manually check each of about 50 or more boxes as 
to the type of notifications you want.  Flexible, but time 
consuming.  At least you only have to do it once per account. 
 
Security cameras 
Cameras in general can either be part of your security 
system or not.  Some people use them for baby or pet 
monitors or for keeping an eye on the backyard pool to make 
sure everything is going okay.  Others use them as part of 
the security system and take advantage of motion alerts to 
trigger notifications that can be sent to their alarm system.  
There is an integration of Nest cameras and the Abode 
security system, for example, that allows for this capability. 
The important thing to know about cameras is that each 
camera is capable of sourcing a live video feed of differing 
qualities.  This feed can either go nowhere if nobody is 
watching it, be sent to your smartphone if you want to watch 
it on demand, or stream its video to some storage facility 
either continuously or when motion is detected allowing for 
later retrieval.  There are substantial ongoing cost factors to 
consider such as the amount of your Internet bandwidth the 
camera uses and video cloud storage costs.  Even though it 
gets a little involved, it’s worth your time to understand these 

Home Security System 
 
 
191 
tradeoffs.  We’ll start with the most intensive application from 
an overall cost and bandwidth perspective and work our way 
down to the least. 
 
Constant streaming to the cloud 
This model has each of your cameras on and recording 
24/7 with all the video data going over WiFi to your router, 
and then using your Internet Connection to store the video in 
a Cloud service (a place on the Internet where stuff is 
stored) for later retrieval.  This is the most expensive of all 
models and to illustrate this, we’ll use the Nest camera as an 
example since they are kind enough to share all this 
information on their web site. 
Each camera recording using its highest quality video will 
use between 0.45 to 1.2Mbps of your Internet uplink capacity 
and of course that same amount of your WiFi network in 
your home.  If you recall the speedtest examples used 
earlier in the book, the uplink number is often the lower one, 
and I was measuring 6Mbps.  So, a three pack of these 
cameras would use between 1.5 and 3.6 Mbps of my 
Internet uplink (more than 50%).  Yes, that is a lot.   
Continuing on, over the course of a month, a single 
camera will generate between 140GB to 380GB of data 
going out your Internet link, just for storing the video. Again, 
recall that many Internet providers are now metering usage 
on your home Internet connection and charging for overages.  
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
192 
My Internet connection is metered at 1024GB per month 
(counting data in and out) so again, three cameras would 
use between 420GB and 1140 GB per month. This is also a 
lot, and in fact could put me in a position of having to pay 
more for Internet service just to handle this load. By the way, 
the reason that there is variation in the data coming from the 
cameras is that the less motion, the lower the data rate.  
More motion tends towards the higher number. 
Now to add one more component to this model, the video 
generated by the camera needs to be stored somewhere 
and that is not free.  Nest has a service called Nest Aware 
that has a yearly subscription of either $100 for ten days of 
rolling video storage or $300 per year for thirty days of rolling 
storage.  Per camera.  Yes, up to $900 per year for three 
cameras, each having thirty days of rolling storage and 
playback. (Note that these figures may change to make sure 
to check the latest figures on the Nest web site) 
As you can see, this can get very expensive very quickly 
and for this reason, here are a few other models that make 
sense depending on your application. 
 
Triggered event video clips stored in the cloud 
It turns out that most of the time, nothing is happening on 
the cameras so there is no point in storing a continuous 
stream.  In this model, used by the majority of the video 
doorbell vendors including Ring which I used, thirty second 

Home Security System 
 
 
193 
clips are recorded for each motion event detected as well as 
a press of the doorbell button.  These clips are dated and 
timed and available to playback later using the appropriate 
Phone app or via the web browser.  The quantity depends 
on how many events occur but hitting your bandwidth limits 
or overall data usage does not factor into this model.  There 
is typically a cost to store and retrieve this video that varies 
by vendor so make sure you read the fine print.  Ring costs 
$30 per year for thirty days of rolling video clips - just enough 
to be annoying but not so much that I didn’t buy it. 
 
Constant Streaming, Local Storage, on-Demand Retrieval 
This model is similar to the first one where each camera 
streams continuously to a storage device but that storage is 
in your home so there’s no need for extra data to clog up 
your Internet connection.  To review any video, an app, or 
web browser can review live or interesting segments either 
locally or remote to your house.  In the case of remote 
viewing, your Internet connection would be used but only 
when you are watching.  From a pure security perspective, 
this is not as secure as if the video was stored offsite since 
someone can steal the storage device from your home if 
they know what to look for.  It is possible to set up a system 
like this in your home by using a Network Attached Storage 
(NAS) with some custom programming and many of my tech 
savvy friends have done this, but I haven't yet found a simple 
to use commercially available system that works like this.  
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
194 
Since this is how I would run the system in my home, I am 
postponing purchase of a proper camera system until this 
becomes available. I will provide timely updates on 
www.smarthomeprofessor.com on this topic.  
 
Streaming on Demand Only 
This model is quite simple and it can be done with the 
same cameras as the constant streaming to the cloud model, 
with the exception being that you are not paying for any 
storage of video in the cloud and you can connect to the 
camera on demand and watch live video.  Only then is it 
streamed over your WiFi and to the Internet when you are 
not home.  Despite my postponement of getting a proper 
camera system, to test this I got the Nest Outdoor camera 
and set it up in the garage so I could see what the cats were 
up to and to be able to check if the garage door was open.  
Admittedly this is a silly reason to buy a camera but 
hopefully you’ll find a better application than mine. 
Since we had already installed some Nest thermostats 
and smoke detectors, we used the same Nest app on our 
phone to do the install of the camera. Again, the installation 
is pretty straightforward using the directions that come in the 
box.  I decided that I would try to use this on my 5GHz WiFi 
network since it uses a lot of bandwidth when streaming and 
I know that the 2.4GHz network already has a lot of devices.  
A quick speedtest using my phone from the desired location 
showed enough bandwidth to go ahead so using my existing 

Home Security System 
 
 
195 
Nest app and account, I just added the camera to the app.  I 
did not sign up for the Nest Aware expensive cloud storage 
so that I could see how useful the camera was without it. 
The camera plugs into an AC wall socket and comes with 
a very long pair of cords as well as screw downs to secure 
the cord to the wall to make it harder to steal.  From a 
security camera perspective, it wouldn’t take a rocket 
scientist to walk up to the camera and unplug it to disable it, 
but that aside, it does have some useful functions.  You can 
get notifications on your phone or email every time there’s 
either movement or sound detected.  You can also decide if 
you want to get these notifications only when nobody is 
home.  You can go into the Nest app and view the camera 
live at any time.  When you get the Nest camera, they 
include a thirty-day free trial of the Nest Aware service where 
you get the notifications of movement and face detection.  
You can then go back and look at video of any of these 
events and of course switch to live viewing at any time. After 
the thirty-day trial, you lose the face detection but still get 
notifications of movement but only with fairly grainy still shot 
archives of what happened.  Also, the number of 
notifications increased so much that I turned it off because it 
was so annoying.  
So, without the subscription, I am essentially using the 
camera as an on-demand live video source with no archival 
footage.  The net effect is that I am still looking for a better 
system for handling video.  Notably, in our new home, I have 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
196 
not found a reasonable application for the camera, so it's 
currently lying dormant in a box. 
Bottom Line – Home Security System 
What to Do 
What you end up doing with your home security 
system depends a lot on what your starting point is.  If 
you already have a system that is centrally monitored 
and are paying more than $20 per month for the 
monitoring service (and your equipment is paid off), 
chances are you can get a much lower monthly fee by 
calling your provider and telling them you want to 
cancel the service.   
If you want to put in a system that also includes 
smartphone control, you may be able to extend the 
system you have, or you can opt for a new system that 
provides all the perimeter protection with door and 
window sensors, sirens, keypads, glass break detector, 
motion sensors, central monitoring via a cellular 
connection, and also smartphone control via an app.  
The two systems that I narrowed my search to are 
SimpliSafe and Abode, both of which offer high quality 
complete do-it yourself-security systems. SimpliSafe 
has a lower up-front cost for equipment but a higher 
monthly monitoring fee, while Abode’s up-front cost is 
higher, with a lower monthly fee if paid annually.  
Abode also can integrate with other Smart Home 
products like smoke detectors, cameras, and sensors. 
I chose Abode for my Smart Home design. 
When it comes to cameras, I chose to do this 
separately from the security system, experimenting 

Home Security System 
 
 
197 
with the Nest outdoor camera.  Costs can be very high 
for monthly storage of video with some cameras, and 
a good chunk of your Internet plan can get used, so 
read the fine print and understand both of those sets 
of implications. I am waiting for a system that has the 
video storage done in the home in a simple and 
integrated way that also allows for remote access. 
Budget 
The biggest cost of security systems over time are 
the monthly fees.  As an example, if a system costs 
$800 for all the gear and you have to pay $50 per 
month for remote monitoring, your ten-year total cost 
is $6,800. When you look at it that way, it matters little 
what the equipment costs because it is dwarfed by the 
monitoring costs.  Therefore, job number one in 
security systems is keeping the monthly fee to a 
minimum.  You could argue that if you have self-
monitoring with your smartphone, you don’t even need 
monitoring by a third party, but this assumes you are 
always available to diagnose problems and your 
Internet connection is always up. 
New do-it-yourself systems cost between $500 and 
$1000, depending on how large a system you need. If 
you do choose a monitoring service, you shouldn’t 
have to pay more than $20 to $25 per month. 
Video surveillance cameras range in price but are 
typically in the $200 range.  Often times there are 
charges to store your video in the Cloud that can be 
as high as $300 per year so evaluate very carefully 
whether you need that service or not. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
198 
Result 
A security system is something that many homes 
have or need.  In the past, large security system 
companies had a lock on the market with promises of 
free equipment in exchange for long term monitoring 
contracts.  Now, we have choices using high quality 
DIY systems that you buy up front and either monitor 
with your smartphone or pay a lower monthly fee for 
monitoring.  In our old home, I chose to keep my 
existing system and I negotiated a lower monthly fee 
from one of the big security companies.  
For our new house, I purchased the Adobe security 
system with an annual monitoring plan that nets out to 
$20 per month.  The freedom of being able to arm and 
disarm the system with a smartphone is super 
convenient but I still have a keypad for manual use.  I 
learned that if the alarm goes off by accident and your 
phone starts beeping at you and you “verify” the alarm, 
it means you will get a visit from the police.  
I'd give Abode full marks for overall functionality, 
but work still needs to be done on the usability front to 
make things simpler to configure in the notifications 
section.  Always do the configuration with a computer 
and browser and manage the system day-to-day with 
the smartphone app. 
 

 
Chapter 18 – Things Working Together 
 
 
 
 
 
By now, you probably have a lot of devices working in 
your Smart Home, some of them together, and some 
independently controlled by their own app.  As a reminder, 
you’ll always need the native phone app to install and update 
whatever product you picked, but you might not use that app 
on a day-to-day basis for turning things on and off or setting 
scenes (creating a group of things that you can do 
something to all at once) or schedules (e.g. turn on these 
five lights and close five blinds at sunset every day).  For 
example, using the Lutron app for controlling the lighting is 
an option but so is using the Apple Home app which can 
also control any other Apple HomeKit enabled products that 
you may have.  But if you don’t have an iPhone, the Apple 
Home app will not be relevant to you. 
To add another twist, if you look at the Nest homepage, 
there is a huge list of works-with-Nest products that might be 
an option for you to experiment with.  It only gets fuzzier 
from there because there is another class of apps, like 
IFTTT (IF This, Then That) and Stringify, that also tie 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
200 
different products together in specific ways.  And to add to 
the mix are products like Alexa, from Amazon, Google Home, 
and the new Apple HomePod which are voice-activated 
speakers that can do many things including controlling your 
home devices. 
Feel free to go to the various websites to see the ever-
changing capabilities of some of these apps and products, 
but in the end, it leads to two fundamental questions: 
1) Should my purchasing decision be impacted by the 
matrix of what works with what? 
2) With all the choices out there, what should I be using 
to run these Smart Home systems on a day-to-day 
basis? 
This is probably the most dynamic part of the whole Smart 
Home puzzle so before answering these questions, we need 
to understand what these integrations mean because they 
are not all equal.  I’ll provide some specific examples as well 
so you can see how different they are, and then let you know 
what I am doing now, and offer some recommendations for 
you. 
 
Apple HomeKit 
Some of the devices you’ll buy are Apple HomeKit 
compatible.  If they are, you can use the Apple Home app on 
your iPhone or iPad to control, group, and schedule any of 

Things Working Together 
 
 
201 
the devices, as long as you have a newer generation Apple 
TV on your home network.  In my case, the Lutron Caséta 
lighting, iDevices outdoor plugs, Schlage and Premis door 
locks, Ecobee thermostat, Lutron Serena shades, and MyQ 
garage door home bridge are all HomeKit compatible. I 
specifically chose smoke detectors from Nest that are not 
HomeKit products because they are not something I need to 
program to do anything on a day-to-day basis.  The Abode 
security system is not HomeKit compatible, but it would be 
nice if it were. Since I have an iPhone, I use the Apple Home 
app to create schedules for dusk, night time, and other 
schedules to come.  They are simple to create, so literally 
anyone can do this with no instruction. 
There are a couple of important things to know about 
HomeKit compatibility.  The first is that for companies to be 
part of the program, there is a dependency on hardware so if 
you buy a product that is not HomeKit compatible and hope 
that it will become so via a software update, (i.e. no cost to 
you) you would be making a mistake.  A good example: The 
Chamberlain MyQ garage door opener was not HomeKit 
compatible (as of Feb 2017) but they announced it would be 
later in 2017.  If you wanted it before then, you would either 
have to buy a new one later or buy a bridge from them to 
make it HomeKit compatible, but either way, it means more 
dollars out of your pocket.  This is the reason I waited to buy 
that product until the HomeKit version was available. 
The downside of this program is that it takes companies 
longer to join the HomeKit club than some of the others that 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
202 
follow, but the upside is more stringent requirements 
imposed by Apple, which yield a consistent, simple 
experience using the Apple Home app. I mentioned this 
earlier, but when I started out looking into Smart Home 
purchases, my initial inclination was to favor products that 
were HomeKit compatible to minimize the number of apps 
required to run the system day-to-day.  I later realized that 
for certain products, it doesn't really matter if they're part of 
HomeKit.  Case in point is the Rachio sprinkler system which 
has its own great app for scheduling your sprinkler zones. 
You have to use it to set up the system, and because you 
program it once, and then it runs on its own, there's no need 
for it to be tied into the Apple Home app.  
My recommendation is that if you want to go the Apple 
HomeKit route, the gadgets that matter the most are the 
ones that you would want to schedule on a day-to-day basis 
and are mostly of the on/off variety of devices.  (Lights, plugs, 
blinds, door locks, garage door opener, thermostat etc.) 
Two more things about HomeKit to note.  I mentioned that 
the Lutron Caséta lighting products are HomeKit compatible.  
To be more precise, it is actually the Lutron Bridge that is 
HomeKit compatible as it translates the proprietary Lutron 
Clear Connect protocol spoken by all the dimmers and blinds 
to the Internet.  Lutron doesn’t make the only bridge that 
speaks Clear Connect.  Wink also makes a Hub called the 
Wink 2 Hub of all things, that can be used in place of the 
Lutron Bridge. (Hub and Bridge are used somewhat 
interchangeably here).  BUT, the Wink Hub doesn’t have 

Things Working Together 
 
 
203 
HomeKit compatibility so this means if you use the Wink Hub 
for your Lutron gear, you can use the Lutron app (or the 
Wink app - more on that in a bit) but not the Apple Home app.   
The last fairly obvious thing to note is that if you don’t 
have an iPhone or iPad, the whole HomeKit thing is not 
relevant to you.  Chances are, the next sections are areas 
you have already been experimenting with, so let’s dive into 
those now. 
 
Works with Nest 
Nest makes a number of different products including 
thermostats, smoke detectors, and cameras, with others 
likely to come over time.  They have a Works with Nest 
program that you can read about on their website where 
manufacturers of other products can put a "Works with Nest" 
sticker on their product and it will be compatible with Nest 
products.  In contrast to Apple’s HomeKit, the Nest 
integrations are all done in software which means their 
product list is a lot longer and changes almost weekly as 
new products come out and new capabilities get released 
with software updates.  What does this really mean though?  
The short answer is that it depends on the product and 
which of the Nest products they have chosen to work with.  
The full detail of the exact integration is shown on the Works 
with Nest tab on the Nest web page but here are a few 
examples for illustrative purposes. 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
204 
• The Rachio Sprinkler controller will cycle on your 
outdoor sprinklers if the Nest Smoke detector goes 
off inside the house. 
• The Chamberlain MyQ Garage door opener will 
work with the Nest camera to provide alerts when 
your garage door is open or closed.  And you can 
also use the MyQ app to see your Nest thermostat 
temperature and set your home/away status. 
• You can use Amazon’s Alexa to send voice 
commands to change the temperature on your 
Nest thermostat. 
There are plenty of apps that also work with Nest in the 
context of being able to control the Nest Thermostat from 
within another app.  The earlier example of the Lutron app is 
one as is the Wink app to be explained later. You can 
probably see that some of these integrations are more useful 
than others so the moral of this story is that the "Works with 
Nest" logo can mean very different things, and you have to 
go to the Nest web site to learn exactly what that integration 
is to know whether this would change your opinion as to 
which device you should buy.  Because Nest has a number 
of very different products, Works with Nest really means that 
at least one of the Nest products works with your product or 
app of interest, not necessarily all of them. Also note that 
you can buy a product that has no Nest integrations but later, 
a free software update could enable it. 
Obviously, none of this matters if you have no Nest 
products, but for me, I consider any Nest integrations more 

Things Working Together 
 
 
205 
of a bonus feature that I might want to use rather than 
something I specifically look for when choosing a product.  
Most companies that ship quality products will want to tie 
themselves to as many “works with” programs as possible 
because they have to hedge their bets on who the winners 
are in the Smart Home space.  
 
Works with Alexa 
Amazon makes a number of home voice recognition 
products ranging in price from $40 to $180.  One is the Echo, 
the size of a large beer can, which has a good quality 
integrated speaker and the other is the Dot, about the size of 
a hockey puck and functionally similar to the Echo but with 
only a tiny speaker, not particularly great for playing music. 
There is also a mid-range portable version called the Tap 
with more likely to come over time. All of them are 
sometimes called Alexa because that is the code word to 
wake up the unit to ask it to do something.  “Alexa, what time 
is it?”  If you have an iPhone, it is roughly the equivalent of 
Siri but more programmable via the use of what Amazon 
calls skills.  It is well beyond the scope of this book to list all 
of the things that Alexa can do, but one of them is to control 
some of your Smart Home devices. Which ones? It depends 
on whether they are part of the works with Alexa program 
and the exact functions you can do depend on what the 
company with the product wants you to be able to do. 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
206 
For example, the Rachio sprinkler controller has at least 
140 different commands that you can ask Alexa to do.  
Lutron, Nest, and iDevices also have integrations with Alexa 
and because this is all done in the apps in software, this list 
is likely to grow without your having to change any hardware.  
The way to link your devices to Alexa is to use your Alexa 
Phone app (or using the Alexa web page on your computer) 
and enable skills for each of the products you want to control. 
It looks a lot like adding an app to the Alexa app but once 
you do the first one, you will see that it is pretty intuitive.  
Once the Lutron lighting is added for example, you can just 
tell Alexa to turn on the living room light and bingo, it will 
come on.  Alexa, of course, does many other useful things 
that have nothing to do with Smart Home control, but I will 
leave it to you to explore that on your own. 
What does the Smart Home Professor make of all this 
coolness?  First, in order to use it effectively for controlling 
devices, you have to remember what you named them all 
(outside lights is not the same as outdoor lights or back 
outdoor lights or outdoor back lights) in order for Alexa to do 
what you want.  Second, the Dot and Echo Alexa models are 
plugged into the wall so that means if you want to have voice 
control in every room, you are going to need to buy one of 
the models for each room.  Also, anyone’s voice can trigger 
Alexa, so if your kid or even a voice on the TV says for Alexa 
to turn on the air conditioning to 60° Fahrenheit, then she will 
do it if that skill is enabled.  If you are using the Apple Home 
app, you already have this type of functionality using Siri on 

Things Working Together 
 
 
207 
your iPhone which only works with your own voice, so you 
may or may not need both types of voice control. 
Alexa is definitely a cool product and I had her set up to 
control my home devices but I rarely use her, mostly 
because I don’t remember what I called anything.  Again, I 
don’t think works with Alexa is a buying criteria for any of the 
products I would choose and like the works with Nest 
program, it is more of a bonus to play with and impress 
friends. 
 
Wink 
As mentioned in various chapters including HomeKit 
section, one of the big questions to answer is what is the 
main app going to be that controls the bulk of your Smart 
Home experience.  Certainly, you can run with one app per 
product, but creating scenes and schedules, which is one of 
the most powerful aspects of Smart Home, means that you’ll 
want to have at least one candidate to take over this role.  
This is exactly the spot that Wink is vying to establish itself, 
so it is not surprising that the Wink Hub is not HomeKit 
compatible since they are effectively competing against 
Apple for this role. 
Wink’s main product is a Hub (aka Bridge) that converts 
all the Smart Home languages (Z-Wave, ZigBee, Lutron 
Clear Connect, Bluetooth LE) back into your home network 
so that everything can be connected.  It then also supplies a 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
208 
phone app that you can run to orchestrate many of your 
things working together.  The Wink web site has a running 
list of all the products that it supports and naturally that will 
also change over time.  Incidentally, from the ones that I 
chose to use, many are on the list like Lutron lighting and 
blinds, Nest thermostat and smoke detectors, Schlage door 
lock, MyQ garage door opener, Ring doorbell, Rachio 
sprinklers, and Alexa.  But what does this really mean?  I 
don’t have a Wink Hub so what happens if I just install the 
Wink app and see what works? 
What shows up in the Wink app depends on two things.  
The first is how a given device is connected to your network.  
If it’s connected by WiFi and doesn’t need to go through a 
bridge (which in this case means a bridge that isn’t the Wink 
bridge), then there is a chance it will appear in the Wink app.  
Examples of things that I have installed that are connected 
by WiFi and show up in the Wink app:  The Rachio Sprinkler 
Controller, Nest thermostat, Nest smoke detector, Ring 
doorbell, but not the iDevices outdoor switch.  Why not 
iDevices?  That is the second dependency; the device also 
has to allow itself to be controlled by having a programming 
interface and Wink has to choose to add that specific device.  
In the case of iDevices, either there is no programming 
interface or Wink has decided not to add it yet. 
If you look in the Wink app, the Lutron lighting and 
Schlage lock (neither WiFi-connected directly) both show up 
as supported devices but because I am not using the Wink 
Hub, it does not support either of those products in my home 

Things Working Together 
 
 
209 
setup.  Recall that the Lutron products talk a language called 
Lutron Clear Connect and are bridged to the main network 
using a HomeKit compatible Lutron Bridge.  Also, the 
Schlage Lock is connected using Bluetooth LE back to the 
AppleTV.  If I bought the Wink Hub (approx. $100), then 
these two products would also be integrated with Wink at the 
cost of losing use of the Apple Home app. 
This might seem like too much complexity, and in my 
opinion, it is, but I am showing Wink as one alternative 
example as an overall app that can run many of the devices 
for day-to-day use.  Certainly, if you don’t use an iPhone and 
therefore have no need for Apple HomeKit, this is an option 
worth considering.  The number of devices supported over 
time will hopefully increase with new software releases and 
new product releases from various vendors.  Do remember 
though that you will still need to have each and every 
product app on your phone anyways for doing firmware 
updates and any troubleshooting should something go 
wrong.  Also, complex apps like the Rachio sprinkler app are 
only partially implemented in Wink so it may just be easier to 
use the native Rachio app since it is not something you 
would need to use on a daily basis anyway. 
 
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
210 
IFTTT and Stringify 
IFTTT (IF This, Then That) and Stringify are similar phone 
apps that perform unifying Smart Home functions but on a 
much broader scale than just Smart Home. For simplicity 
reasons, only the Smart Home part will be explained.   
IFTTT is a collection of Applets, or tiny programs, that 
people have written that do very specific things.  For 
example, there is one that turns on the Lutron lights if there 
is a smoke alarm emergency from a Nest smoke detector.  If 
you were to click on this, it would require you to provide your 
login to both Lutron and Nest in order to activate the Applet.  
If you have some other brand of smoke detector or lighting 
or want something else slightly different to happen, then you 
have to find a different Applet that does exactly what you 
want with exactly what you have.   
There are literally hundreds if not thousands of Applets all 
available within the IFTTT app that you can search for to see 
if there are some combinations that suit your needs.  
Remember to check for all the non-Smart Home functions 
too.  There are lots of other things like getting notifications 
from ESPN with your team’s final score or sending out a 
tweet when the season changes on Mars.  And if you really 
want to get creative, you can create your own Applet using 
the app which can potentially do something very unique to 
your situation. 
Stringify is similar to IFTTT and uses something called 
flows. A flow is simply a command to do something, when 

Things Working Together 
 
 
211 
something else happens; called a trigger and an action.  For 
example, every night at 9:00pm, you can trigger a weather 
report for tomorrow as a notification on your phone.  There is 
some generic default “Things” that will get you started, but 
you can add things like your Smart Home products including 
Nest, Rachio, Alexa, Ring, and even IFTTT, that can be 
used as triggers or actions.  With Stringify, you are creating 
your own flows to make things happen so you are only 
limited by your imagination and the products that Stringify 
supports.  Like IFTTT, this involves much tinkering around 
so if you don’t have the time but do have the desire, ask your 
nine-year-old to help.  It’s probably better than them 
watching TV and maybe they will get interested in 
programming and depart your payroll before the age of 
twenty-five. 
Now, back to our questions from the beginning of this 
chapter. 
1) Should a purchasing decision be impacted by the 
matrix of what works with what? 
If you plan on using an iPhone to run your Smart Home 
system on a day-to-day basis, then the answer is yes, you 
will want to have as many of the smart devices be HomeKit 
compatible as possible.  If you are planning on using an 
Android device, it is still a good idea to choose an overall 
app like Wink or a competitor to run the majority of devices.  
In this case, try the various apps out there vying for this 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
212 
position, and then select your products based on which app 
you have chosen. 
2) With all the choices out there, what should I be using to 
run these Smart Home systems on a day-to-day 
basis? 
Like the answer to the last question, use the Apple Home 
app with all your HomeKit compatible products if you plan on 
using an iPhone.  For specialized products like sprinkler 
systems and video doorbells or products that you don’t 
interact with daily like smoke detectors, use the app that 
comes with that product. 
Whether using an iPhone or Android device to run your 
home, the goal should always be simplicity and minimizing 
the number of apps that you need to create schedules and 
interactions.  This will take some experimentation on your 
part to achieve this goal in the Android world. 
Apps like IFTTT and Stringify are also useful to fill some 
stopgap holes when you need two different products being 
controlled by 2 different apps to interact in some specific way. 
 
 
 
 

Things Working Together 
 
 
213 
Bottom Line - Things Working Together 
What to Do 
If you are an iPhone user, your best bet is to get 
products that are HomeKit compatible and they will all 
show up in the Apple Home app which allows for easy 
scheduling and automation.  Some products that don’t 
require daily interaction like smoke detectors don’t 
really need to be in the HomeKit mix so you can pick 
the one you like the best overall.  Other specialized 
products like the Rachio sprinkler controller are so 
unique that it is also not so critical that they are 
controlled by the Apple Home app. 
The Android world is a bit more complicated but 
choosing another overall app like Wink is still a good 
idea.  Choose one that has the most products 
supported and make sure you try out the actual app 
you plan to use to ensure that all the functionality you 
need is still there.  There is no question that this 
requires more time and experimentation than the 
Apple approach. 
Sometimes, you will want your Smart Home 
products to interact with things outside their known 
environment, and apps like IFTTT and Stringify are 
ideal for setting up these custom interactions.  Maybe 
you want to change the color of your smart bulbs 
when your favorite sports team wins a game, or turn 
on your Christmas lights when it is snowing.  If so, 
these apps are ideal to create custom interactions. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

 

 
Chapter 19 – Moving with a Smart Home 
 
 
 
 
 
When I wrote the first draft of this book, I had no idea that 
all the Smart Home goodness I was putting into my home 
would soon be someone else's. The moment I put the 
finishing touches on that draft, we sold the house and bought 
a new one.   
I massively underestimated the effort involved in 
transferring my Smart Home over to its new owner. I wanted 
to make sure that I safely decoupled myself from all digital 
control of the old home and made it simple for the buyer to 
reap the benefits of their new Smart Home right away. 
This chapter isn’t just for people selling their home, buying 
a new home, or real estate agents. It's for everyone.  
Implementing Smart Home technology correctly out of the 
gate will make real estate transactions simple and smooth 
for the seller, buyer and agents. 
More and more people have some Smart Home products 
in their home and as people move around, it's important to 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
216 
make sure that the buyer and seller add these new steps to 
their list: 
1) Determine which Smart Home products will stay 
with the house and which will leave with the seller. 
2) Ensure the seller unhooks themselves from the 
Smart Home products that are being left behind. 
3) Make it easy for the buyer to get inherited Smart 
Home products up and running. 
 
What Stays and What Goes? 
The general rule is that anything that is attached to the 
house stays in a sale, otherwise the seller may take it.  If 
there is any doubt, specify everything in an addendum to the 
sales contract. 
You would typically leave behind controllers for pool 
equipment, outdoor sprinkler systems, in-wall light switches, 
smart bulbs, thermostats, smoke detectors, video doorbell, 
cameras (if wired in), security system, window blinds, garage 
door opener, and door locks.   
Products that would leave with the seller would typically 
be the modem, router(s), lamp dimmers, outdoor on/off plug 
adapters, music system, AppleTV, Smart Home bridges, and 
any other sensors not attached to the home (like water leak 
detectors). 

Moving with a Smart Home 
 
 
217 
You can immediately see the consequences of a poorly 
executed transfer. If the seller doesn’t “disconnect” 
him/herself from the Smart Home products that are staying, 
the buyer won't have control over them. In fact, the seller will 
maintain control of the old Smart Home equipment when 
network connectivity is re-established. As a buyer, you don't 
want someone raising and lowering your thermostat 
remotely.  
Also, the seller will be taking much of the equipment 
(router, bridges etc.) required to make the whole Smart 
Home system work, so if the buyer doesn’t know how to set 
it all back up, they lose out on the advantages of inheriting 
the Smart Home products that are staying behind.  Here is 
how to ensure the transfer goes smoothly. 
 
Seller’s Steps to Unhook from 
Smart Home Products Left Behind 
Before 
disconnecting 
any 
networking equipment, the seller 
should do the following: 
1) Go into each app for 
every product type being 
left behind that uses your 
personal e-mail as an 
account, and delete those 
products from his/her app.  
At the beginning of this 
section, I suggested that 
you create a new e-mail 
address that you will use 
only for that house's 
Smart Home accounts and 
devices.  When you move, 
you just give this e-mail 
away to the buyer and 
save both of you a lot of 
time.  The buyer just has 
to change the password 
on the e-mail and Smart 
Home accounts tied to it. 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
218 
The products will still operate but in standalone 
mode similar to the state they were in when 
originally installed but they will no longer be 
associated with the app on the seller’s phone. 
2) For products that need to continue to operate on a 
schedule, like pool controllers, sprinkler systems, 
and video doorbells, create a new e-mail address 
and password and link these systems to that new 
e-mail and away from the seller’s personal mail.  
Give the new e-mail and password to the buyer so 
that they can use it to get these up and running 
again. 
3) If you had the foresight to have created a portable 
e-mail account to tie your Smart Home to, remove 
your name as the contact and write down all the 
passwords for the buyer 
4) Disconnect everything that you are taking and get 
ready to install it at your new home.  At this point, 
the seller would have no control over any of the 
former Smart Home devices being left behind, even 
when things are reconnected. 
Because I didn’t have a separate e-mail for Smart Home 
gear in the old house, it took me almost eight full hours to 
unhook myself and then hook the buyer up to a new e-mail 
address.  Selling a home is stressful enough that this added 
work is hopefully something that you can avoid. 
 

Moving with a Smart Home 
 
 
219 
How a Buyer Re-establishes Smart Home Functionality 
There are two things the buyer needs to know to get 
things back up and running.  First, you have to know which 
products being left behind are Smart Home capable. Second 
is the knowhow to set up the Internet, Network, which apps 
to use to run everything, and what to buy to fill in the gaps 
for the products that were taken by the seller.  
This is where the Smart Home savvy real estate agents 
can play a new, key role in the transaction. On the next page 
is a snapshot of a one-page checklist that a real estate agent 
can use to keep track of which Smart Home products’ the 
buyer will have to work with.  A full-page fillable PDF version 
is available on the smarthomeprofessor web site. 
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
220 
 
The seller’s agent should have the seller fill this out in 
detail and provide it to the buyer’s agent.  If the selling agent 
does not provide a list of the Smart Home products, the 
buyer should insist on getting this before finalizing any 
buying arrangement. 

Moving with a Smart Home 
 
 
221 
If the buyer receives this sheet, they will know what they 
have to work with.  If the seller doesn’t fill this out, then the 
buyer can go hunting around the house for these type of 
Smart Home products and make their own checklist.  
Unless the seller has provided all the details of how to get 
all the existing Smart Home products 
up and running, the buyer should 
assume that other than the physical 
installation of the products, they are 
starting from scratch in terms of the 
apps and programming.  It will be 
necessary to reset each product to 
factory defaults and start each install 
from the beginning.  This is of course 
after 
you 
get 
your 
network 
infrastructure in place. 
This book will be a great gift for 
anyone buying a home with Smart Home products installed, 
as it will walk them through everything they need to do to get 
their Smart Home operational. 
If you move into a 
home with Smart 
Home technology, 
assume that you will 
have to factory reset 
all of the products 
and start 
programming from 
scratch.  It’s not as 
hard as it sounds 
and you will learn all 
about each product 
at the same time! 
www.ebook3000.com

 

 
Summary 
 
 
 
I hope that this book has made it easier for you to make a 
Smart Home out of your house.  There are many more 
devices to discover other than what I covered in this book, 
including smart appliances, sensors, sleep aids, baby 
monitors, vacuums, celling fans, etc.  I tried to pick enough 
of the popular items so that even if you want to add more to 
your mix, the strategies, methods of choosing the right 
product, and the technology should all be familiar, so you 
can take your next steps with confidence.  The appendices 
following provide a bit more insight into other technical topics 
and may prove valuable if you choose to expand your 
system. 
As noted many times throughout this book, there will be 
many technology, product, and company changes over time 
so 
the 
companion 
web 
site 
at 
www.smarthomeprofessor.com will keep you up to date with 
any new discoveries. 
Lastly, have fun with this.  Once you start, it tends to be 
addictive, so just take it one step at a time. 
www.ebook3000.com

 

 
Appendix 1 – More Tech Details 
 
 
 
 
 
The previous chapter touched a bit on some of the 
languages and protocols that Smart Home devices use, 
since they are not all connected to the network using WiFi.  
The main reason that other wireless protocols are used is 
that many of the small devices like sensors, window contacts 
and others, operate on batteries, and it is a goal to try and 
extend that battery life as long as possible.  WiFi is not 
known for its lengthy battery life so you rarely see it used on 
battery powered gadgets used in the Smart Home. 
Each of the different wireless protocols that you are likely 
to encounter is described below, noting their key 
characteristics.  The next section on bridges will explain how 
to connect, or bridge, these protocols to ones that your 
network and smartphone can understand. 
 
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
226 
Protocols 
Lutron ClearConnect 
Lutron developed a wireless protocol for their devices that 
uses an interference free radio band for communication with 
one another.  It is a so-called hub-and-spoke design, 
meaning that all of the devices communicate back with the 
central hub (in my case the Lutron Bridge), which is plugged 
into the router.  This allows the system to be very responsive 
to commands, like turning off a bunch of lights at once and 
having them all do so in synch.  It’s used in all the Lutron 
Caséta lighting products and the Serena blinds.  They also 
published a detailed white paper explaining the inner 
workings of Clear Connect and have licensed the technology 
to other companies to include in their bridges. 
 
Bluetooth Low Energy (BTLE or BLE) 
BLE is a standard available on many products including 
your 
smartphone, 
computer, 
many 
fitness 
products, 
speakers, etc.  The Low Energy version of Bluetooth is a 
lower data rate than standard Bluetooth and is suitable for 
sending small amounts of data, for example sending 
commands from an Apple TV to a door lock to tell it to lock 
or to check its status.   
 
 

Appendix 1 – More Tech Details 
 
 
227 
Z-Wave 
Z-Wave is a wireless protocol released in 2004 by a 
Danish company called Zensys, later acquired in 2009 by 
Sigma 
Designs, 
that 
is 
used 
for 
signaling 
and 
communication by home automation devices. Z-Wave uses 
a so-called mesh topology where sensors can communicate 
back to the main hub through other sensors.  This tends to 
make the coverage a bit easier if you have a lot of devices at 
the expense of some added delay if you have to take a 
number of hops to get back to the hub or bridge.  There are 
thousands of products using Z-Wave and many bridges that 
support it as well. 
 
ZigBee 
ZigBee is another wireless protocol that has been 
standardized by the IEEE (an international standards body), 
the same group that created the WiFi standards.  It is also 
targeted for low data rate, long battery life home sensor 
products.  It has been around since 2004 and supports the 
same topology as Z-Wave and for all intents and purposes is 
an alternative of Z-Wave. A quick check shows a number of 
Smart Home products available with ZigBee but probably not 
as many as with Z-Wave. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
228 
The key question about all these protocols is whether the 
protocol supported by a device you are looking to buy should 
influence your buying decision.  The short answer is no, it is 
much better to focus on getting the best products for the job 
but knowing what protocols they support is important.  If the 
device is WiFi, you know how to do the test to determine if it 
is likely to work in the place you want to install it.  If it 
supports BLE like the Schlage and Kwikset door locks do, 
you know that it has to connect back to something that also 
supports BLE, namely the Apple TV.  If it is either Z-Wave or 
ZigBee, you will have to connect those back to a bridge that 
supports those protocols.  If you built out your Smart Home 
exactly like the book outlined, only the Abode gateway 
(home security system) supports Z-Wave or ZigBee  and 
acts as a bridge for those protocols.  Recall that the Lutron 
products all use Clear Connect and so the Lutron bridge that 
we installed in the lighting section would be available to 
connect other Clear Connect products. 
Now it is time to look at a few bridges in the event that you 
do have other products that use Z-Wave or ZigBee. As 
mentioned regarding the Abode products for home security, 
the Abode gateway (or the central unit) is also a Z-Wave and 
ZigBee bridge, one of the reasons that I chose this for the 
security system for the new home.  It allows expansion for 
other products that they don’t sell, like leak detectors, freeze 
sensors, and others. 
 

Appendix 1 – More Tech Details 
 
 
229 
Bridges 
There are a number of companies that make bridges (aka 
hubs) supporting multiple protocols.  Wink for example has a 
bridge that supports Clear Connect, BLE, Z-Wave and 
ZigBee, 
but 
not 
Apple 
HomeKit. 
 
Samsung-owned 
SmartThings has a ZigBee and Z-Wave hub as well and a 
list of compatible products.  Other vendors are Insteon, Iris, 
and WeMo.  A handy comparison chart of what is supported 
by 
all 
of 
these 
hubs 
is 
available 
at 
http://www.insteon.com/technology/#systemscompared. 
From the chart, you can see that Insteon uses its own 
protocol, but also has a HomeKit enabled Hub. Iris uses Z-
Wave and WeMo by Belkin uses WiFi. 
So, what to make of all this?  In my opinion, buy the best 
products and work backwards and source a hub if you need 
one.   Always try to plug them into the Ethernet ports on your 
main router as opposed to one of the extenders.  I favor a 
multi-vendor approach to keep from being locked in to or 
dependent on the survival of any one vendor.  Also, unless 
all these companies merge, I highly doubt that you will find 
all the best products in each category from one manufacturer 
alone. As you have likely concluded by now, keeping things 
simple is a good idea by minimizing the number of apps 
required 
to 
run 
your 
Smart 
Home 
day-to-day.
www.ebook3000.com

 
 

 
Appendix 2 – Evaluating What to Buy 
 
 
 
 
 
Deciding which Smart Home gadget to buy within a 
certain category is half the battle in your Smart Home project. 
I started mine with lighting and it certainly was not clear at all 
to me how to approach the dizzying number of choices in 
order to find something that works for all requirements. This 
whole ecosystem of Smart Home systems is a multi-vendor 
endeavor by definition, but I remain convinced that a simple 
ease of use experience is what the end consumer will 
demand before the market really takes off.  So, to that end, a 
quick analysis of the Smart Home market is in order, as this 
will influence some purchasing and other strategic app 
choices. 
 
Smart Home Market Analysis 
There are some vendors who make specific Smart Home 
products to solve specific problems.  Areas such as lighting, 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
232 
outdoor sprinkler systems, security systems, cameras, door 
locks, blinds, thermostats, smoke detectors, hot water 
heaters, and music systems are examples.  In most cases, 
in order to make a truly great product in any of these 
markets, it takes a tremendous amount of focus, dedication, 
time, and money to get it right.  You might expect the best 
Smart Home door lock to come from a traditional lock 
manufacturer for example.  On the other hand, some 
markets are ripe for a new way of doing things and have 
attracted startup companies that push the incumbents.  In 
either case, it seems unlikely that in the next three to five 
years that any one company will have all of the pieces 
necessary for a solid Smart Home design. 
There is another set of vendors who focus less on making 
the individual products and more on creating infrastructure 
that allows it all to work together seamlessly.  Some of these 
companies like Vivint are more focused on offering this 
integration as a service and making their money from 
monthly fees.  Other companies such as Apple are 
interested in making you more dependent on their 
smartphone and tablet products, making their money on 
upgrades to newer, more functional products.   
The third class of company is a hybrid of the two, where 
they supply some of the products but also create an open 
environment where their products tie in nicely to others, but 
also provide a way to use and manage as many of the 
products as possible.  A good example of this is Wink, who 
sells a hub that integrates products using many different 

Appendix 2 – Evaluating What to Buy 
 
 
233 
wireless technologies and also has an app to manage (most) 
of them.   
Another interesting company is Google.  As of this writing 
in late 2017, Google has two distinct Smart Home stores.  
The first one is the Nest store that makes and sells 
thermostats, video cameras, and smoke detectors along with 
products from Google (the other part of Google) and many 
third-party vendors that all integrate with Nest.  The other 
store is the Google store, and it sells smartphones, 
streaming video, a speaker assistant, tablet computer, and a 
few other things.  If you step back a bit, they are starting to 
look more and more like Apple and certainly have the money 
to merge their efforts and become a dominant player both in 
the gadgets themselves and getting them all to work 
together.  Whether they take this step or not is anyone’s 
guess, but I wouldn’t be surprised to see a huge Smart 
Home push from them. 
Regardless if you are a fan of Apple, Google, or the 
underdog startup (who often gets acquired by one of these 
giants anyway), there is no way to tell who the dominant 
player is going to be, but my money is that it will be one of 
these two.  And of course, we can’t ever count Amazon out, 
either.  In addition to innovating in a number of technology 
areas, I still believe Amazon is the best place to get reliable 
data on the quality of products available in the marketplace. 
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
234 
Using Amazon Ratings 
There will be many times you are looking to find the right 
product and there just is no clear and obvious choice.  Using 
some specific examples, we’ll walk through how you can use 
product ratings on amazon.com to help you decide.  
The first two things to look at are the quantity of reviews, 
which is an indication of overall sales relative to the 
competitor, and the percentage of 5 star reviews.  Here are 
three examples of top products in their category:  Sonos 
Play:1, Rachio Sprinkler, and the Nest thermostat. 
All have thousands of reviews and ratings in the high fours 
with near 80% or over five star ratings, our goal in selecting 
quality products.  These are all excellent products and with 
the large number of ratings, you can use this data to feel 
confident in your selection. 
Now, here are the ratings of three of the major players in the 
video doorbell product category:  Ring Pro, Skybell, and 
August. 

Appendix 2 – Evaluating What to Buy 
 
 
235 
  
The first thing you notice is the massive difference in the 
quantity of product sold between the three choices.  Clearly 
Ring Pro is dwarfing the others in sales at this point in time.  
But you can also tell that the overall maturity of the product 
is not quite there as compared to the ratings of other 
products like Sonos, Rachio, and Nest, all of which have 
exceptional products and support.  Products that are clear 
winners have lots of reviews, and are somewhere in the 80% 
range giving five stars.  As of this writing, Ring has 72%, 
Skybell has 47%, and August has 49% five star ratings.  
Compare this to Sonos at 77% for its Play:1 product, Rachio 
at 86%, and Nest Thermostat at 87%. It tells me that Ring is 
the leader in video door bells but it may still require some 
work to compare quality wise with some of the others that I 
know are top notch. 
Pure quantity of sales and ratings don’t always tell the 
whole story though.  If you want to know why one product 
has a much lower overall rating, read some of the reviews 
and you will get a pretty quick indication of why this is the 
case.  Sometimes the issue may just be its price so if that 
www.ebook3000.com

Make Your Home a Smart Home 
 
 
236 
doesn’t matter to you, then you can discount some of those 
reviews.  If there are quality issues, people will let you know 
what they are.  The most useful reviews are the ones that 
give specifics about shortcomings so again, you can 
determine if these issues are relevant to you. 
Is using Amazon ratings a better way to evaluate products 
than looking for web sites that do professional evaluations?  
The Smart Home Professor thinks so but I still use some of 
the sites linked from my website as they are useful to inform 
us about new products coming to the market.  But I trust real 
users like you to let the masses know how well something 
works in the real world so I always end up checking the 
Amazon ratings. 

 
www.ebook3000.com

 
 

