How to Repair Faucets  
Faucets are sold in many different makes and models, but the common ones fall into just a 
few types. You'll find only two basic kinds of faucets; washer-type (or compression) faucets 
and washerless faucets. 
 TOOLS AND MATERIALS 
  
Smooth-jaw 
adjustable wrench 
Silicone grease or 
petroleum jelly 
Repair Kit 
Screwdrivers, 
standard and Phillips Seat dressing tool 
Cartridges 
Pliers 
Seat 
Disc assembly 
Electrical tape 
Seat wrench 
Manufacturer's 
instruction sheet  
Pipe wrench 
Silicone rubber 
sealant
Penetrating oil 
Faucet washers 
Socket wrench 
Locking plier/wrench 
Brass screws 
Packing 
Cleaning cloths 
  
Stem 
O-rings 
Hand cleaner 
 
STEP 1  
 
FIG. 1 - Compression faucet 
REPAIRING A LEAKY WASHER-
TYPE FAUCET 
• 
Washer-type faucets work with a rubber or 
composition washer that closes onto a metal 
washer seat (Fig. 1). The washer can 
become hardened, worn or the seat wears, 
causing the faucet to leak. You can close the 
faucet tighter to stop the leaking temporarily, 
but this increases the internal damage to the 
faucet. 
• 
To repair the leak, first turn off the water. If 
there's a shutoff valve beneath the fixture, 
turn off the water at that point. Otherwise, 
turn it off at the main house shutoff valve in 
the basement, utility room, or crawlspace. 
Turn off the hot water supply at the water 
heater. 
• 
Take the faucet apart by removing the 
handle (this may not be necessary on some 

FIG. 2 - To use a valve seat 
dresser, place the tool in the valve 
seat and turn untill the seat is 
smooth.  
 
FIG. 3 - T remove the valve seat, 
insert a valve seat wrench into the 
faucet body and turn 
counterclockwise. 
older faucets). Loosen the Phillips-head 
screw, which usually is beneath a decorative 
cap in the center of the handle. The cap 
either unscrews or snaps off when you pry it 
with a knife blade. If you must use pliers on 
decorative faucet parts, pad them with 
electrical tape or cloth to protect the finish. 
And take special care with the plastic parts 
found on many modern faucets. Next, lift or 
pry the handle off its broached stem. 
Unscrew the packing nut beneath the handle, 
exposing the rest of the stem. Remove the 
stem by rotating it in the "on" direction. It will 
thread out. Reinstall the handle if you have 
difficulty turning it (Fig. 1). Clean chips from 
the faucet cavity, but do not use harsh 
abrasives or a file. 
• 
Examine the stem. If the threads are badly 
corroded or worn, take it to your retailer and 
get a new stem to match. Clean the stem if 
it's dirty. 
• 
Now look at the washer, which is located on 
the lower end of the stem and held in place 
by a brass screw. If the washer is squeezed 
flat or has a groove worn in it, replace it–this 
should stop any dripping. Take the washer 
with you to your dealer to ensure an exact 
match in size and style. If the brass screw is 
damaged, too, replace it with a new brass 
screw. 
• 
The washer seat is located inside the faucet 
body. You probably can't determine if the 
washer seat is causing the leak just by 
looking at it. Any faucet that needs frequent 
washer replacement obviously has a 
damaged seat. The seat should either be 
refaced with a seat-dressing tool. A seat-
dressing tool is not costly. Every home with 
washer-type faucets needs one. Use the tool 
according to the manufacturer's directions, 
placing it in the faucet along with the packing 
nut. Then rotate (Fig. 2) until the seat is 

smooth, and blow out the chips. 
• 
Some washer seats can be unthreaded and 
replaced. Check the faucet body with a 
flashlight to see if it has a square or 
hexagonal hole through its center or is 
slotted for a screwdriver; if so, it is 
replaceable. However, if the seat simply has 
a round hole through its center and no slots, 
it is not replaceable. In this case, dress it with 
a seat-dressing tool. To replace it, you'll need 
a faucet seat wrench, which comes with a 
combination of square and hex heads to fit 
most faucet seats. Turn the washer seat 
counterclockwise to loosen, clockwise to 
tighten (Fig. 3). Add a little silicone rubber 
sealant (RTV) or pipe joint compound around 
the threads of the seat before you install it to 
make it easier to remove during future 
repairs. 
• 
It's important to install the correct type of 
faucet washer (Fig. 1, bottom). A swiveling 
washer (C) is preferable to either (A) or (B). 
To install washer style (C), file the shoulder 
off the end of the stem, drill out the threads 
of the screw hole. Instead of rubbing against 
the seat as it closes, a swiveling washer 
closes with a straight-down, frictionless 
action – this allows it to outlast fixed 
washers. 
• 
Following this seat and washer service, your 
faucet should be like new. Put the parts back 
together in the reverse order of taking them 
apart. Spread a bit of petroleum jelly or 
silicone grease on the threads of the stem to 
lubricate the faucet's action. 
• 
If the faucet leaks around the stem rather 
than from the spigot, install new packing. 
You may want to install one of the newer 
nylon-covered or graphite-impregnated 
packings–their lubrication allows the faucet 
handle to turn more freely. Wrap one turn of 

this packing around the stem just beneath 
the packing nut (Fig. 1). Use three complete 
wraps if you're applying string-type packing. 
Some stems use O-rings, rather than 
packing. For these stems, replace the O-ring 
with a matching one to stop a leak. Hand 
tighten the packing nut, then tighten it 
another half-turn.  
 
 
STEP 2 - REPAIRING A NOISY FAUCET 
• 
A noisy washer-type faucet is usually caused by a loose seat washer. To stop the 
noise, first turn off the water and take the faucet apart as described previously. If 
the washer is loose, tighten it or replace it. 
• 
After threading the stem back into the faucet body, try moving it up and down. If it 
moves, the stem is worn and the entire faucet must be replaced. 
• 
Some faucets are noisy due to poor design and construction. The only way to 
solve this problem is to replace the faucet with a quality one.  
 
 
STEP 3 - REPAIRING WASHER-TYPE BATH AND SHOWER 
FAUCETS 
• 
To take apart a bath/shower faucet for repair, first turn off the water. Then take 
the faucet apart by removing its handle, escutcheon and packing nut. The 
packing nut may be buried deeply in the wall, requiring a socket wrench for 
removal. 
• 
Your bath and shower faucets may have a renewable seat that can be smoothed 
with a seat-dressing tool or removed and replaced using a seat wrench. For 
replacing and repacking the washer, follow the same instructions provided for a 
washer-type faucet. Some faucets may need a complete replacement of the 
combination stem/seat unit.  
 
 

STEP 4 - WASHERLESS FAUCETS 
• 
A leak in a washerless faucet usually indicates that the working parts need 
replacing. Often, prepackaged repair kits are available. Kits may contain all the 
necessary parts, or may include only the specific parts that need replacing. 
Follow the instructions for installing the replacement parts. Washerless faucets 
on tubs and showers are repaired in the same way as those on sink and 
washbasins.  
 
 
STEP 5 - DIAPHRAGM-TYPE FAUCETS 
• 
The diaphragm faucet is washerless but is similar to washer-type faucets. A 
rubber diaphragm between the stem and seat creates a straight-down, 
frictionless close. As with washer-type faucets, diaphragm faucets have two 
handles. 
• 
Remove the stem by following the steps outlined for washer-type faucets. Instead 
of a washer on the end of the stem, you'll find a swiveling disc. If the rubber 
diaphragm doesn't come out with the stem, it is still inside the faucet. 
• 
If the diaphragm didn't come out with the stem, use pliers to peel it from inside 
the faucet and pull it out. Install a new diaphragm around the swiveling disc, then 
replace the stem in the faucet. 
• 
If the faucet is leaking around the stem, replace the stem's O-ring before 
reinstalling the stem.  
 
 
STEP 6  
 
DISC-TYPE FAUCETS 
• 
Disc faucets may have one or two handles. 
The water is controlled by openings in the 
two discs. When the discs are rotated to 
align, the water flows; when the discs are 
misaligned, the water shuts off. If the discs 
wear, the worn discs cause the faucet to 
leak. Simply turning the handles harder will 
not stop the leak. 
• 
To repair a leak in a two-handle disc faucet, 

FIG. 4 - Disc faucet  
turn off the water and remove the handle on 
the side that's leaking. 
• 
Use pliers to pull the disc assembly out of the 
faucet (Fig. 4). 
• 
Beneath the disc unit is the seat assembly, 
or seal. Replacing this special O-ring may 
stop the leak. 
• 
You may need to install a whole new disc 
assembly for faucets that have been used 
over a long period of time. In this case, all 
moving parts of the faucet will have been 
replaced and should last as long as the 
original discs did. The parts of some disc 
units snap apart into a separate bonnet 
assembly and bottom cap. 
• 
To repair a leaking single-handle disc, turn 
off both the hot and cold water and remove 
the handle to expose the disc assembly. 
Take out the screws to lift the assembly out 
of the faucet (Fig. 4). 
• 
You'll notice that beneath the disc unit are 
three O-ring seals. Though unlikely, water 
could be leaking between the unit and one of 
these seals. In this case, you may be able to 
stop the leak by cleaning the disc assembly 
and faucet body and installing a new set of 
seals. If that doesn't work, the entire disc unit 
must be replaced. This will renew all moving 
parts. 
• 
Replacing the unit is fairly simple. Place the 
three O-rings into their recesses in the 
bottom of the disc unit. Then install the unit 
and tighten the screws. Finally, replace the 
handle–and you're done!  
 
 
STEP 7  
 
BALL-TYPE SINGLE-LEVER 

FIG. 5 - Ball faucet 
FAUCETS 
• 
The single-handle faucet with a ball inside to 
control both hot and cold water may either 
leak at the spigot or at the handle. A handle 
leak is usually caused by improper adjusting-
ring tension. Simply adjust the tension to 
stop the leak. Leaks at the handle can also 
result from a worn cam gasket. Dripping from 
the spigot is usually caused by worn spring-
loaded, soft rubber seat assemblies. 
• 
Parts for ball-type faucets are available in 
kits. Get the spring/seats kit for spigot leaks, 
or the complete kit for handle leaks. It may 
be advisable to use the complete kit to 
replace all working parts of the faucet at the 
same time. In any case, you'll need a kit 
containing the spanner/hex wrench for 
removing the handle (hex end) and turning 
the adjusting ring (spanner end). 
• 
Without turning the water off, loosen the 
handle set screw. Slide the handle from its 
stem. 
• 
For a handle leak, try using the spanner 
wrench to tighten the adjusting collar (Fig. 5). 
Tighten it by turning the wrench and collar 
clockwise until the faucet doesn't leak when it 
is turned on and off. If the adjustment is too 
loose, the faucet will leak. If you turn it too 
tight, the handle will be hard to move. When 
the adjusting ring cannot be turned with the 
wrench, it is corroded. At this point, you will 
need to remove the cap to free the adjusting 
ring. (See next step.) You must turn the 
water off before removing the cap! Apply 
penetrating oil to the threads, remove the 
ring and clean all parts before reassembling. 
• 
Install the seats. For faucet leaks at the 
spigot, you must install new rubber seats and 
springs. You must turn off the water to make 
this repair. Unscrew the chrome cap by 

turning it counterclockwise. If it won't turn 
easily, wrap electrical tape around the cap 
and turn it with pliers. The adjusting ring, 
which is threaded into the cap's center, will 
come off with it. For a seats/springs 
replacement, pull the ball up and out by its 
stem. The gasketed cam will come with it. 
Now you can locate the two rubber seats and 
springs inside the faucet body. Remove them 
with pliers or yours fingers and install the 
new ones. The springs go into the holes first, 
and the cupped sides of the seats fit over the 
springs. 
• 
Service the ball. If the ball is dirty or coated 
with scale, clean it or replace it with a new 
one. Both plastic and brass balls are 
available, but use a plastic one if your home 
has hard water. 
• 
Reassembly. Put the ball and cam back into 
the faucet with the slot in the side if the ball 
fitting over the pin in the faucet body. Then 
make sure the tab on the cam slips down into 
the notch in the body. Not aligning the tab 
and notch is the number one cause for a 
faucet leaking after it is repaired. Finally, 
screw on the cap and adjust the ring as 
described in Step 2. If a properly adjusted 
ball-type faucet leaks at the cap, the cam 
and gasket must be replaced. 
• 
Swing spouts. If a single-lever ball faucet 
leaks at the base, you should replace the O-
rings. Remove the spout-retaining parts, as 
well as the spout. Wrap the spout-retaining 
nut with electrical tape to protect it, and 
remove the nut with a wrench or pliers by 
turning counterclockwise. Remove the spout 
by pulling it up and side-to-side. One or more 
O-rings should now be exposed (Fig. 5). 
Take the O-rings to your hardware or home 
center store to get matching O-rings for 
replacement. Clean any scale that appears 
on the spout base, faucet body, and the 

inside of the swinging spout. Install the new 
O-rings and reverse the steps above to 
reassemble the faucet.  
 
 
STEP 8  
 
FIG. 6 - To take apart a cartridge 
faucet, remove the spout sleeve 
and retainer clip, and lift out the 
cartridge. 
CARTRIDGE FAUCETS 
• 
Cartridge faucets have only one moving part. 
The stem slides up and down to open and 
close the faucet and rotates to regulate the 
flow of hot and cold water. Any leaking 
requires replacement of the cartridge. 
• 
First, turn off the water. To remove the 
cartridge, you'll need to remove the handle. 
This project can be like working a puzzle. If 
you have the manufacturer's instruction 
sheet for the faucet, you're ahead of the 
game. Without it, look for a retainer clip at 
the rear of the faucet just below the handle. 
Or, you may have to remove a set screw or 
snap-in "hot-cold" button and a handle pin or 
screw. On some faucets the swing spout 
must come off first. The retainer clip may be 
hiding beneath the handle inside a lift-out 
tube. Some cartridge faucets use two 
retainer clips–one by the handle and another 
by the cartridge. Retainer clips can be pried 
out with a screwdriver. 
• 
Once the retainer clip is removed, the 
cartridge simply pulls out. Use pliers, as 
shown in Fig. 6. Install the new cartridge by 
pushing it into place with the flat arrow, or 
other mark upward. If you use a lubricant on 
the cartridge, make sure it's silicone grease. 
 
 
 

