
HOW TO READ MUSIC FOR BEGINNERS
 
 
Learn The Basics Of Reading Music From Scratch To Advance
Level
 
 
 
Copyright@2020
 
Frank Desmond

Table Of Content
CHAPTER ONE
How to Read Music
Section 1 - Learning The Basics
Section 2 - Reading Meter And Time
Section 3 - Learning Rhythm
Section 4 - Learning Melody
Section 5 - Reading Sharp, Flats, Naturals, And Keys
Section 6 - Reading Dynamics And Expression
Section 7 - Advancing
CHAPTER TWO
How to Sight Read Music
Part 1- Brushing Up on Music Theory
Part 2 – Developing Your Sight Reading Skills
Part 3 - Preparing To Sight Read
CHAPTER THREE
How to Sight Sing
Part 1- Learning and Practicing
Part 2 - Sight-Singing a Piece of Music
 
 

CHAPTER ONE
How to Read Music
Western composed music is a language that has encountered
different degree of development for a large number of years, and
even the music we read nowadays has been around for more than
300 years. It is essential to take into cognizance that music notation
is really the representation of sound with symbols, from fundamental
notations for pitch, length, and timing, to more unpredictable or
advanced descriptions of expression, tone, timbre and even special
effects. This book will explain how notes are named and written; how
to read melody, interpret time signatures, keys, sharps, flats, and
naturals. This piece of writing will also introduce you to the nuts and
bolts of reading music, show you various further developed
techniques, and suggest a number of ways to get more knowledge
about the subject.
 

Section 1 - Learning The Basics
1-Get a handle on the staff. 
Prior to you are getting set to start learning music, you have to obtain
a sense for the fundamental information that almost everyone who
reads music should to know. The flat or horizontal lines on a bit of
music make up the staff. This is the most fundamental of all musical
symbols and the foundation for all that is to tag along or follow.
The staff is an array of five equivalent or parallel lines,
and the spaces among them. You have to know that
both spaces and lines are numbered for purposes of
reference, and are constantly counted from lowest (base
of the staff) to highest (top of the staff).
2 -Start with the treble clef. 

One of the first things you will come across when reading music is
the clef. This sign, which seems like a large, fancy cursive symbol at
the left end of the staff, is the legend that informs you just about what
range your instrument will play in. Every voices and instruments in
the higher ranges make use of the treble clef, and for this
introduction to reading and understanding music, we will focus
mostly on this clef for our examples.
The G clef or treble clef, is gotten from an decorative
Latin letter G. One excellent method to commit this to
memory is that the line at the middle of the clef's "swirl"
wraps in the region of the line that denotes the note G.
Once notes are included to the staff within the treble
clef, they shall have the following values:

The 5 lines, from the base up, stand for these notes: E
G B D F.
The 4 spaces, from the base up, stand for these notes:
F A C E.
This may look like a lot to commit to memory, however
you can make use of mnemonics—or word cues—that
might help you keep them in mind. For the lines, ‘Every
Good Boy Does Fine’ is one trendy mnemonic, and the
spaces spell or bring out the word ‘FACE.’ Practicing by
means of an online note recognition tool is one more
fantastic way to reinforce these associations.
3 -Understand the bass clef. 
The bass clef, also called F clef, is utilized for instruments in the
subordinate registers, plus the left hand of the piano, trombone, bass
guitar, and so on.

The name "F clef" takes from its genesis as the Gothic
letter F. The 2 dots on the clef stretch out on top of and
beneath the "F" line on the staff. The staff of the bass
clef symbolizes different notes than that of the treble
clef.
The five lines, bottom to top, stand for these notes: G B
D F A (‘Good Boys Don't Fool Around’).
The 4 spaces, base to top, stand for these notes: A C E
G (‘All Cows Eat Grass’).
4 -Learn the components of a note. 
Individual note symbols are a mixture of up to 3 essential
components: the note head, the flags and stem.
The note head. This is an elliptical shape that is either
open (white) or shut (dark). At its most basic, it informs

the artist what note to play on their instruments.
The stem. This is the slim vertical line that is appended
to the note head. Once the stem is pointing up, it
connects on the right part of the note head. Once the
stem is pointing down, it connects the note head on the
left. The direction of the stem does not have
consequence on the note, however it makes notation
simpler to interpret or read and a lesser amount of
cluttered.
The common rule on stem direction is that at or beyond
the middle line (B for treble clef or D for bass clef) of the
staff, the stem points downward, and once the note is
beneath the center of the staff, the stem points up.
The flag. This is the curled stroke that is joined to the
end of the stem. Regardless of whether the stem is
attached to the right or left of the note head, the flag is at
all times drawn to the right of the stem, and by no means
to the left!
Taken together, the note, stem, and flag or flags
demonstrate to the performer the time worth for any
specified note, as measured in beats or portions of
beats. Every time you listen to music, and you are
tapping or drumming your foot in time to the music, you
are recognizing that beat.

Section 2 - Reading Meter And Time
1 -Learn about measure lines. 
On a piece of sheet music, you would notice thin vertical lines
crossing the staff at moderately regular intervals. These lines
symbolize measures (known as ‘bars’ in a number of places); the
space prior to the first line is the first measure, the space among the
first and second lines happens to be  the second measure, and so
on. There is need to take into cognizance  that measure lines don't
have an effect on how the music sounds, however they help the
artist maintain their place in the music.
As we will see beneath, another handy thing about
measures is that each one obtains the same amount of
beats. For instance, if you see yourself tapping "1-2-3-4"
along to a bit of music on the radio, you have possibly
intuitively found the measure lines already.
 

 
 
 
 
 
2 -Learn about timing, or meter. 
Meter can be usually thought of as the ‘pulse’ or the beat of music.
You sense it unconsciously or intuitively once you listen to dance or
pop music; the ‘boom, tiss, boom, tiss’ of a stereotypical or
conventional dance track is a straightforward example of meter.
Upon a bit of sheet music, the beat is articulated by
something that seems like a fraction written next to the
first clef symbol. Similar to any part, there is a
denominator, and a numerator. The numerator, written in

the zenith two spaces of the staff, informs you how
numerous beats there are in one measure. The
denominator informs you the note worth that receives
one beat (the ‘pulse’ that you tap your toe to).
Maybe the simplest meter to comprehend is 4/4 time, or
‘common’ time. In 4/4 time, there are 4 beats in every
measure and every quarter note is equivalent to one
beat. This is the time signature you will hear in most
trendy music. You can count along to general time music
by counting ‘ONE two three four ONE two three four...’ to
the beat.
By altering the numerator, we alter the amount of beats
in a measure. Another very general time signature is 3/4.
For instance, a large amount of waltzes will have a
stable ‘ONE two three ONE two three’ beat, making
them in 3/4 time.
A number of meters will be made known with a letter C
rather than two numbers. 4/4 time is frequently shown as
a big C, which represents common time. Similarly, 2/2
meter is frequently shown as a big C with a
perpendicular or vertical line through it. The C with the
line through it represents cut time (at times referred to as
half common time).

Section 3 - Learning Rhythm
1 - Get in the groove. 
Since it integrates meter and time, ‘rhythm’ is a essential element of
how the music feel. Conversely, while meter simply informs you how
numerous beats, rhythm is how those beat are being utilized.
Try this: tap your finger on top of your desk, along with
count 1-2-3-4 1-2-3-4, progressively. Not very
fascinating, right? Right now attempt this: on beats 1
and 3, tap stronger, and on beats 2 and 4, tap milder. 
That is got a varied feel to it. That is got a different vibe
to it! Presently try the reverse: tapping noisy on 2 and 4,
and delicate on beats 1 and 3.
Check out Spektor Regina’s Don't Leave Me. You can
obviously hear the rhythm: the calmer bass note

happens on beat 1 and beat 3, and a loud applaud and
snare drum occur on beats 2 and 4. You will start to get
a feeling of how music is structured. That is what is
referred to as rhythm!
 
 
 
2 - Imagine yourself strolling.
Every step will equal one beat. Those are musically represented by
quarter notes in glow of the fact that in a ton of Western music
(which means music of the western world, not simply the music of
Williams Hank!), there are 4 of these beats for each measure.
Musically, the cadence of your strolling or walking will appear like
this:

Each step is one-quarter note. On a piece of music,
quarter notes are the concrete black dots attached to
stems devoid of any flags. You may possibly count that
off as you stroll or walk: "1, 2, 3, 4-1, 2, 3, tw
Quarter notes are known as ‘crotchets’ in a number of
places, such as the UK.
If you were to reduce your speed down to half that
speed, so that you simply took a step each two beats on
the 1 and on the 3, that have to be notated with half
notes (for half a measure). Upon a sheet of music, half
notes appear like quarter notes, only they are not
concrete black; they are delineated in black through
white centers.
In some places, half notes are known as "minims".
If you reduced your speed down even further, so that
you simply took a step each four beats, on the one, you
have to note down that as a whole note—or one note
per measure. On a piece of music, whole notes seem
like "O"s or donuts; similar to half notes devoid of stems.
 
 
3 - Speed up the pace! 

Enough of this reducing down. While you observed, when we
reduced the notes down, we began taking away bits of the note.
First, we had taken away the solid note, afterward we took off the
stem. Right now let gaze at speeding things up. To achieve that, we
are going to include things to the note.
Return to our strolling rhythm, and imagine that in your
brain (tapping your foot to the beat can be of help).
Presently envision that your motor has recently pulled up
to the stop, and you're about a street or two away. What
do you do? You run! Also, as you run, you attempt to
flag the vehicle driver.
To make notes quicker in music, we include a flag. Every
flag cuts the time value of the note partly in half. For
instance, an eighth note (which gets one banner or flag)

is 1/2 the value (estimation) of a quarter note; and a
16th note (which gets two flags) is 1/2 the estimation of
an eighth note. In terms of walking, we  move from a
walk or stroll  (quarter note or quaver) to a run (eighth
note or semiquaver)—two times as speedy as a walk, to
a sprint (sixteenth note or demisemiquaver)—two times
as fast as a run. View in terms of each quarter note
being a step as you stroll, tap along with the above
example.
 
 
 
4 - Beam up! 

As you can notice with that example above, things can begin to get a
bit confusing when there are a lot of notes on the page as that. Your
eyes begin to cross, and you are unable to find path of where you
were. To categorise notes into smaller packages that make common
sense visually, we make use of beaming.
Beaming simply replaces individual note flags with thick
lines drawn among note stems. These are categorized
logically, and while more complicated music requires
more intricate beaming rules, for our purposes, we will
universally beam in groups of quarter notes. Compare
the example beneath with the above example. Attempt
tapping out the rhythm once more, and notice how much
clearer beaming makes the notation.
5 -Learn the value of ties and dots. 

Where a flag will cut the value of a note in half, the dot has a similar
—but the opposite—function. With restricted exceptions that do not
come into play here, the dot is at all times placed to the right of the
note head. When you notice a dotted note, that note is augmented
by one half the length of its original value.
For instance, a dot placed after a half note (minim)
would be equal to the half note plus a quarter note. A
dot positioned after a quarter note (crotchet) would be
equal to a quarter note plus an eighth note.
Ties are similar to dots—they expand the value of the
original note. A tie is just two notes linked together with
a curved line among the note heads. Not like dots, which
are abstract and based totally on the value of the
original note, ties are explicit: the note is increased in
length by precisely as long as the second note value.
One reason you would utilize a tie versus a dot is, for
instance, when a note's period will not fit musically into
the space of a measure (bar). In that case, you just
include the leftover duration into the following measure
as a note, and bind the two jointly.
Note that the tie is drawn from note head to note head in
the contrary direction as the stem.
6 -Take a rest. 

A few say music is just a series of notes, and they are half right.
Music is a sequence of notes and the spaces among them. Those
spaces are known as rests, and even in silence, they can actually
add motion and life to music. Let's take a look at how they are
notated.
Like notes, they have particular symbols for particular
durations. A full note rest is a rectangle descending from
the fourth line, and a half note rest is a rectangle resting
on the third line and pointing upwards. The quarter note
rest is a squiggly line, and the rest of the rests are an
angled bar that looks like a number "7" with the same
number of flags as their equivalent note value. These
flags at all times sweep to the left.

Section 4 - Learning Melody
1 -Make sure you understand the above, and then let's dive into
the fun stuff: 
reading music! We now have the fundamentals down: the staff, the
parts of a note, and the basics of notating durations of notes and
rests.
2 -Learn the C scale. 

The C major scale is the first scale we make use of when teaching
how to read music because it is the one that utilizes just natural
notes (the white keys on a piano). After you have that locked into
your brain cells, the rest will follow naturally.
First, we will show you what it appears like, afterward we
will show you how to make sense of it, and start to read
music! Here is what it seems like on the staff. Observe
the "C scale" above.
If you will have a look at the first note, the low C, you will
observe that it really goes below the staff lines. When
that occurs, we simply attach a staff line for that note
only—hence, the little line through the note head. The
lower the note, the more staff lines we include. However
we don't need to be anxious about that now.

The C scale consisted of eight notes. These are the
counterpart of the white keys on the piano.
You may or might not have a piano handy, but at this
point, it is significant for you to start to get an idea of not
just what music looks like, but of what it sounds like, too.
 
 
 
 
3 -Learn a little sight singing—or "solfège."
That might sound frightening, but chances are, you already
know it: it's the fancy way of saying "do, re, mi."
By learning to sing the notes that you see, you will start
to develop the skill of sight-reading—a skill that can take
a lifetime to perfect, but will be useful right from the
beginning. Let's take a look at that C scale again, with

the solfege scale added. Observe the ‘C Scale Solfege
11’ above.
likelihood are, you may know the Rogers and
Hammerstein song ‘Do-Re-Mi’ from The Sound of
Music. If you could sing the ‘do re mi’ scale, do that right
away while you glance at the notes. If you need a
refresher course, you can hear the song on YouTube.
Here's a slightly more advanced version, walking up and
down the C scale using the solfège notes. Observe the
‘C Scale Solfege 1’ above.
Practice singing Solfege—part II a few times, until it
becomes familiar. The first couple times, read very little
by little so that you can look at each note as you sing it.
The next couple times, replace the ‘do re mi’ for C, D, E.
The objective is to sing the real notes.
Keep in mind our note values from before: the high C at
the end of the first line, and the low C at the end of the
second line are half notes, whereas the rest of the notes
are quarter notes. If you visualize yourself walking, yet
again, there is a note for each step. The half notes take
two steps.
4 - Congratulations, you're now reading music!


Section 5 - Reading Sharp, Flats, Naturals, And
Keys
1 -Take the next step. 
So far we have been able to covered the very basics of rhythm and
melody, and you have to acquire the basic skills needed that you
now understand what all those dots and squiggles stand for. While
this may enable you pass through basic Flutophone class, there are
still a number of things you will need to become familiar with. Chief
among these are key signatures.
You may have seen sharps and flats in music: sharp
looks like a hashtag (♯) and a flat looks like a lowercase
B ( ♭). They are placed to the left of a note head and
indicate that the note to follow is played a half-step
(semitone) higher for a sharp, or a half-step lower for a
flat. The C scale, as we have learned, consists of the
white keys on the piano. When you are beginning to

read music, it's easiest to think of the sharps and flats as
the black keys. C major and A minor don’t have sharps
or flats.
 
2 - Know the whole tones and semitones. 
In Western music, you have to know that notes are either a whole
tone or a semitone apart. If you look at the C note on the piano
keyboard, you'll see there's a black key between it and the next note
up, the D. The musical distance among the C and the D is known as
a whole tone. The distance between the C and the black key is
known as a semitone. Now, you might be thinking what that black
key is called. The answer is, ‘it depends.’
An excellent rule of thumb is if you are going up the
scale, that note is the sharp version of the starting note.
When moving down the scale, that note have to be the
flat version of the beginning note. Thus, if you are

moving from C to D with the black key, it would be
written using a sharp (♯).
In this case, the black note is written as C♯. When
moving down the scale, from D to C, and using the black
note as a passing tone between them, the black key
would be written using a flat ( ♭).
Conventions like that make music a little easier to read.
If you were to write those three notes going up and used
a D ♭ instead of a C♯, the notation would be written
using a natural sign ( ♮).
Notice that there's a new sign—the natural. At any time
you spot a natural sign ( ♮) that means that the note
cancels any sharps or flats earlier written. In this
example, the second and third notes are both "D"s: the
first a D ♭, and so the second D, since it goes up a
semitone from the first D, has to have the note
"corrected" to show the right note. The further sharps
and flats scattered about a sheet of music, the more a
musician should take in before the score can be played.
Frequently, composers that previously utilized
accidentals in previous measures might put
‘unnecessary’ natural signs to provide clarity for the
player. For example, if a previous measure in a D major
piece used an A♯, the next measure that uses an A may
be notated with an A-natural instead.
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
3 - Understand key signatures. 
So far, we have been taken a look at the C major scale: eight notes,
all the white keys, starting on C. Nevertheless, you can begin a scale
on any note. If you simply play all the white keys, although, you
would not be playing a major scale, but something known as a
‘modal scale’.
The beginning note, or tonic, is as well the name of the
key. You might have heard someone say ‘It is in the key
of C’ or something similar. This example means that the

basic scale begins on C, and includes the notes C D E F
G A B C. The notes in a major scale enclose a very
particular relationship to each other. Take a look at the
keyboard above.
Note that among most notes, there is a whole step.
However there is only a half step (semitone) between E
and F, and between B and C. All major scale has this
equal relationship: whole-whole-half-whole-whole-whole-
half. If you begin your scale on G, for instance, it could
be written similar to this:
Notice the F♯ near the top. In order to uphold the right
relationship, the F has to be raised a semitone so that it
is a half step from the G, not a whole step. That is easy
enough to read by itself, but what if you started a major
scale in C♯? (See above.)
Now it starts to get complicated! In order to minimize the
confusion and make music simpler to read, key
signatures were created. Each major scale has a
specific set of sharps or flats, and those are made
known at the very beginning of the music. Taking a look
once more at the key of G, we see that has one sharp—
F♯. Rather than putting that sharp close to the F on the
staff, we take it all the way to the left, and it is just
presumed from that point on that every F you see is
played as an F♯. (See above picture.)
This sounds, and is played, precisely the same as the G
major scale above, without key signature.

Section 6 - Reading Dynamics And Expression
1 -Get loud—or get soft! 
When you listen to music, you have possibly observed that it is not
all at the same volume, all the time. A number of parts get truly loud,
and a number of parts get actually soft. These variations are known
as ‘dynamics.’
If the rhythm and meter happen to be the heart of the
music, and notes and keys are the brains, then
dynamics are certainly the voice of the music. Consider
the first version above.
On top of your table, tap out: 1 and 2 and 3 and 4 and 5
and 6 and 7 and 8, etc. (the and is how musicians "say"
eighth notes). Make sure every beat is tapped at the

same loudness, so that it sounds a bit like a helicopter.
Now take a look at the second version.
Notice the accent mark (>) above every F note. Tap that
out, just this time, accent all beat that you notice the
accent mark. Now, rather than a helicopter, it ought to
sound more like a train. With only a subtle shift in
accent, we totally change the character of the music!
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 - Play it piano, or fortissimo, or somewhere in between. 

Just like you don't always talk at the same level—you modulate your
voice louder or softer, depending on the situation—music modulates
in level too. The way the composer informs the musician what is
intended is by utilizing dynamic markings.
There are dozens of dynamic markings you might see
on a piece of music, but a number of of the most
common ones you will find will be the letters f, m, and p.
p means "piano," or "softly."
f means "forte," or "loud."
m means "mezzo," or "medium." This modifies the
dynamic after it, as in mf which means "medium loud",
or mp, which means "medium soft."
The more fs or ps you have, the louder or softer the
music is to be played. Try singing the example above
(using solfège—the first note in this example is the tonic,
or "do"), and use the dynamic markings to notice the
difference.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 - Get louder and louder and louder, or quieter and quieter and
quieter. 

Another very usual dynamic notation is the crescendo, and it is
corollary, the decrescendo or ‘diminuendo;. They are visual
representations of a gradual change in volume which look like
stretched-out "<" and ">" symbols.
A crescendo gradually gets louder, and a decrescendo
gradually decreases the volume. You will observe that,
with these two symbols, the "open" end of the symbol
stands for the louder dynamic and the closed end stands
for the quieter dynamic. For instance, if the music directs
you to steadily go from forte to piano, you will notice
an f', then a stretched out ">", then a 'p'.
Sometimes a crescendo or diminuendo will be
represented as the shortened words cresc." (crescendo)
or dim. (diminuendo).

Section 7 - Advancing
1 - Keep learning! 
Trying to learn to read music is like trying to learn the alphabet. The
fundamentals take a little bit to learn, but are quite easy, overall.
However, there are so many nuances, concepts, and skills that you
can learn that it can keep you learning for a lifetime. A number of
composers even go thus far as to write music on staff lines that form
spirals or patterns, or the even utilize no staff lines at all! This piece
of writing should give you a good foundation to keep growing!
2 - Learn these key signatures. 

There is at minimum one for every note in the scale—and the savvy
student will see that in a number of cases, there are two keys for the
same note. For instance, the key of G♯ sounds precisely the same
as the key of A ♭! When playing the piano—and for the purposes of
this article, the difference is academic. Nevertheless, there are a
number of composers—particularly those that write for strings—who
will put forward that the A ♭ is played a little "flatter" than the G♯.
Here are the key signatures for the major scales:
Keys not using sharps or flats: C
Keys using sharps: G, D, A, E, B, F♯, C♯
Keys using flats: F, B ♭, E ♭, A ♭, D ♭, G ♭, C ♭
As you can see above, as you move through the sharp
key signatures, you add sharps one at a time until every
note is played sharp in the key of C♯. As you move

through the flat key signatures, you add flats until every
note is played flat in the key of C ♭.
It may be of a little relieve to know that composers
typically write in key signatures that are comfortable for
the player to read. D major is a very common key for
string instruments to play for the reason that the open
strings are closely linked to the tonic, D. There are few
works out there that have strings play in E ♭ minor, or
brass playing E major - it's as much a pain for them to
write as it is for you to read.
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER TWO
How to Sight Read Music
In order to build up your skills as a musician, advance in your craft,
and become employable, you have to become acquainted with
knowledge to sight read music. It is important to bear in mind that
sight reading is a crucial part of nearly all auditions, and an
extremely vital part of being able to stay up in an orchestra, choir, or
band setting. If you learned to play your instrument or sing by ear,
learning to sight read music will help make you a more balanced and
efficient musician and performer.
 
 
 
 
 

Part 1- Brushing Up on Music Theory
1 - Understand the different types of notes. 
When sight reading music, you will come across whole notes, half
notes, quarter notes, eighth notes, and sixteenth notes. These notes
are characterized or epitomized by differing duration, or the time-
span the note is played. The whole note is the longest, and they
become shorter in that order. For instance, a sixteenth note is 1/16 of
a whole note.
While you may assume music and math don’t have
anything in common, understanding the different kinds of
music notes is as easy as understanding basic divisions.
For instance, a quarter note is 1/4 of a whole note.

Simply put differently, you could play 4 quarter notes in
the time you would play 1 whole note (just as you could
play 2 half notes in the time you have to play 1 whole
note).
Each note has a varied symbol. The parts or elements of
the symbols are the head (this is the round part of the
note), the stem (this is the line that projects or extends
from the head), and the flag (this is the curved line
coming off the stem, like a flag).
A whole note is indicated by just an open note head,
with no stem or flag. A half note comprises an open note
head and a stem. A quarter note comprises a closed
(filled in) head and a stem. An eighth note has a bunged
or closed head, a stem, and one flag, while 2 together
have a single bar combining them. A sixteenth note has
a bunged head, a stem, and two flags or two bars
combining as numerous as 4 sixteenth notes.
2 - Familiarize yourself with time signatures. 

Time signatures surface on all pieces of sheet music, and they
inform you the amount and kind of notes in each measure. To put it
simply, time signatures notify you the beats of each bar of the song
you would be playing.
As far sight reading is concerned, this is the very first
thing you would note about a piece, so it is enormously
significant that you understand time signatures in detail.
Practice various rhythm exercises to make yourself feel
more at ease working within varied time signatures.
If the time signature is 4/4, that indicates that each
measure comprises four quarter notes. The top number
has to do with the number of beats per measure, and

the bottom has to do with the kind of note being utilized
to measure the beats (in this case, quarter notes).
A time signature of 3/4 indicates that there are 3 quarter
notes, 6/8 implies 6 eighth notes, 3/2 implies 3 half
notes, and so on.
Make use of a metronome to help keep up track of
tempo. Some pieces will have an M.M. with a number
and a note showing; this is the planned approximate
tempo after it is fully practiced. Practice at a slower
tempo at first, afterward slowly increase the tempo on
the metronome as you become more comfortable with
the piece.
3 - Memorize key signatures. 

The key signature is a group of signatures that directs you to play a
definite note a half-step higher or lower than you typically would.
Basically, the key signature informs you how many sharps or flats
might be in the piece, which in turn informs you the key the piece is
in, and therefore it is a vital component of sight reading. The key
signature can be found right next to the staff, usually at the
beginning of a line of musical notation.
To read sharp (major) key signatures, take a look at the
last sharp on the key signature and go a half-step
beyond that. Hence if the last sharp is a C, the key will
be in D major.
To read flat (minor) key signatures, take a look at the
second to last flat (read the flats left to right). If the
second to last flat happens to be E, then the song is in
E-flat major.
F major (or D minor) is the exemption to this rule as this
specific key signature simply has one flat (B-flat).
If the piece happens to be in a minor key, decide what
the major key of the piece will be and move down a
minor third to identify the major key’s relative minor. For
instance, the relative minor of G major is E minor, given
that this is a minor third beneath G.
4 – Study where each note falls on the staff. 

There are two(2) types of clefs: treble and bass. The notes seem
different owing to which clef you are utilizing. Learning the location of
each note on either sets of clefs and put into practice until you
recognize the notes just by taking a look at them.
On a treble clef, the line notes bring or spell out EGBDF
from bottom to top. Utilize the mnemonic device, ‘Every
Good Boy Deserves Fudge.’
On a treble clef, the space notes bring or spell out FACE
from bottom to top.
On a bass clef, the line notes spell out GBDFA coming
from base (bottom) to top. Utilize the mnemonic device,
‘Good Birds Don’t Fly Away.’

On a bass clef, the space notes spell out ACEG from
coming (base) bottom to top. Utilize the mnemonic tool,
‘All Cows Eat Grass.’
 
 
 
5 - Practice your scales. 
The practicing of scales would help either vocalists and
instrumentalists become more acquainted with the names of each
note and where each note falls on the staff. If you are an
instrumentalist, rehearse or practice the scales devoid of looking at

your hands. This will take a number of practice to master, but it is
necessary for becoming a competent sight reader.
If you are taking a look at your hands, you are not able
to allow your eyes center on reading the music.
Instrumentalists have to also practice sight singing. This
will enable you to work on phrasing, intonation and
musicality.
Check for key signature changes, codas and repeats

Part 2 – Developing Your Sight Reading Skills
1 – Pay adequate attention to the music in front of you. 
In other words, act as though every piece of music you are sight
reading is the only thing that matters to you in the world at that time,
freeing your mind of other every day disruptions and worries. Sight
reading entails a lot of moving parts – you have to keep up track of
notes, rhythms, key changes and a thousand other changeable or
variables. It is not possible to sight read absolutely without focusing
your whole brain on the task at hand.
Dare yourself to sight read a full piece of music without
making any mistakes or errors.
Whenever your mind starts to wander, refocus and begin
the piece yet again.

2 – Check for any apparent changes in key, style, tempo, or
dynamic. 
Read through the piece of music and mark (if you can) any tempo
changes, key changes, or change in dynamics.
3 - Divide music into large chunks. 
As a first-timer in sight-reading, you might try to count every beat,
divide each rhythm, and tap maniacally to the beat. Calm down! It is
vital to know that every piece of music has plenty of notes and
attempting to count and identify every single one can be very tiring
and impractical. Rather, split the piece into bigger chunks of music
and strive to read it that way.

Try to cut each measure into 2 parts, and note down where the
downbeats are. This is a technique of interpreting the music in a
more stress-free, musical way.
Now you can take a look at 2 beats, or even a whole measure, at a
time. This is a lot less disordered than trying to count every and each
beat.
4 - Look for familiar rhythms. 
While each piece of music you come across is wonderfully unique,
there are surely repeating patterns that you will constantly meet. Buy
sight reading practice materials. Children improve at reading words
by reading multiple books. Musicians improve at reading music by

sight reading numerous pieces. Try going online to sites like Piano
Marvel to gain access to sight reading exercises and music pieces
you can rehearse or practice reading.
Also search online for free sheet music websites.
You can inquire of your music teacher if they have spare music they
would be ready to let you copy.
 
 
 
 
 
5 - Keep a practice journal. 

Practice frequently. The most excellent sight readers are musicians
who are confident and relaxed in their skills. To become an
experienced sight reader can take a couple of years, but
implementing good practice habits is something you can do
immediately (right now). Strive to practice your sight reading for a
minimum of 15 minutes daily.
Write down what you practiced and the duration of your
practice in your journal.
You have to practice sight reading gradually. You can
always improve the pace after you feel more at ease
with the music.
6 - Use drills to improve. 
Not only will practice drills enable you identify certain patterns and
commit to memory note types, key signatures, and time signatures, it

will also enable you become a more sure musician. Websites like
TheSightReadingProject.com authorize you to practice for free
online. Get a cheap music book, turn over to a random page, and
begin sight-reading something. Just like what is obtainable in any
other skill, the more you practice sight read, the more confident and
competent you will become. As you feel more at ease with the
basics, you can begin fine-tuning your skills.

Part 3 - Preparing To Sight Read
1 - Read through the music. 
When you first see the piece, get a moment to look it over devoid of
your instrument. Attempt tapping out the rhythm, reading the notes
and looking over the structure to observe which bars will be
repeated. Every time you come across a new piece of music, you
have to go through a fundamental checklist in your head.
Commit to memory the key signature, divide the music
into chunks, note every repeating rhythms and tricky
spots, and tune out the day's distractions.
Check for any markings that indicate changes in speed,
volume or accidentals.
If you have go-ahead, mark these changes on your
sheet music with a pencil.

2 - Play through the piece in your head. 
Seize a moment to sound the piece out and check for patterns within
the music. See if there are areas or places where the melodies
repeat themselves. Learn the piece as hard as you can before you
ever think of picking up your instrument.
Check for places in the music where there are scales or arpeggios.
The more acquainted you are with the music, the less difficult it will
be to sight read when you really have your instrument in hand.
3 - Breathe and brush off mistakes. 

Sight reading can be devastating or overwhelming, but breathing can
help you stay focused and can even keep you on tempo. Relax your
body and your mind and attempt to focus on the work. Continue
going if you make an error, because freezing up can only make the
problem worse. Make a mental note to practice the area or part that
caused you a problem, and afterward forget about it. There is more
music to play, and you would be amazed how often an audience
misses a little mistake.
If you are a singer or if you play a wind instrument, make
use of a pencil to mark where you have to take a breath.
Don’t beat yourself up if you are unable to read the
music flawlessly your first time out. Sight reading is a
skill that requires time to develop.
The ability to keep going even when you make a
mistake is a significant sight reading skill.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER THREE
How to Sight Sing
All typically skilled musicians learn to read music, but singers have to
be able to turn this into notes without utilizing the physical
manipulation of the instrument as a guide. This is a powerful skill that
takes ample of practice, but you do not require perfect pitch to
achieve this. Ensure you have the fundamentals covered, and
continue practicing daily, and ultimately you will be able to sing
pieces without any advance preparation.

Part 1- Learning and Practicing
1 - Learn the solfege system. You might have heard singers sing
ascending scales such as this: Do Re Mi Fa Sol La Ti Do. (In case
you haven't, look out this example to study the intervals between
notes:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s_pq9s9USmI). ‘Do’ is at all
times assigned to the ‘tonic’ or ‘root note’ of the scale, like the C in
the C major scale or G in a G major scale. By means of singing the
solfege scale ascending from here, you would hit every note in that
scale.
A number of singers reinforce the varied syllables by
changing hand shape also. This is discretionary
(optional).
A minority of singers like better other systems, such as
‘1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1.’
2 - Use solfege for minor scales. 

This is given explanation here so you can refer to the solfege system
frankly above, but you might wish to wait until you have got loads of
practice with the solfege system before you attempt this. In minor
scales (which exist in numerous forms), a number of the intervals
between notes are lowered from a whole step (like from C to D)
down to a half step (C to C♯). In solfege, these notes halfway
between definite intervals are specified by altering the vowel sound
in the solfege syllable. Here are a number of instances, with the
lowered notes in bold:
Natural minor :do re me fa sol le te do
Harmonic minor :do re me fa sol le ti do
Melodic minor, from ascending: do re me fa sol la ti do
Melodic minor, descending: do te le sol fa me re do

The chromatic scale, which goes up only in half steps,
includes a number of syllables that are not often utilized
in songs. Learning it is not recommended until you are
at ease with sight-singing.
Knowing these can enable you sight-sing a note in the
sheet music that is a half step down or up from the scale
you are singing in. These are marked using   a flat
symbol ♭(half step down) or a sharp symbol ♯ (half step
up).
3 - Practice solfege with your favorite songs. 
Learning solfege is quite tough, particularly without a music teacher
to guide or direct you. You have to practice as frequently as you can

by picking your preferred songs and striving to identify the ‘tonic
note’ of the piece, which you will sing as Do, then sing the full song
in solfege. There are a number of ways to find the tonic note:
When a note in the song feels like it is ‘coming home’ or
getting a conclusion, this is frequently the tonic note.
Songs frequently end on this note.
Endeavor to play the melody on the piano, while you
listen to the song. Turn off the music and try to sing ‘Do
Re Mi...’ while making use of only the piano keys utilized
for the song. Continue attempting diverse notes for ‘Do’
until you succeed.
If you hear a sudden shift in the emotional tone of the
melody, it might have changed keys. Concentrate on
only one section at a time, because changing your "Do"
note mid-song can be really difficult for beginners.
4 - Learn how to read music. 

It is likely to begin from the first note on the page and count the
number of spaces and lines up or down to the next note. Learning
how to read music is a much more proficient way to go about this,
and will enable you sight-sing quicker and smoother. You can begin
by memorizing the mnemonics beneath, but to get it to sink in you
will require every day practice, maybe with an online note recognition
tool.
In the treble clef, keep in mind the lines from bottom to
top by repeating Every Good Boy Does Fine. The
spaces among them spell FACE.
In the bass clef, bear in mind the lines from bottom to
top with Good Boys Do Fine Always. And for the spaces
among them: All Cows Eat Grass.
5 - Practice counting from C. 

This is the note generally utilized as the baseline note for singers.
Play C on a piano, or make use of a metronome with a pitch function
that produces C. you have to practice singing up or down the scale
to locate a different note. This is the method you will make use of to
find the beginning note of a song.
If you would like to train relative pitch, you can attempt to
find a song you know by heart that starts with C, and
utilize it as a baseline. Remember that people often
begin singing a song in a different key each time, so test
yourself with a piano to ensure you can begin on the
right pitch each time.
On the other hand, carry a tuning fork with you and
listen to it all through the day as frequently as you can.
Presume or guess the note, then make use of the tuning
fork to observe if you are right.

 
6 - Practice jumping across intervals. 
The most significant skill for sight-singing is the capacity to jump
from 1 note to another without making an error or mistake, even if
the 2 notes are nowhere close to each other in the scale. Include
solfege exercises such as the following into your day by day practice
routine:
(low)Do Re Do Mi Do Fa Do Sol Do La Do Ti Do
(high)Do
Sing a song you know by heart making use of solfege.
Slow down and repeat as essential until you can sing
the entire song utilizing the right syllables. (It helps to
sing the solfege scale in the right key a couple times
before you start.)

For example, ‘Mary Had a Little Lamb’ starts with Mi Re
Do Re Mi Mi Mi and ‘Happy Birthday’ begins with Sol Sol
La Sol Do Ti.
7 - Practice rhythm. 
One method to do this is to subdivide while listening to a song or
reading sheet music. Clap to the beat of the song, but divide each
beat into subsections, chanting out loud "1–2" or "1-2-3-4" among
each clap.
There are apps accessible, such as Rhythm Sight
Reading Trainer, that can assist you with this.
8 - Practice sight-singing. 

Sight singing is a tough skill, and it needs much practice to arrive at
the point where you can at ease sing any sheet music that comes
across your way. Explore online or in libraries for sheet music of
different or unfamiliar songs, try to sing them, afterward check
whether you got it correct by finding a recording online. Repeat this
on a daily basis if possible.
Sing it using or with solfege first, afterward with the lyrics
if there are some.
Ensure the sheet music is written for your vocal range.

Part 2 - Sight-Singing a Piece of Music
1 - Assess the time signature. The time signature appears like a
fraction and is noted at the starting of a piece of music. The top
number informs you how many beats there will be every measure,
and the bottom number informs you what type of notes those beats
will be in this song.
For example, if 3 is on top and 1 is on the bottom, there
would be 3 whole note beats for each (per) measure. If 5
is on top and 2 is on the bottom, there would be 5 half
note beats for each measure. If 6 is on top and 8 is on
the bottom, there would be 6 eighth-note beats for each
measure.
The most common time signature (at times just written
with the letter C signifying “common time”) is 4 on top
and 4 on the bottom, which implies there are 4 quarter-
note beats for each measure.
2 - Identify the key. 

At the starting of the sheet music, next to the clef symbol, sharp ♯
and flat ♭ signs make up the "key signature." These tricks will enable
you commit to memory what each key signature seems like:
If there are no sharps or flats next to the clef, the scale is
C major or A minor, so C or A will be Do for this song,
respectively.
The rightmost sharp in the key signature is Ti on the
solfege scale. Move up one half step (a space or line)
and you will find the root note which the scale is named
for, and which you can consider as Do. On the other
hand, utilize this mnemonic to identify the scale by the

number of sharps there are (beginning at one sharp):
Green Day And Elvis Buy Four Cats
The rightmost flat in the key signature happens to be Fa,
and the flat to its left is the root note Do. Identify the
scale by how many flats there are (beginning at one
flat): Fat Boys Eat Apples During Geometry Class
3 - Listen to the root note. 
Except you have great pitch, you will require to listen to the root
tone. This is constantly the note in the name of the key signature,
hence when you are singing a song written in A, you will wish to
listen to an A. You can make use of a piano, a metronome with a
pitch function, a tuning fork, or pitch software on a phone app or
website.

4 - Run through the solfege scale. 
Using the root note as Do, sing the solfege scale up and down once
or two times to get a feel for the notes you will be singing. Keep in
mind to utilize the minor solfege syllables for minor scales.
 
 
 
 
5 - Check the rhythm and tempo. 

The vertical bar lines on sheet music will assist you detect or
ascertain the beat of the music. Tap this onto your leg with your
fingers if it enables you obtain a sense of it. There might as well be a
tempo mark informing you how fast to sing, such as ‘90’ for 90 beats
for each minute. Feel at ease to sing it slowly if you require to,
except you are being accompanied.
Italian words are frequently utilized as tempo
descriptions also, like andante for a ‘walking pace’ of
around 90 beats per minute. Adagio for slow and
allegro for fast are two (2) of the most common.
6 - Cope with difficult passages. 

If you are singing on your own or unaccompanied, particularly when
you are practicing, slow down a little when you are experiencing
difficulty with a passage. If you are being accompanied or singing in
a group, lower the volume instead while you are struggling, however
maintain a confident, clear tone. As you school your sight-singing
and get a feel for the song you are singing, even your presumptions
or guesses would be right more and more frequently.
You can utilize an app such as AnyTune to slow down tricky
passages in a recording without altering the pitch.
 
 

 

