

Are Functions Core Concepts in
Computer Programming?
Author:M Mubashar
Computer programming is a phrase that is bandied about quite heavily, but only few
people actually understand its implications. The process of computer programming itself
is difficult to understand for people who are not in the computer science field. Computer
programming makes use of a code or a language: this language can be placed into several
lines of code that can be translated to mean different things once they are processed as a
program. For instance, the software that you use to calculate your taxes, or the software
that you employ to make your simple web page are all products of skilful computer
programming. Behind these software programs are scripts and codes, and these scripts and
codes can mean different things.
For many different programming languages, a function can be important and can therefore
be a key concept to learn when someone is interested in software and computer
programming. A function can also be termed as a subroutine, procedure, or sub-query.
How is a function important? For instance, if a company or institution has a library of
many different programs, these programs can therefore consist of millions upon millions
of lines of a source code. In the interests of time and space, you would like to keep from
duplicating a certain source code in many different places.
Why is duplication so undesirable? If a source code is duplicated in many different places,
it is being needlessly copied, and it can spell Hell for the programmer and troubleshooter
when things go wrong down the line. If the source code is actually erroneous, the
programmer or troubleshooter will have to correct the code in all the different places that
it appears. If the source code has to be updated or improved in order to make the program
either run faster or perform more operations, then the source code has to be modified,
improved, and updated in all the places that it appears. And if the source code has to be
removed and replaced with a new source code, then it has to be erased and replaced with
the new code in every single place that it appears.
This is indeed time-consuming, and it can lead to more errors because of all the human
intervention that has to be done. On the other hand, if there are functions that are built to
handle all the different programs, then only one or a few changes need to be made should
there be errors, or should the source code have to be updated, modified, improved, or
changed. You can think of the function as an umbrella: it covers all of many different
programs beneath it, so that you do not have to cover each program individually. 
Having a single source code serving as the function is also advantageous when you have
to introduce a new program that still makes use of that same source code. Because the
source code is already available as an overall function or sub-program, you do not need to
add the source code to the new program. You only need to find a way for the new program
to interact with the source code itself.
These are only a few facts that you need to know about functions in computer

programming. For more information, read up on the latest computer programs, how
different programs can interact with each other using some umbrella or overall scripts, and
how different programs can be improved when using functions.

BASIC: A Computer Programming Language
Computer programming has its own language, and that’s just the beginning of the software
adventure. There are many different languages in computer programming, and all of them
have their own purposes. In order to understand the importance of computer programming
languages, knowing them, and tweaking them, one has to understand the importance of
computer programming. Computer programming produces software packages, among
other things, to meet our needs. We may need software for accounting, making photos
bigger or smaller, or editing our home videos. Behind all these software packages are the
computer programmers who use their individual languages in order to create the software.
One such computer programming language is the Beginner’s All-Purpose Symbolic
Instruction Code, or BASIC. BASIC is actually composed of many different kinds of
programming languages that are actually higher level than most other languages. This
BASIC family of computer programming languages was first designed in the 1960’s, and
was originally made for non-science people to gain better access to computers. During that
time, using a computer required that a person write customized software, a task that only
mathematicians and scientists were equipped to do. The BASIC language was therefore a
bridge for people of other professions to take advantage of the power of computers.
When the 1970’s came, the BASIC language, whether in its original form or a variant of it,
spread onto microcomputers; and by the 1980’s, even home computers could be run in
BASIC. Today, BASIC remains popular, as it serves as the basis for many of the more
modern programming languages that have been developed in the wake of advanced
operating systems and the Internet.
When it was originally conceived, BASIC was meant for beginners: it was a language that
people could use easily, whether or not they were educated in mathematics and the
sciences. The language also had to be a general purpose one, in that it had to serve many
different needs, and not only those that mathematicians and scientists required. The root
language of BASIC also had to allow for advanced features to be plugged on as experts
grew more and more adept in it, and as the language found further use in many other
fields. BASIC was also meant to be interactive, and was designed to show error messages
that were clear and friendly; that is, these error messages had to completely explain what
the problem was, which would hopefully allow the user to fix it faster and easier.
When it was first released, moreover, BASIC was free of charge, which allowed the
language to spread much faster. Once the language spread much faster, it was also easy to
modify it and correct errors. BASIC was also distributed to a few high schools in order to
promote it faster. Thanks to this widespread use of the language, BASIC was soon
implemented on several microcomputers, and by several software manufacturers.
Despite its success, BASIC has had its dissenters. For instance, some programmers find
that its scripts do not show proper programming practices, and the language itself is too
slow, or sometimes even too simple. Despite all these, however, BASIC has continued to
thrive, succeed, and evolve, and has thus become a good tool to introduce beginner
programmers to the concept of coding and computer programming.
These are only a few facts about the BASIC language. For more information on BASIC,

read and do your own research through several key pages online, or using computer
programming books.

Training in Macromedia
The Macromedia family of software might be something that is taken for granted by
people who have used the different kinds of software in it a lot. By popping the
Macromedia disk into the CD-ROM drive, everyone, from a toddler to a computer
programmer, can do a lot of things with his or her computer. However, for those who are
interested in working with such software, computer programming and training in
Macromedia is needed.
There are many kinds of software in the Macromedia family. For instance, if you are
interested in developing computer software, and if you are looking for a way to make a
dynamic website, then you may need Adobe ColdFusion, which works like the ASP
package of Microsoft, or the programming language PHP. If you are hoping to cut down
on website design, development, and editing time, then you may also be interested in
Adobe Contribute, which allows different members of an organization to contribute to the
changes made in a website, therefore saving time and money in hiring a single person or a
team to make the changes in the site.
If you want to do website design but want to see your results immediately instead of
plodding through oceans and oceans of script, then you may be interested in Adobe
Dreamweaver. This popular member of the Macromedia family may not require
programming skills, but it can help software programmers understand what certain scripts
do and how these scripts behave online.
For those interested in online learning solutions, there is Macromedia Authorware, which
is a programming language that is based on flowcharts. Authorware is used for making
programs that are interactive, and that can be integrated into various types of multimedia
content. Also in demand is Adobe Director, which was originally created for making
animation. Today, Adobe Director is used as a scripting language for creating a standalone
kiosk, or CD-ROMS. It is also being used for developing online three-dimensional games.
The Macromedia family also has its own graphics editor in the person of Adobe
Fireworks. The Fireworks program is the graphics editor that is designed to integrate with
other Macromedia products. Another graphics program is the FreeHand package, which
creates vector graphics in two-dimensions, and is designed for the use of desktop
publishers.
What is undoubtedly the most popular package in the Macromedia family is the Flash and
Shockwave group. Macromedia Shockwave players are multimedia players that were
originally designed as independent packages, and that were made to play Flash programs.
Today, however, the two are integrated heavily with each other; Flash itself is a highly
powerful tool for website designers who want to create more dynamic and attractive
websites that thrive heavily on animation. Despite the “eye candy” feel of Flash, however,
most website designers stay away from it and do their own scripting, since Flash
animation cannot be picked up by search engines, and can thus limit the amount of
readable content that can help a website be more popular.
If you are interested in training in Macromedia, you also have to be aware that most of the
packages presented are already under the Adobe umbrella. Moreover, you may need to

hone your computer programming skills well enough to be able to run Macromedia
applications and use them for your work. Not only is Macromedia all about popping
something into your CD-ROM drive, it is about computer programming used well, in
order to serve a wider variety of purposes.

The Different Sides of Computer Game Programming
Many people will play computer games without any knowledge of how much work went
into the game. True, a lot of thought and creativity had to be employed in order to make
the game work, but the game also required a good deal of computer programming and
knowledge of different computer programming languages in order to make the game not
only feel real, but look attractive as well. There are many sides of computer game
programming, so if you are interested in computer game programming and may want to
take up courses in the future, take a look at this list.
The game physics programmer is someone who directs how a game uses physics in order
to look correct and feel correct. In most cases, a computer game will not completely
simulate the physics of a real world, but some important aspects of physics may have to
come into play for some games. For instance, wind resistance might be important to
dogfights, while the fluid but retarded movements of some characters in water might be
needed for a role-playing game.
The artificial intelligence programmer is the one in charge of developing the logical
sequence of the game itself. For instance, when a game involves finding a path, employing
strategies, or giving rise to enemy tactics, an artificial intelligence programmer may be
called in to make a game smart – in other words, to make the game think on its own. In
general, the computer language used for artificial intelligence programming is simpler
than other languages, and it can be shared with the game’s players.
The graphics programmer uses a series of codes and algorithms in order to provide
graphics in the world of the game. In the modern age, a graphics programmer has to work
in a three-dimensional environment, and should therefore have knowledge of calculus,
vector math, and other algebra concepts that may be needed for specializing in rendering
such images. There are only very few graphics programmers, and they may usually
demand high wages for their work.
A sound programmer will provide sounds in terms of characters’ dialogues, music, and
even sounds that can make the game seem more real, such as the sound of crunching
leaves or grass as characters walk on them. The gameplay programmer will add to the
experience of the game, and will do so by focusing on the game’s feel and strategy.
Computer game programming will also require a team of scripters, who are also usually
the designers of the game. These scripters write the code of the game itself, usually with a
basic computer language. Also needed are user interface programmers, or the UI: the UI
programmers will create a library of different aspects that can be used across a wide
variety of worlds within the game, or a wide variety of games within a manufacturer. The
UI programming language involves a good deal of math, with the aim of producing special
effects.
Also important is an input programmer, who writes codes for how different kinds of
hardware, such as the keyboard, joystick, or mouse, will affect the game. The network
programmer will find ways for the game to work on a network, where people can play
against each other. A porting programmer ensures that the game can work on different
platforms and operating systems.

Overseeing all these tasks is the lead game programmer. These are only a few aspects of
computer game programming. As the field widens, more and more programmers of
different kinds will have to be called in and identified as important.

What You Should Know About a Computer Programming
Career
Computer programming is one of the most important and exciting careers today. It is also
a field that offers plenty of job opportunities for graduates. It’s one of the best fields of
endeavor for people who love technology and are willing to try out new things. If you’re
considering pursuing a computer programming career, here are some things that you
should know:
What is computer programming?
Computer programming is basically the process of writing codes to create a computer
program. A programming language is used to write this code, also known as the source
code. Computer programming is actually an umbrella term that encompasses all types of
programming involving the use of computers. The design and method utilized to write a
source code will depend on the type of computer language used for the job. Some of the
most common computer languages include BASIC, COBOL, FORTRAN, C++, Java,
Visual Basic, Python and PHP.
The job of computer programming also includes testing the source code, debugging it to
check for flaws and weaknesses and maintaining it to ensure optimum performance.
Creating the code
The soul of computer programming is the creation of the source code, which can either be
brand new or something created to modify or improve upon an already existing code. The
object of the source code is to build a program that will perform a particular series of tasks
based on a specific set of commands. This is called customization.
The end result of writing the source code is a computer program. In software engineering,
computer programming is an important initial phase.
What does a computer programmer do?
The main job of a computer programmer is to write the codes that serve as the foundation
of software programs. He is also tasked to test, troubleshoot, debug and maintain the
program to ensure its quality and reliability. 
Generally, the tasks that a computer programmer must perform are assigned by another
person, usually the system analyst. The computer programmer’s job is then to write the
program, test it, modify it if necessary and ensure that it passes compatibility and quality
standards. If errors are found, it is the computer programmer’s job to ensure that they are
corrected.
The job of a computer programmer usually requires hours upon hours spent in front of a
computer to design and write a computer program. Depending on the type of program
being written, its purpose and the complexity of the commands required in order for a
computer to execute the series of steps involved, writing a program can take several
months to several years to complete.
The length of time it often takes for a program to be completed often necessitates having a
single program broken down into a smaller series of steps. These steps will then be
assigned as tasks to a group of programmers who will work on them independently. The

final step is to put the end results and produce one coherent and useful computer program.
Computer programming is a very dynamic field and involves plenty of imagination and
discipline. Although there are set standards for the tasks involved, the profession itself
does not require certification tests from government agencies. There are also no state and
federal licenses to obtain.
How much does a computer programming job pay?
That will depend on the experience and level of expertise of the programmer. Most entry
level programmers earn a minimum of about $33,000 a year while mid-level programmers
earn approximately $50,000 a year. For senior level programmers and those who have
several years of experience behind them, their typical take-home pay averages at about
$65,000 a year. Consultants, some managers and those who have advanced well in their
computer programming career are often paid more.

What You Need to Know About a Computer Programming
Course
Computer programming may seem like a highly complicated discipline but at its roots,
every program actually begins as a simple set of instructions. Computer programming is
essentially the design of a simple program in order to create a more complicated program.
It is currently one of the most sought-after courses and is also a career that presents plenty
of opportunities in a very exciting field. If you’re curious about what taking a computer
programming course will be like, here are some important information you can use.
The course Computer programming is one of the disciplines under computer science. It
requires study and practical application of theories and concepts. Simply put, computer
programming is the process of writing and creating a group of instructions that a computer
can read and execute.
Computer programming is not a single, one-size-fits-all discipline. For one, the task of
programming (or coding) involves several computer languages. These languages have
different uses and as such, will often require a different set of instructions. JavaScript, for
example, may be a computer language but it is not the same as HTML or COBOL or
Visual Basic. There are also certain sub-disciplines in computer programming that lead to
a specific field of specialization. Students must determine which field of computer
programming they want to focus on. If they want to work for companies that create video
games, for example, they will have to choose courses that teach graphics and animation,
among others.
In the course of study in computer programming, a programmer must be able to learn
multiple concepts and theories on top of the technical stuff, such as computer language
conventions, elements and important operators used to create a source code that will later
produce a computer program.
Computer programming is an essential phase in the development of software and is an
integral part of software engineering.
How learning is obtained
There are two major ways computer programming can be learned – through classroom
type instruction or online, as part of a distance learning program. Classroom type
instruction is still the most common way of attending classes for students but online
classes are fast becoming the method of choice.
What to expect from the course
A computer programming course is usually composed of lectures and hands-on
assignments. The instructor uses lectures to teach theories and concepts in programming
and to provide students with an introduction to the discipline. Generally, students will be
listening to lectures while using computers, a way for instructors to allow participants to
immediately apply what they have learned.
Other than access to a computer, students may also be required to obtain textbooks to be
used as references during coursework. Some lessons, such as those used in online classes,
may also be downloaded from a website.

Who should take the course
Computer programming is not for everyone. Just because you love computers and have
sufficient curiosity about how they work doesn’t always make you the ideal candidate for
this course. Computer programming requires a lot of patience, attention to detail,
creativity, logic and common sense. It also requires careful study and understanding of
certain subjects such as mathematical and engineering concepts.
What to expect upon completion of the course
Once a course has been completed, a computer programmer is ready to be hired for entry-
level jobs in companies that design software. If the programmer chooses a higher level of
study, he can also increase the chances of being hired for higher pay, particularly if he
chooses a field of specialization. A computer programming course can provide a graduate
access to different fields as well, including banking, finance, research & development and
database administration.

Computer Programming Courses in New York City
Although New York City is more famous for its museums, parks, theaters and businesses,
it is also a great location for schools offering computer programming courses. New York
has always been pioneering in many ways and it offers plenty of opportunities for highly
in-demand courses related to computer science. Here are some resources that can help you
look for computer programming courses in New York City:
New York University
NYU is a recognized leader in the field of education and is acknowledged as one of the
top universities in the U.S. It is an excellent institution for many fields of study in
academia but it also has a solid curriculum offering courses in computer programming.
To find out about the type of courses the school offers, go to their website
(www.cs.nyu.edu) and look for their current course list. The link will bring you to their
computer science department page. The course list will outline the courses offered for a
particular semester so you will have an idea of which course to take.
Computer-Schools
Computer-Schools.us is a website that lists schools anywhere in the United States. The site
lets you look for the physical locations of schools or if you prefer, you can search for
schools offering online courses. The site lists a good number of computer programming
schools you can check out. To look for courses, you can click on the links for more
detailed information.
Education-Portal
Education-Portal.com is another website that lists schools in New York offering courses in
computer programming. You can click on the link to the schools to find more information
about specific subjects and courses you might be interested in. The site also offers
information about schools offering computer programming courses that lead to
certification, perfect if you want to build a serious career in this field. New York Institute
of Technology
The NYIT in Old Westbury offers courses in computer programming. You can check out
their site (www.nyit.edu) or send an e-mail to inquire about admissions requirements at
admissions@nyit.edu.
FutureKids
FutureKids is an excellent provider of courses in computer programming, especially for
younger participants. Some of their offerings include C/C++, HTML, XHTML, Visual
Basic and Computer Graphics, among others. If you want children to develop an early
interest in a career involving computers, this is a good place to start.
Columbia University
Columbia University’s Department of Computer Science is an excellent source for
information about computer programming courses. It also offers courses in related fields
such as software engineering, networking and web development.
Berkeley College
Berkeley has a New York City campus which offers some excellent courses in computer
programming. You can check out their site at www.berkeleycollege.edu or send them an e-

mail at info@berkeleycollege.edu. Other courses include web design, software
engineering and networking.
NetCom Information Technology
NetCom Info has a wide range of choices for computer programming courses. It is
currently recognized as a top training center in New York. It offers over 250 computer-
related courses and about 40 certification programs. The center is a partner to several IT
companies and has key relationships with many large corporations. It is also an authorized
provider of training by companies such as Microsoft, IBM, Oracle, Linux and Novell,
among others.
NetCom is one of the best places to obtain computer programming courses in New York
City. If the type and quality of computer programming courses from this center does not
attract you, its address will – it’s located at the 7th floor of the Empire State Building.

Computer Programming Fundamentals You Should Know
uick! Can you tell me how to prepare a bowl of cereals with milk? Too simple, right? You
can probably give me a series of no-brainer instructions that I can perform in less than a
minute. Now try telling a computer to do just that. What began as a simple task has now
become complicated. It’s not just a matter of dumping a cup of cereals in a bowl and
pouring milk in. With computers, it’s so much more than that. Sounds exciting? It should
be. Because that’s what you’ll expect once you begin learning computer programming
fundamentals.
The basics
Computer programming is a whole new world of possibilities. Believe it or not,
programming actually began in the 1200s, when simple machines were designed to
execute simple mechanical tasks. It has grown both as an art and as a science since then,
providing us with the technologies that have made many aspects of our lives easier and
faster.
Once you start learning computer programming, some of the basic stuff you’ll encounter
include:
- The basic understanding of the discipline
You’ll need a good background in the field in order for you to understand how it really
works. With a solid foundation built on knowing the basics of computer programming, it
will be easier to comprehend its details, including procedures, steps and other instructions.
- Understanding the types of programming
Essentially, there are two basic types of programming, each of which has its own uses and
set of advantages and limitations. Procedural programming, while older, is quite useful
particularly because it is a much simpler way to tell a computer what to do. It is also the
heart and soul of many computer languages. Basically, it’s an input-output operation,
where a user or programmer inputs a set of instructions and a computer reacts to it by
executing those instructions. Learning procedural programming helps new programmers
understand elements such as sequence, selection and iteration.
The other type of programming is object-oriented, which is relatively newer. This type of
programming treats instructions as a set of objects, something that is more convenient in
many of the programs that are in use today. With object-oriented programming, you’ll
learn an object’s properties, event handlers and methods.
You’ll learn both types of programming as part of a fundamental or basic course. These
will help you understand how to design codes that are easy for a computer to understand
and effective enough to execute. Using the cereal and milk analogy, for example, you will
be able to write a code that will tell a computer how to pour the right amount of cereal into
a bowl and how much milk to use, in that order. And if you’re truly good, you can even
tell the computer what specific type of cereal and milk to use.
- Understanding the nature of the code
Another important basic knowledge you must learn in programming is understanding
codes. While their functions are generally the same – that is, to power a computer program
– codes differ in design and use depending on the language. Codes are at the heart of a

computer program and will be one of the basics you will learn in programming.
- Learning problem-solving
Much of your time as a first-time computer programmer will be spent poring over
problems – how to create a source code for a desired end result, how to fix a bug, how to
solve a glitch, how to put things together or in sequence so they work. You’ll learn how to
look at a problem, break it down to its solvable components and come up with ways to
solve it.
- Thinking logically.
If you’re not a fan of mathematics and logic, you’ll be dismayed to know that many of the
computer programming fundamentals you’ll be learning will require you to think in
numbers, figures and sequences. However, these basics are easy to learn, provided you
have the patience to follow the right steps. Once you’ve trained your mind to think like
this, you’re well on your way to a great career as a computer programmer.

On the Way to Learning Computer Programming In Nano
Today’s digital technology gives birth to a host of programming languages. And there are
several programming languages being used in different applications such as the web,
Windows, Apple, and Unix. And right now, computer programming in Nano is one of the
newest developments.
It was believed that a Nano mechanical computer could run a million times faster than a
microprocessor-based computer. This is because that one out of the million components of
a computer is made of mechanical space. Therefore, if a programming language is
patterned on the mechanical space a computer has, it will follow that the computer will
work faster.
But then again, engineers would have to create an entirely new line of computer systems.
Computers that are more energy efficient and consumers lesser space is the ones that
would work well with a Nano computer language.
However, the Nano computer language is believed to work well with the present day
computers systems as well. The primary use of this programming language is on graphics.
With the Nano-X graphics system you could create much fancier graphical programs. To
make it work, you have to specifically create the program with the Windows, Unix, or
Macintosh interface in mind.
The Nano computer language primarily came from the nano technology. Nano technology
refers from the fields of applied science that control matter on its molecular and atomic
scale. The technology can be used in materials science, applied physics, and of course,
computer programming.
Japan is one of the pioneers of nano technology and nano programming. In fact, they are
very active in holding symposiums and conventions on both professional nano
technologies and aspiring young scientists. They are constantly looking for new ideas and
concepts surrounding the nano technology and the improvements on the nano computer
language.
Right now, the interest in learning and improving computer programming in nano is
spreading to Asian countries like Vietnam, South Korea, and in Europe, France. The
demand for different applications in nano computer programming is increasing, causing
increased users and clients base.
The nano program is basically very easy to learn and to apply. Texts can be typed
immediately into the interface. It is also quite simple to insert text into the program with
the use of some editing configuration. There is also the nano editor software that you can
use with the main program base so that saving, cutting, pasting, and searching becomes
fairly straightforward.
Currently, there are a lot of instructions software and basic instructional kits for use of
those who want to learn computer programming in nano. Since nano is being one of the
more popular languages today, this software is being applied in almost all newer
applications.
All programming professionals are challenged to learn this new technology. With the basic

knowledge you have for computer languages, learning the nano language won’t be much
of a trouble. The basic principles of the program resemble the other wellused popular
programming languages. The more complex uses and functions of the nano programming
language are unique from all others. But that is always a part of learning a whole new
programming language.
Learn more about computer programming in nano by searching relevant instructional web
sites as well as from different offline sources. The nano programming language is a good
language to learn as it is expected to improve over time.

The Need For Computer Programming Language Evolution
The digital world constantly changes. New technologies are introduced and new
developments in the industry are being made known to the public. There will always be
changes in technology. And technology will constantly improve to help create a better
world.
And one of the primary movers of technology and the digital world is a computer
programming language. This is the language spoken and understood by the computer. The
computer language is machine language. Basically, what the computer can understand and
process are just a bunch of one’s and zero’s. It is really upon the expertise of the
programmer to create special software that could be understood by the computer and the
human user.
Computer programming software follows a certain language that computers follow.
Examples of these languages are the Assembly language, C++, FoxPro, Visual Basic,
Visual FoxPro and several others. These types of software can mediate between the
computer and the programmer. All the programmer has to do is to input the commands he
would like the computer to do. He’ll write the commands in the syntax that the computer
programming language understands. The commands are then processed and converted into
the machine language the computer processor understands. This is how the many
applications and programs downloadable from the internet are created.
Different computer programming languages can provide different levels of functionality.
Some software can give crisp graphical images. These programming languages are usually
used in making games. Games are really what make computers half popular. And this is all
because of the computer programming language created for making games that people
from all over the world love. Games are complex individual programs that are interlinked
together by the main game application.
Aside from computer games, programming languages allows for the development of
functional software such as word processing programs, database programs, webbased
applications, and several others. The software is made possible with the creation of the
programming languages that are most fitting to the design and interface of the program
being created. There are many times that a single application can be created multiple
language platforms.
But then again, all of these programs won’t be possible without the creation of an
operating system. The operating system is the software by which a computer system runs.
Popular examples of such software are the Windows platform, Linux, Unix, and Mac OS.
There are a lot of old operating systems being used before and the most popular of which
is DOS. The operating system serves as a good median for the computer and the
processor’s language. Its main job is to translate every single program created for the
operating system and allow the machine to process them accordingly, so that people can
run and use the program.
The evolution of computer programming languages is required in this ever-changing
world. It is mandatory that they have to keep up with the demands of the current times.
Before, computers are used against a black, monochrome background. Right now,

computers uses images, colors, and interactive icons. The contrast is very striking that you
can just imagine what would happened if there were no evolution that happened.
The introduction of new computer programming languages should be a welcome addition
to the growing group of computer languages. The new features and abilities these can be
used widely in different applications are in currently in demand.

Your Guide to Computer Programming Magazines
If you want to be updated with the new gadgets and the new technologies dealing with
computer programming, you have to subscribe to respectable industry-related magazines.
Thanks to the internet, these magazines are also available for public viewing over the web.
This means you really don’t worry about missing a subscription or so. In other cases, you
don’t even have to pay for subscriptions anymore. All you have to do is to log on to your
internet and read the new entries or the new issue from the programming magazines off
your desktop or laptop computer.
Here are the different computer programming magazines you can check out online:
1. Application Development Trends
This magazine provides all the information you might need about newly released software
and all the new trends in information technology. The audience of this magazine is usually
the technical management groups of big companies and enterprises.
2. C++ Source
This online programming magazine is going to be indispensable for C++ professionals. It
contains information about the C++ language, its philosophy, and the direction it is taking
in this changing world. Aside from that, it also offers feature articles to its readers. There
are also related topics about computer programming and C++ tutorials that are perfect for
the beginners. It also has a news section that gives updates about C++.
3. Developer Network Journal
If you are a .NET, ASP, COM, and ADO technology aficionado, this is the magazine for
you. Every issue is right with articles that software developers are going to find useful.
This is the primary magazine of the Windows and Microsoft-based platforms.
4. Developer
Developer is an independent magazine that is primarily created to carry information about
different topics of interest a computer programmer needs to know. It contains features
about software development, programming, architecture, database creation, and other
things.
5. Doctor Dobb’s Journal
Doctor Dobb’s Journal or DDJ is the foremost programming online magazines that
features relevant software tips, tricks, and tools for both aspiring and professional
programmers. It is also rich in source code, articles, book reviews, product resources, and
a whole lot more.
6. Java World
Java World is your optimum source of all Java-related programming resources. Both
professional and amateur Java developer can use it. It always has fresh news, API’s,
tutorials, tools, feature articles, and interviews with the experts that all deals with the Java
technology.
7. SYS-CON Media
SYS-CON media currently is the leader in information technology media in the world.
They specialize in AJAX development, as well as .NET and JAVA. But they are also the

authority when it comes to XML, Coldfusion, WebLogic, and Flex.
8. MSDN Magazine
If you want to get ahead with the newest technologies that affect the Microsoft networking
systems, then the MSDN magazine is what you need. Their issues are always rich with
source codes and helpful articles. They also have an archive of back issues, should you be
interested in them too.
9. Leading Edge Java
This magazine could qualify as the practical Java handbooks for Java developers. It
contains tutorials, news, tools, and current uses of the Java technology.
10. Luminary
Luminary is a free newsletter published monthly. It contains features on software
management, consulting, and development.
These are the 10 most useful programming magazines you can check out over the internet.
If you want to take a glimpse of how what’s new and hot in the programming world, just
check out these magazines and know yourself.

Learning Computer Programming Terminology
Computer programmers are professionals who are in demand these days. This is because
of the fact that everything is on the stage of being converted into digital. Not too soon,
there won’t be analog systems anymore. All systems would be created according to the
digital generation.
Right now, there are different schools and institutions providing training for computer
programming. You can enroll to either offline or online schools, depending upon your time
availability. For those who recently get off from high school and would like to pursue a
career in computer programming, they can inquire from the different schools, colleges,
and universities around them. These institutions are surely offering programming courses.
However, for those who are currently holding down a job and would just like to learn
computer programming as a hobby, they can enroll in an online school that follows a
distance education setup. They are free to catch up on their lessons during their free time,
whenever they are, provided they have a laptop with an internet access.
Here are the different schools where you can take training courses on computer
programming:
1. Collins College
Collins College is located in Arizona. It is previously known as the Al Collins Graphic
Design School. Right now, the school follows emphasized programs for visual
communications through graphic design, computer animation, and digital video. They also
offer e-commerce programming.
2. Brown College
Brow College’s main institution is in Minnesota. However, they are accepting enrollees
from various locations. They are implementing quality programs in computer
programming. The school employs competent faculty members that implement them.
3. International Academy of Design and Technology 
This career-oriented institution is dedicated in providing academic excellence to their
students. Computer programming is not a very easy course. But this school is one of the
few that tries to find a way to make the learning process more fun and rewarding.
4. American Inter Continental University
The school offers different degrees related to business, industrial, and government career
paths. And all of their graduates have adequate computer programming units to back them
up. There are also Master’s Degree and Associate’s Degree programs being offered, on top
of the school’s Bachelor’s Degrees.
5. ITT Technical Inst
If you want true-blue computer programming training, you have to go to the authority. The
ITT Tech Inst is a special educational institution that focuses on information technology
courses. The schools offers both Bachelor’s and Associate’s degree.
6. Tech Skills
If you want hands-on computer programming and information technology courses, you
should go to Tech Skills. They are offering different programs related to computers and

technology. Their programs include training and certification for Oracle, Microsoft, A+,
Cisco, and a whole lot more.
7. Unitek 
Unitek is the premier provider of certificate courses for both CISCO and Microsoft. They
are also offering training courses for these two. They can provide assessment testing for
anybody situated across the country. They have prepared a skills test online for aspiring
students who would want to join their boot camp.
8. Kaplan University
Kaplan University is an online school that offers classes around the clock. This is one of
the best schools offering programming courses for both teens and adults. Their curriculum
is focused on the individualized career path of their students.
These are the eight different computer programming training centers you can check out.
Look for the school that is equipped to improve your skills and abilities the most. This
way, you can make your future look a lot brighter.

How To Implement Credit Card Computer Programming
There are different types and applications of computer programming. Computer
programming is very essential anywhere there’s a computer or a digital device. Programs
are the primary requirement before a system or device could run. And in this digital age,
they are required by almost all applications, including web-based ones.
Credit card computer programming is one of the most vital forms of programming these
days. This is precisely what makes online banking and e-commerce possible. With these
sets of programs, people can freely buy things over the internet. And merchants can also
get their earning easily from the issuing banks of the credit cards used to pay them.
The main requirement of credit card computer programming is security. These programs
should be created with multiple layers of security so as to protect the interests of both the
online seller and the buyer. Credit card programming requires a series of intricate
commands and test runs just to avoid the loopholes in the programming.
Adequate security is also necessary so that identity theft and other illegal acts are not
committed over the internet. The main reason why identity theft is rampant over the
internet is because there are not sufficient security measures that both online sellers and
buyers follows. It is really the task of credit card computer programmers to make
indestructible security programs for their clients.
Identity theft is the act of stealing one’s sensitive financial information such as credit card
number, social security number, name, address, and age. All of these are required before
an online transaction could push through. But because of the improving abilities of
hackers and fraudulent individuals, they somehow manage to find ways on how squeeze
out the information from unsuspecting victims. They don’t run out of creative ways of
enticing people to freely give out the information they need.
A website that uses a faulty credit card computer programming protocol is exposed to the
risks associated with refunds, fines, and even legal costs. But more than that, the website’s
customers will be very irritated with their experience arising from the transaction with the
website. Worse, they could even suspect that the website is part of a big scam operating in
the underworld of the internet. This is where things could get nasty with legal fees arising
from suits filed by the affected consumers.
Therefore, it is very important for small and medium-scale internet business owners to
avail of credit card computer programming services only from reputable sources. For all
they know, the program that they are using are created with a backdoor that only the
programmers know about. If you can request for a customized programming complete
with documentation and a legal contract, it is highly recommended that they avail of that.
But if that seems a little too expensive, they can definitely try one of the many third party
payment processors in operation today. This is a good alternative to buying or creating a
special software for your e-commerce website. Examples of a third party payment
processor are PayPal, Google Checkout, FirePay, and others. These companies are
offering the processing of payments in cash, checks, and credit cards. However, these
companies charge a certain amount or a percentage of the payment received.

This deal should be just fine, because they normally assume all responsibility when it
comes to the proper handling or credit card charge requests. And for them to do it right,
they ensure their clients that they have a very complex credit card computer programming
system in place.

Looking Adeptly at Programming Function Examples
Before looking at the different examples of programming functions, it is best to
understand the purpose and definition of function. A function is the means by which
someone who uses a program can execute a code block which has two purposes: to finish
a certain task and to return values. Although functions are expected to return a certain
value, it is not always that values are returned.
A function is also considered as a procedure in some programming languages. On the
other hand, functions are commonly known as any term that is being used in referring to
names of code blocks. Take note that it is the C programming language which solely uses
the keyword function. Functions accept restrictions, they also return values, and they are
maintained on a separate location from the code of primary program. The C language uses
main function as the point of entry to certain programs.
Functions can show up in a single or two locations. This is dependent on whether the
function is single line or multi-line. Having a single line function means a value is
returned after the performances of work (in a single line) while the multi-line function is
broadened over different lines.
Perhaps, the most common example of a programming function is a mathematical
function. Log and tan are examples of mathematical functions. The other two known
functions are string functions and the date functions.
Simply defined, a programming function allows you to assign certain values where results
can be calculated in a matter of seconds while saving yourself from the task of doing the
computations manually.
On the declaration or calling of a function which has two or more parameters, the use of
comma is needed to separate the different parameters. One function declaration could
resemble this:
function print_two_strings($var1, $var2) {
echo $var1;
echo “\n”;
echo $var2;
return NULL;
}
For these functions to be called, a value must be assigned to the parameters, hence:
Function call:
Print two strings (“hi”, “guys”);
The output should appear as:
hi
guys
One other good way to have active parameters is the use of PHP’s integral functions such
as func get args, func get arg, and func num args functions. These functions are able to
calculate arithmetic means of any values that are placed onto them and an output is
derived. An example:

mean(35, 43, 3);
The output is then:
Mean: 27
A programming function is usually best when it returns some value or information.
Functions do calculations, indeed, but it is also useful in indicating any errors that are
encountered any function. To return an information from functions, you can use return ()
statement on the specified function.
An example of script for PHP is the following:
<?php
function add_numbers($var1 = 0, $var2 = 0, $var3 = 0) {
$var4 = $var1 + $var2 + $var3; return $var4;
}
$sum = add_numbers(2,4,6)
echo “The result of 2+4+6 is {$sum} ?>
The result is:
The result of 2+4+6 is 12.
Take note that {} statement ended the course of the function. If multiple variables are to be
returned, a group of variables should be returned, not a single variable: An example:
function maths ($input1, $input2) {
$total = ($input1 + $input2);
$difference = ($input1 - $input2);
$ret = array(“tot”=>$total, “diff”=>$difference);
return $ret;
}
There are also ways of accessing functions without having to type a function name or {}
syntax. This can be done in two ways: the call_user_func or the 
call_user_func_array. One complex example is the following:
$one = “One”;
$two = “Two”;
$three = “Three”;
$callback_func = “my_function”;
$result = call_user_func_array($callback_func,array($one,$two,$three)); echo $result;
These equations may show as a bunch of gibberish letters and numbers but these symbols
actually account to make a certain task easier. And that, for us, is the most important thing.

Computer Programming Functions: Get to Know What
They Are
When it comes to computer programming vocabulary, there are so many terminologies
that people who do not have enough know-how tend to become lost and confused. One
term could be translated into so many different names in different languages. For example,
the following words are quite similar: Functions, Programs, Subroutines, Procedures,
Subprograms, or Subqueries. The only question now is which of these terms could stand
on their own.
Theoretically speaking, computer programming avoids the duplication of any code in
multiple spaces. For example, one institution utilizing the programs could have some
libraries of different thousands or even more programs with billions of basic code lines.
With such intricate case, duplication could still be avoided. Let us say that an error
message occurs because the collection now needs to have an additional ‘member’.
A good example is the addition of another global currency called the Euro. If each and
every program will be told to update itself because of this new addition, it could be
complex. But with sub-programs or functions specifically designed to handle diverse
situations, then the only function that would take care of the change would be the one
assigned to handle such a scenario.
In the same way that we write new programs, many of the components that it will need are
already in existence (e.g. accessing a certain file to dig up a certain data, computing
inventories on hand). In cases such as this, a good alternative to writing different source
code lines to work on the new function (and eventually replication of the code onto
numerous other programs), the sub-program is accessed to work on the specified function.
In a handful of programming languages, there are certain parameters that are being passed
from a specific program name to the program that is being called to do a task. A secondary
program usually makes the values altered and then the control is brought back to the main
program. These actions could be levels deeper. The various programs that are being used
to call each other are written in so many varying languages. The reasons behind this are: to
have a reasonable controllable function pieces and having various languages means being
better able to suit different function types.
To further define the uses of programming functions, a function may appear in two
different locations or even a single location. This depends on whether it is multi-line or
single-line function. A function that is single line is one that gives back a value after
performing tasks (all of this in a single line). The multi-line function, however, is stretched
on many different lines.
A single line function could show in a code block all because it only responds when called
by a certain name. The multi-line function does otherwise. If it is a multi-line function that
is being defined in a block of code, then the statements that follow the definition are done
in a non-sequential manner.
In its simplicity, functions are code blocks that can be reusable. These code blocks often
return single values (sometimes they don’t’). Common examples of these code blocks are

Mathematical functions (e.g. tan or log), date functions (figures between two dates), or
string functions (looking for incidents of 1 string located within another string). Functions
are also kept separately from the primary program code. A lot of programming language
has specific functions which are delegated as entry points to a certain program.
Knowing what functions are in computer programming could take sometime to
noncomputer savvy individuals. But the basics are all here. Looking at the many complex
things that functions do, you get to appreciate the things that the computer does for you
each day, don’t you?

The Future of Computer Programming
Computer programming is also known as software program or sometimes it is simply
called ‘program’. Whatever name it’s called, its purpose is to provide instructions to a
computer machine. If there is one thing that a computer needs to be able to function (aside
from electricity, of course!), it would be computer programs. The executor of the
instructions is the central processor.
Computer programming is categorized into two functional lines which are the application
and system software. And when it comes to working on these matters, the experts are the
so-called computer programmers or software developers. But where there is software,
there should also exist the hardware. Generally speaking, hardware devices are any
physical things that are being used in computer manipulation. Examples are circuit boards,
keyboards and processors. The development of hardware plays a major role on the
advancement of computer programming.
This is because most computer programs are embedded in hardware. This means that
some programs that are stored in the computer can be accessed by an initial program that
is stored in its ROM for booting. The process of booting is to be able to recognize and also
initialize all system features.
After the initialization process, the primary program of the computer would load the
operating system which would set the program counters to initiate usual operations.
Totally self-sufficient, a hardware device could have some embedded firmware in
controlling its operation.
Nowadays, there are a number of hardware development tools in the market. Along with
some software development kits are the hardware development tools that are designed to
allow users to have control on design flow processes. There are many different types to
choose from. There are development boards for hardware that are used in assisting
designers for systems and software to validate designs. For example, there are tools that
are used in SoC prototypes, or there are tools that combine several device features such as
Flash programmer or Memory emulator.
Going back to the basics, there are numerous computer programs that would run
concurrently on just one computer. This process is called multitasking. And multitasking
can run on either software or hardware systems.
Operating systems that are modern are able to run several programs through the socalled
process scheduling—this is software system that switches the central processing unit
amongst processes. By doing this, users are able to interact with every single program
while it is being run. As to hardware, modern multiprocessors or computers that are
equipped with multicore processor might run several programs.
‘Heard of the term open source hardware? There is currently no real definition of this term
but this is generally understood as open source software usage alongside hardware. Also,
this is the free discharge of information on the hardware (release on schematics, size,
design and other information). This is the latest in open source hardware information and
logic design sharing is a known open source hardware form.

Designers of open hardware often meet to discuss design problems and their
corresponding solutions; they also assist each other in looking for parts; they also meet to
converse about recent developments in their works. 
Since it is believed that the development of software is quite limited (and might even have
reached its peak), the focus on progression is now on hardware development. With the
many hardware development tools in the market nowadays, the world could look forward
to more innovations in the not-so-distant future…or maybe even tomorrow.

Computer Programming and Its Rich History
If it’s the history of programming that has to be retold, then it is safe to begin an account
with the difference engine of Charles Babbage way back in 1822. Even from the time
when computers were so simple, they still needed to have instructions so that they will be
able to perform tasks that are inputted to them. This set of instructions is what is known
today as computer programming.
During the difference engine’s era, the gears needed to be changed manually which would
then result into the calculations being made. All of that was changed when signals of
electricity replaced physical motion with the US Government’s 1942 machine named
ENIAC. The concept of accepting programming was also followed by this machine.
To make programming faster, two vital concepts which directly influenced programming
languages were developed in 1945 by John Von Neumann, who was then with the Institute
for Advanced Study. The first concept was known as the shared-program method. This
concept dictated that the hardware had to be noncomplex and need not be hand-wired for
every program. Intricate instructions were used to control this type of hardware which
made reprogramming quicker.
The second concept called the ‘conditional control transfer’ gave birth to code blocks
which can be used even in different orders or the so-called subroutines. The next part of
the concept was logical branching. With this, the concept of having code blocks that can
be used and reused was born.
By 1949, the Short Code language came out. It became the mother of electronic device
computer language. With this language, the programmer was required to use 0’s and 1’s
instead of the usual statements. 1951 marked the appearance of compiler named A-0 by
Grace Hopper. This program translated all the 0’s and 1’s for the computer. This gave way
to much quicker programming.
FORTRAN (FORmula TRANslating System) was introduced in 1957 which was also the
first key language. It was designed for IBM for scientific computation. This language
included the GOTO, DO and IF statements. FORTRAN’s forte was not business
computing, though. It was a good program for number handling but not for business
computations.
COBOL was then developed in 1959. It was designed as a businessman’s language. The
COBOL’s program was comparable to an essay where there are 4-5 sections comprising a
major whole. This made it easier to study.
The LISP language (developed for artificial intelligence study) also known as the
Cambridge Polish was developed in 1958 by John McCarthy. This programming language
is highly abstract and specific that is why it is still being used today. The LISP can store
lists and modify them on its own.
In that same year, the Algol language was produced. This became the mother of the Pascal
language, C and C++, and also Java. Algol also had the first proper grammar called the
Backus-Naar form or BNF. Algol 68, which was the next version, was a harder version to
use. Due to this difficulty, Pascal came into existence.

Niklaus Wirth introduced the Pascal language in 1968. It was a necessary means of
teaching then. It was a combination of the following languages: ALGOL, FORTRAN and
COBOL. It was also Pascal that improved the pointer data form. Its downfall was caused
by its lack of variable groups. Modula-2 then appeared but C was already popular among
many users.
C by Dennis Ritchie (1972, used by Unix) was comparable to Pascal but its precursors
were the B and BCPL. It is also being used in Windows, Linux and MacOS. OOP (Object
Oriented Programming) was developed in 1970’s until the 80’s. This developed into the
C++ language in 1983. This language can manipulate many tasks all at the same time.
This is also the chosen language courses in AP Computer Science. In 1987, Perl (Practical
Extraction and Reporting Language) was developed.
Java soon followed in 1994. It has yet many goals to reach especially with its slowrunning
programs. But there are high hopes that a lot is in store in the future for this language.
Microsoft has also developed VB or Visual Basic which uses widgets and these are now
widely used.
The future holds many more developments for computer programming. It may have
started on a crude method but looking at the languages in use today, there were so many
developments that we can only wonder what ‘impossibilities’ could be made possible very
soon.

Information on Computer Programming
Many of today’s companies, businesses, and organizations depend largely on computers
and computer software. Nearly all our business and organizational processes, from
accounting to auditing, editing to writing, and communications to schedule organizing, all
work best with the help of computers. There are many different programs that are
associated with all these processes, and they deal with helping computer users make
spreadsheets, tally earnings, check for grammatical or spelling errors in a document, and
organize a person’s schedule. These computer programs are made by, and are constantly
updated by computer programmers.
The process of computer programming is by no means easy. It starts with developing a
program: here, computer programmers will often work with marketers or even sociologists
or social psychologists. Together, this team, along with many other members, will
determine what computer programs a market might need in order to function better,
whether in the workplace or at home. The program’s features are developed, with the
psychologists or market experts making suggestions, and computer programmers looking
at the feasibility of these suggestions.
Once the program’s features have been determined, it’s time for the computer
programmers to go to work. They will then start writing the program. This is done through
the process of coding, wherein the programmer types in his or her special language, with
the aim of giving rise to a program that will function in the way that it is desired. There
are many different computer programming languages that are available: all of them have
their own special features, and it is not unlikely for programmers to be adept in only one
or two languages. This can make their work easier, because a computer programming
language needs to be learned in enough depth to write it out and identify errors later.
Once the program has been written out, it has to be tested. This can be done, at the first
level, by the computer programmer: the programmer will test the program on different
operating systems, with different microprocessor speeds, and then, eventually, with beta
users. In the past, software companies did not immediately release their software unless it
was completely free from errors. Today, however, many errors might not be pinpointed
early on, so beta versions are released, often with the request that users report any bugs so
that they can be immediately fixed.
Once testing has revealed different kinds of program errors, the programmer can then
debug the program or troubleshoot these errors. The errors will often arise from coding
errors, and the computer programmer will often go back to the code and make the
necessary corrections. If there are no coding errors and the program is still not functioning
properly, then the programmer may have to modify the code or rewrite the program
altogether.
A computer programmer is also in charge of updating a program and making sure that it
fits a growing market’s needs. In this case, the computer programmer may have to check
back with the marketing team and the social psychologist in order to find out if there are
new things that the market might be interested in. better yet, the computer programmer
can ask for suggestions from the market itself in order for the program to function better.

For more information on computer programming, talk to a computer science expert, or
read on computer programs and the process of coding.

The Benefits of Computer Programming
Many of the technologies we enjoy today are the result of computer programming.
Technologies that allow us to utilize and enjoy the Internet, desktop and laptop computers,
mobile phones, video games, even those that run automated processes in homes, offices,
banks and airports are available thanks to the genius of computer programming. However,
the uses of computer programming are not limited to these alone. It actually has numerous
benefits, such as:
It allows the programmer to have a better understanding of computers. Computers are run
by programs. Without programs, computers are nothing but steel, plastic and alloy,
essentially useless. With a background knowledge in programming, it makes it easier to
understand how computers work, which helps users view the equipment as more than a
tool.
A better understanding of computers also allows users to determine the hows and whys of
the system, which helps them become more effective in using the equipment. Knowing
how programs work makes it easy to understand their limitations, such as what they can
and cannot do. This helps users maintain realistic expectations about computers and learn
how to maximize their equipment.
Programmers are able to create newer, more useful programs.
Computer programming is responsible for creating very valuable programs. Operating
systems, for example, the heart and soul of every computer, are made up of thousands,
even millions of smaller programs. If you have the right skills in computer programming,
it will be easy to literally build a program from scratch and create a very useful tool that
may be utilized in many different fields or industries.
Programmers are able to correct bugs in a program.
A background in computer programming will allow you to look at a problematic program
and do more than just sit helpless. If there is a glitch or bug in the program, it will be easy
for a trained individual to look at the system, detect and locate the problem and make the
necessary corrections. Testing the program will then be easier once you understand what
the defective issue was.
It allows programmers to improve an existing program.
Modifying a program is the realm of programmers who deal with specialist applications.
Computer programmers, especially those who have the training and experience, can take a
look at an existing program and determine whether or not it has the necessary components
to become a highly optimized program. If it is not, they can modify the program and
improve it, creating a newer, better version. This is usually done if the program is
problematic or if there are bugs in the system.
It provides programmers more creative ways to entertain.
There is a huge market for games and other forms of entertainment that computer
programming can support. New video games, mobile games, animations, graphics and file
types are the results of programming.
Computer programming is an exciting career.
For individuals looking for a great future in information technology, computer

programming is an excellent career path to follow. According to the figures estimated by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the field of computer science will continue to grow. The
need for programmers, for example, is predicted to increase by more than 70% by 2010,
which is more than a 50% increase in the number currently required.
Computer programming and the future
One of the most exciting benefits of computer programming is that it offers us a glimpse
of the future. The possibilities being offered today, such as CGIs, voiceautomated
technology, artificial intelligence, more sophisticated programs and the like are just a few
of the things we can expect. With computer programming, many aspects of our lives have
gotten easier, quicker, safer and much more interesting.

Computer Programming: Working In a Team
Computer programming requires some very intricate work. This is the type of work that
thrives on details and people who work in this field understand that the absence of even
the minute elements can spell a huge difference in the overall result. If a programmer fails
to correct this problem, it can lead to errors down the line. As a result, bugs will appear in
the system and errors will emerge later on. Programming is also taxing work, requiring
hours upon hours of writing, testing and debugging. This is why computer programming
thrives on team work. Without team work, a single computer program can take decades to
complete.
Although one programmer has the necessary skills and knowledge to work competently on
a problem or even create a program, he or she can only do so much. Creating the source
code for an operating system, for example, will require thousands of manhours from a
single programmer and most probably, he or she will only be halfway through. There just
isn’t enough time for one or even two programmers to work effectively to produce a
usable program.
Team profile
So what constitutes a team in computer programming? A team is usually headed by the
team leader, such as a systems analyst or senior programmer. The senior programmer is
usually a person who has had years of training and experience behind him. His task is to
supervise the team, lead in brainstorming and problem solving sessions, delegate
assignments, check the correctness of the coding, dispense advice and recommendations
and lead in debugging and software maintenance.
The team leader is the one who holds the team together and ensures there is a well
coordinated effort that will lead to the desired results. All team members report to him and
depending on the size of the project, the team leader may have an assistant or another
leader to work with.
The team is usually composed of junior or entry level programmers, particularly those
who may have the qualifications but not the number of years’ worth of experience yet.
Depending on what the team leader wants, a junior programmer may be tasked to work on
his own on much simpler assignments or he may be assigned as part of a group. This
group may consist of other entry level programmers or more experienced professionals.
The members of a team are chosen based on their expertise. At the beginning of a project,
the team leader, along with other more senior programmers, will try to break down the
problem into components, which will consist of tasks. Tasks can vary according to
complexity and function and will be assigned to a team who has the skills to complete
them.
The number of programmers in a team can be as small as 3 or it can number in the dozens
or even hundreds. Again, it all depends on the size of the project and the availability of
resources.
Team work is a necessary component of computer programming. It helps pool a group’s
resources and form a coordinated effort in order to produce a particular program or
software. In some cases, such as in exceptionally huge projects, some teams may work

alternately or in shifts, which makes it necessary that a team is capable of sustaining
coordination among them.
Team work drives computer programming. A vast majority of the computer programs and
software we enjoy today – from the operating systems to the video games to the
technology that run our phones – were produced not by a single programmer but by a
team. Whatever it is that has made using computers and other forms of technology that
much easier and more convenient is something we owe to a team of well-trained and
highly skilled computer programmers.

