How to get things for free from Liberty 
Reserve’s Auto-download links. 
 
 
 
 
 Author: n00bz0r  
 
Thank you for purchasing this e-book! You do NOT have any resale rights of this e-
book and you may not share this with anyone. The less people that know about 
this method, the better. If you purchase resale rights, your username will be 
added in this e-book but you cannot edit its content. 

 
Introduction 
 
Have you noticed that sometimes people sell e-books, or 
applications with a direct download using Liberty Reserve? 
 
Well, I was one of those people, until I noticed this little 
trick with which you can get the downloadable goods either for 
FREE or for as little as $0.01 LR instead of the whole price. 
 
Now, why is it different and it is not always FREE? 
 
The difference comes from the fact that the seller might 
have used either a direct LR link for his payment, or a link that 
passes through an LR store (this is something that the seller 
creates within his account), where the download link of our 
product is hidden. In the first case, you can get the product for 
FREE, while in the second, you have to pay, but I will show you 
how to pay only $0.01 instead of the whole amount. 
 
 
 
 

Case #1 : Direct LR link  
(No store) 
 
For this example, I will be using my own thread with e-book 
sales (http://www.hackforums.net/showthread.php?tid=996609). 
When someone clicked “Buy now with LR” as shown below, 
 
 
it would take him to a page like the one showed below: 

 
Now, take a careful look at the link. There is a field named 
“lr_success_url”. We copy what is next to it until we find the 
“&” symbol.  
 

We are almost done, but if you copy and paste the link to a new 
tab, you will see that it is wrong. You need to replace the 
selected characters with “?” as shown below: 
 
The new link is  working and takes us to the download page: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Case #2 : Link with Store 
 
 
In this case, the seller has used a store in order to make his 
link and the download page is included inside the store and not 
visible in the link, as it was on case #1. See below: 
 
 
 
 
As you can see in the image above, the download page, is 
not included in the link like before.  
So what do we do now to get our product?  
We are going to get the product not for FREE this time, but 
for only $0.01 (meaning almost free). 

In this case, we must locate in the link the variable 
“lr_amnt”. As you see in the image above, the value of this 
variable is the value that we need to pay ($3). 
Now, we can change this value to whatever we want (in 
that case $0.01) like shown in the image below. 
 
 
 
 
If you do what is described above and hit “enter”, you will 
get a page like the one below: 

 
Hit “Login” and do what you would normally do to login. 
 
 

 
Notice that the amount that you need to pay is $0.01 and 
not $3 as it was. 
 
 
 
 
Hit “Preview”. 

 
 
Success!! You paid $0.01 and you got the download link 
and your product! 
 

 
Conclusion 
 
This e-book showed you how to use a simple technique to get FREE stuff from 
auto-download links on LR. 
  
Feel free to PM me and ask any questions that you may have.  
 
 
Hope you’ve enjoyed this e-book 
And Best of luck on using this technique 

 
 
Note: This e-book has educational purposes only. It is not my responsibility on how you may use the 
information presented. 

