
 
2
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter One        Introduction 
 
Chapter Two        Who Am I and Why Do I Care? 
 
Chapter Three     What Exactly is Identity Theft? 
 
Chapter Four       Identity Theft Statistics 
 
Chapter Five        How Do Thieves Steal an Identity? 
 
Chapter Six         How Long Can ID Theft Impact You? 
 
Chapter Seven    What Can You Do About ID Theft 
 
Chapter Eight      Identity Theft Resource Center 
 
Chapter Nine       Identity Theft Statement (Letter  
                             Sample Format) 
 
Chapter Ten        What Is an Identity Theft Report? 
 
Chapter Eleven   ID Theft Service Providers Compared 
 
Appendix One     LifeLock ID Theft Protection 
 
Resources 
 
Recommended Products and Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Legal Notice 
You may give this book away to your subscribers, friends or customers; offer it as a free 
download from your website, or anything you like.  The only restriction is that you not sell 
this book and must leave all pages, references, graphics, banners, links and ownership rights 
in place.  Another words – Do not alter it in any manner! 
 
 

 
3
Chapter One 
 
Introduction 
 
It Really is Time to Worry About Identity Theft! 
 
All of us, no matter how careful, can become victims of identity theft. In fact, it 
was determined every three seconds another identity is stolen.  In 2007 there 
were seventy nine million credit card and Social Security Number thefts 
according to major news media investigations.  That was an increase of four 
million additional people over the previous years statistics, that had their 
identity or financial information compromised.  This makes identity theft one of 
the fastest growing crimes in America. 
 
Anyone with a Social Security number and assets to loose should be concerned 
with identity theft.  Unfortunately, a common belief by many people is they 
assume they have nothing significant for thief’s to take advantage of.  Bear in 
mind criminals are much better than you are at making use of your 
information.  For example; there is credit card theft where someone steals 
your credit card and runs up charges. Identity theft is where someone steals 
your personal information (social security number, date of birth, name, etc.) 
and uses your identity to open a new line of credit, gain employment or even 
establish citizenship. 
 
You must realize that your information is stored locally and nationally.  Your 
dentist, doctor, banking facility(s), college transcript and club memberships 
are examples of data configurations where your personal information is stored.  
I don’t have to remind you there have been numerous sophisticated agencies 
and institutions hacked into and identities stolen.  How easy it would be to 
have your identity stolen from neighborhood businesses, your mailbox or even 
your trash receptacles.  Yes shredding papers listing your personal information 
is a great step to protect your identity but as indicated, your information is 
everywhere. 
 
It’s no secret that many savvy consumers have learned to place fraud alerts 
(more on this later) on their accounts which prompt creditors to call them if 
someone is trying to establish credit in their names.  But did you know these 
alerts are generally only valid for a period of ninety days?  Are you really 
confident enough to believe your going to take the time or for that matter, 
even remember to renew fraud alerts every three months?   Remember too, 
just because you have fraud alerts placed does not guarantee you from 
becoming a victim. 
 
There is an option to implement a credit freeze which locks down all of your 
personal information making it impossible for anyone to open a line of credit in 

 
4
your name, including you. There are also fees involved with many credit 
freezes. When you place a freeze, you pay a fee. From there on, if you want to 
open any new line of credit (loan, credit card, cell phone) the freeze must be 
lifted; there will be a fee for that as well.  Currently 33 states and the District 
of Columbia offer the credit freeze option, but if you are not living in one of 
them, you cannot do this.  We’ll also later cover credit freezes in complete 
detail.  
 
Credit watch services have come into prominence thanks to the many 
breaches that have been publicized. What exactly is a credit watch, and what 
benefit does such a service offer the consumer?  Credit Monitoring (or a watch) 
is the credit bureau selling the consumer their own information. After there has 
been a change on your credit report, the bureau notifies you in 24 to 72 hours 
that there has been a change. It is then the consumer's responsibility to check 
the information for accuracy and by the way, if they find that it is a case of 
identity theft, the consumer is responsible for any losses, expenses and has to 
spend the time to clean up the mess. The Bureaus do nothing to actually 
prevent the crime of identity theft, nor do they help fix the problem. The FTC 
says it takes an average of 177 hours and over two years to clean up an 
identity or credit compromise, if you can clean it up at all. 
 
I’m not trying to come off as a fatalist and give anyone the impression there is 
nothing that can be done about criminal activity.  If you worry about identity 
theft, then it’s time you got to know about identity theft services. These 
agencies provide proactive identity theft protection.  We’ll cover your many 
available options!  
 
On your behalf, ID theft companies request that fraud alerts be placed on your 
accounts. By placing these fraud alerts, you are asking that creditors take 
extra care to identify who you are and to investigate the validity of any 
pending transaction. These services also request that your name be removed 
from pre-approved credit card lists and junk mail lists. Additionally, services 
annually order your free credit reports from the three major credit reporting 
bureaus. In the event that your identity is compromised, qualified 
professionals are available to assist you in addressing whatever complications 
may arise. 
 
In summary one might ask; if the consumer can do these things by 
themselves, what is the need for an identity theft service?  The simple answer 
is nothing more than convenience and protection.  The assurance that nothing 
is overlooked in the shuffle and required responsibilities in everyday living that 
would keep you from taking the measures necessary to protect your identity.  
These services have but one concern and mission, to safeguard your identity 
and assets. 
 

 
5
You and I well, we have a lot of ground to cover!  I’ll do my best to give you a 
pretty complete understanding of identity theft, the tactics criminals use to 
steal your good name and assets as well as; your many courses of proactive 
measures to implement so as to reduce your risks of identity theft.  But, most 
importantly; I’ll walk you through the actions you need to take once you 
realize you have become a victim of identity theft. 
 
Bear in mind even the Federal Trade Commission advises us that putting 
together a defense that provides complete safety and protection with a 100% 
probability; can not be 100% guaranteed. I am most certainly not telling you 
to surrender here and now.  My encouragement to keep you reading and 
educating yourself to thwart criminal activity is really very inspiring.  Just think 
of it this way – Make yourself a less likely target.  Let the thief’s know that 
messing with you is less rewarding and a high risk probability of them being 
caught prosecuted and jailed.  Never lesson you vigilance because statistically 
in 2007 - identity theft remains the number one white collar crime in the 
United States.   The analogy here is really quite simple. 
 
If you were a burglar cruising a neighborhood looking for a home to target 
you’d of course avoid one in the middle of an active crime watch program.  
You wouldn’t likely try to get into a home that looked occupied, had alarms, 
guard dogs or an angry person standing on the porch with a shotgun.  You’d 
either be a crack head in serious desperation or, as dumb as a rock.  There are 
just as many measures you can take that alert the identity thief to move on 
and target a more susceptible person.  It’s not passing the buck but rather, 
good old fashioned self preservation.  
 
Visit www.adultwishfoundations.com/Life_Lock.html to learn more about a 
proactive identity theft protection service that offers - Proactive Identity Theft 
Protection, Reduced Junk Mail, Reduced Credit Card Offers, $1 Million Service 
Guarantee, Child Protection Program, Wallet Watch and more for Only $10 per 
Month. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
6
Chapter Two  
 
Who Am I and Why Do I Care? 
 
Hello, my name is Ronald Hudkins and I retired from the United States Army 
Military Police Corps honorably in 1993.  It doesn’t matter if you are a rookie in 
the civilian or military law enforcement environments; the one thing that 
always gets a good measure of emphases during training is to NEVER take 
anything as routine!  Never assume – Always anticipate and never think 
something (anything) can not happen to you. 
 
The one thing great about working law enforcement in the military is during 20 
years plus of law enforcement one gets exposed to people (good, bad and 
indifferent) from every race, color, creed and religious domination.  The 
military contains people that come from every walk of life, small towns, large 
cities and every country on the planet.  It is the mixing bowl where all 
ingredients get dressed in a uniform that demands cohesion and team work 
without exception and - despite any personal beliefs otherwise.  So realistically 
when Rodney King screamed up to some overly enthusiastic and miss directed 
police officers “Why Can’t We All Just Get Along?”  The military demands it 
(within its ranks) despite any and all circumstances we get along and succeed 
at doing so. 
 
While in the military I maintained a Top Secret security clearance for nearly 
my entire career and than some.  It took 18 months to get it and investigators 
doing the background checks talked to people I no longer remembered or 
didn’t even think I knew.  They knew more about me than I even knew or 
know today.  Apparently, despite an unusual sense of humor and inordinate 
level and capacity for pulling pranks, I was deemed a person of responsibility.  
It took the military a good measure of attention to get me there but, that’s a 
stand alone story (that would fill a book) and a conversation for another time. 
 
When you are awarded a high security clearance you become a person that is 
under a microscope constantly.  There is always someone somewhere 
watching you make it from one day to the next.  Making sure you don’t 
develop kinky characteristics, unusual sums of money, aren’t going mental, 
Anti-government, bitter, sour and or in any way miss-directed.  Your friends, 
family, acquaintances and every hi and good-by is securitized.  It’s a national 
security mind set. 
 
When you have a security clearance you get exposed to things that are hard to 
believe or, you wish you had never seen or knew.  When you retire from the 
organization, agency or whatever, you are debriefed and advised as to what is 
to be forgotten and subject to criminal prosecution if leaked.  This 
conversation usually concludes that if something is divulged intentionally or 

 
7
unintentionally it could result in someone (you choose) being buried so deep, 
their own family won’t even know where they are. 
 
My point here is when you have a security clearance; you don’t worry too 
much about identity thieves as your life is pretty much watched over.  Overly 
curious, criminals, reporters and any capacity of prying personnel somehow 
magically disappear.  When I reached a point in my life where anything I ever 
knew wasn’t worth a reporter from some tabloid buying me a cup of coffee, my 
life changed.  I was no longer a part of that safeguarded environment.  Most 
military and for that matter, civilians don’t have a security blanket.  Every 
Superman has their Luther.  Another word, not all criminals are stupid.  There 
are brilliant masterminds in every country that use their intelligence capacities 
for evil in contrast to doing humanly good things. 
 
So yes, despite my one time ability to find the weak links and breach able 
physical security measures put into place here and there, I became a victim of 
identity theft.  I’m still not over the irritation and audacity of the criminal that 
ran up a thousand dollar phone bill in my good name.  This is minor compared 
to what identity thieves have done to other people’s lives.  I still shutter over 
what it took to clear the whole mess up.  It was a lengthy, drawn out 
requirement of actions needed to put things right.  I carried a whole parcel of 
aggravations, stresses, frustrations and system disappointments. It’s over now 
but, I still remember the comparable migraine string of events it took to put it 
all behind.  There may not be any such thing anywhere that is secure 
absolutely to include one’s identity but, there is deflection, avoidance and 
minimal impact.   
 
I don’t like criminals in any capacity or any excuse they have for being one.  It 
is because of this and my minor victimization by an identity thief that I now 
make it my mission in life to do the best I can to make sure you don’t fall 
victim as well.  That is exactly why this book is free and I encourage you to 
pass it along to everyone you know or don’t know.  So, with that said – let’s 
get cracking on how to take apart the identity thieves.  
 
  Visit www.adultwishfoundations.com/Life_Lock.html to learn more about a 
proactive identity theft protection service that offers - Proactive Identity Theft 
Protection, Reduced Junk Mail, Reduced Credit Card Offers, $1 Million Service 
Guarantee, Child Protection Program, Wallet Watch and more for Only $10 per 
Month.  It is the service provider that is personally used and highly 
recommended by the author. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
8
Chapter Three 
 
What Actually is identity theft? 
According to the Federal Trade Commission identity theft occurs when 
someone uses your personally identifying information, like your name, Social 
Security number, or credit card number, without your permission, to commit 
fraud or other crimes. 
The FTC estimates that as many as 9 million Americans have their identities 
stolen each year. In fact, you or someone you know may have experienced 
some form of identity theft.  The crime takes many forms. Identity thieves 
may rent an apartment, obtain a credit card, or establish a telephone account 
in your name. You may not find out about the theft until you review your credit 
report or a credit card statement and notice charges you didn’t make—or until 
you’re contacted by a debt collector.  
Identity theft is serious. While some identity theft victims can resolve their 
problems quickly, others spend hundreds of dollars and many days repairing 
damage to their good name and credit record.  Some consumers victimized by 
identity theft may lose out on job opportunities, or be denied loans for 
education, housing or cars because of negative information on their credit 
reports. In rare cases, they may even be arrested for crimes they did not 
commit. 
Definitions of Identity theft on the Web: 
• 
This is the crime of obtaining the personal or financial information of 
another person for the purpose of assuming that person's name to make 
... 
https://www.fnb.co.za/legallinks/securitycentre/terms.html  
• 
When an unauthorized party fraudulently represents themselves as 
another party. 
www.hfc.com/learn-about-loans/help/additional_resources/glossary.html  
• 
Please see the Damage Control: Identity Theft page.  
www.albany.edu/its/glossary.htm  
• 
a crime where somebody deliberately impersonates an individual for 
personal gain. Examples of identity theft are credit card frauds and 
gaining access under a guise of somebody else. 
www.assaabloyfuturelab.com/FutureLab/Templates/Page2Cols____1503.
aspx  
• 
(or identity fraud) occurs when someone wrongfully acquires or uses 
another person's personal data, typically for their own financial gain. 
Interest - the price paid for borrowing money. ... 
www.marketprosecure.com/financial-glossary-terms.php  

 
9
• 
The act of impersonating another, by means of using the person's 
information, such as birth date, Social Security number, address, name, 
and bank account information. 
www.white-collar-crimes.com/criminal_terms.shtml  
• 
The fraudulent act of collecting sufficient personal information about an 
individual in order that their identity can be assumed for the purposes of 
carrying out some other illegal or malicious activity. 
www.h-spot.net/threat_glossary.htm  
• 
the co-option of another person's personal information (e.g., name, 
Social Security number, credit card number, passport) without that 
person's knowledge and the fraudulent use of such knowledge  
wordnet.princeton.edu/perl/webwn  
• 
Identity taker is a term first appearing in U.S. literature in the 1990s, 
leading to the drafting of the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence 
Act.  
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Identity theft  
• 
A crime of stealing personal and/or financial information, such as name, 
Social Security Number, or account numbers from a person, with the 
intent to commit fraud. 
www.awbank.net/security_glossary1.asp 
According to the Internets Wikipedia Free Encyclopedia 
at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Identity_theft  Identity theft is a catch-all term 
for crimes involving illegal usage of another individual's identity. The most 
common form of identity theft is  
According to the non-profit Identity Theft Resource Center, identity theft is 
sub-divided into four categories: 
• Financial Identity Theft (using another’s identity to obtain goods and 
services)  
• Criminal Identity Theft (posing as another when apprehended for a 
crime)  
• Identity Cloning (using another’s information to assume his or her 
identity in daily life)  
• Business/Commercial Identity Theft (using another’s business name to 
obtain credit)  
Identity theft may be used to facilitate crimes including illegal immigration, 
terrorism and espionage. Identity theft may also be a means of blackmail. 
There are also cases of identity cloning to attack payment systems, including 
medical insurance. 
We will cover specific examples of identity theft in proceeding chapters.  For 
now however, you have a pretty good realization of its extent just based upon 
some  limited definitions. 

 
10
Chapter Four 
 
Identity Theft Statistics 
 
If you really do not care about statistics, you can skip this chapter however, 
there are some proactive measures listed in the data that you can take to 
avoid identity theft.  I’ll cover these and other measures in greater detail in 
later chapters.  There are live links left imbedded for the agencies to expand 
upon their reports and - I also like to give credit to everyone else’s research 
and professional capacities. 
 
There is a lot of information about identity theft.  It is a real and expanding 
problem.  Do a Google search “identity theft” and you will get as of the date of 
this writing over 20 million pages of information.  I’ll reduce it down to bite 
size increments for your better understanding of the problem and measures 
needed for you to undertake in the face of it all be it proactive or in the 
capacity of a victim.  
 
How Many Identity Theft Victims Are There?  
What Is the Impact on Victims? 
 
Recent Surveys and Studies from Javelin Strategy & Research,  
Better Business Bureau, Identity Theft Resource Center,  
Federal Trade Commission, 
Gartner, and Privacy & American Business  
Contents: 
Javelin Strategy & Research Survey - February 2007 
In February 2007, Javelin Strategy and Research released its 2007 Identity 
Fraud Survey Report. The report is issued as a longitudinal update to previous 
Javelin Identity Fraud Survey reports and the Federal Trade Commission's 
(FTC) 2003 Identity Theft Survey Report.  
Survey findings Include:  
• 
The number of US adult victims of identity fraud decreased from 10.1 
million in 2003 and 9.3 million in 2005 to 8.4 million in 2007.  
• 
Total one year fraud amount decreased from $55.7 billion in 2006 to 
$49.3 billion in 2007.  
• 
The mean fraud amount per fraud victim decreased from $6,278 in 2006 
to $5,720 in 2007.  

 
11
• 
The mean resolution time was at a high of 40 hours per victim in 2006 
and was reduced in 2007 to 25 hours per victim. The median resolution 
time has remained the same for each Survey year at 5 hours per victim.  
Javelin/Better Business Bureau Survey - January 2006 (no charge for 
Consumer Version)  
In January 2006, Javelin Strategy and Research co-released its 2006 Identity 
Fraud Survey Report with the Better Business Bureau. The report is issued as a 
longitudinal update to the Javelin 2005 Identity Fraud Survey Report and the 
Federal Trade Commission's (FTC) 2003 Identity Theft Survey Report. The 
Consumer Version of the survey is available at no cost. 
Survey findings Include:  
• 
The number of US adult victims of identity fraud decreased from 10.1 
million in 2003 and 9.3 million in 2005 to 8.9 million in 2006.  
• 
Total one year fraud amount rose from $53.2 billion in 2003 and $54.4 
billion in 2005 to $56.6 billion in 2006.  
• 
The mean fraud amount per fraud victim rose from $5,316 in 2003 and 
$5,993 in 2005 to $6,278 in 2006.  
• 
The mean resolution time is at a high of 40 hours per victim in 2006 
compared to 28 hours in 2005 and 33 hours in 2003.  
Javelin/Better Business Bureau Survey - January 2005  
On January 26, 2005, the Better Business Bureau in conjunction with Javelin 
Strategy and Research released its Identity Theft survey as an update to the 
Federal Trade Commission's 2003 Identity Theft Survey Report. The full report 
is available online at 
http://www.javelinstrategy.com/reports/2005IdentityFraudSurveyReport.html. 
Survey findings include: 
• 
Within the last twelve months, 9.3 million Americans were victims of 
identity theft.  
• 
The total U.S. annual identity fraud cost remains essentially unchanged 
since [the FTC's] 2003 [results], at $52.6 Billion, an increase of 2.3% 
from the 2003 inflation-adjusted level of $51.4 Billion.  
• 
Most thieves still obtain personal information through traditional rather 
than electronic channels. In the cases where the method was known, 
68.2% of information was obtained off-line versus only 11.6% obtained 
online.  
• 
Conventional methods such as through lost or stolen wallets, 
misappropriation by family and friends, and theft of paper mail are 
among the most common ways thieves gain access to information.  

 
12
Recommendations for consumers include: 
• 
Cancel your paper bills and statements wherever possible and instead 
check your statements and pay bills online. Monitor your account 
balances and activity electronically (at least once per week).  
• 
If you do not have access to online accounts, review paper bank and 
credit card statements monthly and monitor your billing cycles for 
missing bills or statements.  
• 
Use email based account “alerts” to monitor transfers, payments, low 
balances and withdrawals and review your credit report (now available 
for free annual review).  
Identity Theft Resource Center - September 2003 
On September 23, 2003, the Identity Theft Resource Center 
(www.idtheftcenter.org) released its survey of the impact of identity theft on 
173 known victims. To read the full survey, see: 
www.idtheftcenter.org/idaftermath.pdf 
Survey findings include: 
• 
Nearly 85% of all victims find out about their identity theft case in a 
negative manner. Only 15% of victims find out due to a proactive action 
taken by a business.  
• 
The average time spent by victims is about 600 hours, an increase of 
more than 300% over previous studies.  
• 
While victims are finding out about their cases earlier, it is taking far 
longer now than before to eliminate negative information from credit 
reports.  
• 
A large majority of respondents indicates the opening of a credit card 
(73%) or takeover of a card account (27%) to be among crimes 
committed.  
• 
The emotional impact of identity theft has been found to parallel that of 
victims of violent crime.  
• 
The responsiveness toward victims by the various entities with which 
they must interact continues to be lacking in sensitivity in most cases 
and has not improved since studies released in 2000 (Nowhere to Turn).  
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation - December 2004  
On December 14, 2004, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
released a study on phishing and account-takeover including information about 
fraudulent automated clearing house (ACH) payments. A complete copy of the 
FDIC's study is available online at: 
www.fdic.gov/consumers/consumer/idtheftstudy/identity_theft.pdf. 

 
13
Key findings include:  
• 
While precise statistics on the prevalence of account hijacking are 
difficult to obtain, recent studies indicate that unauthorized access to 
checking accounts is the fastest growing form of identity theft.  
• 
Another recent study has estimated that almost 2 million U.S. adult 
Internet users experienced this fraud during the 12 months ending April 
2004. Of those, 70 percent do their banking or pay their bills online and 
over half believed they received a phishing e-mail.  
• 
Consumers are attributing risk to their use of the Internet to conduct 
financial transactions, and many experts believe that electronic fraud, 
especially account hijacking, will have the effect of slowing the growth of 
online banking and commerce.  
• 
Up to 5 percent of the recipients of spoofed e-mails respond to them.  
• 
An estimated 19 percent of “those attacked” have clicked on the link in a 
phishing e-mail. Most, if not all, large financial institutions and electronic 
bill-paying services (such as PayPal) have been hit with phishing attacks.  
• 
Because many phishing attacks originate overseas and because the 
average life span of a phishing Web site is 2.25 days, the sites are hard 
to shut down.  
Federal Trade Commission Survey - September 2003 
On September 3, 2003, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) issued a survey 
on identity theft. The survey was conducted in March and April of 2003 with a 
random sample of over 4,000 households. To read the survey, go to 
http://www.ftc.gov/os/2003/09/synovatereport.pdf 
Key findings include: 
How Many Consumers Are Victims of Identity Theft? 
• 
27.3 million Americans have been victims of identity theft in the last five 
years, including 9.91 million people or 4.6% of the population in the last 
year alone.  
• 
In the past 12 months, 3.23 million consumers or 1.5% of the population 
discovered that new accounts had been opened, and other frauds such 
as renting an apartment or home, obtaining medical care or 
employment, had been committed in their name. 6.6 million experienced 
their existing accounts compromised by an identity theft. A total of 
almost 10 million individuals were victims of identity theft.  
• 
52% of all ID theft victims, approximately 5 million people in the last 
year, discovered that they were victims of identity theft by monitoring 
their accounts.  
 

 
14
Misuse of Personal Information 
• 
On average, 49% of victims did not know how their information was 
obtained.  
• 
Another 26% - approximately 2.5 million people - reported that they 
were alerted to suspicious account activity by companies such as credit 
card issuers or banks.  
• 
8% reported that they first learned when they applied for credit and 
were turned down.  
• 
15% of all victims - almost 1.5 million people in the last year - reported 
that their personal information was misused in nonfinancial ways, to 
obtain government documents, for example, or on tax forms.  
• 
67% of identity theft victims - more than 6.5 million victims in the last 
year - report that existing credit card accounts were misused.  
• 
19% reported that checking or savings accounts were misused.  
• 
Nearly one-quarter of all victims - roughly 2.5 million people in the last 
year - said their information was lost or stolen, including lost or stolen 
credit cards, checkbooks or social security cards.  
• 
Stolen mail was the source of information for identity thieves in 4 
percent of all victims - 400,000 in the last year.  
Costs to Businesses and Consumers 
• 
Last year's identity theft losses to businesses and financial institutions 
totaled $47.6 billion and consumer victims reported $5 billion in out-of-
pocket expenses.  
• 
In those cases, the loss to businesses and financial institutions was 
$10,200 per victim totaling $32.9 billion. Individual victims lost an 
average of $1,180 for a total of $3.8 billion.  
• 
Where the thieves solely used a victim's established accounts, the loss to 
businesses was $2,100 per victim totaling $14.0 billion. For all forms of 
identity theft, the loss to business was $4,800 and the loss to consumers 
was $500, on average.  
Gartner Survey - July 2003 
On July 21, 2003, Gartner (www.gartner.com) released the results of a survey 
of 2,445 households regarding identity theft. To read the press release, go to:  
http://www3.gartner.com/5_about/press_releases/pr21july2003a.jsp 
The survey found the following: 
• 
Identity theft is up nearly 80 percent from last year.  
• 
7 million U.S. adults or 3.4 percent of U.S. consumers were identity theft 
victims in the past 12 months.  

 
15
• 
Because this crime is often misclassified, the thieves have just a one in 
700 chance of being caught by the federal authorities.  
Privacy & American Business Survey - July 2003 
A July 30, 2003, Privacy & American Business survey found the following. To 
read the press release, go to http://www.pandab.org/id_theftpr.html. 
        How Many Consumers Are Victims of Identity Theft? 
• 
33.4 million Americans were victims of identity theft since 1990.  
• 
Over 13 million Americans have become victims of identity theft since 
January 2001.  
• 
Consumer out-of-pocket expenses have totaled $1.5 billion annually 
since January 2001.  
• 
34% say someone obtained their credit card information, forged a credit 
card in their name, and used it to make purchases.  
• 
12% say someone stole or obtained improperly a paper or computer 
record with their personal information on it and used that to forge their 
identity.  
• 
11% say someone stole their wallet or purse and used their identity.  
• 
10% say someone opened charge accounts in stores in their name and 
made purchases as them.  
• 
7% say someone opened a bank account in their name or forged checks 
and obtained money from their account.  
• 
7% say someone got to their mail or mailbox and used information there 
to steal their identity.  
• 
5% say they lost their wallet or purse and someone used their identity.  
• 
4% say someone went to a public record and used information there to 
steal their identity.  
• 
3% say someone created false IDs and posed as them to get 
government benefits or payments.  
• 
16% say it was a friend, relative or co-worker who stole their identity.  
• 
The seven million victims the survey identified in 2002 represent an 81% 
rise over victims in 2001.  
• 
Identity theft incidents reported so far in 2003 suggest a major rise over 
2002. The victims level and upward trend parallel findings of a Gartner 
survey released last week.  
        What Are Victims' Out of Pocket Expenses? 
• 
While 62% of victims did not incur any out-of-pocket expenses, 38% did, 
representing 13-14 million Americans.  
• 
Since January 2001, these 38% have paid approximately $3.8 billion, or 
an average of $1.5 billion per year. Based on actual amounts 

 
16
volunteered by respondents themselves, the average cost per victim for 
this time period is $740.  
• 
An earlier June 2002 survey on ID theft by P&AB and Harris found that a 
majority of Americans, 91%, do not see light at the end of the tunnel; 
they expect heavy ID theft incidents to increase rather than decrease in 
the near future.  
• 
The 2002 survey also found that 49%, or 98 million adults, feel they do 
not know how to protect themselves against identity theft.  
• 
One in six consumers, representing almost 34 million, say they have 
bought a privacy protection product to help avoid identity theft, to check 
their credit report, and to surf or shop online anonymously. At $75, the 
average annual price for these products, these figures represent a $2.5 
billion expenditure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
17
Chapter Five 
 
How do thieves steal an identity? 
 
The Federal Trade Commission tells us that identity theft starts with the 
misuse of your personally identifying information (PII) such as your name and 
Social Security number, credit card numbers, or other financial account 
information. For identity thieves, this information is as good as gold.  
Skilled identity thieves may use a variety of methods to get hold of your 
information, including: 
1. Dumpster Diving. They rummage through trash looking for bills or other 
paper with your personal information on it.  
2. Skimming. They steal credit/debit card numbers by using a special 
storage device when processing your card.  
3. Phishing. They pretend to be financial institutions or companies and send 
spam or pop-up messages to get you to reveal your personal 
information.  
4. Changing Your Address. They divert your billing statements to another 
location by completing a change of address form.  
5. Old-Fashioned Stealing. They steal wallets and purses; mail, including 
bank and credit card statements; pre-approved credit offers; and new 
checks or tax information. They steal personnel records, or bribe 
employees who have access to your personal information.  
6. Pretexting.  They use false pretenses to obtain your personal information 
from financial institutions, telephone companies, and other sources.  
7. Retrieving (Wekipedia adds) information from redundant equipment 
which has been disposed of carelessly, e.g. at public dump sites, given 
away without proper sanitizing etc.  
8. Stealing payment or identification cards, either by pickpocketing or 
surreptitiously by skimming through a compromised card reader  
9. Remotely reading information from an RFID chip on a smartcard, RFID-
enabled credit card, or passport 
10. 
Trojan horses, hacking Stealing personal information in computer 
databases. 
11. 
Advertising bogus job offers (either full-time or work from home 
based) to which the victims will reply with their full name, address, 
curriculum vitae, telephone numbers, and banking details  
12. 
Infiltration of organizations that store large amounts of personal 
information  
13. 
Obtaining castings of fingers for falsifying fingerprint identification.  
14. 
Browsing social network (MySpace, Facebook, Bebo etc) sites, 
online for personal details that have been posted by users  
15. 
Simply researching about the victim in government registers, at 
the Internet, Google, and so on.  

 
18
What is "pretexting" and what does it have to do with identity theft? 
Pretexting is the practice of getting your personal information under false 
pretenses. Pretexters sell your information to people who may use it to get 
credit in your name, to steal your assets, or to investigate or sue you. 
Pretexting is against the law. 
Pretexters use a variety of tactics to get your personal information. For 
example, a pretexter may call, claim he's from a research firm, and ask you 
for your name, address, birth date, and social security number. When the 
pretexter has the information he wants, he uses it to call your financial 
institution. He pretends to be you or someone with authorized access to your 
account. He might claim that he's forgotten his checkbook and needs 
information about his account. In this way, the pretexter may be able to obtain 
other personal information about you such as your bank and credit card 
account numbers, information in your credit report, and the existence and size 
of your savings and investment portfolios.  
Keep in mind that some information about you may be a matter of public 
record, such as whether you own a home, pay your real estate taxes, or have 
ever filed for bankruptcy. It is not pretexting for another person to collect this 
kind of information. 
By law, it's illegal for anyone to: 
• 
use false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or documents to get 
customer information from a financial institution or directly from a 
customer of a financial institution.  
• 
use forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen documents to get customer 
information from a financial institution or directly from a customer of a 
financial institution.  
• 
ask another person to get someone else's customer information using 
false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or using false, fictitious or 
fraudulent documents, or forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen documents.  
Why Do We Need to Worry About Dumpster Diving? 
The best thing about it for people who make a living off the practice is that 
generally this is a LEGAL livelihood!  Stealing trash is not illegal according to 
The Supreme Court ruling in 1988 that stipulated once an item is left for trash 
pickup, there is no expectation of privacy or continued ownership.  If you do a 
Google search on the Internet, there are over 842,000 pages dedicated to 
dumpster diving.  There are thousands of WebPages dedicated to the fine art, 
techniques and guidelines to successful dumpster diving. 
 
 

 
19
  
It should in my opinion and others, be a first step consideration in any serious 
business or personal intrusion. The dumpster diving hacker can map out the 
target, understand the interpersonal relationships that can be subverted, and 
most important, can glean technical details, often passwords and account 
names from the tons of trash they are swimming in. 
 
When it comes to businesses, taking papers from dumpsters outside offices is 
a common tactic used by commercial information brokers as well as foreign 
intelligence services. "Trash cover" is a standard methodology used by 
investigators and intelligence agents throughout the world. It involves 
collecting and going through the trash left out for collection in front of 
residents and businesses. Trash may also be stolen from waste baskets by 
cleaning crews. 
 
In the aspect of residential trash; It is estimated that upwards of 80 percent or 
more households do not take the necessary steps to prevent dumpster diving 
or make it less of an effective tactic for thieves. Instead, they let their 
sensitive, personal information sit at the curb--waiting to be harvested. 
 
Consider the fact that we all get mail and have documents that contain some 
very personal information. Credit card and bank statements, utility bills, 
insurance polices medical records and more. All of which, contain critical pieces 
of the puzzle that once put together by an identity thief, can be used to exact 
a financial quagmire that could literally, take years to recover from. 
 
There is an old saying that "one man's trash is another man's treasure." That 
is certainly true in the intelligence world. 
 
Some of the things that dumpster diving, hackers look for are as follows:  
 
• Phone lists 
Helps map out the power structure of the company, and gives possible account 
names, and is essential in appearing as a member of the organization.  
• Memos 
Reveal activities inside the target organization.  
• Policy manuals 
Today's employee manuals give instructions on how not to be victimized by 
hackers, and likewise help the hacker know which attacks to avoid, or at least 
try in a different manner than specified in the policy manual.  
• Calendars of events 
Tells the hackers when everyone will be elsewhere and not logged into the 
system. Best time to break in. 
 
  

 
20
• System manuals, packing crates 
Tells the hackers about new systems that they can break into. 
  
• Print outs 
• Source code is frequently found in dumpsters, along with e-mails 
(revealing account names), and  Post It & tm; notes containing written 
passwords. 
  
• Disks, tapes, CD-ROMs 
People forget to erase storage media, leaving sensitive data exposed. These 
days, dumpsters may contain larger number of "broken" CD-Rs. The CD-ROM 
"burning" process is sensitive, and can lead to failures, which are simply 
thrown away. However, some drives can still read these disks, allowing the 
hacker to read a half-way completed backup or other sensitive piece of 
information.  
• Old hard drives 
Like CD-ROMs, information from broken drives can usually be recovered. It 
depends only upon the hacker's determination.  
• Organizational changes, such as mergers, acquisitions, and "re-orgs" 
leave the company in disarray that can be exploited by hackers (in much 
the same way those hackers look upon January 1, 200X as a prime 
hacking day). 
 
Dumpster Diving is when an identity thief will go through your trash in order to 
obtain copies of your checks, credit card or bank statements, or other records-
-all for the sake of harvesting your personally identifiable information to steal 
your identity. 
 
Another thing to consider is Tax Season is Bringing Out Identity Thieves! 
 
A number of clients have recently reported to their tax preparation services 
that they have been receiving calls from someone posing as a representative 
from the Social Security Administration.  The caller began the conversation by 
talking about the pending Congressional leader’s announcement where a deal 
with the White House on the economic stimulus package would give most tax 
filers refunds of $600 to $1,200, and more if they have children.    The caller 
went on to solicit from consumers their Social Security number stating 
confirmation of their number would ensure they received their rebate checks 
within the next 6 – 7 months. 
 
The Social Security Administration is not making a conscience effort to confirm 
consumer identification numbers.  You need to be aware that identity thief’s 
are however and they use a number of tactics to steal your identity. 
    

 
21
Spoofing is generally used by thieves as a means to convince individuals to 
provide personal or financial information that enables the perpetrators to 
commit credit card/bank fraud or other forms of identity theft.  An attempt to 
fraudulently acquire sensitive financial or personal information, such as credit 
card information or a Social Security number, by impersonating a business 
representative or trustworthy person is also known as a Phishing attempt and 
is usually initiated through e-mail, phone calls or Instant Messaging. 
 
Thieves do not just collect Social Security Numbers.  They are also after your 
telephone records, date of birth and your bank and credit card account 
numbers.  This information is a personal asset as well and people who illegally 
solicit this information are also known as pretexters.   It is yet another name 
for identity theft and Pretexting is (like the other practices mentioned) a 
means of getting your personal information under false pretenses. Pretexters 
sell your information to people who may use it to get credit in your name, 
steal your assets, or to investigate or sue you. Pretexting is against the law. 
Whether it is by means of Spoofing, Phishing or Pretexting the tactics are all 
designed to get your personal information.  According the Federal Trade 
Commission For example, a pretexter may call, claim he’s from a survey firm, 
and ask you a few questions. When the pretexter (let’s just call it a thief) has 
the information they want, it is used to call your financial institution. The thief 
pretends to be you or someone with authorized access to your account. They 
might claim that they have forgotten their checkbook and need information 
about their account. In this way, the criminal may be able to obtain personal 
information about you such as your SSN, bank and credit card account 
numbers, information in your credit report, and the existence and size of your 
savings and investment portfolios. 
Keep in mind that some information about you may be a matter of public 
record, such as whether you own a home, pay your real estate taxes, or have 
ever filed for bankruptcy. It is not pretexting for another person to collect this 
kind of information. 
 
The United States Department of Justice advises us that, “Many people do not 
realize how easily criminals can obtain our personal data without having to 
break into our homes. In public places, for example, criminals may engage in 
"shoulder surfing"  i.e. watching you from a nearby location as you punch in 
your telephone calling card number or credit card number  or listen in on your 
conversation while you give your credit-card information.”  

 
22
They further advise us “If you receive applications for "preapproved" credit 
cards in the mail, but discard them without tearing up the enclosed materials, 
criminals may retrieve them and try to activate the cards for their use without 
your knowledge. (Some credit card companies, when sending credit cards, 
have adopted security measures that allow a card recipient to activate the card 
only from his or her home telephone number but this is not yet a universal 
practice.) Also, if your mail is delivered to a place where others have ready 
access to it, criminals may simply intercept and redirect your mail to another 
location.” 
Additionally, The Department of Justice states, “In recent years, the Internet 
has become an appealing place for criminals to obtain identifying data, such as 
passwords or even banking information about you. In their haste to explore 
the exciting features of the Internet, many people respond to "spam"  
unsolicited E-mail  that promises them some benefit but requests identifying 
data, without realizing that in many cases, the requester has no intention of 
keeping his promise. In some cases, criminals reportedly have used computer 
technology to obtain large amounts of personal data.” 
Examples of identity theft provided by  Wikipedia (The free Internet 
Encycopedia are as follows; 
 Financial identity theft 
A classic example of credit-dependent financial crime (bank fraud) occurs 
when a criminal obtains a loan from a financial institution by impersonating 
someone else. The criminal pretends to be the victim by presenting an 
accurate name, address, birth date, or other information that the lender 
requires as a means of establishing identity. Even if this information is checked 
against the data at a national credit-rating service, the lender will encounter 
no concerns, as all of the victim's information matches the records. The lender 
has no easy way to discover that the person is pretending to be the victim, 
especially if an original, government-issued id can't be verified (as is the case 
in online, mail, telephone, and fax-based transactions). This kind of crime is 
considered non-self-revealing, although authorities may be able to track down 
the criminal if the funds for the loan were mailed to him. The criminal keeps 
the money from the loan, the financial institution is never repaid, and the 
victim is wrongly blamed for defaulting on a loan he never authorized. 
Other forms of examples of bank fraud associated with identity theft include 
"account takeovers," passing bad checks, and "busting out" a checking or 
credit account with bad check, counterfeit money order, or empty ATM 
envelope deposits. 
 

 
23
 Identity cloning and concealment 
In this situation, a criminal acquires personal identifiers, and then 
impersonates someone for concealment from authorities. This may be done by 
a person who wants to avoid arrest for crimes, by a person who is working 
illegally in a foreign country, or by a person who is hiding from creditors or 
other individuals. Unlike credit-dependent financial crimes, these crimes can be 
non self-revealing, continuing for an indeterminate amount of time without 
being detected. 
Criminal identity theft 
When a criminal identifies himself to police as another individual it is 
sometimes referred to as "Criminal Identity Theft." In some cases the criminal 
will obtain a state issued ID using stolen documents or personal information 
belonging to another person, or they might simply use a fake ID. When the 
criminal is arrested for a crime, they present the ID to authorities, who place 
charges under the identity theft victim's name and release the criminal. When 
the criminal fails to appear for his court hearing, a warrant would be issued 
under the assumed name. The victim might learn of the incident if the state 
suspends their own drivers license, or through a background check performed 
for employment or other purposes, or in rare cases could be arrested when 
stopped for a minor traffic violation. It can be difficult for a criminal identity 
theft victim to clear their record. The steps required to clear the victim's 
incorrect criminal record depend on what jurisdiction the crime occurred in and 
whether the true identity of the criminal can be determined. The victim might 
need to locate the original arresting officers, or be fingerprinted to prove their 
own identity, and may need to go to a court hearing to be cleared of the 
charges. Obtaining an expungement of court records may also be required. 
Authorities might permanently maintain the victim's name as an alias for the 
criminal's true identity in their criminal records databases. One problem that 
victims of criminal identity theft may encounter is that various data 
aggregators might still have the incorrect criminal records in their databases 
even after court and police records are corrected. Thus it is possible that a 
future background check will return the incorrect criminal records. 
Even though the laws are on your side, it’s wise to take an active role in 
protecting your information.  The Federal Trade Commission recommends the 
following actions; 
1. Don’t give out personal information on the phone, through the mail or 
over the Internet unless you’ve initiated the contact or know who 
you’re dealing with. Pretexters may pose as representatives of survey 
firms, banks, Internet service providers and even government 

 
24
agencies to get you to reveal your SSN, mother’s maiden name, 
financial account numbers and other identifying information. 
Legitimate organizations with which you do business have the 
information they need and will not ask you for it. 
2. Be informed. Ask your financial institutions for their policies about 
sharing your information. Ask them specifically about their policies to 
prevent pretexting.  
3. Pay attention to your statement cycles. Follow up with your financial 
institutions if your statements don’t arrive on time. 
4. Review your statements carefully and promptly. Report any 
discrepancies to your institution immediately. 
5. Alert family members to the dangers of pretexting. Explain that only 
you, or someone you authorize, should provide personal information 
to others. 
6. Keep items with personal information in a safe place. Tear or shred 
your charge receipts, copies of credit applications, insurance forms, 
bank checks and other financial statements that you’re discarding, 
expired charge cards and credit offers you get in the mail. 
7. Add passwords to your credit card, bank and phone accounts. Avoid 
using easily available information like your mother’s maiden name, 
your birth date, the last four digits of your SSN or your phone 
number, or a series of consecutive numbers. 
8. Be mindful about where you leave personal information in your home, 
especially if you have roommates or are having work done in your 
home by others. 
9. Find out who has access to your personal information at work and 
verify that the records are kept in a secure location. 
Checking your credit report annually can help you catch mistakes and fraud 
before they wreak havoc on your personal finances.  Order a copy of your 
credit report from the three nationwide consumer reporting companies every 
year. To order your free annual report from one or all the nationwide 
consumer reporting companies, call toll-free 1-877-322-8228, or complete the 
Annual Credit Report Request Form avail at their Website 
www.annualcreditreport.com , and mail it to: Annual Credit Report Request 
Service, P.O. Box 105281, Atlanta, GA 30348-5281.  We’ll go into some 

 
25
additional proactive measures in further detail in later chapters.  We are far 
from being completely informed!  I have more to say about credit reports, 
proactive measures (pros and cons) in later chapters as well.  Do not mean to 
be redundant but, there is just so much to consider about this ever expanding 
criminal activity, countering it and self preservation measures. 
If you do not have the time or expertise to put measures in place to protect 
you and your family’s identity consider visiting a credit protection service that 
can put the appropriate measures in place to preserve your good name, credit 
and assets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
26
Chapter Six 
How long can the effects of identity theft last? 
It's difficult to predict how long the effects of identity theft may linger. That's 
because it depends on many factors including the type of theft, whether the 
thief sold or passed your information on to other thieves, whether the thief is 
caught, and problems related to correcting your credit report.  
Victims of identity theft should monitor financial records for several months 
after they discover the crime. Victims should review their credit reports once 
every three months in the first year of the theft, and once a year thereafter. 
Stay alert for other signs of identity theft.  
Don't delay in correcting your records and contacting all companies that 
opened fraudulent accounts.  Make the initial contact by phone, even though 
you will normally need to follow up in writing.  The longer the inaccurate 
information goes uncorrected, the longer it will take to resolve the problem. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
27
Chapter Seven 
What can you do to help fight identity theft? 
A great deal says the Federal Trade Commission; 
Awareness is an effective weapon against many forms identity theft. Be aware 
of how information is stolen and what you can do to protect yours, monitor 
your personal information to uncover any problems quickly, and know what to 
do when you suspect your identity has been stolen. 
Armed with the knowledge of how to protect yourself and take action, you can 
make identity thieves' jobs much more difficult. You can also help fight identity 
theft by educating your friends, family, and members of your community. The 
FTC has prepared a collection of easy-to-use materials to enable anyone 
regardless of existing knowledge about identity theft to inform others about 
this serious crime. To learn more, click here. 
What are the steps I should take if I'm a victim of identity theft? 
If you are a victim of identity theft, take the following four steps as soon as 
possible, and keep a record with the details of your conversations and copies 
of all correspondence. 
1. Place a fraud alert on your credit reports, and review your credit reports. 
Fraud alerts can help prevent an identity thief from opening any more 
accounts in your name. Contact the toll-free fraud number of any of the three 
consumer reporting companies below to place a fraud alert on your credit 
report. You only need to contact one of the three companies to place an alert. 
The company you call is required to contact the other two, which will place an 
alert on their versions of your report, too. If you do not receive a confirmation 
from a company, you should contact that company directly to place a fraud 
alert. 
Equifax: 1-800-525-6285; www.equifax.com; P.O. Box 740241, Atlanta, GA 
30374-0241 
Experian: 1-888-EXPERIAN (397-3742); www.experian.com; P.O. Box 9532, 
Allen, TX 75013 
TransUnion: 1-800-680-7289; www.transunion.com; Fraud Victim Assistance 
Division, P.O. Box 6790, Fullerton, CA 92834-6790 
Once you place the fraud alert in your file, you're entitled to order one free 
copy of your credit report from each of the three consumer reporting 

 
28
companies, and, if you ask, only the last four digits of your Social Security 
number will appear on your credit reports. Once you get your credit reports, 
review them carefully. Look for inquiries from companies you haven't 
contacted, accounts you didn't open, and debts on your accounts that you 
can't explain. Check that information, like your Social Security number, 
address(es), name or initials, and employers are correct. If you find fraudulent 
or inaccurate information, get it removed. See Correcting Fraudulent 
Information in Credit Reports to learn how. When you correct your credit 
report, use an Identity Theft Report with a cover letter explaining your 
request, to get the fastest and most complete results.   
Continue to check your credit reports periodically, especially for the first year 
after you discover the identity theft, to make sure no new fraudulent activity 
has occurred. 
Does a Security Freeze Stop Identity Theft? 
 
With identity theft on a continued advance upward and noted as the number 
one white collar crime in America today a popular option is for consumers to 
shut down (lock) access to their credit reports.  This makes it nearly 
impossible for some criminal intent to reek financial havoc on an individuals 
well being and the process is known as a security freeze or credit lock. 
 
As of the first of November in 2007, all three credit reporting agencies gave 
consumers in America the ability to limit access to their individual credit 
reports.  Of course unless you are an actual victim of identity theft, the 
process is not actually free in most states.  To put a freeze on your credit 
report as a simple proactive measure to avoid criminal theft of your 
information; costs in most states and fees very widely.  One would have to go 
to each of the three credit bureau’s web sites for specific instructions and 
individual state fees.  Additionally, to implement a freeze completely, the 
process to freeze your credit report has to be done at each agency: all of 
whom have various methodologies. 
 
A credit freeze does provide substantial identity theft protection however, it is 
not without loopholes. It can not stop non-credit-related forms of ID theft, 
such as the creation of a duplicate driver's license or criminal identity theft 
(when a suspect gives your name to police when booked for a crime). It also 
won't stop an illegal immigrant or undocumented worker from using your 
Social Security Number to obtain employment. 
 
Additionally, it won't stop every company from accessing your credit report. 
New creditors are largely blocked out, yet still existing lenders i.e. your current 
credit card company (for example) can still view your report and offer you new 
credit cards.  Also, collection agencies acting on behalf of these companies 
with your current account(s), state or local agencies that includes law 

 
29
enforcement, child support agencies, trial courts pursuant to a warrant or 
subpoena, credit monitoring companies and companies that sell credit reports 
to consumers are still viable accesses.   
 
 It also won't stop those pre-approved credit card offers. The bureaus can still 
give your name and address to credit card companies. Of course, you can stop 
those mailings by making a simple call to 1-888-5OPTOUT or by visiting 
http://optoutprescreen.com.  
 
Putting a freeze in place requires some time consuming paperwork like sending 
certified letters. And it means keeping track of freezing and subsequent lifts of 
an imposed freeze.   As stated earlier, it does no good to freeze one or two 
reports. If you want real identity theft protection, you'll have to go through the 
motion and requirements to freeze all three credit agencies. If you want to get 
a new credit card, you'll have to lift at least one agencies credit report freeze.  
To undertake a major investment such as buying a new home, you'll most 
likely have to lift all three credit agency freezes then; turn around and make 
sure they are frozen again to safeguard your identity after the purchase is 
closed. 
 
Gail Hillebrand, Consumers Union credit bureau expert, compares freeze fees 
to paying for insurance and stated "If you are the person in the household who 
will have to unravel an identity theft after it happens, then you probably think 
$10 a pop is a good deal.” Additionally, “Consumers who are already paying 
for $10-per-month credit monitoring services should cancel and pay for 
security freezes instead.” she concluded.  
 
Despite the time consumption and varying requirements, a credit freeze is 
likely the most optimal thing you can do to stop most identity theft before it 
lurks its aggravating head.  Think of it like the sign you place in your window 
that announces the premise is protected by an alarm system. Yes, the home 
can still be broken into but, many thieves who see an alarm would move on to 
another target. Identity thieves who come upon a security freeze when trying 
to get services in your name such as credit cards or loans are just as likely to 
move onto the next Social Security number.  Only the individual can decide 
what is best for their own circumstances.  My only input would be with identity 
theft on the rampage, some kind of proactive measure is warranted to lesson 
chances of identity theft. 
 
Resource – Visit www.adultwishfoundations.com/Life_Lock.html to learn more 
about a proactive identity theft protection service that offers – the best 
Identity Theft Protection, Reduced Junk Mail, Reduced Credit Card Offers, $1 
Million Service Guarantee, Child Protection Program and more for Only $10 per 
Month. 
 

 
30
2. Close the accounts that you know, or believe, have been tampered with or 
opened fraudulently. 
Call and speak with someone in the security or fraud department of each 
company. Follow up in writing, and include copies (NOT originals) of supporting 
documents. It's important to notify credit card companies and banks in writing. 
Send your letters by certified mail, return receipt requested, so you can 
document what the company received and when. Keep a file of your 
correspondence and enclosures. 
When you open new accounts, use new Personal Identification Numbers (PINs) 
and passwords. Avoid using easily available information like your mother's 
maiden name, your birth date, the last four digits of your Social Security 
number or your phone number, or a series of consecutive numbers.  
If the identity thief has made charges or debits on your accounts, or has 
fraudulently opened accounts, ask the company for the forms to dispute those 
transactions: 
• 
For charges and debits on existing accounts, ask the representative to 
send you the company's fraud dispute forms. If the company doesn't 
have special forms, use the sample letter to dispute the fraudulent 
charges or debits. In either case, write to the company at the address 
given for "billing inquiries," NOT the address for sending your payments.  
• 
For new unauthorized accounts, you can either file a dispute directly with 
the company or file a report with the police and provide a copy, called an 
“Identity Theft Report,” to the company.   
o If you want to file a dispute directly with the company, and do not 
want to file a report with the police, ask if the company accepts 
the FTC’s ID Theft Affidavit (PDF, 56 KB). If it does not, ask the 
representative to send you the company's fraud dispute forms.  
o However, filing a report with the police and then providing the 
company with an Identity Theft Report will give you greater 
protection.  For example, if the company has already reported 
these unauthorized accounts or debts on your credit report, an 
Identity Theft Report will require them to stop reporting that 
fraudulent information. Use the cover letter to explain to the 
company the rights you have by using the Identity Theft Report.  
More information about getting and using an Identity Theft Report 
can be found here.  
Once you have resolved your identity theft dispute with the company, ask for a 
letter stating that the company has closed the disputed accounts and has 
discharged the fraudulent debts. This letter is your best proof if errors relating 
to this account reappear on your credit report or you are contacted again 
about the fraudulent debt. 

 
31
3. File a complaint with the Federal Trade Commission. 
You can file a complaint with the FTC using the online complaint form; or call 
the FTC's Identity Theft Hotline, toll-free: 1-877-ID-THEFT (438-4338); TTY: 
1-866-653-4261; or write Identity Theft Clearinghouse, Federal Trade 
Commission, 600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20580.  Be sure 
to call the Hotline to update your complaint if you have any additional 
information or problems. 
By sharing your identity theft complaint with the FTC, you will provide 
important information that can help law enforcement officials across the nation 
track down identity thieves and stop them. The FTC can refer victims' 
complaints to other government agencies and companies for further action, as 
well as investigate companies for violations of laws the agency enforces.   
Additionally, you can provide a printed copy of your online Complaint form to 
the police to incorporate into their police report.  The printed FTC ID Theft 
Complaint, in conjunction with the police report, can constitute an Identity 
Theft Report and entitle you to certain protections.  This Identity Theft Report 
can be used to (1) permanently block fraudulent information from appearing 
on your credit report; (2) ensure that debts do not reappear on your credit 
report; (3) prevent a company from continuing to collect debts that result from 
identity theft; and (4) place an extended fraud alert on your credit report. 
4. File a report with your local police or the police in the community where the 
identity theft took place.  
Call your local police department and tell them that you want to file a report 
about your identity theft.   Ask them if you can file the report in person.   If 
you cannot, ask if you can file a report over the Internet or telephone.  See 
below for information about Automated Reports. 
If the police are reluctant to take your report, ask to file a "Miscellaneous 
Incident" report, or try another jurisdiction, like your state police. You also can 
check with your state Attorney General's office to find out if state law requires 
the police to take reports for identity theft. Check the Blue Pages of your 
telephone directory for the phone number or check www.naag.org for a list of 
state Attorneys General. 
When you go to your local police department to file your report, bring a printed 
copy of your FTC ID Theft Complaint form, your cover letter, and your 
supporting documentation. The cover letter explains why a police report and 
an ID Theft Complaint are so important to victims.  
Ask the officer to attach or incorporate the ID Theft Complaint into their police 
report. Tell them that you need a copy of the Identity Theft Report (the police 
report with your ID Theft Complaint attached or incorporated)to dispute the 

 
32
fraudulent accounts and debts created by the identity thief. (In some 
jurisdictions the officer will not be able to give you a copy of the official police 
report, but should be able to sign your Complaint and write the police report 
number in the “Law Enforcement Report” section.)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
33
Chapter Eight 
 
The Identity Theft Resource Center 
 
This organization contains a wealth of information and fact sheets that are a 
great resource and time saver for those of you who are a victim of identity 
theft.  To save time in your reporting and agency letters needed to correct the 
impact of identity theft – use their prewritten letter formats. 
 
Fact Sheet 100 - Financial Identity Theft - The Beginning Steps 
http://www.idtheftcenter.org/artman2/publish/v_fact_sheets/index.shtml  
Posted in: Fact Sheets, Identity Theft News  
By Identity Theft Resource Center 
May 2, 2007 - 12:55:25  
 
Fact Sheet 100 
FINANCIAL IDENTITY THEFT – THE BEGINNING STEPS 
 
Other guides on the ITRC website will address other aspects of this crime 
including Lost and Stolen Wallets, Dealing with Collection Agencies, Check 
Fraud/Theft, Family Identity Theft, The Evidence Trail, Medical Identity Theft, 
Enhancing Communications with Law Enforcement, and Financial Identity 
Theft: The More Complex Cases. 
 
WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW BEFORE YOU START: 
 
Your rights under the law: 
 
1. To have a police report taken. Many states do not have a specific law about 
this but if you are persistent you should be able to get a report in the 
jurisdiction where you live.  With a police report you are entitled to: 
 
A 7-year fraud alert  
A credit freeze in the states that have adopted this procedure into law  
Have inaccurate or fraudulent information blocked from your credit report  
Receive a copy of all application and transaction records on accounts opened 
fraudulently in your name (FCRA Section 609e)  
 
2. Have the account removed from your credit report once you have provided 
evidence the account is fraudulent. This includes any collection actions or 
inquiries. 
 
Organizing Your Case: See ITRC Fact Sheet 106 for detailed information 
 

 
34
1. Keep a detailed log in a spiral or composition book of all phone calls you 
receive or make. Including the names or people, their title, phone numbers, 
company name, and what was said during the conversation. Keep loose papers 
in a notebook or an accordion folder. 
 
2. Send all correspondence to collection agencies, credit issuers and other 
entities via certified mail, return receipt requested to confirm the letter has 
been delivered. Keep the postcard that you receive for evidence if necessary. 
 
3. Confirm all conversations and agreements in writing. The person who made 
an oral agreement with you may not be at that company two months later. 
 
4. Keep all receipts of expenses and copied of correspondence. 
 
 
Working with the Right People: 
 
The biggest waste of time is talking with the wrong people. Keep in mind that 
whenever possible you want to speak with someone on the investigative or 
fraud side of a company or governmental agency. 
 
Collection agencies and credit issuers: Customer service helps with billing. You 
want to speak with a fraud investigator or the legal department of a small 
company.  
 
The Social Security Administration does not work on financial identity theft 
cases. SSA only gets involved through their Office of Inspector General if there 
is benefit fraud or theft of benefit checks.  
Law enforcement: Talk with your local police department or the department 
where the crime is occurring. The Secret Service and FBI only get involved 
upon the request of local law enforcement or the U.S. Attorney General’s 
Office. Typically these are large money or multiple victim cases or cases 
involving cyber crime.  
 
When mail theft or fraud is an issue, speak only with the Postal Inspector’s 
Office, not a post office manager.  
 
When speaking to a Department of Motor Vehicles, ask for a fraud investigator.  
 
TERMS you should know: 
 
FCRA – Fair Credit Reporting Act  
FACTA – Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act  
FDCPA – Fair Debt Collections Practices Act: you can get a copy of this at 
www.ftc.gov  

 
35
SSN – Social Security Number  
 
CRAs – These are the 3 major Credit Reporting Agencies – Equifax, Experian, 
and TransUnion  
Fraud Alert – Federal law instructs credit issuers to contact you prior to 
approving an application. However, it is not widely enforced and not 100% 
reliable. ITRC has found fraud alerts to be about 65-70% effective. They don’t 
affect your credit score but might slow down the credit issuing process for a 
thief! (see ITRC-Debix message)  
 
Security or Credit Freeze – With a freeze, a company may not look at your 
credit report for the purposes of establishing new lines of credit. Companies 
you already have an existing relationship with (example: a credit card, loan or 
utility service) may view your reports but only to review your credit-
worthiness. Placing a freeze is a strong step to take and will affect your ability 
to get instant credit since it can take up to 3 days to thaw a report. However, 
it also locks out thieves, and that is the purpose. In those states with freezes, 
most laws state that victims with a police report get this service for free. Some 
states also allow the consumer to buy a freeze. You may thaw your freeze 
anytime you wish to apply for credit but you will need to plan ahead. See Fact 
Sheet 124 for more information or our State & Local Resources to see if your 
state has a freeze program.  
 
Passwords – Your mother’s maiden name should never be used as a password 
or a word that is easily known to you such as a pet’s name. Use an unusual or 
made-up word such as “banapple.” Place passwords on all bank accounts and 
credit cards as a proactive prevention action against account takeover.  
 
FTC – Federal Trade Commission: the governmental agency that oversees 
identity theft issues. All victims should report their case when they have time 
to 877-IDTHEFT or to the website: www.consumer.gov/idtheft  . The 
information the FTC collects is vital statistical information and they have a 
booklet that will also help guide you. 
  
EPTA – Electronic Transfer Act: provides consumer protection for all 
transactions using a debit card or electronic means to debit or credit an 
account. It also limits a consumer’s liability for unauthorized electronic fund 
transfers.  
 
STEP ONE – Assess the Damage and Beginning Recovery Steps 
 
1. Stolen credit cards, checks, ATM or debit cards – Contact the financial 
institution immediately and close the affected accounts. Put passwords on the 
new accounts. If you never made a copy of the card, you should be able to find 
a 24/7 phone number on the back of a billing or bank account statement. 

 
36
 
2. Account Takeover – If a bank, credit card or debit account has been taken 
over by another person (charges you didn’t make appear on your monthly 
statement), close the account and open a new one. In most cases you need to 
notify the company (bank or credit card issuer) within 30 days, so act quickly. 
It is vital to check statement monthly as few financial institutions allow a 
“grace” period longer than the contractual agreement (on the back of your 
monthly statement). Add a password for protection. If checks are involved see 
Fact Sheet 126 for details. A password on the account will also prevent a thief 
from changing the billing address or adding a name to the account. 
 
3. Stolen-Lost Wallets – If your wallet has been taken follow the steps in  
Fact Sheet 104 
 
4. If your Social Security Number has been taken, order your credit reports 
from all three CRAs. 
 
The best way to evaluate how bad your case might be is to examine your 
credit reports. You may call the CRAs 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. At this 
time, English is the only language being used.  
When ordering your credit reports, you will have an opportunity to place a 
FRAUD ALERT (see Terms to Know). The initial fraud alert will only last for 90 
days. (see ITRC-Debix message). It is renewable, using the same phone 
number and procedure you used to place your first fraud alert. It may be 
extended to 7 years when you write the agency and send a copy of your police 
report verifying you as an identity theft victim. A fraud alert will not affect your 
credit score.  
 
Please understand, you will NOT be speaking with a person. These are 
automated systems and it is safe to give them your Social Security Number. 
You will be asked a number of questions to confirm you are you. This is for 
your security and to ensure they don’t send out a credit report to the wrong 
person. You will have access to a fraud assistance advisor once you receive 
your reports in the mail. 
  
While the first credit reporting agency you call will state that they will contact 
the other two agencies for you, ITRC recommends you empower yourself and 
make sure the job is done by calling all three agencies. These are separate 
companies and they may have different information about you causing one of 
them to not send a report to you.  
 
You may also ask that your entire SSN is not on the report mailed to you, a 
good safety measure. Be sure that you have a locked mailbox in which you 
receive mail – a good tip for everyone. 
 

 
37
The primary contact numbers for the CRAs are: 
 
Equifax: Call (800) 525-6285. TDD: (800) 255-0056  
 
TransUnion: Call (800) 680-7289. TDD: (877) 553-7803. Fraud victims can 
also email fvad@transunion.com   but we recommend that you do not send 
Social Security numbers via email if avoidable. 
  
Experian: Call (888) 397-3742  
5. Don’t rush into taking a short-cut and buying a “tri-report” (three-in-one 
report). It could cut you off from fraud investigators at the CRAs. The reports 
generated by placing a fraud alert will have additional information that is not 
on a “tri-report.” 
 
Credit reports generated by banks and businesses do not contain much of the 
necessary information to deal with an identity theft issue. Credit reports 
generated by placing a fraud alert include contact information for companies 
with open accounts in your name. (See ITRC/Debix message)  
When placing the fraud alert, should you hear that the information you have 
provided does not match the information on file, this is a clear indication that 
there is a problem. This may mean that a thief has used an address with such 
frequency that it appears to be your primary address. In that case, follow the 
directions given and mail your request (with the requested documents) to the 
address given, which may vary from state to state.  
 
During the time the fraud alert is in place, if there is an inquiry into your credit 
status, you should be notified by a phone call from the company making an 
inquiry to confirm with you that you really requested the new line of credit. 
  
6. Review Your Credit Report Carefully: 
 
See Fact Sheet 128  How to Read Your Credit Report for more detail on 
reading your credit reports. 
 
Credit reports are divided into five major sections. These sections may not be 
in the same order as listed below.  
 
 
The header: This is where you will find your information such as name, date of 
birth, address, Social Security Number and spousal information. There may be 
information about your yearly income or employer. 
  
Section 1: These are the accounts that you have open or have had opened 
during the last seven years. You will need to verify that it is an account that 
belongs to you. These are cases where the name of the company will not be 

 
38
familiar. You may need to verify the account by comparing the account 
number to the number on your credit cards or billing statements. Some credit 
reports separate this section into “Accounts in Good Standing,” and “Accounts 
that Negatively Affect Your Report.”  
 
Section 2: This is the section where inquiries are logged. Inquiries come in 
several different versions. One is that the company making the inquiry has an 
application in their possession and wish to verify your worthiness for credit. 
The other inquiry is by companies that you currently have a financial 
relationship with and it serves as an account review.  
 
Section 3: This section will display lists of companies that have acquired your 
information so that they can offer you a pre-approved credit card solicitation.  
 
Section 4: Will display a list of previous addresses where you have lived (if not 
in the header section).  
 
Section 5: Consumer alert information. This is where information about fraud 
alerts and other information from the consumer are placed. 
  
STEP TWO: Continuing the Recovery Process 
 
1. Contact the Police in the jurisdiction where you live and file a Police Report. 
You will need to obtain a physical copy of this police report, not just a case 
number. This is a critical document required to clear your name. 
 
2. Contact all credit issuers, utility companies and collection agencies that 
have opened a fraudulent account. Speak only to a FRAUD INVESTIGATOR. 
Then: 
 
Request to close the account(s)  
Request the company mail you a fraud alert or an address to send either our 
Letter Form 100 - 1 or the FTC affidavit ( 
www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/credit/affidavit.pdf  ) along with your police 
report. Always mail out certified with return receipt. If the company does not 
request document information from you, then they are most likely not clearing 
the account.  
Inform then that they may not sell, share, exchange, give away, donate, 
and/or trade this account to any other entity for the purposes of collection 
while it is under investigation.  
 
3. Get Application and Transaction Records – FCRA section 609e requires 
companies to send you any documents they have. You will need to send an 
affidavit and a police report to receive copies of transaction and application 
records. A copy may also be sent to a designated police department. These 

 
39
documents may contain valuable evidence to point to the thief or help you to 
clear your name. The credit issuers must send you this information within 20 
days (FCRA/FACTA). This demand is already part of Letter Form 100-1. 
Highlight it if you wish. 
 
4. Once you get the information from the credit issuers, contact the 
investigating law enforcement agency and provide the information to them. 
 
5. Contact the 3 CRAs using the form they provide for “correction of errors.” 
The Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) says they must remove the information 
unless credit issuers prove it is a true account. Ultimately the credit issuer 
must be the one to remove fraudulent accounts from your credit report 
permanently. The credit issuers also must correct any erroneous information 
including addresses, phone numbers, birthdates and other information falsely 
provided by the thief. (see ITRC/Debix message) 
 
6. Get Letters of Clearance from the credit issuers. Keep these for at least 10 
years. 
 
7. Check your credit reports and make sure all corrections have been made. 
 
8. If your state has a credit freeze law – look carefully at that option. The 
steps to take are in Fact Sheet 124  Credit Freeze and Fraud Alerts . This is a 
strong step to take and will affect your ability to get instant credit because it 
can take up to 3 days to thaw a report. In many ways this is the only truly 
proactive step you can take to stop a thief. 
 
STEP THREE: COLLECTION AGENCIES 
 
ITRC has written an entire guide for this activity. See Fact Sheet 116 Collection 
Agencies and Identity Theft for complete details. 
 
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES: 
 
See Fact Sheet 108 Overcoming the Emotional Impact about the Emotional 
Impact of this crime. Please note that the identity theft recovery process may 
take time. It will not be resolved overnight and you must be mentally prepared 
to take the necessary time to clear it up. Find a healthy stress reduces and 
build a support team to help you during this period of your life. 
  
The FTC has a publication entitled “Take Charge.” You can get a copy mailed to 
you or download this document from 
www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/pubs/consumer/idtheft/idt04.shtm   . You may call them 
at 
877-ID-THEFT or review their website: www.consumer.gov/idtheft  

 
40
 
www.identitytheft.org  – This resource material was written by an attorney and 
identity theft expert, Mari Frank. Please remember to indicate that the Identity 
Theft Resource Center referred you.  
 
To report fraudulent use of your checks:  
Chexsystems: (800) 428-9623  
Certigy/CPRS: (800) 437‑5120  
International Check Services (ICS): (800) 526‑5380  
SCAN: (800) 262-7771  
TeleCheck: (800) 710‑9898  
FBI/NW3C Internet Fraud Complaint Center: www.ic3.gov   
California Office of Privacy Protection, (Dept. of Consumer Affairs), (866) 785-
9663. Web: www.privacy.ca.gov   
Florida AG ID Theft Hotline: www.myfloridalegal.com/identitytheft   or 866-
966-7226 
 
State and Local Resources and Laws 
 
Sample Letters: 
 
Letter Form 100-1  Initial Victim of Identity Theft Statement and Fraudulent 
Account Information Request to Credit Issuers or Merchants  (Listed at Chapter 
Nine) 
 
Letter Form 100-2  Confirmation of Conversation - Letter of Clearance 
  
Letter Form 100-3 To Credit Issuers: Requesting a Fraudulent Inquiry to be 
Removed  
 
Letter Form 124D  To the Credit Reporting Agencies: Request the Removal of a 
Fraudulent Inquiry  
 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
Copyright February 2007, Identity Theft Resource Center®, all rights reserved. 
Created by Linda Foley. Edited by the ITRC staff. 
This fact sheet should not be used in lieu of legal advice. Any requests to 
reproduce this material, other than by individual victims for their own use, 
should be directed to ITRC.  
 
  
 

 
41
Chapter Nine 
 
Posted in: Letter Templates  
By Identity Theft Resource Center 
May 9, 2007 - 2:41:39 PM 
 
INITIAL VICTIM OF IDENTITY THEFT STATEMENT AND  
FRAUDULENT ACCOUNT INFORMATION REQUEST  
 Credit Issuers or Merchants 
 
Date:______________ 
Sent certified, return receipt mail:  Number ______________________ 
 
 
TO :                    [Credit Issuer]                     FAX                                                
 
ACCOUNT NO.                                           REFERENCE NO.                                 
 
FROM:       [Your Name]                                                                                       
 
I have learned that an unauthorized account has been opened with your 
company or bank. I did not open this account and have not given permission 
to anyone else to open this account for me. I have not benefited by this 
account. You shall consider this account to be fraudulent and a case of identity 
theft.  
 
Below is my identifying information. I have filed a report with my local police 
department. Under CA (PC 530.8) and WA law, all lenders and credit issuers 
must provide documentation regarding all fraudulent accounts opened in 
another’s identity and do so within ten days. The Cantwell-Enzi amendment to 
the nationally approved FACTA (effective June 2, 2004) will require compliance 
with this request within 30 days.  
 
Further, credit issuers must provide that documentation and information to a 
police agency designated by the impersonated party. I am designating the 
below named detective(s)/prosecutors as additional recipients of all account 
information and documents:  
 
Application Records or screen prints of Internet/phone applications 
Statements, Billing and Payment Records 
Transaction Records/Charge Slips 
Log of outgoing calls if a cell phone account or telephone utility 
Investigator’s Summary 
Delivery addresses 
Any other documents associated with the account 

 
42
All records of phone numbers used to activate the account or to access the 
account  
Additionally, I hereby request you immediately start an investigation, and 
remove any entries of this account, the application or inquiry records and 
collection notices from my credit report at once. I also wish to speak with a 
fraud investigator within 30 days about the status of this case. Once resolved, 
I expect a letter of clearance to be sent to me within 10 days. 
 
Do not sell, distribute, trade, exchange, share, donate, giveaway and/or 
transfer information about this fraudulent account with any other entity except 
with the designated law enforcement agencies and prosecutors involved in this 
case.  
 
Please notify any collection agencies that you may have sent this account to. 
Please do not assign this account to another collection agency. So far these 
criminals have stolen approximately  $_______ in checks or credit charges in 
my name. We suspect there will be more until they are caught. 
 
Be advised that reporting these items to the credit bureaus as collection items 
or continuing to pursue these debts from me would be considered a violation 
of the state and federal level Fair Debt Collection Practices Act and the Fair 
Credit Reporting Act.    
 
Victim Information 
 
1.   My full legal name is:________________________________   
  
 (If different from above) When the events described in this affidavit took 
place, I was known as: ________________________________________ 
 
2. My birth date is (day/month/year): ____________________ 
 
3. My Social Security number is________________________________ 
 
4. My driver’s license or identification card number is: State________  
#________________ 
 
5. My current address is: 
________________________________________________________ 
 
City:  ___________________________  State:_________________Zip 
Code:____________ 
 
6. I have lived at this address since 
_____________________________(month/year) 

 
43
 
7. (If different from above) When the events described in this affidavit took 
place, my address was: 
________________________________________________________ 
 
City:  ____________________________  State:_________________Zip 
Code:_________ 
 
8. I lived at that address from __________ until __________(month/year) 
 
9. My daytime telephone number is (____)___________________   
                                              Cell (____) __________________ 
 
10. My evening telephone number is (____)___________________ 
 
11.  My e-mail address is  ______________________________ 
 
How the Fraud Occurred  (Check all that apply): 
 
___ I did not authorize anyone to use my name or personal information to 
seek the money, credit, loans, goods or services described in this report.  
 
___ I did not receive any benefit, money, goods, or services as a result of the 
events described in this report. 
 
___ My identification documents (ie., credit cards; birth certificate; driver's 
license; Social Security card, etc.)  were stolen   were lost on or about 
_____________(day/month/year) 
 
___ I don’t know who the imposter is at this time or how this happened.   
 
___ I have proof that the following person(s) used my information (for 
example, my name, address, date of birth, existing account numbers, Social 
Security number, mother’s maiden name, etc.) or identification documents to 
obtain money, credit, loans, goods, or services without my knowledge or 
authorization: (only fill out if you are certain) 
_________________________________  
_____________________________________ 
Name  (if known)                                     Name  (if known)  
 
________________________________   
_____________________________________ 
Address (if known)                                   Address (if known) 
 

 
44
_________________________________  
_____________________________________ 
Phone number(s) (if known)                       Phone number(s) (if known) 
 
_________________________________  
_____________________________________ 
additional information (e.g. relationship)     additional information (if known) 
 
A report has been made with the following police/sheriff’s department. If you 
are unable to obtain a report or report number from the police, please indicate 
that by checking here _____. Instead of a police report I filed an official 
affidavit with the following agency ___________________ (case #________)   
 
Name of agency: 
_________________________________________________ 
Case 
#__________________________________________________________ 
Name of investigator if known: 
______________________________________ 
Contact information for law enforcement: (address/phone)________________ 
_______________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Signature of victim:  _______________________________   Date 
_______________ 
 
I declare under penalty of perjury that this declaration is true and correct to 
the best of my knowledge. Knowingly submitting false information on this 
affidavit could subject me to criminal prosecution for perjury. 
 
Have one witness (non-relative) sign below that you completed and signed this 
declaration.) 
 
Witness: 
 
___________________________________     
__________________________________ 
(signature)                                                      (printed name) 
 
_________________________                       
_________________________________ 
(date)                                                             (telephone number) 
 
List of enclosed documents: 
 

 
45
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Copyright Jan. 2007, Identity Theft Resource Center®, all rights reserved. 
Created by ITRC  
  
 
This fact sheet should not be used in lieu of legal advice. Any requests to 
reproduce this material, other than by individual victims or their own use, 
should be directed to ITRC. ITRC thanks the CRAs in providing material for this 
guide.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
46
Chapter Ten 
What is an Identity Theft Report? 
An Identity Theft Report is a police report with more than the usual amount of 
detail. The Identity Theft Report includes enough detail about the crime for the 
credit reporting companies and the businesses involved to verify that you are a 
victim—and to know which accounts and inaccurate information came from 
identity theft. Normal police reports often don’t have many details about the 
accounts that were opened or misused by identity thieves.  
The printed copy of your ID Theft Complaint Form can provide additional 
details for the police report. The police are not legally required to use the FTC’s 
ID Theft Complaint Form as part of their report. Your police department may 
have another way to incorporate the details of your crime. In these cases, the 
police report by itself may serve as an Identity Theft Report. 
When you file your Identity Theft Report, the credit reporting companies will 
permanently block fraudulent information from appearing on your credit 
report. Filing an Identity Theft Report with the credit reporting companies or 
with the companies where the thief used your information should ensure that 
these debts do not reappear on your credit report. An Identity Theft Report 
can prevent a company from continuing to try to collect debts that result from 
identity theft, or sell those debts to others for collection. It also allows you to 
place an extended fraud alert on your credit report. The credit reporting 
companies may decline your Identity Theft Report if it does not contain enough 
detail for them to verify that you are a victim of identity theft. In that case, the 
credit reporting companies have certain timeframes for responding to your 
Identity Theft Report with requests for additional information.  
Creating and using an Identity Theft Report may require two steps: 
Step One begins with filing your report with a local, state, or federal law 
enforcement agency. These agencies may include your local police 
department, your State Attorney General, the FBI, the U.S. Secret Service, the 
FTC, or the U.S. Postal Inspection Service. Some state laws require local police 
departments to take reports, but there is no law requiring federal agencies to 
take a report.  
In your report, you should give as much information as you can about the 
crime, including anything you know about the dates of the identity theft, the 
fraudulent accounts opened and the alleged identity thief. It may help you give 
the necessary level of detail if you file an online complaint with the FTC, and 
then ask your local police department to incorporate a copy of the printed ID 
Theft Complaint into its police report.  

 
47
Step Two begins when you send the businesses involved and the credit 
reporting companies a copy of your Identity Theft Report, which you should do 
by certified mail, return receipt requested. The companies may ask you to give 
them more information or documentation to help them verify your identity 
theft. They have to make their request within 15 days of receiving your 
Identity Theft Report. The credit reporting company or business then has 15 
more days to work with you to make sure your Identity Theft Report contains 
everything they need. They are also entitled to five days to review any 
information you give them. For example, if you give them information 11 days 
after they request it, they have until day 16 to make a final decision. 
How do I get an Identity Theft Report?  
The officer taking your police report can attach or incorporate your ID Theft 
Complaint into their police report to add more detail. Ask the officer to give 
you a copy of the official police report that incorporates or attaches your ID 
Theft Complaint. In some places the officer will not be able to give you a copy 
of the official police report, but should be able to sign a copy of your ID Theft 
Complaint and write the police report number in the “Law Enforcement Report” 
section. Be sure to keep a copy of the police report number. 
  
The police are not legally required to use the FTC’s ID Theft Complaint Form as 
part of their report. Your police department may have another way to include 
all the details of your identity theft information in their police report. In these 
cases, the police report by itself may serve as an Identity Theft Report. 
Because the detailed Identity Theft Report is required for you to get many 
important protections, you may wish to use the Law Enforcement Cover Letter 
to explain to the police department how important it is for you to get a police 
report – as well as the legal protections that a detailed Identity Theft Report 
gives you. 
How do I submit my Identity Theft Report to the credit reporting companies, or 
to businesses where the thief used my information?  
When you send a copy of your Identity Theft Report to the fraud departments 
of the three major credit reporting companies, include a copy of the credit 
reporting company cover letter, along with copies of your supporting 
documentation. Send your information by certified mail with return receipt 
requested. The mailing addresses for sending Identity Theft Reports to the 
three major credit reporting companies are on the cover letter. 
 
When writing to the fraud departments of each of the companies where the 
identity thief has committed fraud using your personal information, include 
copies of the Identity Theft Report, your supporting documentation, and the 
appropriate cover letter: for fraud on your existing accounts, or for fraud on 

 
48
new accounts. Always send this information by certified mail, with a return 
receipt requested. 
The credit reporting companies have certain timeframes for responding to your 
Identity Theft Report with requests for additional information.  
What do I do if the police only take reports about identity theft over the 
Internet or telephone?  
The FTC ID Theft Complaint has a special section for police reports that are not 
filed face-to-face, to help you use it to supplement an automated police report. 
If you file a police report online or over the phone, complete the “Automated 
Report Information” block of the ID Theft Complaint. Attach a copy of any 
filing confirmation received from the police.    
 
If you have a choice, however, you should file your police report in person and 
not use an automated report.  It is more difficult for the consumer reporting 
company and information provider to verify the information in an automated 
report, and they will likely require additional information and/or 
documentation.  
What do I do if the local police won't take a report? 
There are efforts at the federal, state and local level to ensure that local law 
enforcement agencies understand identity theft, its impact on victims, and the 
importance of taking a police report. However, we still hear that some 
departments are not taking reports. The following tips may help you to get a 
report if you're having difficulties: 
• 
Provide the officer with a copy of the Law Enforcement Cover Letter that 
explains why the police report and the Identity Theft Report are so 
important to both victims and industry.  
• 
Furnish as much documentation as you can to prove your case. Debt 
collection letters, credit reports, a copy of your printed ID Theft 
Complaint, and other evidence of fraudulent activity can help 
demonstrate the legitimacy of your case.  Provide the police a copy of 
"Remedying the Effects of Identity Theft," which shows that police 
reports are necessary to secure your rights.  
• 
Be persistent if local authorities tell you that they can't take a report. 
Stress the importance of a police report; many creditors require one to 
resolve your dispute. Remind them that consumer reporting companies 
will automatically block the fraudulent accounts and bad debts from 
appearing on your credit report, but only if you can give them a copy of 
the police report. In addition, a police report may be needed to obtain 
the fraudulent application and other records the company has.  

 
49
• 
If you're told that identity theft is not a crime under your state law, ask 
to file a Miscellaneous Incident Report instead.  
• 
If you can't get the local police to take a report, try your county police. If 
that doesn't work, try your state police.  
Some states require the police to take reports for identity theft. Check with the 
office of your State Attorney General, which can be found at www.naag.org, to 
find out if your state has this law. 
How do I prove that I'm an identity theft victim? 
Applications or other transaction records related to the theft of your identity 
may help you prove that you are a victim. For example, you may be able to 
show that the signature on an application is not yours. These documents also 
may contain information about the identity thief that is valuable to law 
enforcement.  By law, companies must give you a copy of the application or 
other business transaction records relating to your identity theft if you submit 
your request in writing, accompanied by a police report.  Read more about 
getting information from businesses, and use this model letter to request this 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
50
Chapter Eleven  
 
Comparison of ID Theft Protection Services 
NextAdvisor.com is 
The trusted, independent source for 
Comparing the most valuable new services for Avoiding 
ID Theft and other consumer services 
 
They are located at  
http://www.nextadvisor.com/identity_theft_protection_services/compare.php 
 They Advise  
                                                                 
Identity Theft Protection 
Just being careful isn't enough to prevent or detect identity theft, the fastest 
growing crime in the U.S. with over 9 million victims each year. If you are 
serious about preventing identity theft, sign up for one of our recommended 
identity theft protection services below. Not only will they set fraud alerts on 
your credit files so that any business opening an account in your name must 
contact you to confirm your identity, but they'll help you cut down on junk mail 
and give you copies of all three of your credit reports, too. If you don't want to 
be contacted every time you open a new credit account or also want to keep 
close tabs on your credit report and score, then sign up for an identity theft 
detection service to ensure you catch any theft before it hurts you. Or get 
Identity Guard Total Protection, which provides both prevention and detection 
services. Have more questions about identity theft and which service might be 
best for you? Visit their individual sites. 
 
But you must first know this before proceeding to reviews… 
 
 How does NextAdvisor.com come up with its reviews?  
We thoroughly test and research all the services in the category. We order each and every 
service ourselves and test out every feature available. We contact customer service and 
cancel and reorder each service to make sure that process works as well. After our initial 
tests, we continue to use all the services and update our reviews as situations change. We 
also monitor the providers' sites for any service changes or specials. In addition, we 
research each provider by reading all news and ordering and reading third-party research 
reports. We only include providers on our site that we believe offer a good value 
proposition. If there is a provider you know of that is not on our site, you can be fairly 
certain we did not rate that provider good enough to include in our comparison. If you think 
we are missing a quality provider or have any other suggestions or comments, please let 
us know.  
 
And that…… 
 

 
51
Service, Price, Type Credit Reports Delivered, Fraud Monitoring, Mail List 
Removal, ID Theft Insurance and Overall Rating all contribute to your best 
Bottom Line service need.  
 
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 
LifeLock Review   
  
LifeLock is a great "preventive" identity theft protection service at a great 
price. As a special offer for visitors to NextAdvisor.com, you can now get 30 
days free AND $21 off the price of the service. You must click the link from our 
site to get this special promotion. "Preventive" services employ tools like 
setting fraud alerts on your credit file with all 3 bureaus, which means that 
lenders must call or write you for verification before they can issue new credit. 
Since most identity theft occurs when thieves use your personal information to 
open new credit accounts (credit cards, bank accounts, phone accounts, etc.), 
fraud alerts prevent identity theft by stopping the fraudulent accounts from 
being opened in the first place. (There are also what we call "detection" 
services that monitor any changes to your credit report and are a great way to 
catch identity theft in its early stages and before damage is done. They do not, 
however, help prevent ID theft.) The CEO of LifeLock stands behind his 
product so firmly that he will gladly hand out his social security number on the 
website. While it is a great testimony for his service, we don't recommend you 
try it at home! LifeLock is a preventive identity theft protection service - their 
sole purpose is identity protection and recovery for you and your family. (They 
have reduced-price plans for children as well.) LifeLock works by installing and 
maintaining fraud alerts on your data with the 3 major credit bureaus. What 
this does is force a bank or other credit issuer to contact you personally before 
any new account can be opened in your name. Fraud alerts are a method of 
extra protection and they do not hurt your credit or score in any way. They 
also send you a 3-bureau credit report annually, at the time of and the 
anniversary of your signup with the company. LifeLock also stops pre-
approved credit offers and junk mail with your name on it from circulating, 
thereby reducing your chance of having your identity stolen. LifeLock recently 
added a new feature that is included in their service called WalletLock, which 
we think is excellent. If your wallet is ever stolen, you just call LifeLock and 
speak to a WalletLock specialist, who will contact each credit card, bank or 
document issuing company, cancel your affected accounts and complete the 
paperwork and steps necessary to replace your lost documents, including your 
credit/debit cards, driver's license, social security card, insurance cards, 
checkbook - even travelers checks - at no additional cost. LifeLock's guarantee 
is one of the best out of any of the top companies for identity protection, and it 
is clearly stated on their web site. They offer $1 million towards 
reimbursement, lawyers' fees, and clearing your name if your identity is ever 
stolen. While this guarantee is great, direct monetary losses from identity theft 

 
52
are almost always much smaller since you are not legally responsible for 
paying any fraudulent debt a thief accumulated. The real cost of identity theft 
is the loss of ability to get credit for an extended period of time, the time and 
effort it takes to restore your good name, and many other adverse 
consequences that can even include mistaken incarceration.  
 
Signing up was quick for us, and after 2 screens the company clearly labeled 
what we could expect from our account over the next 12 months or so. (For 
example, within 2 weeks we will be notified about the fraud alerts from the 
bureaus, within 2 months our junk mail will be drastically reduced, and every 
90 days our fraud alerts will be reissued.) Upon contacting customer service by 
phone with some questions, we didn't have to wait more than a moment for 
someone to pick up the phone, and they are available 24/7 for any questions 
or problems. Unlike other services, LifeLock offers no login services at their 
site - you will have to call their number for any adjustments to your account. 
While this may be a bit inconvenient, it makes their system completely hacker-
proof, as they claim that very few people at LifeLock ever get near customer 
data. LifeLock offers both monthly and yearly payment options for individuals 
and families, as well as a Business-class service. Overall, LifeLock is a great 
service to help you prevent identity theft. Relative to TrustedID, another top 
service, it lacks the credit card protection technology and the credit freeze 
option, but it does add the junk mail unsubscribe (TrustedID has preapproved 
credit card offer unsubscribe but not general junk mail unsubscribe) although 
this is certainly not 100% effective and you can easily do it yourself. LifeLock 
also has more generous customer service hours. 
 
 
 
 
 
 $9.00/mo. or $99.00/yr.; 30 days free Protection - sets and renews fraud 
alerts 1 3-bureau credit report each year No Preapproved credit and general 
junk mail $1,000,000  Best overall value in identity theft protection  
 
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 
 
Identity Guard Level 4 - Total Protection Review   
  
Identity Guard Total Protection is by far the most comprehensive identity theft 
product and really lives up to its "Total Protection" moniker. It's the only 
service that offers both identity theft protection and detection. Plus, it has the 
most extensive fraud monitoring we've found and offers them all at a great 
price, just $14.99 per month plus one month free (this special deal is only 
available through our site). Identity theft detection services help to detect that 

 
53
you have become a victim of identity theft by monitoring your credit file at all 
3 credit bureaus. Identity theft protection services aim to stop identity theft 
from happening in the first place by setting fraud alerts on your credit file at all 
3 credit bureaus, meaning a lender must take the extra step of calling you to 
verify your identity before processing a new application from you. If you are 
very concerned about identity theft or at least mildly concerned and also want 
to keep tabs on your credit and credit scores, we recommend you get both 
types of services, and Identity Guard Total Protection is the only service that 
offers both in one package. Identity Guard Total Protection is not only a great 
fraud prevention service, but is also a credit monitoring service on steroids. 
Like many credit monitoring services, it completes daily scans of all 3 of your 
credit files and notifies you of any changes. It also gives you all 3 of your 
credit reports and all 3 of your credit scores every quarter. Identity Guard goes 
far beyond other credit monitoring services in detecting identity theft by also 
monitoring public records for any changes in your name, scanning for 
application or social security fraud, and monitoring the internet's black market 
for any use of your credit cards. If anything is found, they will alert you by e-
mail immediately. Additionally, they provide card registration services to help 
you in case your wallet gets lost or stolen. Finally, if you are not all that 
concerned about identity theft or don't want to have to be contacted when you 
apply for new credit, you have the option to turn fraud alerts off with Identity 
Guard or never turn them on and still enjoy all the other great services they 
offer. The only thing Identity Guard Total Protection doesn't do is remove you 
from junk mail lists, but you can do that yourself for free and it more than 
makes up for it with all its other great services.  
 
The signup process is relatively quick - you will go through a short series of 
screens asking you for information, including payment information. To verify 
your identity, you will be asked for your social security number, date of birth, 
and the answers to 5 multiple-choice questions of information in your file. By 
default, the credit reports and alerts are available online and through e-mail. If 
you want hard copies mailed to you however, you can call their customer 
service number and get them at no extra charge. Your subscription includes 
access to a very useful credit analyzer. You can try out different scenarios, 
such as paying off your credit card by a certain amount or opening up a new 
loan, to see how your credit score will be affected. If you are monitoring your 
credit, this analyzer can help you to make the best choices to raise your credit 
score. In the event of a credit card theft, you can report the incident to 
Identity Guard and they will handle all the details for you, including reporting 
the cards as stolen and getting new cards issued to you. Identity Guard offers 
generous customer service phone hours (8am-11pm M-F and 9a-6p Sat) as 
well as postal mail and e-mail contact methods. When we tried contacting 
them, a customer service representative answered almost immediately, and 
was able to provide useful advice about the service. Reporting for lost or stolen 
cards can be done on the phone or through your account, 24 hours a day, 7 

 
54
days a week. If you like this service but are looking for a cheaper alternative, 
you may want to try another Identity Guard service, Extra Caution, that is just 
$11.99 per month ($3 per month cheaper)plus one month free when ordered 
through this link. It has all the same services as Total Protection except for 
public record reporting and scanning for application and social security fraud. 
For those really serious about identity theft protection, though, Total 
Protection is the best service you will find.  
 
 
 
 
 
 $14.99/mo. & 1 month free protection & Detection - 3-bureau credit 
monitoring & sets and renews fraud alerts 3-in 1 credit reports and Scores 
from all 3 bureaus Credit cards, Public records, social security, applications 
(cell phones, loans, etc.) No $20,000  Most complete service - only one 
offering protection & detection; extensive fraud monitoring 
 
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 
 
TrustedID Review   
  
TrustedID starts with setting fraud alerts (they call this "Lender Doublecheck") 
at all 3 bureaus as soon as you sign up. They have developed an automated 
tool to set these alerts, so they happen essentially as soon as you sign up. The 
downside to any preventive service that sets fraud alerts is that it might delay 
a credit application process because your identity must be confirmed, but this 
is a small price to pay to prevent ID theft and it will not hurt your credit or 
prevent you from getting credit. TrustedID's credit card monitoring service, 
which monitors your credit cards for any suspcicious activity, also starts the 
moment you sign up, using the card number you use to pay for your order. 
Adding additional card numbers to your account is quick and easy. This service 
monitors the internet's black market for your credit card numbers and 
immediately alerts you if it finds any of your numbers are being bought or 
sold. TrustedID's credit offer opt out and identity theft insurance starts the 
moment you sign up as well. The credit offer opt out immediately prohibits 
credit card issuers from sending you preapproved credit card offers. Not only 
do these clog your mailbox and kill trees, but they are also a prime target for 
identity thieves to steal, gain your personal information and open a credit card 
account in your name.  
 
TrustedID's ID Theft Insurance covers you for up to $1,000,000 in costs to 
recover from identity theft. While this is a great benefit, direct monetary losses 
from identity theft are almost always much smaller since you are not legally 

 
55
responsible for paying any fraudulent debt a thief accumulated. The real cost 
of identity theft is the loss of ability to get credit for an extended period of 
time, the time and effort it takes to restore your good name, and many other 
adverse consequences that can even include mistaken incarceration. Your free 
credit reports are mailed to your house, and the address is verified through the 
credit bureaus before doing so. As part of your account, you are offered a 
service called CreditLock, which makes your credit report at all 3 bureaus 
unavailable to everyone without permission. While this may be good for those 
who never use their credit, or those who are stationed overseas, it does cost 
$44.95 to lock your credit reports with all 3 bureaus and $39.95 to unlock 
them - every time! We typically only recommend using this feature if you know 
you have been the victim of an identity thief. In that situation, it is extremely 
valuable. TrustedID scored the lowest on customer service however, as their 
phone hours are only 7:30 am to 4:30 pm (pacific time, and it took me over 6 
minutes of hold time do get a representative on the phone. She was helpful 
once I did get on the phone, and she did mention their phone hours would be 
expanding soon. Logging in to their system does not offer much information - 
just the ability to sign up for CreditLock and add card numbers to your watch 
list. TrustedID's service was activated fastest out of all the services tested - 
which could be extremely useful to lock down your information if your identity 
is ever stolen. Overall, TrustedID is a great preventive identity theft solution 
and an excellent option for those serious about preventing I.D. theft.  
 
 
 
 
 
 $12.95/mo. or $109.95/yr. protection - sets and renews fraud alerts 1 3-
bureau credit report each year Credit cards Preapproved credit $1,000,000  
Great ID theft protection service; includes credit card fraud monitoring  
 
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
  
 
LoudSiren Review   
  
LoudSiren has done a nice job of differentiating themselves from similar 
services LifeLock and TrustedID by developing an easier system to manage 
fraud alert inquiries. All three of these identity theft protection services work 
by setting and renewing fraud alerts on your credit files with the three 
bureaus, meaning that whenever you (or a potential ID thief) applies for 
credit, the lender must call you to verify that it is indeed you submitting the 
application. If the lender cannot reach you, your application will be held up 
until you are able to speak with them. LoudSiren avoids this problem by 
creating a new contact number for lenders to call and leave their information. 
LoudSiren then automatically conatacts you at up to 3 numbers, where you 

 
56
can approve or disapprove the application through their automated system. If 
you cannot be reached, you can call back to LoudSiren at any time and 
approve or disapprove the application at your convenience. In addition to 
saving time and being more efficient, LoudSiren's system adds extra levels of 
security because you have a PIN number that you enter to approve every 
transaction and a recording of your own voice assures you that each call is 
legitimate.  
 
Other than their automated fraud alert system, LoudSiren is very comparable 
to LifeLock. Just like LifeLock, you can get a copy of your credit report from 
each of the three credit bureaus, you can stop getting preapproved credit 
offers through the mail, and you've got a $1 million insurance policy in case 
your identity gets stolen. LoudSiren also will automatically put your phone 
numbers on the national Do Not Call Registry to stop unsolicited telemarketing 
calls. However, LoudSiren's customer service hours (M-F, 9am-5pm CT) are 
not as generous as LifeLock's. Overall, though, LoudSiren has added a valuable 
level of automation to identity theft protection and is an excellent choice for 
those that will be using their credit often.  
 
 
 
 
 
 $9/mo. or $99/yr. Protection - sets and renews fraud alerts 1 report from all 3 
bureaus each year No Preapproved credit; tele- marketing, too $1,000,000  
Innovative automated phone system makes managing fraud alerts easy 
 
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++  
 
Equifax Gold 3-in-1 Monitoring w/ ScorePower Review   
  
Equifax Credit Watch Gold 3-in-1 Monitoring Plus Score Power is another great 
identity theft detection service. Designed primarily as a service to monitor your 
credit reports and scores (it is our top rated service in our credit monitoring 
reviews), it also works very well in detecting identity theft. As a special 
promotion for ConsumerCompare.org visitors, you now get a free 30-day trial 
when you sign up from our site. When you sign up for the free 30 day trial, 
you also get a free Equifax FICO score and a free 3-Bureau credit report 
(reports from 3 bureaus laid out side-by-side for easy comparison). Since the 
FICO score is the score most lenders use to make decisions, this is the best 
score you can get. Equifax actually gives you an entire Score Power report 
which not only includes your FICO score but also a FICO Score Simulator that 
estimates what your score would be if you took certain actions, as well as a full 
explanation of factors affecting your credit score. Equifax is giving you both 
the report and score free just for trying their monitoring service for 30 days, 

 
57
so if you don't like it you can cancel and have paid nothing for your FICO score 
and 3-Bureau report, which you would have to pay $40 for if you bought it 
separately. Canceling would defeat the purpose, though, since what is going to 
detect identity theft is their excellent 3-bureau monitoring service. We think 
monitoring all three bureaus is very important for both monitoring your credit 
and protecting against identity theft because sometimes lenders will only 
report a credit event to one bureau. Equifax constantly monitors all 3 bureaus 
and sends you an email alert within 24 hours of a change to any one of your 3 
credit reports. You can also get an updated Equifax credit report any time you 
want. At only $14.95 per month after the free 30-day trial, this service is an 
excellent value. If you're looking for an identity theft detection service and also 
want to keep tabs on your credit reports and scores, Equifax Credit Watch Gold 
3-in-1 Monitoring Plus Score Power is a great solution.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 $14.95/mo.; Free 30-day trial Detection - 3 bureau credit monitoring Free 3-
bureau credit report and Equifax FICO score No No $20,000  Great 
combination of credit monitoring and id theft detection  
 
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 
What type of identity theft protection is right for me?  
"Preventive" identity theft protection services, like TrustedID and LifeLock, are a very strong form of identity 
theft protection. Both place a fraud alert on all of your credit files (TrustedID allows you the additional and 
more extreme option of placing a "credit freeze" on your credit files) which means anyone opening a credit 
account for you must make an extra effort to confirm your identity, which usually means calling you to 
confirm you opened the account. We recommend this type of service for most people that are concerned 
about identity theft, but it does come with some drawbacks. Mainly, it makes it a bit harder to open credit 
accounts as you must first wait to be contacted by the new account grantor, which can sometimes take as 
long as a few days or longer if the grantor can't connect with you. For those who want to take a less extreme 
approach or who also want to have the benefit of keeping close tabs on their credit reports and scores, one 
of the "detection" type of services we recommend is a great approach. These are credit monitoring services 
that monitor your credit file ("credit monitoring"), as well as the internet black market, for any unusual activity 
occurring in your name. They also give you regular updates of your credit reports and credit scores. While 
detection of something means that your information has already fallen into the wrong hands, it almost always 
occurs before the situation has become a more serious problem and it is not as difficult to deal with. A 
"detection" service is good for someone who opens credit accounts often but is not overly concerned with 
identity theft.  
 
What do I do if I think I am a victim of identity theft?  
If you are a member of one of our recommended identity theft services, call your service 
provider immediately and they will help you handle the situation. Similarly, if you are a 
member of one of our recommended credit monitoring services, call your service and they 
will help you take care of the situation. If you have not subscribed to one of our 
recommended services, visit the FTC's site for further instructions.  

 
58
Appendix 1 
 
 
   
 What is LifeLocks Job?  
The job of LifeLock is to protect your good name. As a consumer, you have 
rights that allow you to take more control over who uses your identity and how 
they use it. We do the mechanics, the details if you will, to enforce those 
rights. And we stand behind our service with our $1,000,000 Service 
Guarantee. We charge $10 per month to do it. 
  
Some of what LifeLock does, you can do yourself for free. The difference is 
that the only thing Life Lock thinks about is how to protect your Identity. Think 
of it this way: all of us can change our own oil, but most of us have it done by 
specialists. We'd like to think that what we do is more complicated than 
changing oil, but you get the idea. 
  
Here's What LifeLock Can Do: 
First, we ask the credit bureaus to set fraud alerts on your behalf. Usually, 
this is done through our automated systems and the alerts are set within an 
hour. From time to time there may be a hitch and we have to do the first one 
manually, usually because they have a different address on file for you. If this 
happens, we'll tell you right away and do what needs to be done to get the 
alerts set. (In case you're wondering, we don't charge anything more for this 
and our Total Service Guarantee is still in effect from day one.) 
  
Second LifeLock Action, unless your circumstances change and you tell us 
not to, every 90 days or so we ask the credit bureaus to do it again. You can 
do this for free if you'd prefer, but we make sure it gets done and that it gets 
done right. That's where the oil change analogy we were talking about kicks in. 
  
Third LifeLock Action, we request that your name be removed from pre-
approved credit card and junk mail lists and we keep making the requests as 
they expire. Statistics show that this is one of the most common ways that 
thieves hijack identities. Plus, all that mail is just so irritating. Many of our 
clients tell us that this alone is worth the price. If you are a do-it-yourselfer, 
you can do this for free, but why not let us do it for you? 
  
Fourth LifeLock Action, we order your free credit reports on your behalf 
from the major credit bureaus and they are sent directly to you. We do this 
every year. You can also do this yourself for free (Pennzoil anyone?). 
  

 
59
Fifth LifeLock Action, hassling with lost or stolen wallets is no longer a 
problem with WalletLock™. If ever your wallet goes missing, just give us a call 
- anytime, anywhere - and a WalletLock specialist will contact each credit card, 
bank or document issuing company, cancel your affected accounts and 
complete the paperwork and steps necessary to replace your lost documents*, 
including your credit/debit cards, driver's license, social security card, 
insurance cards, checkbook - even travelers checks - at no additional cost. 
  
Last, but certainly not least LifeLock Action: If your Identity is stolen 
while you are our client, we're going to do whatever it takes to recover your 
good name. If you need lawyers, we're going to hire the best we can find. If 
you need investigators, accountants, case managers, whatever, they're yours. 
If you lose money as a result of the theft, we're going to give it back to you. 
  
We will do whatever it takes to help you recover your good name and we will 
spend up to $1,000,000 to do it. 
  
We don't think you will see a guarantee like this anywhere else from any other 
company. If you do, let us know because we'd like to do business with them. 
There isn't much fine print in our Guarantee. To see the details, click here. 
  
If you have a reason to think that you will become a victim of Identity Theft, 
we can help you stop looking over your shoulder, because we've got your 
back. 
  
*Pictures, cash and other monies are excluded. 
  
LifeLock Frequently Asked Questions: 
   
The following is a list of FAQs about LifeLock, its service and other important 
facts. As a consumer, it is important for you to fully understand what we 
provide and how we provide it; it will help you feel comfortable about the 
services LifeLock provides. 
 
 
 
 
 
Please take a few moments at your leisure to review the FAQs below. 
 
  
  

 
60
How big a problem is Identity theft? 
According to the Federal Trade Commission, identity theft is the fastest 
growing crime in  America. Roughly 10 million Americans have their personal 
information stolen and misused in some way every year, costing consumers $5 
billion and businesses over $40 billion annually. 
  
What does LifeLock do? 
On your behalf, LifeLock requests that fraud alerts be placed on your accounts. 
By placing these fraud alerts, you are asking that creditors take extra care to 
identify who you are and to investigate the validity of any pending transaction. 
LifeLock also requests that your name be removed from pre-approved credit 
card lists and junk mail lists. In addition, LifeLock annually orders your free 
credit reports from the three major credit reporting bureaus. 
  
Why do children need protecting? 
The identities of children are stolen more often than you think. Criminals know 
they can use a child's information for years before being identified. By then, 
the thieves have run up major accounts and ruined credit for that child. 
LifeLock is just $25 a year for a child age 15 and younger with an adult paying 
annually. 
  
If a child has a valid credit report, LifeLock will request that the fraud alerts 
are placed on the child's file. LifeLock also requests that a notation is placed on 
the report indicating that there should not be any activity on the file because 
the child is a minor. If a child does not have a credit report, as is usually the 
case, LifeLock confirms every 90 days that that no credit report exists. In 
addition, LifeLock prepares a request to the Social Security Administration for 
a copy of the child’s work history to confirm that the child’s social security 
number is not being used fraudulently. 
  
Do I have to give all my credit card numbers to you when I sign up? 
No, LifeLock does not prevent anyone from using your existing accounts. 
However, those accounts would be covered by the guarantee. Through the 
information you provide, Life Lock will place alerts to help protect against 
anybody other than yourself opening new lines of credit. LifeLock suggests you 
place all your account numbers in a secure place if your wallet or purse is 
stolen. If that occurs, call LifeLock so we can help with contacting the credit 
card companies to cancel the stolen cards and reissue new ones. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
61
Who will represent me if my identity gets stolen? 
In the event that your identity is compromised, LifeLock will hire qualified 
professionals to assist you in addressing whatever complications may arise. 
  
What happens when I apply for credit? 
After a fraud alert has been placed in your credit file, any creditor using that 
credit file to grant new credit or an extension of credit in your name must 
contact you by telephone (using the phone number specified in the fraud alert) 
or take reasonable steps to verify your identity and confirm that the credit 
application is not the result of identity theft. If someone else is trying to use 
your identity to get credit, the fraud alert usually stops them cold. We say 
"usually" because nothing is perfect. That's why we have our Service 
Guarantee. 
  
Is LifeLock going to call me if someone tries to use my information? 
No. LifeLock's system is designed for you to have control, so you will know 
before we do. The fraud alerts placed on your accounts ask creditors to call 
you if someone is trying to establish credit in your name. 
  
I have been a victim of identity theft, can you help me? 
We can direct you to competent and reputable firms that specialize in identity 
remediation. Our service can prevent further damage to your identity, 
however, our Service Guarantee does not cover issues which occurred prior to 
you becoming our client. 
  
Who needs this protection the most? 
Any individual who has a social security number and assets to lose should be 
concerned with identity theft. While we have heard people say, "I don’t have 
anything for them to take," criminals are better than you at making major 
purchases with your information. 
  
What makes you different than insurance companies? 
First and foremost, LifeLock aims to prevent ID theft. Insurance companies do 
nothing to prevent anyone from using your personal information. Insurance 
companies will give you a policy to provide some financial coverage if you 
become a victim. However, there are also several disclaimers on what is 
covered and not under these plans.  
  
Who is LifeLock? 
LifeLock is a private company headquartered in Tempe, Arizona. The company 
began offering its service in April of 2005. LifeLock is the largest and fastest 
growing identity theft prevention company in the United States. 
 
 

 
62
 What is the price for the LifeLock service? 
$110/ year per adult OR $10/ month per adult 
$25/year for children 15 and under 
  
Does LifeLock have a family discount plan available? 
No, we do not. Everyone has a different SSN and identity, so Life Lock must 
charge a rate per person. The guarantee is also based upon per person 
membership. 
  
Why does the entire family have to pay annually if there is a minor 
child listed in the family? 
LifeLock now provides the option to pay either monthly or annually regardless 
of if there are minors on the account. 
  
I prefer signing my family up monthly as opposed to annually. Can you 
do this? 
Yes, you can choose between paying annually or monthly during signup. 
  
How do I access my account after enrollment? 
If you need to make a change to your account, contact client services at 1-
877-LIFELOCK. 
  
What happens if I get a fraud alert letter from the credit bureaus 
stating they cannot find my minor child’s credit profile? 
  
That is good, because your minor shouldn't have one. This letter can be 
ignored. If the child is a client, they too are protected by the guarantee. 
  
What if I get a fraud alert letter from the credit bureaus that says my 
minor child's fraud alerts have been set? 
That is good because this means that your child’s account is protected to the 
same extent as yours. We will also make sure that the credit bureaus are 
notified that this is a minor's account and there should be no activity on it. 
  
Why do I need to add a previous address to my account? 
If you have been at your current address for less than 2 years, the credit 
bureaus want your previous address in order to set the fraud alerts on your 
credit file. If you don’t give a previous address, then we need documentation 
to send to them to verify that it is you. To do this, we need a copy of your DL 
license and a utility bill with your name and address on it. 
 
 
 
  

 
63
Why does LifeLock need to know my personal information? 
In order to request that the credit bureaus place fraud alerts on your behalf, 
we need your personal information to do so.  
  
How do I know LifeLock's system won’t be hacked by criminals or 
employees of LifeLock? 
LifeLock is certified ISO 27001. This is the most stringent security certification 
within the industry and LifeLock was the first company in the identity theft 
prevention field to achieve this status. Life Lock has taken every measure 
possible to keep information secure. Nevertheless, as a client of LifeLock, you 
are still covered by our guarantee. 
  
Can I enroll other family members later? 
Yes, call client services to enroll them. 
  
Can I obtain my credit score through your service? 
While receiving one free credit report from each bureau each year is part of 
the standard LifeLock service, your credit score is not included. By law, you 
are allowed one free credit score a year but you would have to initiate the 
request through the bureaus yourself. If you wish to obtain additional credit 
reports, those too would need to be obtained directly from the bureaus. 
  
Are there any plans for LifeLock to go public? 
LifeLock is a private company and at this time has no plans to go public. 
  
How long has your company been in existence? 
While the LifeLock system has been in testing and development for more than 
three years, the company first started selling its services in April 2005. 
  
How many customers do you have? 
We are growing very quickly. As of September, 2007, we have more than 
300,000 individual clients. 
  
Who backs up LifeLock financially? 
LifeLock is funded by private equity investment and venture funds. 
 
 
 
How long does it take to obtain my credit reports? 
The credit bureaus have been getting a substantial amount of fraud alert 
requests and may take up to 4-6 weeks for you to receive your report. 
Although you may not have received your credit report, you are still covered 
by LifeLock from the time you signed up. 
  

 
64
Does LifeLock cover my business as well as my personal credit? 
LifeLock can only cover individuals with Social Security numbers. 
 
Who calls me to let me know that someone is attempting to obtain 
credit in my name? 
It will be the creditor who is determining whether to issue a line of credit. 
  
I'm applying for new credit and I’m a client, do I need to call Life 
Lock? 
No, it is not necessary to contact LifeLock. However, if you run into any 
problems or undue delays, call us at any time and we’ll expedite the process 
for you. 
  
I already have alerts on my credit file, what will happen to them when 
I become a client of LifeLock? 
Once your fraud alerts have expired, LifeLock will request on your behalf that 
the fraud alerts are reset and continue to do so as long as you stay a client or 
until you no longer believe that you may become a victim of identity theft. If 
you sign up as a client while these initial alerts are placed you will be covered 
by our guarantee at the time you sign up for the LifeLock service. 
  
Do I need to call you if any of my information changes on my account? 
Yes, contact client services with any account changes. 
  
If someone steals my credit card number, how would LifeLock handle 
this? 
The fraud alerts that LifeLock requests are designed to help prevent someone 
from opening a new line of credit. If someone gets your credit card number, 
first report that credit card as stolen. If charges were placed on that card, your 
credit card company should credit your account for some or all of the charges. 
Should you need assistance resolving the issue, call us and we'll expedite the 
process for you. 
  
Will signing up for LifeLock damage my credit score? 
No, LifeLock will not affect your credit score in any way. 
 
 
  
What questions will the creditor ask me for verification? 
The creditor will ask you questions that only you would know the answer to. 
Most questions will be taken off your credit report. For instance, your previous 
address, who your mortgage is through, what your car payment is, etc. 
 
  

 
65
What if there’s a dispute? Will you handle it for me? 
If there is a dispute, we will hire qualified professionals to do whatever it 
takes, for as long as it takes, to resolve the problem. 
  
If the consumer can do these things by themselves, what is the need 
for LifeLock? 
Convenience and protection; for instance, most people could change the oil in 
their car but don't. LifeLock requests on your behalf that fraud alerts are 
placed on your credit report every 90 days so you don’t have to worry about it. 
However, the most important value is the $1 million dollar Service Guarantee. 
Remember just because you have fraud alerts placed does not guarantee you 
from becoming a victim. 
  
Will I get $1 million if I become a victim of identity theft? 
Not necessarily. We will reimburse you for any money you lose because of the 
theft and we will pay the costs associated with repairing the problem up to $1 
million. 
  
What is the most important part of the LifeLock service? 
The overall peace of mind you’ll get when you know you are completely 
protected from identity theft. 
  
What is the process if my information is taken while a customer?  
You should contact LifeLock immediately. We and our expert partners will take 
care of the rest. 
  
Where does the $1 million come from that covers the guarantee? 
Our service guarantee is funded through funds in reserve accounts, coupled 
with insurance coverage from one of the highest rated insurers in the nation. 
  
Can LifeLock stop someone from removing money from my bank 
account? 
No, but the LifeLock guarantee will replace any funds the bank doesn’t. 
 
 
 
 
  
If credit card companies will pay me back for anything criminals use, 
what does LifeLock do? 
While most credit cards will pay back items purchased by someone else once 
the card is reported stolen, there is still small print and a time period where 
everything must be reported. In any case, the Life Lock guarantee is intended 

 
66
to protect your credit and new cards and or bank accounts that could be 
issued. 
  
If I lost my wallet and someone used my credit cards and drained my 
bank account, what would LifeLock do? 
After you let the bank and credit card companies know your wallet is no longer 
in your possession and they do what they can, LifeLock will reimburse you for 
the rest of your losses. LifeLock can also hire professionals to work on your 
behalf to oversee the process so you are not out any time. 
  
Is it true that I need to sign a power of attorney with LifeLock? 
No. The power of attorney we require is ONLY IF YOUR ID is compromised and 
we need to act on your behalf in instituting our $1 million service guarantee. 
Additionally, the power of attorney we require at that point is very limited and 
only allows us to work on your behalf regarding issues surrounding your 
identity. You may revoke this at any time. 
  
Is there anyone else that does what LifeLock does? 
There are companies similar but no one has the experience, process or 
expertise. No other company provides a $1 million dollar service guarantee. 
  
If I shred papers and check my credit reports, will I be protected? 
Shredding personal papers is a great step to protect your identity, but you 
must understand that your information is everywhere. Your doctor, dentist, 
your college, your bank and your health club are examples of places your 
personal information is stored. 
  
What would you consider to be the two or three most important things 
a consumer can do to protect his/her privacy? 
1. Set fraud alerts! They expire every 90 days, so you will need to continually 
renew them yourself or sign-up for LifeLock (www.lifelock.com) at $10 per 
month and we not only request that the alerts be renewed, we stop most pre-
approved credit card offers and junk mail, and we back it up with a $1 million 
service guarantee. 
2. Check your credit report every three to four months to look for fraudulent 
activity. 
3. Shred your mail and unneeded personal information. 
 
 
  
Does LifeLock monitor credit cards? 
No, credit card companies do a fine job monitoring their own cards. LifeLock 
helps provide protection against someone applying for new credit cards in your 
name. 

 
67
  
 What is the difference between credit card theft and identity theft? 
Credit card theft is when someone steals your credit card and runs up charges. 
Identity theft is when someone steals your personal information (social 
security number, date of birth, name, etc.) and uses it to open a new line of 
credit, gain employment or even establish citizenship. 
  
What's the difference between fraud alerts and a credit freeze? 
A credit freeze locks down all of your personal information making it 
impossible for anyone to open a line of credit in your name, including you. 
There are also fees involved with many credit freezes. When you place a 
freeze, you pay a fee. From there on, if you want to open any new line of 
credit (loan, credit card, cell phone) the freeze must be lifted; there will be a 
fee for that as well. 
  
Currently 33 states and the District of Columbia offer the credit freeze option, 
but if you are not in one of them, you cannot do this. Everyone can subscribe 
to LifeLock. 
  
Why doesn't LifeLock offer credit monitoring? 
Credit monitoring will alert you after someone has stolen or used your identity. 
LifeLock wants to protect you before that ever happens. We have found that 
once our systems are in place, credit monitoring provides no additional benefit. 
  
Why does everyone recommend credit monitoring and not a service 
like LifeLock? 
Credit monitoring is the old technology, but it is something with which people 
are familiar. LifeLock represents the new generation in Identity protection. 
  
Credit watch services have come into prominence thanks to the many 
breaches that have been publicized. What exactly is a credit watch, 
and what benefit does such a service offer the consumer? 
Credit Monitoring (or a watch) is the credit bureau selling the consumer their 
own information. After there has been a change on your credit report, the 
bureau notifies you in 24 to 72 hours that there has been a change. It is then 
the consumer's responsibility to check the information for accuracy and by the 
way, if they find that it is a case of identity theft, the consumer is responsible 
for any losses, expenses and has to spend the time to clean up the mess. The 
Bureaus do nothing to actually prevent the crime of identity theft, nor do they 
help fix the problem. 
 
 
  

 
68
How does a credit watch service work, and are there significant 
differences between the three major services (Experian, TransUnion, 
Equifax)? 
All three work basically the same, but it should be noted that each bureau only 
notifies you when there has been a change on their credit report, not the other 
two. 
  
When an organization offers a free credit watch subscription in 
response to a breach that may have affected a consumer, is the 
service different than what he or she would receive if they subscribed 
on their own? 
Monitoring may give the victim of the data breach a false sense of security. 
Again, the bureaus do nothing to actually stop the crime before it happens and 
do nothing to help after a person has been victimized. They only provide quick 
notification of a change, nothing more. 
  
What is the consumer's responsibility once a credit watch service is 
initiated? Is it a "turn it on and it works" proposition, or must the 
service be actively managed by the consumer to have any real effect? 
The burden is on the consumer. They must check the credit report after they 
have been notified of a change and then they are responsible for cleaning up 
any mess of identity theft. The FTC says it is an average of 177 hours over two 
years, if you can clean it up at all. 
  
Are there hidden costs, dangers, etc. to working with the credit 
agencies? 
What should consumers know that might be otherwise difficult to find out on 
their own? 
Consumers should know that the credit reports you buy will not include any 
"non-match" name and social security numbers. That means that if someone 
steals your social security number for employment, but uses their name, you 
will not see the accounts on your credit report. However, your credit score 
could be affected and lenders would be able to see the data. 
   
Additional Life Lock Info - Go Here 
  
 Use Promo Code Ron on enrollment form to save an additional 10% should you decide to use 
this valuable proactive identity theft service to protect your good name.  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  

 
69
 Resources 
 
Chapter 1 – Article, Ronald E. Hudkins, Jan 2008, no other references. 
Chapter 2 – Introduction by Ronald E. Hudkins, Feb 2008, no other references. 
Chapter 3 – What is Identity Theft – Internet definitions, resources listed      
following individual descriptions. 
Chapter 4 – Identity Theft Statistics as listed by;                                    
Javelin Strategy & Research Survey - February 2007  
Javelin/Better Business Bureau Survey - January 2006 
Javelin/Better Business Bureau Survey - January 2005  
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation - December 2004  
Identity Theft Resource Center - September 2003 
Federal Trade Commission Survey - September 2003 
Gartner Survey - July 2003 
Privacy & American Business Survey - July 2003 
Chapter Five        How Do Thieves Steal an Identity? – Extracted from The 
Federal Trade Commission’s Consumer Information Section, Feb 2008 at 
http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/consumers/about-identity-
theft.html                                                                                                       
Extracts from the Department of Justice Consumer Information Section, Feb 
2008 at http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/fraud/websites/idtheft.html  
Examples of Identity Theft provided by Wikipedia, the free Internet 
encyclopedia, Jan 2008 at 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Identity_theft#Examples  
 
Chapter Six         How Long Can ID Theft Impact You? - Extracted from The 
Federal Trade Commission’s Consumer Information Section, Feb 2008 at  
http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/consumers/about-identity-
theft.html  
 
Chapter Seven    What Can You Do About ID Theft? – Extracted from the 
Department of Justice Consumer Information Section, Feb 2008, at 
http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/fraud/websites/idtheft.html  
 
Chapter 8 – The Official site of the Identity Theft Resource Center, Feb 2008, 
http://www.idtheftcenter.org/artman2/publish/v_fact_sheets/index.shtml 
 
Chapter Nine – The Official site of the Identity Theft Resource Center, Feb 
2008, 
http://www.idtheftcenter.org/artman2/publish/v_templates/index.shtml  
Where you can find the following Sample Letter Templates as needed to 
correct identity theft victimization; 
 
 
 

 
70
Form Letter 117-1 Request a Credit Report for the Deceased 
To request a copy of your deceased love ones credit report. 
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
Form Letter 117-2 When Your Deceased Love One is a Victim of Identity Theft 
A letter form to send to the CRA's when your deceased love one is a victim of identity theft.  
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 
Letter Form 100 - 1 Initial Victim of Identity Theft Statement and Fraudulent Account Information 
Request to Credit Issuers for Merchants 
Send this letter to Merchants who appear on your credit report to request information on the fraudulent 
account that has been opened. 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
Letter Form 100 - 2 Confirmation of Conversation - Letter of Clearance 
Confirmation of Conversation - Letter of Clearance 
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
Letter Form 100-3 To Credit Issuers: Requesting a Fraudulent Inquiry to be Removed 
If an inquiry has been made to your credit report that you did not initiate, this is the letter form to send to that 
credit issuer to request that they remove it from their records.  
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 
Letter Form 115-1 A Letter from the Victim to the Credit Issuer when the imposter will not cooperate 
Letter Form 115-1    When You Know The Imposter 
A Letter from the Victim to the Credit Issuer when the imposter will not cooperate and sign Letter Form 
115-2  
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 
Letter Form 115-2 Imposter Accepting Responsibility for Accounts or Charges 
Letter Form 115-2 - Letter Forms for When You Know the Imposter 
To be written by the imposter accepting responsibility for accounts or charges.  
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 
 
Letter Form 115-3 When Both Parties Reach an Agreement to Resolve the Case 
Letter Form 115-3   When You Know the Imposter 
A Letter to be used when both parties privately reach an agreement with each other to resolve the case. 
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
 
Letter Form 116-1 Collection Agencies Sample Letter to Merchant 
Letter Form 116-1  Collection Agencies Sample Letter to Merchant  
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 

 
71
 
Letter Form 116-2 Collection Agencies Sample Letter 
Letter Form 116-2  Collection Agencies Sample Letter 
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
Chapter 10 – What is an Identity Theft Report – Extracted from the Federal Trade Commission’s Consumer 
Information Section, Jan 2008 at;  
http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/consumers/defend.html#Whatisanidentitytheftreport  
 
Chapter 11 - Comparison of ID Theft Protection Services 
NextAdvisor.com is 
The trusted, independent source for 
Comparing the most valuable new services for Avoiding 
ID Theft and other consumer services 
 
They are located at  
http://www.nextadvisor.com/identity_theft_protection_services/compare.php 
 
 
  
Legal Notice - Reminder 
You may give this book away to your subscribers, friends or customers; offer it 
as a free download from your website, or anything you like.  The only 
restriction is that you not sell this book and must leave all pages, references, 
graphics, banners, links and ownership rights in place.  Another words – Do 
not alter it in any manner! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
72
Recommended Products and Other Services 
Consumer Goods (Food) 
Learn how you can make a perfect cup of coffee or Tea...every 
time...with no messy clean-up 
 
• 
HerbaGreen Teas                                                                                                        
Not your ordinary green tea, HerbaGreen Teas contain a balanced antioxidant 
formula with standardized extracts of carefully selected, wild crafted herbs from the 
mountains of China for optimum therapeutic benefits for you and your entire family! 
Contains NO calories or caffeine. 
• 
PURJAVA HONDURAN DARK ROAST                                                                                                
PurJava liquid coffee concentrate is the easy way to make just the amount of coffee you 
want -- with no waste. Just add a 1/2 tablespoon to 8 ounces of hot water and you've 
instantly got a delicious cup of fresh coffee.       One 8 oz. bottle of PurJava Honduran Dark 
Roast makes 32 (8 oz.) cups of coffee. 
• 
PURJAVA SUMATRA DECAFFEINATED                                                                                   
PurJava liquid coffee concentrate is the easy way to make just the amount of coffee you 
want -- with no waste. Just add a tablespoon to 8 ounces of hot water and you've instantly 
got a delicious cup of fresh coffee.                                                                                                        
One 8 oz. bottle of PurJava Sumatra Decaffeinated makes 16 (8 oz.) cups of coffee.  
Business Owner Advertising 
Great for you, great for your customers! Simply put, Nice Offers can save your 
customers big money – because you, likewise, can save big money by securing 
customers through Nice Offers unique pay-only-for-results advertising system. 
To Learn more about Increasing Customers and Your Bottom Line Profits visit 
http://www.adultwishfoundations.com/customers.html  
Business Owner Merchant Services 
Merchant Services Just Got More Streamlined and Economical! 
Designed as a complete, money-saving transaction solution for merchants, the 
suite of Merchant Services includes credit card processing, debit card 
processing, bad check recovery, check verification, gift cards, and more.  Start 
increasing your profits NOW.  To learn more or to get started please visit; 
http://www.adultwishfoundations.com/credit.html  
 
 

 
73
Health, Wellness, Nutrition and Weight Loss 
 
      
  
Veriuni Advanced Antioxidant with Red Wine Extract  
Our Advanced Antioxidant with Red Wine Extract helps safeguard your immune 
system, retard the aging process, and protect your health. Research has shown 
antioxidants also support heart health and eye health - both important to older adults. 
One dose delivers 500 mg of Vitamin C, 400 IU of Vitamin E, and 30 mg of red wine 
extract.  
  
https://www.ezinfocenter.com/9999222/Department.vstore?id=34#item1565  
 
 
Veriuni Advanced Joint Support  
Veriuni Advanced Joint Support contains FOUR of today's best selling joint health 
neutraceuticals to promote better joint health, maintain strong muscles and muscle 
tone, increase connective tissue regeneration and repair, and help with muscular 
energy (ATP) levels and joint function and mobility.  
https://www.ezinfocenter.com/9999222/Department.vstore?id=34#item1565  
 
 
Veriuni Advanced Weight Loss  
Advanced Weight Loss is the perfect "full-meal" replacement drink. Advanced Weight 
Loss will help you lose weight with 10g of protein per serving for lean muscles and a 
full array of vitamins, minerals, and calcium to replace any well balanced meal. Only 
214 calories per serving in 8 oz. of skim milk. Available in three delicious flavors: 
Chocolate, Vanilla, & Strawberry.  
https://www.ezinfocenter.com/9999222/Department.vstore?id=34#item1565  
 
 
Veriuni Advanced Whey Protein  
Veriuni's Advanced Whey Protein is the overwhelming choice for athletes, dieters, and 
weekend recreational warriors. Critical to any individual looking to build and maintain 
muscle mass. Available in four delicious flavors: Vanilla, Chocolate, Strawberry and 
Banana.  
https://www.ezinfocenter.com/9999222/Department.vstore?id=34#item1565 
 
 

 
74
 
  
Veriuni Antioxidant Plus with Grape Seed Extract  
Veriuni Antioxidant Plus is one of the most powerful antioxidant formulas available 
today to combat "free radicals" that can cause oxidative stress leading to premature 
aging and development of various ailments. 
https://www.ezinfocenter.com/9999222/Department.vstore?id=34#item1565 
 
  
Veriuni Creatine - Micronized Creatine Citrus  
Veriuni Creatine is a blended, water-soluble form of creatine. Creatine Citrus has 
90% absorption compared to Creatine Monohydrate's 40%. Creatine is a naturally 
occurring metabolite that helps recycle the body's supply of ATP for increased energy 
output, strength and endurance.  
https://www.ezinfocenter.com/9999222/Department.vstore?id=34#item1565  
 
 
Veriuni Diet Assist CLA - Conjugated Linoleic Acid  
Veriuni Diet Assist CLA works by reducing fat and increasing muscle. CLA is both an 
appetite suppressant and fat reducer and can help people to lose weight and keep it 
off.  
Daily supplementation with Veriuni Diet Assist CLA can result in 1 to 2 pounds per week 
of weight loss. 
https://www.ezinfocenter.com/9999222/Department.vstore?id=34#item1565  
 
Veriuni Ginseng Energy!  
This formulation definitely will give you an energy boost and give you a heightened 
sense of awareness. The formulation is designed to improve circulation and promote 
oxygen levels in the brain. Tablets contain Siberian Ginseng, Kola Nut Extract, Lysine, 
Phenylalanine, Glycine, and Cyanocobalamin. 
https://www.ezinfocenter.com/9999222/Department.vstore?id=34#item1565  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
75
 
 
 
Veriuni Joint Health  
Veriuni Joint Health is a nutraceutical that promotes joint health with a highly 
absorbable form of glucosamine, which nutritionally supports connective tissue and 
joint structure and function and is a basic building block for cartilage, synovial fluid, 
and other connective tissues. 
https://www.ezinfocenter.com/9999222/Department.vstore?id=34#item1565  
 
Veriuni Natural Digestion - Digestive Enzyme Aid  
In order to restore health and well-being to digestive problems, food (plant) enzymes 
are used to improve digestion and absorption of essential nutrients. Enzymes are an 
important link in stamina, energy level, utilizing vitamins and minerals and boost the 
natural immune system. 
https://www.ezinfocenter.com/9999222/Department.vstore?id=34#item1565  
 
 
Veriuni Super 25 Multivitamin & Minerals  
Our Veriuni Super 25 offers the most complete daily supplement, with 25 essential 
vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants. This vitamin is designed specifically to bolster 
immune systems. It contains unique ingredients and is loaded with the powerful 
antioxidant CoQ10, which plays a critical role in the production of energy within each 
cell in the human body and can help promote weight loss.  
https://www.ezinfocenter.com/9999222/Department.vstore?id=34#item1565  
 
 
Veriuni Thermo! Fat-Burner Formula  
Veriuni Thermo! is a NON EPHEDRA Thermogenic agent that provides unique 
ingredients to promote weight loss and fat burning safely. Pure Thermo Burn will give 
you energy and appetite suppressant activity. 
https://www.ezinfocenter.com/9999222/Department.vstore?id=34#item1565  
 
Fill life with Veriuni Nutritional Products. Give peace of mind that you are 
investing wisely in you and  your family's wellness and nutrition. Making Health 
for the future is a specific purpose of Veriuni in cleaning products too. 
 

 
76
 
 
Internet Shopping Mall 
 
MaxMalls organizes hundreds of the Web's biggest and best stores. New stores 
will be added regularly. Many additional features are planned to create the 
optimum online shopping experience.  To tour the mall businesses that all offer 
secure check outs visit; 
  
http://www.adultwishfoundations.com/mall.html  
 
Coupons, Discounts – Savings! 
Nice Offers works directly with merchants all over the world to create exciting 
and exclusive offers for you, which are made available at this Nice Offers 
Website. 
Nice Offers makes it easy for everyone everywhere to find great moneysaving 
deals on specific products and services you're looking for, while also providing 
a fun and exciting way to discover new and different products, services, 
businesses, restaurants, and more.  See how you can save visit; 
http://www.adultwishfoundations.com/offers.html  
Home Based Business Free Opportunity 
SFI is a totally FREE Home Business to join. And there's absolutely NO 
OBLIGATION. SFI provides you with FREE Websites, a FREE course that 
teaches you everything you need to know to make money online ($295 value), 
and hundreds of exciting products to stock your online store shelves with.  
Start earning an additional income now – sign up here; 
http://www.adultwishfoundations.com/free.html  
Needed Education for Those Running a Home Based Business 
The International Association of Home Business Entrepreneurs IAHBE is an 
organization that champions the home-business lifestyle and provides its 
members with a multitude of resources designed to achieve maximum home-
business success. Learn what they are offering by visiting; 
http://www.adultwishfoundations.com/IAHBE.html  
 

 
77
 

