www.ebook3000.com

How to Run a Successful Design Business
www.ebook3000.com

For Don.  
Without him, none of this would be possible.
www.ebook3000.com

How to Run a 
Successful Design 
Business
The New Professional Practice
Shan Preddy
with contributions from other design experts

II
© Shan Preddy and Contributors 2011
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,  mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
Published by
Gower Publishing Limited
Wey Court East
Union Road
Farnham
Surrey 
GU9 7PT
England
Gower Publishing Company
Suite 420
101 Cherry Street
Burlington 
VT 05401-4405
USA
www.gowerpublishing.com
Shan Preddy has asserted her moral right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 
1988, to be identified as the editor of this work.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
 How to run a successful design business : the new 
   professional practice.  
   1. Design services--Management. 
   I. Preddy, Shan. 
   745.4'068-dc22 
   ISBN: 978-0-566-09189-6 (pbk)
	
978-1-4094-1763-7 (ebk) 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Preddy, Shan.
  How to run a successful design business : the new professional practice / Shan Preddy.
       p. cm.
  Includes index.
  ISBN 978-0-566-09189-6 (hardback) -- ISBN 978-1-4094-1763-7 (ebook)
  1.  Industrial management. 2.  Success in business. 3.  Industrial design.  I. Title. 
  HD31.P668 2011
  745.2068--dc22
2010032973

Important Notice
The material contained in How to Run a Successful Design Business has been provided 
by a number of authors. The Editor and Publishers have taken care to check its 
content but they cannot be held responsible for the views and opinions of the 
authors or for the accuracy of their information. Several of the chapters address 
legal and financial issues and while the guidance and examples given will help you 
prepare for consultations they should not be treated as substitutes for specialist 
advice in specific situations. Make sure that the plans you make and the decisions 
you take are appropriate for your own business and within the current law of the 
country (or countries) in which you operate.

This page has been left blank intentionally

Contents
Reviews for How to Run a Successful Design Business
xv
Foreword by David Kester
xvii
Preface by Shan Preddy
xix
Section One	
The Industry
1.1	
The Arrival by Jeremy Myerson
3
The design industry in context, with a look at its roots and its early pioneers.
1.2	
The Present by Shan Preddy
9
The shape, size and make-up of the current UK design industry.
1.3	
The Global Context by Michael Thomson
15
The global design industry and support policies and practices.
1.4	
The Client Perspective by Shan Preddy
23
The role and value of design from the clients’ viewpoint.
1.5	
The Future by James Woudhuysen
27
The economic, regional and technological trends affecting design.
Section Two	
The Business
2.1	
The Vision and Values by Shan Preddy
35
Knowing where you want your business to be, and what’s important to you.
2.2	
The Culture by Shan Preddy
39
What does your business feel like to work in and to visit?
2.3	
The Product by Shan Preddy
43
Assessing and developing your core offer and what you do.
2.4	
The Business Journey by Adrian Rasdall
47
Strategies for developing and growing your business.

viii
How to Run a Successful Design Business
2.5	
The Business Structure by Peers de Trensé
53
Organising your teams: who does what?
2.6	
The Money (Part One) by Mandy Merron
59
Financial planning and investment.
2.7	
The Money (Part Two) by Gary Baxter
67
Managing the finances.
2.8	
The Law by Jo Evans
75
Forms of company, partnership agreements and employment contracts.
2.9	
The Intellectual Property by Darrell Stuart-Smith
81
Your intellectual property and your clients.
2.10	
The Management Issues by James Woudhuysen
87
Researching, understanding and communicating what’s happening in the market.
2.11	
The Validation by Shan Preddy
93
The various accreditations and qualifications, and their benefits.
2.12	
The Memberships by Shan Preddy
97
Joining design and client sector associations and organisations.
2.13	
The Network by Phil Jones
101
Building a network of people and talents.
2.14	
The Working Environment by Shan Preddy
105
Creating your own space.
2.15	
The Neverending Story by Shan Preddy
109
Identifying and sustaining improvements to your business.
Section Three	
The People
3.1	
The Management Team by Shan Preddy
115
Owners, directors, managers: how leadership works in practice.
3.2	
The Creatives by Rod Petrie
119
Managing and motivating your creative talent.
3.3	
The Client Facers by Jan Casey
123
Working within existing client relationships.

ix
contents
3.4	
The Hunter-Gatherers by Blair Enns
127
Different models for business development.
3.5	
The Farmer-Growers by Shan Preddy
131
Proactively cultivating relationships with your clients.
3.6	
The Strategists by Ann Binnie
135
The role and involvement of planners in the design process.
3.7	
The Orgs and Ops by Shan Preddy
139
Office administration, management and organisation.
3.8	
The Incoming Resource by Madelaine Cooper
143
Who to employ and how to recruit them.
3.9	
The Ongoing Resource by Kim Briggs
147
Staff induction and retention, including job descriptions, appraisals and training.
3.10	
The Outgoing Resource by Kim Briggs
151
Handling departures, redundancy and dismissal.
3.11	
The Training by Liz Lydiate
155
Approaches to formal, informal and professional training.
3.12	
The Development by Rod Petrie
161
Coaching, mentoring and motivating individuals and teams.
3.13	
The Rewards by Mandy Merron
165
Selecting and using rewards and incentives to improve staff performance.
3.14	
The Cavalry by Madelaine Cooper
171
Calling on non-execs, consultants and other outside help.
3.15	
The Self-Incentive by Kevin Duncan
175
Ideas for self-motivation and management.
Section Four	
The Income
4.1	
The Marketing Strategy by Shan Preddy
181
How to develop your positioning, target markets and propositions.
4.2	
The Marketing Plan by Shan Preddy
189
Planning and implementing your marketing activities.


How to Run a Successful Design Business
4.3	
The Geography by Christine Losecaat
195
The practicalities of working internationally.
4.4	
The Reputation by Julia James
199
Building and sustaining your profile and reputation.
4.5	
The Media by Lynda Relph-Knight
205
How to engage with editors and journalists.
4.6	
The Social Media by Gemma Went
209
Vehicles and techniques for developing a social media presence.
4.7	
The Sales Process by Shan Preddy
213
Encounters, credentials meetings, pitching.
4.8	
The Pitch by Jonathan Kirk
219
Planning and delivering successful pitches.
4.9	
The No Pitch by Blair Enns
223
Alternatives to competitive pitching.
4.10	
The Record by Shan Preddy
227
Managing marketing databases and measuring performance.
4.11	
The Procurement by Tina Fegent
233
Dealing with clients’ procurement processes.
4.12	
The Prequal by Simon May
241
Responding to screening and pre-qualification processes.
4.13	
The Roster by Simon May
245
Framework agreements and preferred supplier arrangements.
4.14	
The Client Journey by Shan Preddy
249
Balancing client lifecycles and developing existing clients’ business.
4.15	
The Client Experience by Shan Preddy
255
Satisfying and retaining clients (and knowing when to fire them).
Section Five	
The Work
5.1	
The Terms by Barry Morris
263
Approaches to terms of business for clients and suppliers.

xi
contents
5.2	
The Knowledge by Liz Lydiate
269
Building a balance of commercial, technical and people skills.
5.3	
The Brief by Kate Blandford
277
Designing, developing and assessing client briefs.
5.4	
The Projects by Lorna Dallas-Conte
283
The basic structure and skills of managing design projects.
5.5	
The Research by Don Preddy
291
Using quantitative, qualitative and desk research.
5.6	
The Meetings by Sean Blair
295
How to improve your internal and client meetings.
5.7	
The Feedback by Shan Preddy
301
How well are you doing? Surveys and reviews.
5.8	
The Proof by Deborah Dawton
305
Understanding, improving and using design effectiveness.
5.9	
The Recognition by Stef Brown
309
Winning and exploiting the (right) awards.
5.10	
The Planet by Sophie Thomas
315
Practical techniques for sustainable design.
Section Six	
The Designers
300million
325
999 Design Group
326
Blue Marlin
328
Boxer
329
Checkland Kindleysides
330
Dalziel and Pow Design Consultants
331
Design Bridge
332
Dragon Rouge
333
Elmwood
334
JKR
335
Living Group
336
Media Square
338
Rufus Leonard
339
Seymourpowell
340
Small Back Room
341

xii
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Start
342
Tayburn
343
The Alloy
344
The Team
345
Uniform
347
Section Seven	
The Clients
Musgrave Retail Partners GB, Jemima Bird
351
Land Securities Group PLC, Anna Chapman
352
HM Revenue & Customs, Julia Coulson
353
Virgin Atlantic Airways, Joe Ferry
354
Innocent, Dan Germain
355
Cisco Systems, Clive Grinyer
356
British Library, Penny Hamilton
356
Eurostar, Richard Hill
357
Waitrose, Maggie Hodgetts
358
Transport for London, Jon Hunter
359
Royal Mail, Marcus James
360
British Heart Foundation, Louise Kyme
361
Chivas Brothers Limited, Neil Macdonald
361
NHS Institute for Innovation and Improvement, Lynne Maher
362
BT, David Mercer
363
Science Museum, Tim Molloy
364
UKTV, Matt Scarff
365
Habitat, Theo Williams
366
Ford Motor Company, David Woodhouse
366
Xerox Europe, Les Wynn
367
Section Eight	
The Design Bodies
British Design Innovation (BDI)
371
D&AD
372
Design Business Association (DBA)
373
Design Council
374
Design Management Institute (DMI)
375
Design Partners
376
Design Wales
377
New Designers
378
Royal College of Art (RCA)
379
Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA)
379
The Sorrell Foundation
380
UK Design Alliance
381

xiii
contents
Section Nine	
The Reference Library
1	
UK Design Membership Bodies
385
2	
International Design Membership Bodies
385
3	
UK Design and Creative Sector Support
386
4	
UK Business Organisations
387
5	
Business Support and Information
387
6	
Other Useful Organisations
388
7	
UK Design Exhibitions, Events
389
8	
Award Schemes
390
9	
Like To Know More?
392
10	 What Else Have We Written?
396
Section Ten	
The Contributors
Gary Baxter
401
Ann Binnie
402
Sean Blair
402
Kate Blandford
403
Kim Briggs
403
Stef Brown
404
Jan Casey
404
Madelaine Cooper
405
Lorna Dallas-Conte
405
Deborah Dawton
406
Peers De Trensé
406
Kevin Duncan
407
Blair Enns
407
Jo Evans
407
Tina Fegent
408
Louis Hellman
408
Julia James
409
Phil Jones
409
Jonathan Kirk
410
Christine Losecaat
410
Liz Lydiate
411
Simon May
411
Mandy Merron
412
Barry Morris
412
Jeremy Myerson
412
Rod Petrie
413
Don Preddy
413
Shan Preddy
414
Adrian Rasdall
414

xiv
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Lynda Relph-Knight
415
Darrell Stuart-Smith
415
Sophie Thomas
415
Michael Thomson
416
Gemma Went
416
James Woudhuysen
417
Index
419

Reviews of  
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Occasionally a book is published that you know you will keep not in the bookcase but on the 
top of your desk. A book that will get well-thumbed and dirty with use, with pages curled 
up, the spine broken, passages and phrases underlined, re-read many times, copied, quoted 
and memorised. This is such a book! Shan Preddy has brought together some of the brightest 
minds in the design industry and distilled a lifetime’s experience as consultant and coach to 
the stars of our profession. The result is a vital reference tool for anyone who works in the 
field of design, stuffed with clear and practical advice. This is a book you cannot afford to 
be without.
Rowland Heming, Business Development Director, Design Board, Belgium
Doing creative work with impact needs headspace and optimism. Without the underpinning 
of a well-managed business, design business owners – the creative linchpins – are lost to 
circular conversations about office supplies and what went wrong. It’s never too soon to take 
your business seriously. Help is at hand from a dream team of experienced practitioners. Don’t 
anyone let them go into business together.
Joe Heapy, Director, Engine Service Design, UK
Shan Preddy’s new publication is a bible for design business practice. She and her contributors 
cover all the basics for growing your firm, avoiding pitfalls and offering some surprising 
insights that might otherwise be lost. Everyone in the industry should read this invaluable 
contribution to success. It will put pounds in your pocket!
Celestine Phelan, Chairman, Event Communications, UK
This is an uplifting affirmation of the power of design in business, combining a clear view 
of the big picture with a strong focus on the important details that make design such a great 
business to be in. As always, Shan Preddy gets right to the heart of the matter; with exactly 
the kind of insightful business advice that designers need to know and, more importantly, put 
into practice. 
Jim Orkney, Managing Director, Kinneir Dufort, UK
It’s not very often a book comes along that is as relevant as this one. It is packed with 
information and guidance on every aspect of running a design business. Its success lies in 
the variety and cross-section of information provided by the specialist practitioners Shan 
Preddy has invited to contribute to the book. Their in-depth knowledge delivers great nuggets 
of consultancy advice that would take you years to accumulate. The book does a great job of 
reminding you of all the good things you’ve ever learnt; it provides reassurance that much of 
what you’ve implemented (or tried to) is right; most importantly, it provides the inspiration 
and confidence to go on to achieve ever greater things. 
Caroline Hagen, Managing Director, Reach, UK
•
•
•
•
•

Reviews of  
How to Run a Successful Design Business
A well informed – and at times surprising – wealth of information which, whilst acknowledging 
extremely well the traits of the design sector, provides sound advice for any modern business. 
The book explores so many important facets, which you can easily dip in and out of, and the 
use of quotes at the start of each chapter add an interesting mix of humour and philosophy.
Adryan Bell, workplace consultant and adviser, formerly Director, DEGW
Maintaining an equilibrium between customers, team work and design quality is a delicate 
balancing act at which many fail and few master brilliantly. A book that explains how these 
elements are connected was long overdue; Shan Preddy has now written it. Please read it. It 
belongs on every designer’s bedside table.
Jean Jacques Schaffner, Founder, Schaffner & Conzelmann, Switzerland
The more we designers understand and value the business world, the more impact we can 
make with our ideas. This book has some very impressive contributors. It is an interesting 
read and a useful book to have on your shelf for ongoing reference. 
Deborah Szebeko, Founder, Think Public, UK
A ‘must read’ for anyone who wants to follow their passion in design whilst putting food on 
the table. Shan Preddy has managed to collect the hard-learned experiences of some of the 
best in the business. I wish I’d had this years ago when I started out: it would have saved a 
lot of grief.
John Corcoran, Director, Wire Design, UK
•
•
•
•

Foreword
When you’re getting to grips with graphic design software, honing your modelling 
capabilities and mastering 3D drawing, no one mentions hiring and firing, profit 
and loss and client meetings. But maybe they should. Design Council research 
suggests the average design business is a little like a butterfly – very eye-catching 
while it lasts but prone to a short lifespan. In some of the disciplines we surveyed, 
as many as 45 per cent had been trading for under three years, and most lacked a 
long-term perspective, which tells its own story.
When design businesses shut up shop, it might be because key people move on 
and can’t be replaced. But often they close because they have to. And the reason 
they have to is a simple lack of business skills. All that carefully nurtured design 
craft goes unused until the next opportunity to open a studio comes along. Very 
draining, very frustrating.
Office leases, accounts and billing are boring compared to the crackle of creativity, 
but unfortunately you can’t get by without a working knowledge of them. They’re 
part of being a professional designer. Knowing how to pitch ideas, bring a project in 
on budget and manage a client’s whims are all vital too.
But don’t mistake business savvy for drudgery. It makes you a better designer. 
The more you know about business, the better you’ll be at seeing the world from 
your clients’ point of view, working out what they need and spotting opportunities 
for them. Do enough of that and you will win their confidence and form a really 
effective partnership where everyone wins.
So this book is good news. Whether you’re starting out or an experienced 
veteran, the wisdom in these pages will help to make being in business a positive 
experience.
David Kester
Chief Executive, Design Council
www.designcouncil.org.uk

This page has been left blank intentionally

Preface
How do you run a successful design business? That’s the question this book aims to 
answer. It contains advice, information, suggestions, guidelines and top tips, not to 
mention a number of thought-provoking opinions.
It’s a big subject, so I asked a big group of people to help me to write about 
it. They are all experts in their different fields. Some, like me, are advisers and 
consultants to the design sector. Others are clients, practitioners or representatives 
of design organisations. A huge thank you to all of them.
I would also like to thank the Design Council for their continuous support; the 
editorial and production teams at Gower for their expertise; and my husband and 
business partner, Don Preddy, who worked on the book with me throughout its life 
from initial idea to final implementation.
Louis Hellman has generously allowed us to use some of his wonderful cartoons; 
they originally appeared in Design Week. And this book would not have been possible 
without Preddy&Co’s clients worldwide who, over the years, have demonstrated  to 
me how to run successful design businesses: thank you.
This book will give you the knowledge and tools you need to run a successful 
design business. I hope you enjoy reading it as much as we did writing it.
Shan Preddy
Partner, PREDDY&CO
www.preddy.co.uk

This page has been left blank intentionally

Section One: 
The Industry

This page has been left blank intentionally

1.1 
The arrival
Jeremy Myerson
Art without industry is guilt; industry without art is brutality.
John Ruskin (1819–1900), art critic and social thinker
Design and the human dimension
Every object and experience in our world today has been designed. Professional 
designers make fundamental decisions about function, shape, colour, form, style, 
material, layout, assembly and production to enable us to understand, use and enjoy 
modern products, communications 
and environments. Knowledge and 
skills may vary between different 
design fields but, essentially, the 
work of designers can be defined 
as influencing the relationship 
between people and the objects, 
messages and places they encounter 
every day.
This 
‘human 
dimension’ 
to design is highly significant. 
It explains why design is such 
an important business tool for 
company profitability, and why it is 
a social lever to improve the quality 
of life. It accounts for the prominent 
role of design businesses in Britain, 
which today has one of the largest 
and most sophisticated design industries in the world.
But how did a country which has leaned more to the literary than the visual 
throughout its cultural history develop such a breadth and depth of design expertise? 
For answers, we need to look back to the roots of the design industry and explore 
the pioneers of the past.
•


How to Run a Successful Design Business
Cradle of the Industrial Revolution
British design owes its illustrious position to deep historical roots stretching right 
back to the tradition of craft creativity evident in the stained glass windows, royal 
regalia, flags, heraldry and tapestries of medieval times. However, the true origins 
of the modern design industry can be traced to the first stirrings of the Industrial 
Revolution in the mid-eighteenth century, to the foundation of the Royal Society 
for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce, the RSA, in 1754, and 
to the pioneering work of ceramics manufacturer Josiah Wedgwood (1730–95).
Wedgwood’s family ceramics business was the first in the world to mass-produce 
goods. It pioneered production techniques and a division of labour that anticipated 
Henry Ford’s model of manufacture by 150 years. Wedgwood used simple, practical 
design to target a new consumer group: the expanding middle class. His famous 
Black Basalt teapot, for example, was produced to show off the bleached white 
hands in vogue among women at that time.
In the same period, the commercial and cultural impact of professional interior 
design was being felt for the first time through the activities of the Classicist architect 
Robert Adam (1728–92). During the 1770s, Adam’s design business employed 2,000 
people. According to records of the time, his senior craftsmen – cabinet-makers, 
sculptors and decorative artists – did rather well financially out of his patronage 
by the royal and the rich. Some of Adam’s ornate interior designs survive today at 
Osterley Park and Syon Park in west London. His reputation is of a British designer 
who combined creative flair with business acumen. Many great British design names 
were destined to follow in his footsteps.
The 1851 Great Exhibition
A century later, following rapid industrialisation and the consolidation of Wedgwood’s 
achievements, design attention was focused on the 1851 Great Exhibition in Hyde 
Park, as Britain embarked on a period in which its mastery of industrial techniques 
would famously make it ‘the workshop of the world’. Prominent in this period was 
Christopher Dresser (1834–1904), widely acknowledged as the first industrial design 
consultant of the modern age.
Dresser was a Glasgow-born botanist who turned to design after an unsuccessful 
application for the Chair of Botany at University College, London. From 1862 
onwards, he gradually built up a large and thriving freelance practice, designing 
glass, ceramics, tableware and wallpapers for popular use. Tile maker Doulton’s, a 
supplier to Liberty’s of London, and Sheffield silver plate company Elkington’s were 
among his clients.
Within a decade, Dresser was able to boast that ‘there is not a branch of 
manufacture I do not design patterns for’. He can be seen today as an early example 
of a designer who was commissioned to create new designs specifically to boost sales 
for a company. Although his work was largely based on the metaphors of botany, 


the arrival
he became increasingly interested in geometric forms and in the possibilities of the 
machine-made rather than handcrafted design.
As a counter-balance to this, another great designer of the late-nineteenth 
century, William Morris (1834–96), led the Arts & Crafts Movement in defiance 
of the machine and argued for a return to the medieval craft guild. Morris was 
ultimately to be disappointed. The machine was to dominate design thinking in 
the early years of the twentieth century, at a time when artistic movements were 
subject to intense change.
The Modern Movement
Increasingly, design in Britain began to divorce itself from arts and crafts and became 
an activity associated with mass production and mass marketing. This change was 
reinforced by the impact of the Modern Movement in design after World War One, 
with its emphasis on machine-like forms to sweep away the bourgeois ornament of 
the old order and express a new, egalitarian social purpose.
Professional designers saw their role as interpreting and refining the new 
industrial technologies of the era for commercial use. They became as fascinated 
and inspired by man-made automobiles and turbines as Victorian artists had been 
by studying the natural environment.
Modernist design was an import from influential Bauhaus art school in Germany 
in the 1930s, as Bauhaus pioneers such as Walter Gropius and Marcel Breuer fled to 
Britain from the Nazis. The Bauhaus would go on to claim an impact on post-war 
British design practice and education in terms of promoting a core ideology. But this 
wasn’t the only external catalyst to development. During the twentieth century, 
British designers synthesised a range of historical and international influences – 
including American and Scandinavian design – to create their own special mix of 
design.
Technical developments, especially in new materials, were also a key factor, 
from early plastics such as Bakelite in the 1920s and 1930s, which gave designers an 
expressive new material, to new prefabricated building techniques, which acted as 
a catalyst for modern architectural ideas.
Influence of the New York pioneers
When two UK designers Milner Gray (1899–1997) and Misha Black (1910–77) 
established Britain’s first modern design consultancy, Design Research Unit, in 1943, 
they freely acknowledged their debt not only to the material technology rapidly 
advanced during World War Two, but also to the pioneering New York design firms 
of Raymond Loewy, Henry Dreyfuss, Walter Dorwin Teague and Norman Bel Geddes 
which had thrived during the 1930s.


How to Run a Successful Design Business
In America, a design industry with distinctive characteristics had already 
emerged; publicity-conscious design consultants charged companies substantial 
fees to devise new products, environments and communications. Their methods 
entailed linking consumer psychology and advancing technology to the traditional 
design skills of thinking, drawing and visualising. Their approach was unashamedly 
commercial, in sharp contrast to the more purist and elevated concerns of the 
Bauhaus masters.
Design Research Unit (which created the landmark British Rail corporate 
identity programme) was based on this American model and anticipated the future 
multidisciplinary shape of the British design industry. Importantly, its emergence 
coincided with an era after World War Two in which sleepy British industry slowly 
began to realise that it could no longer rely on large, captive Empire markets and be 
aloof from design trends from across the Atlantic.
Post-war optimism
The 1951 Festival of Britain set an optimistic post-war tone for Britain’s design 
potential, showcasing the vibrant work of young designers and architects. Names 
such as Hugh Casson, James Gardner and a very young Terence Conran emerged 
from this event. But this proved a false dawn during the often grey and gloomy 
1950s and it was not until the 1960s that Britain fully shook off a period of austerity 
to become a world centre for Pop art, design and music.
Many of the consultancies destined to lead Britain’s design industry – for 
example, Wolff Olins, and the forerunner to Pentagram, Fletcher Forbes Gill – were 
first established during that exciting decade. Much design work previously done 
by technicians, printers and shopfitters was at last in the hands of professional 
designers dedicated to developing and publicising their skills.
In the 1970s, British designers began to sell their design expertise overseas, 
although with mixed success, against a background of economic uncertainty at 
home and abroad. The world’s first global design firm, American-owned Unimark 
International, created the corporate identity for Ford before collapsing amid the 
repercussions of industrial unrest of the early 1970s.
Design boom of the 1980s
Despite such setbacks, the trend towards globalisation accelerated in the 1980s as 
British design companies set up international networks to meet demand from multi-
national clients. The background this time was of more dynamic and sustained 
economic growth: rapid growth in property prices, high street spending and 
corporate mergers and acquisitions all helped to fuel a British design boom.
Several UK designers became wealthy entrepreneurs, their design firms publicly 
listed on the Stock Market, among them Rodney Fitch and Michael Peters. By 1988, 


the arrival
British design had expanded spectacularly, even investing more than £70 million in 
the US design market through a series of takeovers of American design firms. Before 
long, the entire sector began to overheat.
In the recession that followed, there was painful contraction in the design 
industry. The 100 largest design firms in the UK trimmed their workforces by nearly 
half. Yet fee income was not similarly reduced; by the early 1990s, the use of new 
labour-saving computer technology was enabling design practices to produce more 
work with fewer people.
Power of the creative industries
Gradually, during the 1990s, the design industry nursed itself back to robust health. 
A combination of a common digital platform and the rise of global brands allowed 
British design consultants back into the game on favourable terms. Design was 
essential to the marketing mix and at the same time important to broader cultural 
debates about the future of our cities, the environmental cost of production and 
social inclusion. By the late 1990s, the Labour Government could claim that Britain 
was a ‘design workshop for the world’, its historical echo sending a message about 
the growing economic power of the creative industries.
From 2000 onwards, all of these themes would be developed at breakneck speed 
with sustainable and inclusive design rising to the fore in the face of growing social 
challenges. Today, the core business areas of product, graphic and environmental 
design are reframed in the context of new digital technology, which makes interaction 
design central to product development, web communication an essential part of 
the graphic armoury and a digital layer part of every environmental project.
There is also an industry-wide concern to measure the effectiveness of design, 
to isolate and monitor its impact on business performance, in much the same way 
that marketing and advertising agencies track their commercial effectiveness.
Forged from disparate roots
With the benefit of hindsight, it is possible to see that today’s British design industry 
is forged from disparate roots in art, craft, architecture, marketing and engineering. 
It has distilled the best qualities of the adjacent professions from which its core 
disciplines have emerged.
Design draws its:
skill, vision, form-giving and lateral thinking from art and craft;
focus on planning, project management and social responsibility from 
architecture;
boldness of communication, spirit of entrepreneurship, consumer psychology 
and emphasis on meeting business objectives from advertising and marketing;
•
•
•


How to Run a Successful Design Business
commitment to invention, technique, process and use of materials from 
engineering and science.
Design is a hybrid profession, freely borrowing techniques and vocabularies 
from other areas, but that is what makes it such a fascinating field in which to 
work. The design industry in Britain is not just built on the rich pattern of historical 
experience: it is supported by the largest and most comprehensive system of design 
education and training in the world.
Pentagram co-founder Alan Fletcher once described design as ‘a mental utensil’, 
a practical tool but also a way of thinking. The pioneers of Britain’s design business 
have been true to that idea.
•

1.2 
The present
Shan Preddy
I’m looking for a lot of men who have an infinite capacity to not know what can’t be done.
Henry Ford (1863–1947), automobile industrialist
What shape are we in?
We can be accused in the UK of being blinkered and over-confident about our design 
prowess. We sometimes imagine that we are above comparison with the rest of the 
world, that we are as good as it gets. We are not; we face many genuine and robust 
threats from other countries, and we are nowhere near as strong and inviolable as 
we like to think we are. But we are not a cottage industry either. We are a significant, 
growing and rapidly maturing business sector.
Mapping design can be problematic, and the available data can be a bit muddy: 
our still relatively young and rapidly changing industry doesn’t always fit neatly 
into existing categories, and reports inevitably lag some time behind data collection. 
We also have to deal with the ongoing 
problem of what exactly constitutes 
‘design’. However, even if the picture isn’t 
quite crystal clear yet, visibility is certainly 
improving.
Just how big is the UK design industry 
today? Are we growing or shrinking? How 
many consultancies are there? How many 
people work in design? Statistics don’t 
always provide the most gripping reading, 
but here are some that are worth knowing 
and using when you talk to your clients, 
your colleagues and the bank manager.
Taking measurements
The UK creative industries are valued at almost £60 billion with average growth 
over the ten-year period 1997–2007 running at 5 per cent a year compared with 3 
•

10
How to Run a Successful Design Business
per cent for the economy as a whole. This data excludes design; if it was included, 
the figure would be substantially higher.
Design itself contributes an estimated £6.8 billion Gross Value Added (GVA) to the 
UK economy each year. It is a substantial and growing business sector in its own right. 
Including consultancies, freelancers and in-house units, our total 2009 income totalled 
£15 billion; in 2005, a turnover figure of £11.6 billion was reported. This indicates a 
growth of 29 per cent while, for comparison, general inflation for the same period was 
15 per cent. Design consultancies accounted for 51 per cent (£7.6 billion) of income, 
freelancers 24 per cent (£3.6 billion) and in-house units 25 per cent (£3.8 billion).
We are well-populated, and getting more so. Total design employment is 232,000, 
with 82,500 in consultancies, 65,900 freelancers and 83,600 in in-house units. This 
is a 29 per cent increase on the equivalent 2005 figure.
We have a lot of consultancies. There are 10,800 design consultancies in the 
UK alone, and although this represents a 13 per cent fall from the equivalent 2005 
figure of 12,450, overall fee income and employment numbers are up; this suggests 
that, on average, consultancies are each employing more people than before.
We are a dynamic sector, constantly launching new firms and merging others. 
Just under a quarter of design consultancies, 24 per cent, have been in business for 
fewer than three years; 37 per cent if freelancers and in-house units are included. 
However, to counter-balance that, almost 20 per cent have been in operation for 
more than 15 years.
We have a consultancy sector composed largely of very small businesses. 60 per 
cent employ fewer than five people; 27 per cent between five and nine, and 11 per 
cent between ten and 49. Only 2 per cent employ more than 50 people. Some clients 
have departments which are bigger than many of our consultancies. We are, however, 
broadly in line with the national picture of all employers in all industries: BIS, the 
Department for Business Innovation and Skills, estimates that 95 per cent of all 
enterprises in the UK employ fewer than ten people, and 99 per cent fewer than 50.
We also have a lot of in-house design units. At an estimated 6,500, over a quarter 
of organisations which employ more than 100 people have such in-house teams. 
59 per cent of them are in the private sector, with the remainder in the public and 
not-for-profit sectors.
	
DCMS (Department for Culture, Media and Sport) Creative Industries Economic Estimates February 2010, using 2007 
data. GVA is a measure of the contribution to the economy of each individual producer, industry or sector in the UK. It 
is used in estimating Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
	
Creative and Cultural Skills Design: Impact and Footprint 2008–2009
	
Design Council Design Industry Survey 2010 and The Business of Design: Design Industry Research, 2005
	
Ibid.
	
Ibid.
	
Ibid.
	
Ibid.
	
BIS (Department for Business Innovation and Skills) Small and Medium Enterprises Statistics: UK Whole Economy 
Table 2a, 2008
	
Design Council Design Industry Survey 2010 and The Business of Design: Design Industry Research, 2005

11
the present
We are diverse in our skills. Some 62 per cent of us report competencies in 
communications, and 48 per cent in digital and multimedia. 16 per cent offer 
interior and exhibition design, 11 per cent product and industrial and around 1 per 
cent service design. The natural overlap between some of these disciplines, by the 
way, results in these percentages adding to more than 100.10
We are geographically uneven. 40 per cent of us are based in London and the 
South East of England, with all other regions ranging between 1 per cent and 10 per 
cent.11 This compares with an overall UK population percentage of 26 per cent in 
London and the South East.12
We have clients who are predominantly UK based. Only 10 per cent of design 
consultancies’ clients are based outside the UK; the figure for freelancers is lower.13
We are largely a fee-based business. However, other sources of income include 
retainers, royalties and a combination of fixed-fee plus percentage-of-profit. These 
models are not mutually exclusive; several might be in use concurrently.14
And, on average, we are earning money from our employees. Financial experts 
Kingston Smith W1 publishes an annual survey of the financial performance of 
marketing services companies, including branding and design. Based on a detailed 
analysis of 30 businesses to the end of 2008, the design sector’s average annual 
operating profit per head ran at £9,494, or 9.9 per cent of gross income per employee. 
This was higher than digital, which Kingston Smith W1 treats as a separate category 
from design, at 5.7 per cent (£4,037) and higher than direct marketing and sales 
promotion combined at 7.7 per cent (£6,440). Don’t cheer too loudly, though. We 
are beaten resoundingly by advertising at 12.6 per cent (£13,442), PR at 16.6 per cent 
(£17,123) and media buying at 22.2 per cent (£25,492); of the three, PR operates on 
the most similar financial model to the design sector, in that it is largely fee-based. 
In fact, we shouldn’t be cheering at all. Kingston Smith W1 believes that a well run 
marketing services firm should be generating an operating profit per head of at least 
£15,000 a year. The same could apply to design firms of all disciplines but, at under 
£10,000, we have some way to go yet.15
Morphing and maturing
The UK design industry is fortunate to have in it a number of world-class 
consultancies, many of them leaders in their respective fields. Both large and small 
in size, they are sought-after and respected internationally by clients, and they are 
10	
Ibid.
11	
Ibid.
12	
Office for National Statistics Census, 2001
13	
Design Council Design Industry Research Survey, 2010 and The Business of Design: Design Industry Research, 2005
14	
Ibid.
15	
Kingston Smith W1 Financial Performance of Marketing Services Companies, 2009

12
How to Run a Successful Design Business
an inspiration to other design businesses. You can find several of them in Section 
Six of this book, The Designers.
And yet design businesses are not big businesses. Many thousands employ fewer 
than five people and only a very small minority enjoy an annual fee income of 
over £1 million. Around a quarter of design consultancies earn less than £100,000 
a year.16 While some of these businesses are undoubtedly profitable, remaining 
small in size over the years through choice, others work on projects with tiny 
budgets, returning very low profits to their owners. As in any business sector, the 
less successful firms will eventually vanish without trace unless their owners close 
the gap in their business skills.
Overall, there are many reasons to be optimistic about the prognosis for the UK 
design industry’s future. One advantage of being a dynamic, growing industry is 
that we have people with ambition, enthusiasm, passion and energy. One advantage 
of micro-businesses17 is that they can be flexible, and can change rapidly to meet 
market or economic circumstances. And there is a great advantage of being a design 
firm in the UK: compared with many countries, we have a lot of help, information, 
advice and support to help new and ambitious design businesses of today become 
the global players of tomorrow.
For example, within the wider business arena, we have our Chambers of Commerce 
and the Federation of Small Businesses as well as government-funded Business Link 
with its aid to small and medium-sized businesses;18 this category includes all but a 
tiny handful of design firms. We have Creative and Cultural Skills, whose vision is 
to make the UK the world’s creative hub. We have a very proactive Design Council, 
the national strategic body for design, which is predominantly funded through 
government grant-in-aid. We have the UK Design Alliance and its Good Design 
Practice campaign, which addresses the gap in business and professional skills in 
design firms. It also supports design teaching and learning in schools, colleges and 
universities to ensure tomorrow’s designers are ready for new challenges. And we 
have more membership-based design associations and networks, both national and 
regional, than anyone could ever be an active member of in a lifetime.
The UK design industry is now maturing in a number of important ways. It 
is settling from fragmentation to segmentation, from an amorphous mixture 
where it is hard to tell one brand or sub-sector from another, to clear marketplace 
differentiation. We are learning that the way forward, the route to success, is to make 
sure we have the right professional and business skills in place. We are beginning 
to focus our offers not on what we can do, but on what clients want now and will 
want in the future. We are pursuing specialisms in whichever fields we have chosen, 
while understanding the bigger picture. We are working in strategic alliances with 
other experts when appropriate instead of missing out on opportunities or trying 
16	
Creative and Cultural Skills Design: Impact and Footprint 2008–09 and Design Council Design Industry Survey, 2010 
17	
The EU (European Union) defines ‘micro-enterprises’ as those which employ fewer than 10 people and whose 
annual turnover and/or annual balance sheet total does not exceed €2 million
18	
The EU definition of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) is those employing fewer than 250 people and 
whose annual turnover does not exceed €50 million or whose annual balance sheet total does not exceed €43 million

13
the present
to do it all ourselves. And we know more and more about what design is, and what 
it does, increasingly having the courage to measure and prove the effectiveness of 
our design interventions in the marketplace. All in all, the UK design industry is a 
very exciting place.

This page has been left blank intentionally

1.3 
The global context
Michael Thomson
A journey of a thousand miles must begin with a single step.
Lao Tzu (sixth century BC), philosopher
The international design business
The design business is global. It is a distinctive form of economic activity that for 
many economies represents an important tradable, intangible and exportable asset. 
Many nations now categorise design within the creative industries as an important 
aspect of the cultural economy and the link between design and innovation is 
increasingly recognised in innovation 
policy.
As a global business, the distinctive 
characteristics of design consulting 
companies across the world appear to 
be similar. These include the average 
size of the companies, their business 
models, methods of working and the 
training backgrounds of the creative, 
professionally 
qualified, 
talented 
people that are attracted to work in 
them.
Design is a 
nanotechnology
Studies from a number of sources 
demonstrate that the design industry 
is structured principally of small companies operating in specialist discipline 
niches.
As an example, research completed for the European Commission on the 
service industries across Europe in 2005 revealed that some 70 per cent of all design 
companies across 27 Member States are between one and five people in size, with 
•

16
How to Run a Successful Design Business
only 6 per cent of companies employing more than 50 people. Of that 70 per cent, 
a total of 38 per cent are businesses of only one or two people.
Numbers of design firms in different countries
The International Design Scoreboard: Initial indicators of international design capabilities 
(see Table 1.3.1), produced by Cambridge University in 2009, provides an indication 
of the number of design firms in different countries according to the most recently 
available statistics.
The USA is attributed 30,485 design firms and the UK 12,450. Canada is close 
to the UK with 12,411 firms. The smallest in the sample of 12 countries is Iceland 
with 82 companies.
These numbers make more sense relative to population size, and the report also 
provides these figures.
	
Innovation in Services: Issues at Stake and Trends, J Howells and B Tether, 2004. A report for the European Commission, 
Directorate General for Enterprise and Industry
Table 1.3.1  International Design Scoreboard: Initial indicators of international 
design capabilities, Cambridge University 2009
Number of design firms
Design firms per million population
USA
30,485
105.7
UK
12,450
206.8
Canada
12,411
380.4
Sweden
8,459
947.8
Singapore
3,657
888.9
Korea
2,500
51.8
Japan
2,349
18.4
Hong Kong
1,797
26.7
Norway
927
203.1
Finland
921
176.2
Denmark
450
82.3
Iceland
82
283.5

17
the global context
Contribution to national economies
If measured by size alone, it is clear that design is a very small component of any 
national economy. This is a barrier to policy formation, as design falls below the 
‘policy radar’. And yet, time and again, through different studies in different parts of 
the world, design’s impact on national economic performance is revealed as being 
larger than could be assumed according to its scale. Design brings considerable 
added value to the economy.
In the UK, British Design Innovation (BDI) lists 4,500 design companies 
generating a turnover of some £4.4bn, with 65,000 employees and overseas income 
of £0.8bn. In Denmark, recent research indicates that in 2005 the turnover of 
the design industry was some €740 million, four times more than it was in 1995. 
Equally, the export figures showed a six-fold increase during the same time period, 
representing about twice the growth experienced by other consultancy sectors in 
Denmark.
A global competitiveness ranking for design
In 2002, the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research (NZIER) assessed 
countries’ design competitiveness by selecting indexes from the World Economic 
Forum (WEF)’s Global Competitiveness Report. These included: ‘Extent of Branding’; 
‘Capacity for Innovation’; ‘Uniqueness of Product Designs’; ‘Production Process 
Sophistication’; and ‘Extent of Marketing’. Despite some variations in the indicators 
from year to year, these features were aggregated in 2007 into the WEF’s Sophistication 
of Company Operations and Strategy Index to create a so-called Design Index (see Figure 
1.3.2). Based on these indicators, it was possible to plot the national competitiveness 
ranking of leading countries against their ‘design ranking’ to show a correlation 
between national competitiveness and levels of design.
Building upon this work, Designium, the Design Innovation Centre at the 
University of Art and Design in Helsinki, produced in 2008 its third Global Design 
Watch. This latest report utilises a new combination of seven rather than five WEF 
indicators including three from the original NZEIR 2002 Design Index. The new 
indicators have been added to take into account the impact of indirect spending 
on design competitiveness and include ‘Company spending on research and 
	
BDI Valuation Survey, 2008
	
A Picture of Danish Design – Challenges and Perspectives, Danish Enterprise and Construction Authority, 2007
	
Building a Case for Added Value through Design, NZIER, 2002
	
The Global Competitiveness Report 2007–08, World Economic Forum, October 2008, Palgrave Macmillan
	
‘Uniqueness of product design’ was dropped from the WEF list after the 2001/2002 competitiveness report and 
‘Extent of branding’ was last included in the WEF report for 2004/2005
	
Global Design Watch 2008, Katja Sorvali and Eija Nieminen, Designium, the Design Innovation Centre at the 
University of Art and Design in Helsinki. The previous two reports were published in 2003 and 2006

18
How to Run a Successful Design Business
development’, ‘Nature of competitive advantage’, ‘Value chain process’ and ‘Degree 
of customer orientation’.
Design promotion and design support
In many countries, governments support design through funding design promotion 
and design support organisations. These exist in a number of different formats and 
can operate at regional, national and international levels. The commitment of 
	
Ibid. p. 14
Figure 1.3.2  ‘Sophistication of company operations and strategy’ ranked with 
‘global competitiveness ranking’, 2007, as quoted in INNO-GRIPS 
Mini Study 05 – Designa
Source: With kind permission of Pierre Bitard and the Publications Office of the European Union
a  Mini Study 04 – Design, Pierre Bitard and Julie Basset, June 2008. Work package 3 for INNO–
GRIPS, (Global Review of Innovation Intelligence and Policy Studies), EU Commission.
Sophistication of company operations  and strategy Ranking
Global competitiveness index Ranking
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
Switzerland
United States
Finland
Singapore
United Kingdom
Netherlands
Korea, Rep.
Japan
Germany
Sweden
Denmark
Canada
Hong Kong SAR
Taiwan, China
Norway
Israel
Malaysia
Belgium
France
Austria

19
the global context
governments to these design organisations also differs from country to country, 
ranging from little or no interest to supportive engagement over decades.
In the UK, the national authority for design is the Design Council. Although 
only one of a number of different organisations working in the area, (including for 
example, The British Council, Invest Northern Ireland, Design Wales and Design 
Partners to name but a few), the Design Council is by far the largest in the UK when 
measured in terms of funding received from Government.
Alongside government-funded design promotion, the impact should not be 
underestimated of the non-government-funded design promotion organisations, 
for example Design Exchange in Canada, and the national professional bodies or 
associations, such as Industrial Designers Society of America (IDSA) in the US, the 
Design Business Association (DBA) and Chartered Society of Designers (CSD) in the 
UK, and Danish Designers in Denmark. These organisations play a complementary 
role at the national level in creating organisational infrastructure and activities that 
facilitate the development of the professional practice of design.
The need for coherent action in Europe
In any case, when viewed from a pan-European perspective, it is clear that the 
regional and national design support and promotion organisations are both diverse 
and fragmented. Some organisations have very low funding levels; others have 
only part-funding. Within Europe, some Member States such as the Czech Republic 
have closed down their established Design Centres whilst others, such as Norway, 
are currently increasing their commitment to design as a component of innovation 
strategy. In competitor nations outside Europe, in particular in the Far East including 
South Korea and Taiwan, the levels of government commitment to design are much 
higher. In short, the picture is very mixed.
Driven by this realisation amongst others, the Bureau of European Design 
Associations (BEDA) met with the President of the European Commission, José 
Manuel Barroso, in October 2007 to push for a strategic approach to design at the 
European level. BEDA presented the case for better statistical evidence of design’s 
impact on the European economy, and requested a mapping of the pan-European 
design promotion sector and coherent action at the European level for design, 
incorporating a permanent dialogue for design with the European Commission.
As a direct consequence of that meeting, the European Commission embarked 
on the development of a design strategy as a component of Europe’s strategy for 
innovation. This work led to the publication in 2009 of the Commission’s Staff 
Working Document entitled Design as a Driver of User-centred Innovation.10 Following 
a successful public consultation that received over 500 responses during May/June 
	
The European Design Report, BEDA, 2006
10	
Commission Staff Working Document, Design as a Driver of User-centred Innovation, SEC(2009) 501 final, Brussels, 
07 April 2009

20
How to Run a Successful Design Business
2009, the intention is that design can be included within Europe’s Innovation 
policy, post-Lisbon Agenda 2010.
Competitor nations – aggressive design 
policies
Returning to the picture at the national level, many countries are now competing 
hard with the UK’s design capability as a consequence of aggressive policies offering 
support at the micro – and macro – economic levels to push design as a strategy for 
innovation. South Korea’s current target is for its design industries to be at 95 per 
cent of the capability of that of the Western industrialised nations by 2013.
Indeed, South Korea has been implementing five-year plans since the 1990s and 
it is clear that determination and tenacity are paying off. A number of companies 
have transformed themselves from Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), 
making products or components for other companies, into global brands in their 
own right. LG and Samsung in Korea are powerful examples of companies taking 
design as a strategy to change their vision; both these companies extensively use 
design talent from the UK.
As reflected elsewhere in this book, the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India 
and China) will continue to develop their creative talent and are putting in place 
policies to support design. India’s Union Cabinet published the first national 
design policy in February 2008. Actions such as these will continue to accelerate 
the development of design competence in developing economies and this will lead 
to the availability of competent creative design services at fee levels far below those 
of Western industrialised economies.
Staying ahead
At the international level the design game is changing. There are many new entrants 
coming to market with sophisticated consulting offers. Research conducted over 
the past years by the Danish Government identifies the emergence of a larger 
and more sophisticated form of design firm that represents what they believe to 
be a development in the sector.11 These companies, which have been labelled as 
‘Concept’ or ‘Strategic Design Companies’, are emerging in ‘concept design hubs’ 
including London, New York, the San Francisco Bay area and The Netherlands. 
These companies offer more strategic responses to the changing innovation and 
business needs of global clients.
For the UK design sector facing increasing competition, it may be possible to 
take some comfort from the fact that our education system and heritage of design 
11	
Research conducted by FORA, Centre for Industrial Economics Research, Danish Ministry of Economic and 
Business Affairs

21
the global context
excellence continue to keep us ahead of the game. But this position will continue 
to be challenged.
In an ocean of design companies that all claim creativity, innovation, user-
centred design and design thinking as unique qualities, it will be increasingly 
vital to build sophisticated international competence in order to survive. Only 
those consultancies that achieve both insight and foresight into the changing 
international marketplace for design will be able to stay ahead. For design firms 
that are ambitious, connected, flexible, mobile, networked and talented, the world 
will be their oyster.

This page has been left blank intentionally

1.4 
The client perspective
Shan Preddy
Greater creativity is key to greater productivity, whether by way of higher-value products and services, 
better processes, more effective marketing, simpler structures or better use of people’s skills. Every 
business needs to be cost-conscious, but that’s insufficient for enduring success. No company ever cut 
its way to greatness.
Sir George Cox, former Chairman, UK 
Design Council
The impact of design
For clients, the purpose of design is to 
provide businesses or organisations 
with solutions to problems, challenges 
and opportunities in order to get results. 
Everything else, including working 
with interesting and inspirational 
design professionals, is just a bonus. 
It doesn’t matter whether the clients 
are 
experienced 
or 
inexperienced 
design buyers, nor whether they are 
entrepreneurs, business people or public sector employees. It’s results they are after.
Design works. Regular tracking studies carried out by the UK Design Council 
demonstrate that clients who use design out–perform their rivals consistently. The 
Value of Design Factfinder not only assesses the attitudes and behaviour of design-buying 
clients, but also evaluates the impact of design on a number of performance measures, 
including market share, growth, productivity, share price and competitiveness.
Here are a few headline facts and figures; they are worth using when you need 
to make the case for design to any reluctant clients you might encounter:
Design can help to increase turnover. For every £100 a ‘design alert business’ 
(the Design Council’s term for those which have observed a direct impact from 
the use of design) spends on design, turnover increases by £225.
	
UK Design Council Value of Design Factfinder contains research from a number of sources, mainly the ongoing 
National Survey of Firms and Added Value Research 2007
	
Ibid.
•
•

24
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Design can help to increase profit. For every £100 a design alert business spends 
on design, profit increases by £83.
Design can help to improve share prices. Design-led companies’ share prices 
outperformed the FTSE by 200 per cent over ten years.
Design can help to increase market share. On average, design alert businesses 
increased their market share by 6.3 per cent through design. Those in the 
retail, wholesale and leisure services and manufacturing sectors saw the biggest 
increases: 6.9 per cent and 7.2 per cent respectively. Some manufacturers 
increased their market share by 100 per cent, with design helping them to either 
take over a market or create a new one.
Design can help to produce and launch new products. On average, design alert 
businesses develop 25 new products a year through design and over two-thirds 
(71 per cent) launch at least one. 83 per cent of businesses which see design as 
integral to their operation have launched new products or services, compared 
with just 40 per cent of all businesses.
Design can help to increase employment. Design alert businesses with more 
than 250 employees are most likely to increase staff numbers as a result of using 
design; on average, such businesses hired 13 new people in a year.
Design can help a business to grow. Rapidly growing businesses are six times 
likelier than static ones to see design as integral to their operation.
This research demonstrates a clear link between the use of design and improved 
performance in commercial businesses, and there is no reason to believe that an 
equivalent link doesn’t exist in, say, public services, or education, or the not-for-
profit sectors of the economy.
Barriers to buying design
Design is a powerful and valuable tool. So why don’t clients feel more assured about 
using it? It’s not primarily a question of price, but of perceived need and perceived 
value.
There are four main barriers to purchase:
poor knowledge and understanding about what design is, and what it does;
little confidence in an investment in design having the desired effect;
difficulty in finding the right designers;
anxiety about managing the design process.
	
Ibid.
	
Ibid.
	
Ibid.
	
Ibid.
	
Ibid.
	
Ibid.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

25
the client perspective
Poor knowledge and understanding
As an industry and as individual consultancies, we’re already doing a lot to promote 
design and the benefits it can bring to clients’ organisations. However, we don’t 
always make it easy for ourselves. Part of the difficulty lies in the term ‘design’. It 
covers such a wide range of activities that it’s not surprising that clients find it hard 
to define; we sometimes find it hard ourselves. The rapid growth of the industry 
since the 1970s and its continuous development into new areas has left us with a 
dazzling number of ‘design specialism’ descriptions. Additionally, we don’t make it 
easy when we constantly invent new ones.
Then there’s the relationships and inter-relationships between the design 
industry and its closely related cousins. Is service design closer to management 
consultancy than it is to, say, industrial design? Does a branding consultant relate 
more to a marketing consultant than to a museum designer? Where does architecture 
stop and interior design start? No wonder clients are confused. We need to be clear 
ourselves before we can communicate what we do clearly to other people.
Little confidence in investment in design
We know that design provides value for money, and we are able to prove it. Not 
only do we have the Design Council’s Value of Design Factfinder research and 
many, freely available results-based case studies, but we also have the DBA (Design 
Business Association) Design Effectiveness Awards scheme. Launched in 1989, it 
has demonstrated year after year the return on investment that a coherent, well-
thought-out and professionally executed design programme can achieve.
In their marketing materials and in meetings with prospective clients, design 
firms tend to describe what they have done: identities, packs, brochures, websites, 
interiors, products. However, these are simply the facts of their interventions; they 
should be talking instead about the result. What was the effect of the design work? 
What impact did it make?
Put yourself in the shoes of a prospective client. Wouldn’t you be reassured 
about planned expenditure on design if you were persuaded that it would provide 
a return?
Difficulty in finding the right designers
Clients will often use one design firm’s services until something goes wrong; this is 
because finding a new one can be surprisingly difficult. Often, it’s the designers who 
find the clients through their marketing activities, but clients are much more likely 
to base their decisions on other criteria: they will use their own past experience of 
working with a particular firm; they sometimes ‘inherit’ a designer from a previous 
holder of their job; they rely on suggestions from colleagues and friends; they might 
ask for recommendations from a respected source such as an industry body or a 
valued adviser; and they might use a professional search service. Clients see any one 

26
How to Run a Successful Design Business
of these options as more likely to guarantee success than the lottery of responding 
to incoming sales approaches or looking at names in a directory; it’s a damage 
limitation exercise.
Anxiety about managing the design process
For all but the most experienced design-buyers, the thought of managing a creative 
process can be a deterrent. The anticipated difficulty of working in an unfamiliar 
territory can be enough to put a stop to the idea of doing it at all. For example, 
an internet search on ‘managing the design process’ currently returns 17 million 
results; ‘managing design’ returns 79 million. Many contain useful guidelines and 
advice, but the sheer number is daunting. Professional guidelines and advice are 
available from some of the leading design membership and support bodies but, to 
access them, clients need to know where to look in the first place.
Breaking down the barriers
Whose fault is it that these barriers exist? It’s ours, the design industry’s, and it’s our 
responsibility to demolish them.
We need to remove anxieties about return on investment by talking about 
the outcomes, or results, of our design interventions and not just the outputs, 
or what we’ve done. We need to think about alternative business models such as 
royalty agreements, ‘shared risk, shared responsibility’, and money-back guarantees 
against poor satisfaction. We need to encourage our trade organisations and design 
support bodies to promote design in the general business press, and to forge links 
to relevant client bodies. We need to make sure that design and its proven value are 
on the agenda of every business school. We need to be much better at marketing 
our services, so the right clients find the right designers at the right time. We need 
to reassure clients about the design process by explaining it more convincingly. And 
we need to stop giving our work away for free in pitches; if we don’t value it, why 
would anyone else?
Finally, we need to communicate better. There is an old saying: ‘Failure in 
communication is always the fault of the sender, not the receiver.’ If we, the sellers 
of design services, aren’t completely clear about what we are offering, how can we 
expect clients to be clear about what they are buying? As an industry, it’s up to us 
to articulate our skills and benefits confidently and persuasively so that they are 
understood and believed.
Let’s break down those barriers. Let’s start right now.

1.5 
The future
James Woudhuysen
To expect the unexpected shows a thoroughly modern intellect.
Oscar Wilde (1854–1900), playwright, from ‘An Ideal Husband’
Economic trends affecting design
The end of the first decade of the century 
brought a global recession, and economic 
uncertainty is now the New Normal. Future 
spending on design will remain constrained, 
and clients will be late to pay if their 
cashflows allow them to pay at all.
However, life will not be all ‘downs’ for 
client sectors or consumer spending; there 
will be ‘ups’ as well. Things will not be 
completely bleak for manufacturing in the 
West, for instance. Firstly, labour costs are 
not the only factor in the cost of products, 
or China would have completely triumphed 
long 
ago. 
Secondly, 
China’s 
currency 
will continue to appreciate and, with that, its own costs will rise. Perhaps more 
importantly, few UK manufacturers are purely in the manufacturing business any 
more. Services, including financial services, will continue to form a key part of 
every major manufacturing business. Rolls Royce, for example, has for some time 
sold ‘power by the hour’, charging customers a fee for every hour that its engines 
run. Naturally, each arrangement includes the sale of an engine; but it also includes 
a guarantee to monitor, maintain, and – if necessary – replace that engine should 
it break down. In other words, rather than simply sell a sophisticated assembly of 
metal and carbon fibre, Rolls sells the purpose of that assembly: reliable, efficient 
propulsion and time in the sky.
The shift to services will persist. What the UK Government defines as ‘service 
industries’ take no fewer than 21.56 million, or nearly 84 per cent, of the 25.7 
million employee jobs in Great Britain. However, they account for just 76 per 
	
Office for National Statistics, Monthly Digest of Statistics, 765, September 2009
•

28
How to Run a Successful Design Business
cent of Gross Value Added (GVA), the measure of the value of goods and services 
produced. It will remain hard, however, to raise productivity in services, especially 
in the public sector.
Persistent economic difficulties in the West will underline how important it will be 
for genuine innovation to triumph over new financial and business models. To the extent 
that it wins, innovation will encourage realism in design, and products and brands that 
deliver unimpeachable functional performance. Tough times will also produce design 
solutions that reduce costs, whether of production, operation or disposal.
Design thinking will change
The design of services will be more important. So will what Tim Brown, head of the 
innovation consultancy IDEO, calls ‘design thinking’: not just designing an artefact 
to a brief, but involving staff and users in video-recording, brainstorming, role-
playing and rapid prototyping around new processes, services, interactions, forms 
of entertainment and ways of communicating and collaborating. Both privately 
delivered and public sector services will be subject to more of this treatment.
Additionally, designers will need to consider demographic changes in the 
population: the staff and the users consulted in design thinking will be older. The 
expansion of the over-65s group is particularly striking (see Figure 1.5.1).
From West to East
Client work will not just shift further into services; it will shift further to the East. It 
will therefore be more orientated to technology than in the past, because technology 
is taken more seriously in the East than in the West. Design there will regain some 
of its historic role as the handmaiden of technological innovation.
Design will not always be sold as eco-friendly, as ‘conspicuous non-consumption’. 
For the wealthy East in particular, design will still be aspirational. With the big 
proviso that it works well, people will continue to want design to relieve them from 
drabness. That will put a premium on aesthetics and emotions in design.
Chinese and Indian designers will become more self-confident; they will be the 
ones handling most of Asia’s tasks in design. Brands indigenous to that continent 
will grow, too. To be a global brand, says Melanie McShane of consultancy Wolff 
Olins, you ‘have to be number one in Asia’.
Nevertheless, there will be a major market for Western design firms in Asia, if 
they build an Eastward-facing culture. It is notable that newspapers such as China 
Daily and The Hindu cover the West more than, say, The Times in the UK covers the 
East. Acquainting yourself fully with trends there will pay dividends.
	
Office for National Statistics, Annual Abstract of Statistics, No 145, 2009
	
McShane, quoted in Jenny Wiggins, ‘World’s Next Top Brands Set to Rise in the East’, Financial Times, 19 July 2009

29
the future
The Green issue
The Green Economy and Green Jobs will be illusions more than real trends. In 
government, design and the wider culture, Green will arguably be the biggest game 
in town, until something radical changes that game. However, while the capitalist 
spirit is more than willing to go Green, the capitalist flesh finds it much more 
difficult. It is more likely that China and India will sell green technology to the 
West than countries like the UK will set an example to the world through their ‘Low 
Carbon Economies’.
The ability of designers to be discriminating in sustainable design will do much 
to persuade clients. For example, people impulsively object to the export, by air, of 
Kenyan horticulture to Europe. However, most Kenyan produce travelling this way 
is, in fact, put in the holds of planes taking European tourists home from Nairobi. 
Should Kenyan smallholders be penalised for this? Instead of fretting over different 
ways of calculating food miles and carbon footprints, it may be more worthwhile to 
design vehicles, receptacles, installation processes and educational materials to help 
Africa establish large-scale irrigation.
	
James Gikunju Muuru, ‘Kenya’s Flying Vegetables: Small Farmers and the Food Miles Debate’, Africa Research 
Institute, 8 July 2009
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
1982
2007
2032
Populaon share, percentage
Year
85 and over
65-84
16-64
<16
Figure 1.5.1  Population age structure, 1982–2032, UKa
a  Karen Dunnell, ‘Ageing and Mortality in the UK – National Statistician’s Annual Article on the 
Population’, Figure 5, p. 10, Population Trends, No 134, Winter 2008 (with kind permission of the 
National Archives)

30
How to Run a Successful Design Business
The impact of Information Technology
Information Technology (IT) will be more than simply ‘virtual’. It will become 
more physical and controlling, as well as more visual. It will be about making sure 
that robots, wind turbines and solar panels run smoothly, and it will be about the 
projection of images in 3D. What the Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) describes as sensors and displays’ will have 
a new prominence: sensor-based networks will facilitate the remote monitoring 
of patients, traffic, pollution and geological phenomena, while liquid crystal, 3D, 
wearable and holographic displays will multiply. More and more computers, too, 
will read faces, voices, gestures and handwriting.
The use of Enterprise 2.0 – Web 2.0 techniques within organisations – will 
grow, with Asian players setting much of the pace in consumer versions. Mobile 
applications will determine much of the future of other applications. Yet design 
studios need to avoid dumbing down their practices: facility with a mobile phone 
is not the Alpha and Omega of the future. The idea that young people inherently 
know more about IT because they are ‘digital natives’ – as opposed to old people, 
who are ‘digital immigrants’ – is longstanding, but misguided. To be able to play 
around with social media on a mobile handset is not the same as having a degree 
in computer science, nor is it the same as reading a book from cover to cover. The 
successful design leaders of the future will acquire those skills, and will encourage 
younger people to acquire them.
Implications for designers
In new products and services, an orientation to realism and to engineering in its 
broadest sense will ensure that design’s answers are substantive, not superficial. 
Designers will have to develop new skills in economics, business, services and 
technology, and this will mean understanding technologies relevant to:
construction;
cognitive science, medicine, biology, neuroscience;
energy and adaptation to climate change;
the environment (for example, agriculture, water, forests, pollution and waste).
In the future, good design will increasingly demonstrate effectiveness. A glance 
at the winners of the UK Design Business Association (DBA) awards for effectiveness 
shows that both the categories for awards and the criteria for giving them have 
changed over the years.
Finally, in this move to a more extensive, more advanced design offer, it will be 
vital not to confuse design with social engineering. To plan and develop better, more 
	
OECD, OECD Information Technology Outlook 2008, 18 December 2008
•
•
•
•

31
the future
effective products or services or surroundings is one thing; to take on the politicians’ 
responsibility for solving deep-rooted social problems, however, will inevitably lead 
to ill-feeling if, as is likely, design alone cannot solve those problems.

This page has been left blank intentionally

Section Two: 
The Business

This page has been left blank intentionally

2.1 
The vision and values
Shan Preddy
You’ve got to have a dream; if you don’t have a dream, how you gonna have a dream come true?
Oscar Hammerstein (1898–1960), from ‘South Pacific’
Why you need a vision
A business without a vision is a business without direction. Far too many design 
companies are reactive in their development and, even if they are growing and 
profitable, they have arrived where they are by accident. How does this happen? 
Very easily. Opportunities are pursued without enough questions being asked about 
their usefulness; projects appear from clients and are accepted, whether or not they 
are a good fit; senior people with specific skills and experience join or leave and this 
changes the company’s capabilities.
Like boats without a destination and 
without navigation charts, businesses 
like this are drifting. They might have 
powerful 
engines 
and 
active 
crew 
members, but they are either going 
nowhere fast or heading for the wrong 
place. If they are lucky, they ride the high 
seas on favourable winds and find safe 
harbours when storms threaten. If they 
are unlucky, they circle aimlessly and sink 
without trace. The majority of visionless 
companies lie somewhere between these 
extremes, of course. They just dock in 
ports they don’t like, on landmasses they 
never wanted to visit in the first place.
And what about values?
Like nation states and individual people, businesses have values whether or not 
they are formally stated. Think of any market sector: one retailer, one airline, one 
•

36
How to Run a Successful Design Business
accountancy firm or one architectural practice might have very different values from 
its competitors, even though some aspects of their vision, such as their commercial 
goals, might be identical.
Values are simply the things which are important to a business. They will not 
lightly be compromised, if at all, and they form an integral part of the vision. In 
some cases, a value can become a business’s core proposition to its customers: 
examples of this would be an ethical, fair-trading stance, or an organic premise, or 
a no-questions-asked returns policy.
What’s important to you right now? What do you think will be important in 
the future? If you own your firm as well as managing it, your business values will 
inevitably reflect those you and any co-owners hold in life in general.
The benefit, and the building blocks
A good vision, and its accompanying values, will allow you to run your business 
more easily. Once they are in place, everything else – from major to minor decisions 
you will need to take – follows: finance policies; marketing strategies; recruitment 
criteria; IT investment; location and style of your workplace; choice of coffee and 
biscuit brands in the office kitchen.
They will also help you to construct your business strategy and plan. If you 
don’t first lay down the foundations of vision and values, you will be building on 
quicksand.
Think of it as building blocks. Start with your vision and values and, from them, 
develop your overall business strategy. What will the business be doing in, say, 
three or five years’ time? If you run a new or small company, or work in a rapidly-
changing, emerging market such as digital, two years might be more realistic.
Once the two foundation building blocks of your vision and values and your 
business strategy are in place, you can work on strategies and plans for the separate 
elements in your business. Some typical design company elements (finance, product, 
marketing, people) are shown in Figure 2.1.1; they are explored in detail in the 
following chapters.
After the separate plans are completed, they can be combined to form your 
overall three (or five, or two) year business plan.
How to define your vision and values
Get together with your management team and do a bit of imagineering. Think 
forwards, and then think again. One projective technique you could use is to 
imagine your company being written about in the press in three (or five, or two) 
years’ time. How would it be described? Another is to imagine a fairy godmother or 
a genie giving you the wish to create the business exactly as you want it. The wish 
won’t come true without a lot of input from you, but it’s a good place to start.

37
the vision and values
To help define your vision, you could consider:
The finances: what do you want the business’s annual fee income and profit to 
be?
Geographical location(s): where do you see the business being situated, in the 
same location as now, or somewhere else, and how many offices might you 
have?
The type of work done: will it be the same as now, or different?
The client list: who will you be doing the work for?
Staff, if any: numbers, skills, quality, seniority.
Your own role(s) in the business: what you, personally, will be doing.
To define your values, think about what’s important to you; those are the things 
to work on. You could look at:
intellectual satisfaction
award-winning creativity
maximising profit
peer group recognition and respect
market reputation
brand image and profile
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
DETAILED BUSINESS PLAN YEARS 1, 2, 3 (4, 5) 
OVERALL 3 (or 5) YEAR BUSINESS STRATEGY 
VISION & VALUES 
FINANCE 
STRATEGY
MARKETING 
STRATEGY 
PEOPLE 
STRATEGY
PRODUCT  
STRATEGY 
FINANCE 
PLAN 
MARKETING 
PLAN 
 
 
PRODUCT 
PLAN 
PEOPLE 
PLAN 
Figure 2.1.1  Strategic building blocks for business development 
Source: © PREDDY&CO

38
How to Run a Successful Design Business
design effectiveness
the client sectors you will (or won’t) work with
the quality of client relationships
your levels of client service
staff development
environmental sustainability
community and charitable activities – design or broader
leisure time
fun.
Setting the vision and values for a business is the responsibility of the owner, 
Partners or Directors. Unless you work alone, it should be a team effort, but only 
up to a point. Employees, together with any shareholders or investors who are not 
directly involved in running the firm, only need to be informed – and inspired 
– once the full business strategy and plans have been developed. Democratic vision-
setting-by-committee can be disastrous, leading to division of opinions and resulting 
in inactivity.
Reality checks
Once you’ve drafted your vision and values, you will need to ask yourself whether 
they are achievable. If necessary, ask a trusted external consultant or expert to work 
with you. Your vision needs to be ambitious, challenging and, ideally, exciting to 
the point of being just a little scary. But it also needs to be realistic. Otherwise, you 
will become frustrated and dispirited if you don’t achieve it.
Your vision and values will change when external factors change and when 
unexpected opportunities or challenges occur. The market, the economy, your 
competitors and your clients will all influence them. Revisit and confirm them 
regularly, at least annually and preferably every six months; the newer the business, 
the more frequently you’ll need to do it. In very volatile economic trading 
environments such as rapid market growth or economic recession, review them 
monthly.
You can tell if your vision and values are getting a bit murky when you can’t 
describe them easily and convincingly to someone else, or when you just can’t get 
excited about them anymore. And you’ll know when they are clear. That’s when you 
are brave enough to turn down work – any work, even the attractive and profitable 
stuff – which doesn’t help you to achieve it. Voyage to Mombasa? No, thanks. This 
boat’s heading for Rio.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

The man ain’t got no culture.
Paul Simon (b. 1941) and Art Garfunkel (b. 1941) from ‘A Simple Desultory Philippic’
Planned or accidental?
Endlessly fascinating to outsiders and almost invisible to insiders, a business’s 
culture develops from its vision and values. It is the job of the management team 
to make sure it is as it should be, influencing it as appropriate and correcting it 
whenever needed.
From the way you run your business and the tone of voice of your marketing 
materials, to your attitude to paying bills, to the way you identify your washrooms, 
everything you do – absolutely everything – says something about your business.
Some corporate cultures and personalities are planned and actively driven; others 
will grow organically. Most are, of course, a mixture of the two. If your business’s 
culture is not as you want it to be, change it. If it is, make sure you maintain, grow 
and develop it as both you and external factors change. If your culture is exactly the 
same now as it was, say, ten years ago, it could be overdue for a refit.
If you don’t know what your corporate culture really is, try asking an independent 
consultant to carry out an expert 360° survey 
among your clients, prospects, staff and 
suppliers. The results can be enlightening.
Who cares?
You and your management team, for a start. 
Are you proud of your business? Inspired by 
it? Leaping-out-of-bed excited by it? Would 
you want to work there if you didn’t have 
to?
Your staff will be significantly influenced 
by your culture. Their work needs to be 
challenging and satisfying, of course, and 
•
2.2 
The culture
Shan Preddy

40
How to Run a Successful Design Business
they need to be in possession of the right remuneration package. But over and 
above that, your company’s culture will either motivate them or demotivate them. 
To paraphrase Oscar Wilde’s Lady Bracknell: to lose good staff because they win 
the lottery and decide to retire early may be regarded as a misfortune; to lose them 
because they don’t like your culture looks like carelessness.
And what about recruiting new staff? It’s not only your snazzy ads, animated 
website and the headhunter’s recommendation that will influence possible future 
employees. The design sector is a very small world, and people – including your 
current and former staff – will talk. All it takes is ‘it’s not really a happy place at the 
moment’ or ‘it’s not very professionally run’ to dissuade people from applying for a 
job, let alone joining you.
Clients and prospects will be influenced by your culture as well as by your skills, 
capabilities and experience. In fact, if all things are equal at the selection stage – and 
when design buyers have done their job properly, all things should be equal – it will 
be the culture and personality of the relevant design businesses which influence the 
appointment.
Finally, your extended commercial network, including strategic alliances, 
freelancers and suppliers, will be affected by your culture and personality, even 
if it’s only for a short time. They can, of course, escape whenever it suits them by 
simply being, ‘with great regret, too busy to help’. And that’s the problem: the best 
networkers and freelancers and suppliers will favour the businesses whose culture 
they like. They will prioritise working for them, and will be prepared to go that extra 
mile. If the people you want to work with are always mysteriously unavailable, or 
half-hearted in their work for you, it might be worth holding a mirror up to your 
own culture.
Doing it your way
Most design companies of any size will have a ‘welcome pack’ or manual for new 
joiners. They vary in content and style, but tend to cover things like company 
structure, staff details and examples of paperwork procedures such as how to 
complete time sheets, expenses forms and so on. Some also include useful local 
information, like the best place to buy sandwiches at lunchtime.
However, in every company of every size, there is also an unwritten rulebook: 
let’s call it ‘This Is The Way We Do Things Around Here’. These rules for behaviour 
– good or bad – are initially devised by the leaders of the business, and then 
demonstrated on a daily basis by their attitude and behaviour. They filter down 
through every team member, until the newest arrival turns to the person next to 
them and asks how something should be done.
Your unwritten rules will derive from example, not instruction. If, after a 
particularly difficult conversation with a client, a senior manager puts the phone 
down with a grimace and an expletive or two, he or she is hardly in a position 
to criticise a more junior staff member for inappropriate attitude towards client 

41
the culture
service. In business management, there is no place for ‘do as I say but not what I 
do’: it must be ‘do as I say and also as I do’.
One problem we face in our sector is that it is inexpensive and easy to launch a 
design business, and many firms are run by young, ambitious, dynamic people who 
have had little experience of being an employee, let alone an employer. Or, if they 
have spent time working for other people, it was so many years ago that they’ve 
forgotten what it feels like. In addition, the owners of design businesses are, by 
definition, entrepreneurial in nature; they are initiative-takers and used to taking 
unilateral decisions. As a result, they sometimes find it hard to empathise with their 
employees and the issues they face. To them, the ‘rules’ are obvious; to their staff, 
however, they might seem unclear at best and, at worst, contradictory. If you fit into 
this category, take care with the unwritten messages you might be sending to your 
team members.
When investigating your rulebooks – both written and unwritten – there is no 
limit to the areas you might consider. There are the ‘macro policies’: staff welfare; 
what and how you charge clients for your work; your attitude to waste management; 
fire drill. And there are the ‘micro policies’: how the phone is answered; general time 
keeping; washing up; birthday conventions. Large or small, good or bad, planned or 
unplanned: if it relates to your business, it forms your culture.
The company that plays together stays 
together
The social elements of a business’s culture are important; they help to reinforce 
and maintain team relationships and allow people to relax away from the working 
environment.
It’s important to cover both the spontaneous trip to the pub to celebrate a new 
project win and the scheduled events which are an integral part of your business, 
such as a summer picnic or an annual winter party. Some companies organise 
weekend trips away. If you are asking people to give up their free time, you will 
need to take a policy decision about the inclusion or otherwise of social partners. If 
you decide on a staff-only invitation, make sure you don’t penalise any partnered 
employees who choose not to come.
You can also spread invitations to parties and events to your clients, your alliance 
networkers and your suppliers as well as your staff. After all, these people make up a 
significant element of your business’s culture and personality, and they all influence 
each other as well as you.
And then there are the sporting events. Could you have a champion baseball 
team just waiting to be discovered? Tiddlywinks? Quizzes? By sponsoring a team 
event, you can enjoy the benefits of teamwork training outside of the normal 
working environment without having to send everyone on a week’s outward bound 
course. Make sure that anyone who doesn’t want to play an active part in the team 

42
How to Run a Successful Design Business
is encouraged to participate as a supporter, or organiser, or even just an observer. 
Aim for inclusivity and diversity.
Brain food and body food
Does your business have a ‘learning culture’? As well as formal training programmes, 
ongoing CPD (continuing professional development) is important, and CPD can 
include observing, analysing, thinking and sharing. Brain food keeps the grey cells 
– and the more colourful creative cells – refreshed and active.
Some design businesses have art galleries in their reception areas, which 
stimulate the team and attract visitors; they can even make a profit. Others organise 
staff trips to other cities or countries, using them as ‘incentive-and-reward’ for good 
performance as well as learning opportunities. Most firms can’t afford the time and 
money to do this, but there is a lot you can do on a smaller scale. What about visits 
to museums, galleries and exhibitions? Or trips to films and concerts? Outings, 
perhaps: to shops if you work in retail or packaging; to businesses if in identity and 
service design; to hotels, restaurants and theme-parks if in leisure markets. One 
of the great drivers of creativity is a burning curiosity about everything. Why not 
throw a little fuel on the fire? Make sure you get your money’s worth, however. Ask 
staff to report back afterwards with a presentation of what they have observed and 
learned in a ‘show and tell’ session, so that everyone else can learn something as 
well, and store any relevant materials in your central resource library.
Finally, don’t forget body food. Some of the world’s larger creative businesses 
have their own in-house cafés, where people can meet over good, nutritious food 
at subsidised costs at breakfast, coffee, lunch and tea, and occasionally evenings as 
well.
If you don’t have a café but your business is large enough to have one, why 
not investigate the feasibility? You will need to work out the ‘benefit-in-kind’ 
tax implications with your financial advisers as well as the cost of the café itself. 
If you’re not big enough to make a café realistic, how about dedicating an area 
of your offices to a place where people can munch their lunchtime sandwiches 
together instead of going out or sitting isolated at their desks checking their social 
media messages? Either option will return huge benefits of informal working and 
relationship-building, as well as encouraging a time-efficient and, in the case of a 
café, properly-fed workforce.

If a man write a better book, preach a better sermon, or make a better mousetrap than his neighbour, 
though he build his house in the woods, the world will beat a path to his door.
Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–82), essayist, philosopher and poet
Mousetraps and myths
The statement from Ralph Waldo Emerson above lingers on as a famous concept 
in business circles. It is known, unsurprisingly, as ‘the better mousetrap’. If your 
product is better than anyone else’s, it claims, that’s all you need to do.
It is, however, something of a myth, and – like most good myths – it refuses to 
go away. The premise clearly doesn’t hold water these days, and perhaps never did. 
There are many examples of successful businesses which have inferior products, 
and there have always been great products and services which don’t succeed 
commercially.
Nevertheless, it is the case that you will be much more likely to fail if your 
product is poorer than your competitors’ products. No disappointed customer 
ever bought an unsatisfactory product twice from the same source and, worse, no 
disappointed customer ever lied about it to someone else. We are many times more 
likely to tell others about our displeasure with a business or personal purchase than 
we are about our pleasure. Like it or not, humans are good at complaining.
Another lingering myth is that a business’s greatest asset is its people. They 
are important, of course, but every individual – even the owner – is replaceable. A 
business’s greatest asset is its good reputation, and while there are many elements 
which go to make up that reputation (including, of course, the behaviour and 
capabilities of its people), the ‘product’ or ‘service’ forms the core. No one sets out 
to make mistakes, but the truth is that if your product is impeccable, you’re likely 
to be forgiven for them. If your basic product is poor, on the other hand, every tiny 
error will be held against you.
A high-quality product is a wonderful asset. It will help to attract new business 
prospects and satisfy existing clients. It will attract new staff and retain existing 
employees. In fact, it will almost do your marketing and recruitment for you. But, 
like all assets, it needs to be cared for, maintained and developed. Think of it like a 
living organism: without nurture, it will die.
•
2.3 
The product
Shan Preddy

44
How to Run a Successful Design Business
The nurturing
So what are these ‘organisms’ in the design sector and how do you nurture them? 
Whichever design specialism you embrace, they are the three main elements of 
your work:
strategic thinking;
creativity and innovation;
production and delivery.
To be successful, each element needs to be equally strong as the others, and they 
all need to be wrapped up in expert client service, faultless business administration 
and inspirational leadership.
Here are a few ‘product’ questions you can raise with your management team:
Are you paying as much attention to your product as you are to the rest of your 
business, such as finance, law and HR?
When did you last invest the time, budget and energy in away-days or events for 
your teams with no other objective than product improvement?
How much time and money are you investing in staff training and skills updating 
on your product?
Are you encouraging your staff to get out to design events, lectures, 
exhibitions?
Are you running regular ‘show-and-tell’ sessions internally, where all of your 
staff can hear about a project from one of their colleagues, and learn from it?
Are you running regular ‘creative inspiration’ sessions, where colleagues talk to 
each other about what inspires them, perhaps over a beer or a breakfast?
Whose job is it in your business to keep an eye on product quality?
When did you last do a formal benchmarking analysis of how your product 
stacks up against that of your direct competitors?
When did you last find out what your clients and prospects want and expect, so 
you can adjust your product to match?
Are you keeping abreast of market trends and innovations? Or even overtaking 
them?
Hurdles and expectations
The hurdles in product and service provision get higher and higher and, once they 
have been raised, they will never be lowered.
Imagine you ran a small hotel. Some years ago, you could get away without 
providing ensuite bathroom facilities: now, even the tiniest of B&Bs seem to offer 
individual toiletries, TVs with DVD players and in-room tea-making equipment. 
How long will it be before fluffy bathrobes and slippers become as normal as they 
1.
2.
3.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

45
the product
are in luxury hotels? And then what will luxury hotels have to offer to earn their 
keep?
Your own ‘hurdles’ will be raised partly by your own actions, partly by clients’ 
demands, partly by your competitors and partly by activities in the worldwide 
marketplace. Think about the three product elements mentioned earlier. In the 
design sector, there was a time when ‘creativity and innovation’ was enough. The 
clients did the ‘strategic thinking’ part, and a few slips in ‘production and delivery’ 
were not only accepted, but expected. In fact, wise clients always used to include 
time and budget contingencies in their plans. Now, they rightly expect perfection 
in all three. Why? Because that is how we have positioned ourselves, as consultants 
charging top fees.
We have set the expectations ourselves, and we have raised those hurdles. At 
the moment, perfection in the three product elements is just the basic entry-level 
for a serious design business. You and your management team should be keeping 
a very close eye on the levels of future hurdles, and making sure your product is fit 
for the race.
Benchmarking
There are a number of things you can do to benchmark your business against the 
marketplace. You can carry out desk research, such as reading books and publications. 
You can analyse creative and effectiveness award winners. You can investigate what 
related business sectors such as advertising, architecture and technology do. You 
can carry out a survey among your clients, prospects, employees, freelancers and 
suppliers to see how you compare with other design firms they know. You could 
even consider starting a formal benchmarking system with a similarly sized, but not 
directly competitive, company: if you work with an external business adviser, why 
not discuss this with them?
If, after analysis, you decide that your product isn’t as good as it needs to be, you 
will need to decide whether you can improve it organically, or will need to form 
strategic alliances with other, differently skilled businesses.
Make a habit of constantly benchmarking your business, and make sure that 
you list product quality as a regular item on your management meeting’s agenda. As 
well as thinking about new product development, you will raise internal awareness 
of the importance of actively driving existing product development.
Do what you do best. Then work on doing it even better.

This page has been left blank intentionally

2.4 
The business journey
Adrian Rasdall
If you are going through Hell, keep going.
Sir Winston Churchill (1874–1965), politician and statesman
Beyond the start-up
The adrenalin rush of starting a company is likely to ebb as you realise you have 
created a sustainable business. From here the task is to build your agency to the size 
that matches your ambitions, through organic growth, merger and acquisition, and 
then eventually to make your exit.
By forming excellent relationships 
with a raft of clients and working hard to 
win new business, you have reduced your 
dependency on one or two customers. 
Now there is a stream of work flowing into 
the agency, with a balance of resource to 
manage the work to a very high standard. 
The right processes and strict financial 
controls are in place, and the business is 
generating a comfortable profit. It would 
not be unreasonable to feel less vulnerable 
and happier with the world.
This is when you have to be true to your 
ambition. It’s possible to have a highly 
successful and fruitful career running a 
£1.5m, tightly managed business, aiming 
for very small growth and a constant team of committed staff. If that is your goal, 
then it is important to resist the pressures around you to grow for growth’s sake. It’s 
OK to be small and profitable.
However, for many people standing still in business isn’t an option. Driving 
forward and building a bigger and better agency is perceived as simply the next 
stage of the business adventure.
•

48
How to Run a Successful Design Business
How do you grow and develop what you have?
The key word is plan. Just running helter-skelter for more business and recruiting 
more staff usually ends in tears.
Look at what effect more revenue would have on your annual budget. Say you 
plan to grow turnover by 20 per cent. What would be the effect on staff and office 
space? Growth needs financing, so is the company sufficiently capitalised?
Consider also if more work would put a strain on the team and endanger current 
client relationships. The risk is that you bring in 20 per cent more work but lose 20 
per cent of your current client business.
So to plan for growth it is first necessary to increase resources, both in quantity 
and quality. This is a bold move and requires investment. In the short term you 
could see a fall in profits while you are growing and developing the company. This 
is the next stage in the business cycle-growth, followed by consolidation – as the 
business regains its equilibrium and maximises profits.
Quite often, though, growth is unplanned. A huge win can transform an agency 
overnight, putting stress on its infrastructure. This can be a threat as well as an 
exciting opportunity. When a company overheats and there is way more revenue 
than resource, the business can overtrade, and you could lose control.
It is critical to stand back and recognise what is going on. By acting swiftly to 
either bring in more resource, which impacts on your margin, or negotiate longer 
lead times with your clients, you can slow the company down and thereby regain 
control.
The idea is to grow and grow, not grow then shrink, then grow again. This puts 
too much strain on everyone.
Mergers and acquisitions
Mergers
As an alternative to organic growth, opportunities may arise to merge your agency 
with another business. If all goes well you can end up with a larger market presence, 
a stronger management team and a much enhanced balance sheet.
Mergers have worked very well in the worlds of law and accountancy, where clients 
and revenue are attached primarily to partners. A merger becomes a restructuring 
of the partnership arrangement under one name. This is highly democratic and 
should deliver greater value to clients with more disciplines available to them.
However, for many this approach is fraught with difficulty and not for the 
faint-hearted. The usual areas of contention are around the name and leadership of 
what should be an equal partnership. Generally the largest, longest established and 
best-known wins. The issue is more about emotions than realities and a pragmatic 
approach must be applied. If all else fails then an amalgamation of names may 

49
the business journey
resolve the issue, although a combination of leaders seldom works and can lead to 
corporate schizophrenia.
Whenever you are considering a merger it wise to begin with the end. What 
would these two, streamlined operations look like merged and how will they appear 
to your clients? Does it really make sense? If cost saving is an issue, will it really 
deliver benefits?
Deals have a way of distorting the original plan as they progress. So, when all 
parties have agreed a model, keep referring back to that model throughout the 
merger process.
Acquisitions
A less democratic approach to non-organic growth is the acquisition. Here, there is 
a definite buyer and seller.
It is always wise to avoid buying a company just for the turnover and profit. 
There should be much deeper reasons, such as:
clients you covet and would take ages to develop yourself;
a geographic advantage;
technology that would give you a competitive advantage.
When you have made the overtures to a company or someone has approached 
you, it is imperative that you select appropriate advisors to guide and protect you. 
The right lawyers and accountants can aid you through the nightmare of valuations, 
due diligence, negotiations, renegotiations, tax and employment issues.
If you have not yet formed solid relationships with professionals who specialise 
in mergers and acquisitions, then ask around for referrals and shortlist three law and 
accountancy firms. It’s common practice to hold a ‘beauty parade’, where potential 
clients choose professionals with the most sector experience and a style that suits.
Not all deals reach completion, as problems can be thrown up at any stage. 
However, as your confidence grows that the deal will happen, start planning and 
even act as if the deal is done. Develop relationships with all the key managers in 
the target company, and try to resolve issues before you sign the papers. At all times 
concentrate on how this deal will be communicated to clients and staff. Nobody 
likes surprises!
Selling your business to others
Third-party acquisition
As you build up your business with a good team and effective client management, 
the core value of your company will increase. It should not be a surprise that your 
•
•
•

50
How to Run a Successful Design Business
business shows up on competitors’ radar and becomes a target for acquisition 
itself.
When an approach comes from an agent or directly from the interested party it 
is very flattering and should be taken seriously. Be aware, though, that the process 
of talking about a sale is very time-consuming and can impact on the day-to-day 
running of the company.
If you are the sole shareholder the process is straightforward. If there is more 
than one owner, the situation is more complicated. It is important to acknowledge 
that people are at different stages of their lives and while the disruption of a sale 
of the company may be exciting to some, it can be threatening to others. Taking 
time to explore the needs of the individuals before the discussions begin ensures a 
united team.
First, ascertain the identity of the interested party and why they think there is 
a fit between the two companies. If your immediate reaction is negative, then it is 
better to say so at once. If you think the deal has potential, spend time with the 
principals and listen to their plans for your company. Remember that price is not 
everything. A deal that adversely affects staff morale will affect client relationships 
and therefore the future success of the business.
Your role in the agency may not end if the business is acquired. If you and 
other principals work in the business and have client relationships, a change of 
ownership could affect the value. Your company will be attractive because of your 
track record, but will be bought for its future earnings. That means most buyers will 
prefer to buy the company over a period of years to mitigate their risk. They pay an 
amount of cash up front, with agreed amounts released if certain targets are met. If 
the targets are missed then the payments are not made and therefore the sale price 
reduced.
This is called an ‘earn out’, with the principals being given a fixed-term service 
agreement to cover the earn out period. It ties the principals into the company for 
a number of years until the sale is complete.
As with all deals, it is your advisors who will guide you through this process 
and act for you to achieve the very best sales price with the most reasonable 
conditions.
Management buy out
The clever principal continually strives to hire the best people and invest in 
developing a strong management team. As the company grows the management 
team expects to play a more dynamic role in running the company.
Ultimately, there can come a time when the management feel ready to approach 
the principals with a suggestion that they would like to instigate a Management 
Buy Out (MBO).
This is a time for plain talking. An MBO can be a very successful route to a 
transfer of ownership, as long as the tricky question of value can be agreed. However, 
one of the most devastating occurrences a business can suffer is a failed MBO. When 

51
the business journey
the management and owners fall out, there is a very serious schism, which can 
generally only be adjudicated by an outsider.
An alternative approach is a Buy In Management Buy Out (BIMBO) where an 
experienced outsider buys into the agency, and then controls the MBO from the 
inside and negotiates on behalf of the team.
Your own exit strategy
Eventually you will want to leave the business – to take a new direction or to retire 
altogether. You will need to plan your exit strategy.
A business is made up of two entities: assets on the balance and a cash generator. 
While you consider how to decouple yourself from the assets, it’s important to 
remember the day-to-day business of making money.
Much will depend on what sort of leader you are when you decide to move on 
– a player manager or as a sideline manager?
As a player manager you are completely involved in every aspect of the agency, 
which relies on you to win work, manage clients and/or produce killer creativity. 
Any reduction in your involvement will show up negatively in the figures. To move 
away from being a player manager takes time, courage and patience.
Being a sideline manger is all about building a team and letting them work together 
while you support their strengths and help them address their weaknesses.
As ever, this process relies as much on the quality of people you hire as your own 
attitude. You cannot remove yourself from responsibility in your business simply 
by delegating functions to others. The transfer of responsibility will only come if 
you surround yourself with people who actually crave that responsibility. By also 
creating an environment where people feel supported, you can grow the business 
beyond yourself.
As the strength of team grows, you can start to groom your successor. Choosing 
the right person is one of the most difficult processes and it is vital to put the needs 
of the agency first. In a family business, children may seem the obvious choice, but 
may not actually have the specific skills for running a business. Dividing your role 
into skill bites and spreading them across a management team may prove a more 
viable route.
Handing over the reins when you go on vacation offers candidates the 
opportunity to demonstrate their expertise, but be clear about what roles you are 
promising. To raise expectations only to change your mind can crush enthusiasm 
and disrupt the smooth running of the agency.
How quickly and how completely you leave the business is your choice. 
With effective planning, you can transfer management and ownership smoothly, 
assured that the business will continue to move forward with highly capable new 
leadership.

This page has been left blank intentionally

A place for everyone and everyone in their place.
Adapted from congregational minister Charles A Goodrich’s (1790–1862) motto ‘Have a 
place for every thing, and keep every thing in its proper place’
Who does what?
A well-organised structure enables members of a design company to understand 
where they fit in, and what purpose they serve within the organisation. It provides 
the framework for companies to develop 
and deliver their offer in a timely, cost-
effective manner, without destroying 
any of the raw energy and creativity. It 
allows companies with whom they do 
business, both clients and suppliers, to 
understand the company and who they 
relate to within it.
One definition of structure is: ‘The 
organisation of a society or other group 
and the relation between its members 
determining its working.’
Design companies would not exist 
without clients, and it’s obvious that the 
structure of such organisations should 
reflect the demands and requirements 
of the client base. Some clients want to deal directly with designers, others prefer 
a more formal and structured company, and require account handlers or project 
managers.
However, it’s your agency. What you put in place has to deliver profit, create 
interesting careers and opportunities for the people who work with you, and operate 
efficiently to produce consistently high standards of work. Although clients are 
necessary, they should never be allowed to dictate to you how you operate your 
company.
•
2.5 
The business structure
Peers de Trensé

54
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Motivation and direction are two critical management tools that can help growth 
and build profitability. This process starts at the very top, from the managing director 
down to the intern, with every person in the business implicitly understanding 
what he or she should be doing and what is required of them. Not just for each 
project, but also in their wider roles as part of growing and developing the business. 
This is about involvement and team spirit.
Roles and responsibilities are evolutionary, require planning and need reviewing 
from time to time, at least once a year. The key word here is review because once 
you have set the targets and parameters and agreed them with each person, you 
have a basis on which to measure, judge and reward. You eliminate duplication of 
effort, and can play to strength and character rather than job title. Someone who is 
good with people may not be good with process and vice versa. Much can be learnt 
from upward reviews where staff take management to task.
Structure is essential whatever the size of the company. Structure equals 
efficiency and purpose. This is important for employees who will see a career path 
ahead of them, promotion and the rewards that go with it. It’s also important for 
managers who can measure performance and judge ability, and identify training 
opportunities to bring people on, or to teach them new skills.
A good structure helps deliver a good return on investment and creates a highly 
motivated and energised team acting as one, rather than as individuals. This shows 
in the work that is produced and in the client meetings that are held where everyone 
has a voice and a function.
Who runs the ship, an autocrat or a democrat?
At the head of every design company is a leader with a management style. Take 
any half dozen exemplary design consultancies and you will find as many different 
management and leadership styles, each claiming to be the model for a successful 
and dynamic business. Indeed they can be, but which works best, and for whom? 
The company or the employees, and are they all as good as each other? A designer 
moving from one consultancy to another could well experience all of them in a 
short space of time.
Leadership and management styles are either inherent in the psyche of the 
person, or have to be learnt very quickly, or bought and brought in. The different 
styles are not hard to identify.
There’s the entrepreneur, or the creative, both of whom might want do what 
they are best at, rather than manage and lead. Then there’s the professional manager, 
Master of Business Administration (MBA) or equivalently trained, full of process 
and procedure, and possibly slightly unemotional. Or the home grown manager, 
who’s had to learn at the coal face, making it up as he or she goes along, and making 
mistakes too.
So what makes for a good management style? Would you rather work in a 
dictatorship, where everyone knows their place and there’s that certain frisson 

55
the business structure
when the boss strides in, or work in a relaxed, democratic environment, where 
everyone has a say about the place, and the boss ambles in?
The worst of each of these scenarios is anarchy in the dictatorship, and chaos 
in the democracy. The best are the authoritarian leader who is single-minded and 
has the best interests of the company at heart, driving it forward, and the democrat 
who can hold together, motivate and represent the wishes of the people to grow 
and develop the business.
There is also the ‘Collective’ which always seems to end in tears: oh, and would 
the last person out please turn the light off?
Some important characteristics of leadership are charisma and personality: not 
everyone is lucky enough to possess these qualities. The most important quality of 
all however, is respect, and this has to be earned, usually by leading from the front. 
Earn it, and you will gain respect for what you do and what you say. Frankly, people 
will be much more inclined to follow you whatever your leadership style.
Is the sum of the parts greater than the whole?
Which is best for an agency, designers who are all-rounders or teams of specialists?
How often have you heard this? ‘One day I’m going to have my own design 
company, and it’s going to be full of creative people producing bright ideas and 
stunning work for brands that share the same ideals.’
This is the dream that many designers have, which some have turned into reality. 
At this stage it’s purely a creative enterprise. There are several design companies that 
have pursued this ideal relentlessly and successfully. The purity of the concept is a 
wonderful ideal and of course many clients just love dealing directly and only with 
creative people.
It’s somewhat of a perverse and contrary idea, however, given that rather than 
devoting all their time and energy to creativity, designers have perforce to be their 
own account manager with all that it entails: part planner, part strategist, part 
accountant, part client service, part this, part that.
From a business point of view, having a purely creative team is possibly easier 
and more cost effective to manage, but recruiting a creative who is capable of 
multitasking as an all rounder is not always easy, and there is an inherent danger of 
creating a series of one-man bands, each operating in its own ivory tower.
This particular model works well in a start-up situation or in a collective. 
However, the design industry recognises, and clients generally demand, a three-
stage delivery process of strategy, creativity and implementation, the latter more 
often than not with multichannel creative interpretations.
This process calls for teams with specialist skills; in larger agencies this can often 
consist of a triumvirate of planner, creative and account person each with very 
clearly defined roles. The creative should be in his/her element, not having to be 
involved with housekeeping, and being given what all creatives desire, a tight brief. 
With this model the sum of the parts are genuinely greater than the whole.

56
How to Run a Successful Design Business
The designers are happy because, unless they work on a very large account, they 
are more likely to enjoy a varied diet of clients and they have colleagues to bounce 
ideas off. And the clients are happy, getting such professional attention from three 
specialists.
The team: permanent or freelance?
A wise old financial guru once said, ‘watch fixed overheads, keep them as low, and 
as flexible as is possible’ but of course the biggest expense in a design company is 
its people.
Enter the freelance, the name that originates literally from a mercenary cavalry 
lancer, hired for a specific battle or war. The cavalry is always welcome in design 
companies: we are, after all, primarily a project-based industry having to deal with 
skirmish after skirmish.
Freelancers are hired for a number of reasons: specialist expertise; when times 
are busy; maternity relief; in times of uncertainty; or because the financial model 
forbids hiring any additional permanent staff. What do they bring to the party?
Flexibility is the big bonus and, although they can be more expensive, they can 
be turned on and off like a tap. No notice period, redundancy payment, and so on. 
They also bring a wealth of experience of working in other, possibly larger agencies, 
including your competitors. Learn from them, how they work and how they present 
their work. Freelancers bring intelligence. There’s no suggestion here of broken 
confidences, but you’d be surprised at what you can pick up about people, clients 
and the levels of morale in other design companies where they have previously 
worked.
Freelancers will become more important for design companies that morph 
into other areas of communication: broadcast, computer generated imagery (CGI), 
research, sonic branding and so on, where specialist expertise needs to bought in. 
This is generally known as the ‘Hollywood model’, where you assemble around you 
the skills to deliver the project.
However, the real character of every design company lies in creating a dynamic, 
skilled and permanent team of experts, the people and personalities that make up 
your brand. Clients want a long-term relationship so they can build a rapport, have 
confidence and trust in the team and know that the team is acquiring vital brand and 
sector knowledge. This is unlikely to happen with new faces at every other meeting. 
Permanent staff are the lifeblood of the design company; they are responsible for its 
reputation and ultimately for other designers wanting to work there.
They have other responsibilities too, such as helping to build up morale, 
evangelising about the business, and, in all but the smallest of agencies, helping 
to create a hierarchy where seniors bring on the juniors and juniors aspire to be 
seniors, in one big happy family.

57
the business structure
How big is your team? How big do you want it 
to be?
Being part of an extended network or operating within a strategic partnership, 
allows a local and specialised design business to punch above its weight, extend its 
offer through wider skill sets, and reach out to the world.
The big advantage is that it gives you the ability to field anything that the client 
throws at you, anywhere. It allows you be involved with the whole project, rather 
than parts of it, local and global. If you offer pure design, who does the brand 
strategy? If your creative solution needs to work in Japan, who makes sure that it’s a 
cultural fit and is understood? With links, partnerships, a network, all these things 
are possible. Being part of a network means you can refer the client to a trusted 
specialist. Word of mouth is the most powerful form of recommendation and so 
much more credible. Having a strategic partnership allows you to compete with the 
bigger design companies, which may have several specialist divisions and a global 
operation.
Perhaps the biggest benefit of an alliance or a closer tie is the opportunity of 
cross referral. If you are linked to, say, four complementary skills or regions, there is 
a fourfold chance of new business introductions. The companies to which you are 
linked will expect you to reciprocate.
Who to partner with? Look at your offer and top and tail. Which discipline 
comes before, and which after? Track your clients and projects to see what part of 
the process or project you are not being given. Many design companies have links 
with PR companies, a natural fit where each company can introduce business to the 
other.
What to expect financially? There’s money to be made. Agree how successful 
business leads should be rewarded. A one-off introductory fee or a percentage of the 
fee value of the project? Agree how you might collaborate, and who will lead the 
project.
On another level, make good use of business colleagues and suppliers. Promote 
them on your website: writers, photographers, artists, gurus, printers, bloggers, 
animators, or just people who have inspired you. They will be thrilled to be included. 
Suddenly your design company looks twice the size and will appear three times as 
interesting and, hopefully, four times as successful.

This page has been left blank intentionally

You only find out who’s swimming naked when the tide goes out.
Warren Buffet (b1930), investor and philanthropist
Why plan your finances?
With a buoyant market and a good creative product, there are times when it is 
relatively easy to run a design business. Work comes in, clients approve budgets 
and pay bills, banks lend money when it’s needed and the company can hire the 
right staff. In such times, management teams can jog along and turn in a modest 
profit without thinking too hard about the financial structure of the business. Does 
it matter that margins are not as high as they should be? Or that the assets in the 
business don’t work as hard as they should? Or that the capital base of the business 
is not high enough? Yes, because the owners will not be getting the most out of 
their asset and, in more difficult economic circumstances, the business will be more 
likely than its professionally run peers to fail.
The three key aspects of managing profits in a business are: (i) planning, (ii) 
taking action and (iii) measuring the results (see Figure 2.6.1).
Business Planning
Planning gives a context within which to 
assess performance. If a design consultancy 
generates a profit of £200,000 when hoping 
for £200,000, the management team will 
have delivered on budget and will be 
happy. If they were hoping for £500,000, 
however, this will be a disappointing 
result.
Every business should have a business 
plan. This should be a working document 
used to set business and financial goals, 
to provide a context for evaluating 
•
2.6 
The money (part one)
Mandy Merron

60
How to Run a Successful Design Business
performance, to consider and plan for factors which will affect trade, to assess likely 
outcomes and responses and to identify key performance indicators (KPIs).
Not all KPIs will be financial, and it helps to bring them together in an executive 
summary, often referred to as a ‘dashboard’.
Which financial performance measures matter? In a design business there are 
four key headings:
Income pipeline: how far and how much known and likely business is coming 
through.
Profit margins: comparing profit and costs with revenue.
Productivity statistics: revenue and costs per head as well as utilisation rates, or 
the proportion of time spent on client work.
Balance sheet statistics: cash balance versus overdraft level; cash resources versus 
overheads.
Creating a business plan
Although this chapter deals with financial plans, it’s worth remembering that they 
sit within a broader business plan, which can be split into three ‘M’s:
Market: the business offer; where the firm sits versus the competition; the state 
of the marketplace.
Manpower: the people needed for delivery to clients, with roles and responsibilities; 
the resources (like premises and IT) needed to support them.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Figure 2.6.1  The profit management cycle
Source: © Kingston Smith W1
Plan
Take 
action
 Measure 
results

61
the money (part one)
Money: the pricing policy, and how clients will be charged (project fees, retainers); 
the mark-up on recharged costs; the hours which could be worked on client 
business, and how many hours are likely to be worked on client business; future 
business costs, revenue and cashflow.
Planning ‘the money’
Financial forecasting is an iterative process. Costs are known and relatively easy to 
predict. Income is harder to predict, especially for designers. Separately estimating 
costs and income usually leads to a gap – often a forecasted loss. It is tempting to fill 
this gap with a new business target, but this can be dangerous and every income and 
cost assumption needs to be challenged and tested. Usually both forecast income 
and forecast costs are revised until an acceptable profit is predicted.
In producing forecasts, it is very important to run two or three versions which 
answer ‘what if?’ questions such as:
What if fee income is 10 per cent lower than we think?
What if we grow by 25 per cent not 15 per cent?
What if clients take a month longer to pay us than we think?
By running spreadsheets which look at these different possibilities, management 
can get a good feel for what they would need to do in those circumstances.
Planning profit
Once the first working plan has been produced the underlying assumptions need to 
be challenged. For example:
Is productivity high enough?
If not, why? And how can we change that?
How else can we increase profit?
Can efficiency and ‘right first time’ process be improved?
Is it possible to charge more?
Is there a line of work which is particularly profitable or unprofitable?
Should the business focus more or less on those areas?
Is the business dependent on one or two key clients and if so how can it 
diversify?
The action generated will be company-wide and will include looking at 
efficiencies in process, approaches to client handling, client contracts, estimation 
procedure and charging models among other areas.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

62
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Without the discipline of a business plan, significant opportunities to improve 
performance can be ignored.
Planning cashflow
Cash is the oil which enables a business machine to keep turning, and design 
businesses can run out of cash before they run out of profit. Buying fixed assets, 
paying rent deposits and returning VAT payments won’t affect profit, but they will 
have a significant impact on cash.
Producing a cashflow forecast helps to identify pressure points such as quarter 
ends when a rent payment might coincide with a VAT payment, and it will give 
management teams the chance to take actions like arranging a short-term overdraft 
extension with the bank to cover a peak need.
Growth needs cash, and faster growth needs more cash, to fund the gap between 
paying staff to do the work and eventually being paid by the client (see Figure 
2.6.2).
In a design business, there is only limited scope to manage cash. The two 
biggest overheads are people and premises, and it is not usually possible to extend 
Working
Capital 
need
 Month 
 1 
 Month 
 2 
 Month 
 3 
 Month 
 4 
Fast growth
Medium
growth
Do work 
and pay 
staff
Bill 
client
Collect 
debt
Figure 2.6.2  Growth and cash requirements
Source: © Kingston Smith W1

63
the money (part one)
payment terms for either. How clients are billed and managed does, however, have 
a significant impact. Many consultancies bill an element in advance, while others 
bill monthly based on progress: payment terms should be expressly discussed and 
agreed in the client contract.
Credit checks should always be run before credit is extended, and any clients 
where cash collection may be difficult – such as overseas clients – should be billed 
and the cash collected in advance of the work.
Raising investment from banks
Design consultancies can need significant cash for items such as buying capital 
assets, following business development opportunities, setting up abroad, company 
acquisitions or buying out departing shareholders.
There are various ways to raise funds but the basic rule is to match the type of 
funding to the type of expenditure. Companies shouldn’t use cash to buy capital 
assets unless they are sitting on a cash mountain, and borrowing arrangements 
should match the type of expenditure. Just as people don’t buy a house using an 
overdraft, companies shouldn’t use short-term borrowing arrangements to buy 
long-term assets such as another company.
Working capital is the cash needed to fund day-to-day trading activities. This 
is the sort of finance provided by banks, either as an overdraft or as invoice-
discounting. Typically an overdraft is less expensive but invoice-discounting can 
raise more cash for the business.
Overdrafts are generally well understood. Banks will need security in the form 
of good trade debts and usually want any lending they advance to be covered two 
and half to three times by trade debts. Often, banks will ask for additional security 
in the form of personal guarantees from the directors.
In undisclosed invoice-discounting, the bank effectively buys the company’s 
debts for cash and the company then collects the cash on behalf of the bank. 
Disclosed invoice-discounting, or factoring, involves the bank or factor collecting 
the debts itself and so effectively running the design business’s debtor book. Banks 
won’t take on debts which are not contractually enforceable so invoices for stage 
payments, up-front payments or retainer fees can be difficult to invoice-discount.
For longer-term projects bank funding can be available in the form of loans. 
Banks need to understand how easily the business will be able to repay the loan 
interest, and when they can expect their money back. This should have been 
covered in the business plan and profit and cash forecasts. The economic climate 
has a significant impact on the terms on which banks are prepared to lend, but 
they will usually want to see that the interest cost is easily covered by profits. It is 
useful to speak to your accountant before approaching your bank to see what broad 
lending criteria are currently in operation and to ensure that any lending request is 
sensibly framed.

64
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Raising investment from government
It is worth investigating the Government-introduced measures designed to give small 
and medium-sized businesses (SMEs) access to guaranteed bank loan finance. Most 
banks will have information on how these schemes work. At the time of writing, 
there are also Government grants available to businesses in some parts of the UK: 
details are available from Business Link, a free business advice and support service.
Raising investment from other sources
If a business needs more long-term capital, and bank finance is unavailable or too 
costly, alternatives include individual angel investors, trade investors, venture 
capital and flotation, or public listing.
Angel investors will often be people who already know the management team and 
are prepared to back them. There are organisations which can introduce business angels 
to design firms, and a good place to start is the British Business Angels Network. The 
best business angels bring more to the table than cash, and will usually want to help 
the business as a non-executive director. Non-executive directors can be very useful 
in providing an objective perspective to the management team and in particular to 
help them focus on key issues and long-term strategy. They can also bring business 
experience which may be lacking in a less experienced management team.
Trade investors are companies operating in the same or similar field. They may 
want a stake in the business in order to secure a specialist offer for their clients, or 
to cement existing shared client relationships. A trade investor may take a minority 
stake (less than 50 per cent) although some will insist on a controlling stake. It is 
usual for the trade investor to want the right to buy the rest of the business at some 
point in the future, which means it is vital to be happy with that relationship.
Venture capital investors are interested in investing in businesses with good growth 
potential where they can see a high return for their investment. They are not usually 
interested in investing small amounts so this sort of investment suits larger businesses 
with fairly ambitious growth and acquisition plans. Venture capitalists will want to 
see their money back with a good return, typically over a three to five year period.
Becoming a publicly listed company is a fourth source of finance. This can assist 
in providing funds, usually for acquisition, and a market in the company’s shares 
can make them more attractive when used to pay for acquisitions. This is suitable 
for only a few design businesses: to have a reasonably active market in the shares, a 
business needs to be generating profits of around £10 million.
Income models, retainers and project fees
How much designers charge for their work and how that income comes in both 
have a significant impact on the business’s finances. Systems and processes should 

65
the money (part one)
never obscure the opportunity for designers to charge what a project is worth, as 
opposed to what it might cost.
There are a number of income models used by designers. These are the most 
common:
project fees
retainers
recharges on production costs
performance-related fees
royalty streams
share-based payments.
Project fees are the most common income model. They have the advantage of being 
separately negotiated for every project, thus providing the opportunity to charge 
what the market will bear, which may be more than the resource cost. Conversely, 
they also give the client the opportunity to negotiate the price down. Project fees 
have other disadvantages. Psychologically, they reinforce a short-term client/supplier 
relationship. They also provide little certainty of income, and they are difficult to 
forecast which makes planning difficult and cashflow harder to manage.
Retainers reflect a longer-term relationship which is more of a partnership, and 
also provide more certainty of income and cashflow. The disadvantage is that they 
are difficult to negotiate. Containing the work requested within the scope of the 
retainer can be a struggle, and it can also be hard to invoice-discount debts for 
retainer fees.
Recharging production costs can still represent a significant element of income even 
though more clients are putting clauses in their contracts which prohibit mark-ups 
and which require designers to pass on any volume discounts. Where production 
income is significant, it should not subsidise creative fees. The core product is creative 
output and designers should be paid properly for this and not for, say, buying print.
Performance-related fees are less common in design than in other marketing 
disciplines. Clients will sometimes ask a design company to share their risk and 
take a smaller basic fee in exchange for an additional bonus fee based on the 
achievement of agreed targets. These may be delivery targets for the consultancy 
(client satisfaction ratings for example) or targets based around the outcome of the 
work. Performance fees can provide a welcome upside, but care is needed that the 
potential bonus is sufficient to compensate for the risk.
Royalties can happen when designer and clients work together to develop a new 
product, and a suitable deal negotiated.
Share payments can be offered by clients who have no cash, but offer shares in 
their business instead. If a design business has cash reserves to sustain work for 
which it will not be paid until the shares are sold, this can be worth doing. The 
question designers should ask themselves is: ‘If we were paid in cash, would we 
then invest that cash in those shares?’ If the answer is no, it’s probably a bad idea 
to do it.
•
•
•
•
•
•

66
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Business Insurances
It is important to plan for when things can go wrong, and insurance plays an 
important role. The usual insurances include the following:
Professional Indemnity
Public Liability
Employer’s Liability
Directors’ Insurance
Buildings & Contents
Legal Expenses
Key Man Cover
Shareholder Protection
Professional Indemnity Insurance protects the business against claims made by 
dissatisfied clients where they have suffered financial loss as a result of neglect, errors 
and omissions. This is probably the most important cover a designer should consider.
Public Liability Insurance protects against claims from third parties as a result of 
injury (or death) or harm done to property as a result of business activities.
Employer’s Liability Insurance protects the business against claims from any 
employees, including claims for accidents and sickness. It is a legal requirement to 
have it.
Directors’ Insurance protects directors from being sued. Even though the nature 
of running a limited company ‘limits’ claims against its directors, in some cases (for 
example, negligence), directors of limited companies can be sued. Non-executive 
directors will usually insist on this insurance being in place.
Buildings & Contents Cover is standard insurance to protect business property and 
fixtures/fittings.
Legal Expenses Insurance provides protection in the eventuality of legal action 
being taken against the business.
Key Man Cover protects the business against the loss through death or illness of 
its key people.
Shareholder Protection Insurance protects each of the shareholders. On the death 
or diagnosis of a critical illness of a shareholder, the other shareholders receive a 
cash lump sum which can then be used to buy the affected shareholder’s shares. 
This ensures a swift resolution with minimum disruption to the company.
From planning to managing
Planning helps management teams to anticipate what the business may throw at 
them, and to think about what to do before the heat of battle. It also provides 
opportunities to optimise performance and to build a business which, when 
followed with effective management action and the measurement of results, will be 
highly focused, efficient and profitable.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

2.7 
The money (part two)
Gary Baxter
As a general rule, the most successful man in life is the man who has the best information.
Benjamin Disraeli (1804–81), politician and statesman
Who needs financial management?
Design has come a long way in the last quarter of a century, but the fundamental 
qualities of successful design companies have changed little. It has always been true 
that a rigorous approach to financial management greatly improves the likelihood 
of business success. This is because the culture of a company with good financial 
management tends to be one in which the management is disciplined in all aspects 
of its business.
The success of any accounting system ultimately depends on whether the business 
owners and managers understand the information, and whether it is sufficient to 
enable them to make timely decisions, taking into account the company’s financial 
circumstances and the wider economic environment.
Particularly in recessionary times, businesses need to pay very close attention 
to their finances, which means that there is little tolerance in slack or inadequate 
financial management. Accounting systems which may have been adequate in 
more buoyant times start to creak under the pressure of the demand to understand 
what is going on in the business.
It is possible to create a successful accounting system in the form of handwritten 
‘books’, but owners and managers of design companies today can take advantage 
of sophisticated and affordable technology to produce timely financial information 
and reports. This ensures that the directors of the company have the opportunity 
to understand their performance and enables them to react quickly to information 
derived from analysis of the data.
Financial plan and budgeting
Whatever the size or situation of your design company, you need to prepare a 
financial income and expenditure plan and budget for the year ahead. How?
•

68
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Money in
Firstly, look at how much money you can bring in.
Evaluate the fee income potential of your team. To do this you need to work 
out the estimated ‘achievable chargeable hours’ for the fee earners in the year 
ahead, taking account of planned additions and departures. Experience suggests 
that designers should achieve 1,500 chargeable hours per year, and client services 
1,200. The number of achievable chargeable hours for directors will be less because 
of their non-chargeable work in areas such as new business development, human 
resource management and so on. The chargeable hours plan for them is likely to be 
between 250 and 750.
Hourly charge-out rates should be established for each chargeable employee. By 
using published survey data, such as that provided to Design Business Association 
(DBA) members, it is possible to ensure that the hourly rates used are ‘market-rates’. 
By multiplying the hourly rates by the estimated achievable chargeable hours, the 
‘potential fee income’ can be established. Typically, about 25 per cent of this value 
will be ‘written off’ and not charged to clients, because of lost pitches or general 
inefficiencies. Having worked out your ‘potential fee income’, therefore, take 75 per 
cent of this to arrive at the fee income budget.
Using this as a basis, plan your team potential for each of the 12 months ahead. 
This will give you your budgeted fee income for each month against which you 
can measure actual performance. If you then apply the same charge-out rates used 
in this calculation to your quotes for each and every project, it will be possible to 
derive a meaningful analysis of the variances between your budgeted fee income 
and the actual fee income achieved.
Having arrived at the fee income budget, use historical data to estimate the 
amount of rechargeable expenses that will be billed to clients in addition to design 
fees. This will vary according to design discipline, but could be in the range 10–50 
per cent of fee income.
Turnover is the sum of the fee income plus the recharged expenses. But for 
useful comparison with other businesses and for internal statistics you should use 
‘Gross Income’ rather than turnover, because turnover can be greatly increased by 
items such as large print bills, whereas the mark-up on that item may only be 20 
per cent. Gross income is defined as fee income plus the mark-up on recharged 
expenses. For the gross income budget, therefore, you need to use historical data to 
calculate the estimated mark-up on recharged expenses for the year ahead.
Money out
Next, you need to review your salaries and overheads and set budgets for the year 
ahead. In carrying out this review, take the opportunity to categorise the budget 
into levels 1–4, with 1 being the costs which could be cut most easily and 4 those 
where cuts would radically change the way the business operates.
For the expenditure plan, allocate costs into these categories:

69
the money (part two)
Salaries: include employers’ National Insurance Contributions, planned 
dividends, freelancers.
People costs: include training, pension scheme, staff social costs.
Premises: include rent, utilities, maintenance, mortgage.
Technology and communications: include IT, telephone, equipment.
Business development: include entertaining, awards, website costs.
Professional fees: include legal, accountancy, insurance, consultancy.
Studio costs: include studio administration, stationery, reference material, 
postage.
In preparing the expenditure plan, it is essential to consider the detail within 
the above headings and create sub-headings to suit your particular circumstances. 
This will make cost control and monthly review much easier. It will be particularly 
important to prepare a detailed plan and allocate personal responsibility for the 
business development and technology budgets. This is because these two areas are 
typically where there is most choice – unlike rent or electricity, for example – so the 
budget needs to be planned and controlled by an individual.
Armed with this cost analysis, the ‘break-even’ figure can be computed. This is 
the level of fees which have to be achieved in order to pay for the total salaries and 
overheads. If done accurately, this gives business owners an instant feel of how the 
business is doing each month when the billing figures are reviewed. One of the best 
uses of the break-even figure is to compare it to the forecast gross income for the 
next three months. This is often the earliest warning sign of potential problems, 
and can be used to make timely, crucial decisions on cost cutting when they can be 
most effective.
Whilst owners and managers may employ the services of someone in the finance 
department or their accountant to help with the budget, its ‘ownership’ should be 
very much theirs so that they understand the content and implications.
Financial management reporting
The budgets, as detailed above, should be compiled into a format which the owners 
and managers understand. Also, it is important to ensure that reports of actual 
results from the accounting system are easily compared to the budgets. Data entered 
into the report (sales and purchase invoices, for example) needs to be analysed 
into categories which exactly reflect the income and expenditure headings and sub-
headings used when preparing the budgets.
The financial management reports will include:
Operating Report: income and expenditure analysed into categories.
Balance Sheet: showing investment in premises and equipment and what is owed 
by the company and what it owes to suppliers, HMRC and so on.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

70
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Cashflow Forecast: based on expected money receivable and payable over the 
next 3–12 months, this is a forecast of the expected balance in the bank.
Billing Analysis: by client and by job, showing billing and profitability.
Billing Forecast: 3–12 months, ‘known’, ‘prospective’ and ‘speculative’.
Accounts Receivable Report: aged debtors (amounts owed by clients), with 
comments on the 60–90 day columns.
Accounts Payable Report: aged creditors (amounts owed to suppliers).
A summary extract from a simple operating report would look like this (Table 
2.7.1). For detail to be included in the expenditure lines, see bullet points under 
‘Money Out’ on the previous page.
	
From a CRM (Client Relationship Management) pipeline or other system, the potential for fee income over 3–12 
months should be analysed into: (i) ‘known’ projects, normally those in the plan to be completed in the next 1–3 
months and confirmed by the client; (ii) ‘prospective’, those for which proposals and/or quotes have been sent; (iii) 
‘speculative’, the potential, based on estimates of projects and relationships yet to be developed.
•
•
•
•
•
Current Month
Budget
Actual
Variance
Fee income
Mark-up on expenses
_________
_________
_________
Gross Income
_________
_________
_________
Salaries & planned dividends
People costs
Premises 
Technology and communications 
Business development
Professional fees
Studio costs
_________
_________
_________
Total salaries and overheads
_________
_________
_________
Net profit (before taxation)
_________
_________
_________
Table 2.7.1  Summary extract from a simple operating report

71
the money (part two)
Benchmarking and key performance indicators 
(KPIs)
To put your company’s performance into context, you need to benchmark your 
performance against others in the industry.
On average over the last 25 years, well-run design companies would have spent 
55 per cent of their gross income on salaries and 25 per cent on overheads, leaving 
a net profit margin of 20 per cent (before taxation). In recessionary times companies 
will have shifted their targets to 60 per cent, 30 per cent and 10 per cent respectively, 
in order to keep their team and structure in place in anticipation of an upturn.
Design companies’ spend on overheads will vary from year to year depending 
on their particular circumstances. Based on UK survey data, realistically achievable 
targets would be as follows (Table 2.7.2).
Problem avoidance
The above is a useful guide to levels of reasonable expenditure, when the business 
remains profitable. When income starts to fall, the ‘fixed’ element of the costs will 
obviously start to impact upon these ratios. It is not easy to simply cut out sufficient 
costs instantly, to bring your ratios back in line.
As mentioned earlier, budgets should be categorised in the planning stage in 
order to prepare for the possibility of a need to make cuts. This preparation will prove 
invaluable in a situation where income is falling toward the break-even point.
As a rule, sufficient funds should have been retained in the business so that 
the amount of cash, plus debtors, less creditors, equates to at least four times the 
monthly running costs of the business. This would give a cushion of time to evaluate 
the situation and develop an action plan.
Salaries
57%
People costs
4%
Premises
9%
Technology and communications
3%
Business development
4%
Professional fees and insurance
2%
Studio expenses
5%
Subtotal
84%
PROFIT MARGIN
16%
Table 2.7.2  Overhead targets

72
How to Run a Successful Design Business
The extent to which funds have been retained will influence the required speed 
at which decisions need to be taken. For example, if only two months’ salaries and 
overheads are covered, the decision to cut costs can’t wait one more month.
In addition to the expenditure percentages described above, key balance sheet 
ratios should be compiled to reveal strengths and weaknesses in the company’s 
finances.
The following are some useful ratios with typical targets:
Debtor days: the ratio of the total amount owed by debtors (excluding VAT) to 
turnover for the last two months.
This calculation will give you the average number of days’ credit period you 
are giving to your clients. You should aim to achieve average debtor days of 
around 45, and it would be a warning sign if the average were over 60.
A hypothetical example of the calculation would be: 60 (average debtor days) 
divided by £100,000 (turnover for last two months) multiplied by £120,000 
(debtors excluding VAT). It indicates average debtor days of 72, and potential 
cashflow problems on the horizon.
2.	 Running costs cover: the ratio of net current assets to monthly running costs.
This ratio will indicate how long the company could continue to pay for its 
running costs (overheads plus salaries and loan repayments) if income dried 
up.
In current times we would expect this ratio to exceed three (months) and be 
aiming at five.
Other ‘risk assessment’ ratios would include:
‘Gearing’ ratios, which compare the amount of loan finance to equity in 
the balance sheet, and the extent to which loan repayments are covered 
by after-tax profit.
The spread of income across the client base, the target being no more 
than 15 per cent from any one client, with warning signs if this reaches 
more than 30 per cent.
Accounting and financial project management 
systems
Avoid overly complicated project management systems, which purport to give 
you ratios and margins on just about every piece of data you can imagine. For 
projects, all you really need to know is if you are on time and on budget. Project 
management systems need to have a facility for recording the fees budget for a 
project, broken down into its natural stages. It should be capable of processing time 
sheets so that the value of the resources used – mostly time spent at charge-rate 
– can be monitored against the budget. Similarly, you need to record the budget 
for rechargeable expenses and monitor the expenditure via purchase orders, not via 
suppliers’ invoices. By the time they arrive it’s often too late!
1.
•
•

73
the money (part two)
With this basic data recorded, the system should be capable of producing reports 
which show how much of the budget has been used and profitability reports, once 
a project or stage has been billed to the client, to show whether the project was 
completed in accordance with the criteria set in the business plan. The financial 
target in the business plan will be achieved only if, on average, the completed 
projects comply with the chargeable hours, charge-rates and efficiency ratios 
implicit in the financial plan.
Who’s in charge of the money?
If necessary, owners and managers should know when they need to take a back seat 
and let someone else look after the details of the finances. However, as indicated 
already, it is important to remember that the responsibility for financial management 
rests with the businesses owners. This is true in law, but it also needs to be true in 
practice, in the way the business is run.
Whilst it is not possible or indeed desirable to turn designers into accountants, 
systems should be in place which are capable of producing reports and information, 
free of accounting jargon and mystery, and accessible.
This means that you need to find expert employees or specialist professional 
advisors who understand the industry, and who can introduce appropriate 
accounting and financial project management software which is intuitive and has 
good reporting capability.

This page has been left blank intentionally

2.8 
The law
Jo Evans
Although our intellect always longs for clarity and certainty, our nature often finds uncertainty 
fascinating.
Carl Von Clausewitz (1780–1831), soldier, historian and military theorist
Business types, and the pros and cons
The most common form of business entity in the UK is a private company limited 
by shares, identified by the word ‘Limited’ or ‘Ltd’ after its name. You may also see 
the suffix ‘LLP’, which identifies a limited liability partnership.
A limited company or an LLP is likely to be the most suitable vehicle for 
establishing a new design business. So why are they the most popular and which 
one is likely to suit you best?
Why a limited company and not a partnership or sole trader?
One reason why most people set up a limited company when starting a business, 
rather than operating as a sole trader or as a partnership, is to minimise risk. As a 
shareholder in a company, your risk is limited to the amount invested: the company 
has its own legal identity and is responsible for paying its own debts.
If you operate as a sole trader you are responsible for the debts of the business. 
Similarly, in a partnership the liability of each partner is unlimited and each partner 
is jointly liable for the debts of the other partners in connection with the business.
Another form of limited company is a public limited company, or plc. If you 
intend to offer shares in your company to the general public – by floating on the 
stock market, for example – then the company must be a plc. Whilst the risk to 
shareholders is still limited to the amount invested in the shares, a public limited 
company (plc) must have share capital of at least £50,000 of which £12,500 must be 
fully paid up before the company can trade. So whilst there is some kudos attached 
to having ‘plc’ after the company’s name, the minimum capital requirement 
and additional corporate governance requirements to maintain a plc are usually 
dissuasive factors.
•

76
How to Run a Successful Design Business
There are other forms of company: unlimited companies; companies limited by 
guarantee and community interest companies. However, unless your business has a 
social enterprise or charitable objective, these are unlikely to be the most suitable.
Whilst minimising risk is a key factor, there are other characteristics of limited 
companies which make them good business vehicles:
Tax: a limited company structure may be more tax efficient.
Continuity: a limited company continues even though the personnel changes.
Shares: in a limited company, shares can be used to incentivise key employees 
as the company grows.
Finance: companies can offer shares to third-party investors to raise funds and, 
if borrowing from a bank, can offer security in the form of a charge over its 
assets.
The quid pro quo for the limited liability of the shareholders is that, unlike a 
partnership and a sole trader, a company needs to file financial statements each year 
with Companies House and they appear on a publicly available record.
The rise of the Limited Liability Partnership (LLP)
For all of the above reasons, a limited company has been the natural choice of 
vehicle for many businesses. However, since 2001, it has been possible to incorporate 
a limited liability partnership in the UK. There are now over 40,000 limited liability 
partnerships registered at Companies House, so in a relatively short period of time 
they have become a popular business vehicle. As the name suggests, they are a 
partnership in which the liability of the partners (or members) is limited. This 
distinguishes them from a traditional partnership where the liability of the partners 
is unlimited. The LLP is a hybrid vehicle. Think of it as a partnership on the inside 
and a company on the outside. The key difference between an LLP and a limited 
company is that the LLP has no share capital. The members of the LLP themselves 
determine their rewards and returns outside of a share capital framework
An LLP has many of the advantages of a limited company: limited liability; 
continuity; tax efficiency, especially in the early growth years; and the ability to 
raise finance and offer security. These characteristics when coupled with the concept 
of a partnership between its participants – suggestive of collaborative working and 
equality between members and, importantly, with the ability to fix the rewards 
between members privately and flexibly – make them an attractive proposition for 
‘people’ businesses.
Table 2.8.1 compares some of the key features of an LLP, a private limited 
company and a partnership/sole trader. Which is right for you will depend upon 
the needs and expectations of the participants and their plans for the growth and 
development of that business.
•
•
•
•

77
the law
A final word on limited liability. It is increasingly the case that banks, landlords 
and suppliers are minimising their own risk in lending to smaller limited liability 
enterprises by seeking personal guarantees from the owners of such enterprises. This 
trend undermines the concept of limited liability, holding the owners personally 
accountable for liabilities of the business which ordinarily would stay with the 
business. The incidence and scope of those guarantees will be a matter of bargaining 
power in each case. Whilst you may not be able to avoid giving the guarantee in the 
first place, do keep it under review. As the business grows and the loan is repaid or 
the overdraft no longer used, you can seek to have the guarantee released.
Limited company
LLP
Partnership/sole 
trader
Constitutional 
documents
Articles of association 
(filed at Companies 
House)
None required
None required
Annual Accounts
Filed at Companies 
House
Filed at Companies 
House
None required
Taxation
Taxed according to 
company principles: 
corporation tax on 
profits; income tax on 
salaries and dividends to 
shareholders
Taxed on partnership 
principles: no 
corporation tax, 
members taxed on 
shares of profits
Taxed on partnership 
principles: no 
corporation tax, 
partners/trader taxed 
on shares of profits/
income
Liability to third 
parties
Liability of shareholders 
and directors limited 
Liability of members 
limited
Unlimited liability
Interest of 
participants
Dividends and capital 
returns to shareholders 
governed by share rights 
in articles of association; 
directors and employees 
paid by salary
Members determine 
income and capital 
rights between 
themselves and can flex 
as required
Partners determine 
income and capital 
rights between 
themselves and can flex 
as required
Contractual 
arrangements 
between 
participants
Articles (see above). 
Shareholders agreement 
recommended (private 
document)
None required but LLP 
members agreement 
recommended (private 
document)
None required but 
partnership agreement 
recommended (private 
document)
Publicly filed 
returns
Annual accounts; 
annual return; names 
of directors and 
shareholders
Annual accounts; 
annual return; names of 
designated members
None
Registered name 
and registered 
office
Required and filed at 
Companies House
Required and filed at 
Companies House
None required
Table 2.8.1  Comparison of business types

78
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Client Contracts
There is no need, as a matter of law, for there to be anything in writing in order to 
establish the existence of a binding contract. As any good law student will tell you, 
all you need to make a binding contract are an offer, an acceptance of that offer, 
some consideration (usually money) and an intention to create legal relations.
Litigation thrives on, and is fuelled by, uncertainty, and the main reason why 
contracts are usually reduced to writing is to establish certainty as to the precise terms 
agreed between the parties. Certainty is needed in the complex terms which might 
have been negotiated back and forth between the parties dealing with matters such 
as: payment; deliverables; obligations; responsibilities; rights and consequences in 
the event of breach; termination provisions; length of the contract; exclusions and 
exclusivity of arrangements.
Common law also imports terms, called ‘implied terms’, into contracts and the 
parties need to be clear in the explicit terms agreed between them which of the 
implied terms are to remain and which to be excluded.
Understanding that eventually a commercial relationship will end, and realising 
that the point of termination is probably not the best time to be arguing about 
notice provisions and the scope of ownership of intellectual property, is often a 
sufficient prompt to agree contract terms with clients in writing.
There are good design industry-specific standard terms for client/agency 
agreements which reflect a fair position between the contracting parties. Whilst 
these agreements should not be slavishly followed, they provide a good starting 
point for negotiations between your agency and its clients.
Employees’ contracts and policies
In whatever form your business is established, you will be taking on employees as it 
grows. You need to make sure that your prospective employees have permission to 
work in the UK. If you are in any doubt as to whether a visa stamp means the person 
is allowed to work then you should seek specialist help, for example from The UK 
Border Agency. You will also need to familiarise yourself with UK income tax and 
social security regulations.
All employees in the UK are entitled to receive a written statement of certain 
employment terms, covering things such as: place of work; start date; salary; 
notice period and holiday entitlement. Certain terms will also be implied into an 
employment contract by common law; these implied terms include a duty by the 
employee not to misuse confidential information or trade secrets of the employer 
and the mutual obligation of trust and confidence.
Whilst the provision of a written statement may satisfy your statutory employer 
obligations, you might find it advantageous to consider a longer agreement. This 
would allow you to clarify explicitly the common law implied terms, and also to 
include covenants to protect the goodwill of the business when the employment 

79
the law
relationship ends. These post-termination provisions or ‘restrictive covenants’ 
allow you, for example, to prevent the employee from soliciting clients when they 
leave. If you have an employee who is producing creative work for clients and/or 
has a client-facing role, then it is perfectly legitimate to seek to protect the goodwill 
created in an employment contract. Enforcing such provisions is difficult but 
provided they are drafted carefully and with proper thought given to the nature of 
the business, the clients and the client relationships and are limited in scope, they 
are upheld by the courts.
Employment legislation is constantly evolving. The 1990s and early 2000s 
saw fundamental changes to employment rights reminiscent of the far reaching 
changes introduced in the 1970s when equal pay and race and sex discrimination 
were embedded in statute. Legislation now covers: minimum wages; health and 
safety; working hours; rights for part timers and maternity, paternity and adoption 
rights; grievance and disciplinary procedures; and discrimination on disability, 
sexual orientation, religion and belief and age.
Best practice dictates putting in place policies for dealing with these statutory 
obligations. Whilst it is not a legal obligation to have a policy covering all these 
issues in the event of, for example, a discrimination claim, the lack of an equal 
opportunities policy will make it appear that you, as an employer, are not committed 
to equal opportunities. That is a factor which a tribunal could take into account 
when deciding whether to draw an inference of discrimination.
Suppliers and Freelancers
Suppliers and freelancers engaged by design businesses are frequently providing 
creative work to the agency; this might include freelancers engaged to assist on a 
particular client brief or suppliers designing the agency’s website.
In the case of employees, if there is any doubt as to ownership of the intellectual 
property rights (IPR) created by the employee in the course of their employment, 
the courts and relevant intellectual property statutes tend to favour the employer. 
This is not always the case where those intellectual property rights are created by 
freelancers and third-party suppliers.
In the absence of any contract dealing specifically with intellectual property 
rights, consultants or freelancers (that is, non-employees) will, by default, own 
the copyright in works they create. This means that computer programmers, 
photographers and artists will be the primary owners of the copyright in their work 
not the agency – or indeed the agency’s client – for whom the work was created. 
But the rules applying to different forms of intellectual property are not the same. 
For example, in relation to design rights, it is the commissioner of the design (the 
agency or the client) rather than the designer him or herself who is entitled to any 
registered or unregistered design rights in a design.
The application of those two principles could lead to a situation where the 
copyright in a drawing or model belongs to the freelancer but the agency or client 

80
How to Run a Successful Design Business
owns the registered or unregistered design rights. As most contracts between an 
agency and its clients will contain a warranty from the agency that it owns the 
intellectual property rights in the work created for the client, the agency might find 
itself in the awkward position of having to deliver rights in intellectual property to 
a client and being unable to so because the freelance owner of the right refuses to 
assign the rights over.
All of the above could be avoided by a clear contract between the agency and its 
freelancers and suppliers dealing with a comprehensive assignment of intellectual 
property rights to the agency.
Partnership and shareholder agreements
Many successful design businesses have sprung from the creative collaboration 
between two or more individuals: look at the top names on any industry league 
table. It is an overused cliché, but true nonetheless, that embarking on a business 
partnership is akin to a marriage. Many marriages are long and harmonious, but not 
all. And the same is true of creative business partnerships.
Let’s continue the analogy and assume an early honeymoon period of business 
growth and prosperity and a roster of amazing work for an enviable list of clients. 
But, as time goes on, strains appear in the relationship, or something unexpected 
happens, like the death or illness of one of the founders. At that stage, the business 
itself could be a very valuable asset, and most would agree that is not the best time 
to embark upon the discussions about how the founding partners are going to deal 
with the new circumstances.
Far better, at the start of the relationship to have had a thorough discussion 
about the future plans and expectations of each of the founders; to have thought 
through what will happen if one of the partners wants to go part time, becomes ill, 
divorces or dies; or if one wants to sell all or some of their shares, or bring in a new 
partner, and the others don’t like the prospective new shareholder or partner.
All of the above issues, having been discussed and agreed, can be set out in 
an agreement between you and your founding partners. If the business entity is 
a limited company, the principles will be enshrined in your company’s articles of 
association and a shareholders’ agreement. If your business is an LLP, you ought to 
have a partnership or members’ agreement. As well as dealing with the ‘big’ questions 
mentioned above, the agreements can also clarify the roles and responsibilities of 
each of you and become a blueprint for good business practice and governance.

2.9 
The intellectual property
Darrell Stuart-Smith
Don’t worry about people stealing an idea. If it is original you will have to ram it down their 
throats.
Howard H. Aiken (1900–73), computer pioneer
Why are Intellectual 
Property Rights so 
important?
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) protect work 
that is the expression of human intellectual 
creativity. They arise either automatically or 
through a process of registration.
All businesses own IPR even if it is just 
in the letters they write or their name, but 
for a creative business it can be its very 
life blood. Every design business needs to 
recognise, manage and protect its own IPR, 
whilst understanding what clients need to receive to use and exploit the creative 
work which they are buying.
If a design business does not address IPR in its dealings with clients, suppliers, 
agents, representatives and staff then the law will, to an extent, deal with it for 
them in a way that might fetter the future creativity of the business. It may also 
leave a design consultancy with a contractual obligation to deliver or license rights 
to a client which the consultancy does not, in fact, own.
What is included IPR?
Copyright
Arises automatically and protects original literary (including computer programmes), 
dramatic, musical and artistic works as well as sound recordings and films. The 
•

82
How to Run a Successful Design Business
owner of the copyright in a qualifying protected work has – subject to certain limited 
exceptions – the right to copy, publish, adapt or perform the work. It generally lasts 
for the life of the author plus a number of years, usually 70. Copyright is often 
asserted by the symbol ©, followed by the year of creation and the name of the 
owner. Whilst recommended, it is not a legal requirement to do this, and works that 
do not carry this assertion may still be protected by copyright.
Design right
Arises automatically and protects the original design of the shape and configuration 
(including patterns and aspects of surface decoration) of articles or parts thereof. 
The owner has the right to produce articles to that design. It lasts for a maximum 
of 15 years.
Unregistered trade marks
Arises automatically and protects aspects of the goodwill, usually the identity, of 
a business (such as name, logo, house style) against unfair use. This right, which, 
unlike copyright and design right, originates not from statute but through the 
decisions of the courts and their desire to control unfair competition, is protected 
through the law of ‘passing off’.
Registered trade marks
A mark (including words, logos, design devices, strap lines and even smells, shapes 
and sounds) which meets qualifying criteria and which distinguish goods and 
services of one business from another can be registered. This confers an almost 
monopolistic right to use the mark in relation to the goods and/or services for 
which it has been registered. A registered mark can be challenged if it is not used, 
but otherwise can be renewed every ten years.
Patents
A registered right which protects by conferring a legal monopoly upon novel and 
not obvious inventive processes and features which make things work. A registered 
patent will last for up to 20 years.
Confidential information
Proprietary information that is not generally in the public domain. It is most 
effectively protected through the use of contractual confidentiality or non-disclosure 
agreements.

83
the intellectual property
Know-how
Accumulated commercially sensitive business knowledge that is often protected 
through the retention of staff with particular expertise and, where it has to be 
disclosed in the course of business, through confidentiality agreements.
Moral right
The right of an author of a copyright work to be identified and to stop the work 
being treated in a derogatory way. This right cannot be transferred and must be 
asserted.
Managing clients’ IPR expectations
Clients are concerned about the disclosure of their confidential information, 
whether it be plans to rebrand their business or to launch or relaunch a particular 
product or service or even to just freshen up an existing part of their business.
Clients often believe:
that design work produced in response to a brief will somehow incorporate 
confidential information about their business;
that they have bought a complete design process (rather than just a design 
solution);
that all of the work arising in response to a brief has been created for them and 
paid for by them.
Many clients therefore conclude that all of the work arising in response to 
the brief and all IPR therein should and must belong to them, whereas the design 
process will invariably generate a vast amount of work that does not form any part 
of the final design solution.
Designers need to understand their clients’ concerns and be able and prepared 
to explain why it may not be appropriate for such a large body of work and rights 
to pass, and that the focus should be on the final design solution.
The designer must also consider if it is necessary to transfer IPR to the client 
or merely grant a licence of IPR to allow the client to use the work for the purpose 
it was created. This requires balancing the clients’ expectations against what is 
reasonable and appropriate in the circumstances.
As a general rule of thumb, the graphic, two-dimensional design business 
probably has nothing to be concerned about if it transfers IPR in the final selected 
design, whereas the three-dimensional designer, and those who work in areas where 
there are limited design solutions available because of functionality or other factors, 
is better off thinking in terms of a licence.
•
•
•

84
How to Run a Successful Design Business
If IPR are to be licensed, then usage, exclusivity, duration, market sector and 
rights of adaptation should be addressed. If the licence terms are not stipulated, the 
court will impose such terms as are appropriate in the circumstances.
If a design consultancy agrees to transfer or exclusively license IPR to a client 
then it should consider if it needs to reserve rights to itself to enable it to work on 
similar projects in the future.
Pitches and IPR
A pitch (paid or unpaid) is a form of contract, with work being carried out in 
return for a fee and/or an opportunity to be considered for further work. The same 
considerations regarding IPR apply.
Where a consultancy is unsuccessful with a pitch (paid or unpaid) it may feel 
it inappropriate to pass to the prospective client any work and any IPR. It may also 
wish to protect, through written pitch terms, the ideas and concepts that have been 
presented as part of the pitch.
Infringement of IPR
Designers have a tendency to think that provided they do not actually copy another’s 
work there will be no problem. At a certain level (specifically as regards copyright) 
this is generally true, although the designer needs to be alert to the possibility of 
subconscious or subliminal copying. It is also necessary to consider the possible 
infringement of registered rights. Searches are possible but the interpretation of the 
results is often complex and inconclusive.
Clients usually assume that their use of commissioned work will not infringe 
the rights of another person or business. If the client prepares the contract terms, it 
will often include a warranty from the designer to this effect and may require this 
to be supported by an indemnity against any infringement claims. This is usually 
unreasonable. Unless designers specifically agree, as part of the brief, to provide 
intellectual property clearance in relation to their work, responsibility should be 
limited to producing ‘original’ work that does not ‘knowingly’ infringe any other 
rights. It should also be made clear that, unless expressly agreed, the designer is not 
expected to carry out formal searches or enquiries.
Should IPR ever become a deal breaker?
This depends upon the nature of the services being provided and the attitude of 
the client to legal clearance and liability. A brief that provides for all of the work 
arising (and IPR) to pass to the client, backed up by the passing of responsibility for 

85
the intellectual property
legal clearance, topped up with an indemnity for claims and losses arising, may be 
a contract too far!
Each contract and its risks has to be considered in context with regard to the 
nature of the work, the reward and the ability of the consultancy to discharge its 
obligations. Most problems arise because the design firm either did not understand 
its obligations or did not address certain of those obligations and merely signed the 
contract believing, perhaps, that it had insurance if there was a problem.
In all contractual negotiations – and in particular when dealing with IPR and 
risks – it is important to put forward reasonable proposals which can be explained 
and supported. Professional and reasonable terms of trading will probably apply to 
the majority of contract work, and an understanding of how contracts are formed 
is helpful in this regard. However, contracts tabled by clients will invariably seek 
to claim ownership of all the rights in any work arising and place unreasonable 
burden and responsibility upon the design consultancy.
With a good working knowledge of IPR, an understanding of client expectations 
and a reasonable position to put forward, the design consultancy can maintain 
good client relations without taking on unreasonable and potentially business 
threatening risks.

This page has been left blank intentionally

My own business always bores me to death. I prefer other people’s.
Oscar Wilde (1854–1900), playwright, from ‘Lady Windermere’s fan’
Taking the high ground
Clients buy designs, but they also buy individuals who clearly convey relevant, 
informed and surprising opinions. They buy the charismatic mind, not just the 
brilliant execution. While designers need to show that they understand clients and 
their businesses, they also need to show that they can anticipate developments in 
and beyond the sector those businesses are in.
There is no reason to have pretensions to be a management consultant, but there 
is a reason to differentiate your business from those run by design-only designers. 
That way, you can hope to achieve higher margins and to secure more durable 
client relationships. A critical attitude, mastery of facts, numeracy and real brain 
skills – in finding things out, writing and speaking about them – are the invaluable 
complement to the skills of hand and eye.
Remember, too, that although a 
fierce intellectual approach doesn’t 
guarantee a close attention to client 
briefs, it can help to create the right 
forensic skills and environment to allow 
such attention to flourish.
The management advantages of a 
practical, but also intellectual, stance 
don’t end with client relationships. 
Your ability to motivate, retain and get 
the best out of staff will be improved if 
they believe that they will learn from 
you. Your relations with suppliers and 
regulators will get better, the more you 
understand where they are coming from 
and going to. Your ability to get into the 
•
2.10 The management issues
James Woudhuysen

88
How to Run a Successful Design Business
mainstream media, and to win more respect from everyone, will depend on your 
taking the high ground.
To help in this, there are plenty of books and journals on economics, leadership, 
management and human resources. However, although designers need to know 
about the dynamics of the workplace, the supply chain and perhaps even corporate 
finance, the imperatives for them have more to do with understanding future trends, 
communicating their ideas with the maximum clarity and doing good research. 
Designers also need closely to follow developments in innovation and marketing.
Understanding future trends
There are many pitfalls in forecasting future trends. Designers, as much as anyone, 
have a habit of impressionistically representing ideas they have picked up from the 
mass media as their own, freshly minted. They also have much to learn about the 
history of ideas: understanding the past is important to grasping the real outlines of 
tomorrow. The Web and sites like Wikipedia make the history of ideas a much easier 
subject to grasp than it was in the past.
The chief thing to remember when working on future trends for clients is that 
they grow out of both the present and history, but they never repeat them. Nor 
is the future just something that happens to people; it’s something that people, 
including clients, make happen.
It is always hard to predict the timing of coming developments. However, a way 
to avoid mistakes is to collect more professional forecasts and, having collected 
them, suspect them more. In particular, there is a clear need to adopt a critical 
and independent stance towards breathless declarations about new trends, whose 
novelty, poor durability and weak force make them better described as fads.
Communicating with clarity
In 1963, the legendary British advertising guru, David Ogilvy, could insist that 
discipline was needed to write good ads. He admonished his readers that the then 
‘fashionable’ word ‘creativity’ was ‘not in the 12-volume Oxford Dictionary’. His 
other rules included:
what you say is more vital than how you say it;
unless your campaign is built around a great idea, it will flop;
give the facts;
you can't bore people into buying.
	
See Trends: Introducing Futures and Trends Research, James Woudhuysen, Design Council
	
Confessions of an Advertising Man, David Ogilvy, 1963
•
•
•
•

89
the management issues
Communication needs to be simple, incisive, and, as George Orwell said of good 
prose, like a windowpane.
In all your communications with clients, you need to put yourself in their shoes. 
The key to that is to research their overall position and operating context.
Doing good research
Your business can only benefit by conducting a programme of research that runs 
independently from the different projects you have running with clients.
Make sure you build separate files on:
sectors
clients
rivals
issues.
With research, outcomes cannot be predicted in advance. It involves taking 
risks, accepting serendipity and, often, embracing the bizarre. It must have an 
inspiring goal. It must be comprehensive and done from every angle. It means 
learning about how other people have, historically, approached the problem you’re 
looking at – what they’ve got right, and what they’ve got wrong.
Be prepared to suspend judgment, at least initially: don’t take the problem 
as given. You will also find that it is particularly useful to start by thinking hard 
about the most topical, concrete and puzzling paradox about the issue you are 
researching.
For example, why is it that, despite all the interest in fashion and in mobile 
phones, few applications have yet emerged for what specialists have been talking 
about for some years: ‘wearable media’ – electronic textiles that can monitor your 
blood pressure, or adjust to different conditions of temperature and humidity? Part 
of the answer to this difficult question is that it is hard to make flexible electronic 
garments that can withstand the rigours of washing and drying. What the example 
shows is that, by selecting paradoxes, one is led both into useful directions for 
research, and into what to do next. In this case, the next thing to do would be 
to find out who is doing what in flexible and waterproof electronics. Makers of 
thin, bendy plastic electronic screens, and of underwater cameras, would be worth 
a look.
This broad approach to research is also relevant to how you present your 
ideas and your past work. Organise these things by topical and knotty theme, 
not by chronology. Start with the present dilemmas, explore their history from 
the standpoint of the present, and build design directions from scholarly, creative 
challenges to received opinion and the status quo.
	
Essay, Why I Write, George Orwell, 1946
•
•
•
•

90
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Innovation and marketing among clients
Not a few clients are rather averse to taking risks and engaging in technological 
innovation. Activities related to accounting and finance (‘business models’), 
human resources, regulation and environmentalism tend to win out against hard 
work, leadership and long-term programmes of basic research and development 
(R&D).
An obsessive interest in the West in branding, customer segmentation and 
customer loyalty is the flip side of disdain for the messy business of developing 
and applying new technologies and designs. Indeed there are signs that the East, 
despite its continued commitment to new technology, is also beginning to revel in 
marketing as a low-cost, line-of-least-resistance route toward profitability.
A big trend in the West is to talk up any aspect of innovation that isn’t 
technological. This is all too convenient at a time when business spending on R&D, 
and – even more – government spending on R&D is stagnant. R&D in energy, and 
in services, is particularly weak.
While clients and designers both have much to learn about users, the exaltation 
of users as the key to innovation only flatters the user-conscious designer. Just like 
conventional market research, it is unlikely to lead to groundbreaking innovations. 
Bill Gates, Google, Sony and James Dyson did not do what they did by fixating on 
consumers.
In fact, investing in daring, risky, supply- and expertise-led innovations contrary 
to the business cycle tends to make the biggest differences. Design should be a 
willing collaborator in such projects, and not a cheap alternative to them.
Convincing your clients
After all these years, design is part of the mainstream, and is managed more 
professionally than in the past. However, for many board-level clients, it is still 
more about styling than about real practical benefits. To spell out those benefits 
convincingly, in terms of costs and time saved, ease of use, likely profitability and 
other factors, is the main task facing the managers of design today.
That is why you should broadly price your work by the benefits your design 
brings, not by the timesheets you have filled out. What clients are interested in 
paying for is not your blood, sweat and tears, but rather the difference you make 
to the bottom line. To compute that difference convincingly, you will need to 
understand the client’s business and its future – in some ways, and without being 
arrogant, even better than the client.
That is also why, to give them the persuasive powers that are required, your staff 
need to be able to work in and feel comfortable with high professional standards of 
	
See Chapter 7 of Energise! A Future for Energy Innovation, James Woudhuysen and Joe Kaplinsky, Beautiful Books, 
2009

91
the management issues
reading, writing and public presentation. Such skills can never substitute for creativity 
in solving design problems, but they are now the indispensable complement to 
professionalism in design.

This page has been left blank intentionally

2.11 The validation
Shan Preddy
The fight does not always go to the strongest, nor the race to the swiftest, but that’s the way to bet.
Damon Runyon (1880–1946), newspaperman and writer
The proof of the padding
Unlike many other business sectors, including its close cousins architecture and 
advertising, the design world gets off lightly: we are not regulated and controlled, 
and we do not have compulsory validations or accreditations. Anyone with a laptop 
and the appropriate software can set themselves up as a design firm, regardless of 
their abilities, qualifications and experience. Many, of course, succeed in building 
very successful businesses and take their professional responsibilities seriously. 
Others work hard within the various design associations and bodies to improve the 
professionalism of the sector as a whole. But it is all voluntary.
Your own business might be perfect in every respect: processes and procedures; 
policies; accountability; due diligence; ethics; sustainability; staff training and 
development; health and safety. However, there will be times when you need to 
prove that perfection to others, particularly to clients and prospective clients from 
larger commercial companies and public sector bodies. If they operate rosters, 
frameworks or approved suppliers’ lists, they might ask in their pre-qualification 
questionnaires (PQQs) whether you hold any accreditations from third parties. 
These might range from simple membership of professional organisations to official 
international standards certificates. If you don’t hold them, it doesn’t necessarily 
mean that your roster application or project bid will be rejected outright, but you 
might have to fight a bit harder to get on the list.
For clients and prospects who don’t actively insist on accreditation, of course, the 
presence of some sort of validation will act as a reassurance of your professionalism.
What validation is there, and how do you decide 
if it’s important?
There are several forms of validation which are relevant to the design sector, and 
which you might like to consider.
•

94
How to Run a Successful Design Business
Refereed or qualified memberships
One of the benefits of being part of a recognised membership organisation is that it 
will underline your professionalism, especially when there are criteria for eligibility. 
In the UK, for example, the DBA (Design Business Association) stipulates that full 
membership is available to design consultancies and company in-house design 
teams which earn more than 50 per cent of their total income from providing design 
services, and that the contact details of three clients must be supplied for the DBA 
to approach for references. There is also a Code of Conduct which members agree 
to follow. Other, but by no means all, membership bodies worldwide have similar 
arrangements. Organisations which require that members qualify to join are harder 
to enter, but much more worthwhile once you’re there.
Awards
Some design-specific honours are given to individuals in recognition of lifetime 
achievements; they are awarded, not applied for. However, there are many 
application-based schemes for design firms, and listing the awards you have won is a 
powerful way to support your claim of professionalism. They act as an independent, 
prestigious endorsement of the quality of your company.
Firstly, there are the design sector awards. There are dozens, and there will 
almost certainly be one or more for your own design discipline and specialism. 
Winning creative awards which are based on peer-to-peer judgements is important 
and inspirational, and will help to attract and retain key creative staff. Winning 
design effectiveness awards, on the other hand, will impress clients and prospects, 
demonstrating that your design interventions have commercial value.
But what about looking beyond our immediate sector and applying for national 
recognition schemes for businesses, especially for small businesses? Contact your 
local or national government enterprise support service to see what might be 
available. Also, look out for schemes advertised or reviewed in the business press; 
new initiatives are being launched all the time. What about being ‘best employer 
of the year’, or ‘greenest company in the county’, or ‘fastest growing firm in the 
region’?
What about the really premium awards? In the UK, for example, we have the 
Queen’s Award for Enterprise with three categories: International Trade, Innovation 
and Sustainable Development. What a wonderful opportunity winning any of 
these would be to illustrate to your clients, suppliers and staff (not to mention your 
competitors) the success of your business.
And some clients have their own regular assessment schemes for suppliers and 
contractors, and issue awards to those which provide a particularly high-quality 
service. It’s worth checking whether any of your clients run such schemes, and 
discussing with them how you might apply and qualify.
	
Source: DBA, January 2010

95
the validation
Official accreditation certificates
Finally, there are the official accreditation schemes which exist for all companies, 
regardless of business sector.
Of these, the ISO (International Organisation for Standardisation) certificates 
are probably the best-known. ISO, a non-government organisation with a Central 
Secretariat in Switzerland, is the world’s largest developer and publisher of 
International Standards, and is a network of the national standards institutes of 
163 countries. There are hundreds of standards relating to every aspect of business 
and public life, but within the design sector there are two which are most likely to 
be held by leading firms: ISO 9001, which relates to quality management, and ISO 
14001, which relates to sustainability, or environmental management.
Additionally, in the UK many design successful firms – not all of them large 
– have qualified for the Investors in People (IIP) accreditation, a standard which 
covers the way businesses improve their performance through their people. By 
placing proper emphasis on your staff and their training and development, and 
being recognised for doing so, you will demonstrate that you are a serious contender 
in the business arena.
Choosing them, and using them
Qualifying for, and subsequently maintaining, the various types of validation can 
be expensive and time-consuming. It’s worth remembering, particularly with the 
official accreditation schemes, that there are independent commercial organisations 
which specialise in helping companies through the maze.
The simplest way to decide which, if any, to pursue is to keep a weather-eye on 
what your clients and prospects are asking for, and on what your main competitors 
are offering. If the cost and effort involved in validation will, in your judgement, 
result in a commercial benefit, go for it.
And once you’ve got your validations, don’t forget to use them to maximum 
effect in your marketing materials: brochures, website, stationery, credentials 
presentations, written proposals. It’s surprising how many design businesses sweat 
blood to get an accreditation, and then forget to mention it to anyone.

This page has been left blank intentionally

2.12 The memberships
Shan Preddy
What good is sitting alone in your room?
Fred Ebb (1933–2004), lyricist, from ‘Cabaret’
Come hear the music play
Running a design business can be a lonely occupation and you can sometimes end 
up talking to yourself if you’re not careful. ‘Here’s a great marketing idea!’ you say, 
and no one will agree or disagree with you. ‘Great!’ you announce, ‘We made x per 
cent profit in the last year!’, but you will have no idea how that compares with the 
marketplace as a whole. ‘Anyone else had a problem with recruiting good staff?’ you 
cry, and the answer is silence.
Around 90 per cent of design firms worldwide employ fewer than ten people. 
Only the largest businesses in the sector, therefore, will have reasonable-sized 
management teams, parent companies, sister divisions or subsidiaries to discuss 
commercial matters with. For the rest, it’s a case of relying on external advisers such 
as lawyers and accountants (who will be good in their own skills set but might not 
be very design-knowledgeable) or just dangerous guesswork.
Before you sob gently into your mug of tea, all is not lost. For annual membership 
fees which are very modest in comparison with the benefits they offer, you can join 
a number of professional and trade associations, societies and groups. There’s no 
need to be lonely.
Joining in
There are three main sectors whose organisations are worth considering:
the design sector;
the business sector;
and the client sector.
	
Design Council Design Industry Survey, 2010
•
•
•
•

98
How to Run a Successful Design Business
It’s not a case of ‘either/or’. Within the limits of budgets and common sense, 
many successful design professionals are members of one or more organisations in 
each of the different sectors. They will all give you a wide range of benefits, not least 
the advantage of similarly-minded people to talk to. Even if you’re not a natural 
joiner-in, now might be the time to give it a try.
The design sector
Design sector associations, societies and membership groups further sub-divide into 
three main types:
individual (or professional) which is for you and corporate (or trade) which is 
for your company;
national and local;
general and discipline-specific.
Although availability and quality varies from country to country, the overall 
quantity and quality are improving rapidly. Most are based in the relevant capital 
cities, which is where the majority of design businesses will be located, and so they 
tend to focus most of their activities there. However, they will hold regional events 
if they can marshall sufficient numbers, and they are often open to suggestions.
What will you get for your money with these fee-paying associations, societies 
and groups? What are the real benefits? Do they outweigh the cost?
The mature and well-established organisations offer a very wide range of 
benefits. They will have directories of membership, which allow clients to find you 
and allow you to find potential strategic alliances. They will help with your own 
and your staff’s professional development through their design-specific training 
courses, webinars, conferences and seminars. They will have a Code of Conduct 
and encourage you to display the association’s logo, which you can use to promote 
your professional services to your clients. They issue regular magazines, newsletters 
and blogs which will keep you in touch with general developments in the sector. 
They provide information and assistance for your business, and are able to put 
you in touch with expert advisers. They often have online discussion groups where 
you can join a debate or pose a question to your peers. Some have awards schemes 
which recognise and acknowledge excellence. Some have favourable deals with 
providers of business services such as insurance, pensions and travel. And most 
hold networking events, usually with a topical business issue at their heart.
In the UK, we are very fortunate compared with most other countries. Almost 
every region has at least one membership network of its own, often several. Nationally, 
we have the corporate membership opportunities afforded by the Design Business 
Association (DBA). For individual membership, we have the Chartered Society of 
Designers (CSD), British Design and Art Direction (D&AD) and the Royal Society for 
the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce (RSA). There are several 
discipline-specific membership and promotion organisations such as British Design 
•
•
•

99
the memberships
Innovation (BDI), which concentrates on industrial, service and innovation design. 
Interior design seems to be particularly well-served: organisations include British 
Interior Design Association (BIDA), Interior Design Association (IDA) and Society 
of British Interior Design (SBID), all representing slightly different facets of the 
discipline. In architecture, we have Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) with 
40,500 individual members as well as its Chartered Practice Accreditation scheme. 
Others exist for other disciplines and new ones appear regularly.
Finally, some countries have government-funded design bodies, which are 
not open to membership; the UK’s Design Council is an example. Their services 
are usually free at the point of delivery, and they can be an excellent source of 
information and expertise through their websites, publications and mailings. 
Attending their workshops and events can provide good networking opportunities 
as well as knowledge, as can volunteering for one of their task forces or being 
appointed to a committee. All you need to do to use them is to visit their website 
and get on to their mailing lists.
The small business sector
Design businesses are small businesses, and the challenges that face you are often 
the same as those facing other entrepreneurs. Most countries have their share of 
national and local business organisations; in the UK we have several that design 
businesses can join, including the Federation of Small Businesses, the Institute of 
Directors and local Chambers of Commerce.
Each will offer slightly different benefits and, if you happen to specialise in 
working for small businesses, you can also use these forums to meet potential 
clients.
The client sector
Some of the larger, national client-sector organisations can be all-embracing, with 
members from a wide range of markets and skills sets; others are very specific and 
specialist. If you think about your own client base – or perhaps more importantly 
your desired client base – you should be able to work out where people are likely to 
gather. If you’re not sure, ask your own clients.
On the assumption that you are eligible for membership – some societies are 
strict about ‘suppliers’ joining, and others require relevant professional qualifications 
– what can you hope to achieve? The main advantages lie in access to the specific 
market. Membership lists can be of use in your sales activities; networking events, 
seminars and conferences can provide opportunities for meeting people; and 
magazines, newsletters, blogs and online discussion forums will keep you in touch 
with facts, issues and trends.
By immersing yourself in the marketplaces of your clients and prospects, your 
new business activities and existing client relationships will become easier and 

100 How to Run a Successful Design Business
more meaningful. No client wants to work with someone who doesn’t understand 
what’s going on.
Be a leader, not a follower
If you don’t make use of any associations you are a member of, then give them 
up; there is little point in renewing your subscriptions. But if you do use them, 
why not engage fully with them? Why not take John F Kennedy’s approach of 
asking – to paraphrase – ‘not what your association can do for you, but what you 
can do for your association’? Get involved. Make suggestions. Write articles for its 
newsletters. Join a committee or a task force. Become a regional representative. 
Stand for President.
Once you have become established in your career, there is something enormously 
rewarding in ‘giving back’ some of your experience and expertise in order to shape 
the future of the design industry. In addition, you can cite the position on your CV 
or profile, and use it in your marketing and promotional materials.
It will take time and effort, and you will need the support of your colleagues, but 
the value that such involvement brings, if done properly, is priceless.

2.13 The network
Phil Jones
You only get to keep what you give away.
Anon
The ultimate paradox
To make the most of networking 
opportunities, it helps to know your 
strengths. Are you a natural networker? 
People come in all shapes and sizes, and a 
good way to find out how to play to your 
strengths is to understand what they are. 
There are some good analytical tools on 
the internet, and they are a great place 
to start discovering what makes you who 
you are.
These days, too much emphasis is put 
on short-term payback in networking. 
Many people assume that merely being 
seen at industry events, and offering the odd handshake and cheek brush with the 
right people before slipping out the door on the way back from the toilets, is all 
that’s required to ‘network’. Minimum time and effort expended; job done.
In reality, to get the most from a network it’s important to leave more behind 
than a handshake and a business card. People need to feel valued, including the 
driver who takes you to an appointment and the receptionist who greets you; time 
spent in a car speaking to the driver will help you grow your network far better than 
playing with your iPhone. Word of mouth is still the best PR tool there is and to 
create a great network it’s more important to be interested than interesting.
The election of Barack Obama in 2008 was a triumph of great networking. Camp 
Obamas took place all over the USA, and instead of conventional focus groups or 
indoctrination events, priority was given to listening to the stories of individuals, 
to taking a genuine interest in them. It captured the imagination of ordinary people 
on the election trail, and the rest, as they say, is history.
•

102 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Who to connect with?
Success in business is all about making connections with interesting people, and a 
great network includes your family, your own team and your suppliers. In an ideal 
world, you need a good sprinkling of people who fit into categories 4 and 5 below. 
But realistically, to find those precious 4s and 5s, you’ll also have to waste a little 
time with categories 1–3.
Those who just don’t know what’s going on.
Those who simply watch what’s going on.
Those who always criticise what’s going on.
Those who get involved.
Those who make things happen.
Building a network with the right talents and personalities doesn’t happen 
overnight, and you’ll have to invest time in order to get the best results. Some 
design organisations offer great networking opportunities, particularly if you’re 
prepared to give up time and help the organisers, rather than just attending events. 
In the UK, for example, The Typographic Circle was kick-started in the nineties by 
pulling together a committee full of 4s and 5s who knew how to have fun and make 
things happen.
There are some interesting and original networking events that are put on by 
individuals in our industry. Sweden has Digital Crayfish; Madrid and London have 
Bladdered Again, a quarterly social drinks event that came out of the old Bladdered by 
Fax; there is a global initiative Creative Social, where international Creative Directors 
can compare notes. In the UK, there is She Says, for women in the digital sector, and 
regional events like Manchester Digital, Bristol Media, Wired Sussex and Long Lunch in 
Scotland. Also in the UK, the Design Council, Design Business Association (DBA) 
and British Design and Art Direction (D&AD) run excellent talks and events that 
give the opportunity to meet like-minded people and network.
Create your own
Rather than relying on existing ones, some individuals choose to create their own 
networking events. Taking the initiative (and time) to create an event around 
something you feel especially passionate about is a great way to meet like-minded 
people, as long as you create a reason for them to attend. New technology and a 
boom in social networking sites make this much easier to achieve.
An example of an event born out of a need for something different was the 
Podge Council Lunch, created in 1994 after a major recession in the early nineties 
had ripped through the design industry. Its aim was to allow owners of design 
businesses to chat informally about how they had fared during the recession, 
and to offer help to each other. Thirty top designers attended the first lunch, and 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

103
the network
Podge is still going strong now with over 160 in regular attendance. Arguably, the 
success of this particular annual networking lunch is because it has never been 
called a networking lunch. It is about creating an environment that allows people 
with similar interests and challenges to get together, to meet their peers and chat 
informally with absolutely no agenda (but a lot of booze).
Few of the companies which attended that first lunch came out of the recession 
unscathed, but those that did were happy to share their experiences, and a genuine 
camaraderie was established. Digital Podge was created shortly after the dot.com 
bubble burst, and has been doing the same for the digital world since.
If you give, you’ll get
Social events like these attract a great cross-section of creatives and naturally provide 
an excellent networking opportunity. However, the people that make the most 
from such opportunities are those who go with the flow, and turn up regardless of 
whether there will be any tangible payback in it for them. These are the people that 
make themselves available to others.
Giving your time and offering your ear to listen are the greatest gifts you 
can make. Whether it’s to a student looking for advice, or a prospective client, 
it shouldn’t make a difference. Give your time to people and they’ll help you to 
build your network. Networking is essentially about ‘paying it forward’. You help 
someone, asking nothing in return, and one day they will remember your kindness 
and help you. This is the simplest, purest form of networking.
Whether it is through social media or real-world, face-to-face connections, the 
magic ingredient for creating a great network is remembering that ‘you only get to 
keep what you give away’.

This page has been left blank intentionally

2.14 The working environment
Shan Preddy
No man is an island entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main.
John Donne (1572–1631), lawyer, diplomat, chaplain and metaphysical poet
You are where you work
Take a good look around you, as though you were seeing your offices for the first 
time. Do they reflect your firm’s corporate identity? Do they form a visual signpost to 
your business’s culture and personality? 
The answer – whether you like it or not 
– is yes, they do. The appearance of your 
offices, intentional or unintentional, 
sends out a clear message about how 
you run the rest of your business.
Your working environment is a key 
part of your business, and it will either 
contribute to or hinder your commercial 
success. If you have invested in a great 
place to work, with attractive, well-
functioning workspaces, you will be much 
more likely to attract and retain good staff, 
and to reassure clients and prospects. You 
will also be more motivated personally. 
On the other hand, if your workplace is 
a mess, with brushes and mops in the 
bathrooms, tatty furniture everywhere, dirty coffee cups piling up in the sink and 
boxes of unfiled paperwork everywhere, it will do exactly the opposite. Either way, the 
environment you have created says something about you and your priorities.
Corporate or creative?
Beyond the obvious basics of common sense, employment legislation and health and 
safety requirements, there’s no right or wrong about how you create your working 
•

106 How to Run a Successful Design Business
space. Whether you reflect your clients’ offices in style, or have an innovative space 
which could only belong to a design company, the choice is yours.
There are many excellent examples of creative firms’ interiors available for 
reference in print and online. Some use sleek minimalism to create calm, serene 
workspaces. Others use funky elements such as slides and fireman’s poles instead 
of stairs, or mud huts and space-age pods instead of meeting rooms. What your 
working environment should look like depends on your culture, your positioning in 
the marketplace, your product, your offer and, of course, your needs and resources. 
Whatever your business stands for, however, it should look the part.
Once you have decided on your overall interior direction, make the time and 
budget to do it properly. It isn’t just a question of decor, although that will obviously 
act as a powerful motivator or demotivator. You need to think carefully about what 
you want the space to do, how you want it to work. Here are a few questions you 
might like to ask yourself:
Does the space function in line with your working methods and processes?
Are there enough storage areas, now and for the foreseeable future?
Where will all of the IT requirements go?
Could some of the space be flexible, with more than one use?
How much of your furniture needs to be fixed, and how much needs to be loose 
to allow different ‘break-out’ combinations?
Does everyone need their own permanent area, or can you hot-desk?
What do you need on and around each desk-space?
How much latitude will you allow your staff over their own space, and over 
shared spaces?
Could you have areas with different styles for different functions, such as one 
formal meeting room and one with squishy beanbags?
What is the immediate visual impact on entering the space?
Where will you display examples of your completed projects?
Do you need waiting areas for visitors, away from the confidential areas of the 
studio?
Can visitors get to the bathroom without passing ongoing confidential work for 
clients?
Have you got places where staff can work quietly, and where they can work in 
teams?
Are there places to meet, to have discussions, to generate ideas? Places to think? 
Places to eat, and to chat? Places to have fun, play, relax?
Is there somewhere to store coats, bags, bikes?
What functions do you really need in the kitchen area?
Is there somewhere to pin up notices, information, inspirational items?
Where will central-resource reference and library items be kept?
Can you expand the workspace as your business grows?
Is it secure from potential theft of valuable equipment?
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

107
the working environment
Is your client work secure and confidential?
Does the space inspire everyone to do better work?
From buzzer to boardroom
What is the journey like to your place? Most of us never ‘visit’ our own workspaces. 
With the exception of the largest and most professional design firms, the journey 
often goes something like this. With a downloaded map in hand, realisation dawns 
on the visitor that it is not to scale or oriented north-south, and that it contains no 
phone number for directions. Arriving eventually and finding a small sign, he rings 
the buzzer and a voice on the other end says something incomprehensible due to 
the traffic noise outside, followed by a loud parp of the door-release. The internal 
signage is poor and, once at the right door, the visitor finds that he is unexpected. 
Nobody takes his coat away or offers refreshment. He waits on an uncomfortably 
low chair, flipping through dog-eared, irrelevant trade journals. Finally, he is greeted 
and collected, and the meeting finally starts with a very stressed guest and a slightly 
puzzled host.
Try taking ‘the journey’ and find out how it works at your place. Even better, ask 
a friend to make the journey with you. In particular, make sure that your directions 
and signage work, and that clients, prospects and other important visitors (such as 
talented potential recruits) are greeted by name and made to feel welcome: it is very 
rare that they will turn up unexpectedly. It’s in your own interest, after all, to hold 
meetings with people who are relaxed and in a positive frame of mind.
•
•

This page has been left blank intentionally

2.15 The neverending story
Shan Preddy
It has taken me all this time to discover which notes to leave out.
Dizzie Gillespie (1917–1993), jazz trumpet player, bandleader, singer and composer
Kaizen and the art of design maintenance
It could be argued that if you want to run a successful design business, you’ll need 
to enjoy it and you’ll need to make a profit. Not enjoying it, and never will? Give it 
up and do something else. Life’s too short. Not making a profit, and never will? Ah, 
well then, your decision is shortly going to be made for you.
However, even assuming that you are enjoying it and making a profit, you can’t 
afford to be complacent. Part of the enjoyment of running any business – and 
part of the profit – comes from making continuous improvements to knowledge, 
culture, staff motivation, financial performance, client retention, pitch wins, time 
recovery, office environment and all of the hundreds of different elements, large 
and small, which go into making a business tick.
This process of continuous improvement, or the art of ‘kaizen’ as the Japanese 
call it, is the philosophy and practice of making constant, small advances. It’s not 
a one-off activity; it’s a process. We need to ask ourselves – continuously – ‘are we 
getting better and better at doing what we do?’
Standing still on the up escalator
Here’s just one example of continuous improvement in the area of knowledge: 
keeping abreast of trends and innovations.
The design world, in common with other fast-growing business sectors, is 
developing rapidly. New technologies are leading to new products and services, 
which are leading to new market behaviours and new demands from clients. These 
will, in turn, lead to the arrival of further new products and services and the hunt 
for new technologies to supply them.
If you don’t understand the changes taking place in technology, products and 
services, market behaviours and client needs, you will still progress by absorbing 
things through the media, through conversations and through projects. But taking 
•

110 How to Run a Successful Design Business
such a passive stance will slow you down. It’s like standing still on a flight of up 
escalators instead of walking up them: you will get to the top eventually, but when 
you get there you’ll find that the market – and your competitors – are already half 
way up the next escalator.
Dangers and solutions
Introducing a culture of continuous improvement is not always as easy as it sounds. 
There are four main pitfalls.
The first is the feeling of gloom that can descend if you decide that absolutely 
everything needs improving. The second is the failure to improve the right things. 
The third is not knowing whether your improvements have worked or not. And 
the fourth is the sense of ‘improvement fatigue’ that can set in among staff and 
colleagues.
Let’s look at each of these, together with some solutions.
Feeling gloomy
Once you start looking into all of the improvements you could make to your 
business, it is easy to become disheartened and imagine that you’re useless at 
everything. And this can become contagious, spreading though your firm like an 
unstoppable force.
Stop right there; beating yourself up isn’t going to help anyone, least of all 
you. Instead, make sure that your culture is one of constructive feedback so that 
you, your senior management team and all of your employees find the continuous 
improvement process motivating and are empowered to join in.
Constructive feedback isn’t based on ‘good…bad’, or ‘yes…but’. It focuses 
instead on ‘good…better’, or on ‘yes…and’. A simple but very effective feedback 
framework is to ask two questions: first ‘what do we do well?’, and then ‘what could 
we do better?’ Give yourself a well-earned pat on the back for the former before you 
start to fix the latter, and be realistic about goals, resources and timescales.
Improving the right things
Focus on the important things. There’s little merit in spending a lot of time on 
trivial improvements, satisfying though it can be to tick them off the list.
To make sure you fix the right things, it’s important to know what’s broke and what 
ain’t. One sure way to find out is to conduct a 360° survey, where everyone is asked for 
their views: your clients, your employees and your suppliers. Asking for constructive 
feedback from people who know your business well can be enlightening.
If you ask an independent consultant to do the survey for you, and if you 
make the responses non-attributable, you will get better results than if you do it 
yourself.

111
the neverending story
Knowing what’s worked
There is an old business saying: ‘If you can’t measure it, you can’t manage it.’ You 
will certainly find a continuous improvement programme easier to operate if you 
monitor and measure it.
Start by identifying the most important areas for improvement. Financial results? 
Staff knowledge? Client satisfaction? Internal processes? Benchmark where you are 
now, and then go on to repeat the reading at a later date to see how you have 
progressed. This doesn’t need to be over-complicated: as long as you are consistent 
in its application, you can set up your own ‘scoring’ system.
Some things are easy to measure in figures: financial results, staff resignations, 
client retention, sales conversion rates, electricity consumption, waste. However, 
other things in design can’t be measured numerically: creativity, for example. Here, 
you will need to decide how it will be measured. Who will be the judge? In whose 
opinion has the team’s creativity risen or fallen? This is where a good creative 
director comes in.
Improvement fatigue
Finally, too much change, too often, can be exhausting, and continuous improvement 
programmes can be frustrating if objectives are not swiftly followed by outcomes.
If you announce brilliant ideas for improvements and then don’t execute them, 
your staff and colleagues will become disappointed and disillusioned. If they offer 
suggestions themselves, and those suggestions are never acknowledged, they will 
stop thinking of them. If their suggestions are praised, but never see the light of 
day, they will lose respect for you. It’s difficult to know which is worse: the dullness 
of never having ideas in the first place, or the frustration of good ideas which go 
nowhere.
Why not turn improvement fatigue into improvement invigoration? Engage 
and empower the whole company. Set up a ‘suggestions box’, physical or digital, 
and encourage everyone to post their ideas for improvements whenever the thought 
strikes them. Empty it at regular, fixed intervals and evaluate the ideas with the 
management team. Present both the ideas and your evaluations to everyone in a 
group session, indicating which ideas will or will not be carried forward, and why. 
And make sure that you only announce planned improvements once it’s absolutely 
certain that they will be implemented. As the old proverb says: ‘Measure a thousand 
times, cut once.’

This page has been left blank intentionally

Section Three: 
The People

This page has been left blank intentionally

3.1 
The management team
Shan Preddy
A man is nothing without his hat.
Buzz Lightyear, character in ‘Toy Story 2’, Disney/Pixar
How many hats do you wear?
Senior people in design businesses tend to wear a lot of different hats, and the 
smaller the firm, the more the hats that will be on your head. There might be a 
shareholder’s or owner’s hat as well as a Company Director’s or Partner’s hat. There 
might be a whole wardrobe of workers’ hats, such as team leader, practising designer 
or consultant. Sometimes, there will be a coffee-maker-and-biscuit-buyer hat, or a 
stationery-orderer hat or a find-a-plumber hat. Anyone reading this who works in 
one of the larger design companies, by 
the way, might suddenly be remembering 
why they don’t want to run their own 
business.
When thinking about the structure 
and function of a senior management 
team, you need to understand the different 
hats and their relative roles, whether you 
personally wear one of them or all of 
them. You need to make sure that you are 
constantly playing to strengths, both yours 
and your colleagues. You also need to get 
professional advice from your lawyers to 
make sure you fully understand the legal 
implications of all senior appointments.
The different hats
Shareholder/owner
Shareholders or business owners might or might not play an active part in the 
management of the business. Even if their involvement is purely financial, however, 
•

116 How to Run a Successful Design Business
it is likely that that they will have an interest in design in general and in your 
business in particular; they probably wouldn’t be investing in it otherwise. In many 
cases, the main shareholders will also be the management team; they own and run 
the business. Either way, shareholders should expect to receive a financial return 
on their investment, whether that initial investment is in money, time, expertise 
or all three.
Don’t forget to record properly how the relationship between shareholders will 
work. What will happen if an owner – whether a shareholder or a partner – wants to 
sell or give away the interest they have in a business? Or if a shareholding employee 
leaves the business? A shareholders’ or partners’ agreement will provide the proper 
record, and the process of considering these issues before they are recorded can be 
illuminating.
Company Director or Partner
Whether you are a Director of a Limited Company or Public Limited Company 
(plc), or a Partner in a Partnership or Limited Liability Partnership (LLP), the title 
isn’t just a status symbol. It carries duties and responsibilities, legal and otherwise.
According to the UK’s Institute of Directors (IOD): ‘The Board of Directors of a 
company is primarily responsible for:
determining the company’s strategic objectives and policies;
monitoring progress towards achieving those objectives and policies;
appointing senior management;
accounting for the company’s activities to relevant parties, for example 
shareholders.’
The same would apply to Partners. In addition to their Board responsibilities, 
individual Directors or Partners might have specific, specialist functions: finance, 
marketing, HR, creative and so on.
Directors are responsible for making sure that the company fulfils its statutory 
duties. Again, the IOD is clear on the subject. ‘Many of their duties and obligations 
are mandated by the Companies Act 2006. Others are governed by the Insolvency 
Act 1986 and the Company Directors’ Disqualification Act 1986’. A Board Director 
is also expected to ensure the company seeks and gets appropriate professional 
advice on those matters where there is not sufficient expertise on the Board itself. 
So the Board has to ensure, for instance, that it is provided with good financial 
information so as to enable it to properly manage the affairs of the company. If 
someone is not a Director but tells the Board what to do – for example if someone 
owns all or a significant part of the company – then the law might consider that 
	
Institute of Directors Factsheet 2010, The Duties, Responsibilities and Liabilities of Directors.
	
Ibid.
•
•
•
•

117
the management team
person to be a ‘shadow director’, with the same duties and responsibilities as any 
other member of the Board.
The Managing Director or Chief Executive is responsible for the performance 
of the company, as dictated by the Board’s overall strategy. He or she reports either 
to the Chairman, if there is one, or to the Board of Directors. In Partnerships and 
LLPs, each Partner is responsible for – and liable for – the performance and statutory 
duties of the company.
It’s worth mentioning one thing which sometimes catches people unawares. 
Many senior roles in design firms have the word ‘Director’ in their title: Creative 
Director, Design Director, Account Director, IT Director and so on. However, the 
people holding these titles might or might not be Directors of the company and it 
is important that everyone concerned is clear whether the title is only an indication 
of seniority, or whether it indicates the legal status of Company Director with a 
place on the Board.
Non-Executive Directors and other influencers
There is an option of appointing non-Executive Directors. Their job is to advise the 
Board but they do not, as the name implies, have executive powers and may not 
vote on resolutions. They tend to be experienced people with a good general track 
record, although they are sometimes very specialist. They are not just consultants: 
they have statutory duties and, arguably, a moral obligation not to work for 
competing or conflicting businesses. Occasionally, a non-Executive Chairman will 
be appointed: this can be particularly helpful in firms whose management teams 
are relatively young and inexperienced.
Which hats do you need for your management 
team?
The composition of your management team will depend on the size of your business, 
on its structure, on its legal status and on its areas of operation.
Who might you include? All of the Board Directors, or all of the Partners, of 
course. You might benefit from appointing a part-time Finance Director, or HR 
Director: smaller companies need the skills and advice these experts can provide, 
but not their full-time input. You might consider a regular, retained consultant, or a 
non-Executive Director or two. A design company which works with clients in the 
medical sector might, for example, appoint a consultant for business development 
experience and a non-Executive Director from a pharmaceutical background for 
specialist knowledge and, possibly, contacts. You might think about a non-Executive 
Chairman.
For all but the smallest firms, it can be helpful to include a senior representative 
from each section, or specialist area, of the business on the team: design, client 
service, production, finance, HR, IT, marketing, administration and so on. These 

118 How to Run a Successful Design Business
people, who might be ‘Heads of xyz’, do not have any legal responsibility for the 
business, other than the obvious requirements of fulfilling their employment 
contract obligations and behaving within the law. Their purpose on the management 
team is to share their knowledge and opinions with the top people, and to take 
information and directions from those top people back to the teams which report 
to them. They influence and help to drive the current and future performance of 
the firm, but they don’t run it.
Finally, if you have one, an Office Manager or Practice Manager should also sit 
on the management team and attend management meetings.
Which hats go to management meetings?
All members of the management team should attend regular management meetings, 
whose purpose is to debate and decide on issues relating to the running of the business. 
Other issues, such as project work, should be covered in a different meeting.
A few words on management meetings. Hold them at regular, scheduled intervals, 
at least monthly. Keep them short, start and end them on time, and make them 
productive. How many meetings have you had which start late and run over time, 
and where the agenda meanders about between half-year profits, staff birthdays, client 
gains, upcoming pitches, the quality of the coffee, tax matters and project planning?
The shareholder hat, by the way, should be left firmly on its peg during 
management team meetings, and only worn when the Directors or the Partners 
are carrying out their periodic reporting on profitability (or otherwise) and on 
the dividends which will be paid (or not). If you are both a shareholder and a 
Director/Partner, try to separate the two functions as much as is sensible, in the 
same way that you will already separate, say, running a company and running your 
household. Think like an investor and like a business director, but not necessarily 
at the same time.
Putting all the hats together
Finally, it’s important that the management team is just that: a team. It needs to 
work together properly, not just as a group of people with fancy titles. This can 
particularly be an issue in the larger design consultancies.
No matter how many people, and which sorts of people – Directors, Partners, 
senior section representatives or non-Execs – you have on your management 
team, it must share common goals, and have clearly assigned roles which suit the 
capabilities of the individual members. Everyone on that team should be involved 
in your business’s vision and values, its strategic direction and its operating policies. 
Everyone is collectively responsible for monitoring the performance of the business 
and ensuring that the agreed goals are reached. If your management team isn’t 
working, your business isn’t working.

3.2 
The creatives
Rod Petrie
Creativity is an expression of self. Therefore, belief in what they’re doing is essential for creative 
people.
Sir John Hegarty, founder of advertising agency BBH (Bartle Bogle Hegarty)
How to manage 
creativity
To 
achieve 
the 
best 
from 
design 
and production, you need the right 
combination of people, a process that 
results in great work from beginning to 
end, clear communication and a spirit 
of collaboration. Then you need to make 
sure you have a best-practice policy that 
keeps you there. One of the key challenges 
in the creative world is the different skill 
sets involved in all aspects of the process: 
from pre-design strategy, through front-
end creative design concepts, to back-end 
production, with project management expertise and systems keeping things on 
track throughout.
Achieving the best over time relies on four key factors:
recruiting and keeping exceptional talent;
building collaboration;
getting the best results;
staying on top.
Recruiting and keeping exceptional talent
Talent is a gift, with serious talent in short supply. Ours is a people-first business, 
so recruiting and retaining the best people is key to competitive advantage and 
•
•
•
•
•

120 How to Run a Successful Design Business
getting it right is never easy. Talent might present itself in an ability to come up 
with original ideas, approaching problems from left field, putting teams together 
and getting the best out of others, or an eye for detail that makes for consistently 
accurate artwork.
The common thread is an exceptional quality standard, usually associated 
with a love and passion for that activity. To be the best, you need people with 
the right attitude and the ability to become ‘one of us’. You need to know what 
makes someone exceptional, whatever their skill traits and this is often down to gut 
feel and personal chemistry. You need to be able to make a connection with that 
individual so they want to work for you and no one else. Then you need to make 
sure you keep them.
The approach to recruitment and personal development might need individual 
strategies for each discipline so you need to think outside the box. Consider bringing 
in unconventional staff, exploring unusual talent pools, and being flexible in what 
you offer to persuade someone to join the team. Don’t forget the talent pool you 
already have as this is often the most rewarding way forward and, if you get it right, 
the most economic.
Building collaboration
True collaboration is a seamless process, from start to finish. It’s no easy task, 
however, when the skill sets involved in the process differ so widely. It’s essential 
to foster mutual respect between individuals with different job roles. One of the 
most common problems in a design agency is the lack of understanding between 
disciplines, leading to a culture of ‘Them & Us’.
Every part of the process is as important as the last. It’s no good having great 
strategic input to a brief if the designers don’t take it on board, or having a great 
creative idea if it can’t be implemented commercially. Also, the best people often 
have egos to match. Talented creatives, like other brilliant minds, can be notoriously 
temperamental with strong characters that need creative management, or their 
undisciplined behaviour will affect team performance and ultimately the quality 
of the work produced. Handling emotions and strongly held principles is often the 
biggest challenge of running a successful creative agency.
You need a common vision and goal that is clearly communicated and 
understood, with each team member knowing their role and value. Just as someone 
is responsible in the agency to lead and champion a project, it is critical that the 
creatives are led by someone who knows the difference between right and wrong, 
someone with talent, skill and a grown-up approach to leadership. They must 
know when to support and when to challenge, and be able to spot a great idea in a 
scribble. They should never hog the limelight, but should give credit where credit 
is due.

121
the creatives
Getting the best results
The best design will result in creative ideas that exploit a genuine opportunity or 
address a core problem, that answer a commercial brief, and that make designers 
proud. The best production is a faithful translation of these ideas, consistently and 
accurately implemented in collaboration with supplier, manufacturer and client.
You need to focus on getting the best out of each individual and each discipline. 
When people feel their ideas are valued they contribute more. For design there is 
a need to recognise a client’s real problem, empathise with the target audience, be 
creative and inspired about potential solutions, and identify those ideas that best 
meet and stretch the brief.
For production it is about being thorough, having rigorous systems, managing 
effectively, being accurate and interpreting design solutions across a range of 
products and media. Exceptional talent and ability is rare, so knowing the emotional 
pressure points of when to stroke and reassure people and when to boost their 
confidence is critical.
Staying on top
Getting to the top is tough. Staying there and remaining there is even tougher without 
the best people working together. The real trick is consistency of performance. This 
means being flexible enough to respond to change, and being confident and brave 
enough to fix something that might not be broken.
Businesses need to be successful in the long term, not necessarily for financial 
reasons but also to recruit and retain the best talent and to maintain a position at 
the top. The best people stay ahead by constantly upgrading themselves, by keeping 
in step with developments, not just in their own area of expertise and industry but 
in other sectors.
Creativity needs to be kept fresh and alive at all times or it will become a 
factory-processed, mass-produced commodity item. Creatives need to be constantly 
breaking new ground in finding ways to fuel their creative fires, as profitable ideas 
can create profit. Creative leaders need to establish a clear philosophy and a criteria 
for judging work that inspires risk-taking, and should never be afraid of working 
with the very best people. Successful companies stay on top by establishing best 
practice procedures, and continually investing in the foundations for growth – their 
people, and the goodwill of those people.

This page has been left blank intentionally

The single biggest problem in communication is the illusion that it has taken place.
George Bernard Shaw (1856–1950), playwright
Who looks after the clients?
Design businesses have a variety of 
operating models. Some have account 
management and strategy as separate 
functions to the creative process, some 
designers manage all aspects of a project 
themselves and in some cases the 
managing director or creative director 
has the principal relationship with the 
client. Whichever model you adopt 
– and indeed there are many more than 
these listed – take the time to assess 
not only whether it is right for your 
business, but whether it works for your 
clients. Perhaps it works for most, but 
not all. Some clients prefer to work with 
account managers but others, particularly 
those who come from a design background, prefer to liaise directly with designers. 
There is a tendency in all businesses to develop systems on the basis of what suits 
them rather than their customers, but it is vital to remember that your clients are 
your income and you are there to support them.
Below are seven key points that, if fully incorporated into your practice, will 
improve your delivery beyond measure.
Know your client
It’s essential that you understand your client’s business. This includes their audience, 
products, services, competitive environment and the challenges they face. If you 
•
3.3 
The client facers
Jan Casey

124 How to Run a Successful Design Business
enjoy your work, seeking out this information will become an integrated part of 
your daily life.
It’s also important to understand what the client organisation is trying to achieve. 
Often we focus on the task in hand rather than the end goal. Be proactive: ask your 
clients to share their marketing plans so that you have a full appreciation of the 
organisation’s vision. Clients commission design because they want fresh thinking 
but they know more about their product and organisation than you do, so respect 
the tacit knowledge of the individuals you work with and consider them as part 
of the creative process. It’s good practice to invest some time conducting internal 
research or brainstorming for each of your client relationships. This will enable you 
to go to your client with ideas to take your project and their organisation forward.
Understand the brief
The project brief is a key document. Understanding a client’s requirements seems a 
statement of the obvious, but many clients experience designers saying little in the 
briefing session and then returning with work that is inappropriate. Interrogate the 
brief with intelligent questions, challenge where necessary and define what needs 
to be done. Ask for the brief ahead of the meeting so you can do some fact-finding 
in advance. If your client hasn’t written a brief, do it for them. This will highlight 
your skills, show that you are proactive and demonstrate your investment in an 
integrated client/agency team.
Support your client
Many clients put chemistry as the key criteria when assessing the success of an 
agency relationship – even above creativity. They look for a collaborative and 
trusting partnership where the creative and client teams are aligned. You need to 
empathise with and support your clients, especially when they are having difficulties. 
Understand what matters to them and try and feel what they feel. Design can be a 
step outside of a client’s comfort zone and can be a nerve-racking experience, with 
its accompanying pressures – credibility, money, even their job. So it is important 
to be sensitive to this, to demystify the design process and support the client on the 
journey. You should work with your clients to move them forward and give them 
reflected glory.
We live with design every day and are in the advantageous position of having 
been involved in many projects before. The client may not. So make use of this 
fortunate situation and ensure you are always one step ahead across every aspect 
of your project. This approach will also build the relationship – the client will 
immediately feel supported and their confidence in you will start to build. Keep the 
client informed of your progress and look after their budget as though it were yours. 
Make them feel comfortable and never blind them with technology. Some designers 

125
the client facers
love the big reveal, and understandably: delight can come from creative theatre. 
Clients, however, fear the nasty surprise. Involving them at interim stages in the 
process will help ensure approval of your work, as they will take more ownership.
Agree relationship practices
At the start of a client relationship share your working methods and agree how best 
you can collaborate. Explain your tools of communication and at what point they 
will receive documentation: for example, a Contact Report should be issued no 
later than 24 hours after a meeting. This not only helps the client understand what, 
how and when work will be delivered but also sets their expectation so they are not 
disappointed. But don’t impose your process on your clients: make sure you tailor 
one that works for them.
Agree the contact procedure. At the early stages of the relationship you need to 
understand who the key stakeholders are and whether there is someone more senior 
to your client who is really driving the project, so you can address this situation 
early on. Be available for your client, return their calls and emails at the earliest 
possible moment, even if it just to acknowledge receipt and confirm when you will 
supply an answer to their question.
Qualities and conduct
Be attentive: people like to be heard but unfortunately designers not listening is a 
common experience for clients. A crucial part of your work is understanding your 
client, so you need to concentrate on what they are saying. Actively listen to them 
and really focus on the moment. It’s not only courteous but you will learn more and 
be able to ask the right questions.
Be confident: be sufficiently secure to say ‘no it’s not the right thing to do’, if this 
is what you believe.
Be genuine: pretending to be someone else comes into play when you’re out of 
your depth and feel insecure. If you’re good at what you do you can relax into your 
authenticity.
Be honest: right down to not allowing your colleagues to say you’re in a meeting 
when you’re not. At some level the client will pick this up and then question 
whether you are truthful in other areas.
Be open: your client should have visibility of your fees at the start and throughout 
the project. Money needs to be discussed openly and confidently, though ensure 
you choose the right moment so that it doesn’t provoke the wrong reaction.
Be accountable: don’t over promise, know your limits and don’t offer skills or 
disciplines that you are not able to deliver. Concentrate on what you do, and do it 
well.

126 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Be appropriate: if you think negatively about a client, somehow it will leak out, 
even if it’s just to your team. Question whether these feelings are more about your 
inadequacies.
Be knowledgeable: read, listen and learn. This will help you and your clients.
Be clear: check with your colleagues that you are articulate both in the spoken 
and written word. Also ensure you don’t use terminology that may be unfamiliar to 
clients: this can lead to misunderstandings.
Be skilled: lack of clarity when presenting work is weak and unconvincing. 
Client-facing individuals need to be competent as well as talented.
Deliver what you are paid to do
As a design consultancy you should think strategically as well as tactically, deliver 
both breadth and depth with the end customer in mind and present ideas that are 
commercially viable as well as creatively excellent. Make sure you plan. Presentations 
are often left to the last minute with no time to review, whereas you should be 
assessing the creative work against the brief on regular basis. Make sure you debrief 
after each meeting and ask your colleagues not only what you did well, but what 
you could have done better. It’s very helpful to get feedback from your clients 
and on the whole they enjoy expressing their thoughts. Whether you employ an 
external consultant or appoint someone internally to instigate a client feedback 
process, if you want to continue improving you need to know what you are doing 
well and where you are not performing. Make sure you take constructive criticism 
in a receptive way.
Go the extra mile
A huge amount of energy is put into winning clients through credentials, website, 
PR and your profile. Make sure you put as much energy into keeping them. Don’t 
settle into a routine but aim for a long-term fulfilling relationship by constantly 
challenging yourself, being diligent, surprising your client and delivering unwavering 
commitment.
Go over and above what is asked, and do more than what is simply required. 
The extra effort is really appreciated and, as a consequence, you will develop long 
lasting relationships.

The timid man yearns for full value, and demands a tenth. The bold man strikes for double value 
and compromises on par.
Mark Twain (1835–1910), writer and humorist
Who brings in the business?
No other role in the firm carries such weight of expectation, such belief, that the 
firm is but one über-human person away from success as the business development 
magician, the rainmaker. Such large expectations are rarely met.
Consistent business development success requires a compelling positioning, 
strong business development processes and good personnel. Too often a design firm 
looks to overcome weaknesses in the first 
two areas with unrealistic expectations 
of the third. This is the real reason that 
rainmakers are as rare as unicorns.
Centralised versus 
Distributed Business 
Development models
There are two main strategies for 
allocating new business responsibility 
within the firm. One is to centralise the 
efforts through one person, either an 
employee or a principal, and the other is 
to distribute responsibility across many 
individuals.
The question of centralising or 
distributing responsibility arises as the 
firm grows and the principal begins to 
delegate. To better understand whether 
•
3.4 
The hunter-gatherers
Blair Enns

128 How to Run a Successful Design Business
to centralise or distribute, let’s first explore the various functions of business 
development.
The functions of business development
There are five main functions within business development, some of which can be 
delegated and/or distributed, and some of which the principal should retain.
They are:
planning
lead generation
lead conversion
nurturing opportunities
closing opportunities.
Planning is the preparatory work that comes after the firm’s focus has been 
chosen and before leads are generated and converted. It includes identifying the 
target market and determining the criteria that will frame the engagements the firm 
pursues.
Planning is the domain of principals and partners, with input from others. It 
must not be delegated.
Lead Generation is the collection of activities that surfaces potential opportunities 
for the firm, from sales-based unsolicited enquiries, to marketing activities and the 
PR and publicity-based activities of speaking and writing. Lead generation can be 
delegated, and is typically the first function to be so. And while the responsibility 
for seeing that lead generation targets are hit resides with one individual (usually 
the head of business development), lead generation responsibility can be distributed 
widely across the firm.
Lead Conversion is the act of following up on leads to determine if they represent 
any specific near or mid-term opportunities. Lead conversion also includes 
assigning the next steps in the buy-sell cycle, and all appropriate record keeping. 
Lead conversion can be delegated, but should be centralised in order to maintain a 
consistency in their evaluation and the assigning of next steps. So, while firms will 
ask numerous employees to bring leads to the table, the most efficient approach to 
following up on and categorising those leads is to centralise the function with one 
individual. This takes the pressure to sell off of people who have no inclination or 
training for it.
Nurturing includes the follow-up conversations with viable prospects that have 
no identifiable opportunity associated with them. This includes follow-up phone 
calls and emails and distribution of the firm’s nurturing tools, typically newsletters 
and other vehicles of the firm’s thought-leadership. Nurturing can be delegated but 
should be centralised through one person.
•
•
•
•
•

129
the hunter-gatherers
Closing describes the final acts, late in the buying cycle, that secure the 
engagement with the client, culminating with the final meeting with, and typically 
a presentation to, all the client decision makers. Before clients hire a design firm, 
they want to meet with and evaluate the brain trust of the organisation. For this 
reason, closing remains the function of principals and should not be delegated. 
Others are often enlisted to help, particularly in setting up the closing meeting and 
in helping to facilitate proper sales process within the meeting, but the principals 
of the firm must see closing as their domain.
Of the five functions of business development, it is the first and last – planning 
and closing – that should not be delegated. Thus, when you hire a business 
development person, you are looking for someone who is skilled at generating 
leads, who has the probing conversational skills to be able to convert those leads to 
opportunities where they exist, and who is able to nurture over time those prospects 
that are furthest from buying. You also want your hire to be able to transition to 
closing opportunities and possibly help to facilitate the close.
The skills of business development
The business development role requires a combination of sales, marketing, public 
relations and networking skills. The required balance of these skills will vary from 
firm to firm, primarily based on how the firm is positioned.
Narrowly-positioned expert firms that are seen to have a deeper expertise 
than their more generalist counterparts can often get away with less sales and 
networking skills, as they typically enter into the sales cycle already commanding a 
differentiated position relative to their competition, and therefore can get by with 
fewer of the personal interaction skills of selling and networking. Maintaining that 
expert position is far easier for someone who does not trade on personal rapport.
More broadly-positioned firms that invite much more competition require a 
higher level of sales and networking skills, as they are more likely to win business 
based on chemistry and relationships.
Vetting candidates with the Four Tools 
Question
When interviewing candidates for the business development role a good question 
to pose is the Four Tools Question:
Business development is a combination of four skills: sales, marketing, public 
relations and networking. Consider each of these skills as a tool that is lying 
on the table in front of you. Playing to your strengths, what tool do you pick 
up first? What do you select next? And which do you choose third and then 
last. Why?

130 How to Run a Successful Design Business
The ideal candidate would select sales as one of the first two tools. This indicates 
a high competitive drive and an ability to overcome obstacles such as call reluctance. 
A generalist firm would look for someone who selected networking in the top two as 
well, while a narrowly specialised firm with well-developed thought-leadership and 
a broad geographic trading area would look for someone who selects networking as 
one of the last two tools.

3.5 
The farmer-growers
Shan Preddy
There were four people named Everyone, Anyone, No one and Someone Else. There was an important 
job to be done, and Everyone was responsible for doing it. The trouble was, Everyone thought that 
Someone Else would be sure to do the work. In the end, however, although Anyone could have done 
the job, No one actually did it. As a result, Everyone got angry and blamed Someone Else.
Anon
Farming the clients’ business
It can take a lot of effort to win business from a new client. The delicate sowing 
of the seed, the watering and feeding of first growths, the protection from harsh 
weather and hungry predators. Even in design disciplines with a reasonably rapid 
turnaround of projects, such as communications and packaging, it can take several 
months of time, money and energy before a prospective client becomes an active 
client. In disciplines where projects have longer durations, such as in industrial 
design and interiors, it can take many years. However, it only takes a very short time 
indeed – sometimes merely a matter of hours – to go from ‘you’re hired’ to ‘you’re 
fired’ and to lose a client’s business.
The previous chapter, 3.4 The Hunter-Gatherers, deals with the rainmakers, the 
people who bring the business in. Here, we are concerned with whose job it is to 
satisfy clients and keep their business once it has been won, and then to develop 
the relationships so that you are given bigger and better projects in the future. 
The aim is to get to a point when either you are the preferred design consultancy, 
automatically appointed for relevant projects, or you are retained, with a contract 
and a regular schedule of payments.
Cultivation danger points
At different stages in a project’s life, it becomes easier or harder for a client to decide 
to work – or to continue working – with you.
The first danger point comes at the appointment stage. Unless you are the only 
design business in the world who can do a particular thing, the client holds the 
balance of power and can choose whether to work with you or not. Once you have 
•

132 How to Run a Successful Design Business
been appointed, however, and right through all of the concept and development 
stages, the balance shifts slightly in your favour; rigorous timelines tend to mean 
that replacing design firms mid-project isn’t something to be undertaken lightly.
The next major danger point arrives when the project reaches its implementation 
stages. Although few clients would think it desirable to do it, another design firm 
could be appointed to take the project over at this stage if you are not delivering 
what the client wants. The final, and toughest, danger point comes at the end of the 
project, before plans are made for the next. Will you be reappointed automatically? 
Will you have to pitch? Or will the project go to one of your competitors?
Like most of us, clients aren’t always good at complaining. They often don’t 
tell you that they have no intention of ever working with you again, but just slip 
quietly away into the sunset. Often, the first time you realise that you have lost that 
client is when you hear that they have just appointed one of your competitors for a 
project which should, by rights, have come to you.
Who gets to drive the tractor?
So who is to blame if a project doesn’t develop into a relationship, and the client 
wanders off to seek pastures new? Who should have been ensuring client satisfaction? 
Who should have been nurturing the relationship and actively cultivating and 
growing the business? The easy answer, of course, is ‘everyone’. Each encounter 
the client has with your firm – from major project meetings and budget updates 
to minor phone calls and emails – contributes to the decision whether to continue 
working with you or not. But one person needs to be responsible and, ultimately, 
accountable, regardless of the job title that person uses.
There are two main alternative operating structures in design firms: those 
where an account (or client, or project) director, manager or executive takes the 
main client-facing role, and those where designers have responsibility for it as well 
as for creativity. Neither model is better than the other; they are just different. 
Communications and branding consultancies often use the first model; digital, 
interior and product consultancies tend to favour the second. This is due, in part, 
to the in-depth knowledge of design technicalities that the client-facer needs to 
have in addition to their strategic and project management skills. In each case, the 
farmer-grower should be the most senior person allocated to each client, whether 
that is an account person or a designer.
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs): how do you 
know the cultivation is working?
It’s not enough just to ‘encourage’ the farmer-growers to do this part of their job. 
Like all other aspects of their work, you should outline the responsibility for both 
client satisfaction and proactive client development in their job descriptions, set 

133
the farmer-growers
clear, measurable targets and evaluate the person’s ability to do it successfully or not 
in their performance appraisals. This means establishing measurement criteria, or 
key performance indicators (KPIs).
On top of the absolute baseline of the successful and profitable delivery of 
projects, specific farmer-grower KPIs might include:
no loss of clients mid-project;
evidence of client satisfaction from post-project completion surveys, or client 
audits;
growth in income value from existing clients;
improvement in quality of projects from existing clients;
appointment to new projects from existing clients without having to pitch 
competitively;
referrals and recommendations from existing clients to new clients for new 
projects.
In some design businesses, farmer-growers are incentivised and financially 
rewarded on their performance in this area, just as hunter-gatherers often are.
•
•
•
•
•
•

This page has been left blank intentionally

3.6 
The strategists
Ann Binnie
‘Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?’ ‘That depends a good deal on where 
you want to get to,’ said the Cat. ‘I don’t much care where,’ said Alice. ‘Then it doesn’t much matter 
which way you go,’ said the Cat.
Lewis Carroll (1832–98), mathematician, writer and photographer, from ‘Alice’s 
Adventures in Wonderland’
Planners, and what they do
Having invented the role and given it the name, the advertising agency business has 
spent decades trying to explain planners to outsiders. ‘Planning’ attempts to describe 
an activity which is usually about 
guiding or facilitating a disciplined 
process of creative development. 
Knowledge 
and 
understanding 
about the market, its customers and 
consumers is collected and turned 
into insights which are then applied 
to the enhancement of the creative 
development process. At the core of 
what the planner does is the need to 
understand customers and consumers, 
how they interact with the category, 
the brand, its competitors and what 
influences 
their 
behaviours 
and 
attitudes in the context of the brand.
In their natural habitat you might 
find planners operating in a variety 
of ways. They might be in research 
mode, analysing and interpreting data, moderating qualitative focus groups, using 
online methods to conduct primary research, seeking out published sources on the 
internet, or conducting studies using the principles of anthropology and observing 
(even living with in some cases) users of brands in their own environments. This 
•

136 How to Run a Successful Design Business
last is known as ethnographic research and can provide tremendous insights, 
particularly for packaging and ergonomic related design.
They might be operating in the manner of a shop steward of the target audience, 
making sure the latter’s needs are understood and bringing their point of view to 
every step of the creative development process.
Or they could be in thoughtful strategist mode, developing and guarding the 
strategy, mining data for insights. You might also find them in creative catalyst role, 
writing the creative brief, facilitating workshops and brainstorming sessions.
Some planners do all of these and some have clear favourites. Some do all their 
own research, others wouldn’t dream of it. Some like nothing better than burying 
themselves in excel spreadsheets of quantitative consumer data, others would rather 
be surfing relevant consumer blogs and making inspired connections; still others 
would rather spend their time with a few representative consumers and really get 
under the skin of attitudes and motivations. You can expect all to take on the 
consumer or customer perspective and to have a strategic role, some looking at the 
big picture, others loving to get down and dirty with the creative product.
Be clear what you need from them
It is useful to work out what you want and be sure that you hire the right flavour. 
Much will depend on the nature of the project (for external planning resource) or 
the kind of agency you want to be (for an in-house resource). It also helps to take 
account of who in your team they’re going to work with. Planners at the creative 
end can work beautifully with their creative counterparts if that’s what the creatives 
are used to; but they can cause a sense of insecurity if perceived as a threat or 
encroachment upon creative territory. So make it clear to them and to the rest of 
the team what they’re there for.
Get them in the loop early
Let planners in as early as possible in the design process. That way their focus can be 
on the strategy and early guidance and not on using your precious ideas as cannon 
fodder in a last minute research shoot out. Tell them everything: let them get close 
to the client and give them all the inputs they ask for.
Give them room to breathe and space to think: open plan offices are rarely 
ideal when the planner is in thinking mode. And remember they work with data, 
experience, models, connections, but they can’t magic strategies out of thin air, not 
ones with any robustness anyway. Listen seriously to their requests for investment in 
published or proprietary data sources or some focus groups. A little data or input can 
go a long way in the right hands and are grist to the mill of a happy and productive 
planner. With the right stimulus (grain of sand) the most valuable interpretations 
and insights (pearls) can emerge. So do let them loose to their hearts’ content.

137
the strategists
If they want to research your ideas, trust them. If they know what they’re doing 
they are not looking for respondents to say what they like but rather to understand 
how your ideas work. If in the process they discover some unintended consequences 
that render an idea unviable, they will be gentle with you.
And do bear in mind that they’re keen on measurement and accountability; 
they like to set objectives and see if they have been met. They really aren’t trying to 
be difficult, and you will thank them in the end: see outcomes below.
What planners add to design outcomes
Clarity. Early clarity in design direction saves hours of wasted effort. Setting and 
agreeing clear design objectives, sensitive creative development research and/or 
communications knowledge gained at an early stage can point everyone in the 
right direction and thus avoid unnecessary pain.
Objectivity. An ability to stand back from the everyday preoccupations of the 
client on the one hand and the glorious fantasies of the creative in flight on the 
other. Taking an overview of the brand and design issues in its widest context, 
competitive, business, social and over time. Ensuring objective measurement 
and accountability against objectives helps embed positive outcomes with 
clients.
Relevance. Identifying the correct target audience and understanding what makes 
them tick; unearthing powerful insights that inspire powerful design solutions.
Discipline. Planners can create a strategic framework into which to place design 
which enhances credibility for presenting to clients. The good ones can start a 
story that the design completes. The discipline of a strategy also helps remove 
some of the subjectivity demonstrated by clients (and even – whisper it – 
wayward colleagues).
Inspiration. Writing creative briefs that challenge, that go outside the received 
rules for a category in the knowledge that consumers are ready for it or simply 
revealing possibilities borne of a wider understanding of how the audience ticks 
and what the market needs.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

This page has been left blank intentionally

3.7 
The orgs and ops
Shan Preddy
I don’t have anything to do with the washing up.
Prince Philip (b1921), Duke of Edinburgh
Whose job is it to change the light bulbs?
We design professionals can be our own worst enemies. We spend a lot of time 
and energy doing things which we really don’t need to do. We have a ‘can-do’ and 
a ‘will-do’ mindset. When we see a problem – any problem, at work or in real life 
– we want to find the solution. We know it’s there, just waiting to be discovered; we 
want to find it ourselves, and we want to find it quickly. The result is that we can 
sometimes be poor delegators and team leaders; fundamentally, we just want to get 
on and do things.
This urge to find solutions is compounded with our natural human tendency 
to seek the security of comfort zones. We get huge satisfaction from completing 
tasks, and so we actively seek those we know we can do well. Equally, we don’t 
like the idea of failure. We postpone decisions and procrastinate tasks, sometimes 
indefinitely, which are slightly beyond our current skills and which look, well, a 
bit difficult. Take a moment with a mirror. Are you putting off tough jobs, the ones 
which no one else can do, and spending valuable time on activities which should 
be done by someone else? Are you failing to sort out your HR strategy for next 
year, or to develop a robust future marketing strategy and plan, or to think about 
the vision and values for your business? Are you enjoying a displacement activity 
because it’s easier and because you know you can do it? ‘Sorry, no time to write the 
business plan, I need to change the light bulbs and then rearrange my markers in 
Pantone™ reference order’.
Management guru Peter Drucker is reported to have said: ‘Management is 
about doing things right, leadership is about doing the right things.’ The former is 
efficiency; the latter is effectiveness. You constantly need to ask yourself whether 
you are being effective or merely efficient. If you are spending time and energy on 
tasks which are preventing you from completing tasks that only you can do, who’s 
running the business? No one.
•

140 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Play to strengths, yours and theirs
You will, of course, already employ external experts such as accountants and 
lawyers to help you with specialist tasks for which you’re not skilled. But have 
you got the right infrastructure in place for dealing with the organisational and 
operational elements in the business, the areas which are essential but which don’t 
relate directly to income-generating client projects? Broadly, these are: legal issues; 
finance; marketing and business development; HR; IT; and office administration.
If you are running a larger design business, you will have several members of 
staff under the management of a specific Director or a team leader to cover each 
area of expertise and responsibility. If you are running a one or two person business 
you will inevitably have to cover a lot of ground, doing a bit of everything, both 
business-facing and client-facing. However, you still have the option of bringing in 
help on an ad-hoc basis, or on a regular part-time basis.
Whether you are CEO of one of the top 10 design companies worldwide, or a 
single person starting the journey from freelance to business-owner, a simple exercise 
to make sure that you are not changing too many metaphorical lightbulbs is to carry 
around, for two working weeks, a big sheet of paper. Jot down all of the business-
related things you do in a day. On one side, record the things you – and only you 
– should be doing in your role in the business. On the other side, note the things 
other people could do instead of you, either because they could do them just as well 
or because they have specific skills and expertise to do them better. The second side 
will help to inform the list of orgs and ops people (among others) you need. You 
might not be able to appoint them immediately but, having identified them, those 
future appointments can be included in your forward business planning.
Treat it like a project planning exercise, and do a needs analysis. Work out 
exactly which orgs and ops resources you need, draw up a checklist and then work 
out how best to find and afford the people. Do you need someone full or part time, 
bearing in mind that part time could be as little as a few hours a month? Do you 
need to line up some external, independent experts for guidance and advice, so that 
you get top advice whenever you need it without the regular salary?
For example, a 15–20 person business might decide that it needs:
For legal matters: an external law firm.
For finance: an external accountant plus a part-time employed book-keeper or 
financial administrator.
For marketing and business development: an external consultant, plus a part-
time employed business development manager.
For HR: an external consultant, plus a part-time employed HR administrator.
For IT: an external consultant.
Different sizes of design businesses will need different mixtures of orgs and 
ops resources. In a smaller firm, some of these roles, such as financial and HR 
administration, might be combined.
•
•
•
•
•

141
the orgs and ops
Secret weapons
Finally, there are two secret weapons that many successful design businesses have 
discovered: the PA, or Personal Assistant, and the Office Manager.
A good PA, sometimes known as an Executive Assistant, is not the same as an 
old-fashioned secretary. They will help you to accomplish more things in less time, 
and will help you to work both more efficiently and more effectively. Their work 
frees you up to do the things that only you can do, and they are a strong right-hand 
support in everything that you do in the business. Not everyone will be able to 
afford to employ a PA, but remember that they can support more than one person 
in your firm, or they can work part time. Often, a small part of a really excellent PA 
is better than no PA at all.
The precise job title of an Office Manager will vary from firm to firm; Practice 
Manager is sometimes used. The role, however, is to take care of all of the 
administrative aspects of a business. This will include areas like travel logistics, 
insurance, security, fire regulations and health and safety. It will almost certainly 
include dealing with – and negotiating with – suppliers of all of the products and 
services the office needs, from paper jotter-pads to major building maintenance. In 
smaller firms, it might also cover finance and HR administration. Whatever the size 
of the business, it’s an ideal appointment for businesses whose owners are wearing 
far too many hats to be effective.
The only time a PA or an Office Manager should interface with clients is in 
communicating with them, inbound or outbound. If they get involved in project 
management, they will end up doing someone else’s job and will not be able to do 
their own properly. And the only time you should step in to do the work that they 
should be doing is when they are away for any reason.
You know you’ve got good people in these roles, by the way, when the very 
thought of either of them going on holiday for two weeks is enough to give you 
sleepless nights.

This page has been left blank intentionally

3.8 
The incoming resource
Madelaine Cooper
First-rate people hire first-rate people; second-rate people hire third-rate people.
Leo Rosten (1908–97), teacher, academic and humorist
How to employ people
The old nursery rhyme described the 
genders as being made of either sugar 
and spice or slugs and snails. A design 
company is even easier to analyse. It is 
made of people and their talent. There 
isn’t anything else.
You might change the colour of the 
walls, the style of the reception desk or 
the layout of the studio. You might have 
developed a process, or a unique way of 
managing your clients’ needs. But even if 
all of the above were missing, a creative 
and wonderful design studio could still 
exist and thrive if it had creative and 
wonderful people working there.
The people you employ define your 
company. There is no DNA of a design agency, only the DNA of the people who work 
there. So you will, of course, make every effort to employ only the very best people.
Much is written about the knotty problem of How To Get a Job. Surprisingly 
little is available about How To Employ People; an issue which can be particularly 
problematic in the design business since talent is a subjective matter. But there 
are certain disciplines which will help you to make clearer and better-informed 
decisions about your most important commodity.
Who to employ
First of all, who do you need to employ? Writing a job description helps a company 
to clarify what sort of person is needed, and what they will need to bring to the 
•

144 How to Run a Successful Design Business
company. This can be a curiously therapeutic process in itself. By reflecting on why 
you need to employ someone, fundamental questions about the company itself 
can be raised. Is this employment process a knee-jerk reaction to the departure of 
someone else or in anticipation of new or increased workloads? Or are you covering 
bits which might be missing from within the existing team?
If it is a replacement for somebody, are you sure that you want to replicate 
that person or would it be good to revise your needs as the company evolves, the 
dynamics of the team change or the market opportunities shift? If the recruitment 
is to respond to a new client or more work, do you simply want another person 
who is like the other people who are already working with you? Could this be an 
opportunity to step out a little and capture ideas, techniques and experiences that 
are not yet represented within your company? Otherwise, the company will be full 
of people who are all a bit like you, which is neither healthy nor wise.
Describing the position
A recruitment job description might include:
the job title;
what the company has done, is doing and where it is going as an organisation;
where the company is located, with website map links;
an outline of the general nature and objectives of the role;
a summary of the principle tasks involved in the role;
some of the personal qualities which will be needed.
Don’t go mad on the last point. You want to employ a human being, not a saint, 
and there are, of course, legal limitations around this area. Be careful not to indicate 
preferences or prejudices on the grounds of sex, race, disability, marital status, age, 
religion or number of dependents.
Positive interviewing
Another fundamental question is whether you need to employ someone on a 
permanent basis, or whether it would be more expedient, and perhaps more 
interesting, to purchase the talents of someone purely for the duration of the project. 
That way you can afford to experiment with skill sets, personality types and levels 
of seniority before making a long-term – and hard to back out of – decision.
Once you have a vision about what and who you need, and have written it down, 
add a profile of your own company. Whatever the market trends as to whether it 
is a buyer’s market or a not, it is helpful to you as a company, to the applicants for 
the role and to the recruitment consultant if you are using one, to have a profile on 
the company.
•
•
•
•
•
•

145
the incoming resource
It is often said that ours is a small world. People in design know other people in 
design, and they like to talk about where they have been, who they have met and 
what they think about it all. So, as you no doubt say to your clients often enough, 
it is important that all the brand touch-points give positive messages to your clients 
and consumers. It is a good idea to use the employment process to send out good 
vibrations about your company, your company’s vision, the way that you behave 
and the way that you treat people. Make that profile of your company on the job 
description a positive one; give it structure and enough vision to make candidates 
feel that this is somewhere that they would really like to work, and to spread that 
good feeling around amongst their peers.
The next step – and still part of the positive brand messaging about your 
company – is to prepare yourself for the interview. Don’t just roll up to meet the 
candidate without doing any groundwork. Just as it is considered courteous for the 
candidates to have done their homework on your company, it is not only courteous 
but advisable to have taken time to study their CV, look at any work samples they 
have sent in advance of the meeting and be equipped to ask questions based on 
what you have found there.
The encounter
Time spent carrying out good interviews will be a worthwhile investment. Don’t 
try to interview more than three or four people each day or you won’t have time to 
do any work before or after each meeting, and all of the candidates will meld into 
a blur of faces. Be consistent across the interviews, and make sure that if you are 
going to conduct the interview with somebody else from your company they are 
available for all the meetings.
Then there are the courtesies which not only make a good impression with the 
candidate, but make the difference between a company which is poorly run and 
one which has ambition, shine and class:
brief other people in the office so that the candidate is expected and dealt with 
appropriately when they arrive;
be on time for the interview yourself;
book a room for the interview to take place in;
make sure that the room is clear of clutter and dirty cups from previous 
meetings;
allocate enough time for the interview and stick to it;
shake the hand of the candidate when they arrive and make them feel at ease;
don’t take calls during the interview;
explain the job that you are looking to fill, give something of the background 
of the company and where the job fits in both now and, if appropriate, in the 
future;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

146 How to Run a Successful Design Business
at the end of the interview give the candidate a chance to ask questions and 
if you don’t have answers immediately, offer to come back to them with the 
information;
close the meeting in a conclusive way by telling them what will happen next 
and when you hope to be able to make decisions or hold further interviews.
Plan the questions and make sure that there are some worthwhile questions that 
can provoke more than just a ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ answer, something which will engage the 
candidate to tell you something about their work, themselves and their ambition.
For example:
‘Looking back at your career so far, is there anything you might have done 
differently?’
‘Where do you see yourself in five years time?’
‘What is the most interesting piece of design work that you have seen 
recently?’
Create a structure so that there is a continuity across different interviews and a 
way of making comparisons between people. Take the time to understand both the 
job role that you are seeking to fill and also the details of the individuals so that you 
can make an informed decision. Gut instinct is powerful and important, but make 
sure that you don’t get seduced by an engaging personality and find six months 
down the line that the job in question is not getting done.
And afterwards?
After all of that, make some notes both during and immediately after the meeting 
so that you can remember the individual people you have met.
When you get to the final round of interviews it may well be helpful to ask a 
neutral, but trusted, outsider to join you in those meetings to help you to decide 
who to employ. Someone who can stand back from the company and help you to 
see whether the vision that is there for your company can be fulfilled through this 
person.
You are asking a lot from everybody that you employ: they are the realisation of 
the ambitions that you have for the company. If they are any good, they will relish 
that chance.
•
•
•
•
•

3.9 
The ongoing resource
Kim Briggs
The two most important things about a company do not appear on its balance sheet: its reputation 
and its people.
Henry Ford (1863–1947), automobile manufacturer
Settling in
The induction period is a critical time for any business to secure the talent that it 
has invested so heavily in recruiting. It is during this period that you establish the 
roles and relationships that individual will have with the business. An ‘induction 
crisis’ where people arrive, do not like it and leave within the year is costly.
Induction allows people to settle into their new role as quickly and easily as 
possible and to start delivering value to the business. Meetings should be set up 
with the appropriate people, but be aware that too much information too soon can 
overwhelm people.
Whilst there are many formal aspects to induction; you should consider fun 
activities to immerse new people in both the culture and the role they will be taking 
on. Be creative! You really need to consider interesting ways to get your people ‘on 
brand’ and engaged.
Probation time
The probationary period allows people to understand their role before either they or 
the business commit to permanent employment. As a business you must establish 
that the individual is the right cultural fit and has the talent and skill set required. 
It should be a period of continuous assessment. Regular reviews throughout this 
period are essential; both parties need opportunities to reflect on progress made 
and to raise any issues they may have. If at the end of the probationary period, 
the business is uncertain of the ‘fit’ then the probation should be extended. Do 
be aware that people need to know why; do not do it to avoid the difficult task of 
letting someone go if you know they are not right.
It does take time to fully engage a new person. The nature of the business, the 
timing and the role are all key factors, and new people will quite naturally feel 
•

148 How to Run a Successful Design Business
overwhelmed. It will often take the probationary period and beyond to fully grasp 
the culture and the role.
Job descriptions
Many businesses make the mistake of overlooking clear job descriptions but it is at 
their peril to do so. It is important to have these in place for all roles, not just for the 
purposes of recruitment and induction but also as an ongoing foundation for the 
measurement of performance and delivery. Without clearly defined expectations 
from the outset it is very hard to provide meaningful feedback or tackle issues 
relating to underperformance.
Roles can never be set in stone, particularly in smaller and creative businesses. 
Roles are often very diverse and continually evolving and it is important to recognise 
this. It is a good idea to regularly review roles as part of appraisal process.
Performance appraisals
Ultimately people need to know if they are doing a good job, but there are many 
other reasons for the performance appraisal. People value being listened to and 
managers benefit from hearing a different perspective. Regular appraisals provide 
a framework for objective setting and measurement and an opportunity to ensure 
consistency across the business, and to establish both company culture and expected 
behaviours. Training needs and potential stars for the future will also flow from 
appraisals.
The timing and frequency of appraisals will depend on the type of business and 
client demand; some businesses only require one formal annual review, for others 
there is a need for more frequent reviews. Remember, it is all about the quality of 
the dialogue, not the form.
Whatever approach you go for; appraisal meetings should provide people with:
an in-depth understanding of their role, responsibilities and the what is expected 
of them;
feedback on their performance;
an opportunity to discuss their development and objectives for the future.
People are motivated by feeling they have both the support and the opportunities 
they need to reach their full potential. Without a regular appraisal or review, it is 
very hard to achieve this.
An appraisal process should be highly participative and include an element of 
self-appraisal. Individuals play a key role in their own development and the process 
should reflect this; development and growth require input and careful consideration 
from both sides. Appraisal meetings should never be a post-mortem.
•
•
•

149
the ongoing resource
It is important to engage the creative minds in your business. Whilst not all 
people are in exclusively creative positions, those who are need this acknowledged 
in the way you approach reviews; invite them to bring their work in and talk about 
it, and avoid being too dry in your approach.
Discipline and grievance procedures
The very words ‘discipline and grievance’ conjure up an image of something 
very serious and a formality that many design businesses would rather shy away 
from, but really they are just about the creation of a fair and transparent working 
environment, one in which people will know what they need to do to meet the 
expectations of the business or what to do if they are unhappy about something at 
work.
Discipline
Any disciplinary policies and procedures in place should be designed to help your 
people achieve and maintain the right level of conduct and performance. It is often 
possible to resolve issues relating to poor performance informally. When it is not, 
the business should then take formal disciplinary action, following best practice and 
the correct procedure. In the UK, the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service 
(ACAS) sets out very clear guidelines on the process that needs to be followed.
It is a statutory requirement for all businesses to provide all employees with 
access to the disciplinary and dismissal procedure. Such policies provide fairness 
and equity for all, but more importantly help to clarify the relationship between 
the business and its employees. Having the right things in place will also allow you 
as a business to show that you have protected people’s rights.
Grievance
Grievances are still reasonably rare in businesses, many problems that people have 
can be resolved informally, but sometimes people do feel that they have a genuine 
grievance against the business. This can be difficult, but a formal grievance procedure 
can really help to resolve the conflict fairly. It should however not replace open 
communication between all parties.
As with handling disciplinary situations, ACAS sets out the required process and 
procedure. Ensuring adherence to best practice will allow for greater consistency 
in such areas and ensure that the business has the records in place that make life 
simpler.
In an ideal world everybody would perform and deliver brilliantly and never 
have any complaints but, as you will be aware, people can and always will provide 
the greatest of challenges. By giving clear consideration to the above you will find 
it a whole lot easier.

150 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Staff development and training
Training and development is an important part of the employment offer: you will 
be far more appealing to talented people if you present a culture that encourages 
development and progression. People are motivated by training and by businesses 
that will ultimately contribute to their ‘personal portfolio’. Training is an investment 
that will keep people loyal and improve retention.
Providing training will ensure that people have the skills and knowledge they 
need to achieve the overall business goals. The more skilled and knowledgeable 
your people are, the more it will impact on the work they deliver for clients. This 
will ultimately lead to stronger and more sustainable relationships.
Make sure the money and time dedicated to training and development is both 
relevant and well spent; decide on where the management wants to focus the 
business. A lack of clarity will risk the training failing to enhance performance in 
key areas.
Information on training needs can be gathered from a number of sources, 
including induction feedback, appraisal and review notes and client feedback.
The business needs to establish gaps by reviewing the levels of competence and 
expertise required and comparing it with current levels. This will provide the basis 
for any training undertaken and can be used to inform an annual plan. Attention 
should be given to which strategies are most appropriate, timeframes, providers 
(both internal and external) and any cost implications.
It is important to consider evaluation when planning any investment in training. 
It is through evaluation that the business can ensure that it is addressing the needs 
identified. It also allows you to assess the quality of the training, the content, 
the delivery and whether learning has been transferred back into the workplace. 
Evaluation can take place immediately after training but there is some merit in re-
evaluating at a later date. It is only then that a business can measure whether or not 
training has had an impact on performance.
Training and development is not all about external courses, there are many 
other ways to develop people. The actual role, client exposure, internal coaching, 
planned internal projects and experiences will all provide a range of development 
opportunities. Creative people will benefit from taking in the world around them, 
reviewing competitors, visiting exhibitions and sharing what they like. Equally, 
when sourcing a trainer that is right for your business, make sure they understand 
the creative mind and know how to engage it.

3.10 The outgoing resource
Kim Briggs
If you treat people around you with love and respect, they will never guess that you’re trying to get 
them sacked.
Ricky Gervais (b1961), comedian, from his television series ‘The Office’
Dismissing staff
If you have been unable to recover or improve performance through the disciplinary 
process, you may have to terminate employment on the grounds of capability. 
Other reasons for dismissing someone would be:
conduct
a legal reason
some other substantial reason
redundancy.
Under current UK employment legislation, an employee who has been employed 
for more than a year has the right not to be unfairly dismissed. If an employee 
claims to have been dismissed unfairly, the complaint will heard by an employment 
tribunal. Many claims do not make it to tribunal, but when they do, it can be 
very costly in terms of time, money and management attention. It is therefore in 
every business’s interest to avoid such claims being made. A tribunal would need to 
establish whether or not there was adequate reason for the dismissal, and whether 
the employer acted reasonably in the circumstances.
Dismissals are likely to be considered unfair if you have failed to demonstrate 
that the dismissal is linked to one of the above reasons. A dismissal can be considered 
to be ‘constructive’ if the employee felt, through actions of the employer, that their 
position was untenable and resigned as a result. A dismissal will also be considered 
unfair if the business has failed to follow the legally required redundancy procedure, 
as outlined below.
Following the required disciplinary procedure, where appropriate, will ensure 
consistency and fairness. It is worth highlighting that even if the dismissal is valid, 
the business still needs to be regarded as having acted fairly and reasonably at the 
point of dismissal. Demonstrating this is the responsibility of the employer.
•
•
•
•
•

152 How to Run a Successful Design Business
What is a reasonable and fair approach? The individual should be informed of 
the issue and given a chance to explain, and they should be, or have been, given 
the chance to improve, unless the dismissal relates to gross misconduct. They must 
be made aware that failure to improve could result in dismissal. They must also 
be given the right to appeal. Employers should ensure that they have sufficient 
evidence to uphold the dismissal and that they have considered any extenuating 
circumstances. It is all about research, investigation and preparation.
Redundancy
Redundancy is a legally regulated dismissal and, as such, there are very clear 
procedures that must be followed. Failure to do so as highlighted above will result 
in the dismissal being deemed unfair. Managing redundancies is a particularly 
demanding and stressful part of running a business, but the process is very 
clear and the structure, whilst a little time consuming, does make it reasonably 
straightforward. Employment law specialists will always be on hand to guide you 
through this process should you need them to.
The first step is to make sure the process of selection is fair and objective. The 
redundancy process must begin with consultation. People need to understand:
the reasons for the potential redundancies;
the steps the business has taken to avoid redundancy;
the numbers likely to be affected;
how redundancy payments will be calculated.
It will be important to outline the process, covering how people will be selected 
and the likely timescale. The scale of the redundancy will dictate how wide the 
announcement has to go and how long a consultation period must last. Remember: 
redundancy should never be presented as a decision already made.
People should be given as much notice as possible about any potential 
redundancies. The process then falls into the following four stages:
Individuals should be invited to an initial formal meeting to inform them their 
position might be at risk of redundancy.
The next meeting will confirm to them that their position is at risk, and that 
they are now entering into the consultation period. They should be informed of 
how the decision will be made and shown the objective selection criteria against 
which they will be measured. Consultation should be genuine and the business 
should remain open-minded.
During this period, both parties should consider ways of avoiding the redundancy. 
The business must consider and respond to any suggestions made.
If no alternative is found the business must then confirm the redundancy and 
inform the individual of the right to appeal. All employees have the right to 
•
•
•
•
1.
2.
3.
4.

153
the outgoing resource
appeal against the decision to dismiss, and all appeals must be considered and 
responded to in writing.
Whilst consideration must be given to how the business can support those being 
made redundant, it is essential that attention is given to those who remain. People 
will naturally feel very vulnerable, as well as emotional, about losing people with 
whom they have established a working relationship. Follow-up communication 
must be timely and sensitive, but at the same time motivational and providing 
energy for the future.
Exit interviews
Turnover in any business is natural. When people are leaving the business of their 
own volition it is good practice to invite them to an exit interview: people are often 
at their most candid when they are leaving. The aim of any exit interview is to gain 
insight into why a person is leaving and to allow you to establish areas of possible 
dissatisfaction or unhappiness. Exit interviews conducted by an independent 
external provider will often provide greater insight.
It is important to question skilfully and sensitively to establish which feedback is 
justified and to decide what can be done about it. A standard template of questions 
relating to all key areas of employment is advisable.
A final thought…
People come and people go, but it is the business that must control both ends 
of the employment relationship. Inevitably, when people want to leave, they will 
focus on what is best for them. This does not always reflect what is best for the 
business, so consider how long they should stay for. Risk must be considered, and 
caution is advisable: those who have left the business emotionally can have a big 
(and not always good) impact on those who remain. Always do what is right for the 
business.

This page has been left blank intentionally

3.11 The training
Liz Lydiate
The real voyage of discovery consists not of seeking new landscapes, but in having new eyes.
Marcel Proust (1871–1922), novelist, critic and essayist
From to college to work
Most people now enter work in the UK design industry through some form of 
educational qualification, and this is most commonly located in the Higher Education 
(HE) sector. Since the 1990s there has been a conscious shift of emphasis by the UK 
Government towards academic rather than specifically vocational education, which 
has had a strong impact on design educational provision. Vocational education 
emphasises skills and competences; academic education encourages research-based 
analytical thinking. The difference lies between a journey following a prescribed 
route or one hacking a new path through the jungle with a machete. The Higher 
National Diploma (HND) was a well-regarded qualification which many design 
industry employers found delivered potential new recruits with a sound skills-based 
education, but it is now frequently replaced with newly validated BA programmes. 
Recent years have also seen the introduction of the two-year Foundation Degree.
During the same period, the design of educational programmes has become 
more formal – some would say rigid – with 
validated, framework-based curricula and 
provider institutions subject to a complex 
infrastructure of quality review. Colleges and 
universities have worked hard on building 
active and valuable links between HE and 
real-world design practice, including the 
involvement of assessed internship, work-
based learning and live projects within 
many design programme curricula. There 
has also been a rise in flexible HE provision 
which has encouraged many mature 
students to re-enter education, making 
career development and changes through 
HE much more accessible.
•

156 How to Run a Successful Design Business
How design education links to employed skills
It is the role of HE to be aware of the needs of industry and to mastermind a 
complex balancing act between preparing students for practice whilst at the same 
time preserving and encouraging radical academic growth and enquiry. Study of 
the current UK design industry reveals that while there are still some self-trained 
practitioners, particularly in the technologically-based areas of creative practice, the 
predominantly graduate entry of an average company comes from a surprisingly 
wide spread of subjects.
Designers usually come from practice-based programmes that aim to develop 
creative thinking, autonomous practice and a broad underpinning of wider general 
education to support creative work. In the client-facing and management areas of 
design companies, staff are sourced from very diverse educational backgrounds, 
reflecting the need for skills profiles to meet the business needs of design consultancy. 
Examining their education and career trajectory is very interesting. A minority of 
design business people come in with a fully formed skill set: there is much ‘growing 
into’ the work through learning on the job, with or without formal training. HE 
design management programmes annually provide a small number of graduates 
with specialised design business knowledge, and contribute to the important 
business of generating research about how design works.
Design consultancy practice is a team-based activity, and the extent and nature of 
the linked and complementary skills within any particular company require careful 
management planning. To what extent do designers interface directly with clients? 
What is the exact nature of the consultancy on offer, and who contributes what? 
Doctors and lawyers do not usually need special colleagues to help them interface 
with their clients; is design actually different in this regard? As this type of questioning 
increasingly reconsiders the nature of what designers do, it also raises enquiry about 
appropriate education provision and recruitment profiling for this industry.
Continuing Professional Development (CPD) 
– what it is, why it’s important
Soon after the establishment of the UK’s Design Business Association (DBA) in 
1986, one of the core business needs addressed was education and training. The 
founder DBA members reported that the design graduates who comprised their 
entry-level staff intake required challenging amounts of additional training before 
they became effective employees. Interestingly, this has not changed and the need 
for continuing professional development (CPD) has increased.
Building on experience from the 80s recession, steps have been taken to include 
new elements of personal and professional development (PPD) in the HE design 
curriculum, addressing what level of professional awareness should be embedded in 
the education process and to what extent the new design graduate can be expected 
to hit the ground running.

157
the training
Educators increasingly subscribe to the view that BA and MA programmes 
cannot be expected to turn out a ‘fully-cooked’ design professional, but should 
ensure that graduates have a real understanding of the role of business knowledge 
in the provision of design consultancy and an expectation that they will add to 
their capabilities and understanding through a process of life-long learning.
As a people-based service industry, design stands to gain enormously from 
investing in developing its greatest asset, the staff. CPD helps companies to develop 
new skills and to re-tune their offer to meet changing market needs. It rewards 
valued staff and helps in staff retention. The shared experience of working with 
peers from other – sometimes competitor – companies in a CPD situation builds 
stronger ties across the industry sector.
Self-directed and more formal training
CPD is also the responsibility of individuals. A positive attitude towards CPD 
demonstrates a commitment to growth and career development. It is also an aid 
to recruitment and staff selection, and as people move around within the design 
industry for career progression there is an incremental sharing and cross-fertilisation 
of the CPD investment.
Surveys of design professionals indicate that there has been a major shift in 
employer attitudes towards appraisal and performance review, with more and more 
staff reporting that they take part in a formal structure that supports self-reflection, 
internal discussion and personal development planning. At their best, line 
management and appraisal relationships can provide a supportive environment for 
personal development, and an appraisal meeting may be a natural place to discuss 
CPD. Recent growth in mentoring, professional mutual interest groups and peer 
support can help individuals to address whether CPD should be playing a role in 
their professional lives, and can also aid the challenging task of researching and 
evaluating potential CPD opportunities.
Not all CPD involves attending actual training courses. In its 1992 report 
Developing Design Excellence the Chartered Society of Designers (CSD) identified many 
additional types of industry-relevant CPD activity, including reading published 
material, visiting exhibitions and attending seminars and debates. To these can 
now be added: use of the internet; creation of websites; creation of archives. The 
important thing is that the activity should be conscious, targeted and planned.
In-house, in-job training
Traditionally, in-job training involved ‘sitting by Nelly’. Learning from Nelly 
represented maintenance of the status quo; today’s needs are different because 
business survival requires an ongoing process of corporate questioning, review, 
innovation and change. In the complex life of contemporary design companies, 

158 How to Run a Successful Design Business
making time for in-house training can deliver enormous dividends. Away-days and 
residential events make time for staff to work together and build shared values and 
real developmental growth. In Leadership is an Art, former Hermann Miller CEO, 
Max DePree, writes about the power of tribal storytelling. In-house training builds 
both tribes and stories.
Commitment to in-house training also signals investment in staff and a 
commitment to participative management. The work of a design consultancy 
involves being able to deliver on the promises made and expectations created 
during the client courtship period. Shared standards, goals and values are needed 
to achieve this, and in-house training is an important tool for the achievement of 
performance standards. Learning together is valuable for team building and helps 
with the creation of an environment and work practices conducive to creativity. 
Commitment by management to in-house training can be a differentiating factor 
in employee perceptions of the workplace and in building commitment and loyalty 
to the company.
Bringing training to the staff, rather than vice versa, is also cost-effective 
and allows for finely calibrated customisation of the learning experience. Small 
organisations have to watch costs carefully but, with imagination, in-service training 
experiences can deliver great value for money.
External courses and programmes
External training creates dedicated space and time for learning, away from the 
distractions of the workplace. Designers and design employers are often unsure 
whether CPD should be industry-specific or sourced from a wider professional 
pool. Training represents a major financial investment for design companies, so 
the spectre of making a poor choice of provider is real one. Sometimes there is 
benefit in sourcing training outside of the home sector, related instead to the 
needs and specialisms of key client markets. Learning alongside existing and 
potential clients can be an effective way of building in-depth knowledge of their 
context.
Universities and colleges have made an important contribution to individual 
personal development/qualification opportunities through development of part-
time courses that can fit alongside employment. MA work, in particular, is generating 
a new body of committed research and practice development of great benefit to the 
design industry and its clients. Educational institutions also provide short courses, 
offering affordable and relevant updating and knowledge extension. Technological 
developments have brought the benefits of online courses and programmes within 
the reach of most people, offering a particularly flexible and effective method of 
learning.
Many of the UK design industry bodies source, promote or signpost training 
programmes in order to help design companies buy wisely. Their contact details can 
be found in The Reference Library section.

159
the training
Grants and funding
Training should be seen as an investment and, where possible, factored into the 
annual operating budget as a regular provision. Taking account of the predominantly 
small size of design companies it is easy to understand why it is often viewed as a 
one-off expense to be considered ‘only when money permits’.
From time to time, external financial help to pay for training is available to both 
organisations and individuals. In the UK, a number of different Government grants 
and schemes have been offered in recent years to meet either all or part of the cost of 
approved training, as part of economic development initiatives. Information about 
such schemes can be obtained from the design organisations, from branches of 
Business Link and other Government-funded support agencies and, for individuals, 
from any of the major clearing banks. Support may be available for education 
and retraining connected with unemployment and redundancy, such as schemes 
applied to part-time university Masters programmes if the student is unemployed 
or in receipt of benefits.
Universities and colleges sometimes obtain development funding for particular 
types of training provision which is then offered free of charge or heavily subsidised 
to the relevant groups of users, and savings can occasionally be made by organising 
training as a company-wide activity. A level of vigilance is needed to monitor these 
frequently changing opportunities.
Developing a learning culture
Traditionally, vocational education and training were thought to occupy a space 
between school and work, with the results expected to last a lifetime. External 
changes have now altered work culture, causing a complete change of view, with 
real recognition of the value and importance of life-long learning. People are no 
longer pigeon-holed into a single career direction and great creative benefits arise 
from the migration of staff from one field to another.
Both individuals and organisations have responsibility for their own learning, 
including its design, development, care and maintenance. A learning culture 
makes one workplace preferable to another with more dynamic and effective 
results. Learning can be built in to company life, whether it be lunch-hour yoga or 
sponsoring an MA opportunity for a valued employee through a period of flexible 
working hours. Offering time and support for learning is a powerful and appropriate 
reward for great performance, and the shared celebration of learning achievement 
is an effective endorsement of company culture.
What simple structures could you put in place to encourage knowledge 
sharing and knowledge transfer? Could you interrogate your address book to find 
stimulating speakers for evening events for the shared benefit of staff and clients? 
What benefits might come from a link with your local design college or university? 
Could offering internships transform lives and also deliver some valuable input and 

160 How to Run a Successful Design Business
insights? Might investment in an away-day – with some built-in magic – reward and 
cement commitment from your key staff members? With a little creative thinking, 
you can build and maintain an effective learning culture.

3.12 The development
Rod Petrie
I always sum up people’s ambition with a simple analogy. Some people like to go to Blackpool on 
holiday; some just prefer to stay at home and go to the local park. If you take people from my time 
in Govan they were just happy to get out of the shipyards for two weeks. Some people like to go to 
Majorca, and then there are those who want to go to the moon.
Sir Alex Ferguson (b1941), footballer and football manager
Unleashing success
Successful agencies take control of their people, beyond simply the recruitment 
process. They invest in their people, sending out a global message of the consistent 
desire to improve quality, productivity and profitability and that people come first. 
They turn the workplace into an environment that encourages individuals to be 
themselves, to have fun, to take risks with confidence. As a result those agencies fuel 
and unleash creativity. The key to this focuses on five key areas:
team building and growth
effective management
motivation
coaching
mentoring.
Team building and growth
A team is not just a collection of individuals. It’s about getting more out of each 
person because they are part of that team. Together Everyone Achieves More. It is an 
organic and dynamic thing, so will be constantly changing as individuals change 
and respond to each other differently.
It is the people, their creativity and the way that they are led and managed that 
differentiates a successful design business, not the latest gadget or hi spec piece of 
kit, and this needs to be consistently brilliant, day in and day out.
It is the way a team of people interacts, feels about one another, connects, works 
together, shares a common purpose which is harder to copy and sets them apart 
•
•
•
•
•
•

162 How to Run a Successful Design Business
from the competition. If you focus on the team performance you will find the 
individual performance will improve.
Start with a vision and a goal so you know what type of team you want to create. 
Make sure you communicate the vision and goals clearly to everyone. Create a 
checklist for building your team, so that you aren’t tempted to pick someone for the 
wrong reasons. They might tick all your normal recruitment boxes but not be right 
for this team. In the ideal world build your team around people whom you like 
and respect, who fit your criteria and who have different views and ideas and start 
from there. Choose people with complementary skills and personality traits and 
think of their individual roles within the team, for example, diplomat, energiser, 
strategist and so on. Once you have selected your people, give them the creative 
space, inspiration and opportunities to bond and grow as a team.
Effective management
There are many definitions about what is good and effective management. The key 
is to have a strong and inspirational leader who understands the different styles of 
management required to achieve the task, who trusts the people, has loads of common 
sense, is totally dedicated and has the ability to get the very best work from their 
people. In the creative business there is a need to understand the problems involved in 
the management of creative people and the creative process. You need to be a creative 
manager. You are not there to block people being creative, but to inspire and motivate 
people to be creative. That said, the creative manager needs to make sure that everyone 
is made responsible and understands the commercial disciplines and deadlines involved 
and the importance of what they do. It is the responsibility of management to create the 
right environment for individuals to flourish and produce their best commercial work. 
A group of individuals needs a structure and a set of rules; people need to know where 
they stand and what is expected of them. They need direction and a collective vision 
and goal. Imagine a game of football where the goalkeeper ignores responsibilities to 
team mates and charges off down the field to take a pop at goal.
Managers need to be chosen for their relationship skills, and not just their 
technical capabilities, as they are dealing with highly talented people and there can 
be a clash of cultures. Great managers start with a vision and communicate it clearly 
and they tend to be ‘people people’. They lead by example and they are great role 
models. As ‘man managers’ they have empathy with their staff; they know what 
makes each individual tick and what they want to achieve. They never avoid the 
people issues, and they inspire total confidence in others.
Motivation
Motivation is what gets you out of bed in the morning. It’s all about your intent, 
your purpose and your ability to put to good use qualities like passion, commitment, 

163
the development
fire, heart and energy. It’s what empowers you to succeed and makes light of the 
barriers and roadblocks that cause others to stop and give up.
Motivation is key to success. Look at any successful person or business and you 
will find motivated individuals who are driven to an end goal. Motivated people 
have a positive mental attitude that makes things happen. They think differently 
and creatively along the way to overcome the barriers that can suddenly appear 
from nowhere. Stress levels are turned into a source of energy that enables them to 
go on and make those big and decisive decisions.
Understand the individual triggers that work for people, what their learning 
strategies are and how they process information. Some crave power and prestige, 
while others look for recognition of a job well done. Focus on the positive; 
shouting and negativity doesn’t generally work in motivating people to reach peak 
performance. Be consistent. Don’t forget the power of small things: a kind touch; 
a word of encouragement; the simple act of listening; an honest compliment. 
Help people to create tailor-made challenges: achieving a personal challenge will 
prove one of the most effective motivators, just like athletes or explorers who push 
themselves to the limit and beyond. Never stop talking to one another as this can 
lead to confusion, bad decision-making and a distortion of reality. When the heads 
in the team start to drop and the captain has stopped talking, the game is up.
Coaching
The context for coaching is creating the space, ‘your space,’ to create tangible shifts 
and changes in people’s performance and behaviour so they can step up to the 
next level. In a business context it is an ongoing process designed to help people 
to gain greater competence and overcome the barriers to improving performance. 
Coaching requires dedicated time. When it becomes a time-driven activity that 
pushes people, it becomes ‘direct coaching’, and the results are less effective. 
Successful outcomes are achieved by ‘holding the space coaching’, offering time 
and a helping hand to pull people forward. This is often easier to do via an external 
coach than internally.
Because a creative services business is about people, it is by coaching those 
people that you will get the most out of them. When you are looking at why people 
aren’t fulfilling their potential, it doesn’t matter what job they do or who they 
work for, it’s how those things make them feel that is important. It should be an 
ongoing process that helps employees gain competence and overcome barriers, 
particularly in situations where an individual clearly has ability and knowledge 
but hasn’t reached peak performance. Coaching is a powerful business tool that 
creates differentiation and a competitive advantage for an agency. Make it part of 
the business culture and not a one-off activity. Focus on people within the context 
of your business and give everyone the opportunity to benefit from it, in whatever 
way best suits them. Imagine having someone in the business that was there solely 
to help you to succeed.

164 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Mentoring
We all remember the names of our favourite teachers at school and, if you’re like 
me, they were probably your first mentors without you realising it. Mentoring is an 
advanced level of coaching. It is more relational in that it provides both personal 
and professional help, both within the context of the business and outside it. 
Most top athletes and businessmen have mentors, not on how to play the game 
or run the business, but on how to control their frame of mind, especially in very 
challenging situations when not playing well or unable to cope with high-powered 
negotiations.
At its best it is a one-to-one relationship that allows the younger partner to 
confide in someone who understands something of wider life. Traditionally it 
involves the younger, less experienced person learning from the success and non-
success of someone older and, perhaps, wiser. In the most successful agencies 
everyone is important and they will be nurturing every single individual. Think of 
it as another ‘benefit’ like healthcare/pension.
People need to feel that the mentor understands their issues and is truly there 
to help them succeed. There must be mutual respect, liking and a real connection, 
and potentially things in common beyond the business itself. Focus on the whole 
person, not just their performance in the context of the business. A good mentor 
gets the right balance between inspiring creative work and commercial success, tells 
it as it is and doesn’t play politics. It is all about helping people to embrace change, 
to be courageous, to create a vision, and to have a more trusting and open dialogue 
with one another, so that everyone can be even more successful.

3.13 The rewards
Mandy Merron
Treat your staff in the same way you would like them to treat your best customer.
Stephen Covey (b1932), author and trainer
What are you seeking to achieve?
Getting the balance right for rewards is a difficult trick to pull off. You want to 
contain employment costs in line with income levels but also to pay enough to 
attract and keep the right talent.
It is important to understand the underlying reasons for wanting to motivate 
and reward key employees. Is the aim to provide an incentive to work towards 
a common corporate goal, or to ‘lock in’ key people? A number of options are 
available. The key is to find the most appropriate incentive for each employee.
Targeting the incentive to the employee
Understand your employees
The first step is to understand each employee’s value to the business and their 
individual motivation. Figure 3.13.1 suggests how employees can be segmented 
by their motivation and loyalty.
Select the right incentive
The most suitable incentives for each of the key employee groups are usually:
Core Team and Transfer List Employees: salary and possibly simple discretionary 
bonus.
Nomads: performance-related bonuses or a profit-sharing scheme.
Superstars: potential shareholders.
Nomads often require an incentive, whereas Superstars are more motivated by 
recognition and reward.
•
•
•
•

166 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Different types of remuneration
Salaries
Salaries are a function of market rate. In the UK, an invaluable tool for assessing 
what different members of staff should be paid is the Design Business Association’s 
(DBA) annual confidential salary and charge-out rate survey.
Simple bonuses
For the Core Team, a market rate salary is often sufficient. Care is needed before 
embarking on a firm-wide bonus scheme: regular bonuses not linked to specific 
performance measures can soon be taken for granted. When this happens they no 
longer make staff feel rewarded but in the year they are not paid staff feel hard done 
by. A lose-lose outcome!
Bonuses are often linked to company performance, and sometimes to multiples 
of salary. The most important thing is to ensure that both the performance measures 
and their likely monetary outcomes are well understood. Complicated bonus schemes 
too often leave staff confused, so they discount this element of their reward.
Figure 3.13.1  Employee segmentation by motivation and loyalty
Source: Kingston Smith W1 ©
TIME 
TALENT
Superstars 
Key players vital to the 
future of the company, who 
would want to contribute to 
developing the business 
long-term as owners and 
managers. 
Nomads 
Top talent, but more 
committed to working 
with exciting clients/ 
projects than to the 
company. 
Core Team 
Hardworking and loyal, 
forming the backbone of 
the company. 
Transfer List 
Variable talent of no 
particular value to the 
company. 
 

167
the rewards
Benefits
The provision of staff benefits is an area where designers can, and should, get creative. 
In a survey commissioned by Kingston Smith W1, over 90 per cent of respondents 
offered benefits to staff over and above basic salary and holiday entitlement. Of this 
number, 73 per cent provided a fixed suite of benefits, while 27 per cent provided 
some form of flexible benefit package.
Creative businesses offer a selection of ‘well-being’ benefits such as health club 
membership, sabbaticals and company outings as well as ‘insured benefits’ such 
as life and health insurance and pensions. The key is to ask employees what they 
themselves would value.
Profit-sharing scheme
The top contributors in our Nomad category are not wedded to the company, but 
enjoy working on challenging work (or are salesmen) and should usually be rewarded 
by a more sophisticated form of performance-related bonus scheme. Often these 
are referred to as Long-Term Incentive Plans (LTIP). The scheme is often linked 
to individual, team or company performance, and involving the individual in 
target setting is important. Normally LTIPs are structured so they serve as an 
incentive to stay, by paying the bonus in instalments in the future.
Equity incentives
Superstar employees are really the only ones who will find equity incentives truly 
motivating. The main ways to provide equity incentives are:
phantom shares;
employee offered chance to buy shares;
unapproved share options;
Enterprise Management Incentive (EMI);
Share Incentive Plans (SIPs);
Employee Benefit Trust (EBT).
These fall into two main categories: those approved by HM Revenue and Customs 
(HMRC) and those which are not. The fact that certain schemes are not approved 
does not in any way mean that HMRC dislikes them, it just means that they do not 
meet the specific criteria that enable them to be eligible for special tax reliefs.
	
Kingston Smith W1 Employee Benefits Survey, 2009
•
•
•
•
•
•

168 How to Run a Successful Design Business
HMRC unapproved equity schemes
Phantom share schemes
Phantom shares are effectively future bonuses, based on the value of the company 
but which are presented as shares. These allow staff to share in the growth in value 
of your company, without giving them real shares. Any proceeds will be taxed as 
remuneration, but corporation tax relief will be available for the expense. Phantom 
shares can be a drain on resources if the phantom share price is high when the 
employees cash them in.
Employee offered the chance to buy shares
This is the simplest way to offer key employees the opportunity to acquire shares, but it 
should not be done lightly. Shares can have a significant value, and should only be made 
available to those few individuals who can make a real difference to the business.
How the share price is set can vary depending on what level of reward is offered, but 
employees should always pay something. Any purchase of shares at below market 
value can result in employees having a significant tax bill.
It is important to plan for what happens should an employee shareholder leave 
and the company rules should be written so the company can get these shares back 
at a reasonable cost.
Unapproved share options
In order to avoid the immediate income tax charge that can arise with the direct 
issue of shares at a discount, the company can grant options for the issue of shares 
at a future date.
When employees exercise the options and obtain real shares, they will have an 
income tax liability based on the then market value of the shares less any amounts paid 
for the shares. There may also be a National Insurance liability. After exercise of the 
option, further growth in the value of the share will be subject to capital gains tax.
An unapproved share option scheme is very flexible because, unlike an approved 
scheme, there are no restrictions such as size of company or value of options that can 
be granted. For this reason they are popular despite the fact they are less tax effective.
HMRC approved equity schemes
Enterprise Management Incentives (EMI)
This scheme is popular and relatively easy to implement. It is specifically designed 
for growing businesses wanting to give options over shares to a small number of key 
employees. The main features are:

169
the rewards
The company must carry on a qualifying trade with gross assets of less than 
£30m.
Each employee may hold up to £100,000 of options.
The total value of options that may be granted under the scheme is £3m.
There will be no income tax or National Insurance arising on the grant or 
exercise of the option (provided market value is used for the option price).
Conditions may be applied to the right to exercise the options.
The shares must be ordinary shares but can have restricted rights.
Share Incentive Plans (SIPs)
Unlike EMI, SIPs must be open to all employees and not just a select few. 
Consequently, these are rare in practice. The main features are:
Employees can buy up to £1,500 worth of shares each per annum out of gross 
pay.
The employer can provide up to two free ‘matching shares’ for each share that 
they buy.
The employer can also provide up to £3,000 of performance-related shares.
The shares are held in a trust on behalf of the employees for a period of five 
years, at which time the employee can take the shares free of income tax and 
National Insurance.
Employee Benefit Trusts (EBT)
An EBT may be established by a company as a means of rewarding employees. 
Most commonly this will involve the trust acting as a ‘warehouse’ for employee 
shares, so that it initially purchases shares from the company and then issues them 
to employees, perhaps under some form of share option scheme.
This is a simpler process than if a company repurchases its own shares, and it 
ensures that other shareholders’ proportionate holdings do not change every time 
that shares are issued or repurchased.
The EBT may also be used to provide other employee incentives and rewards 
such as cash bonuses.
To sum up
A scheme to motivate and reward key members of the company is something that no 
design business can afford to ignore. Whilst a scheme should provide the company 
with significant long-term benefits, a poorly implemented scheme can demotivate 
employees and leave them with unexpected tax and National Insurance liabilities.
When implementing any incentive scheme, whether share based or otherwise, 
careful planning and consideration is vital.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

170 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Define the objectives of the company; is it reward, retention or succession that 
you are trying to encourage?
Consider the key motivational drivers of the individuals concerned.
Choose the most appropriate method of incentive based on the type of people.
Where applicable discuss with employees before implementation.
Ensure the scheme is effectively communicated.
Do not overcomplicate it.
Regularly review whether incentive schemes are achieving the aims.
The information given about remuneration schemes in this chapter is based on 
the UK situation, and applied at the time of writing. Make sure you get advice from 
your own professional advisers before implementing any schemes.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

3.14 The cavalry
Madelaine Cooper
Knowledge speaks, but wisdom listens.
Jimi Hendrix (1942–70), musician
Calling for the experts
Imagine that you are alone in your home and there is an ongoing monotonous buzz 
coming from your electrical appliances followed by an almighty explosion and a 
blackout. Would you:
Set about sorting out the fault by yourself?
Call for the best electrician you could find?
Sit in the dark?
If you value your personal safety as well as the integrity of your electrical 
appliances, you will hopefully opt for (b) and get the best person possible in to sort 
it out for you. It is too important and tricky to mess about with yourself.
Yet in a business context, most owners and managers of creative agencies 
have to turn their hands to a pretty daunting range of tasks. They regularly tackle 
everything from having the vision about the company as a whole, managing the 
client relationships, running the projects, being creative, innovative and impressive, 
having an understanding of finance, employment, business, law and people 
management as well as the paperclip-ordering aspects of running a company. It is 
asking a great deal of anybody, and particularly someone whose only management 
training has been ‘on the job’ training at the feet of others, and who are essentially 
making it up as they go along. To continue the analogy, it would be like trying to 
fix that big electrical problem based on knowledge that you have picked up from 
someone who has no training as an electrician but who has changed the fuses a 
couple of times.
Wouldn’t it be wonderful to be able to talk to people who are really good at 
some of the things that you aren’t so good at? People who have done these things 
before and who have real knowledge and practical experience. People who are 
acknowledged experts in their field, who are independent and impartial, and who 
aren’t part of the ongoing politics of the company and can bring a bigger view from 
•
a)
b)
c)

172 How to Run a Successful Design Business
outside the company. Experts who aren’t there all the time, and therefore become 
affordable, and who can be asked to go away when not needed.
There are three main categories of outside expert: the Non-Executive Director 
(NEDs), the Consultant and the Mentor. All have subtle, yet discrete, differences in 
their offer.
Non-Execs
Funnily enough, there is no categorical job description in company statute for 
Non–Executive Directors. They tend to be independent, part time, self-employed, 
hands-off from the day-to-day running of the business, and valued for their external 
perspective.
Prospective NEDs should note that company law assigns equal responsibility to 
all Directors whether they be ‘executive’ or not. NEDs share the same legal duties 
and responsibilities as Executive Directors, whereas a consultant does not. If the 
company trades whilst insolvent or operates outside the law in any way, the NED 
is as responsible for those actions as the other Directors. The role should not be 
viewed as a way of popping into the company every once in a while to pick up 
a cheque and slap a few backs. Despite broadcaster Michael Grade’s view that ‘A 
non-exec is like a bidet: no one knows what he does but he adds a bit of class,’ the 
position carries real responsibility.
Unless they are able to bring real strategic thinking to the company, and unless 
that company will allow that strategic thinking to be actively implemented, the role 
really has no value at all.
Consultants
Equally, there is no written brief for the use of a consultant. The reasons and 
the situations for using an expert consultant are as varied as the consultants 
themselves.
It might be that your company is going through a period of change, or moving 
towards a particular business issue such as succession, sale, merger, downturn, 
growth, change of management or change of culture. The insights and knowledge 
of someone who has been there and done it, who can view it from the outside 
looking in, or who can offer guidance and support through challenging times would 
be hugely reassuring.
Or it could be that the company is pitching in a particular business sector or 
geographic region which needs expertise from someone who knows the area. Or 
perhaps the company has simply run out of ideas and lacks context and perspective 
on a particular project. Instinctively, you know that you need something extra that 
you don’t have within the company, and how could any company have all of the 
expertise that is needed all of the time for every project and every business situation? 

173
the cavalry
By inviting a consultant to work with you, you aren’t losing control of the process. 
Consultants are able to add something extra, but ultimately the decisions rest with 
you and the other Directors.
Mentors
A mentor has a different role; they are there as personal confidantes to one particular 
Director or member of the senior management team. Being an entrepreneur can 
put you in a very isolated position, and often it is important to be able to talk 
through decisions and situations with someone who can bring judgement and 
wisdom without being judgemental. All conversations with a mentor will remain 
confidential; they are not intended to be shared by the company as a whole but 
to support the mentoree. There must be complete understanding and trust in 
this relationship and the range of topics covered may extend beyond the purely 
professional and into aspects of personal development for the mentoree.
Because it is generally accepted that the biggest barrier to growth within the 
Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) business sector is the capacity and capabilities 
of the management team itself, it is easy to see how NEDs, expert consultants and 
mentors can bring immense value to a company which is smart enough to use their 
knowledge.
Bringing on board some extra, expert help is not a signal of management 
weakness but of sound judgement. It means that you don’t have to sit in the dark 
and figure it all out for yourself.

This page has been left blank intentionally

3.15 The self-incentive
Kevin Duncan
If a problem is hard, think, think, then think again. It will hurt at first but you’ll get used to it.
Barbara Castle, Baroness Castle of Blackburn (1910–2002), politician
What gets you out of bed in the morning?
This section is all about staying sane and relentlessly enthusiastic. Here are five 
ideas that should help:
You’re the boss. So what?
You are the company culture.
Take the issues seriously, but not 
yourself.
Thinking is free, so do it more often.
Heed your own counsel.
Apply one of these ideas a week, and 
you will never lose the incentive to run a 
successful business.
You’re the boss. So 
what?
Try asking yourself some of these rather irritating questions:
You’re in charge. So what?
You have lots of people reporting to you. So what?
You have a large office. So what?
You have your name on the door. So what?
You are your own boss. So what?
You earn more money than before. So what?
Your sales are up this year. So what?
Your profit is up on last year. So what?
•
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

176 How to Run a Successful Design Business
The knack is not to give any particular answer, but to know why you have given 
that answer. If you do know why, and are happy with that response, then excellent. 
If you are not happy with any particular answer, then work out why and change 
something.
You are the company culture
You need to confront the fact that, as the owner of the company, you are the 
company culture. You need to behave as you would like others to behave. What 
does that mean? Well, disregarding personal style for a moment, there are some 
basic principles of good conduct to which you should adhere. Being polite and 
realistic, returning calls when you say you will, and paying your bills diligently are 
all important.
You can create your own list of this type based on your personal preferences. 
Over time, you will undoubtedly receive back as much good behaviour as you dish 
out. You will gain a reputation for high standards, integrity and honesty. Repeat 
business will follow.
Over-deliver if you wish, but never under-deliver, and should you choose the 
former, then make sure you charge for it. Pursuing perfection rather than progress 
has killed many an agency.
Pay close attention to the effect that your personal behaviour has on your staff. 
If you are small-minded, then you will in turn attract those who are small-minded 
and unreliable. Map out what you believe to be the important parts of how to 
conduct your business, and use that as a blueprint to determine how you should 
conduct yourself, and in turn what you expect and desire of others. This will stand 
you in good stead if you have to confront a dilemma about whether to release a 
member of staff or decline some business, or if you have to take the harsh decision 
to inform an existing customer that you will no longer work with them. Making 
such a fundamental decision on the spot often comes across as impetuousness or 
impatience, but if you have thought through your principles carefully, you can state 
calmly and clearly that their way of doing things does not tally with yours.
Take the issues seriously, but not yourself
This is a maxim that really, really works. Customers want their issues taken seriously, 
but this doesn’t mean that you have to do things in a boring way. Earnest subject 
matter does not mean that the people dealing with it have to be in a permanent 
state of melancholy. So relax and don’t take it all so seriously.
Humour and lightness of touch are great ways of staying calm and sane. A 
good laugh can really take the pressure off. On the other hand, being downhearted 
too frequently makes you annoyed with yourself, and you can be sure that it’s no 
barrel of laughs for those around you either. This is not to suggest that you wear 

177
the self-incentive
a revolving bow tie and clown suit to your next meeting. But do try to lighten up 
the working day. You and your staff will benefit hugely. Make things fun and good 
things will follow.
Thinking is free, so do it more often
‘I haven’t had time to think.’ How many times have we heard that said? Millions of 
people say it every day in all walks of life, let alone in business. What does it actually 
mean? If you analyse the phrase carefully, it is complete nonsense. Every sentient 
being spends the entire day thinking, absorbing circumstances, and reacting to 
them. Of course, the phrase is not literal. What it really means is: ‘I haven’t had time 
to pause and think about the things that really matter, because lots of irrelevant stuff has 
got in the way.’
Aha. That’s more accurate, and because businesses usually generate vast amounts 
of irrelevant stuff, businesspeople are very prone to the problem of not having 
enough thinking time. This is a tragedy, and it is your job to create the appropriate 
time to rectify the position. Why is this so important? Because, although you may 
claim that you are too busy to create the time, if you haven’t worked out whether 
what you are doing is the right thing, then you may only be busy pursuing all the 
wrong things.
So now is the time to get thinking. It is a free activity. All you have to do is set 
aside the time and create the appropriate conditions. Some people like total peace 
and seclusion, others like something to shake them up. Work out your style and 
develop different ways of creating thinking time.
Heed your own counsel
Respect yourself by paying close attention to your instinctive reactions. When you 
are confronted with a tricky problem, ask yourself:
What do I personally think of this issue?
If it’s a bad thing, do I know how to fix it?
Is there something I can learn from it?
What is my immediate thought about what to do next?
If I don’t have a strong view, shall I ask a respected colleague?
Trust your instincts and start making some decisions. If an idea is unsuccessful, 
then ditch it, or refine it as you go along. Indecisiveness has killed many a business, 
so go for imperfect action rather than perfect inertia.
•
•
•
•
•

This page has been left blank intentionally

Section Four: 
The Income

This page has been left blank intentionally

It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a client in possession of a good budget, must be in want 
of a design consultant.
Shan Preddy, with thanks to Jane Austen (1775–1817), ‘Pride and Prejudice’
So what is marketing all about?
The purpose of marketing is to generate income 
from new and existing customers, or clients. It 
is not the same as sales, which comes later on 
in the process, nor as negotiation which is the 
skill used to close the deal. Nor can it ensure 
profit from the income it brings; that’s the job 
of business and project management. Marketing 
is what we use to attract buyers to our services 
in the first place and then, in conjunction with 
client 
relationship 
management 
processes, 
continue to attract them.
The consultant and writer, Peter Drucker, 
defined it like this: ‘The aim of marketing is 
to make selling superfluous.’ If you get your 
marketing right, design buyers will come to 
you. They will be ‘purchase-ready’, knowing 
what you do, how you do it and who you do it 
for. All that remains is for you to reassure them 
that you can do it for them.
On the whole, designers understand marketing. Around 60 per cent of all design 
firms work in the branding and communications arena with clients in marketing 
roles. Designers working in other disciplines are also regularly exposed to the theory 
and practice of marketing, and anyone living in the Western world is all too aware 
of the effect that consumer marketing has on us and our behaviour.
	
Design Council Design Industry Survey, 2010
•
4.1 
The marketing strategy
Shan Preddy

182 How to Run a Successful Design Business
So why is it that when design firms launch their own marketing initiatives, they 
start in the wrong place? Why do they rush to produce websites, brochures and 
mailshots without first developing an intelligently constructed marketing strategy? 
Is it ‘because they can’, falling into the comfort zone of producing marketing 
outputs? Without a good marketing strategy, they might as well take a fistful of 
money and throw it in the air in a gale-force wind for all the good it will do; it feels 
like action, but it’s pointless.
Putting the strategy together
It’s not difficult to create inspirational, robust strategies, but it does depend on 
starting in the right place; that is at the beginning, with a clear vision and a robust 
business strategy. Once you have the proper focus, you can develop your marketing 
strategy, then your marketing plan, and then the accompanying marketing aids and 
outputs. In that order.
There are three main elements in any marketing strategy:
your positioning in the marketplace;
your target markets;
your propositions.
A simple way to work on these is to ask three questions; the answers will inform 
every marketing activity you undertake:
What are you?
Who wants you?
Why should they bother appointing you?
Positioning: what are you?
If you have a business, you have a brand, and that brand will have values. Strong or 
weak, intentional or accidental, they will be there.
The market positioning of your brand will depend on your product and its 
quality and it will be relative to your chosen target market’s needs, your competitors’ 
products and what is happening in the marketplace as a whole. In turn, your 
positioning will influence your pricing policy, your geographical location and your 
employment strategy. In marketing, your activities should be based around your 
desired positioning, which might be different from your current positioning.
As a simple non-design example, let’s take a look at positioning in practice 
with five brands of tea. One might position itself as a no-frills, cheap-and-cheerful 
product; a second as a reliable, good-value family drink; a third as a high-fashion 
luxury treat; a fourth as a working man’s tea; a fifth as a low-calorie, decaffeinated 
drink for young women. None of these positions is inherently better than the others: 
•
•
•
•
•
•

183
the marketing strategy
they are just different. Their product formulations, prices, promotional campaigns 
and places of distribution (the so-called ‘Four Ps’ of the traditional marketing mix) 
will be determined as a result of the decision on positioning, not before. The same 
thing applies to design firms: positioning first, and the rest will follow.
Let’s go further. The five tea brands will not necessarily be differentiated by 
target market demographics: one customer might well buy all of them, seeing them 
as a range of options for use at different times and under different circumstances. 
In the same way, design-buying clients will have a number of differently positioned 
design companies on their radar.
Now let’s dig a little deeper. There is another important ‘P’ in the cocktail: 
personality. Two budget – or mid-range, or premium – teas might have exactly the 
same product at exactly the same price, but the buying and drinking experience will 
‘feel’ different in each case owing to their brand personalities. In the design sector, 
two firms might offer the same capabilities and the same levels of project delivery, 
but they will ‘feel’ different.
Finally, it is possible for one tea to be positioned in different ways to more than 
one target market; a healthy drink in one country and a luxury in another, or a 
breakfast drink for men and an evening drink for women. The product formulation 
will be similar, and often identical, in each case. But the positioning differs, and this 
will dictate different prices, promotions and personalities. In the design world, a firm 
might position itself differently in a mature marketplace and in emerging markets: 
‘Food and drink branding’ in the UK, for example, and ‘packaging’ elsewhere. Sole 
designers might decide to present themselves to direct clients as ‘independent 
design consultants’, and to design groups as ‘freelancers’. In both of these cases, 
the products remain the same, although the pricing will probably be different. The 
promotions certainly will.
How clear is your positioning?
Having decided on your desired positioning, you will need to articulate it in 
everything you do in marketing from sales calls and meetings to websites. If you 
can’t describe clearly and simply what you are and what you do, how can other 
people understand it? And if prospective clients don’t understand it, how can they 
be expected to buy your services?
Many design firms find it difficult to describe their market positioning, and it is 
often because they haven’t worked it out properly themselves. Try this simple test. 
Ask every member of your company to describe what you are in one short written 
sentence; apart from some inevitable variances in wording, they should all contain 
the same content.
A website can be a useful window into a business’s clarity of thinking. Take a 
look at the sites of as many design firms as you can. Look at them as though you 
were a client. How many of them state on the homepage exactly what they are 
and what they do? How many make blind assumptions that because they know, 
everyone knows? Next, ask a few friends who don’t work in design to browse your 

184 How to Run a Successful Design Business
own website for no more than 60 seconds, and then write down from memory 
what they think you are. If they can’t do it accurately, your website needs some 
adjustments.
Working on your positioning
Here are ten questions to ask when working on your own positioning:
What exactly do you do?
Who do you do it for?
How do you do it?
What are your current strengths and weaknesses compared with the market as 
a whole?
How many design firms offer much the same as you do?
Which firms are your direct competitors?
What are their strengths and weaknesses compared with yours?
What are the trends in the design sector?
What are the trends in business and in market behaviour in general?
What are clients likely to want from design firms in, say, five years’ time?
Design is an over-crowded, over-supplied sector worldwide. But how many direct 
competitors do you really have? Once you have mapped out your competitive set, 
you might discover that there aren’t as many as you had feared. Even within one 
narrow design discipline, companies are not always as competitive as they might 
at first seem. For example, an interior design company specialising in boardrooms 
and office suites for directors might not be directly competitive with one working 
on large-scale office interiors. A branding design firm working on food might 
not be directly competitive with one working on wine and beer. Although both 
might describe themselves as ‘office interior designers’, or ‘brand designers’, their 
positioning is different.
Specialisation
The more mature and crowded your marketplace is, the greater need for specialising. 
The more you position yourself as an expert, the fewer competitors you will have 
and the easier your marketing and selling will be. In design, there are several tried-
and-tested methods of doing this (see Table 4.1.1).
A specialisation can be developed by combining wide or narrow capabilities with 
wide or narrow markets and functions. You can offer a wide range of capabilities 
to a narrow client market or job function: ‘Branding and communication, on and 
offline, for financial services’; ‘Industrial and product design for medical equipment 
manufacturers’. You can offer a narrow, but deep, capability to a wide client base: 
‘Websites for businesses’; ‘Packaging for manufacturers and retailers’. If you offer 
a narrow capability to a narrow client base, you are working in a niche market: 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

185
the marketing strategy
‘Interior design of museum shops’; ‘Internal communications for HR professionals 
in public sector bodies’. The combination to avoid is a wide capability offer to a 
wide client market or function; you will be seen as a ‘jack-of-all-trades’ but master 
of none.
By joining forces with other, differently skilled firms – design or otherwise – a 
more complete service for specific client sectors can be developed. For example: 
‘Branding, packaging, communications, ecommerce, interiors and point-of-purchase 
for retailers’, or ‘Design, PR and advertising for the property market’.
Health warnings
There are two main danger areas.
Firstly, if you have discovered a gap in the market, check that there is also a 
market in the gap. There might be a very good reason why no one else is offering 
that particular specialisation.
Secondly, some clients worry about design firms working for other clients in 
the same market, and they might ask for a non-competitive agreement as well as 
the usual confidentiality and non-disclosure clauses. The problem comes when you 
work with only two competitors; once you work with three or more, it makes you 
a specialist and your expertise will usually outweigh other considerations. At worst, 
you might need to exclude one or two of a client’s closest competitors from your 
Specialisation
Example
By capability
Branding
Communications
Packaging
Product
Interiors
Digital
By market
Medical
Leisure
Food
Retail
Education
Public Sector
Museums
Automotive
By function
HR
Marketing
R&D
Finance
IT
Table 4.1.1  Expert specialisations 

186 How to Run a Successful Design Business
portfolio for the duration of the relationship. If you decide to limit your potential 
income by agreeing to requirements of this kind, negotiate a compensation 
payment.
Target markets: who wants it?
Once you have decided on your positioning, you can move on to target markets. 
Filtering down from the big picture to detail, the process goes like this:
The geographical area you will cover.
The market sectors you intend to focus on, both direct clients and middlemen.
The likely demographic and psychographic profiles of the relevant design buyers 
in those companies.
Geography
If you receive incoming approaches from clients, there is nothing to stop you working 
anywhere in the world provided that you can do it profitably. For outgoing sales 
approaches, however, the geographical area you can realistically cover will relate 
to the size of your business. The smaller your firm, the more local your outgoing 
target market will need to be; you can’t afford the time, let alone the expense, of 
travelling the length of the country to go to sales meetings. The exception would 
be if you have a very narrow specialisation; in this case you might need to travel 
some distance.
Market sectors and components
Not only do you need to identify the sectors which best fit your chosen positioning, you 
also need to check that those sectors have appropriate budgets, and that they are likely 
to continue having them for the foreseeable future. Then think about the companies or 
organisations which operate in those sectors. It’s worth putting together a ‘wish-list’ of 
those that interest you and that you want to work for, as well as those you would rather 
avoid. If you heart isn’t in it, there’s not much point in chasing after that business.
As well as targeting direct clients, it is worth marketing your services to 
‘third parties’, or middlemen, who will either recommend you to their clients or 
commission you directly as part of a larger project. In either case, you will need to 
negotiate appropriate financial arrangements and, possibly, reciprocal agreements. 
Interior designers could consider forming relationships with architectural practices 
which don’t have their own interior studios. Creators of large-scale environmental 
graphics could promote their services to brand, identity and service design firms 
as well as to advertising agencies. Packaging design companies could team up with 
product and industrial designers who can help with structural design; ecommerce 
specialists might link with retail designers.
1.
2.
3.

187
the marketing strategy
This kind of work, although usually of lower financial value than working 
directly for clients, can be very profitable. It can also provide a good entry-point 
into new markets if you are diversifying or repositioning your business. Make sure 
you have written contracts with the other people, and insist on contact with the 
client. The relationship should be positioned as an alliance, not a sub-contracted 
arrangement.
Demographics and psychographics
After you have identified the country, sector and company names, you need to focus 
on the individual, budget-holding design buyers and think about more than just 
the job title. At the moment, you don’t need their names; you are simply putting 
together a portrait of representatives.
First the demographic profile, which will affect the choice, tone and content of 
your marketing materials. What are the most probable design-buying job roles or 
titles? How much annual design spend might be under their control? What age and 
gender are they likely to be? What nationality are they?
Next, the psychographic profile, or what makes them tick. How much knowledge 
and experience might they have of buying design? What is their attitude to design 
likely to be: at the heart of what they do, or only a part? What status do they enjoy 
in their own organisations, and how might they behave as a result? Will their age, 
gender or national culture influence their buying behaviour?
Demographic targeting is like knowing which pond to fish in; psychographic 
targeting is knowing which bait to use.
Propositions: why should they bother?
Why should anyone read your brochure or take your phone calls? Why would they 
want to meet you? What benefits can you bring to them and to their company or 
organisation? Why should they appoint you instead of one of your competitors, 
or instead of doing it themselves in-house? Should you have a Unique Selling 
Proposition (USP)?
This three letter acronym (TLA) has a lot to answer for. It was developed in the 
early 1940s by the American agency, Ted Bates, for advertising campaigns, but the 
hunt for a business USP has now become something of a Holy Grail for design firms. 
If you have been searching, stop it right now: you will make yourself unhappy in 
the attempt. Not only is it is very unlikely that any of the propositions, or sales 
benefits, that you put to prospective clients will be genuinely unique, it is also 
unnecessary. If you really can’t live without a snappy TLA, call it an MSP instead. 
A Meaningful Sales Proposition. You need to be good at what you do, not the only 
one to do it.
To work, propositions must be expressed as benefits, not features. That you are 
expert digital designers – or brand identity specialists, or award-winning interior 

188 How to Run a Successful Design Business
designers, or innovative product designers – is a feature. That your expertise results 
in commercial effectiveness for your clients is a benefit.
Propositions come in two types:
Universal, which will apply to any client or client-to-be. These will appear on 
your website and any other promotional materials.
Specific, which will apply to a particular individual prospect at a particular time 
and in a particular set of circumstances.
Universal propositions will remain relatively static over time, changing only 
as you change your vision and business strategy or when market forces dictate. 
Specific propositions are always dynamic, changing with each sales situation. It 
is the combination of the two which wins clients but it is universal propositions 
which you need to concentrate on for marketing strategies. Specific propositions 
come into play later within the sales process.
From strategy to plan
Once you have developed your marketing strategy, complete with positioning, 
target markets and universal propositions, you can then – and only then – draw up 
a practical marketing plan. Don’t waste time and effort by trying to do things in the 
wrong order.
•
•

4.2 
The marketing plan
Shan Preddy
To achieve great things, two things are needed: a plan, and not quite enough time.
Leonard Bernstein (1918–1990), conductor, composer and pianist
Getting to know you
Marketing, when it’s done properly, is a mainstream business activity, just like 
finance and HR management. It should be a continuous, controlled, planned 
process, not an irregular, ad-hoc, activity undertaken whenever incoming business 
is looking a bit slow and you have a few spare moments. If you drive your search for 
income in fits and starts, you shouldn’t be too surprised if your workflow pattern 
follows peaks and troughs.
Let’s assume that you’ve developed your marketing strategy by establishing 
what you are (your positioning in the marketplace), who wants you (your target 
markets) and why they should bother appointing you (your sales propositions). In 
case you skipped it, all of this is outlined in the previous chapter. Now, and only 
now, is the time to work on your implementation plan.
Just as with the marketing strategy, there are a couple of questions you can 
ask:
How will they find out about you?
How will they remember you?
Brands, both corporate and consumer, need to become visible and relevant, 
and then retain that visibility and relevance. A few brands fail because they don’t 
satisfy needs, but many more simply fade away, either because people don’t know 
they exist or because their otherwise perfectly satisfied customers forget all about 
them.
Once you’ve achieved visibility and relevance for your own brand, therefore, 
your aim is to keep it. At the precise moment a need for design occurs in your 
targets’ minds, your business’s name should pop up as the solution.
•
•
•

190 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Outgoing approaches
The best marketing plans deploy a combination of initial ‘active approaches’ (AA) 
and follow-up reminders, or ‘keeping in touch’ (KIT). Once you have made contact 
with AAs, you need to follow up with regular KITs; this is relationship marketing, 
and it’s where proper planning and good database management come in.
The frequency at which you KIT will depend on the design discipline you 
offer and on your prospective clients’ buying patterns. The cycle for product and 
interior design, or for major corporate identity campaigns, is much longer than 
it is for some areas of communication design. You don’t, however, want to make 
contact too often, Not only is it wasteful, it is counter-productive; over-frequent 
communications just become irritating. As a rule-of-thumb, you should aim to get 
your brand and its key messages in front of each prospective client at least four 
times a year, excluding seasonal greetings cards.
Don’t forget, by the way, to KIT all of the people present in any credentials 
meetings and pitches you have, not just the main contact. Even if they didn’t want 
to take the relationship any further at that point, they might in the future.
Media choices
Good marketing uses a mixture of direct (‘bullseye’) and indirect (‘broadshot’) 
media. Used together in a planned programme, they can be very powerful.
Bullseye media are those which are targeted at a named individual. They 
include:
telephone;
mailings (print or digital) such as letters, emails, mailshots, newsletters;
invitations to seminars and events, yours or others;
personal contact (face-to-face or remote) such as networking, social media;
stalking: tracking down a specific person at an event or conference.
Broadshot media are those which reach a focused group of like-minded people, 
but not named individuals. Options include:
websites;
brochures (print and digital);
PR through the media;
advertising in any medium;
	
How to Market Design Consultancy Services by Shan Preddy (Gower ISBN 0-566-08594-1) contains more information 
on AA and KIT: these terms are specific to this way of thinking, although the principles they represent are universal.
	
How to Market Design Consultancy Services by Shan Preddy (Gower ISBN 0-566-08594-1) contains more information 
on bullseye and broadshot media. Like AA and KIT, these terms are specific to this way of thinking; the principles they 
represent, however, are universal.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

191
the marketing plan
pay-per-click online schemes;
registers and membership lists;
directories;
exhibitions and trade shows;
awards;
sponsorship;
speaking at conferences, workshops, seminars.
It’s not a question of scale; the difference between bullseye and broadshot is 
whether you are addressing a known person or not. Even if they involve thousands 
of people, mass mailings and social media are still bullseye activities; they go to 
individuals, although all you know about them might be their email addresses. The 
best relationship-based bullseye campaigns know a lot more than that, of course.
How can you get the names and contact details of these bullseye individuals? 
The best way to develop high-quality lists is to build your own, using the target 
market criteria you have identified in your marketing strategy. However, you can 
also buy or rent lists from commercial providers. If you do this, make sure that you 
clean and validate them before use: they are often out-of-date and inaccurate.
Broadshot activities will keep your brand visible, relevant and memorable, and 
the more multi-channel you make them the better. They support bullseye approaches 
by attracting incoming enquiries and by creating fertile ground for outgoing AA 
and KIT approaches. When busy prospective clients receive mailings or phone calls 
from design firms they have never heard of, and which they know nothing about, 
they are much less likely to look and listen.
When selecting which broadshot media to use, choose those which provide the 
best match to your defined target market, with as little waste as possible. For example, 
to reach prospective clients who work as marketing directors in food manufacturing, 
you might be better concentrating on media which has food production as its main 
focus rather than on the more general marketing media, which will reach a lot of 
other, irrelevant (to you) marketers.
With paid-for media, such as advertising and exhibition space, don’t base your 
financial calculations on the absolute cost but on the ‘cost-per-thousand’. This is 
the amount it will take to reach 1,000 of your prospective clients, and it will allow 
you to compare one media option with another. Something which costs £5,000 
and potentially reaches 10,000 of your prospects provides better cost-per-thousand 
value (50p) than something which costs £1,000 but only potentially reaches 10 
(£100).
Display your expertise
Press articles, thought-leadership pieces and speaking at conferences will demonstrate 
your expertise and attract potential clients; these are broadshot media. However, 
you can also use bullseye options. What about running your own, invitation-only 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

192 How to Run a Successful Design Business
events and seminars? Or client workshops on design management? Or dinner 
debates? To be most effective as a business development tool, include both current 
and prospective clients.
And what about writing guides – or even books – and offering them free to clients 
and prospects? If they contain usable advice, they will stick around for years, and 
will be passed from person to person. How to develop a website? How to manage 
design? An A–Z of digital? Or print? Top tips for rapid prototyping? Using retail 
design for best effect? Make sure they are properly branded, with full contact details 
including your website address, but don’t be tempted to turn them into brochures 
masquerading as thought-pieces, or you will lose the reader. And if you publish 
them as downloads from your website or send them to people in digital form, make 
sure you give them a file title which has both your brand name and the name of the 
publication and not an internal system name which will be meaningless to anyone 
else.
Find their spaces
Occupy the spaces your current and prospective clients occupy, both physical and 
virtual. Find out where they go for professional information, advice, inspiration, 
challenges and ‘go’ there too, using the spaces as shop windows for your services. 
Why not start discussion forums on the appropriate sections of online networks, and 
engage with the letters pages of their trade publications? Are there any membership 
bodies, or trade organisations, or professional groups which you could partner? 
Could you advertise on their websites, or sponsor their events, or run workshops 
alongside their annual conferences? Go where your target markets go. If you have 
third-party sectors, or middlemen, in your marketing strategy, remember to occupy 
their spaces as well.
Viral buzz
Word of mouth (or mouse) is one of the cheapest marketing channels available, and 
one of the most powerful. It is also the most difficult to control as you can’t dictate 
what other people will say about you. As businesses, and smallish businesses at that, 
design firms aren’t the ideal candidates for concerted viral campaigns, unlike, say, 
a new album or soft drink aimed at teenagers. However, on top of the references 
and testimonials you will already be discussing with them, it’s worth asking your 
current clients for referrals and introductions to others, especially those in their 
own organisations. You can also proactively ask third parties to spread the good 
word; make it easy for them by providing information in a way that they can pass 
on.

193
the marketing plan
Resources
You will need to cut your marketing cloth to suit your means. What resources have 
you got: budgets, time, personnel, skills? Is your business big enough to employ a 
dedicated marketing and sales person or team, or will you have to supply the muscle 
in other ways, such as outsourcing all or part of the work? Are there any aspects of 
your plan that need specialist skills, such as cold-calling? Do you need someone for 
simple database cleaning? If you intend doing it all yourself from existing internal 
resources, make sure you release sufficient time and budget to do it properly and 
invest in appropriate training and coaching.
Setting marketing budgets falls into the ‘more art than science’ category, and 
even the largest organisations in the world struggle to get it right. Looking at data 
from 2005 to 2009 in its twice-yearly Marketing Trends Survey, the Chartered 
Institute of Marketing (CIM) reports that, in general, UK marketers are working to 
an annual budget of just over 8 per cent of turnover, excluding salaries. Anecdotal 
evidence suggests that some design businesses are working to 10 per cent of fee 
income, excluding staff costs.
For you, the important thing is to decide how much you want to achieve in 
what period of time, and then work out how much you can afford to spend. For 
example, if you are aiming to raise awareness of your business to a high level over a 
short timescale, you will need to do much more marketing than if your objective is 
to maintain that awareness over time; your budget will therefore have to be larger.
Different design firms include different elements in their budgeting. Some 
account for bought-in items alone; some cover bought-ins plus outsourced resources; 
some add in staff time as well. Only you and your accountant will know what’s 
right for your business.
The good news is that marketing implementation isn’t particularly difficult, and 
it needn’t cost a lot of money. It will, however, take time and effort to do it properly, 
as with all aspects of running a business.
Don’t just think it, ink it
Once you have decided which weapons in the media armoury will work best for you, 
and how frequently you will deploy them in AA and KIT approaches, and which 
resources you can afford, you need to bring them all together into The Written Plan. 
There’s no point imagining that you can manage the process if everything remains 
in your head or on a dozen or more different pages.
Marketing plans are dynamic, not static, and should be developed on a rolling 
monthly basis; as each month finishes, add another to the end of the plan. You can 
work to the conventional 12-month pattern, but 13 months are preferable. Why 
	
UK Chartered Institute of Marketing (CIM) Marketing Trends Survey, conducted by IPSOS MORI. This data: Autumn 
2009

194 How to Run a Successful Design Business
the extra month in the calendar? If your plan starts in June, ending it in June the 
following year, not May, allows you to cut-and-paste and view annual events such 
as press features, exhibitions and conferences without having to look them up each 
time.
What goes into the plan? Three main things. First, your financial targets for future 
fee income, month by month and accumulated for your financial year; secondly, 
your planned marketing activities with item details, dates, and who’s responsible for 
doing it; thirdly, your budgeted costs, month by month and accumulated. Update 
it at least monthly, recording actual income, activities, expenditure and results as 
well as making changes ahead as circumstances change or as opportunities present 
themselves. By being able to look backwards as well as forwards, you can evaluate 
future ideas against past performance.
Finally, what does it look like? Every plan from every firm is as different as the 
firms themselves. If spreadsheets are your style, use them. Some people use project 
management software, others simple tables or spreadsheets. It really doesn’t matter. 
The only important thing is to do it.

4.3 
The geography
Christine Losecaat
We all live under the same sky, but we don’t all have the same horizon.
Konrad Adenauer (1876–1967), statesman
Why work internationally?
Working internationally, or exporting, can increase turnover, keep you and your 
staff motivated and generally improve overall business performance. If you operate 
in an industry sector that moves geographically, for example the manufacturing 
shift to the Far East, it can be imperative.
Whatever the reason you are looking to work internationally, it should be 
stimulating, inspiring and fun. What it isn’t, is a solution to an already weak 
business. Exporting gives you a whole new set of challenges to grapple with, and if 
your business is wobbly for operational reasons in your domestic market, working 
overseas is not the answer. It costs time and money and it will take you out of the 
office for extended periods of time.
Where do you begin?
The first thing is not to feel overwhelmed. Working internationally is not that 
different from working at home: you still need to find customers and have a 
compelling proposition for them to buy from you. The sensible route is to make 
your international marketing strategy an extension of your UK strategy.
That still means having to identify potential markets, and there are two ways of 
doing that. You can choose a geographic market: this could be because an existing 
domestic customer has a branch office there and might find your services useful, or 
because you might have cultural or family links to a particular country or region. 
Alternatively, you can choose a specific industry or sector specialism: for example, 
you may have a speciality in the automotive sector, or food and drink.
Whichever route you decide on, you need to undertake market research to 
identify if there is a demand for your services and, if so, who your customers might 
be. It will also help you identify potential competitors and partners. Your research 
•

196 How to Run a Successful Design Business
will help you understand how best to promote yourself to your target market, and 
whether there are any regulatory issues or specific procurement practices you should 
be aware of. It should also tell you early on, before you have invested too heavily, if 
you have chosen a market that is inappropriate for your capabilities.
Researching your market is easier than you think: the internet has made all 
our lives simpler. If you have chosen to look at a sectoral route, identify the major 
international trade fairs and conferences for that sector. Most will list speakers, 
who will be leaders in the field, as well as listing exhibitors. You may find that key 
international events in a given sector take place in your domestic market, or close 
by, so you can easily attend. If you have chosen a geographic focus, don’t forget 
that most countries have special Chambers of Commerce or Trade Development 
Councils you can join where you can network with domestic representatives of 
relevant international businesses. You can also look at countries close to home. 
Many regions have trading blocks which have simplified cross-border regulations 
and accounting practices, for example the European Union or North American 
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Another source of invaluable information is other 
design companies who are already working internationally. Many are willing 
to share information, especially if you find someone in a different discipline to 
yours.
Whichever countries you choose, visit them as part of your research. Make sure 
you plan your visit properly. You will get much more out of it if you time it to 
coincide with a relevant industry event, such as sectoral exhibition (for example, 
a furniture fair or motor show) or a design specific event (Tokyo Designers Week, 
Shanghai Creative Week) and if you have a full itinerary of relevant meetings.
Lastly, don’t forget to check that your insurance policy covers you for 
international work.
on your own or find an agent?
There is no single answer to this question. You are the best person to sell your own 
proposition, and most clients want to buy from the owner or senior partner in a 
design company. Having said that, it can be useful to have a representative or an 
agent to help with business development, especially where there are language and 
wider cultural barriers. A representative may also become imperative for project 
delivery.
Agents usually work on a non-exclusive basis, and largely on commission. 
Representatives work for you, or perhaps one or two others, on an exclusive basis 
and would expect a contribution to their salary plus all relevant expenses paid. This 
makes a representative more expensive, but you have better control. The best way 
of finding someone is by word of mouth and keeping your eyes and ears open when 
doing your initial market research.

197
the geography
Do you need to set up an office?
Setting up an office in another country demonstrates commitment to the market 
and will stand you in good stead when pitching potential customers. It is a big 
investment, however, and one that you should only consider doing on the back 
of considerable existing business in a given country. When you decide to do it, 
send your best senior executive– who must be willing to relocate – to set it up. This 
obviously has implications on your business at home.
Culture and Language
There will be cultural differences no matter where you go. In most countries, you 
just need to look at the difference between north and south to give you an idea! 
Don’t worry. On your first few visits, any cultural faux-pas will be politely forgiven, 
and you will soon pick things up. Culture becomes a bit more challenging when 
trying to design for a particular market. For example, you may be asked to design 
a specific product or service for India: if you have never lived there, restrict your 
offer to design strategy and process and get a local partner to help you with the 
implementation.
When it comes to language, people prefer buying in their own language. However, 
we live in a globalised world and most business people are used to conversing in 
different languages and working through interpreters. If you are looking for repeat 
business from an overseas client, consider employing a designer or client services 
manager who can speak that language. And, if you are a graphic designer, think 
twice before looking for work in a country with a different alphabet if you don’t 
speak the language.
Contracts and Getting Paid
In some countries, a contract is a moveable feast. Where it is not worth much, 
your personal relationship with the client’s key executives is what underlines any 
agreement: this is why it can take two to three years to win any business in some 
Asian countries. Also, your first commission is likely to be a ‘test’ commission. This 
means that you will be asked to deliver a project that is considerably smaller in scale 
to what you are used to working on. This is simply risk management from the client. 
If you accept it, and deliver it well, it should lead to more significant business.
Key contractual learning points are not unlike domestic ones. Clarify ownership 
of copyright or any licensing issues, in writing. Follow up any agreed points from 
telephone conversations or meetings promptly, also in writing. If you feel an issue 
arising at any point, deal with it openly and quickly; if you have spent time building 
a relationship with a customer, this should be easy. Often, issues result from simple 
misunderstandings and airing concerns early should lead to quick resolutions.

198 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Internationally, payments terms vary hugely. In many countries it can take 
several months to get paid, which can play havoc with your cashflow. It is not 
unusual to ask for stage payments in a contract and, where possible, load your costs 
into the upfront payment. In some countries you may never get your last payment, 
or get it up to a year later, so allow for that.
Experienced lawyers can help with contract negotiations. They can be based 
in your home country, or you can ask a Chamber of Commerce, or get a word of 
mouth recommendation from other designers.
What Price?
Do not compete on price, compete on value. You will undoubtedly be more 
expensive than a local agency, sometimes as much as 50 per cent more. It is much 
easier for clients to work with local agencies, and they need proof of your value to 
their organisation.
Remember, too, that you will have invested time and money in a given market. 
You are a running a business, and one of key reasons you are working internationally 
is to expand it. You can always reduce prices, but it’s impossible to negotiate fees 
upwards once you have set a precedent.
Pricing in a local currency is mandatory in some countries and, where it isn’t, 
it can make you more competitive. However, it means your business takes the 
exchange rate risk. Your bank will advise you on how to reduce that risk.
Finally, look into the local tax regulations. Many countries insist on a ‘withholding 
tax’, which can easily wipe out any profit if you have not allowed it.

4.4 
The reputation
Julia James
The purest treasure mortal times afford is spotless reputation;
That away, men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
William Shakespeare (1564–1616), poet and playwright, from ‘Richard II’
Reputation management
The reputation game has seen huge change recently. It’s probably changed more in 
the last three years than over the last 30 years put together, and design businesses 
need to think seriously about how they are managing their profile if they want 
to stay ahead. This chapter will give you some practical help, whether you want 
to start some simple PR for the first time or revitalise your communications using 
blogs and opinion pieces to build thought-leadership.
Let’s start by thinking about what reputation is. Only then can we begin to 
manage it.
Whether you’re an organisation or an individual, your reputation is determined 
by three main factors: what you say, what you do and what others say about you. 
Reputation is not based on the image you project, but on the personal experiences 
others 
have 
with 
you 
and 
your 
company. It grows slowly over time. 
Your reputation is based on how people 
experience the design products and 
services you offer, how they interact 
with the people in your company, and 
how well you fulfil your promise to 
deliver what you say you will.
Everyone’s experience of you affects 
your reputation. Not just your clients 
and the media but your staff too. Your 
reputation among your colleagues and 
employees is just as important, both 
in terms of recruiting good quality 
candidates and influencing potential 
clients. And if you think you can keep 
•

200 How to Run a Successful Design Business
your clients, peers and the media away from your people then social media, the 
blogosphere and the local pub should have put paid to that idea.
A solid reputation is worth its weight in gold
Everyone who interacts with your company falls into one of two categories: apostle 
or terrorist. The apostles will help strengthen and build your reputation; the terrorists 
(often unwittingly) will destroy it.
A word of mouth referral is much more likely to bring success than other forms 
of selection. If your reputation is strong, your credibility among clients and potential 
clients is strengthened too. And the smart design company knows that the upside of 
delivering beyond a client’s expectations is that their reputation will grow as a result.
Building reputation
There are four principal audiences your reputation matters to; the industry you 
operate in, the industry your clients operate in, your colleagues and the media.
To start building reputation, you need to define your goals. Ask yourself, ‘Where 
do I want my business to be in five or ten years’ time?’, then draw up a list of related 
questions.
What do you want to be known for?
Who would you like to work with?
What sectors do you want to work in?
What will be your expertise or specialism?
What kind of business will it be?
Do you have the skills sets to deliver?
Are you commercially minded, strategically led, creatively led or a combination 
of all three?
Does your name reflect the playing field that you wish to be in?
By focusing on the answers to these questions you have something on which 
you can start to build your reputation.
Aim high
When it comes to influencing clients or prospective clients, aim as high as you can. 
Try and build a rapport with the chairman, CEO and other Board members of the 
company, regardless of whether they operate at a national or international level. They 
are the ones who pull the underwater cables, and it’s often the Board directors who 
place most emphasis on the ‘reputation’ of people they’re looking to work with.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

201
the reputation
The PR challenge
Now it’s time to think about your reputation in the press. People think PR is many 
things. Anthony Davis, author of Everything You Should Know About Public Relations 
defines it like this: ‘The communication by an organisation, with people who matter 
to it, in order to gain their attention in ways that are advantageous to it.’
This is a good start. At its most simple, PR can be just providing a source of 
material for the media. With journalism in decline and more media outlets than 
ever before, there are some really good opportunities to take advantage of PR. If you 
can assist a time-strapped journalist to do their job by becoming a trusted source for 
news, information and opinion, it will help immensely.
Take a 360-degree view
PR is not just about getting your story and your name into the press and having a 
dog-eared clippings book on reception. PR is about the relationship you have with 
all of the various publics or audiences you wish to engage with. It’s about how you 
speak to the world at large, whether it’s through a great content-driven website (your 
shop window), speaking at conferences, working a room full of potential clients, 
entering awards, producing newsletters or e-bulletins, creating thought-leadership 
pieces, book inclusions, running your own events, or getting involved with your 
industry bodies. These don’t necessarily cost a great deal in financial outlay, but 
they do need dedication of time, effort and focus.
Every business must take every opportunity to make itself known in order to 
attract clients, and small companies and start-ups can grow quickly by adopting a 
PR strategy early on. But PR takes time to deliver worthwhile results. Done well, and 
at a sustained level, it will go a long way to building your reputation and attracting 
clients, quality job applicants and the media to your door.
Do it yourself or hire a pro?
Undertaking a simple PR programme offers you a low-cost option of building your 
profile. As a start-up or small business, you could certainly consider doing it yourself. 
There are comprehensive ‘how to’ courses and books available for beginners and the 
Chartered Institute of Public Relations in London, or its equivalent body outside 
the UK, can help here.
The other option is engaging an external person or agency to run your PR 
programme for you. As your company grows, you might consider employing a 
professional as an internal resource, although this will only be cost effective if your 
company is fairly large.

202 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Profile raising
Times are changing. The old media and PR rules no longer apply, and the advent of 
the web has presented a huge opportunity. If you really want to stand out from the 
crowd nowadays, you have to be seen to have valued opinions, to be engaged with 
debates, to demonstrate your expertise. For those that really want to stay ahead, you 
need to think like a media company.
Profile raising is not just about speaking through the print and broadcast media 
any more, even though it remains an important component. You really do need to 
think about becoming your own publisher and harnessing the power of the web to 
tell your story or stories.
Launch/relaunch your blog with valuable 
opinion pieces
Draw up a communications plan that takes into account all types of media, but 
make sure you are self-publishing high-quality ideas. An excellent way is starting 
or revitalising your blog, generating useful content related to your expertise, and 
linking it with other sites, blogs and social media streams.
In terms of content, you have your news stories to get out, but you also have 
your professional expertise and the ability to solve problems for your clients. Think 
about developing ideas for opinion pieces on a topic that is relevant to the audience 
you are trying to reach. Post them on a blog, direct other bloggers that operate in 
your sector (they can be extremely influential) to your blog, contact a journalist or 
publication and share your idea. As long as it is relevant to the target audience and 
you have understood and researched the topic, it might prove to be successful. In 
the case of journals and publications, it could well be turned into a feature.
News and views
You need to have an informed voice, to get your news out regularly, and you can 
do this yourself or through your PR person. For news stories there are really simple 
syndication (RSS) feeds, newswire services and of course regularly sending news and 
views to your target media titles. Journalists and freelance writers will often subscribe 
to keywords for RSS feeds, and as long as you have embedded these keywords into 
your release, they will alert journalists worldwide who might well come to you for 
input and opinion.
Thinking like a publisher on the web is not about hype and spin and messages. 
It is about delivering relevant content when and where it is needed and, in the 
process, branding you or your company as a leader.

203
the reputation
Conclusion
There is an enormous opportunity right now for design companies to take control 
of their own reputation, with all its benefits. Conducting a focused PR and 
communication programme that aims to position you as thought-leaders, engaging 
and delivering professionally across all media touch points, is easier and more 
effective than ever before.

This page has been left blank intentionally

4.5 
The media
Lynda Relph-Knight
Journalism is printing what someone else does not want printing. Everything else is public relations.
George Orwell (1903–50), novelist and journalist
Engaging with the media
There was a time when, just as a brand’s success was gauged purely by sales, the 
effectiveness of media relations was measured solely in column inches. The more 
coverage you, your product or service achieved the better, with little account taken 
of what was said or where the coverage appeared.
Things are different now. Just as brand owners seek ‘engagement’ with their 
customers – encouraging interaction online, gaining points through association 
with events and initiatives they sponsor and creating ‘customer experiences’ – so 
dealing with the media has become more about building relationships.
Journalists are constantly on the lookout for interesting things to share with their 
audience. They appreciate fresh angles, genuinely new projects and, with project 
stories, stunning visuals. They are also seeking to build contacts with experts, whose 
views they can trust, to provide a reliable source of information and opinion.
Designers and design groups are meanwhile seeking to engage with that audience, 
be it their peers, potential clients or City backers. The medium you choose and the 
message you seek to put across depends on the audience you are courting.
Media relations
So how do you build relationships with the media? You start quite simply by 
making contact with the most appropriate person on the editorial team of your 
chosen medium. Who on your team makes that contact, and who it’s with, will 
vary according to the publication and the nature of any potential interest it might 
have with you. If, for example, you have a story relating to design in the financial 
sector, it is pointless approaching the political editor of a national newspaper.
For the sake of argument, let’s say the media – be it print, online, TV or radio 
– separates into three main areas: design and related media; business-to-business; 
and consumer.
•

206 How to Run a Successful Design Business
If you are published in design and related media, you are reaching your peers 
and involving yourself in the creative industries. Coverage of your work or your 
business helps to build profile, which is invaluable in attracting the best staff. You 
will also reach: committed and serial clients, who are looking to buy design and 
keep abreast of the consultancies out there; potential backers active in the sector; 
and other media, which use specialist publications as a source.
When you contact the design press, it is best to deal direct with the journalists. 
They speak the same language as you and can give you a snap decision about 
whether or not your story is interesting. You can probably get direct access to the 
editor, which is a great starting point, but if you have a news lead you might be 
better approaching the news editor. A bigger idea might suit the features editor 
better.
It is also worth getting to know freelance design journalists. They make their 
living out of selling stories and have inroads into the key titles, so foster them. 
Check out their by-lines in your chosen media, discover where their particular 
interests lie and get to know them. Specialist freelances can be a useful link to the 
national media, as they often ply their trade there too.
Business-to-business titles may be harder to crack and, if your resources extend 
to it, it might be worth bringing in a public relations consultant who knows the 
field you are targeting. But they too are interested in stories that are slightly beyond 
the norm for them, and that might spark bigger ideas for features.
If, for example, you have created branding for a garden product, or interiors for 
a garden centre, or designed a garden chair, it is worth contacting the gardening 
media or gardening correspondents on the nationals. If your work is engaging 
enough and relevant, you may attract new clients from the sector and eventually 
be recognised as an authority on design in the sector who can be called upon for 
comment or appear on conference platforms.
Sending material
What you submit for publication depends on what the publication wants. In most 
instances, journalists are looking for brand new projects – just won, or just about to 
complete – and stories about people and business moves. They also have seasonal 
specials or publish a ‘features list’ of topics they are planning to cover that offer you 
the opportunity to pitch in ideas or projects they might pick up.
Whatever you put forward has to be interesting and relevant and not, for 
example, just another brochure win, unless it is in some way quirky, or the process 
behind it is innovative, or the client is particularly important.
If there is an image, send a high-resolution version with a brief written outline 
of the story, preferably by email. You might like to call the publication first to see 
who is best to deal with and to get their email address, but never pester, particularly 
not by phone, something public relations consultants are apt to do. If the story is of 

207
the media
interest, the journalist will get back to you, but remember that stories date quickly 
and attention spans are short in most media.
Beyond press releases
Editors are also looking for opinion and for people prepared to raise the debate. 
Never be afraid to raise your voice on issues affecting your industry or the client 
sectors you work in. If you are heard, you can enhance your own standing and that 
of your consultancy, and be called upon for further comment as coverage is rolled 
out.
Letters for publication or comments to online stories and blogs are particularly 
welcome to most media as they stimulate debate. These should be pithy and 
pertinent and never self-promotional, unless your experience of a particular issue 
genuinely adds to the discussion.
But there are other potential outlets for your thoughts, whether it is as an invited 
respondent to a voxpop-style question or as someone choosing or commenting on 
a piece of branding or design. Some titles or blogs run regular columns, contributed 
externally, and the key here is to attract the attention of the editor, and to have 
something meaningful to say. The personal approach is always best, even if someone 
else – a public relations consultant, colleague or assistant – helps you to pen the 
words.
There is a difference between print and online media, even within the same 
title. What editors choose to put online is often very different in terms of type 
of story from what they publish in print, and audiences vary so that, too, needs 
checking out. Timing is crucial here, as online stories can be released immediately, 
while the print title will have an obvious delay.
Rules of engagement
You need to observe certain etiquettes when dealing with the media, most of which 
are based on common sense. The most fundamental of these is that if you are talking 
to a journalist it is their job to gather information from reputable sources, and even 
the most chance remark at a social event could be quoted. You need to make the 
terms of engagement clear at the start of any interchange, and build a relationship 
of mutual respect and trust at every opportunity.
If something is ‘off the record’ then say so at the outset. A statement cannot 
be retracted later and, if faithfully reported, is fair game. You might wish to share 
something that you don’t want published to put a potential story in context, and 
a professional journalist will respect this. If you’re in a social situation you might 
agree to discuss the story ‘on the record’ later, when you are both in a position to 
have a proper dialogue.

208 How to Run a Successful Design Business
You may wish your comments to be ‘non-attributable’, particularly if talking 
about a pitch or a potential client, in which case your sentiments may be reported 
as coming from an industry source. Again, make it clear at the outset if this is the 
case and your request will be honoured. Don’t overuse this privilege though, as 
named sources carry more weight with journalists and their audiences.
Never expect to be shown the copy before it is published. No reputable title will 
ever do this and you must trust the professionalism of its journalists.
A final word needs to be said about advertising. The only way to control what 
appears about you in the media is to advertise, but advertising in a publication 
doesn’t guarantee editorial coverage so don’t ask.
And finally…
Journalists are generally looking for exclusive stories, and blanket press releases 
don’t have much merit, particularly to the specialist media. It is important to work 
out where you’d prefer to see coverage and then negotiate with the journalist 
concerned. This is where relationships come into their own in that mutual trust 
invariably means better coverage for both parties and more likelihood that you 
are mentioned in the piece, something that is rarely guaranteed outside the design 
media.
Remember that the media isn’t scary. Publication is a fundamental part of any 
industry, providing opportunities for you to promote yourself, but also to keep 
readers and visitors informed, enlightened and entertained. Engage with the media 
and you could reap huge benefits.

4.6 
The social media
Gemma Went
Communication leads to community, that is, to understanding, intimacy and mutual valuing.
Rollo May (1909–94), psychologist
Talk with your audiences, not at them
Traditionally, the tools for keeping 
your brand front-of-mind included 
advertising, press coverage, tradeshows, 
networking and so on. These days, the 
toolbox is much larger, with a raft of 
digital additions. The introduction of 
social media has given us a compelling 
way to engage with clients and 
stakeholders. It has changed the way 
we communicate which, in turn, has 
brought about a massive step change in 
marketing strategy. In the past, activities 
followed the broadcast method of 
talking at your audience: these days it’s 
all about talking with your community; 
listening, communicating, engaging 
and collaborating. This is powerful stuff. 
Where else do you get the chance to listen to your audiences’ conversations, learn from 
them, monitor trends, spot potential opportunities and act on them there and then?
But what is it? Social media as a term can be confusing. In basic terms it’s a 
range of digital platforms that allow us to find, communicate and with a range of 
people online. These platforms allow us to make our businesses social and include 
networking sites, micro blogging sites, blogs, bookmarking sites, forums, video and 
photosharing sites and such like.
What does this mean to you? It allows you to build relationships, position 
yourself as a thought-leader, earn trust, build community and encourage brand 
loyalty amongst clients, prospects and industry leaders. This, in turn, facilitates 
word-of-mouth activity, one of the most useful tools in your marketing armoury. 
•

210 How to Run a Successful Design Business
By standing out, sharing knowledge and opinion, helping and engaging with your 
community, you give them a reason to talk about you positively.
You should not ditch traditional marketing activities altogether; far from it. 
Not all of your clients will be active in the digital space but studies have shown 
that many are and this audience is growing, which means you need to be there, 
engaging with them. So integrate digital tools with your existing strategy to get the 
most out of them. For example, social media activity can bolster email campaigns 
and newsletter sign-up.
If you think social media is a viable activity to add to your marketing strategy, 
first consider whether you have the time and resource to give to it. Once you open 
the door to social media activity, you can’t shut it if you find suddenly that you don’t 
have the time. You’ve invited people to connect with you and, once they do, you 
need to continue to engage with them; so think about who could be responsible for 
the activity. Much of the time it’s someone who is already active on social media, 
someone who knows and understands your business, your values, your objectives 
and someone you feel comfortable with speaking on behalf of the company.
Setting objectives, measuring results
Before you jump into the social media pool, you need a strategy. Think about the 
objectives. What do you want social media to achieve for you? Do you want to raise 
brand awareness? Establish credibility in a specialist area? Drive traffic to a website? 
Reposition your brand? Launch a new service? Then think about the tactics that 
will help you to achieve these objectives, which social media activities to use and 
how you use them. Once you have your tactics mapped out, these will drive your 
content, resources and what you’ll need to measure to ensure Return On Investment 
(ROI). For ideas on what some of these key strategic elements could look like, see 
Table 4.6.1.
Of course never forget the Holy Grail: sales! Keep track of any leads gained 
through social media and if or when they convert to get an idea of how this is 
working for you.
There is so much that could be written about the various activities themselves, 
far too much to fit into this chapter. Instead, here are two key areas that will give 
you a taster.
Blogs
A company blog is a great way to raise your profile, establish credibility and 
engage. Get it right, and you can become an authority and opinion-former 
in your industry. Content is king when it comes to blogging, so keep to your 
specialist area. Don’t use it as a vehicle to ‘sell your wares’ as you would on a 
website. Readers will lose interest, and you’ll lose subscribers. Think about your 

211
the social media
social media strategy and what you want the blog to achieve, then think about 
what the people you want to read your blog are interested in. This should help to 
form your content strategy.
Make the most of your internal talent pool, and seek out any budding writers. 
Management of a blog becomes much easier when you share the load. Create an 
editorial calendar by listing the topics that interest readers. This can include practical 
advice on the stuff you’re great at, opinion on the latest industry trends, reviews on 
events or books, how you solved a particular problem. Then work out who can write 
about it. Once you’ve done that, be clear about how it should be written. A blog is 
very different from other forms of business writing. It is much less formal. Readers 
want to get a sense of the writer, so the rule of thumb is to write how you speak. 
Finally, put together your calendar with deadlines. The frequency of new posts is 
dependent on how much time you have available. If you can manage at least one 
a week, so much the better. However a successful blog is reliant on regular posts, so 
be strict with your scheduling.
Objective
Tactics
Measurement
Raise brand awareness
Grow a relevant, engaged 
Twitter audience
Relevant followers
Number of @ replies
Number of Retweets
Increase in brand mentions across 
the web
Establish thought-
leadership
Launch a blog to showcase 
your knowledge in your niche 
area
Blog subscriptions
Number of comments
Number of links to the blog
How much is this content being 
shared and bookmarked?
Increase in approaches to 
contribute in speaking and writing 
opportunities
Drive traffic to the 
website
Create an eco-system of social 
media activity, driving traffic to 
relevant pages of the site
Number of links to the site
Increase in traffic to the relevant 
pages
Unique versus return traffic
Bounce rate (you might be driving 
them there, but how relevant are 
you to them when they get there?)
Launch a new service
Create a campaign of activity 
across various social media 
sites showcasing your abilities 
in this new service
Traffic to the service page on the 
website
Mentions of the new service across 
the web
Emails or phone calls enquiring 
about the new service
Table 4.6.1  Measuring social media return on investment

212 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Time should be set aside for this, so give it to someone to manage. The blog 
won’t become a success overnight: be prepared for readership to build slowly. You 
will need to establish a reputation for regular, relevant, quality content.
If you don’t have the budget to build your blog as part your website, there are 
plenty of blogging platforms you can use; these allow you to brand the blog so it 
fits with your identity. They are well optimised, which will help with search engine 
optimisation (SEO) activity, and integrate easily with other platforms. Link your 
blog with other online activity to ensure full integration and be sure to send out 
links to new posts through social networking sites.
Social Networking
There is a range of platforms available including, at time of writing, Twitter, 
Facebook and LinkedIn. By the time you read this the landscape could be somewhat 
different, with the addition of new platforms. But these are just the tools: the way 
we communicate through social networks is here to stay.
Before you start, do some research; work out where the people you want to 
connect with are, and set up profiles on those platforms. There are some niche 
communities on the web that you can get involved in, outside of the bigger networks. 
Don’t be fooled into thinking you just need to connect with potential clients either; 
widen your pool to include industry peers, industry leaders, journalists and others. 
Opportunities can come from less obvious places and getting different viewpoints 
can provide great insight. The main thing to remember here is that it’s a place to 
listen, connect and engage.
Content is important and your social media strategy should drive the messaging 
to fit with your objectives. But be flexible with this and allow the conversation to 
flow. As with the blog, write as you speak, it’s not a place for ‘business speak’.
Those that get the most from social networking sites are flexible. They don’t 
broadcast sales messages; instead they share useful advice they know their audience 
is genuinely interested in. They help people and share links to useful advice. They 
listen and respond to questions and conversations they can participate in. All of 
this will help to establish credibility, raise awareness and build your community.
Although you don’t need to be present on social networks 24 hours a day, allow 
yourself time to check in a few times a day to listen and respond.

4.7 
The sales process
Shan Preddy
T’ain’t what you do, it’s the way that you do it, that’s what gets results.
Melvin Oliver (1910–88) and James Young (1912–84), songwriters, first recorded 1939 by 
Ella Fitzgerald (1917–96) and by many more since
From contact to contract
It takes anywhere between a few days and several years for prospective clients to 
become active clients. The sales process contains a series of encounters and there 
are opportunities for failure at each stage along the way. While you might have 
every intention of reaching the journey’s destination, the clients-to-be can leave it 
at any point.
The main opt-out moments are:
first impression;
receipt of information about your services;
credentials, or chemistry, meetings;
pitches, proposals and tenders;
the legal contract.
Along the way, you will need good marketing, sales and negotiation skills, and 
they come into play at different times in the process.
Make each encounter count
First impressions count. It is surprisingly easy to give the wrong idea about what 
you do, whether you are contacting people with outgoing marketing activities such 
as phone and mail, or whether they read an article about you in the press. Your 
‘elevator pitch’ might not be great: this is a brief summary of what you do and, 
either by overt statement or by implication, what you could do for them. A claim 
for accurate project delivery might be undermined by spelling mistakes in written 
work, or elements of content, style and tone might simply put them off. Many 
prospective clients will opt-out at this earliest encounter.
•
•
•
•
•
•

214 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Assuming they are interested enough to continue, the next departure point is 
when they look more closely at your firm. They might visit your website, read a 
brochure, make enquiries among their colleagues or speak to your recent clients. If 
they don’t like what they see and hear at this stage, they are not going to go any 
further.
Up to this point, you’ve needed marketing skills, seasoned with some good 
interpersonal skills. So far so good? Now they will want a credentials, or chemistry, 
meeting, whether that meeting is held face-to-face or in a conference call. The result 
of this meeting – the ‘first date’ – will dictate whether the relationship goes any 
further. Here, you’re going to need presentation and sales skills.
Then the hurdles get higher. If you succeed at the chemistry stage, the next opt-
out point is the pitch or tender process, almost always competitive. Here, you will 
continue to need presentation skills – written as well as spoken – and sales skills. But 
you’ll now also need to negotiate professionally, not only with the main contact 
but also, possibly, with procurement experts.
Are you then clear? No more opt-out points? Regrettably not. It sometimes 
happens that either you or the prospective client can’t agree to the terms and 
conditions of engagement, whether they are outlined in a legal contract or specified 
in a simple phone call. Even at this last stage, one or both of you can decide to call 
the whole thing off, and the journey you have embarked on will stop short of its 
destination.
Sales meetings
Credentials meetings and pitches are sales meetings; they are about the prospective 
clients’ needs and what the design firm can do to fulfil them. And they are meetings, 
not presentations. Although it is likely that a presentation will be involved at some 
point, if you spend 90 per cent of the meeting talking about yourself and your work 
in loving detail, you will fail.
It takes a lot of time, effort and money to get to the point of the credentials 
meeting, and then a lot more again to get to the pitch. Make the most of them. 
Here are ten tips:
The meetings are just a part of the whole sales process and its encounters. Make 
sure that your messages are relevant to the prospective client, and that they are 
consistent throughout in their messaging and their style. If your website, your 
brochure, your newsletters, your presentations and your documentation don’t 
all resonate visually and verbally, you will weaken your case; they will appear to 
come from a number of different sources.
Meetings start before meetings start. Investigate the prospects’ companies or 
organisations, their customers and their marketplaces, and use your expertise 
to interrogate their briefs. Ask which other design firms they are talking to, and 
work out why they should appoint you instead. Find out how many people 
1.
2.

215
the sales process
will be at the meeting, and who; think about their expectations so that you can 
deliver against them.
Don’t just react, pre-act. In advance of the meeting, build as much rapport as 
you can with the main contact and with any ‘gatekeepers’ such as support staff. 
If appropriate, build rapport with the other people who will be at the meeting 
as well. Without hassling them, phone and write: the objective is to make 
communication between you as easy and as fulfilling as it will be when you are 
actually working together.
Remember that these meetings are sales meetings, so use sales skills. Know 
your own product, and those of the prospects and your competitors, inside 
out, upside down and backwards. Then use that knowledge in the meetings to 
inform the content; it will also allow you to ask penetrating questions which 
will demonstrate your expertise. Uncover the prospective client’s real needs, 
and then match your propositions, or benefits, to those needs. There’s no point 
in rambling on about your skills in identity creation if the prospects are looking 
for an interactive website; not only is it a waste of time, but it might be counter-
productive. Answer any voiced objections, and take a judgement on tackling 
any which are unvoiced but probably there, such as ‘you are too small/big/
inexperienced/expensive’. Finally, make it as easy as possible for them to buy 
your services by reassuring them about your capabilities, clearly identifying the 
next steps in the process and creating a real desire to work with you.
Understand what they are looking for; it will be the same as all prospective clients 
look for, plus the specifics of their own situation. The bottom line is that they 
want to know that you have the right skills, capabilities, processes and talents 
to do the job. They want to see evidence of your creativity, of course, but also of 
your strategic ability. A survey carried out by Design Week indicates that just over 
a half of the design buyers interviewed (53 per cent) unsurprisingly cited ‘visual 
work’ as ‘the key role of design in your business in three years’ time’. But almost 
a third (31 per cent) cited ‘strategic advice on brands or products’ as the key role, 
and nearly three-quarters (73 per cent) rated ‘business skills such as strategy and 
working with you to spot new opportunities for your company’ as ‘important’ 
or ‘very important’. Increasingly, prospective clients want to hear about the 
value you bring through design effectiveness. They want to experience flawless 
service: if you can’t get it right at the sales stage, it doesn’t look good for the 
future. They want to be reassured that you have a good client list, with relevant 
sector experience, and that you have processes in place for successful project 
delivery. They want to know that you are the appropriate size for the project 
and in an appropriate location. And finally, they want to believe that you will 
be good to work with; these sessions haven’t earned the nickname ‘chemistry 
meetings’ for nothing.
You’re the one who has to do the convincing, so make your case clearly. Discuss 
their specific needs, and only use casework which demonstrates your suitability 
	
Design Week survey. Fieldwork carried out by YouGov in September 2008 among 199 commissioners of design
3.
4.
5.
6.

216 How to Run a Successful Design Business
to fulfil them. A robust three-part method of framing case studies is to identify 
the problem or opportunity that you addressed, then show the work, then state 
the results of your intervention. For example, can you demonstrate that your 
work resulted in increased sales, or entries to new markets, or improved staff 
knowledge and skills? Were there identifiable improvements in production 
processes, or employee morale, or brand perception, or user compliance? Can 
you show reductions in manufacturing costs, or time to market, or complaints, 
or waste? If you have quantitative data, so much the better, but qualitative 
information is important as well. Testimonials from existing clients will help, as 
will an offer to provide contact details for references.
Make sure they remember your work, and that they are impressed by it. It is 
often hard for prospects to tell one firm from another. Sales presentations from 
design firms are often no more than a set of slides which talk at length about the 
business’s history and development from its conception, followed by an endless 
portfolio of casework. Fascinating to them; very dull to the prospects.
Get your paperwork right; good leave-behind documentation will go on making 
the case for you once you’ve left the room. It is likely to be distributed to people 
who were not present in the meeting, so the content needs to be comprehensive. 
In the case of tenders, it needs to stand alone entirely. What should it contain? 
A summary of your business and its appropriateness for the work in question; 
visual and verbal references to the casework shown; a client list; an outline 
of your delivery processes; photographs and brief descriptions of the people 
from your firm who were present at the sales meeting; full contact details. For 
pitches, the documentation will also include: your understanding of the brief; 
the work to be carried out, phase by phase; fee proposals; timelines; proposed 
delivery team, with relevant details; the rationale for appointing you; terms and 
conditions. Obviously, sales documentation must be well-written and accurate 
as well as persuasive.
Meetings don’t end when meetings end. Get in touch with the main contact 
to follow up; if you let anxieties about being a nuisance stop you, it will be 
interpreted as a lack of interest. Even if you lose a pitch, you were successful in 
being shortlisted, so make sure you keep in touch afterwards with everyone you 
met in the sales meetings, both immediately and in the longer term. You never 
know when they might want to talk to you again and, in a mobile market, they 
might need you if they change jobs.
After each successful encounter, make an opportunity to find out what they 
liked about you; it will help you with the next stage. If they opt-out, try to 
find out why; it will help you in future meetings with other prospects. Ask an 
external consultant to help if you think you might not be told the real reasons. 
It’s easy for prospects to tell you that you were too expensive or that you didn’t 
have the right capabilities; it’s very much harder for them to tell you that they 
had no confidence in you personally.
7.
8.
9.
10.

217
the sales process
Free pitching
Try this. Log the unrecovered time and bought-in costs of the pitches you took part 
in over the last year. The amount is what it has cost you to market your company 
to that small handful of potential clients. What else could you do have done with 
that budget? Hired a PR consultant? Developed a new website? Employed a business 
development manager? Run a major marketing campaign?
No pitches are fully paid, and most are completely unpaid. It makes no sense to 
work for nothing except when it’s for charity, and yet design firms of all shapes and 
sizes freely donate their work in unpaid pitches. Is it because ‘everyone else does it’? 
Or simply because they are bad at business?
Free pitching is not necessary. You will need to have sales meetings, of course, 
and prepare proposals. You might need to negotiate with procurement professionals, 
and complete lengthy pre-qualification questionnaires. You might need to work 
hard to get onto rosters. But you do not ever need to free pitch.
Clients don’t ask for pitches, free or otherwise, because they lack budgets; they 
ask because they lack the confidence to appoint you without seeing proof of your 
ability. It’s your job to help them. How? Firstly, through your marketing activities 
and your specialisation; prospects need to understand what you offer and believe 
that you can deliver that offer better than your competitors. If you get this right, 
clients will come to you rather than responding to your approaches, and you will 
have less to prove. Secondly, through what you communicate in sales meetings; 
by focusing on your expertise, your processes and the proven effectiveness of your 
work you will remove doubts about your capabilities. That’s the proof they need, 
not visuals created in the absence of a proper working relationship.
There is a well-known negotiating strategy called ‘sprats and mackerels’. The 
idea is that instead of eating small fish (sprats), you sacrifice them as bait to attract 
bigger fish (mackerels); by going hungry now, you hope for feasts to come. It is 
based on risk assessment, and in markets when the sprat is tiny and the mackerel 
huge, it can work. In design, however, our sprats are enormous, and the mackerels 
are puny. If we give away the early development and creation stages of a project in 
a pitch, we use mackerel as bait instead of sprats. Worse, we also send the message 
that we don’t value sprats at all; how can we ever hope to charge full price for 
mackerels in the future?
There is a significant disconnect between attitude and behaviour in the design 
world; firms complain vociferously about free pitching, then go out and do it 
anyway. Any business model which has at its heart the notion of donating its core 
skills – not just creativity, but also analysis and strategic thinking – is flawed, and 
if design firms continue to give away their main product, they will fail. No design 
business will survive if it’s not profitable, and no design industry will survive without 
successful design businesses.
Where does the remedy lie? With the design industry. Over the years, we have 
trained clients to see free pitching as normal and, therefore, as expected. It is now 
our responsibility, not the clients’, to change it. Act now. Just say no.

This page has been left blank intentionally

4.8 
The pitch
Jonathan Kirk
You’re such a lovely audience, we’d like to take you 
home with us, we’d love to take you home.
John Lennon (1940–80) and Paul 
McCartney (b1942) from ‘Sgt Pepper’s 
Lonely Hearts Club Band’
Why you need to pitch
Whether we like it or not, clients are now 
locked into pitching as the accepted, 
‘due diligence’ way of selecting agencies. 
Realistically, pitching is here to stay.
However, 
the 
nature 
of 
pitching 
is changing. The best pitches are now 
‘entertainment’ pieces. This doesn’t mean they are frivolous or lightweight. It means 
they are akin to a well-crafted documentary, a complete story with a beginning, 
middle and end. As Diane Thompson, Chief Executive of Camelot, is quoted as 
saying, ‘There is no excuse for a boring presentation nowadays.’
Alongside the ‘entertainment’ comes an increasingly hard edge. Clients are interested 
in return on investment as never before. In clients’ eyes, appointing a design agency 
is always something of an intangible, a ‘leap of faith’. In this respect, the marriage of 
strategy and creativity has become vital. Agencies that construct a seamless rationale 
and give convincing business reasons for their recommendations will succeed.
Pitch decision-making is also changing. The rise of procurement has reduced the 
role of personal chemistry whilst the number of major decision-making points is 
reducing. More brands are now owned by fewer companies so brand decisions are 
tending to be taken higher up for more markets. This represents a challenge for the 
mass of small/medium-sized agencies who can struggle to gain access to these levels.
So how can agencies succeed in this environment? Here are five pointers that 
may help:
persuade clients to buy into your argument;
ignore the brief;
simplify, don’t confuse;
•
1.
2.
3.

220 How to Run a Successful Design Business
make sure you ‘get it’;
bring it to life.
Persuade clients to buy into your argument
At a recent big pitch in India, it soon became apparent that the Chairman of the 
Board never looked at the screen. He was concentrating on the presenter, to know 
if he was someone he could do business with. It was a salutary reminder not to over 
rely on the slide presentation.
So, let’s get out of the ‘presentation’ mindset. What’s your argument? Clients 
want to know what the agency thinks, and they want to know this very early in the 
proceedings, so state your big thought right at the outset. The rest of the pitch is 
an argument to prove that assertion. Don’t meander in. People tend to remember 
introductions and conclusions more strongly than what is said in the middle. 
Spending the first third of the pitch talking about the agency, regurgitating the brief 
and telling the client what they already know is doomed to failure.
Many agencies are guilty of asking the client to choose the picture they like 
rather than buy into their argument. A useful test is whether the client would be 
able to sell on your recommended concept to their boss without you being there. 
Does it have a real business context and rationale? Alternatively, imagine the client 
came in three days before the pitch and said, ‘Tell me in a couple of minutes what 
you’re going to tell me in three days time.’ If you can do that, then you might have 
a good argument, not just a presentation.
Ignore the brief
My advice is to ignore the brief. Alright, that’s an exaggeration to make a point. 
However, over 70 per cent of ‘lost pitch’ interviews undertaken with clients reveal 
that the winning agency went against the brief.
In some way, large or small, the winner rejected a direct requirement of the brief, 
showed a better approach and made the client think, ‘We hadn’t thought of that.’ 
Many agencies are understandably eager to please at the pitch stage, sometimes a 
little too eager. This can easily result in simply giving the client what they want to 
hear. In fact, clients rarely know exactly what they want. That’s why they called 
you. You’re the experts.
Simplify, don’t confuse
Beware of leaving the client more confused than when you came in. It’s fine to raise 
lots of questions and issues, but remember that this is a pitch not a client project. 
	
Lost pitch research: interviews with clients conducted by 2Fruition, 2006–2009
4.
5.

221
the pitch
The point of this exercise is to win the business. At pitch stage most clients are 
looking for clarity from complexity, crystal clear advice and straightforward next 
steps. Are you making it easy for them to buy? If you are one of three agencies, 
possibly all pitching on the same day, you need to be memorable. When the client 
discusses the three pitches, they need to be able to remember the main thrust of 
your argument: ‘They were the ones that said…’
Therefore, keeping it simple is a vital factor in winning pitches. Remember that 
there is no such thing as several big points. They simply become several little ones. 
To put it another way, it is generally agreed that you can only make two major 
points in 20 minutes, three in 30 minutes and four in 45 minutes.
There is a famous Mark Twain quote: ‘I didn’t have time to write a short letter 
so I wrote a long one instead.’ In other words, it takes time and effort to produce 
something sharp and concise. For every thousand presentations that go on too 
long, only one or two will be too short.
Make sure you ‘get it’
A typical client comment about the losing agency is that they didn’t really ‘get 
it’. This often comes down to a fundamental misunderstanding. For example, the 
agency presented creative work that the client believed was ‘too radical’ or conversely 
‘too cautious and didn’t go far enough’. This can be a difficult nut to crack. After 
all, one man’s ‘evo’ can be another’s ‘revo’. Partly, the answer lies in a really good 
interrogation of the brief and client, as well as a thorough understanding of the 
target market.
Some agencies, however, are going further. As well as the usual pre-pitch 
questioning, they are using imagery to help clarify what clients mean. It is almost a 
client-agency workshop approach to understanding the brief. The main currency of 
our industry is visual so why not use visuals early on in order to align expectations 
and reach better mutual understanding?
Bring it to life
We often talk about the need to add ‘theatre’ to the pitch. But what is ‘theatre’? 
Firstly, it is a mistake to confuse ‘theatre’ with wackiness. Simply setting out to 
shock, surprise or amuse for the sake of it is not pitch ‘theatre’. Nobody wants to 
buy something important from a clown. ‘Theatre’ is about how to capture and 
maintain the client’s full interest and engagement throughout the pitch.
With this in mind, mixing the media is a good idea; showing slide after slide is a 
sure way to lose the audience’s attention. Analogies with other brands/markets will 
show that you understand the bigger picture and can be an interesting but relevant 
‘break out’ from the project in hand. Similarly, relevant personal anecdotes about 
your experiences of the brand in question can help make pitch content real and less 

222 How to Run a Successful Design Business
abstract. They can help win the support of your audience by revealing more of your 
personality, the ‘real you’ not just the business persona.
Many clients tend not to fully appreciate the thought processes behind visual 
concepts that can often appear ‘finished’. Sketches and drawings are rarely seen in 
design agency pitches but can be very powerful. Most clients (and some designers!) 
cannot draw and are impressed by such overt creativity. The veil can suddenly be 
lifted with the realisation that images do not just magically churn out of a computer. 
Another way to ‘lift’ the presentation is to show a route that you explored and 
rejected. Explaining why you rejected it shows the effort you put in, demonstrates 
your understanding and can serve to strengthen the appeal of your recommended 
concept.
Unfortunately, the ‘about us’ and credentials part of the pitch can all too often 
be the most tedious part for clients. An introduction to the agency can usually be 
done in two or three minutes. Don’t make the mistake of turning it into a ten minute 
speech. You wouldn’t be there if the client wasn’t already reasonably convinced of 
your credentials.
As for case studies, clients are interested in direct analogies with their situation, 
useful insights and what you really did for the client. In other words, how you 
helped that client’s business. Most clients are less interested in the merits of the 
particular teal blue that you used.
which pitch?
Finally, it almost goes without saying that an agency must choose its pitches 
carefully. It is important to recognise pitches that you are never going to win and 
not get sucked in. You may be too small for the project/client, you may be the 
incumbent agency and it is obvious that the client wants change, you may not have 
enough relevant experience or you may not have the international network the 
client is looking for. Without being defeatist, it is important to know when to pull 
out and put your effort into pitches where you have the highest chance of success. 
After all, the agency must have a return on its investment, not just the client.

Whenever you find yourself on the side of the majority, it’s time to pause and reflect.
Mark Twain (1835–1910), writer and humorist
The four phases of engagement
A pitch is any defined selection process that pits design firms against each other 
and invites them to give their thinking away without appropriate compensation. 
This free or underpaid thinking is not limited to designs, but includes also the 
phases in the engagement that precede design. 
Let’s begin by looking at the four phases in any 
client engagement.
In this order, the design firm:
diagnoses the challenge;
prescribes a strategy;
translates the strategy to design direction;
applies and reapplies the design across 
various tools and tactics.
Many firms with a policy of not pitching will 
routinely diagnose and prescribe for free. But it 
is success in these first two phases that predict 
a firm’s ability to do the third at a consistently 
high quality. The value a design firm brings to 
its clients therefore, and the profit margin it is 
able to command as a result, is highest in the 
first phases and diminishes as the engagement 
progresses.
This frontloading of high-margin opportunities means that diagnosing and 
prescribing for free is a costly way to win new business, even when no designs are 
included.
•
•
•
•
•
4.9 
The no pitch
Blair Enns

224 How to Run a Successful Design Business
The two reasons why the client asks
There are two primary reasons why clients ask you to free pitch. The first is that they 
can, and the second is that they are afraid.
The over-supply reason
The first reason clients ask you to part with your thinking is because they have the 
power to do so. Their power comes not from their money but from their choice – 
their legitimate alternatives to hiring your firm. In any market with a large number 
of undifferentiated sellers, the power rests with the buyer. The buyer can use that 
power to get a lower price and to dictate the buying process. If any undifferentiated 
seller chooses not to participate in the arduous, expensive selection process, the 
buyer simply substitutes a seller who will participate.
The way to gain power back in these market conditions is through differentiation, 
but most design firms fail on this front. The only meaningful differentiator of design 
firms is the depth of the firm’s expertise, and the only practical means to deepening 
a firm’s expertise is to narrow its focus. Therefore it is the specialised firms that are 
most able to win without pitching.
Power in the buy-sell relationship is had through positioning. The goal of 
positioning is to reduce or eliminate competition. By drastically reducing the viable 
alternatives to hiring your firm you begin to take back power and then use it to win 
without pitching.
The fear reason
The second reason clients ask you to free pitch is because they are afraid of making a 
mistake. They want to be certain that yours is the right firm for the job, so they ask 
you to begin to solve their problem as proof of your ability to solve that problem.
To fully appreciate this, we need to understand how clients’ motivation change 
as they progress through the buying cycle. They begin by seeking information 
to educate themselves on their challenges. Once informed, clients then move to 
seeking inspiration to help them form the intent to take action. And then, once 
intent is formed, a change in brain chemistry takes place that triggers a sense of 
elation over the decision just made. When the elation subsides however it gives way 
to doubt, commonly referred to as ‘buyers’ remorse’.
Your job as salesperson changes as clients progress through the buying cycle, 
matching their need for information first, inspiration second and reassurance third. 
Closing the sale is all about managing this doubt and delivering reassurance late in 
the buying cycle.
The first step to winning without pitching is to properly position the firm to 
have few real direct competitors. This has been covered in Chapter 4.1.
The second step is to offer alternative forms of reassurance. Positioning gets you 
the power to make the client consider your alternative way forward.

225
the pitch
Raise objections
As soon as the client asks you to pitch, respond with the objection that it is your 
policy that you do not part with your thinking for free. When clients mention that 
they are about to send you a tender, raise the objection that you do not typically 
respond to tenders. Raising objections early is the most effective way to gauge how 
much power you actually have. By raising these objections you need not be saying 
‘no, absolutely not’. You’re just saying ‘we don’t typically do that’. And then you’re 
waiting to see what the clients do next. Do they try to convince you to participate? 
Do they say they are willing to work with you? Or do they immediately turn to 
leave, unbothered by the idea of you not participating?
You reserve the right to remove any objection you raise, but you will not get a 
sense of how much power you have to affect the buying process unless you raise 
them and see how the client responds.
You can then follow up your objections by telling the clients that you understand 
their motivation and that you’re willing to work with them to help them get the 
reassurance they need.
Alternative forms of reassurance
Three of the more powerful alternative forms of reassurance are defined processes, 
phased engagements and money-back guarantees. They may be used individually, 
but are most powerful when used together.
Defined processes
Repetitive problem-solving inevitably leads to a standardisation of the problem-
solving process. If you can prove to the clients that you follow the same ‘diagnose 
– prescribe – translate – apply’ process, they will draw a very important inference. 
They will understand that little variability in process equals little variability in 
outcome. This is vital, because late in the buying cycle the clients’ doubt is not 
rooted in your ability to do good work, but rather the likelihood that you will do 
good work. Every firm the clients consider can show them an inspirational portfolio 
of beautiful outcomes. But now they are grappling with odds. They’re wondering, 
‘How do I know that I will get a beautiful outcome?’ The most reassuring thing you 
can do is to prove that you follow a defined process.
Talking about your process isn’t enough: every design firm claims to follow a 
process. You must prove it. Take your traditional before-and-after case studies, break 
them up and reassemble them to reflect the process you claim to use. These process-
framed case studies become the content of your pitches. Where others are pitching 
free ideas, you are saying, ‘We won’t begin to solve your problem without being 
financially engaged, but we will show you how we’ve helped other companies like 

226 How to Run a Successful Design Business
yours solve problems like this. And we’ll show you how we work, so if you do hire 
us, you’ll know what it’s like to work with us.’
Get the focus off the ideas and onto the power of your process. Again, your 
process is only meaningful if you prove that you follow it, and you won’t prove it 
by showing one case study. Reassurance comes when clients see two or three case 
studies and sees for themselves that you do in fact follow a defined process. From 
there they can extrapolate a likelihood of outcome.
Phased engagement
If the client is experiencing doubt around a 100k investment, do you think they 
would experience more or less doubt with a 20k first phase?
Once you’ve walked through your case studies, point to the most relevant 
one and propose to the client that they proceed with you to the initial design 
concepts. Suggest that they hire you, begin at the beginning with a proper diagnosis 
and strategy, and then, once the strategy is agreed upon, you will present design 
direction. At that point they can agree to proceed with the rest of the engagement, 
or they can end it right there and resume their selection process.
Money-back guarantee
Once you’ve walked through your process-framed case studies and proposed a 
phased engagement you can now add in a money-back guarantee. Tell the client 
that if at the end of the design direction phase they feel like they have made a 
mistake in hiring you, you’ll refund their money.
If you do follow a defined process and the client does let you lead the engagement, 
then you should have no problem guaranteeing their satisfaction to this point. 
Do not guarantee anything after design direction: there’s too much out of your 
control.
Some people have a hard time with the idea of giving money back, but the 
financial risk in doing so in this manner is far less than it is in a pitch. Using the 
methods laid out here the client is committed and working with you. Usually the 
worst that happens is the design direction goes back for some tweaking. When both 
parties are invested it’s easier to make some fixes than to start over.
Each of these alternative methods can work, but they work best when strung 
together, and they work best of all in the hands of a well-positioned firm that has 
done the hard work of eliminating much of its competition.

4.10 The record
Shan Preddy
Insanity is doing the same thing while expecting a different result.
Albert Einstein (1879–1955), theoretical physicist and philosopher
The broken record
There’s a guilty and rather shocking secret in the design world. A lot of design 
businesses spend time, effort and hard-earned money – and often a great deal of 
all three – on marketing without ever properly recording what they’ve done, who 
they’ve approached and how much they have spent, nor analysing the results.
There are, it’s true, some things in creative businesses which can’t easily be 
recorded or measured. Fortunately, marketing isn’t one of them. There are three 
main areas to consider:
marketing databases;
marketing metrics;
client performance analysis.
Marketing databases
A database is only a way of keeping information records in one place so that multiple 
users can create, retrieve, amend or remove them. You can use scraps of paper and a 
shoebox if you want, but you’ll find it very much easier if you use proper relational 
database software; this will allow you to ‘interrogate’ the data in the most flexible 
way possible.
Would you like the details of all of your medical sector prospects who are female 
and based in Edinburgh? Or of past clients who have not given you work for six 
months, who came to a recent seminar you ran, but who have not yet opted in to 
your blog? No problem, provided you have entered the appropriate data in the first 
place. The more your database relies on tick-box categories or alternative ‘buttons’, 
the easier it will be for you to interrogate it for different purposes.
•
•
•
•

228 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Records should be organised by individuals, not by their employers, although a 
relational database will, of course, allow you to search on companies or organisations 
and call off lists of everyone you know there if you want them.
What should you record?
All databases are different. For yours, what you record will be whatever you think 
you’ll need. Here are a few suggestions.
Demographic data (name, gender, job title or function, full contact details, 
geographical location and market sector) for:
current, active clients; you might like to indicate the type of work you’re 
doing for them, and their levels of expenditure;
recent clients; as above, plus project dates so you can tell how recent or 
otherwise they are;
prospective clients, with their current status within the sales process: ‘hot 
prospect’, ‘pitch shortlist’, and so on;
past clients you never want to work for again; it’s galling if new members of 
staff accidentally contact someone who turns out to be a former client you 
sued five years ago;
media contacts;
people from any strategic alliances you might have;
opinion-formers, such as consultants and network contacts, who might act 
as channels for your business.
2.	 Information about each person. Where have they worked previously, for example? 
How might they relate to your other contacts? The names of their partners, 
children, dogs and cats, perhaps, and their interests outside of work: there’s no 
point inviting them to a football match if they hate it, or to a steak supper if they 
are a life-long vegetarian. How far you go with this personal content is up to you.
3.	 Information about their organisation and its activities. Who do they own? Who 
are they owned by? What are the main issues facing them?
4.	 For prospective clients:
an ongoing, chronological narrative of the dates and details of your 
marketing approaches;
all responses and conversations;
next actions to be taken: what should be done, how, when, and who by. 
Many database programmes have automatic reminder systems built in.
5.	 For all others, anything and everything you think you’ll need to inform your 
conversations with them and fuel the relationship.
Who’s in charge?
Someone needs to be put in charge of creating the database and updating it 
continually so that it is accurate, or ‘cleaned and validated’.
1.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

229
the record
You’ll also need to decide who will have access to it, in full or in part, and who 
will be authorised to enter, change or remove data, again in full or in part.
Make sure you’re legal
Finally, it’s important that you comply with the law on keeping personal records on 
computers and registering, if necessary, with the appropriate authorities. In the UK, 
it’s the Data Protection Act and the Information Commissioner’s Office.
Marketing metrics
With simple records and a consistent approach to measuring and monitoring, you 
can tell which elements of your marketing activities are working, and which are not.
The main things to look at are planned versus actual expenditure, and at the 
results of your activities. However, there are also other areas which lend themselves 
to measurement, such as certain media choices. You should also be measuring your 
conversion rates.
Planned versus actual expenditure
Your planned marketing expenditure for the year ahead won’t be set in stone. Your 
strategic and implementation thinking might change, resulting in altered budgets, 
and media opportunities which are too good to ignore sometimes come up.
You should already be recording your overall planned and actual marketing 
expenditure in your business accounts, monthly and annually. But if you want to 
know what has worked, you will need to be able to collect information in more 
detail, activity by activity, and then analyse it against the results. If you know what 
has worked, you can replicate it.
Results of activities
Good marketing is always multi-channel. It also uses a mixture of bullseye media, 
to a named individual, and broadshot, to a focused but unnamed group. In case you 
skipped Chapter 4.2 The Marketing Plan, you’ll find details there.
This multi-channel, multimedia approach can sometimes make it difficult to 
isolate exactly what has worked and what has not. You will need to take a view 
on which marketing activity was the main purchasing influencer, and which was 
simply a trigger for action: both are important. Suppose you have been mailing a 
prospective client six times a year for three years, and they suddenly phone you 
with a request for a meeting after seeing an article about you in the press. Although 
the press coverage has triggered the contact, it is the long-term mailing campaign 
which has done the real work for you; without it, the prospect wouldn’t even have 
noticed the article.

230 How to Run a Successful Design Business
One interesting exercise is to draw up a list of your clients over the last few years. 
Where did the initial introductions come from? Which led to easy conversions? 
Which led to profitable projects? The results can be surprising. If you discover that 
the majority of your clients got to know you through an activity which is, on the 
face of it, financially unprofitable – unpaid work with their trade organisations, for 
example – keep doing it.
Media metrics
Certain media activities are easy to measure quantitatively; you can track usage 
patterns for websites and other digital media, for example, or see the effect of online 
advertising and pay-per-click campaigns. High unique visitor figures or click-through 
rates won’t bring in business on their own any more than column inches, regardless 
of their content, in press-based PR campaigns. But at least tracking tools give you 
the information to ensure your digital media is working as well as it should.
Conversion rates
How many cold approaches do you need to make in order to gain a client? How 
many credentials meetings? Proposals? Pitches? Regrettably, there is no set formula: 
it will depend on your target markets, on how competitive the marketplace is and on 
how specialist you are. However, by logging and analysing the numbers, you will be 
able to construct a model which works for you. If you discover over time that your 
conversion ratios for credentials-to-pitches or proposals-to-client are falling, you can 
address the problem by finding out why and by investing in training and advice.
Client performance analysis
Having clients is good; having profitable clients is much better. Most of your 
marketing measurements will be against your plan, but it’s also worth checking 
from time to time that your strategy is valid.
Which are your most profitable client companies? In which market sector, 
geographical region, country? Among individual design buyers, which job function 
tends to return the most profit? Do certain types of clients tend to repeat purchase 
more than others? What is the most profitable kind of work that you do? By 
analysing where you make your profit, you will improve your future marketing and 
business strategies.
Integration or separation?
Finally, some design firms integrate their marketing database and activity records 
with their overall business management software systems. It makes a lot of sense 

231
the record
to have everything in one place, from timesheets and invoices to employee and 
supplier records, but if this doesn’t work within your current system, and you 
have no ambition to upgrade it, use what you’ve got. The single addition should 
be relational database software if you don’t already have it. Otherwise, start now. 
Record, measure, analyse, act. And then record again.

This page has been left blank intentionally

4.11 The procurement
Tina Fegent
As I hurtled through space, one thought kept crossing my mind. Every part of this capsule was 
supplied by the lowest bidder.
John Glenn (b1921), astronaut and US Senator
Design and 
procurement
Procurement 
has 
existed 
for 
as 
long as man could buy or barter for 
goods and services. However, getting 
procurement formally involved in 
the area of design is relatively new, 
starting just 10–15 years or so ago 
at companies such as Cellnet (now 
O2), Guinness (now Diageo), BA and 
NatWest. Today, it is on the increase.
To say that procurement is not a 
design firm’s favourite subject would 
be an understatement. To illustrate 
this, here are a few opinions:
I cannot remember a time, in the 30 or so years I have been in the industry, when clients have been so 
focused on cost. Given overcapacity, low inflation and lack of pricing power, and high management 
turnover, that is perhaps understandable. However, the question remains whether the procurement 
process can successfully purchase creative services in the way door handles or widgets are bought. The 
emphasis on procurement seemed to start in the pharmaceutical industry and then moved elsewhere. 
It may work in media buying, where there are clearly economies of scale, but not necessarily in media 
planning or other creative or intuitive areas.
Sir Martin Sorrell, CEO, WPP, 2007 Annual Report
We’ve lost our confidence in the face of procurement, preview, prevarication and process. But fight 
back we must; it’s that or a slow and painful death.
Simon Sherwood, CEO, BBH Worldwide, July 2009
•
•
•

234 How to Run a Successful Design Business
If you had a trained monkey, what would you make it do? Talk to some procurement people.
Frances Royle, Head of TV, BBH, September 2009
You would think that after seeing these quotes, procurement professionals 
would lick their wounds and retire gracefully from digging into costs in the world 
of marketing and design.
‘Why do they have to get involved?’ is a lament heard very often in the corridors 
of design agencies. ‘They know the value of nothing and the cost of everything.’ 
This is an outdated and incorrect view. Many agencies in all areas of marketing are 
finding that procurement can, and does, add value to their commercial relationships 
with clients.
The role of procurement
Strategic purchasing, as procurement is also known, is defined by Chartered 
Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS), the official body for procurement, as: 
‘Satisfying business needs from markets via the proactive and planned analysis 
of supply markets and the selection of suppliers, with the objective of delivering 
solutions to meet pre-determined and agreed business needs.’ Procurement 
should work strategically and not in a tactical or reactive way. It is simply good 
practice.
Procurement contributes to the overall profitability of an organisation. The 
tougher the economic climate, the greater the scrutiny on external expenditure, 
with clients cutting budgets or seeing if they can make them go further. The role of 
procurement is to manage the organisation’s external resources (suppliers) in order 
to minimise risk and maximise value.
Risk is defined as impact (what is the impact of failure on the company’s 
operation?) and supply (what sort of market is it, how many suppliers are there, 
and what is the cost of switching?).
Value is defined as size (how much does the company spend?) and impact (what 
is the impact on the company’s cost base?).
Many would regard buying as being as important as selling. A £1 saving in 
expenditure will benefit the bottom line immediately, whereas a £1 increase in 
revenue will, depending on margins, benefit the bottom line by as little as 35p after 
the reduction of the cost of sales. Good procurement has helped bring companies 
back into profitability.
Procurement departments are responsible for:
managing costs that are acceptable to the business and that represent good 
value;
ensuring that quality and delivery are not compromised;
developing and implementing sourcing strategies for external expenditure;
ensuring corporate and departmental governance principles are applied;
•
•
•
•
•

235
the procurement
instilling good project management skills, working collaboratively with internal 
and external departments;
ensuring that appropriate contracts are implemented and managed.
What’s in a name?
You may hear different titles used to describe this role: they are effectively all the 
same thing (see Table 4.11.1).
Procurement departments
Client organisations vary in the way they structure their departments, but a typical 
Marketing Procurement team might look like Figure 4.11.2.
•
•
Purchasing
The original name of the role.
Procurement
The name preferred by CIPS.
Category Management
External expenditure is divided into ‘categories’ (eg 
design, media, market research) with a buyer per category. 
It can be done at a local, UK, European or global level.
Buyer
Senior Buyer
Category Manager
Purchasing Manager
The person responsible for that category of spend.
Table 4.11.1  Procurement roles and titles
Figure 4.11.2  Procurement departments

236 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Procurement terminology and acronyms
As in all areas of business, procurement uses specific language to describe aspects 
of its work. Here are some of the more commonly used terms, along with their 
acronyms (see Table 4.11.3).
How does the process work?
There are seven steps that a traditional procurement team will follow.
1. Identifying opportunities
This is the stage where challenges are made to the requirement. Does the company 
need to buy this product and service, now or in the future? Does the purchase 
meet the business goals? All parties take part in these discussions, especially the key 
stakeholders.
2. Research and analysis
The historical demand for the requirement is profiled, together with the expenditure 
and volume of orders placed for that particular item or service, the number of 
current suppliers, and the number of products. The specification is identified and 
confirmed, and future demand and requirements are estimated. Industry data is 
analysed, and a shortlist of potential suppliers for tender is drawn up.
RFI
Request for Information
A document asking for your company 
credentials, main clients, key staff and areas of 
expertise.
RFQ
RFP
ITT
Request for Quotation 
Request for Proposal 
Invitation to Tender
A document asking for a proposal from 
suppliers, which would typically cover the 
creative solution, methodology, timing and 
fees.
KPIs
Key Performance Indicators
Measures of performance, used to define, 
monitor and evaluate the outcome.
SLA
Service Level Agreement
A contract, where the details of the service are 
defined.
PRF
PBR
Performance-Related Fee 
Performance-Based Results
Payment in arrears, based on performance, or 
results. 
Table 4.11.3  Procurement abbreviations

237
the procurement
3. Developing the strategy
A sourcing strategy will include:
evaluation of the opportunity;
supplier evaluation;
research of sources, and identification of possible risks;
product or service specification;
draft SLAs;
volume of product required;
number of suppliers to contract with;
type of supplier relationship;
contract term;
main features of the negotiation method (for example, eAuctions or standard);
overall sourcing approach.
4. Request for proposal
It is vital that the most important evaluation criteria have been selected before 
the tender is issued. The RFP includes a draft copy of terms and conditions. Cost 
data from the suppliers is collected, analysed and verified. Suppliers’ capabilities, 
as defined under the non-financial criteria, are evaluated and a scoring system is 
confirmed.
5. Negotiation
The points from each proposal which require discussion are identified. ‘Must 
haves’, ‘nice to haves’ and ‘giveaways’ are clarified. A negotiation pack is produced 
to support meetings and summarise the strengths and weaknesses of the supplier’s 
tender response. Discussion points are highlighted, and data provided to support 
the summary. Payment terms are confirmed, and the agreement is signed.
6. Implementation of agreement
The agreement is communicated to the relevant stakeholders: all parties who will 
be working within the agreement need to be fully aware of the agreement and its 
contents.
7. Management and development of suppliers
This is often missed by procurement, but it is critical that clear responsibilities are 
agreed to manage supplier performance effectively.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

238 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Top procurement tips
When dealing with procurement
accept and respect their role;
appoint an opposite number as their point of contact;
be transparent in your dealings;
push back if you feel bullied;
try to see the procurement person and the commissioning client at the same 
meetings;
educate them about what you do and how you work;
ask for their help in improving client/agency processes;
talk about measurement and effectiveness;
provide regular financial reconciliations on fees and costs;
invest in relationship management, using a formal feedback process such as a 
questionnaire or an independent third-party survey.
When replying to a tender
follow the instructions;
answer all the questions in the correct sequence;
make your reply interesting and readable;
don’t provide flippant answers;
sell yourself, but not too egotistically;
always prof red the docment;
take the initiative, and provide extra information as an appendix;
ask questions throughout the tender process;
provide alternative choices (for example, a discount for a 3-year contract, or 
different bonus schemes);
be honest, open and transparent.
Why you need to work with clients’ procurement 
processes
Procurement teams can be involved in:
roster creation;
market analysis (they may use intermediaries);
pitch process management;
scoping the work;
contract and fee negotiations;
suggesting PRF/Bonus plans;
drafting SLAs;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

239
the procurement
reviewing your own supplier arrangements, or decoupling them;
generating rate cards;
quarterly or annual reconciliation of fees versus scope of work;
annual performance reviews, and fee or contract renegotiation.
Although procurement has its foundation in the traditional areas of 
manufacturing, it now performs a key role in the majority of clients’ organisations, 
and is becoming firmly embedded into marketing teams. Design firms need to learn 
to work successfully with procurement departments to get the best outcome for all: 
to generate great ideas that create profit for both the client and the agency.
•
•
•
•

This page has been left blank intentionally

4.12 The prequal
Simon May
The term ‘client’? I hate it. If I go to see the doctor, technically, I’m his client. I’m paying him, after 
all. But that doesn’t mean I’m in charge. Not if I know what is good for me.
Peter Phillips, designer and author, from ‘Creating the Perfect Design Brief’
Why the Pre-Qualification Questionnaire (PQQ)?
As more and more agencies understand the tendering and bidding processes, the more 
clients will be obliged to reduce the number of responses to a manageable number.
Traditionally, this screening process meant assessing a large amount of 
information about agencies and their approaches and technical responses to briefs 
or tenders. The process of ensuring a complete audit trail, as well as managing 
communication with unsuccessful applicants, added to both the complication and 
the time taken to set up a project.
Increasingly, the use of a Pre-Qualification Questionnaire (or PQQ), especially 
in public sector tendering, has been introduced to help manage the early stages of 
procurement. More often than not this is now the first stage in the process, and it 
is what is likely to be sent out when an agency registers its interest in taking part in 
the tender.
The PQQ document is a screening tool, a way of getting the number of agencies 
the procurement team will need to work with down to a manageable number. It is 
designed to make sure that all the agencies invited to the next stage are capable of 
carrying out the work required, and that they can deliver from a business perspective. 
The procurement team also wants to be satisfied from the responses given that the 
agency is financially sound, and that it has systems and procedures in place to cope 
with the demands of that particular client.
Although it is an extra stage, using a PQQ as the first stage in the process makes 
the selection process easier for the client. It helps reduce the amount of time that 
elapses between the first and second contact with an agency, and it helps reduce 
the cost of the process, especially in higher-value projects, where more time will be 
spent ensuring the best selection of agencies are put forward to pitch.
The feedback process is made easier, as the first screening is more business-orientated, 
and therefore less subjective, according to a ‘pass’ or ‘fail’ for each criteria. This may 
not be what the agency wants to hear at this stage, but it is how clients reduce risk.
•

242 How to Run a Successful Design Business
It is likely that this system will be used elsewhere in the business, so the purchasing 
of design services will be brought into line with other purchasing projects, as well as 
complying with and satisfying purchasing standards.
What is the client asking for and why?
The clients are asking for information about the business and the way it is managed, 
its performance to date, and some background on the management team and their 
experience in delivering similar projects for similar clients. They are assessing 
whether the agencies selected to go forward to the next stage are capable of carrying 
out the work proposed, and that they are financially stable. They want to ensure 
that they don’t waste time engaging a business that is unable to deliver: at this 
point in the process, it is unlikely that a full brief has been issued.
The PQQ therefore satisfies two requirements: it reduces the amount of agencies 
they will need to communicate with at the next stage, and it provides a level of risk 
reduction early on in the process.
Typical Contents of a PQQ
PQQs vary in length depending on the number of questions and the level of detail 
required. However, they will usually cover five sections:
Initial overview, or background
Financial status
Business probity
Technical response
Additional information.
The initial overview, or background section will introduce the PQQ and indicate its 
purpose in terms of project, roster or framework agreement. It will specify the 
terms under which the PQQ is being operated. Most importantly, it may cover 
the guidance notes for suppliers. This section will tell you how they would like 
the agency response made, and by when. It will give instructions on completing 
the document, whether there is a need to complete it online, and information 
about how to supply your response to pricing and fees.
The financial status section will usually ask for your last two to three years turnover 
and your ability to supply a set of audited accounts. It might ask for a statement 
of turnover, profit and loss and cash flow for the most recent year of trading, as 
well as a letter from your bank on your current cash and credit position if you 
cannot supply audited accounts. You might also be asked to answer questions in 
areas such as loan agreements and obligations to creditors and staff.
•
•
•
•
•
1.
2.

243
the prequal
The business probity section will ask for information about the agency, contact 
details for the person handling the PQQ, date of registration, type of company 
and ownership. You might be asked to confirm the main activities of the business 
and provide up to three references that reflect the type of work you will be asked 
to deliver under the final contract. Some PQQs might ask for information about 
your business structure, key personnel and reporting methods as well as sub-
contracting and risk management policies.
The technical response section will ask questions about the contract and the lots, or 
projects, you would like to be considered for. Case studies might be the required 
format for responses, illustrating your ability to deliver the requirements of the 
chosen lot or lots.
Finally, the additional information section can cover a host of questions. 
Typically, it might include insurance, quality assurance, health and safety, 
equal opportunities and environmental management, as well as professional or 
business standing where questions are asked about the owners or Directors of 
the agency in relation to previous bankruptcy, insolvency or other misconduct, 
including criminal proceedings.
Completion Rules
Do exactly as the PQQ requests. In most cases, if you fail to follow or comply with 
basic completion guidelines, it will be treated as a way of screening out responses. 
Answer all of the questions where possible and, if in doubt, check to see what the 
required action is. If you don’t know the answer, or it is not applicable, leaving 
empty spaces or blanks will be seen as failure to respond and, again, you will be 
screened out. If you don’t understand the question or the reason for the question 
being asked, there is usually a contact number or email address for queries. Make sure 
that every attachment asked for is submitted at the same time as main documents, 
especially in an electronic response. It is unlikely that you will ever be asked to 
submit these separately, if you have failed to submit them initially.
Deciding to attempt a PQQ
Most agencies will not have the resources available to complete every PQQ that 
they see. From the technical perspective, it is likely that you will be able to supply 
the service requested and will have a suitable case study to support the application. 
However, it is worth looking for certain clauses and requests before deciding to start 
the response process.
Key areas to look out for are the way the client wishes to deal with the Freedom 
of Information Act, the type of guarantees required and how they will be evaluating 
the responses. A big part of the response will be the way you are asked to detail 
fees and costs. They will ask for your fees against job descriptions in the format 
3.
4.
5.

244 How to Run a Successful Design Business
requested, but may also start to identify your approach to volume discounts and, in 
some cases, payment settlement discounts. They will look to see how you deal with 
ancillary costs or bought-in items, and how flexible you are on these.
The decision to respond or not will usually depend on your approach and 
feel for some of these questions, rather than on your ability to deliver the service 
required, and there may be questions that you feel uncomfortable with or unable to 
respond to. These are the areas that will need some sort of debate, usually with your 
accountant or financial advisor, to explore the financial implications of providing 
what you have been asked for in order to stand a reasonable chance of getting 
through this first round.
The rest of the response is usually quite straightforward. You either have the 
experience and can demonstrate it, or not; you are either able to answer all the 
questions positively, or not.
Being PQQ ready
Recording your responses to previous requests will build a bank of information that 
will allow faster decisions on whether to respond to PQQs. Having that information 
to hand electronically will, over time, reduce the time spent filling in basic questions 
about the agency and the ancillary data required. Collecting case studies in a typical 
response format will also help reduce preparation time. Once your PQQ process 
has been established, it will leave only the key technical response sections to be 
confirmed.
With an established process which includes feedback from previous responses, 
both successful and unsuccessful, you will have the benefit of being able to respond 
to more requests, more rapidly, and with an improved chance of success.

4.13 The roster
Simon May
The moment clients realise that revisions are not an all-you-can-eat buffet, suddenly, they realise 
that they are not so hungry.
Soonduk Krebs, Principal, SK Designworks, design firm
Why rosters?
The subject of rosters (or ‘framework agreements’ in the public sector) occupies 
nearly as much discussion time as that of free pitching but – good, bad or indifferent 
– they are here to stay. Rosters are similar in process to Pre Qualifying Questionnaires 
(PQQs) in that they provide a way of pre-selecting and screening agencies for 
working with a client over a period of time instead of just a single project.
Typically, rosters are a management tool for companies with geographically 
dispersed design buyers, or a large design spend that needs to be controlled, or where 
there is no real design control and the onus for brand and identity management 
falls on the selected agencies. The roster represents the smallest group of people 
the company will need to communicate with in order to ensure design consistency 
through the use of published guidelines, whilst keeping reporting lines simple.
The additional benefits to a client are the ability to negotiate specific contractual 
agreements based on the length of the proposed term; these might include fee 
structures, performance targets or guarantees, and impact or effectiveness measures. 
For most however, it will be the time and cost saving of being able to select agencies 
from a list without the need to repeat the entire selection process. There will always 
be requests for project-specific fee estimates or written proposals: these are part of 
the normal process. It is accepted, however, rostered agencies will still occasionally 
be asked to pitch competitively.
Clients might also use existing rosters as a way of managing requests by agencies 
for credential meetings (see ‘The Agency Approach’ overleaf).
The roster process
A typical roster process will have about six stages:
understanding
•
1.

246 How to Run a Successful Design Business
long list
shortlist
pitch/evaluation
communication
contract start.
Understanding covers the work done prior to an invitation, or an advertisement, 
for inclusion on the roster being sent out. It will comprise a review of the current 
performance levels in design, any incumbent providers, the future needs of 
the business and a plan for the process. It will involve meetings between those 
responsible for procurement and those who need the design services. The biggest 
issues usually faced at this point are trying to decide what the selection criteria are, 
and how many agencies need to be selected.
The long list represents those agencies who have responded to the invitation to 
take part. A filtering process gets the list down to a manageable size for the next 
stage. This will be carried out following the instructions for responding set out in 
the invitation. At this point, it is critical that agencies answer all the questions, 
where applicable, and carry out all instructions: these may be used as a way to reject 
agencies for non-compliance. Successful agencies will be invited through to the 
next stage. For unsuccessful agencies, feedback should be available but this will be 
dependent on the number of agencies applying.
The shortlist stage aims to get the list down to the target size. Agencies will 
be issued with a second set of instructions, and a date for a credentials pitch 
to the selection team. The number of meetings required will depend on the 
organisation of the roster and the way the service provision, or specialisms, are 
split up. There will always be exceptions to having this stage, from just notifying 
the agencies that have made it (or not) to selecting all of the agencies seen at 
the pitch level.
The communication stage is where all agencies taking part in the shortlist stage are 
spoken or written to. As there is now a shorter list, a higher level of communication 
is possible, with feedback for the successful and unsuccessful. This stage will also 
cover the contractual negotiations required by the procurement team with the 
successful agencies. This is key, as the contract term is likely to be for up to three 
years. Understanding the likely implications is vital on both sides.
The final stage is the contract start, and this will vary from organisation to 
organisation. In some cases, design users will just be made aware of the roster and 
the agencies on the list; in others, they are told who they should use, and who 
to contact for information. Occasionally, rostered agencies will be brought in and 
taken through the client’s thinking, strategy and requirements. This also allows 
the design guidelines to be presented and understood before the first project is 
commissioned.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

247
the prequal
The Agency Approach
Roster applications typically ask for the same information, albeit in different formats. 
When first responding to an invitation, collect all the information required in one 
place so that future applications don’t need the same amount of time spent on 
them. It is also useful to keep track of what works and what doesn’t, to increase your 
chances of a positive outcome. Always ask for feedback, good and bad.
When applying, look at the outgoing roster or the agencies the client has used 
in the past. This will indicate the level of design they are used to, and who else is 
likely to be responding.
If an approach is made to a potential client and they already have a roster in 
place, ask when the roster is due for review and who is likely to be doing it. Make a 
note, and re-contact a month or two before the date to see what the position is.
Once you are on a roster, find out how the clients intend to communicate with 
the selected agencies. If they have asked for information about your agency, ask 
how they will be using it and who will get it.
Finally, on a new roster, don’t just expect work to appear. Agencies that are 
proactive about letting people know who they are and what they do by marketing 
themselves internally are far more likely to get the first projects under the new 
contract, and therefore be used again at the exclusion of other, quieter agencies.

This page has been left blank intentionally

4.14 The client journey
Shan Preddy
Because you understand ‘one’, you think you understand ‘two’, because one and one makes two. But 
you must also understand ‘and’.
Sufi proverb
A scent, assent, ascent
Working for new clients in new markets keeps the grey cells ticking over, providing 
opportunities for fresh thinking and shiny new creativity. Hunting after new clients 
can also be very exciting: the potential dangers and the hoped-for rewards make the 
adrenalin-loaded thrill of the chase dramatic, if slightly scary.
But the best design solutions come from within deep working relationships, 
where the client and the consultant act as a team, each bringing a different set of 
skills and knowledge to the project. This is why world-class design solutions often 
come from in-house design teams working with their in-house clients, and it is 
why, for consultancies, the most profitable design work is almost always done for 
existing clients. There are fewer steep and wasteful learning curves.
Marketing’s role is to generate income, and it involves two separate, but 
linked, areas of activity. The first is new business development (NBD), the search 
for commissions from client companies and organisations which you have not 
worked with previously. The second is client relationship management (CRM), 
the satisfaction, retention and proactive development of existing clients. When 
used together in integrated strategies and plans, they provide powerful income-
generators. In addition, good CRM will result in increased profit.
In newly launched design firms, NBD will naturally take precedence, as it will in 
businesses which are undergoing a dramatic repositioning exercise or which are tackling 
the danger of relying on too small a handful of clients. Among established and stable 
design businesses, however, CRM should outweigh NBD, with as much as 80 per cent 
of marketing time, effort and expenditure put behind client relationship programmes.
The Chartered Institute of Marketing (CIM)’s Marketing Trends Survey, explores 
what marketers think and how they are deploying their budgets. Respondents stated 
	
UK Chartered Institute of Marketing (CIM) twice-yearly Marketing Trends Survey, conducted by IPSOS MORI. This 
data: Autumn 2009
•

250 How to Run a Successful Design Business
that 10 per cent of their overall marketing resources is spent on CRM; this is just 
behind the highest proportion of 10.8 per cent on PR. However, when asked ‘Which 
one of these activities do you believe delivers the best return on investment?’ 
CRM was cited by 21 per cent of respondents. All other marketing vehicles used 
– including PR, advertising, email campaigns, telephone, direct mail – come in at a 
rather less impressive 12 per cent or less. The conclusion? CRM works.
Client categories
Despite what you might list on your website, your clients are the individual design 
buyers, not the companies. There are four basic categories:
Prospective: people who you would like to become clients.
Current: those whose projects you are actively working on at the moment.
Dormant: those who you have worked with recently or in the past, including 
when they were at other companies, and who you would want to work with 
again.
Ex: people you do not want to work with again.
You might have several hundred fully databased prospective clients, and a dozen 
or so current clients. You will have very few genuinely ex-clients, possibly none; 
these are people you never want to work with again (or vice versa) for any reason, 
including legal disputes.
Unless you are in a launch phase, your dormant clients will form a large group, 
and they are often ignored by design firms in the rush to approach prospects 
and the drive to satisfy current clients. They are, however, the easiest and most 
productive targets for your marketing activities: they know who you are, they know 
what you offer, they know your strengths and your weaknesses. In turn, you know 
their structures, their systems, the way they set their design budgets and when they 
set them. And, unlike prospects, dormant clients will always take your calls. They 
are slumbering, and all you need to do is to wake them up. How loudly you’ll need 
to shout will depend on whether they are having a little nap between projects or 
deeply hibernating.
Why is good client relationship management 
(CRM) so important?
You can look at sales options by putting four elements into a simple grid. The first 
axis relates to your clients: ‘prospective’ and ‘current-and-dormant’ (there’s no point 
including ex). The second axis comprises your products and services: ‘existing’, 
which is everything you are doing at the moment, and ‘new’, which is anything 
you might introduce in the future (see Figure 4.14.1).
1.
2.
3.
4.

251
the client journey
By looking at the options and their associated risks, you will see that selling 
existing products and services to current and dormant clients will give you the 
quickest return at the lowest risk. Joint second are the promotion of existing services 
to prospects and the promotion of new services to current and dormant clients. 
Unsurprisingly, the option with the worst conversion potential is always selling 
new services to prospects; they have no reason to trust you.
Moving deeper
Not only do you have to satisfy your current clients, but you need to deepen the 
relationship so that you can proactively develop it.
You might like to assess and monitor on a regular basis the relationship you 
have with each of your individual clients. Your own checklists will need to suit your 
own business, but here are a few suggestions.
Your clients’ areas of operation 
Are you thoroughly familiar with all of your clients’ companies or organisations, 
their products and brands, the market(s) they operate in, their strengths and 
weaknesses compared with their competitors, their challenges and opportunities? 
Do you understand their consumers, or users, or audiences? Are you familiar with 
their promotional activities?
Figure 4.14.1  Sales options and relative risks
Source: © PREDDY&CO
PROSPECTIVE 
CLIENTS
EXISTING 
PRODUCTS     
AND SERVICES
NEW 
PRODUCTS 
AND SERVICES 
Low Risk
Quick Return
CURRENT AND DORMANT 
CLIENTS
High Risk
Slow Return
Medium Risk
Medium Return
Medium Risk
Medium Return

252 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Your individual clients 
Do you understand their design needs, now and in the future? Do you know the total 
budgets they have under their control? Do you know which of your competitors 
they also work with? What are their professional needs: career status and ambitions? 
Do you know anything about their interests and personal life?
The current relationship 
Is it one of trust and friendliness? Can you easily discuss design needs and finances? 
Are you able to resolve problems?
Your communications 
Are you communicating the status of projects as often as they want it, daily if 
necessary? Are you clear what all of the current issues are? Having bigger picture 
conversations? Post-project reviews? Are you keeping in touch in the periods 
between projects?
Your initiative taking 
Are you actively suggesting new design projects? And regularly sending items which 
might be of interest to them, such as market and competitive information?
Your promotion of your company 
Are you making opportunities to talk to them about your firm’s services, skills, 
people? And keeping them constantly updated with recent news?
Deepening the relationship you have with each individual client will allow you 
to become the automatic choice for design work, and will give you opportunities to 
‘cross-sell’ and ‘up-sell’ your services without ever having to ‘hard-sell’. If you want to 
promote an aspect of your business that you think they might not be aware of, it’s very 
easy to drop a comment into a normal conversation, such as: ‘We’ve just completed a 
fantastic new xyz project for one of our other clients; would you like to see it?’
Strong relationships will also help you to qualify for, and remain on, rosters or 
approved suppliers’ lists and it will make it easier for you to negotiate retainers, where 
you are paid regular fees for ongoing consultancy, not just project-by-project.
Going wider
As well as deepening a relationship, you can widen it. This means looking for 
opportunities from your clients’ sister departments, divisions, companies and 

253
the client journey
organisations. If your ambitions lie in international work, it means looking 
worldwide.
To investigate where the possibilities might lie, draw up an organisational chart 
for each client company based on what you know already, and what you can find 
out. Your clients are good sources of information, as are published sources such as 
annual reports. Identify potential sources of design work, moving ‘up and out’ from 
people you know, to people who work in the same department and sit in the same 
open-plan office, to people who are in quite separate organisations on the other 
side of the world. Then work out how you can best reach them. You can ask your 
clients for introductions or, as a minimum, for permission to mention their names 
in your initial approaches. Instead of cold calling, use the warm connections you 
already have.
From first date to long-lasting marriage?
In design, we tend to expect clients to remain for a project, then hope they’ll come 
back for more. In other business sectors, such as PR and advertising, there is an 
assumption of an ongoing relationship and a contractual, paid-for commitment. 
Their expectation is that clients will be kept until lost. They sell relationships: we 
sell projects. They enjoy ‘marriage until divorce’: we’re ‘just dating’.
The journey that clients embark on with you does not have one, big, final 
destination; it is ongoing. It takes them from being prospects to current clients, 
and from current to dormant. Then, if you are doing your job properly, it takes 
them back to being current again, whether they are still in their original role or 
have moved during the dormant period to another job, another employer or even 
another country.
For design firms which get it right, client relationships – both with individuals 
and with the companies and organisations they work for – can last for decades. But 
it takes effort. The duration and the direction of the journey is largely controlled 
by you, not them, and it relates to your skills or otherwise in client satisfaction and 
retention and in CRM.
The design market is very competitive, and clients are becoming increasingly 
mobile. It’s worth remembering that their loyalty, like their respect, is not yours by 
right. You need to earn it.

This page has been left blank intentionally

You ponce in here expecting to be waited on hand and foot. Well, I’m trying to run a hotel here. Have 
you any idea of how much there is to do? Do you ever think of that? Of course not. You’re too busy 
sticking your noses into every corner, poking around for things to complain about.
Basil Fawlty, owner and manager of Fawlty Towers, aka John Cleese (b1939), actor, 
comedian, writer, film director
Clients? Who needs ’em?
Without clients, there would be no design 
consultants, no one working for in-house 
design units, no freelancers, no design 
teachers or students. Quite simply, there 
would be no design industry.
The relationship you have with 
your clients – that’s each individual 
person, not the companies you list on 
your website and in casework – is one of 
your greatest assets. However, given the 
competitive nature of the design sector, 
and the inevitable stresses that time-
urgent projects can cause, it is also one 
of the most fragile; you need to actively 
manage their experience of working with 
you.
Finding and winning business takes a lot of time and effort. It can often take 
years of approaches, meetings, proposals and pitches before a prospective client 
becomes an active client. Losing that client, however, can take no time at all. And, 
unfortunately, you sometimes won’t even know that you’ve lost a client until you 
see that they have taken their next projects to one of your competitors. Most of 
the time, clients don’t make a point of firing you; they just slip quietly away when 
you’re not concentrating.
•
4.15 The client experience
Shan Preddy

256 How to Run a Successful Design Business
What do clients want?
There was a time when the design industry could get away with less than perfect 
delivery. Experienced design-buyers would build in contingencies both for time 
and budgets, and they would take on the burden of micro-managing projects in 
ways that they would never have considered in other areas of their business. Some 
anxious clients still do this.
As an industry, we have now put some shiny new markers in the ground. We 
rightly charge good fees for the expert work that we do, and we refuse to be treated 
as suppliers, asking instead to be considered partners or consultants. But are we 
living up to this desired positioning? What do clients really want from us?
At appointment stage, prospective clients are looking for assurance that you can 
do the work to the desired quality, at the right price and within the right timeframe. 
Once you are in a working relationship, the hurdles get higher, not lower. In order to 
stay in that relationship, what clients want – consistently – is no less than perfection 
in project delivery, in value and in service. None of these is an optional extra.
Project delivery
The baseline in delivering projects is that every aspect of your work needs to be 
100 per cent accurate, on brief, on budget and on time. But are you succeeding 
in delivering more than that baseline? Do you provide expert strategic thinking 
alongside appropriate creativity? Is your implementation faultless? Is your 
communication seamless? Do you achieve hands-free (for the client, that is) project 
management? And are you remembering to celebrate project completion with the 
client as well as with your team?
Value
The baseline on value is that you deliver what you have promised at the quality you 
have promised, and that your budgets are in line with those of your competitors. 
It’s not simply a question of how much you charge. In life in general, some things 
which are extremely cheap represent poor value, and some things which cost a lot 
of money can be great value if they deliver the right results. Are you demonstrating 
proven commercial effectiveness? Are you delivering more than the anticipated 
results?
Service
The baseline with service is to provide a rapid reaction to whatever is being asked. 
Clients certainly aren’t always right, but they need a swift and positive response 
before, if necessary, you recommend an alternative course of action. Increasingly, 
however, you need to be proactive in the service you offer, not just reactive. Are you 
regularly giving your clients that little bit extra? Are you making suggestions, rather 

257
the client experience
than waiting for instructions? Are you benefiting their businesses in unexpected 
ways? Are you keeping in touch with them between projects, or are you like 
insurance companies which only ever contact their customers when they have a 
new product to sell or at renewal time?
Guaranteeing satisfaction
Satisfaction and dissatisfaction are never about absolute quality (or the lack of it) on 
its own, but about delivery against an expectation of that quality.
If our expectations are met, we are satisfied. When we get better than we expect, 
we are very satisfied, and sometimes delighted. When our expectations are not met, 
we are dissatisfied.
But it gets more complicated than that. Human beings are a grumbly lot. When 
we are disappointed or angry, we tell other people – sometimes a lot of other people 
– about our dissatisfaction; in fact, we are much more likely to moan to others than 
to complain to the person or organisation concerned. We do this spontaneously, 
without being prompted. Conversely, we tend to keep satisfaction – and even 
delight – to ourselves, unless something prompts us to share it with others, such as 
someone asking us for a recommendation. Bad news always spreads more quickly 
than good.
Let’s look at a simple analogy of having a cup of coffee in three different cafés 
on three separate occasions.
In the first, a high-street chain, the coffee, price, service and surroundings are 
all fine, just as you thought they would be from the look of the place. Your 
expectations are met, and you are satisfied. You will go there again next time 
you want a coffee in that area, and if someone asked you, you might or might 
not think about recommending it.
In the second, an expensive, fashionable café at which you had to book a table in 
advance for a special occasion. The place looks great, the coffee is excellent and 
the staff are attentive; the price, although expensive, is understandable. However, 
there is a dirty mark on one of the teaspoons and they add an outrageous 25 per 
cent service charge to your bill without asking. Your expectations, which were 
high, are not met and so you are dissatisfied. You won’t go there again and, over 
the next week or so, you tell nine friends about your dissatisfaction.
In the third, a cheap-and-cheerful roadside café, the coffee is good and the 
service is wonderful: all much better than the low expectations you had of 
the place. They also gave you a free chocolate biscuit, and there were fresh 
flowers in the bathroom. You are very satisfied, perhaps delighted, and you 
will make a point of going there again, even if you have to go out of your 
way. The next day, you post an enthusiastic comment on your blog about the 
experience.
•
•
•

258 How to Run a Successful Design Business
All successful relationships, business or personal, rely on good expectation 
management, and it is only by managing your clients’ expectations properly that 
you will keep them in a state of continual delight.
Relationship management
As satisfaction and delight are based on the management of expectations, it 
follows that we need to be careful not to make overclaims to our clients about our 
capabilities. In their eagerness to secure the business, design firms are sometimes 
guilty of making exaggerated claims in their marketing materials and over-promising 
at pitches. Inevitably, if those claims and promises aren’t fulfilled at project delivery 
stage, the result will be disappointment and dissatisfaction.
Your task, therefore, is to make sure that you establish your clients’ expectations 
properly right at the start of the relationship, and then strive to meet and slightly 
exceed them consistently. Why ‘slightly exceed’ and not ‘massively exceed’? 
Because once something has been achieved it becomes standard practice, and it 
will be expected again. If you did it last time, you can do it this time, and the next 
time. Don’t hold back from delivering excellent service, but do hold back from 
performing minor miracles; they can be very bad for your health.
Ask yourself these questions. Do you know what your clients’ expectations are 
now, and what they are likely to be in the future? And, if you do know, are you 
fulfilling them? The only way to find out accurately is to ask them, through regular 
post-project reviews and through more formal client surveys.
Your clients’ expectations won’t only be set by yourself, by the way, but by your 
competitors, by the design industry as a whole and by other related industries. And, 
in growing and developing industries like the design sector, the baseline almost 
always moves in an upward direction. The hurdles get higher and higher.
Dealing with dissatisfaction
Clients who complain are not difficult clients; they are just people who are in a 
difficult situation. At times, that difficulty will have been caused by you. If you 
know something isn’t working, you can fix it, or at least have the conversation 
about fixing it even if you eventually conclude that it’s unfixable. As computer 
giants, Dell, said in one of their advertising campaigns: ‘To all of our nit-picky, over-
demanding, ask-awkward-questions customers; thank you and keep up the good 
work.’
Treat all client dissatisfaction seriously, whether it comes as a prompted response 
in reviews or surveys or as an unprompted complaint; never ignore it in the hope 
that it will go away. Investigate the cause and address the problem. Then tell the 
client you’ve fixed it (or that you can’t fix it), and thank them for pointing it out.

259
the client experience
A good relationship will survive any number of small problems if they are 
acknowledged and treated properly, but one small dissatisfaction can signal the end 
of a beautiful friendship if it is allowed to fester.
When (and how) to fire clients
There will be times when the dissatisfaction is on your side, and you will sometimes 
need to fire a client. Examples would include clients whose projects are not 
profitable and never will be; clients who break their contracts with consistent late 
payments without compensation; clients whose business conflicts with a larger, 
more profitable client and needy clients who are just more trouble than they are 
worth. There will also be clients whose business no longer fits your desired market 
positioning. In all of these cases, the relationship can’t continue.
You will need to handle the split professionally. The time to fire clients is 
between projects, and the way to do it is to help them to find another consultancy 
by offering to advise them on the selection process, charging an appropriate project 
fee if they want you to be very hands-on in the search. Although you don’t want 
to work with them anymore, you should aim to part company on the best possible 
terms. Clients move jobs, and they talk to other clients; you are, after all, only as 
good as your reputation.
From project to relationship
Regular clients, working within long-term relationships, not only make the design 
process much more enjoyable, but they will also save you time, effort and money 
both in project delivery and in marketing activities.
With projects, you will not have to spend so long researching marketplaces 
and investigating consumer behaviour. You will understand their business goals 
and processes, and you will be able to arrive at design recommendations much 
more quickly. Communication will be easier, and you will be more likely to get 
swift approval of design strategies and concepts. And, if you are running a sizeable 
business, you will be able to match the right team members to each client, and 
avoid the risk of personality clashes which would hinder project progress.
With marketing activities, regular clients will automatically come back to you 
with more work, reducing the number of sales meetings you would otherwise need 
to have. They will make sure you are on the shortlist for major pitches and tenders. 
They are more likely to agree to a retainer-based way of working. They will remain 
clients when they move to a new job. And they will recommend you to other 
potential clients both in their own organisations and elsewhere, becoming roving 
ambassadors for your business.
If the relationship you have with them is good, your clients will do half of your 
work for you, but only if they are satisfied to the point of delight.

260 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Finally, it’s worth remembering that your clients will be under surveillance 
from your direct competitors, who will constantly attempt to seduce them away 
from you. Whether your clients stop to listen to – or even notice – their tempting 
approaches will depend entirely on the condition of the relationship you have with 
them.
You are running a business. Make sure that it is successful business, both now 
and in the future. Aim to work within relationships, not just on projects, and make 
sure that you consistently satisfy – and delight – your clients.

Section Five: 
The Work

This page has been left blank intentionally

A verbal contract isn’t worth the paper it’s written on.
Samuel Goldwyn (c. 1879–1974), film producer
Ts and Cs: Your Terms, Your Conditions
Stop! Don’t flick past this chapter because it looks ‘legal’ and boring. It isn’t boring, 
and it is important.
In all your dealings with clients, a contractual relationship binds you whether 
you realise it or not. It can be expressed in a letter, or a written contract, or an 
acceptance of terms of business. Communicating clearly about these issues will 
show that you are professional about 
your work and it will help to avoid 
misunderstandings. As a last resort, it 
will stand you in good stead if there is a 
future argument.
Set out below are some guidelines 
and comments about quotes and 
proposals, terms of business for clients, 
and terms of business for suppliers. We 
also take a look at delivering the work 
against contract.
Quotes and proposals
There are many ways of setting out your 
ideas before you win a piece of work. 
More often than not this will include some form of quotation, estimate, proposal 
or simply a letter or email.
There is a difference between a quotation and an estimate. Quite simply, a 
quotation is a fixed price for an agreed piece of work or a project. An estimate, on 
the other hand, is your best guess at how much the work will cost. It is difficult to 
quote for a job until you really understand the scope and scale of the work so, if 
•
5.1 
The terms
Barry Morris

264 How to Run a Successful Design Business
you have to talk money, try using a range of prices (‘Stage 1 prices will be between x 
and y’) or quote a similar recent piece of work (‘We cannot give firm prices without 
knowing xyz, but a similar piece of work for an existing client cost x’).
The key points in any proposal, estimate or quote are:
Introduction/background: the definition of the job and your understanding of the 
work required.
How: your method of working.
Who: your team, with details of who is doing what, and the client’s team if you 
know it.
What: the deliverables.
When: the timetable.
Fees and other costs.
Terms: Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) and when you get paid.
If in doubt about what is worth putting in a proposal ask yourself: ‘What would 
I want if I were the client?’ Put yourself in the client’s shoes.
Assuming you win the work, the proposal also serves as the basis for the contract, 
which is another incentive to make it clear. If you set out what you think you have 
been asked to do, you have a ‘paper trail’ and can say ‘that will cost extra’ if the 
client changes their mind later.
It is worth bearing in mind that many buyers of design do not understand the 
design process. Don’t make assumptions. Set out the stages of the work and explain 
– without jargon – what happens at each stage, and why it’s important. Explain the 
basis of your costs (‘We have allowed for three roughs of the first stage design’; ‘We 
have assumed no more than 10 changes of copy’). The more clients understand 
about what you do and why you do it, the more likely they are to accept your price 
and the less likely they are to argue later.
So, the proposal has gone in, the client has said ‘yes’ – what next? If you attached 
your terms of business to your proposal, they are the ‘rules’ for this project. If you 
didn’t, now is the time to do it.
Terms of business for clients will be different from those you use with suppliers, 
but in both cases they are a statement of how you are going to do business. Often, 
you don’t need to refer to them at all, but they can be crucially important. They 
can help to make relationships with clients and suppliers smoother and more 
professional.
Terms of business with clients
Any job you undertake for a client needs to have a written agreement. In practice, 
this ranges from an exchange of letters or emails, to an acceptance of a proposal 
with terms and conditions attached, right through to a full-blown legal contract 
argued over by respective sets of lawyers.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

265
the terms
If you submit a proposal with terms of business to a client, and the client accepts, 
then your terms are what govern that relationship and will be looked at in the event 
of any disagreement. Project-specific contracts often crop up in bigger pieces of 
work, or if you are working for large national and international clients. However, 
the principles also apply to smaller jobs and smaller clients.
Whatever sort of contract you have, write down the main points and agree 
them with your client. The golden rule? Write it down. Make it clear.
The starting point is to know who is producing the contract. Many clients want 
their own: others expect you to do it. This sends some consultancies rushing to 
their lawyers, but there are a number of common sense things you can sort out and 
get right before getting legal advice. If in doubt, draft as much as possible yourself, 
then get a lawyer to look at it.
There is no ‘one size fits all’ here, but set out below are some headings which 
you can use as a checklist.
Parties: who the contract is between. Check if you are dealing with a subsidiary 
company or the parent: whoever the contract is with is ultimately responsible for 
paying your bill.
Recitals: what has already happened, or the background information. Often the 
full contract comes after you have started the work, or at least after your proposal 
has been accepted.
Interpretation: this defines specific words used in the contract.
Performance/Engagement: This section could contain approval procedures or 
payment terms or timings or definition of deliverables – or some combination of 
all of those.
Approval procedures: details of who is authorised to approve your work and sign 
invoices for payment.
Payment: should simply state agreed payment terms.
Timing: the overall timing plan.
Deliverables: what you will give the client.
Term of contract: how long does the contract last? Check against restrictions on 
termination.
Disputes: how any disagreement will be resolved, preferably by negotiation 
between you and the client. It’s often useful to have an escalation chain. If your 
account manager or designer falls out with (say) a client marketing manager, the 
contract might say the disagreement should be resolved by your respective managing 
directors. It is difficult to resolve disputes about creative work as subjective opinion 
can be involved, so it’s far better to involve clients during the design process. If you 
get sign-off at each stage or sub-stage, there will be no surprises for the client, and 
no disputes.
Termination: who can end the agreement, and how.
Assignment of IPR: if possible, don’t pass over IPR until you have been paid: one 
of your main weapons in terms of payment or disputes will be lost.
Design credits: for use after completion of the work. It is entirely reasonable that 
you should be allowed to use your work in your own marketing materials. Unless 

266 How to Run a Successful Design Business
you reserve that right through the contract, however, you run the risk of the client 
subsequently refusing permission, and there will be little you can do about it.
Warranties and indemnities: what you are warranting (guaranteeing) to the 
client, and any indemnity you are giving them, or they are giving you. Expect 
to see something about you guaranteeing that you own the copyright in all that 
is produced. This provides no problem if all the design work has been done by 
your staff, but remember freelancers’ contracts, and any limited copyright you 
have bought on specific items such as music for the project. Some clients will seek 
indemnity so that, if they are accused of breach of copyright, you, the consultancy, 
will pay any costs. This may be acceptable if it is proved that you have breached 
copyright, but is unreasonable if the client tries to get you to indemnify them against 
claims of breach alone. Under those circumstances, all the costs of defending that 
action would fall to you, however unreasonable the claim might be.
Confidentiality: what you are assuring the client in terms of information 
security.
Restrictions: consider a clause which prevents clients poaching your staff. If 
clients seek exclusivity, restricting you from working with other companies in their 
field, read the section carefully and only accept it if you are happy.
Assignment: larger companies might want the right to assign (that is, pass on) 
the contract to a subsidiary, and at the same time restrict you from assigning the 
contract to another design company. Neither should cause a problem.
Additional work/variations to contract: what is additional to the contract, and who 
can authorise changes. Clearly, if the contract is to produce 1,500 brochures and 
the client changes his mind and says 2,000, an exchange of emails should cover it. 
But beware of subtle changes to the brief: they can cause a lot of extra work, but are 
often not regarded as much by the client.
Law/jurisdiction: which country’s law any legal action will follow: in Canada 
or the USA, for example, it is expensive. In the UK, English or Scottish law should 
prevail.
Terms of business with suppliers
You don’t need a breakdown with one of your suppliers. How do you avoid that? As 
with terms of business with clients: be clear, write it down.
Most consultancies will use purchase orders to cover everything from buying 
copier paper to commissioning freelancers. Your purchase order should contain 
your terms and conditions of business, often printed on the back.
What you are buying will dictate how relaxed you can be about it. You should be:
relatively relaxed about buying items like stationery, or coffee;
slightly less relaxed about, for example, employing temporary staff; or renting 
mobile phones and photocopiers; or booking studios you might hire for a shoot, 
with potential overtime rates and cancellation charges;
•
•

267
the terms
very unrelaxed about freelance staff, and anything you buy that will be used as 
part of your work for a client, for example, music, stock, images.
The relaxed category is unlikely to cause problems. It won’t matter whether 
your purchase order or the supplier’s terms of business prevails.
In the less relaxed category, you will be asked to sign a contract, drawn up by 
the supplier and their lawyers. They will usually be big companies, and unwilling 
to negotiate on standard terms. Check out the important points and make sure 
you have understood them. If you struggle to find information in the small print, 
ask the supplier to put it in writing. If you negotiate something different from 
the standard terms, exchange emails. If you have an argument later, you’ll have a 
written understanding of what should have happened.
Be very careful about the final category, unrelaxed. This is where IPR comes in. 
Read Chapter 2.9 The Intellectual Property for more details, and involve your lawyer 
if necessary.
For freelancers, the contract (which is your terms of business) should set out 
clearly the usual information on duration of contract, fees and confidentiality, but 
it should also give you, the company, IPR in the work. Without it, you cannot 
pass it on to your client. You might also include restrictions to prevent freelancers 
pinching your client when the project finishes.
Be particularly careful when buying copyright. For example, if you buy for a 
particular project the right to use music on UK television channels, or the right 
to use an image in a UK catalogue, you can only pass on to your client exactly the 
same rights. If your client uses the music in Europe, or publishes the catalogue in 
Asia, you are heading for an expensive settlement and, at worst, a court case. Make 
sure you know exactly what you are buying, and make sure your client understands 
any limitations.
Delivering the work against contract
The creatives are working away on the project; account handlers, too, if you have 
them. Who is looking after the non-creative bit?
There are links between project management and conforming with the contract. 
There are no hard and fast rules, but somebody needs to make sure that the right 
hand knows what the left hand is doing. It needs to be seamless for the client, but 
important areas, often invisible to clients, must be covered.
Make sure responsibility is agreed in-house for:
monitoring deadlines;
watching hours spent;
knowing what to recharge and what not;
stage billing;
approvals procedures;
•
•
•
•
•
•

268 How to Run a Successful Design Business
monitoring changes to brief;
writing to clients about cost and timing implications of changes;
producing contact reports.
In summary? Write it down. Make it clear.
•
•
•

5.2 
The knowledge
Liz Lydiate
An investment in knowledge pays the best interest.
Benjamin Franklin (1705–90), politician, statesman and polymath
From education into design practice
What does a practising design consultant 
need to know? It is generally accepted 
that the business of design is creativity, 
but very many additional and related 
skills are needed to put the wheels on the 
ideas and to deliver practical, workable 
design solutions, on time, to budget and 
hitting the precise targets defined in the 
brief in a way which can be monitored 
and evaluated.
Since the 1980s design consultancy 
has changed radically, repositioning 
itself away from a purely creative 
service (as it used to say on the back of 
the Design Council’s envelopes ‘…not 
something you stick on afterwards…’) and 
increasingly maturing towards a true 
business management consultancy service. As a very necessary part of this process, 
during the 1990s and to the present there has been much enquiry and debate about 
the review and development of the Higher Education (HE) design curriculum, 
including heavyweight Government intervention such as the Cox Report.
UK practice-based design programmes have a strong and distinguished reputation 
for the encouragement and development of creativity, but sometimes have not 
caught up with the radical change in the nature of the design industry. As design 
works hard to establish itself as a true business consultancy service, this orientation 
is not yet fully reflected in the HE design curriculum. Is there still a place for the 
	
The Cox Review of Creativity In Business, Design Council/ HM Treasury, 2005
•

270 How to Run a Successful Design Business
highly creative designer who does not have an integral knowledge of the business 
needs that clients seek to satisfy through design? Are the HE design programme 
directors who worry that inclusion of more business education in design courses 
will damage the core business of developing creativity correct? What are the real 
knowledge-based needs of the UK design industry, now and for the future?
There are also important unresolved issues about whether design management 
practice is about running design companies or something else altogether. Design 
management programmes provide a very important source of business and academic 
knowledge, and are of great benefit to the design industry, but study of the UK HE 
sector reveals that the delivery of design management courses at undergraduate and 
postgraduate levels has been complex and often problematic. Many courses have had 
only a relatively short life before being redesigned or closed, reflecting external confusion 
about the changing nature and professional competences of design consultancy. It is 
not the role of design management education to act as a Band-Aid™ to make up for 
other skills deficits in the design industry, particularly among designers.
It has become apparent that even if the HE curriculum changes and develops 
in the manner discussed, it will never be possible within the parameters of an 
undergraduate design programme to produce ‘oven ready’ graduates, fully versed 
in all aspects of professional practice. Instead, the aim should be to produce young 
designers with a realistic understanding of design practice, aware of the many 
different branches and sectors of the design industry and associated possible career 
paths and expecting to undertake further Continuing Professional Development 
(CPD) as an integral part of their career development.
The necessary skill and knowledge base for successful contemporary design 
consultancy is both broad and deep and needs constant refreshing and updating. 
Not all things will be found in all people, and a successful consultancy will look at 
the interconnection of collective complementary skills within its team as whole. 
Because design consultancy is a service industry, it is vital to understand the business 
needs and objectives of the client. The subsequent development of design solutions 
is a partnership process, where the efficient and effective execution of the project is 
of paramount importance.
Creative skills, design and craft skills
If the studio – the hub of creative activity, generation and execution – is the centre 
of a design consultancy, it can also be visualised as the essence of the organisation, 
surrounded and supported by a large number of essential and interconnected 
activities that together make up the consultancy’s ability to deliver. Sourcing and 
attracting good designers, whether employed or hired as freelancers, is the life blood 
of the design organisation. It is well recognised that good companies attract the best 
staff, and that company reputation plays a key role in the recruitment process
The hiring activity alone is not sufficient. Care must also be taken to harness the 
true value of the staffing investment through nurture, refreshment and extension 

271
the knowledge
of the designers’ knowledge base and capability. In his introduction to a predecessor 
to this book, Professional Practice in Design Consultancy, Sir John Sorrell comments 
that design is a business area where the key capital assets walk out of the door at 
the end of each working day. Management has to attend to making sure that they 
want to come back in the morning, that they will have a working environment 
conducive to creativity, and work practices which enable them to interact effectively 
and enjoyably. Training and active staff development make a major contribution to 
staff effectiveness, profitability and retention.
Meredith Belbin’s work on team roles can be applied to design consultancy to 
interrogate and understand the different roles and skill sets within the organisation. 
Knowledge of the company’s market positioning, specialisms and core offer should 
pro-actively influence the blending and mixing of creative, craft and design skills, 
rather than the other way around, where a company attempts to reactively adapt its 
market offer to suit existing design competence and preferences.
Initiative and resources
There are some magic ingredients which are hard to define, difficult to source or 
order up, but essential to creative success.
Research skills are seldom specified on design industry job descriptions, but 
deliver enormous competitive benefit at many different stages of the design process. 
Can team members get the best out of the internet, use libraries, source reports and 
statistics and use these things to enhance the robustness of design consultancy 
work? Will appropriate primary research – surveys, focus groups, interviews, 
visual research – be implemented to enhance and extend the range of the creative 
solutions? Can observation and deliberate strategies for maintaining an open mind 
help in the initial interrogation of the brief and the development of better and 
more accurate interpretations of the situation and the requirements?
Similarly, the recruitment process is unlikely to explore the mechanics of a 
candidates’ thinking processes, but these are central to what they will contribute. 
Design is built upon effective thinking, but this can be enhanced by knowledge of 
different tools and techniques that complement and extend the creative process. 
Most organisations will use versions of brainstorming, but a ‘thinking tool kit’ can 
contain many wider possibilities. Shared understanding of thinking – and thinking 
techniques – will help a team to function more effectively, as will knowledge of 
different team roles and personality. Deliberate activities which facilitate sharing of 
individual knowledge are helpful and can be built into company and team working 
styles.
‘Blue sky thinking’ and ‘thinking outside of the box’ can be nurtured by company 
behaviour. Are wild ideas encouraged or shot down? Can the company deliberately 
	
Professional Practice in Design Consultancy, ed. Liz Lydiate, Design Council, 1992
	
Team Roles at Work, R Meredith Belbin, Butterworth Heinemann, 1993

272 How to Run a Successful Design Business
undertake challenging and stimulating experiences as part of a central commitment 
to shared creative growth? And what resources are available to support this?
Strategic planning and project management 
skills
Design is about making new things happen, and making ideas into working reality. 
A successful design company actively reviews actions and possibilities all the time, in 
response to external drivers and stimuli. An inward looking company, pre-occupied 
with internal concerns, will not be as in tune with the external environment 
as one which constantly looks outside. This data and intelligence informs the 
strategic planning process that should be an integral part of the activity of well-run 
company.
Learning about strategic planning can be tackled in different ways, but the first 
step is to recognise its critical role. Some companies work with external consultants, 
some hire staff with specialist qualifications, and some work on their strategic 
planning skills incrementally. At the same time, design consultancy work is going 
to link in to the strategic planning of clients, and this requires understanding and 
insight arising from theoretical knowledge.
In order to execute and deliver the work required by the client, there is a need 
for excellent project management skills, linking in to the overall requirement 
that standard of service is at all times equivalent to the standard of creative work 
produced. Good project management practice enables a design consultancy to 
manage concurrent projects, over an extended period of time where it will often be 
essential to accommodate change and revision. Like so many things in this section, 
this activity is driven by shared knowledge and shared standards, understood and 
practised by all. Although there will be staff with dedicated project management 
skills and responsibility, success can only be guaranteed by the performance of the 
team.
Business consultancy skills
During the late 1980s design business consultant Paul Southgate developed a 
model of the buying climate for design, showing how design expenditure related to 
corporate spending on advertising and management consultancy. Design formed 
the lowest tranche of expenditure, commissioned by less senior staff, followed 
by significantly greater investment in advertising, commissioned by different, 
more senior people, and then finally by high-level expenditure on management 
consultancy commissioned from the top. In subsequent years, design and advertising 
expenditure has become more integrated, but the great challenge of repositioning 
design as a form of management consultancy has been achieved by only a very 
small number of companies.

273
the knowledge
Clients buy design as part of marketing, but is marketing recognised as an 
essential part of the knowledge base of a designer, or even as part of the core 
knowledge base of the consultancy overall? Can HE design programmes justify a 
curriculum which does not include marketing knowledge an integral part of design 
activity? Recognition of the importance of marketing and business consultancy 
skills is not only essential to the successful delivery of the present design offer but 
also key to releasing the industry’s greater potential in a world driven by visual 
communication. By resolving and recognising its inalienable link to marketing, 
design can take its rightful place as a high-value consultancy service.
Another skill set resides in the management of the consultancy relationship. 
Neither empirical research into the movement of clients between agencies, nor an 
interrogation of the reasons for this has been conducted. Finding and winning clients 
is hard work and keeping them by making reality meet (or exceed) expectations is a 
very sensible idea. This can only happen with incorporation of high-level business 
consultancy skills as an essential component of the design offer.
Communication: visual and verbal, written and 
spoken
In order for the consultancy partnership process to flourish, excellent communication 
is essential. From the outset of the client relationship, communication skills will 
influence future progress. The way in which the telephone is answered in response 
to the very first enquiry should be compatible with the company’s overall values 
and image, and this should follow through in all subsequent activity: meetings, 
presentations, emails, proposals, reports and events. All of these interactions define 
the company and express personality and attitude, whether or not this has been 
intended and planned. The aim should be to proactively direct and manage this 
activity to say the right things in the right way, but this is not going to happen by 
magic. It needs a positive decision, and acceptance by everyone involved that good 
communication skills are critical to success and require a programme of sustained 
action.
How does the company communicate? What does it say, when and why, and 
to whom? And through what means? Every single member of the company is 
involved in this activity so everyone needs to know the answers to these questions. 
The overall aims of company communication should be to uphold and endorse 
company values, to make life as easy and efficient as possible for clients, suppliers 
and associates and above all to achieve clarity and accuracy.
Design has its own language, practices and technical terminology. Good 
consultancy involves making sure that appropriate language is used in all 
circumstances, with sensitivity to differing levels of client knowledge. Any creative 
process taking place over a period of time generates many opportunities for 
misunderstanding and mistakes. Clear communication and good communication 

274 How to Run a Successful Design Business
discipline can overcome this, and needs to be part of the ongoing skills audit of 
every member of the team, with appropriate training action taken.
Time management and self-organisation
The large number of books available on time management skills and self-organisation 
techniques might suggest that these are skill needs which can be speedily resolved, 
and reflect the many different routes and approaches to success. Design is a creative 
industry, made up of creative people, who constantly struggle with the need to 
balance perfectionism and profitability. As discussed in the Team Leadership and 
People Management section below, design company staff make a transition from 
individual performance to shared responsibility because of the team nature of the 
work undertaken. They also contribute to the delivery of corporate values and 
standards rather than undertaking virtuoso individual performance. This does not 
sit readily or naturally within the stereotypical ‘creative’ role.
Foundations for personal organisation and good time management can often 
be learned by example and by the implementation of good shared practices within 
the company. Mentoring and ‘buddying’ can make a strong internal contribution 
to the development of individuals, and this can be supplemented by provision 
of external input through courses. Delegates attending industry-specific training 
discuss matters such as identifying effectiveness among people they know and 
dealing with over-demanding clients, before exchanging techniques and solutions. 
This type of focused learning experience is particularly valuable in adjusting self-
expectations and goals, enabling individuals to enhance their performance.
One of the most demanding time management issues is resolving the displacement 
of scheduled and planned activity by unplanned things which through being left 
have become urgent and demanding. Through discussion, trainees examine the 
feasibility of assessing tasks according to priority, carrying out careful scheduling 
and then resisting being pushed off course by urgent and noisy distractions.
There are no quick fixes in this area of learning, but real progress can be made 
with a focused approach and sustained commitment over a period of time.
Team leadership and people management
As a people-based business, design has particular needs for team leadership and 
people management skills. Research has established that most design consultancies 
are small; they are therefore unlikely to have dedicated Human Resources (HR) staff. 
Personnel management issues are often handled by someone who also fulfils other 
roles. In learning about staff management and HR activity, there has traditionally 
been a gap between theory and practice, with staff in design consultancies finding 
it hard to identify their work practices within the more corporate theory on offer.

275
the knowledge
This is now changing as more study is made of the creative industries and 
management practice in small organisations. Twenty years ago very few design 
consultancy employees would report having formal review and appraisal procedures 
in their company, but appraisal has now become widespread. This makes it much 
easier to identify useful learning activity in this area and to identify a body of 
knowledge which will sit comfortably across the whole sector.
The same change is reflected in the growth of flatter management structures and 
democratic working practices, with employees having much more direct control 
over consultancy planning and activity. Many design businesses now organise 
‘awaydays’ and team-building activity which feeds back into enhanced collective 
performance.
When staff take part in team leadership and people management training, it 
creates valuable possibilities for opening up discussion on return to work. Design 
as a sector benefits from very high calibre staff with strong motivation but has 
sometimes suffered from lack of opportunity for team members to raise problems 
or to suggest new ways of working. Growing activity in training in this area and 
recognition of the relevance of sections of the great body of theoretical HR and 
knowledge of human behaviour will help with progress.
Client interface skills, including negotiation 
and sales skills
Because design consultancy is a service and a partnership undertaking, with a long 
gap between the buying decision and the eventual realisation of completed work, 
client interface skills are the oil that makes all the wheels go around smoothly. There 
are several different stages to the client relationship, and these require a whole range 
of skills and expertise. Initially there is good market intelligence, driven by the 
company’s strategic plan and supported by excellent research skills and marketing 
knowledge. This same knowledge informs the preparation of well-targeted and 
appropriate marketing material and new business initiatives, and then underpins 
the preparation of strong credentials presentations and business proposals.
The significance of research skills continues. The UK Design Council’s ‘double 
diamond’ model (see Figure 5.2.1), divides the design process into four distinct 
phases.
It maps the divergent and convergent stages of the design process, showing 
the different modes of thinking that designers use. Through its use, it is possible 
to understand the crucial significance of the unpacking and questioning of the 
initial brief or design opportunity identified by the client. This leads to providing 
true consultancy through development of a more detailed and more extensively 
researched set of objectives.
Alongside this activity runs the need for deep understanding of negotiation 
and sales skills, together with keen awareness of the activity of competitors. 
Forming and managing client expectations during the initial business enquiry 

276 How to Run a Successful Design Business
and development stages demands strong interpersonal skills, sensitivity and keen 
business awareness.
Different approaches can be taken about who then manages the client 
relationship, but the quality of client care skills applied will have as strong an 
effect on client satisfaction and retention as the eventual quality of the work. There 
are also no rules about how to source client care skills – excellent client services 
managers come from a wide range of backgrounds – but it is important that the 
skills and knowledge needed in this activity area are fully recognised and actively 
incorporated into recruitment and HR activity.
Figure 5.2.1  The ‘Double Diamond’ design process model
Source: © Design Council 2005
Discover 
Define 
Develop 
Deliver 

Give me the freedom of a tight briefing.
David Ogilvy (1911–99), advertising executive
So, what is a design brief and why do you need 
one?
Whether you call it a brief, a design brief, a creative brief or any other label is 
unimportant. What is important is what’s in it and, crucially, the response it elicits.
You may have heard a brief referred to as the roadmap, or compass, for your 
impending project. Others think of the brief as a bridge. Those analogies are fair. 
The brief is essentially the bridge between what has hitherto been an intellectual 
exercise and a live design project. More importantly, perhaps, it is the bridge between 
the challenge and your creative team. Your brief, like a bridge, needs to be robust, 
well-built and easy to cross, and it needs to ensure you arrive in the right place on 
the opposite side, whilst also allowing you to cross backwards and forwards to check 
progress and understanding with those on both sides. Elegance and an ability to 
raise a smile help too.
A 
more 
contemporary 
and 
appropriate analogy is perhaps a SatNav. 
Like a brief, it is at its heart a tool to 
get you where you need to be. But it 
also talks to you in a language you 
understand, shows you the journey and 
breaks it down into milestones, is fully 
customisable, and can talk to you in a 
voice that appeals. But, most of all, it’s 
flexible. When you take a wrong turn it 
brings you back onto the right road.
Like a SatNav, a brief needs to 
be setup correctly from the start. It’s 
essential to create the right document 
for your purpose; one that it is clear and 
focused, and that everyone who needs to use it understands.
•
5.3 
The brief
Kate Blandford

278 How to Run a Successful Design Business
A brief usually still takes the form of a physical document, even in this digital 
age, but often with verbal, visual (static and moving) or even audio appendices. It 
is good to have the brief in physical form so that everybody is clear on the final, 
approved version, but never let this paper-based document limit your creativity in 
making the brief come to life.
Whatever your favoured name and format, every project in the commercial 
world has to start by outlining three things:
Where you are now: your start point.
Where you want to be: what you need to achieve; your objective.
How you are going to achieve it: the strategy.
The role the brief plays is to bring all of this to life for those with the huge 
task of coming up with the creative magic. And that is the key. Although it is vital 
that your client understands, agrees with and is excited by the brief, the primary 
audience is your creative team. Think about how best to motivate and inspire them 
to turn those blank sheets of paper or screens into award-winning, commercially 
effective design solutions.
The quality of a brief is directly related to 
the quality of the output
Without wanting to flog the SatNav analogy too hard, you will not get to your 
destination unless your SatNav is fully charged, has the right lead and has the 
correct maps loaded. In the same way, neither will you solve a complex commercial 
brand or consumer issue with an ill-considered, woolly design brief.
This hypothetical letter really brings this to life: it is widely available in various 
forms on the internet although it seems that details of the original source have been 
lost.
Dear Mr Architect
Please design and build me a house. I am not quite sure of what I need, so you should 
use your discretion. My house should have somewhere between two and 45 bedrooms. 
When you bring the blueprints to me, I will make the final decision of what I want. 
Also, bring me the cost breakdown for each configuration so that I can arbitrarily pick 
one.
Please don’t bother me with small details right now. Your job is to develop the overall 
plans for the house: get the big picture. At this time, for example, it is not appropriate 
to be choosing the colour of the carpet. However, keep in mind that my wife likes 
blue.
1.
2.
3.

279
the brief
While you are designing this house specifically for me, keep in mind that sooner or 
later, I will have to sell it to someone else. It therefore should have appeal to a wide 
variety of potential buyers.
PS: Perhaps what I need is not a house at all, but a travel trailer. Please advise me as 
soon as possible if this is the case.
A high-quality, concise, well-considered brief will draw the same from your 
design team. A broad, confusing or conflicted brief may well lead to great design 
work, but you have no way of knowing if it is the right answer to your ill-formed 
question. Don’t expect the design process to solve strategic questions that you have 
not resolved in the brief.
If you get the brief right, you will also stimulate creative ideas that can be 
executed in every place, format and channel that the clients’ customers touch, not 
just those you are addressing in the immediate brief.
What should – and shouldn’t – a brief contain?
The problem. Start with a clear articulation of the problem to be solved: what is the 
business issue? Then describe, succinctly, which part of this business issue design 
can resolve.
The offer. Articulate the brand’s, product’s or service’s vision and strategy, and 
what this project aims to make consumers think, feel and, crucially, do differently 
as a result of the (re)design?
The USP. Define the unique selling point. Why will the customer pick out this 
brand, product or service from all the others on offer? What are the reasons to 
believe that the USP is true?
The customer. Provide a clear articulation of who the brand, product or service 
is aimed at. This should be less about standard demographics (although these can 
have their place) and more about their lives, how they use or interact with the 
brand, product or service, and ideally, genuine insights that could drive new creative 
direction.
The application. Describe clearly where the design will need to work; in which 
media, in what channels or formats.
The success factors. The brief should also contain a really good idea of what 
success actually looks like: a physical or metaphorical picture of your destination, 
and how you’ll know when you’ve got there. These could be customer, commercial 
or brand measures and you will need to be clear on how evidence of success will be 
gathered. It is invaluable when judging creative output along the way, as it keeps 
the whole team on track and acts as a counter to subjective feedback.
The practical stuff. You will also need things that will affect the design, such 
as sacred cows (‘thou shalt not touch the logo’) and mandatories (‘there must 
be the following icons on the front of pack’ or ‘this is the variant colour coding 

280 How to Run a Successful Design Business
convention’) and those that will drive the project such as overall project timings 
and key meetings.
A few watch-outs too:
Try to avoid long lists of do’s and don’ts, personal likes and dislikes, and wish 
lists that could simply act as creative fog.
Avoid reams of numerical data. Derive insights from them and present that in 
your brief rather than leaving it open to individual interpretation.
Sense-check your brief thoroughly when you’ve written it, making sure that the 
story is clear and concise without conflicting information. And watch out for 
meaningless jargon words that are so often used like ‘accessible’, ‘premium’ and 
‘classic’. They are so generic as to be useless for the creative team; a few, carefully 
chosen words are much more powerful.
How do you know when you’ve got it right?
Can you answer all these questions in the affirmative?
Is it brief?
Does it focus on one key message?
Are you telling a simple, inspiring story?
Does it lead the designer from the key message, through the insight, to the 
reason to believe, with each building on the other?
Is it clear on genuine sacred cows and mandatories?
Is it jargon-free? Will everyone understand it?
Does it have your designers reaching excitedly for their pencil or mouse before 
you’ve finished presenting it?
How to help clients define their briefs
As an agency, it is well worth your while assisting your client so that they can 
clearly define their brief. The relationship is yours, so you will understand the best 
way to approach this, but the first job is to illustrate to clients where more clarity is 
required and why. Use all your creative skills to do this, by using examples already 
in your portfolio, or in the wider marketplace. You may need to use imagery in 
order to bring your point to life, or to magnify the differences between alternative 
design directions.
Bringing things to life is really the key here, and a client workshop that brings 
all key team members together can be invaluable. Break down the brief with them, 
and build it back up again. Illustrate points of conflict, and generate consensus. 
Identify gaps, and agree how they will be filled. This agreement will be invaluable 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

281
the brief
later in the project when you need the whole team to be galvanised around the 
same creative execution.
It can also be illuminating to ask customers themselves at this point, to 
understand more about their views on the brand, product or service and its place in 
their lives or – more deeply – to generate insights that allow you to innovate. More 
often than not it is preferable to generate customer insight upfront rather than to 
subject design concepts to a ‘beauty parade’-style consumer research programme 
later in the project. Often this will create a list of things that customers do and don’t 
like without any clarity: this can lead to an endless round of design iteration and 
subjective judgement. Avoid that at all cost.
The benefits of getting it right upfront
Clients often don’t want to spend money on the brief, especially during belt-
tightening times, as they feel it to be something they ought to be able to do alone. 
They may even hand you a brief and simply not understand why you can’t start 
straight away. This is where all your best verbal and visual persuasive talents come 
in. Add value for them; help them understand the benefits for time, cost, morale 
and quality of the end results of pulling that brief apart, reconstructing it and 
ensuring that it is focused on its one key audience – not their directors, not the 
end consumer, but your creative team. The creative solution is for their customers: 
the brief is for your designers. This is also where you should bring all your design 
effectiveness evidence into play. Talk to them about the benefits to their return on 
design investment of getting it right first time.
Don’t confuse the brief and the briefing
A last word. The brief may be a paper document, but you should also think about how 
to inspire your team through the briefing. Take the team to the front line, where the 
product or service or brand lives, face-to-face with its customers. Bring the whole 
experience – the current issues and the vision for the future – alive for them and 
you will generate infinitely greater understanding and emotional connection than 
leaving them with a document to read or talking it through around a boardroom 
table.

This page has been left blank intentionally

5.4 
The projects
Lorna Dallas-Conte
Tell me and I’ll forget, show me and I may remember, involve me and I’ll understand.
Chinese proverb
Why you need good project management skills
A key element in a successful consultancy is control over the type and quality of 
client projects. Robust project management skills and systems are vital to maximise 
the potential of the selected projects and to secure future relationships and further 
business. This chapter describes the stages of a project, links aspects of the design 
process to these stages, and highlights areas to improve the cost efficient delivery 
of creative business solutions. It also explores the use of your project management 
process as a powerful marketing tool.
Key success factors
Projects and their management start long before the brief is confirmed and end long 
after the solution has been delivered.
A successful project relies on:
a shared, common purpose;
identified resources and timescale;
appropriate skills and experience of key personnel;
a positive attitude towards team working;
an effective project management process.
The skills and qualities
Project management skills are often learnt through handling client projects, rather 
than through the study of a professional qualification in the subject. The basic 
skills and qualities – such as communication, information-gathering, relationship 
development, common sense – are usually inherent within an individual. They 
•
•
•
•
•
•

284 How to Run a Successful Design Business
may be further developed through a consultancy culture that encourages and 
supports the transfer of skills through good team working and professional practice 
training.
The client perspective
Clients will assume that your consultancy will be competent in project management 
as part of your professional and business service offer, and that this is backed up by 
robust systems and processes which ensure your ability to deliver.
Reassuring the client by keeping them involved and informed in a controlled 
way through a professional approach to project management helps to build positive 
relationships, keeps the unexpected to a minimum and ensures a good outcome for 
all parties, including a better understanding of each other’s businesses.
The consultancy perspective
Client projects are the soul food of a design business: they offer opportunities for 
creative challenge and staff motivation as well as business rewards. An additional, 
and sometimes undervalued, element of a project is the transfer of design and 
business knowledge between consultancy and client. This is often difficult to 
measure, but the development of a common understanding and language can be 
pivotal in achieving an outcome that is considered successful by all parties. Internal 
projects are equally important. Often running alongside client work, they provide 
enhancement of business processes, changes to the working environment and 
diversification into new areas of the market place.
The five stages of project management
The management of a project within a design consultancy will take account of the 
specialist design processes employed.
In theory, a project can be divided into five stages. In reality, a project is rarely as 
clear cut and – depending on the complexity of the range and variety of design skills 
required, the type of solution and scale of the project – it is possible for elements of 
a project to be spread across more than one stage at any one time.
However, an awareness of this simple five-stage model helps to identify 
opportunities and issues that support efficient project management:
Initiate
Plan
Execute
Control
Close.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

285
the projects
Stage 1: Initiate
The start of a project is influenced by the expectations and assumptions of both the 
consultancy and the client. The business problem is articulated, the extent of the 
opportunities for finding a solution is explored and a particular type of output may 
be discussed. The extent to which these discussions are formalised and exchanged 
in writing will depend on a number of factors, including the complexity of the 
need, the previous client-consultancy relationship and the level of risk that both 
parties are prepared to accept. This is the start of the opportunity to build client 
confidence, and it plays an important role in the continuous marketing and delivery 
of your own ‘brand behaviour’.
Client expectations
A client will be influenced by both their knowledge of a consultancy and their 
expectations of the commercial benefits of design, long before the decision to place 
a piece of work is made. These expectations will be informed by the extent and 
success of a consultancy’s marketing activity, by previous design project experience 
with the consultancy or by word of mouth recommendations. They may or may 
not be in line with the consultancy’s business offer. It is valuable, therefore, to re-
establish what these expectations are, and also the level of design experience the 
client brings at the start of the relationship.
Consultancy expectations
Understanding how a project fits into your own business strategy is also important. 
A clear knowledge of the type of projects that are within your available resources, 
competency range and expertise – as well as having the potential to generate the 
right level of profit – will help to inform initial discussions and lead you to accept 
or refuse a piece of work. Understanding and taking control of the relationship 
between the three main ‘project drivers’ of time, quality and resource is vital to 
supporting this decision (see Figure 5.4.1).
Accepting a project that is low in budget (resource), tight on deadlines (time) 
and demands a high level of attention to detail (quality) is a familiar scenario for 
many consultancies. Identifying from the start how the design solution is going to 
balance these resources will improve planning and allow the subsequent execution 
of the project to take place within the constraints.
The more complex a project is, the wider the range of activities and processes, 
the greater the resources employed, the more global the reach, and the longer the 
timescale. When combined with a reduced certainty about the outcome, it becomes 
more difficult to control the project drivers, and problems with budgets, late-
running and issues around quality will result. Lack of control will make complex 
projects more likely to be high risk, and will have an impact on the likely success 
for all parties concerned.

286 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Getting started
As a result of initial conversations, possibly a pitch and/or a brief, important 
information about the project is captured and exchanged between the parties. A 
business proposal is then generated as a firm quotation or an estimate by the design 
consultancy. This proposal articulates the stages and costs of the consultancy’s 
services, as well as its terms and conditions.
It is good practice to be as clear as possible in this initial stage so that all parties 
share a common understanding of the extent of the project. However, it is in the 
nature of a design-led project that within this certainty there needs to be room for 
flexibility and creative solutions: the extent will vary between clients, consultancies 
and projects. The degree to which the brief and the estimate are formalised depends 
on the processes of the design consultancy, the degree of complexity of the project 
and the familiarity of relationship between the consultancy and the client.
Stage 2: Plan
Transforming the brief into a plan of action involves both the client and the 
consultancy. The purpose of the plan is to articulate the key stages of the project 
and the design processes that will be used. It should identify the resources required, 
including team members and responsibilities. Finally, a timescale and the order of 
the main activities, expressed as ‘milestones’, should be identified to ensure a critical 
path through the project. Plans may be developed using software, whether simple 
spreadsheets, commercially available project management systems or customised 
software developed for your own particular needs.
Depending on the way that your design consultancy is organised and the 
complexity of the project, there may be a range of people (staff, freelancers and 
suppliers) who will all need to be in contact with the client, crossing offices, 
geographies, time zones and cultures. Each of these members of the team needs to 
be aware of the project and have sufficient information to be able to manage their 
Figure 5.4.1  Project drivers
Time 
Resource 
Quality

287
the projects
own teams of staff. This formalising of the programme of activity allows you to 
start monitoring and controlling the process, and will help to identify any concerns 
or unforeseen issues such as time considerations, conflicting business activities or 
suppliers’ needs.
Client considerations
Clients will feel reassured by the sharing and agreeing of the plan, the milestones 
for delivery, the introduction to the key staff from the design consultancy and 
the identification of an effective mechanism for communication between all the 
parties.
At this stage, it is vital to identify within the client organisation the personnel, 
locations and key systems or processes that need to be considered. Continuing 
to monitor this information over the lifespan of the project will help to prevent 
problems and hold-ups. It is also useful to gain an insight into the levels of key 
personnel and their commitment to the project. This will help you to develop 
effective relationships, and can be instrumental in anticipating potential barriers 
to success.
Consultancy considerations
The opportunity to formalise the project plan will enable you to involve and select 
the appropriate staff and other resources for the delivery the project, as well as plan 
the project into the present workload of the individual teams. To protect your long-
term business goals, it is important to take care not to overload your personnel or 
suppliers. Agreeing communication channels, planning meetings and scheduling 
the timings of client-facing activities will allow members of your team to prepare 
properly, and will maximise your ability to maintain the client’s involvement in the 
developing project.
It is good practice to include the creative team as early as possible in the planning 
process to ensure that an appropriate amount of time has been allowed to get the 
most from their skills.
Contingency
Within the proposal there will be a calculation for a contingency to allow for the 
risks associated with each particular project. It is important that, in planning the 
key milestones of the project, this contingency is taken into account. Transparency 
between clients and consultancies regarding contingencies varies. Best practice 
encourages an open and trusting relationship, where deadlines are respected and the 
impact of slippage on milestones is understood both commercially and practically 
by all parties.

288 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Stage 3: Execute
The complexity of the project and the number of different design disciplines that 
are to be employed will influence this stage of the project management process. 
The project manager has to balance a difficult combination of leadership and 
management skills during this time. Leadership skills will ensure overall ownership 
and responsibility for the project, and will protect the business and design integrity 
of the project for both parties. Management skills will enable a flexible approach 
towards the project team and will build trust. They will also encourage information 
sharing, vital to the success of the project.
Design process
Different design disciplines use different components of the design process. Following 
the briefing and planning stages – which will take account of these differences – all 
design projects will share the three activities of research, initial concept ideas and 
presentation.
Depending on the response of the client to the concepts, there will be a 
development stage which will produce a test design solution. This may be two or 
three dimensional, be physically presented or be shown in a digital format. Again, 
depending on the complexity of the project, these initial design solutions may 
need to be tested with the target users to enable further design refinements and 
presentations to be made and, eventually, a final design solution to be worked 
up.
Where other suppliers are to be used to execute the final design solution it will be 
appropriate for a specification to be developed. Some form of tendering or selection 
process will need to be undertaken to clarify further costings and to arrange for the 
final stages of the project. The client and appropriate design consultancy staff need 
to be involved at the relevant times, according to the original plan which identified 
their roles and responsibilities.
The final steps within this stage of project management will be the implementation 
of the design solution. From the initiation stage, the intention of all the parties has 
been to ensure that this happens on time and to budget. ‘Capturing’ the successful 
delivery of the project in casework is good practice, and can be useful for further 
marketing for both the client and the consultancy.
Stage 4: Control
The role of the project manager is to take control of the project from the start, 
identify key milestones, check with the project team to make sure that the project is 
following the plan, and report back. The plan will have identified the aspects of the 
project that require control, and will have identified the methods and measurements 
that will be used to monitor progress. This monitoring and control process may 

289
the projects
be captured in a range of different ways from formal to informal, according to 
the design consultancy. It may be supported through commercial or customised 
computer software, or paper systems, or a combination of the two.
Client needs
Clients need to be reassured that the project is developing to plan. By involving them 
in a timely manner, information can be shared and risks identified and ameliorated. 
Budgets can be checked and, if necessary, the project can be revised to take account 
of the most recent knowledge about the design solution and the evolving business 
needs and success criteria.
Consultancy needs
There can be tension within a design consultancy between the creative and the 
commercial aspects of the business. It is important to be clear about the relationship 
between time, resources and quality for a particularly project, and about its placing 
within the creative and business strategy of the consultancy. There can then be a 
conscious decision about whether more time can be found to work on a design 
solution from within the budget for the project, or whether there needs to be a 
further discussion with the client to review and revise any milestones.
A consultancy also needs to take control over other costs associated with the 
project, such as expenses or orders made to other suppliers. Creating control systems 
– such as an order book – and allocating responsibility for placing the orders will 
ensure that checks can be made.
Job management systems
Information about each design job or project is usually captured through a timesheet 
and then entered into a job file. The job file, or ‘job bag’, is a collation of all the 
individual contributions that make up the development of the design solution from 
different members of the design team and others. This system may be digital or 
physical, but either method relies on the integrity of the data collection: this, in 
turn, is influenced by how useful the data collected is to the design consultancy. 
Management information can be extracted from the collected data, and may be 
used to improve the efficiency of the studio and support your costings, as well 
improving the delivery of future jobs.
IT systems and software
Design consultancies use a range of software programmes, both commercial and 
customised, to support the design and project management processes. Some still 
rely on a mixture of software and paper systems which sometimes overlap and 
duplicate each other. You will need to understand which information needs to 

290 How to Run a Successful Design Business
be captured and used most effectively in order to balance the cost of the capture. 
Where a design consultancy opts to use software to support the collection of data, 
it is important that the programme integrates with other backroom systems and 
back-up processes.
Stage 5: Close
At the closure of a project it is good practice for the client and consultancy to review 
and evaluate the progress and delivery of the project. This review will capture useful 
information, and can be used to develop further work for the consultancy as well 
as to develop marketing material for both parties. It is an opportunity for the client 
to reflect on the business value of the project and its outputs and outcomes, and 
for the consultancy to maintain and develop its systems and processes, to ensure 
continual learning, and to enhance business development. It is also important to 
create a backed-up archive of material from the project which might be reusable, 
and which can easily be retrieved.
Supplier relationships may be reviewed, and any outstanding accounts need to 
be settled. The client’s ability to settle invoices should be noted, so that costings for 
any future work can take account of poor or slow payers.
A discussion between the in-house members of the team involved in the project 
will identify any necessary future improvements, and follow-up activities or projects 
can be passed to team leader or the account manager for further discussion and 
development with the client.
Conclusion
Good project management can help a design consultancy to develop both 
the business and the brand. The use of simple stage models – tailored for your 
own design discipline and company – will allow you to position your project 
management processes in a relationship with your design processes. It encourages 
the development of good relationships between client and consultancy throughout 
the project. Finally, it can be used as a powerful marketing tool.
Although project management skills are often developed through in-house 
experience, it is worth noting that it is a profession in its own right with a global 
institute and a UK association overseeing the discipline, offering qualifications and 
promoting the subject across sectors.

Predicting the future is easy. It’s trying to figure out what’s going on now that’s hard.
Fritz Dressler, photographer, designer, academic
Figuring what’s going on
There are a number of situations when design 
businesses might encounter market research. 
These include clients’ own data about their 
brand and their market, perhaps provided as 
part of the briefing process. If they don’t offer 
to provide this, it is important to ask for it to 
help you understand the market in which 
their product or service operates, and doing so 
shows willingness to engage with the client’s 
business.
Clients may then want to carry out research 
into the work you do for them, either during 
the development stages or after it has been 
exposed to the market. Rather than resenting 
this as an intrusion into the creative process, 
why not embrace it and use it to inform your 
own future work?
You could do some research of your own, to help you get under the skin of the 
consumers in the market you are working in, and to understand how they interact 
with the product or service you are interested in. Many design business already do 
this as part of the discovery or exploration phase of a project, and it needn’t be 
complex or difficult, or expensive.
You may also want to commission some research amongst your clients, or 
prospects, to get a sound and objective view on how you are perceived and how 
you could improve the service you offer.
Let’s look briefly at the broad types of research you might encounter. There 
are many research techniques, but they can be grouped broadly into quantitative, 
qualitative and desk research.
•
5.5 
The research
Don Preddy

292 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Quantitative research
A design consultancy is perhaps most likely to encounter quantitative research in 
the background information provided by a client in connection with a brief, or 
when carrying out desk research into background information on a market.
Quantitative research aims to provide robust data with statistical reliability. 
It provides information such as what percentage of people in a certain category 
think one thing rather than another, or prefer one brand of a product to another, 
and to some extent can explore why. It uses relatively large samples of people, 
or ‘respondents’ (typically in the hundreds), chosen at random from the relevant 
‘universe’ as a whole (for example, the universe of car owners, or chocolate eaters). 
By using a sample which is representative of the universe of interest, in terms of 
demographics, product usage and so on, inferences can be made about the opinions 
of that whole universe, and of sub-groups, with a statistically measurable degree of 
confidence.
To achieve this robustness, the questions have to be asked in exactly the same 
way with every participant in the research. You can ask different questions of 
different people according to their answers to previous questions, but the way this 
is done has to be exactly the same for everyone. Interviewers can’t say ‘That’s an 
interesting point, tell me more about that’, unless the questionnaire instructs them 
to do so and it is done every time.
Questionnaires can be administered by trained interviewers, or designed for self-
completion. Interviews can take place by phone or face-to-face, the latter especially 
being used where respondents need to be shown something such as a pack or a 
design for an interior, or where a product needs to be tested, or tasted. Whether 
face-to-face or on the phone, quantitative research frequently uses computerised 
interviews, with the interviewer guiding the respondent through a questionnaire 
on a computer and entering the responses. This facilitates accurate questionnaire 
delivery and fast analysis of results. Self-completion questionnaires can be provided 
online, but that depends on the whole sample having internet access; you shouldn’t 
use one method of data capture with some respondents and another with others in 
the same study.
Writing a quantitative questionnaire is a skilled task, to make sure that questions 
are clear, in the right order and avoid the trap of leading the respondent towards a 
particular answer. Interpretation of the results also requires expertise and familiarity 
with the use of statistics, as it can be easy to draw wrong conclusions.
Qualitative research
Qualitative research approaches things differently. Here, the aim is to achieve 
more in-depth understanding of the beliefs, feelings and perceptions of the target 
audience, rather than statistically robust figures. The researcher not only can, but 
must, follow up answers to questions with further enquiries and probing. 

293
the research
A quantitative interviewer does not need a thorough understanding of the 
subject of the research (although the questionnaire designer does), but a qualitative 
researcher needs to be comprehensively briefed and in many cases have an 
existing in-depth understanding of the market being studied, as well as empathy, 
understanding and curiosity.
Qualitative research uses a topic guide rather than a structured questionnaire, as 
an aide-memoire for the researcher, who will depart from it as each session requires, 
just making sure that all relevant points are covered. It uses small samples, typically 
in the tens. This is partly because of cost, but mainly because even the analysis of a 
large sample would not enable statistically robust comparisons to be made, as every 
interview will be different. The aim is to dig deep and reach real understanding.
Typical techniques are focus groups and individual interviews, although there are 
many variations on these. Focus groups typically consist of six to eight respondents, 
meeting together under the guidance of a researcher or ‘moderator’. They have 
the advantage that the views and feelings of individual respondents help spark off 
those of others, who may agree or disagree, and this can lead to a greater depth of 
understanding than may be obtained from individual interviews.
Individual ‘depth’ interviews are preferred in some situations, for example 
where a specialist sample of respondents from a small universe is required and 
they are geographically spread, or where they may be reluctant to come to a group 
venue; examples would include medical consultants and senior business people. 
They are also useful where the topic is sensitive, perhaps because of commercial 
confidentiality, or where it is personal in nature. Depth interviews are often 
conducted face-to-face, but where the subject matter is not too complex and can be 
covered in no more than, say, 30 minutes, telephone works well.
You may see the results of qualitative research in the background material a 
client provides as a part of a brief. A design business is also likely to encounter this 
type of research when it is commissioned by a client to assess consumer reactions 
to your work, at various stages in its development.
If the research includes focus groups, go and watch if you can. Focus groups 
often take place in viewing facilities, with a one-way mirror allowing clients to 
observe the proceedings first hand; ask if you can go and join them. It may give you 
a closer insight than reading the report or attending the presentation of results. You 
should still go to the debrief as decisions based on research findings are often made 
then and there, and it is better if you are there and have the chance to influence 
those decisions.
Another qualitative approach involves observational studies, or ethnographical 
research, where the researcher spends time in the relevant environment (for example, 
a supermarket, museum or other public space) watching how people behave, and 
perhaps asking them about it. It may be worth doing some of this yourself; go out 
and watch how people interact with the product or service you are working on. If 
you are working on a public space go and experience similar places for yourself, 
putting yourself in the position of a consumer. How child-friendly are they? How 
accessible for disabled people? Some ethnographical studies go to great lengths, 

294 How to Run a Successful Design Business
spending prolonged periods with small groups of people, but there is no need for 
you to go this far; an afternoon spent in fieldwork can be very informative.
Desk research
Finally, desk research, as the name implies, is done without actually going out and 
talking to people. It looks into published and other available data on a market, 
product or universe of people, to gain background information. It can range from a 
large-scale structured piece of work conducted by a specialist, down to half an hour 
on Google™. The internet has, of course, made it much easier, and the move towards 
making more and more data available, and the development of applications to 
combine datasets to explore new kinds of information, means that the possibilities 
are growing.
Again, you are likely to encounter it in background information provided 
by clients, but you can easily do some yourself to increase your knowledge and 
awareness of the market you have been asked to work in.
CHOOSING IT, USING IT
Quantitative, qualitative and desk research are fundamental parts of good business 
practice. Time spent in learning how best to use research, how to commission it 
and how to read and understand it correctly will inform and improve your design 
outputs. It will also enhance the professional relationship you have with your 
clients. Embrace it, and make it an integral part of your working practices.

9 out of 10 people daydream in meetings.
Donald Wetmore, time management and personal productivity expert
Meetings: the currency of business
Meetings are where business happens. They are the time and space where people 
work together to plan, create and deliver projects. Yet below the surface appearance 
of people sitting in a room working together live vital factors that determine 
organisational energy and vibrancy.
Critically, meetings are where organisational and project leadership lives (or 
not), culture thrives (or not), mutual respect grows (or not) and meaningful progress 
occurs (or not). Meetings are also where 
fragile new ideas live or die.
You could say that meetings are the 
barometer of organisational vitality: 
ten 
minutes 
spent 
in 
an 
average 
meeting will indicate the health of an 
organisation’s leadership and culture. 
Dr Donald Wetmore, founder of the 
Productivity Institute, reports that nine 
out of ten people daydream in meetings. 
Additionally his research shows that 60 
per cent of meeting attendees take notes 
to appear as if they are listening, and that 
managers spend over ten hours a week in 
meetings, with the majority saying more 
than half that time is wasted.
While many of us can identify with 
these findings, it shows that poor meeting cultures that waste valuable time, create 
confusion, breed disrespect and demotivate previously enthusiastic team members 
are all too prevalent.
•
5.6 
The meetings
Sean Blair

296 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Why are so many meetings dreadful?
So many meetings stink. This is hardly a new insight, but what is a better way of 
working together?
Most people have never received any formal training on how to conduct a 
meeting. Instead, they simply adopt the dysfunctional, hierarchical habits created 
many, many generations ago in less democratic times. It’s time for a fresh look at 
how we can work better together.
Although there are hundreds of kinds of meetings, from two people taking 
five minutes at the water fountain to hundreds of people in a multi-day strategy 
workshop, research has shown that the same principles, if used skilfully and 
sensitively, apply to almost every type of meeting.
Five principles of the Meeting Excellence model
Let’s begin this brief overview by looking at the five principles of the Meeting 
Excellence model. This is based on theoretical and practical research, and some of 
the source material can be found in Section 9, The Reference Library.
Excellent meetings:
Are participative: they include the right people, with full intellectual, emotional 
and energetic engagement.
Are purposeful: they motivate people with a compelling, over-arching purpose, 
and have specific and clear objectives, not agendas.
Have a process: they are designed to achieve the meeting objectives, maximising 
energy and diversity.
Use visibility: they align the energy in the room creating visible collective wisdom 
and clear actions and learning.
Are healthy: they build authentic respect for each other and deliver real learning, 
both individually and collectively. This in turn creates an energetic, vibrant 
culture.
Deceptively simple and all too rare
These principles sound simple, yet the prevailing meeting orthodoxy does not 
usually welcome full participation and is often limited by positional power and the 
vagaries of ego. What academics call the ‘action strategies’ of traditional meeting 
‘chairmen’ are often due to not wanting to look silly or lose face. These largely 
unconscious strategies seek to control contributions, and can dramatically limit real 
participation.
The ubiquitous list of ‘agenda items’ almost guarantees a disconnection with 
motivation and, by default, delivers a bland meeting process that is based on taking 
•
•
•
•
•

297
the meetings
turns to talk. It creates fertile ground for ego, and ensures that the diversity that 
is so vital for creativity remains unexpressed. Instead, why not break into small 
groups or pairs and work concurrently?
By looking at bad meetings it is clear that energy is all too often unaligned, and 
that actions and learning are far from clear. If people spend as much time after the 
meeting as they spent in the meeting, trying to make sense of what was said or 
licking wounds, it’s clear these principles are not in operation.
What each principle means in action
Participative
This is the core principle: it is a fundamental attitude and belief. The most powerful 
way of using it is to want participation, to want the joyful experience of working 
together, thinking together and creating together. Put simply, it is respect for other 
people’s presence, perspective and outlook.
‘Participative’ means:
meetings led with a state of mind that wants participation;
welcoming intellectual, emotional and energetic engagement, especially from 
those with diverse views;
participants who own the meeting’s objectives and process.
Purposeful
Know what a meeting is for. Most organisations have an over-arching purpose that 
in some way serves the better parts of humanity. In really great meetings, people 
know, believe and want to achieve that over-arching purpose, and they understand 
how it connects to a clear set of meeting objectives.
‘Purposeful’ means:
a compelling, over-arching intention;
clear, specific meeting objectives, not an agenda;
staying focused to achieve the common objectives.
Process
Why sit round a table and talk (or not) when there are so many better ways to work 
together? Meetings cover huge terrains of information, tricky decisions, differing 
views and perspectives, and apparently contradictory positions; having a process 
means planning time for all the right things to happen in a logical order, and in a 
way that allows all to contribute.
•
•
•
•
•
•

298 How to Run a Successful Design Business
‘Process’ means:
designing a set of steps to allow everybody to participate in achieving the 
objectives and getting results;
designing steps to maximise energy;
harnessing diversity of views.
Visible
Using large wallcharts will make the meeting process visible. It will help people’s 
energy levels if they are focused at the same time on the same part of the journey. 
It will also reassure people that ‘the thing I want to cover will be covered at the 
right point’. Progress, or lack of it, will become obvious, and it will help to keep 
the collective brain awake: everyone will be seeing the same data at the same 
time.
‘Visible’ means:
aligning the meeting participants’ focus on the same thing at the same time;
creating a map, or wallchart, of the ‘collective wisdom’ as the meeting 
progresses;
creating clear actions and clear learning points.
Healthy
Our effectiveness is directly related to the culture we work in. Healthy cultures are 
good, and dysfunction in meetings often equals dysfunction in what follows those 
meetings.
‘Healthy’ means:
getting the best from each other through deep and authentic respect;
using every meeting as the way of constant and ever deeper learning;
using meetings to create energy for action;
listening, and respecting the fact that everybody has a piece of the truth.
How to run great meetings
These five principles operate best inside the four phases of a meeting:
Establish Clear Objectives
Ensure your meetings are serving your organisation’s goals by defining and 
agreeing clear objectives for the meeting. Before your meeting write, in very clear 
language, a statement of what the objectives of the meeting are. An objective is 
best written with a clear active verb: ‘To agree… ‘To create…’ and so on. Begin 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
1.

299
the meetings
the meeting by reviewing the objectives with all of the participants and, if the 
objectives are not right, be prepared to modify them. During the meeting, review 
the objectives periodically, especially if the meeting goes off-track.
2.	 Have a Clear Process
Make sure that meeting time is well spent by following a process designed to 
allow the meeting objectives to be fulfilled. Before the meeting, plan a process 
to allow the intended objective to be achieved and be prepared during the 
meeting to change it if the objective changes, or the process is not working. 
Give meeting participants clear steps by which they know the meeting objective 
can be achieved, allowing their full contribution.
3.	 Clarify Actions
Clarify the real actions that people want and need to take because they own 
the action and the responsibility. Make time in the meeting for participants 
to write down and share the actions they would like to take because they are 
passionate about them. Explore where the energy for action is, and align actions 
with people’s passions.
4.	 Learn
Grow the culture of your organisation by using every meeting as the central time 
and place that learning occurs. Conclude meetings by reflecting on learning 
about:
Me (what have you learnt about yourself in the last hour).
It (what have you learnt about the subject at hand).
Us (what have you learnt about the team in the room).
It only needs one sentence for each, written on a Post–It™ note. It takes a 
couple of minutes and, when done properly, it is powerful stuff for growing team 
effectiveness and vitality.
•
•
•

This page has been left blank intentionally

O wad some power the giftie gi’ us
To see oursel’s as ithers see us
Robert Burns (1759–96), poet
Look within
We know we are doing well when our 
clients come back for more, and we know 
we aren’t doing so well when we lose a 
client. But around those polar extremes, 
the rest can be a dangerous mixture of 
guesswork and wishful thinking. We all 
need to know what our clients think about 
us and our abilities, and it’s all too easy to 
make assumptions.
There are two main ways to find out exactly what they think. The first is to focus 
on project delivery and client satisfaction; if you’re not already doing it, you should be 
carrying out regular post-project reviews. The second is to look at the bigger picture by 
conducting formal surveys into the relationships you have with your clients. They are 
not mutually exclusive, and both have an important part to play.
Most clients are very willing to share their opinions of how your work, your 
value and your service match up with their expectations. They see post-project 
reviews as good housekeeping, an essential part of basic working practices. They see 
client surveys, on the other hand, as part of advanced business management, and 
they will be impressed that you have taken the trouble to invest in them.
Post-project reviews
You might already have internal ‘wash-up’ meetings after a project has been 
completed. You might even be asking your clients what they thought. But are you 
doing it in such a way that you can record the results, and compare them with the 
results from projects for other clients? Or over time for that same client?
•
5.7 
The feedback
Shan Preddy

302 How to Run a Successful Design Business
You don’t need to over-complicate the exercise, nor do you need statistically 
significant quantitative data. All you need is regular, comparable findings. Here’s 
how:
Decide on your Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), or measurement criteria, for 
external, client-facing areas. You might want to know how your clients thought 
your business performed on quality, creativity, strategic thinking, scheduling 
and delivery, budget control, responsiveness, technical knowledge. You might 
also want to know what they thought about individual team members. These 
KPIs will differ from business to business; the important thing is to get them 
right for you.
Decide on your KPIs for internal use; again, they will depend on your own 
business. You could consider overall project profitability, or actual time spent 
against billed time, or final bought-in costs against budget.
Create a simple template which allows you to rate each project against both the 
internal and external KPIs. If you decide to work with a numerical system, such 
as 1–10 scores, make sure you also include room for comments and thoughts.
Although you won’t be able to access much information at this point, you might 
also want to start recording the initial impact of your design intervention for 
use in promotional casework and design effectiveness awards entries. This is 
often a good time to ask clients for testimonials.
Carry out the post-project review with the client, looking at your external KPIs. 
This is best done face-to-face or on the telephone by a senior member of staff, 
preferably one who has not been directly involved in the project. However, if you 
tend to work on a very large number of small, low-budget projects – especially 
if each individual client gives you a lot of work – simple self-completion 
questionnaires might be the answer.
Next, look at the internal KPIs.
Log the results and benchmark them against previous reports for that client 
individual, for that client company and for all of your clients together.
Act on the findings, maintaining and reinforcing what you are doing well, and 
fixing any less-than-perfect areas.
Ask the team members for suggestions on general improvements to internal 
processes, policies and practices.
Finally, remember to tell your clients that you are acting on the results of their 
feedback, so that you ‘close the loop’.
Client surveys
In addition to a review of every project you work on, it is good to carry out a more 
formal survey among your clients from time to time to look at the bigger picture.
What might you ask them about? On top of questions about your product, your 
service and your value for money, how about why they chose to appoint you instead 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

303
the feedback
of anyone else? And where they would position you in the market, according to 
your strengths and weaknesses? Or which other design firms they are working with, 
or have worked with recently, and how you compare? Wouldn’t it be good to know 
what they think they will be looking for from design firms in the future? And what 
their selection processes are likely to be?
Client surveys are best conducted qualitatively so that the interviewer can 
probe responses and ask the client to clarify or expand the information given. 
In-depth telephone interviews usually get the best level of client compliance: it’s 
easier to agree to a 15-minute telephone conversation than to commit to a face-to-
face meeting or a focus group, or to complete a lengthy questionnaire. However, 
short self-completion questionnaires will still provide enough material to work on, 
especially if they are properly designed and are user-friendly.
Some companies include their hot prospects in their surveys, and people who 
they have presented or pitched to but failed to convince. Some take it even further 
and extend it into a 360° perception audit by including staff, suppliers, strategic 
partners and relevant opinion-formers such as the press.
If you have very limited budgets, you can carry out client surveys yourself. 
However, you will get better results if you ask an external consultant to do them. Not 
only are you unlikely to have professional skills in-house for interviewing, analysing 
and getting constructive feedback, but a badly conducted survey can be damaging 
to the relationship. It’s hard for clients to comment on your failures to your face, 
for example, and it can be just as hard for you not to react with counter-criticism. 
But if you give the job to the right, suitably skilled consultant, you might find that 
your clients will say things that they wouldn’t dream of telling you, including that 
they think you’re wonderful. Now, wouldn’t that be worth knowing?

This page has been left blank intentionally

Don’t accept your dog’s admiration as conclusive evidence that you are wonderful.
Ann Landers (1918–2002), advice columnist
Design effectiveness
Proving that design can add value to business has been the Holy Grail for many a 
designer over the last few decades.
Effectiveness is not the antithesis of creativity, however. If you were to offer 
designers the option of marketing themselves on an effectiveness ticket or a creative 
ticket, most would give it some serious thought. There’s attraction in both, and 
the trick is to use both: they are not mutually exclusive. Prowess in creativity and 
prowess in effectiveness act as magnets, but to very different audiences.
Creative awards are an important way to benchmark yourself against the industry. 
They are an indicator of what your peers – who are normally the judges – think of 
your work in the creative context. They gain 
trade press coverage and are a magnet to the 
next generation of creative talent coming out 
of our universities. They are also the means 
by which creative teams can be rewarded for 
great output although, in the most part, that 
output is not linked to commercial result.
Being able to prove the effectiveness of 
your work, on the other hand, is a magnet 
to prospective clients. As one winner of a 
design effectiveness award put it: ‘The award 
put us on the map. It acts as a beacon for 
clients.’ When a consultancy can lay claim to 
an idea that has achieved impressive levels of 
effectiveness, it opens doors to other clients. 
It’s a very different way of talking about 
design work, but one that a left-brained budget-holder will engage with instantly.
The discipline of forcing yourself to think about your work in tangible, 
measurable terms is exactly that: a discipline. Some designers aren’t created with 
•
5.8 
The proof
Deborah Dawton

306 How to Run a Successful Design Business
this as a default setting. However, given the nature of the competitive markets 
design businesses operate in, you need to leverage as much as possible those things 
that make you stand out. A market positioning based on effectiveness will never let 
you down.
Not a black art
Design effectiveness is not a substitute for the creative process, but a way of working. 
Measuring the impact of any piece of work or thinking requires you to know your 
starting position, to have set very clear objectives, and to stick around long enough 
to evaluate the outcome. Then you apply the lessons learnt to the next piece of 
work, and the next.
Measuring the effectiveness of your design interventions is the means by which 
you can help your clients to make informed decisions about the future of their 
brands: for them, the battle is never over. As Jack Welch, Chairman and CEO of the 
American company, General Electric, once put it: ‘Change before you have to.’ As 
long as your clients’ competitors are out there, your clients will need change, and 
they will need you. As your knowledge of their sector increases along with your 
knowledge of what works and doesn’t, the more valuable you become. Importantly, 
for the very same reason, you also become much harder to replace.
Only for big agencies?
Larger agencies have greater resources to put behind measuring the effectiveness 
of their design outcomes, and bigger projects to supply the evidence. In practice, 
however, it is often easier for small firms with smaller design projects to prove the 
effectiveness of their work. The challenge in large-scale projects can be to isolate 
and determine the specific impact of design, as opposed to that of PR, marketing 
and advertising, all of which usually accompany big launches.
Smaller agencies also have the benefit of servicing smaller clients for whom 
design is the only option: they simply don’t have a budget for anything else. The 
impact of design on a small client business can be monumental.
Delivering corporate objectives
Measuring design effectiveness is not always about measuring sales or financial 
data: it’s about measuring the impact of your design interventions against all of 
your clients’ corporate objectives. What might these objectives be? There is a huge 
range. To reach a new market, perhaps. To reposition a brand into the quality sector. 
To aid expansion into new territories. To secure listings with all the big retailers. 
To increase a brand’s share of its market. To increase sales value while reducing 

307
the proof
manufacturing costs. To increase a museum’s footfall and drive its shop sales. To 
change the behaviour of a hard-to-reach group in society. To enable patients to inject 
higher doses of insulin painlessly. To get people to their destination on time.
No reputable designer should start work without a clear understanding of what 
needs to be achieved, and this requires you to check that the outcome you’ve been 
asked for is actually the right one. It’s a bit like going to the doctor, having decided 
yourself what’s wrong, and asking for the prescription you want. All self-respecting 
doctors will carry out their own diagnoses and prescribe the appropriate remedies. 
As a designer, you have an obligation to make sure that any self-diagnosed client 
has got it right, and that’s before you prescribe your remedy. Not only is it your job 
as a design professional to do this, it also ensures that the control in the relationship 
resides with you. Given that you’re the expert with the demonstrable track record, 
you need to be driving the process.
The clients that commission you can be several steps removed from their 
Board of Directors, and their interpretation of corporate objectives can, frankly, 
sometimes be dodgy. To produce effective design, you need to avoid that all-too-
familiar meeting when you sit there on the receiving end of information that, had 
it been available at the start of the process, would have sent you down a completely 
different route. Question their intent, and encourage them to focus on the project’s 
outcomes (the results) and not on the outputs (the items you have designed). Using 
your experience and expertise, recommend the best route to take and don’t be afraid 
to offer them only one. How many times have GPs offered you a variety of drugs 
to cure your problem? If they did, might that not undermine your view of them as 
experts? Experts solve problems. Become your client’s corporate problem slayer!
Driving more budget your way
Think about this. Your client commissions you to do something for her. The results 
are great. She uses that to justify her spend to her boss. Her boss is impressed with 
the return on their investment in design. In the next round of budget discussions, 
her budget is increased. She commissions more work… and so on. Simple. Get your 
clients involved in talking about design effectiveness internally. It makes them look 
good, they become valuable within their own businesses, and the value of design 
to that business is profiled. If you do this time and time again, you will change 
corporate attitudes to design.
Bringing inexperienced clients with you
Most people base their decisions on the experience they’ve had to date: it’s the 
only frame of reference they’ve got. Designers, on the other hand, leapfrog into the 
unknown, often leaving their inexperienced clients behind. It’s no wonder they 
won’t run with the idea that you ‘just know’ is going to change their lives. Take 

308 How to Run a Successful Design Business
smaller leaps. Consider what the objectives are, and plan very carefully how to get 
them there. Growing clients’ interest in design effectiveness will lead to better briefs 
and to their involvement in all the right places. It will also lead to their gratitude 
each time you deliver.
Tackle it or kick it into touch?
The big question: do you embark on the discipline of design effectiveness or not? In 
truth, you can’t avoid it. Your competitors are mastering the discipline. Your clients 
are expecting it. And, led by the UK’s Design Business Association (DBA) and Design 
Council and the US’s Design Management Institute (DMI), the major design bodies 
worldwide are becoming more and more vocal on the design industry’s ability to 
change the fortunes of those who commission effective design. The aim is make 
design effectiveness the default setting for every client, and for every designer.

5.9 
The recognition
Stef Brown
You can never be guaranteed good roles because of an award, but I think your profile and net worth 
as a performer has to do with awards, unfortunately.
Minnie Driver (b. 1970), actress
Choosing your red carpet
Utter the words ‘what about entering awards this year’ in any agency and you’ve 
unleashed a can of worms. Which schemes should we enter? Which work? How 
much will it cost? How much time will it take? Can we measure the return on 
investment? Does anyone really care if we win awards?
The design industry is awash with hundreds of creative awards schemes, not 
to mention business impact and client sector specific awards. Awards make good 
business sense for the awards bodies 
themselves, but do they make good 
sense for agencies?
It’s difficult to know if awards 
translate directly into increased revenue, 
but they can be an important profile-
raising and marketing channel. People 
might spot you’ve won an award. That 
might push them to your website. Then 
they might call you.
There are pros and cons to entering 
awards. On the plus side, awards can 
raise your profile. You can use them to 
promote yourself to clients and prospects. 
They are good for staff morale, and a bit 
of silverware can act as a spur to creativity. 
They cement your client relationship, and 
can help you attract talent. But entering 
awards is expensive, they take up a lot of 
non-billable time and, if you don’t win, 
you risk disappointing your clients.
•

310 How to Run a Successful Design Business
When planned carefully, with a strict eye on budgets and on maximising 
your exposure post-win, awards can be an exceptional route to supporting your 
positioning and building your agency’s reputation. The most important thing to 
remember when tackling them is to be practical and realistic, or you risk spending 
all your non-billable time and cash in just this one activity.
Choosing the right awards
The starting point should be your positioning. Are you aiming to be the most 
creative agency? The most effective? If you are single-mindedly determined to build 
a creative positioning, only enter creative awards. Your bulging trophy case will be 
testament to its position.
Next, you need to align your awards strategy to your business strategy, your key 
audiences and what they want. Do you need to attract talent to your agency? Then 
creative awards might be right. Trying to attract new clients? Then business impact 
awards could help. Trying to get work in a particular sector or new geography? Then 
look into client sector or foreign awards schemes.
Once you know what you’re trying to accomplish, it’s time to do the research 
and plan your year. Choose your awards schemes, then apportion an annual budget 
for entry fees, production costs, copywriters and ceremony attendance with your 
clients if you win. Many deadlines are around the same time of year, so create a 
timeline of activities. You might want to make someone responsible for managing 
the awards process and budget.
How to submit entries and win
Every award scheme has different entry rules and criteria, but there are some things 
to consider to increase your chances of winning:
Be ruthless when deciding what work to enter; it’s better to focus on fabulous 
entries for two or three outstanding pieces of work than a dozen good pieces.
Review the previous years’ winners to give you a feel for the type of work the 
scheme recognises.
Research the judges and the type of work they do to understand their judgement 
approaches.
Select categories which attract fewer entries to increase your chances of 
winning.
Don’t use agency branding on your entries so judges won’t pre-judge based on 
preconceptions about your agency.
Get your senior people on judging panels to better understand how winning 
entries are selected. It’s also a good profile-raising exercise.
•
•
•
•
•
•

311
the recognition
Understand and follow the entry criteria and rules. By all means stretch the 
boundaries and be creative with your entry, but make sure the nuts and bolts are 
covered or risk disqualification.
Creative awards
No matter the category, try to show your work in the context for which it was 
created. Above all, be visually impactful. In some creative awards schemes judges 
will look at hundreds of entries in one sitting, so make sure your work grabs them. 
You should also consider including short captions on any imagery.
As to the writing bit, be succinct: judges have little reading time. The judges 
see your work in front of them so don’t spend time on flowery descriptions of the 
design solution; focus on the background and the design challenge. Creative awards 
increasingly ask for evidence of success, so try to include some business impact 
data.
Finally, many agencies spend a lot of time and money ‘packaging’ their entries 
into beautiful boxes so the judges have a spectacular reveal of the work. Don’t 
bother. The judges will only see the contents.
Business impact awards
Business impact awards are all about proving that your design is effective, that it 
helped your clients achieve their business objectives.
You need to set out the business objectives, and then prove how your design 
has positively impacted each of those objectives. You also need to explain why your 
design achieved success over and above any other marketing activities. Try to set 
things in context: a large sales uplift in a rising market is less impactful than a smaller 
sales uplift in a declining market. Don’t spend too much time describing the design 
solution as this is about proving the effectiveness of the design. And make sure that 
all your data has a source and date, even if the source is the client’s internal data.
In acknowledgment that clients market their brands in an integrated manner, 
there are increasing numbers of awards schemes for multi-channel recognition. You 
may want to consider working with your client and all its agencies on a cross-
agency entry.
It does take time to source all the information and write the entry and you will 
need the full support of your client, but the resulting entry can be used for your 
agency’s business development activities whether you win an award or not.
Marketing your winning entries
Winning an award is great, but it’s only as good as the people who know about it, 
and you have to assume that most of your target audience won’t. The effort you put 
in post-win can be as important as the entry itself.
•

312 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Press relations activity: news release
Most awards schemes issue a news release about all winners to the key design and 
marketing publications, so avoid those: journalists don’t need to receive the same 
story from multiple sources. Consider regional press, client sector trade press, 
foreign press and blogs, and ask your client to issue a release about the win. Make 
sure you send out your release within one or two days of the awards ceremony or 
it’s old news. And remember to get your client’s sign-off on the release before you 
send it out.
Thought-leadership
Why not think about leveraging your learnings by writing an opinion piece? It’s 
always better to try to get the piece published as a third party endorsement, but if 
this isn’t possible, self–publish on your website or blog. Wherever possible, articles 
should have a practical take-away, things the reader can act on.
Business development activities
Some things to consider:
Post the press release and any actual coverage to your website, and direct 
people to the link. Make sure you get permission from publications, or you risk 
contravening copyright.
Is the case study already on your website? Or in your credentials and capabilities 
presentations? Revise it to include information on the award win, and include 
the awards scheme’s logo as an endorsement.
Do you already have a printed case study or brochure and can’t afford reprint 
costs? Create a sticker to merchandise the win.
Get a testimonial from your client. Draft something for them to edit and sign 
off, to capture the right messaging. Use it on your website, case studies and 
credentials.
‘Dress’ your reception area and meeting rooms with details of the win.
Add a sentence to all email footers, along with a link to the case study on your 
website.
Add 10–15 minutes at the end of a meeting to take your existing clients through 
the award-winning story.
Direct marketing
You’ve got a fantastic story to tell. Send it to your clients, prospects, suppliers 
and referrers. Remember that brand owners are inundated with information 
from agencies, and getting cut-through is all-important. They want relevant and 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

313
the recognition
insightful communication that focuses on their needs, so always state the business 
case. Ultimately, prospects respond positively to beautiful design that works.
Your people
Finally, does everyone know the award-winning story? Why not have the core team 
and your client present the story to them over lunch? What about investing in a 
branded cake? Or rewarding the core team with a team-building activity? Celebrate 
your win, and don’t forget to tell everyone how you plan to market it externally.

This page has been left blank intentionally

5.10 The planet
Sophie Thomas
Tomorrow is our permanent address.
Marshall McLuhan (1911–80), educator and media theorist
Design and sustainability
Sustainable design is not about hair shirts, unbleached paper, products made from 
someone else’s waste or some other clichéd response. Sustainable design, just like 
any other design, has to be good design.
Design is the process that lays the foundations for the creation of every man-
made object or system. It has to be aesthetically pleasing, catch the attention, have 
purpose and be a well-resolved solution to a problem that needs material expression. 
There is too much bad design in the world: rule number one is to deliver high-
quality design, which resonates with the user, creates a reaction, is seen as adding 
value and has a lasting quality.
But sustainable design is much more than this. It must deliver good design 
whilst also addressing the big issues of our time: climate change, resource depletion, 
accessibility, pollution, waste, ethical issues like fair trade and child labour. To do this, 
designers have to recognise that, as creators of things both physical and virtual, they 
have a huge impact on the way people 
consume. The design community can 
have a very significant influence on the 
environmental footprint of consumers, 
and can help clients understand how 
they can do more with less.
The issues that face us will throw up 
very different challenges to the ones we 
are used to dealing with. New disciplines 
such as ethical design, which promote 
positive change by working with social 
communities, are becoming more and 
more evident. In the past, companies 
who dismissed this lobby paid dearly 
for their avoidance, and have had to 
•

316 How to Run a Successful Design Business
work hard to repair their reputation. Other issues such as resource depletion – the 
increased scarcity of the raw materials we need to produce our work – now require 
designs that make ‘more with less’. As citizens, we are confronted every day with 
big challenges that demand change in our habits, and design must change too. 
We find it all too easy to deposit our concerns on the doorstep of our studios and 
not return to them until we leave to go home but, in order to affect real change, 
sustainability must become part of the DNA of the design process and take its place 
as a continuous, research-led tool.
There is no greater issue now than climate 
change
Most of us are concerned about climate change. The loss of the planet’s resources 
and the accumulation of waste worry us. Although there has yet to be a calculation 
of designers’ contribution to the global carbon footprint, it is probably much larger 
than we dare imagine. Our creations shape our society and sell lifestyles. They dress, 
feed and shelter us. They move us from A to B. The environmental trade-off for all 
this will be considerable, and we have a duty, therefore, to use our skills to change 
the way we create. The design sector should lead the way, or at least keep up with 
best practice of other industries and government initiatives. It can no longer blame 
the client for not requesting it, or fall back on the myths of expensive production 
and inferior results as reasons for continuing with unsustainable design practices.
The following environmental statistics illustrate the awful truth:
At the current rate of global warming, a quarter of the world’s species will be 
extinct by 2050, and 70 per cent of the people alive now will be around to watch 
it happen.
The harvesting of tropical and sub-tropical rain forest timber specifically for 
papermaking is projected to increase by 70 per cent by the end of the decade.
The estimated remaining official oil reserves represent 40 years of global use.
There are projected to be around 150 million climate refugees by 2050.
We are only a couple of generations from losing access to key elements, like 
copper, nickel, zinc and indium, which is used in LCD screens and is essential 
for the production of solar voltaic panels.
Decisions made during the design stage profoundly influence the entire life of a 
product and determine 80–90 per cent of its total lifecycle costs.
	
Adapted from study first published in Nature Journal, January 2004. Lead author Chris Thomas, Professor of 
Conservation Biology, University of Leeds
	
Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC)
	
Society of Petroleum Engineers (SPE)
	
International Panel for Climate Change (IPCC)
	
Mike Pitts, Chemistry Innovation Knowledge Transfer Network (KTN)
	
AT&T report, December 1995
•
•
•
•
•
•

317
the planet
Statistics such as these must influence us and our decisions. The design industry 
sits between raw materials and producers, companies and consumers, ideas and 
landscape. We visualise and specify, designing with purpose to create better lifestyles 
through new products and services.
The International Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) has called for a global cut 
of 80 per cent in greenhouse gases by 2050. Our contribution as designers must be 
in the adoption of integrated sustainable design practices. It is insufficient to give a 
passing nod to the ‘green’ lobby by way of a token effort. It requires a reappraisal of 
every aspect of our work from concept development to the processes, the materials 
and the final outcome. The fundamental beliefs and principles of the studio and its 
designers should be reassessed so that a change in practice ideology becomes the 
way of thinking and working. This involves tracing every step of design practice 
and evaluating each one in terms of its sustainable accountability.
Design teams working within companies have less room to adopt or introduce 
sustainable practice, but this does not mean that it is impossible. Companies 
now recognise the kudos of having good sustainable credentials and the general 
public, their customer base, is better acquainted with – and knowledgeable about 
– the dangers of unsustainable practices. They are becoming more aware of what 
constitutes ‘dirty’ and wasteful manufacturing. Based on thorough research, an 
argument for a sustainable basis for design products can be put forward. Ethical 
principles are now frequently being followed when working for certain product 
manufacturers, such as tobacco companies, and embracing eco-morality can expand 
and deepen our own design expertise.
What can you do?
There are a number of levels on which designers can positively address these big 
challenges:
You can seek to influence and educate your clients by challenging briefs so that 
positive social, environmental and economic outcomes are achieved.
You can rethink an approach to a client’s brief in a way that delivers the same or 
enhanced outcomes in a different way.
You can use your skills and understanding of materials to choose better resources 
for your work.
You can support sustainable procurement by selecting suppliers who have 
environmental and ethical management systems, or by only using sustainably 
certified products such as Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) timber, or by working 
with suppliers who are actively investing and innovating in green products and 
systems.
You can change your own working practices to ensure you minimise your own 
environmental footprint, and you can help the wider design community to 
•
•
•
•
•

318 How to Run a Successful Design Business
think about how they can address the sustainability agenda in practical and 
positive ways.
One lone designer can make big waves. Through open-source networks, like-
minded contacts can be made. Use these to give support, advice and a wealth of 
knowledge that can bolster your convictions (see Figure 5.10.1). There is a greater 
influence in a well-informed peer group than in trying to change the world’s bad 
habits on your own.
The process
The design process starts with considering how to get from brief to product. 
Historically, this was a linear process. The brief was handed in, the contract signed 
with the designer intermittingly going back to the client with progress reports and 
for stage approval. The signed-off product would then go to the manufacturer, who 
would then create the designed product for the client and the consumer.
Sustainable design thinking, however, should be a closed loop or ‘cradle-to-
cradle’ process. This means that when the product is no longer needed by the user 
or consumer it can be disassembled and recycled back into useful raw material with 
minimum effect on the environment. This can only be done if the designer has 
built this legacy into the design. When considering all the stages of the design of 
Figure 5.10.1  Links and influences

319
the planet
a product, there is a need to understand where the raw materials come from (its 
‘chain of custody’) and also where they will end up, or how they can go back to 
being useful again. This knowledge forms the foundation of sustainable design (see 
Figure 5.10.2).
Information and misinformation
The more we know, the better we are able to argue against bad practice and 
misinformation. Sustainable technology is developing at a rapid pace and we 
need to keep up with the industry’s innovations. Finding out who has expertise 
in processes and materials is important as is discovering trustworthy sources of 
knowledge through networks and different global media. We need to be able to 
spot the wolf in green clothing, the sham of ‘greenwash’, a practice of promoting 
an environmental fact that has no relevance or is out of scale. We need to be able 
to search for and recognise true green materials by establishing their credentials. 
This requires setting up a good relationship with suppliers so that you can demand 
sustainable alternatives and start an updatable sustainable materials library.
Your clients will ask questions. Is it an affordable solution? Will I like it? Will the 
consumer like it? Will it promote my product/sell my service? We have to be ready 
with the answers, together with some questions of our own. Has the client’s carbon 
footprint been reduced? Does this design have good environmental credentials?
The key to turning a design studio or team into a sustainable one lies in acquiring 
and sharing information which can inform your response to the client and which 
may result in a rethinking of the brief. The result, if done well, will do ‘more 
Figure 5.10.2  The chain of custody

320 How to Run a Successful Design Business
with less’ and will demonstrate your knowledge of materials and environmental 
indicators. You will be able to embrace systems such as ‘cradle-to-cradle’, to look 
at eliminating waste and reducing the toxicity of the design through the careful 
choice of materials. And giving feedback to clients, through external footprinting, 
or impact tools that can measure performance, is a useful means of validating your 
processes.
Systemic sustainability has to become a normal habit. It should be there at the 
earliest concept, and should be a reference for all stages of design right through 
to production and beyond. Clients are beginning to ask for evidence of improved 
sustainable performance and, as stricter legislation comes into play, business integrity 
will start to appear on agendas. Sustainability and environmental responsibility 
must be considered in both the design and the making: as designers, we must keep 
thinking, researching, persuading and talking about them.
In the end you need to be able to ask yourself ‘have I created more with less?’ 
and ‘does my design have real value and true quality?’ With good sustainable design, 
the answer for both will be a resounding ‘yes’.
HOW TO CLEAN UP YOUR STUDIO
Waste management
monitor waste and set targets;
consider how all waste (including hazardous waste) is dealt with through legal 
and responsible means;
sort all waste, and research local recycling services;
replace small waste bins with communal recycling bins.
Energy use and efficiency
implement a ‘switch off’ campaign for electrics, with people being responsible 
for turning off their own computer and screen;
change to energy-saving light bulbs and install a smart meter to see exactly 
where your energy goes;
replace water coolers with water filter tap or plain tap water;
change your energy tariff to a green supplier;
look into alternative energy web-hosting sites and energy-efficient server 
computer systems.
Transport
use public transport and bikes whenever possible when travelling to meetings;
use bicycle or motorcycle couriers when practical and set up a green-accredited 
taxi account;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

321
the planet
set up a company loan scheme for purchasing bikes to encourage employees 
to ride to work: look into the availability of green transport tax-incentive 
schemes.
Studio stationery and materials
use double-sided printing and reuse envelopes;
use electronic formats when possible;
consider studio purchases such as stationery, toilet paper, cleaning products.
General
write and display a studio environmental policy, and keep it up to date;
create a ‘green officer’ who can help implement systems and enforce them;
make sure the environmental agenda is included in meetings.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

This page has been left blank intentionally

Section Six: 
The Designers

This page has been left blank intentionally

The designers
The following stories from 20 different companies, all listed in the UK Design Week 
2009 or 2010 Top 100 Surveys, demonstrate how to run a successful design business 
in practice. They represent most of the major design disciplines, and they range 
from small to large and from single-focus to multi-disciplinary. They were asked to 
reveal the secrets of their success, responding to the simple question: ‘How did you 
do it?’
What do these companies have in common? Talent and a driving will to 
succeed, for sure. But they have also taken a number of brave decisions along the 
way, streamlining and focusing their offers and investing in help from external 
advisors. Some of them learned the hard way, encountering setbacks and hardships, 
but they picked themselves up and went on to become leading firms.
The design market is constantly changing, with arrivals, departures, mergers and 
acquisitions. By the time you read this, some of these companies might well have 
changed along with it. However, as a spotlight on what it takes to make it in the 
design consultancy arena, these stories are both enlightening and inspirational.
300MILLION 
Nigel Davies 
Managing Director and Founding Partner 
www.300million.com
We started for all the usual reasons; greater control of our creative output, lack of 
opportunity to go further in our existing agency, the desire to do it our way. It may 
be a bit soon to say we’ve ‘run a successful business’ or tell you ‘how we did it’, but 
we’re happy to share the main factors that underpin our progress to date: people, 
planning and place.
First, people. The three founding partners came from creative backgrounds, 
working at leading UK design agencies and spending evenings in the pubs of 
Clerkenwell (drinking, watching football, planning world-domination – that sort of 
thing). Most agencies start like this. But for us, the final impetus came from a more 
unusual source. We formed an electro-rock band. Five tracks and one gig into our 
glittering career, we realised we were never going to headline at Glastonbury. But 
we were excited and inspired by creating music, and by the mutual trust involved 

326 How to Run a Successful Design Business
in performing. We quickly came to the conclusion that we would be better applying 
our complementary skills and qualities to something we were really good at ... 
running a brand design consultancy.
We have always planned. From initial scraps of paper and Post-It™ notes on the 
kitchen table to the advisers we regularly consult with, we are aware of the need to 
work on our own brand. Define the vision, develop the culture, set financial goals. 
It’s the hardest part of the job, and it will never be finished. But we know we need 
to be our own toughest client to ensure our business constantly evolves in a clearly 
defined direction.
Our final priority when we started (other than the small matter of finding a 
few clients) was place. We took a lease on a 1,200 square ft floor in a converted 
warehouse, a bold statement that we were serious and intended to grow. In the 
early days, the space definitely played a part in helping us win clients. Location is 
important, too: the many delights of Exmouth Market help to make clients’ visits 
to us even more of a pleasure.
Maybe when we truly feel that 300million is ‘successful’ we’ll stop developing as 
people, let planning take care of itself, and never again bother to give the old place 
a lick of paint. But I don’t think we’ll ever say, ‘This is it. And that’s how we did it.’ 
In fact, it’s about as likely as a reunion tour for the band. 
999 DESIGN GROUP 
Richard Bissland 
Founding Director 
www.999design.com
999 Design Group Limited was established in 1982, after my business partner and I 
bought a small design business out of the Rex Stewart Group portfolio in Scotland, 
and renamed it. Looking back, the fact we called it ‘Design Group’ from day one 
probably displayed a confidence we had no way of validating. However, having 
Disciplines
Brand strategy
Brand definition
Naming
Brand design
Print implementation
Digital implementation
Company description
300million is a brand design consultancy. We position 
ourselves as ‘pragmatic dreamers’. We aim to improve our 
clients’ businesses by delivering brilliant answers to their 
most important brand questions – the ones that will make or 
break their businesses. 
Office locations
London
Year established
2003

327
the designers
your livelihood on the line, not to mention the mortgages and welfare of your 
people, is a wonderful stimulant to perform to your best.
Our early success came from securing contracts with major local businesses and 
persuading them to pay us quickly: cashflow is king in every young business. We 
worked all hours, often doing 60–70 hour weeks, and delivered high-quality work. 
This got us noticed by national accounts, and after a relatively short time we had 
growing UK brands like Reebok, Co-operative group and BT on our books.
The management style of the agency was: work hard; grow and consolidate 
‘step at a time’; hire the best creative people we could find; and leave profits in the 
business. This built a strong balance sheet for rainy days. In business, it always rains 
at some point.
It duly poured. In late 2001, Orange, who had been a major client for six years, 
was bought by French Telecom and changed marketing direction. We lost around 
£1.3m of annual turnover in a month. It was that quick: we had way too many 
eggs in one basket. However, our balance sheet and resolve were strong enough to 
see us recover after a year. Trimming the workforce was an extremely stressful task, 
and some good people lost their jobs. You find out a lot about yourself, and other 
people, going through this process.
Our success and longevity is based on a genuine interest in seeing our clients 
prosper. Many have remained with us for years: that takes commitment on both 
sides to work through the good times and the not so good. Today, our client spread 
is broader and the business is much less susceptible to the loss of a major client. In 
retrospect, I wish we’d fully embraced the development of digital communications 
a few years before we did. Inexplicably, we were too cautious. If I were doing it 
all over again, knowing what I know now… I wouldn’t. My business would be 
manufacturing and product-led but with a high design philosophy, offering a much 
greater return than a people-based, service business.
Disciplines
Branding
Marketing
Literature
Digital
e-commerce
Packaging
Events
Company description
Established since 1982. Independent UK-wide digital and 
brand-based communications business. Blue chip public and 
private sector client list. Three UK Design Effectiveness Award 
wins. 
Office locations
London, Glasgow, Manchester 
Year established
1982

328 How to Run a Successful Design Business
BLUE MARLIN 
Andrew Eyles 
CEO and Group Managing Director 
David Hodgson 
Global Human Resources Director 
www.bluemarlinbd.com
We met in our mid-twenties, a special time because we felt the invincibility of youth and 
we were just starting to dream. We recognised a shared ambition and entrepreneurial 
spirit. We were lucky: that special connection doesn’t happen often. Working at an 
agency in London, we had reached the limit of what we could achieve there, so Blue 
Marlin was born out of dissatisfaction with the old place and a lot of scotch.
In the small hours of a cold April morning in 1993 we had a big idea: to create 
a world-class, independent, international design consultancy. To cement our bond 
we exchanged a sock, the pair of which still graces a wall in one of the offices. 
Backed by capital from family members, we started work off Andrew’s kitchen table. 
We quickly won three clients (and 16 years on, they are still our clients) and a few 
months later we opened our first office.
In the early days we relied to a very large extent on gut feel, and it got us places 
very quickly. We were – and still are – instinctive, decisive and entrepreneurial. 
Conventional wisdom dictated that when we expanded from our base in Bath it 
should’ve been to go to London, the heart of the design industry. We opened up 
in Australia instead. The decision was based on client business, personal lifestyle 
aspirations and economic nous. Australia provided the springboard into Asia and 
the success of those businesses funded further international expansion, and the 
growth of our business to London.
We may be unconventional, but we are rigorous. We do our homework, we 
keep a close eye on cashflow and we are always in it for the long term. We’ve never 
borrowed from the bank and we invest profits back into the business.
The real secret to our success is our people. Without them we would not be in 
this book now. We’ve managed to articulate our vision and ambitions, and have 
attracted people who like the entrepreneurial environment and want to come along 
for the ride. The strength of our partnership plays a very important role too. Again, 
this is about people.
Culture is important to us. From that first sock swap we have been a family, and 
‘family’ remains one of our core values. We are all in this together and we have a 
very no-nonsense attitude, where everyone gets stuck in.
Disciplines
Brand strategy
Brand innovation
Structural design
Brand identity and graphic design
Brand environments
Realisation

329
the designers
BOXER 
Julian Glyn-Owen 
New Business Director 
www.boxercreative.co.uk
The now not-so-secret successful habits at Boxer.
We have grown from a small regional agency into a global brand design agency 
with offices in the UK and US in the space of 12 years. The team believes that there 
are three habits that have contributed to our success over the past decade.
Firstly, the creative and client-side teams have grown to become a cohesive and 
well-matched creative collective, the core of which has been working together for 
over a decade. Ideas, as we all know, don’t care where they come from, so our ability 
to honestly challenge one another throughout the creative process has become the 
norm. At the end of the day, it comes down to an underlying trust and belief in the 
collective experience of our combined individual expertise.
Secondly, the team works extremely hard to understand the market challenges 
to our clients’ brands. A good example is McDonald’s, with whom Boxer has had a 
relationship for over eight years, answering increasingly larger and more influential 
briefs. The most significant result for our business was winning the last global 
quality packaging project in 2007, designing the look of all McDonald’s packaging 
worldwide. This project was won in a competitive pitch against 20 other agencies, 
some of whom were amongst the world’s biggest brand design agencies. The winning 
of this business remains a powerful demonstration of an agency understanding the 
challenges faced by a client’s brand. Our creative response simply answered those 
challenges better than others, and this was possible because the team understood 
the brand.
Thirdly, we’ve made an active effort to capitalise on our global brand experiences 
through our own initiative called ‘Soak It Up’. The teams who head out to markets 
around the world are actively encouraged to sketch, photograph or drag home 
design that catches the eye. The studios then share these designs between them as 
a resource for ongoing work, making the creative process more inspiring and fun 
and allowing the teams to soak up the inspiration, colour and experiences of global 
travel. Over the years the team has built its own valuable, personal and highly 
stimulating pool of materials that subsequently provides more powerful creative 
Company description
Blue Marlin is the home of landing big ideas, which are 
at the heart of everything we do. We pride ourselves on 
delivering relevant, unique and consistent experiences 
across brand touch points worldwide. Blue Marlin is an 
independent integrated brand design consultancy with an 
international network. 
Office locations
London, Bath, New York, Sydney, Bangkok
Year established
1993

330 How to Run a Successful Design Business
stimulus for ongoing work. This has the obvious added benefit of bringing very 
happy memories to the studio environment as we print up a lot of these images into 
huge montages and use them to decorate the studio.
CHECKLAND KINDLEYSIDES 
Jeff Kindleysides 
Co-Founder 
www.checklandkindleysides.com
David Checkland and I started our business in 1979, and at that time we had no 
real plan of what we felt we might achieve. Naively, we set about creating our own 
version of what we believed a design partnership to be. The important things to 
me were craft, art and the aesthetics of design. David was the pragmatic one who 
played out his design on a work bench and who believed in a robust and analytical 
approach to business, even though at the time there were only two of us.
From the outset there was just something very right about what we were doing, 
and although we did what came naturally to us, it proved to be unique. Using our 
combined talents in unconventional ways, having no fear, and advocating that to 
create in 2D was the same as creating in 3D, we believed that designers needed to 
have minds to embrace both. Not only that, we felt it was impossible for us to be 
fully creative without having our own workshop to develop our ideas. One thing 
fuelled the other, and our thoughts were often demonstrated to our clients with a 
full sized mock-up.
We believed in tutoring talent – the younger the better – and we invented 
our own ways of doing things. Through this, a culture developed that had craft, 
practicality and responsibility running through the veins of each and every person 
in the company, irrespective of position or job role. This in turn created a solid 
commercial foundation and, as we began to grow and our ambitions became greater, 
we were able to confidently create and realise beautiful things in the knowledge 
that they would be financially viable.
Importantly, we invested in equal measures in our creative ability as well as our 
business operations. We invented our own accounting systems that gave us the 
ability to monitor every project and, in turn, the performance of the business week 
on week. This gave us the freedom to make intuitive decisions about the future of 
our client relationships and our company.
Disciplines
Brand design
Company description
Medium-sized brand design agency specialising in global 
brand design and management, working primarily on 
high street brands in the food, beverage and personal care 
sectors.
Office locations
Birmingham, Chicago
Year established
1996

331
the designers
We have always sought to win clients not projects and, without a doubt, this is 
the single most important driver in our success. It’s important to understand that 
our culture demands that we do what’s right every time without fail, whatever it 
takes, because it not only carries our reputation, but that of our clients too.
DALZIEL AND POW DESIGN CONSULTANTS 
David Dalziel 
Creative Director 
www.dalziel-pow.co.uk
Dalziel and Pow was formed in 1983, after John Pow and I had worked together at 
McColls on a variety of retail and leisure briefs. We had a desire to be independent, 
exploiting our skills, knowledge and methods in a more direct and personal way.
The business was formed on a sound financial footing with work lined up from 
the outset, mostly interior design for bars, pubs and clubs around London. We 
began to attract attention from retailers interested in how we might help them 
improve their offer, and our first major retail client was Chelsea Girl and Concept 
Man, a business that would be rebranded and reinvented as River Island in 1987. 
This transformation took the high street by storm, creating a lot of interest from the 
market, and we began to develop a strong portfolio of retail clients.
An ability to maintain the commitment of key clients – over two decades and 
more in some cases – helped us grow from a team of four in 1986 to over 80 in 2009. 
The growth has been steady and gradual, built on live projects with guaranteed 
income. This frugal approach has helped the company trade through various market 
conditions, both boom and bust, avoiding the pitfalls experienced by many of our 
competitors.
With John’s retirement in 1999, we restructured the company and created a 
broader, more inclusive management team to take the business on to the next phase 
of growth. Ros Scott stepped up from Operations Director to Managing Director and 
continued to develop the company with the pragmatic, considered approach that 
had served us well up to that point.
Disciplines
Interiors and retail
Branding and graphics
Consumer engagement
Research and forecasting
Company description
Checkland Kindleysides is an independent design company 
specialising in consumer-facing design and research. The 
company has a craft-based culture working in both 2D and 
3D disciplines, and is also recognised for its expertise in 
sustainable retail design.
Office locations
Leicester and London
Year established
1979

332 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Since 2000, we have worked internationally across Europe, China, India, USA 
and the Middle East. Global work is easier to win: you are respected and welcomed. 
There is less emphasis on the pitch process and more on your track record in 
delivering creative services that bring profit. This has been a revelation. Now, up 
to 40 per cent of our commissions come from outside the UK. We are seen as the 
experts, a position gained through honing our skills in our highly competitive local 
market. We now employ as many as 15 nationalities on our staff and opened our 
first international office, in Shanghai, in 2008.
The key to our success is the work. We build relationships by providing solutions 
which are rewarding: our design works. We are looking forward to the future with as 
much enthusiasm as we had in 1983, but now also with authority and experience.
DESIGN BRIDGE 
Sir William Goodenough 
Executive Chairman 
www.designbridge.com
Design Bridge was launched in 1986 after the takeover of Allied International 
Designers by Addison prompted a breakaway team. Unusually, there were five 
founders, who spent the early years travelling around Europe at least two days a 
week building the business, mainly in Holland, Germany and Scandinavia and, to 
a lesser extent, France, Italy, Spain and South-East Asia.
There were very few companies actively doing this in the late 1980s and it is still 
unusual today, especially for privately-owned design businesses. That culture is now 
embedded: nearly 24 years later, with offices in London, Amsterdam and Singapore, 
we work in 35 different countries, and employ 21 different nationalities.
The Amsterdam office started in 1996 when it became difficult to develop the 
business on a weekly-trip basis. Having lived in Singapore in the early 1980s, I had 
contacts in Asia – many of whom are still working with us today – so it was natural 
to open an office there in 2004 to have a base in the fastest growing region of the 
world. Both offices were developed by individuals who had been working in Design 
Bridge for a number of years, and the Board backed them in these ventures.
Disciplines
Brand definition
Brand environments
Brand communications
Company description
A leading international consultancy, focused on design which 
connects clients with consumers. We have many examples 
in our portfolio where our work has delivered a 20 per cent 
to 70 per cent uplift in sales. Our client coverage extends 
around the globe and we have built projects worldwide. 
Office locations
London, Shanghai
Year established 
1983

333
the designers
There are other factors that have determined our success. The financial 
structuring of the business was based around a number of individuals, rather than 
one or two people, which was unusual in the design industry. From the outset, there 
was always the ethos that Design Bridge was more important than the individual. 
This is still the case today.
If you go down this track, you have to learn how to manage the complex issues 
that inevitably arise. We set high standards across all the areas that go to make up the 
business and how they inter-relate from a management perspective. Design is a craft 
industry, and for most of us a vocation. We do our best to offer everyone a career, by 
developing a clear line-management system, and a great number of our staff have 
been with us for more than ten years. Success is a people issue; we employ the best 
people in the industry, and then back and encourage them in their careers.
Our values remain the same but we have evolved yearly, developing new offers 
to match our clients’ needs. Fundamental to our success is our very real passion for 
design, and a clear understanding of the role which creativity plays in the success 
of our clients’ businesses and brands.
DRAGON ROUGE 
Ian Farnfield 
Chief Executive 
www.dragonrouge.com
Starting a new London business at the height of the recession in the early 1990s may 
seem like madness, but to us it was a chance to prove that there was a better way 
to realise the power and influence of creativity and strategy. We set out with strong 
beliefs for an agency that worked with clients in a more insightful, forward-thinking 
way, and whose people enjoyed high levels of involvement and empowerment.
Our approach then, as it is today, was to help clients perform, compete and lead. 
This requires understanding and insights, not just into people, markets and businesses 
as they exist today, but also into the opportunities and challenges facing clients in the 
future. We have never been constrained by the norms of the design industry, and have 
led the way in matching high levels of strategy with creativity, in developing a rigorous 
approach to innovation alongside design, and in integrating consumer and corporate 
perspectives. As brands became more global, we evolved our informal network into 
a true international partnership with a common spirit, culture and way of working. 
Developed organically, we are now one of the world’s leading brand agencies.
Disciplines
Branding
Company description
International branding agency, working across a wide 
range of consumer touchpoints.
Office locations
London, Amsterdam, Singapore
Year established
1986

334 How to Run a Successful Design Business
While our commitment has been to deliver the best possible results for our clients, 
we have always tried to be smart commercially, investing properly in developing our 
people, expertise and influence. We are more entrepreneurial than other groups and have 
the flexibility to do what is best for our clients. Our independent ownership structure, 
with all the shareholders working in the business, has enabled us to take a long-term 
view, rather than pursuing short-term financial targets. We’ve always funded ourselves 
and have a thriving, well-resourced business where we control our own destiny.
Agencies need to be flexible and prepared to change, but getting the timing 
right is important. For example, clients are often slower than we would imagine in 
investing in new opportunities and challenges. In areas such as trend-forecasting, 
sustainability, cause-related marketing, employee engagement and digital 
communications, we were offering expertise long before clients really valued it. For 
some time, we’ve been educating rather than consulting.
We knew what we wanted to stand for, and what was important to us. We 
delivered what clients needed, not just what was easy to sell them, and we put great 
work and staff motivation first in our priorities. This is the best route to commercial 
success in both the short and long term.
ELMWOOD 
Jonathan Sands 
Chairman 
www.elmwood.com
Looking back at the defining moments in our success, it is true that we have enjoyed 
lots of luck. This said, there is no doubt that the harder we have tried the luckier we 
have become. And herein lies what makes Elmwood, Elmwood: ‘restlessness’. It seems 
that no matter what successes come our way, we are never satisfied. We want to win 
Disciplines
Brand identity
Brand style
Digital communications
Packaging design
Product design and innovation
Printed literature
Retail environments
Company description
Dragon Rouge has in-depth knowledge and proven expertise 
in brand strategy, design and innovation. With us you will 
find a unique fusion of strategy and creativity, smarter 
insights and brilliant ideas focused on helping products, 
services and corporations to be the best they can be.
Office locations
Dubai, Hamburg, Hong Kong, London, New York, Paris 
and Warsaw
Year established
1991

335
the designers
everything. The tenor of any business is governed by the persona of the boss and it is 
perhaps no surprise that I have been described by a client as ‘a competitive little sh**’! 
This will to win, or rather a fear of failure, has been a significant driving force in our 
development and forms one of Elmwood’s many mantras in our phrase There is no 
finish line™. It is a fundamental truth that all businesses are taking part in a race that 
nobody can ever win. Success is only ever in the moment, whether it be a bountiful 
awards night, a significant client win or a record profits year. You can never sit back 
and think ‘we have made it’: you always have to have your eyes on the next prize. The 
status quo does not exist, and standing still is the quickest way to go backwards.
Being competitive and never being satisfied is one thing but being true to a set of 
values is another. Success is not about growth for growth’s sake. To move forward, you 
often have to take one step back. Your values are like the roots of a tree rather than 
the branches that you see. If you mess with the roots you die, but sometimes a good 
pruning of the branches can lead to better growth next year. On several occasions 
now we have turned down work when we have disagreed with the strategic intent 
of a project, only to then win the work back further down the line when our point 
of view turned out to be right. Being true is hard, especially when the dollar signs 
are big, but the only thing you have to sell as a consultant is your integrity. In my 
experience doing the right thing has always led to bigger bucks in the end.
My final words of advice are to be good-humoured and to give back to the 
industry, but be humble in doing so. It pays tangible dividends beyond altruism. 
You really do reap what you sow.
JKR 
Andy Knowles 
CEO 
www.jkr.co.uk
There are three phases that have characterised our development, one step at a time.
We started jkr in 1990, just as the remarkable multi-disciplinary, multi-national 
design empires built by pioneers like Rodney Fitch and Michael Peters were crashing 
with the bursting of the economic bubble of the 1980s. The end of a boom isn’t the 
Disciplines
Brand consultancy
Brand owners (Make Mine a Builder’s tea and Good Cheer 
Beer)
Company description
On the back of winning more DBA Effectiveness Awards 
than anybody else ever, we describe ourselves as ‘The 
World’s Most Effective Brand Consultancy’.
Office locations
Chicago, Edinburgh, Leeds, London, Melbourne and 
New York
Year established
1989

336 How to Run a Successful Design Business
obvious time to launch another design business but, by specialising in packaging, 
we felt we had a chance to excel. With value for money high on every client’s 
agenda, perhaps it was time to take a risk.
We got lucky, landing some high-profile projects early on and set out our stall 
with design that got noticed. The telephone started to ring and things went quickly 
from there, pretty much by word of mouth. Inside a year or so we’d moved to bigger 
offices and almost 20 staff.
That first phase was exhilarating and exhausting. An ‘all hands to the pump’ 
mentality bound us like brothers-in-arms, but many of our relationships outside 
work were suffering and we saw we had to spread the load. This was the beginning 
of the second phase. Instead of making us slow and expensive, as we initially 
feared, supporting designers with professional project and technical managers was 
a catalyst for growth. Specialisation gave us the ability to win new clients and to 
develop enduring partnerships, which is what most major clients actually want.
Despite great team spirit and some brilliant, dedicated people, we plateaued 
at around 50 or 60 people until we realised we would only grow by getting 
organised. We initially attempted to improve our way of working using consultants. 
Unfortunately, when we introduced their recommendations they made us slow and 
inflexible. So we put a cross-functional team of our own people together and they 
came up with a simpler system that continues to this day. By delivering consistent 
quality and improved productivity we became better, faster and cheaper and no 
longer fell back exhausted, whenever we’d experienced a surge in workload.
We’ve taken delegation and teamwork to a higher level in our third phase. 
Teamwork hasn’t replaced the need for individual effort, of course, but in a deadline-
driven business, sharing the pressure produces a productive calm that is attractive 
to talented colleagues and clients alike. It’s hard to understand what took us so 
long, but then everything looks easy with hindsight.
LIVING GROUP 
Duncan Shaw 
Group Creative Director 
www.living-group.com
Vision, vision, vision… the three most important considerations to run a successful 
agency. Vision to understand how your business can develop in the future, vision to 
know that in tough times, there will be better times around the corner and finally, 
vision to keep an eye on all aspects of your business.
Disciplines
Branding and packaging
Company description
Design that gets noticed and chosen.
Office locations
London
Year established
1990

337
the designers
The Living story originally started on 18 October 1972, but let’s fast-forward 
32 years to June 2004, when my wife and I purchased the business from her 
parents and relaunched it in London. Kate had previously been a trader at UBS, 
a global investment bank and I had been Creative Director at Springboard. We 
were both looking for a new challenge. With just the two of us sitting across a 
desk from one another, we started out life as a design agency doing all things for 
all people. Our overriding objective was simple; to do a really good job for our 
clients.
From the outset we have always taken advice from industry experts and in 
2006, we followed the recommendation to specialise in what we really knew 
best – providing brand and communications to the financial and professional 
services sector. This seemed like a brave decision at the time, and we were 
nervous about losing clients who did not fit into that category. However, as time 
passed, we grew in confidence and new clients warmed to our carefully crafted 
proposition.
Specialisation, aligned with our creativity, the commitment and dedication 
of our team and our strong financial acumen has attributed to our growth. 
We doubled in size year after year, growing to a team of 25 today. We foster a 
culture of openness and honesty with our clients and have an acute attention 
to detail, with a reputation of getting things right first time. In 2009 we moved 
to a group structure expanding our external offering across four key disciplines: 
Living Designs, Living Digital, Living PR and Living Reporting. We call it joined-
up communications.
If we were to do it again tomorrow, we’d probably have the courage to specialise 
earlier and not give jobs to the first people who walk through the door. Finally, if 
we had one piece of advice for anyone thinking of starting a creative business… 
be prepared to put every ounce of your heart and soul into it if you want to be a 
success. And don’t forget to have vision!
Disciplines
Branding and identity
Literature
Digital
PR
Reporting
Company description
Living specialises in joined-up communications for the 
financial and professional sector. Our clients, based 
globally, benefit from our team’s inherent knowledge and 
understanding, which delivers outstanding brands and 
communications.
Office locations
London, Hong Kong
Year established
2004

338 How to Run a Successful Design Business
MEDIA SQUARE: includes Lloyd Northover, 
Holmes & Marchant, Arken, 490 
David Worthington 
Chairman 
Lloyd Northover Group  
www.mediasquare.co.uk
There are no right or wrong ways to grow a design business: there is only the way 
that is right for you. This means doing what you do well, and getting someone else 
to do the rest. This is my story.
I set up a business, Worthington, in 1980 simply because I always thought I 
would. I had no strategy; I just left work one day and started the day after in my 
spare room. I slowly built a list of clients and, 16 years on, we had 35 people, 
produced good work, won awards and made a profit every year.
Come 1996, I was looking for a new challenge. We sold to the people who 
owned (but did not understand) Conran Design Group. Our strategy was simple: 
merge our businesses, put Conran Design Group back on the map, enhance the 
value for the owners, take a slice for ourselves.
This took four years, and it was the most exciting period of my working life. We 
travelled the world, worked on great projects, won awards and made remarkable 
profits. Ten years on, there’s 200 or so alumni who still talk well of those times. 
However, once the earn-out concluded, the market got tougher, my own incentive 
reduced (plcs don’t understand post earn-out motivation) and performance declined. 
We persevered, but one by one I made trusted people redundant until it was my 
turn. Not pleasant, but an experience.
Today, I chair Lloyd Northover and Holmes & Marchant, part of the marketing 
services group Media Square plc. They are both great brands which, like Conran 
Design Group, have previously been bigger: the cycle starts again. Slowly but surely, 
with good managers and people, we are swinging in the right direction. That we 
will succeed is undoubted and, when we do, it will be down to the same sentiment 
that drove Worthington and Conran Design Group before: people and purpose, 
together with the sense that we are doing something worthwhile and it’s fun.
Disciplines
Branding
Packaging
Retail design
Company description
Media Square is the fifth largest UK-based quoted 
marketing communications group. We are experts in 
advertising, design, marketing, public relations and 
research. We work to make our clients’ brands more 
valuable through the implementation of creative ideas.
Office locations
UK, Barcelona, Dubai, Singapore, Hong Kong, Shanghai
Year established
1975

339
the designers
What is my advice? Be clear about what you want: independence, money, 
better work, a nice office, fame. Imagine what the business will look like when it’s 
delivering those goals: size, clients, recognition, people and culture. Draw a route-
map, and refer to it frequently. Employ people who are far better than you, and 
identify what they will get from the adventure: if they succeed, you will too. And 
follow your instinct. It’s all you have.
RUFUS LEONARD 
Neil Svensen 
CEO 
www.rufusleonard.com
We launched Rufus Leonard back in 1989. At the age of 26 I had the overwhelming 
urge to do something for myself. Working with my friend and co-designer Darrel 
Worthington, we began with a couple of clients and some shared workspace. Quite 
quickly we started to get work by word of mouth. We were driven by delivering high 
quality and real stand-out value. We always knew we wanted to do something of 
note, and over time, this has evolved into a desire to create and develop connected 
brands.
Our heritage lies in pure brand and design. We’ve always had stable foundations 
and regular referrals and, over time, this has grown into the solid roster of key 
clients we have today. The launch of our digital offer in the mid-1990s was a 
key moment for us. We developed a model that worked and was still viable after 
the first great boom. Since then we’ve evolved a distinctive brand and digital 
proposition that we believe has real uniqueness. As a result, we have a far more 
integrated and holistic client offer today... not to mention almost 100 people in 
London and Dubai.
We put our clients first and care about what we do. I can remember many 
sleepless nights thinking about the finer detail of a project, and I wasn’t the only 
one. We created a contagious culture in our early growth years and we’ve always 
been pretty good at finding and keeping great people.
The internet boom was a time of massive growth. Around 1996 we developed 
some initial digital capability. Then the boom arrived and, without exception, our 
main clients turned their attention to the web space. We spent considerable sums 
getting to grips with it, and within about six months revenues from digital projects 
were over 50 per cent of our total. We had a few near misses, one involving a digital 
infrastructure project for a major financial organisation. But without enduring the 
highs and lows of this period, we wouldn’t have our own unique perspective on the 
digital channel – or our highly developed offer.
You never always know what’s round the corner, so we’ve learned how to use 
share options as a way of attracting and incentivising key talent – whilst staying 
in control. Because our seniors are still all active practitioners, we’re learning to 
celebrate and champion the art of delegation.

340 How to Run a Successful Design Business
SEYMOURPOWELL, a Loewy Group company 
Dick Powell 
Founder and Director 
www.seymourpowell.com
Seymourpowell was formed osmotically rather than built to a pre-conceived 
business plan. The two of us, Richard Seymour and I, had both been through 
the break-up of our former businesses and found ourselves sharing a common 
workspace in Fulham. Me, a committed product designer, Rich on the run from 
advertising. Within a few months it was very clear that we had complementary 
abilities and we increasingly worked together, or at least Rich found himself 
dragged into my projects. Rather than operate as two solus traders, we created 
the umbrella company Seymourpowell, moved into adjacent premises recently 
vacated by the graphics company from whom we rented, and continued to trade 
as freelancers... but with the image, ambition and shared staff of a slightly bigger 
business. Two years later, having established the relationship worked and we were 
winning interesting work, we officially pooled our resources and became a single 
company. That was in 1984.
Against an industry background that was somewhat dry and striving for 
professional acceptance, we felt a bit dangerous and different – less ‘good design’ 
as the profession understood it, but more creative, fun and adventurous, But it was 
not just a question of style because innovation was our mantra then... just as it is 
now.
From the start, we got involved building a brand: working with industry bodies, 
speaking at events, writing articles and ultimately taking design onto prime-time 
TV. We really wanted Seymourpowell to be famous and worked hard at it.
There are two key factors in our success. First, it took a major setback before 
we realised that, if we were to grow, our senior people needed to operate more 
autonomously, winning and doing the work and owning the client relationship. And 
second, from the very beginning of Seymourpowell, we focused on the upstream 
part of the process (the product strategy, user research, brand, market context and 
Disciplines
Brand
Digital
Company description
Rufus Leonard is a highly innovative brand and 
communications business, specialising in digital. Offering 
a full service mix, we’re experts in bringing brands to 
life and managing consumer interaction on and offline. 
We are an award-winning, independently-owned agency 
working across financial services, telecoms, professional 
services, utilities and the public sector.
Office locations
UK, Dubai
Year established
1989

341
the designers
rationale) rather than on the downstream delivery of finished products. We never 
wanted to be labelled as a production design and engineering company and could 
see our competitors embracing that. As a result, we are quite a diversified design 
and innovation business doing everything from trains and digital futures, to FMCG 
products and packaging.
We look back on our mistakes and setbacks and, while it was tough at those 
moments, we wouldn’t change their outcome. Ultimately, they helped create what 
we are today.
SMALL BACK ROOM 
Callum Lumsden 
Creative Director 
www.smallbackroom.co.uk
Lumsden Design Partnership joined forces with Small Back Room in November 
2008. This was not a merger, or an acquisition; it was a strategic decision by both 
agencies to expand their individual offer into new business sectors and to create an 
important adjunct to their core propositions.
Founder and Joint MD John Rushton started Small Back Room, a graphic design 
agency, in 1977. John and his business partner Ian Tasney have succeeded in 
building the business into a Design Week Top 50 agency, providing brand creativity 
aligned with strategic consultancy to clients on a global basis. The core offer of Small 
Back Room has historically been based around the property sector, and focuses 
particularly on branding and strategic consultancy for clients from Crown Estates 
for Regent Street through to Northumberland Tourism.
I founded Lumsden Design Partnership in 1995. We’re best known for our 
retail design work for clients such as Lakeland, Habitat, Gap and M&S, and are well 
regarded for work in the cultural sector for clients such as Tate Modern, London 
Transport Museum and British Museum.
Fundamental to this whole approach has been the enablement of a crossover 
of talent, creativity and process allowing both companies to learn from each other, 
as well as to offer current and prospective clients a far more compelling offer. In 
Disciplines
Innovation
Strategy
Brand
User research
Product and transportation design
Structural and branded packaging
Company description
A design and innovation company with all the 
disciplines necessary to deliver successful innovative 
products (durable and FMCG) to market.
Office locations
London
Year established
1984

342 How to Run a Successful Design Business
simple terms, the process and strategic talents of Small Back Room have enhanced 
the creativity of Lumsden, and vice versa.
An important and contributing factor to the success of this initiative has been the 
decision to maintain the high-profile name of Lumsden and to create a separate, but 
integrated, brand within the agency named ‘Lumsden at Small Back Room’. This has 
enabled us to introduce some of the other core skills from the agency, such as brand 
engagement and on-screen technology, creating a different offer which a specialist 
would find difficult to achieve. Having this ability to plug into other teams has also 
enabled me to win clients who are looking for a wider selection of skills. The benefit 
to Small Back Room has been the creation of a wider client base, a significant increase 
in revenue and an introduction to new business sectors not previously available.
In essence, the pairing of the two agencies has allowed us to integrate our 
individual specialisms, tailored according to project demands, and enables us to 
market an integrated offer to existing and potential clients around the world.
START 
Darren Whittingham 
Co-founder 
www.startcreative.com
Mike Curtis and I founded Start in 1996 as a new brand and digital agency, with a 
single-minded plan to put ideas at the heart of our work. With only limited practical 
experience in managing a company, we found a base in Covent Garden and set out 
to limit risk and avoid debt by not paying ourselves for the first year. We surrounded 
ourselves with talented people – creatives, lawyers, accountants – and built strong 
relationships with clients. We kept our heads down and worked hard and by 2001, 
with an average year-on-year growth of 79 per cent over five years, we ranked 73 in 
The Sunday Times Fast Track 100.
With 50 people and a turnover of £5m, we moved to larger premises in 
Holborn. Our work became increasingly multi-disciplinary, and our services 
expanded. We entered the top 10 in design, marketing and digital leagues, and 
Disciplines
Brand identity
Brand communications
Internal communications
Environments
Exhibitions
Retail interiors
Interactive media
Company description
An integrated design consultancy delivering outstanding 
service, strategy and creativity.
Office locations
London
Year established
1977

343
the designers
our rapidly increasing workload took us to around 100 people. Producing streams 
of award-winning work, we began exploring international markets and searching 
for complementary acquisitions. To sustain growth, we restructured the company 
into a holding company and trading company. In 2004, we moved to our spiritual 
home, Soho, and have now expanded internationally, with clients across the globe 
and offices in Dubai and Hong Kong.
It’s a tough marketplace, getting tougher. We continue to work hard at attracting 
the most talented people, and have surrounded ourselves with highly regarded non-
executives, advisors and industry gurus. We focus on rigorous creative and financial 
management, and relentless relationship-building. We are investing in next-
generation management, in young and hungry digital creative talent and in other 
skill sets such as brand environments, artist representation and event management. 
The alignment of brand and digital services is irreversible, and we have evolved to 
include digital marketing, brand experiences and brand environments to provide 
360° creative communication solutions. Creating and promoting clarity and 
differentiation around our offer is more important than ever.
Start is not built on a traditional model; we are a dynamic creative ideas business 
that sets its own agenda. We remain independent, not overly swayed by competitors, 
and adaptable to market needs. Our simple proposition of ‘Ideas made well’ continues 
to guide what we do: great creativity from great people with a passion for what they 
do. We are outperforming the market, and are determined to champion our industry 
across the globe while staying true to what we set out to achieve. We still feel we are 
at the beginning: The Start. It’s an incredibly exciting place to be.
TAYBURN 
Simon Farrell 
Managing Director 
www.tayburn.co.uk
In March 2009, Tayburn celebrated its 30th birthday. This was quite a milestone for 
the agency; indeed, quite a milestone for any creative agency. Yet, despite a huge 
sense of pride and achievement, there were no lavish parties or showy celebrations. 
Why? Because we knew that the couple of thousand pounds spent on such festivities 
could mean the difference between us making a profit for the year or making a loss.
Disciplines
Brand
Digital
Retail communications
Company description
An ideas-led integrated approach for brands in online, retail 
environments and communications. Start: ideas made well.
Office locations
London, Dubai, Hong Kong
Year established
1996

344 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Now this might not seem like a great insight into how to run an agency but I 
thought there were some telling pointers behind this seemingly simple anecdote.
Firstly, we knew what our likely profit would be at the end of the year. It may not 
seem like rocket science, but most agency costs are fixed and we operate in an industry 
typified by its ‘project-by-project’ nature. It’s vital that you are on top of forecast income 
as much as possible. We’re lucky to have a few large clients that provide us with a 
steady income of work. But there are no guarantees, so we make sure every team within 
the agency understands their expected contribution and reviews progress regularly.
Secondly, we knew that the profit would be marginal. Again, that doesn’t 
sound like a ringing endorsement of a well-run agency, but the backdrop to that 
performance is the worst recession since 1929 and a dramatic loss of income from 
clients hit really hard by the downturn. Our response was to accommodate their 
new requirements (rather than letting them find a solution elsewhere) and focus 
new business activity on a small number of sectors where we thought we could 
claim a competitive advantage. So far it seems to be working, fingers crossed.
And finally, it matters that we don’t make a loss. Tayburn has always been 
managed with the long run in mind. That means thoughtful planning, prudent 
investment and ideas on succession. It may not seem that exciting yet despite the 
caution or, more accurately, because of it, we have made a profit for 30 consecutive 
years. It’s not always been that big, but it’s been there. And if we can keep that track 
record intact in this very difficult year, then we can live without the big party.
Hopefully, things will be rosier when we’re 50. We’ll have a big knees up then.
THE ALLOY 
Gus Desbarats 
Chairman 
www.thealloy.com
The Alloy was launched in 1999. We had an exciting, turbulent birth when the 
owners of my previous company refused my offer of a management buyout and 
implemented what can only be described as a fundamental business re-engineering 
exercise. The outcome left us all jobless, some more temporarily than others. The 
Alloy was ‘plan B’. I offered the eight best people the opportunity to join a new 
Disciplines
Corporate identity
Brand packaging
Corporate reporting
Digital
Company description
A brand and design consultancy dedicated to effective 
ideas.
Office locations
Edinburgh, Manchester, Istanbul
Year established
1979

345
the designers
business opening soon in prestigious new offices being set up in my living room. To 
my surprise, everyone accepted and we have never looked back.
Our success since then is due to the contributions of many talented people 
pulling in a common direction, and so it is probably worth focusing on the core 
elements of this direction.
One of The Alloy’s founding strategic ambitions was to build a brand with clear 
innovation values that would outlast both myself and my co-founding partner, 
Nick Vessey. From our experience together at BIB in the 1980s neither of us wanted 
the company to lose momentum when the time came for us to step back.
The brand ambition is followed through by the way we put design (and 
designers) at both the heart and head of the business. Our culture reflects my belief 
that industrial designers should think and act like leaders.
This belief is also reflected in our ownership model. The Alloy’s second founding 
ambition was to become employee-owned, a bit along the lines of John Lewis. 
Design is a people business and doesn’t need huge amounts of working capital, so 
we saw this route as the best answer to many of the barriers to second generation 
businesses that we believed were holding back our profession and industry.
In addition to setting up a more organic succession, the other aim of the 
employee ownership structure was to encourage loyalty. To deliver a unique offer in 
a people business, one needs to train. To avoid training the competition, it helps if 
people want to stay. To make this more likely, we have always tried to offer career 
paths in the business. Not everyone has stayed but, mostly, the right people have. 
Some have actually left and come back.
The outcome of this is a challenging environment, 100 per cent focused on 
understanding, evolving and delivering best practice in what we do. Clients seem to 
like the pitch, and tend to come back as well, so we must be doing something right!
THE TEAM, a Loewy Group company 
Julian Grice 
CEO 
www.theteam.co.uk
In 1984, a small band of people assembled in a former church in Putney to start 
work. We had aspirations to do great work and create a stage for diverse creative 
Disciplines
Product design
Interaction design
Innovation strategy 
Company description
The Alloy is a team of consultants which helps organisations 
of all kinds achieve more effective innovation through better 
connections between people and technology.
Office locations
Farnham, Surrey, UK
Year established
1999

346 How to Run a Successful Design Business
talent to perform. We believed we could make a difference by helping the public use 
the government services that will change their lives. We thought we could create 
communications that could change public attitudes, raise awareness of things they 
were entitled to and result in people improving the quality of their lives.
We established a reputation as a creative player with an innovative edge that rarely 
declined an opportunity because we enjoyed learning. Today, that handful of creative 
people has swelled to 130 as the largest business in one of the world’s leading creative 
services groups, The Team. Some of the faces have changed and the offer has broadened, 
but the same belief persists: that effective communication can change lives.
In the Nineties we embraced branding, and attracted blue chip clients. We did 
everything a rapidly growing business did: competed against anyone, embraced 
digital media, completed a succession plan where original founders left the business 
and a new management team was created. We focused on what we enjoyed doing 
most – public services.
In the Noughties we relocated our expanding team of 50 from the suburbs to 
London Bridge, a hub of real-life where our audiences were all around us. We attracted 
rainmakers, directors who wanted to work in public services. As a result we sustained 
20 per cent growth from 2002–06, building a credible specialist complementary 
design and communication offer and a reputation for effectiveness.
In 2007, the next opportunity presented itself. We became a wholly-owned 
subsidiary of the Loewy Group, ranked as the second largest design consultancy 
group, number four in the Marketing Design League table and number one for 
creativity and effectiveness. The Team remains an autonomous business, in control 
of day-to-day decisions but able to access specialist insight from other design leaders 
including Williams Murray Hamm and Seymour Powell, invaluable to sustaining 
and growing our offer.
There are four principles that have driven our success: sticking to our core beliefs; 
deciding on a goal and going for it; knowing that the most important decisions are 
the people you hire; continuously reappraising services to meet market demand. 
As we approach the end of the decade we are at the top of our game. The key thing 
we’ve learnt is to listen to advice, follow our instincts and take decisions fast.
Disciplines
Integrated brand
Marketing
Internal communications
Digital communications
Company description
We’re an integrated creative communications agency driven 
by effectiveness. We bring together brand, marketing, 
digital and internal communications in one place. We 
change behaviours by engaging minds. Helping clients 
succeed is what matters most. 
Office locations
London
Year established
1984

347
the designers
UNIFORM 
Nick Howe 
Managing Director 
www.uniform.net
Uniform was established over a beer in the summer of 1998 a week after finishing 
university. Pete Thomas, Nick Bentley and I set up the business as there was no-one 
in the city who we wanted to work for. By the summer of 1999 we were in Design 
Week’s ‘Rising Stars’ feature, and had a few decent projects under our belt.
From our initial meanderings as a multi-disciplinary agency, designing award-
winning interiors to furniture and lighting exhibited at 100% Design, we soon 
realised the need to focus and consider our strategy for success. We built our CGI 
animation and film team with key corporate clients and began to grow. Our creative 
edge set us apart, and we soon won major international contracts.
When it came to planning, we were organised, detailed and thorough. There 
was a good natural balance between the three of us: Pete pushing us creatively, Nick 
managing production and me focusing on the vision and finances.
In 2006, we won a place on the DBA’s ‘Small/Medium/Large’ programme, and 
this was a turning point for us as a business. It helped us focus on strategy and 
planning, and this has been critical to our success: for us, design was about problem-
solving, and we felt we could work across any sector or discipline. We cemented our 
position as a Top 100 agency and built our design team alongside our digital team.
The last three years have seen us achieve many of our goals. We have grown in 
size but not at the expense of fee income and profit per head, the two key financial 
indicators of a successful agency. We have upped our creative standing in awards 
programmes from Design Week to the Roses, and in 2009 won ‘Design Team of the 
Year’ twice, at the How-Do and Roses Awards. We’ve also diversified into new sectors 
and moved higher up the food chain, delivering strategic-led projects nationally.
If I were to dish out advice – not something I’m used to, I might add – I would 
say: stay true to your roots; keep doing what you believe in; never settle for anything 
less than producing the best work. Spend as much time as possible designing the 
perfect business, and work on your own brand. You might think it’s dull, but write 
the business plan, and then design it, just like a client project. Typeset it beautifully. 
If nothing else, the bank manager will love it.
Disciplines
Branding and identity
Graphic design
Exhibition design
CGI, film and animation
Company description
Uniform is a leading brand, design and digital agency. We 
help our clients position themselves in their market, raise 
their profile and achieve their commercial objectives.
Office locations
Liverpool
Year established
1998

This page has been left blank intentionally

Section Seven: 
The Clients

This page has been left blank intentionally

The clients
What is it like to be a client? Consultant and psychotherapist Jan Casey asked them. 
The results of her interviews with 20 experienced design buyers from a wide range 
of companies and organisations show that it’s not always as easy as it looks.
Jan asked them what was good about working with design businesses, and 
what could be improved. She also explored what, ideally, they look for when they 
are appointing a design resource. What are design firms good at? Fresh, creative 
thinking; good consumer understanding and insights; interrogating briefs and 
thinking differently; being fun to work with. What are they not so good at? 
Commercial acuity; listening to the brief; swift delivery and proper scheduling; 
communication and presentation skills. And what are these design buyers looking 
for, over and above the basics? They would like design businesses to extend their 
strategic thinking and understanding, to see the bigger picture.
Some of the people Jan interviewed are designers by training, and have roles 
which are completely focused on design; several of them run in-house design units 
as well as commissioning creative services from external sources. Others have much 
broader marketing and management roles; for them, design activities are only a part 
of their remit. All of them are clear, however, in their views about working with 
designers.
Musgrave Retail Partners GB 
Jemima Bird 
Marketing Director 
www.musgrave.ie
I find generally that design consultancies, more than advertising agencies, 
really understand what I want from brand building and development. Designers 
understand the essence of a brand and how to visually architect it in a meaningful 
way. They have an intrinsic understanding of how great design resonates with the 
consumer and how it can engage with employees.
That said, one of the utmost frustrations is that design consultancies can become 
navel-gazing purists, hanging on to a design to the detriment of commercial viability. 
Although ad agencies all too often throw the baby out with the bathwater to ‘flog 
the product’, design consultancies could learn a little from them and, to carry on 

352 How to Run a Successful Design Business
the analogy, let the water out but leave the baby in, thereby delivering a brilliant 
creative solution that is also commercially effective.
In my experience there is a more considered and methodical approach to client 
management from the design side; I find briefs are delivered to a microscopic level 
of detail, with clear pricing for each stage and timings for delivery. It is rare that I 
am surprised by hidden costs or additional fees.
There is, however, a tendency for design consultancies to be become obsessive 
with ‘brand guidelines’, challenging work produced by other agencies. Given 
different mechanics and media are at play across my range of brand deliverables, it 
can become wearing to say the least to manage real-life expectations.
The approach to relationship engagement by design consultancies is second to 
none, with often even small pieces of work given the same passion and energy as 
larger projects. They tend to approach a relationship as a lifetime affair rather than 
a short- to mid-term partnership. There is a real sharing of cultural brand DNA 
between designers and clients in a way I have not experienced with ad agencies 
who, whilst caring passionately, always seem mindful that the account may shift to 
another agency at any time.
Other than the ‘negative’ points that I’ve listed, I tend to find that design 
consultancies have a real desire for partnership and to this end are my favoured 
part of the agency mix.
Land Securities Group PLC  
Anna Chapman 
Head of Marketing, London Portfolio,  
www.landsecurities.com
I have found when commissioning work for Land Securities that most designers 
are good at interrogating and understanding our briefs, but some are anxious, 
sometimes too anxious to ask questions. Consequently these designers can leave 
not having fully understood our requirements and can spend time exploring routes 
that may not answer the brief. However, there is another breed of designer who will 
argue until they are blue in the face that we have got the brief wrong. Both styles 
present their own challenges!
Designers can be very nervous when presenting their work. It seems that they 
don’t have enough faith in their concepts, which is a shame, because they put 
their heart and soul into ideas that are usually excellent. My team and I accept this 
behaviour because we can see beyond it, but our corporate colleagues find it very 
weak and unconvincing. Designers must be confident and slick as well as talented. 
They need to demonstrate that they are in control and be aware that they will be 
Musgrave Group (a €5 billion business) partners entrepreneurial food retailers and food service 
professionals in Ireland, UK and Spain. In Great Britain, it partners 2,000 Budgens and Londis 
retailers.

353
the clients
compared with consultants who work for other areas of our business, and who 
present in a far more accomplished and confident way.
Brilliant design work takes time but speed of delivery is, I am afraid, the reality 
of our corporate lives. I am very aware that designers are conscientious, work hard 
and are earnest about delivering the right result but it can take a long time. I think 
that the quality/speed equation will always be the hardest nut to crack. Although I 
can usually schedule their time requirements, it is difficult for others to understand 
why a design concept can take six weeks, then the detailing another month again.
The relationship aspect of a project is fundamental and designers do this well, 
yet, as with their behaviour in presentations, when they are confronted with a 
room full of people they don’t know, especially confident consultants from the 
property world, they can become uneasy and awkward.
I have been fortunate to have worked with some of the best designers around 
and design remains the most fun part of my job. It always has been and always will 
be.
HM Revenue & Customs  
Julia Coulson 
Head of Design, Marketing Communications  
www.hmrc.gov.uk
Working with design agencies can be a positive experience. They are able to start a 
brief without preconceived ideas and have the potential to bring greater scope to 
projects. Fresh thinking away from civil service processes is always welcome and 
very often agencies will go the extra mile to solve problems.
The provision of status reports and account management is particularly valuable. 
We are almost always asked to disclose how much a campaign has cost. There has to 
be transparency and accurate records of how taxpayers’ money is spent. When fees 
are involved, record keeping helps us get our internal clients to focus on rounds of 
amends.
But there are times when working with design agencies causes frustration, and 
they can fall short of expectation. For example, over-promising at the presentation 
and not admitting to lack of skills in a particular area; or meeting the ‘big guns’ 
at the start of a project but then only seeing lesser-skilled staff thereafter. For me, 
relationship chemistry with the agency is vital, yet often I need to make a special 
request to include the creative team in meetings. We need to be able to trust each 
other as well as establish how we are going to work together.
It seems there can be a lack of appreciation of the client’s specialist knowledge. 
The Government sector has an abundance of people who really know their stuff 
Land Securities is the UK’s largest Real Estate Investment Trust. Its London portfolio includes 
famous sites, such as the Piccadilly Lights, and mixed-use developments in the West End, City 
and Victoria.

354 How to Run a Successful Design Business
and this can be overlooked. Some colleagues have said at times they feel agencies 
look down their noses at them and are dismissive of any input. Others have found 
that designers don’t always listen to the brief. It is good to be challenged, but 
fundamentally if the brief has not been answered it is a waste of time.
We understand that creative ideas will be recycled. However, it is embarrassing 
for both parties to be shown presentations of rehashed work that still includes a 
previous client’s name. This has happened on more than one occasion.
Finally it is perhaps worth emphasising the benefit of honest feedback – for both 
the client and the agency – to allow the relationship to grow.
Virgin Atlantic Airways 
Joe Ferry 
Head of Design 
www.virgin-atlantic.com
Virgin Atlantic has witnessed genuine return on its investment in design. Unlike 
most airlines, I actively employ agencies that are naïve to the constraints of aircraft 
design in order to push the boundaries and maintain product differentiation. I then 
rely on my in-house team’s expertise to focus on mitigating any risk. Some agencies 
have little appreciation of the skills and amount of work entrusted to in-house 
designers, which ultimately results in the design becoming a reality with minimum 
compromise to the design ambition. When an agency leaves the arena, the in-
house team have to field any arising issues and protect the design ambition right 
through to implementation.
Designers need to be themselves and not pretend to be someone else. It’s 
important for me to know what an agency is good at and where their limits are. If 
they specialise in interiors they should not aspire to also do graphics if they are not 
experts in that field: where areas of a project are not their discipline, they should 
partner with a specialist.
It’s also imperative for a design agency to be honest. For example, if they are not 
happy with their work or there is an issue, they must let the client know, and as soon 
as possible. Visibility of costs and timings are important at the start and throughout 
a job. It can be difficult to be explicit sometimes, and it is the responsibility of the 
client to have an appreciation of what is involved, but it is important for me not to 
have any unpleasant surprises along the way.
Having a strategic understanding of how design fits into the big picture is also 
important. This is a gap that I have experienced with many agencies. If designers 
just focus on their project, it may not work within the wider scheme.
HM Revenue & Customs is a Government department that makes sure money is available 
to fund the UK’s public services. It also helps families and individuals with targeted financial 
support.

355
the clients
When I see someone with talent I ask the question, ‘Can I work with you?’ The 
relationship with an agency is key. It’s like employing anyone. Someone could have 
the best talent in the world, but if we don’t gel then it won’t work.
Innocent  
Dan Germain 
Head of Creative 
www.innocentdrinks.co.uk
We design lots of things in-house: packaging, web, ads, books and more. In 1999 
we started off with one designer but these days there are seven of us in the in-house 
creative team. It’s good to have options though. We like having the flexibility to 
do stuff ourselves or to work with agencies. Doing everything in-house would be 
too insular: although we’re smart, we only generate a finite number of ideas on any 
given day. So we relish the chance to work with other smart people.
When we start working with a new agency a period of indoctrination is 
important, so they can really understand the context of what we do. Agencies might 
have five or 55 other clients so we can’t expect them to know all about us. So we like 
to collaborate, by going off to work with agency creatives at their place, or getting 
them to come to ours.
Ultimately, we’ll do whatever is necessary to get to the best piece of work. 
Collaboration (as mentioned above) is crucial, but we don’t want to mollycoddle or 
get in the way, and our underlying entrepreneurial streak can sometimes encourage 
mild chaos. So we definitely need processes to keep things moving. We have 
someone who manages the workflow in-house and we want our agencies to be 
extremely organised at their end too. In terms of what this means in practice, I like 
meetings that don’t take too long (after one hour I’m done). It’s also good not to 
have too many people in the room: clear decision-making is better served by being 
focused. And I like to talk to the person who is doing the job, not someone who has 
to relay the information to someone else.
We are lucky that we’ve been around long enough to know some good 
agencies that we have worked with for a while. It’s good to know that they have an 
understanding of our history and our DNA so that we can jump straight into the 
issue of the day.
Award-winning Virgin Atlantic, launched in 1984, is one of the world’s leading long-haul carriers. 
With bases at London’s Heathrow and Gatwick Airports, it flies six million passengers every year 
to 30 destinations around the world.
Innocent was founded in 1999. It makes smoothies and other healthy food and drink.

356 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Cisco Systems 
Clive Grinyer 
Director of Customer Experience for Internet Business Solutions Group 
www.cisco.com
As a consultant to Cisco’s major clients I sometimes commission, but mainly 
broker, design, introducing the concept to a wide range of Cisco clients at senior 
management level.
I need agencies that cross the gulf between pragmatic, cost-effective delivery 
– which most achieve – and big thinking, the ability to extend understanding in a 
way that can be digested. It’s this latter quality that opens the eyes and minds of 
my clients at Cisco. Agencies need to have both breadth and depth: maturity, the 
ability to communicate, to present ideas in the context of the end customer and 
bring to life the possibilities that design can deliver. Not enough design companies 
think ‘big enough’, not just at the designer level, but at design management level 
too. There have been times when I have chosen an agency where the designers 
think bigger than their leaders.
Design is an unfamiliar field to some clients and is sometimes seen as a 
commoditised machine. Recently a public sector client needed an agency which knew 
about web design but, more than this, they needed to understand how to demonstrate 
the total experience of the end-user, to explain value and purpose. Design agencies 
can be so focused on their specialised area that they don’t see it in the context of a 
wider field. They need the ability to zoom from detail to strategy in a microsecond.
A classic problem can be the cultural differences between clients and agencies. I 
can explain to my clients why designers don’t dress like accountants and that they 
need to embrace these visual beings often missing from business, but designers then 
need to deliver inspired thinking and with rigour. They can be so focused on their 
bit that they forget to listen to the parameters or restrictions.
The opportunity for design is enormous right now, but designers must grasp 
and intellectually understand that the tools they have can be applied to solving 
fundamental issues in business and the public sector.
British Library  
Penny Hamilton 
Head of Public and Regional Marketing 
www.bl.uk
I have commissioned design both in my present role and also when working at 
the Natural History Museum and Tate. Although at the British Library we have an 
Cisco Systems is the world’s leading manufacturer of technology systems that power the 
internet. Based in California, it creates the platform for the ‘human network’ of communication, 
entertainment and transactions with innovative products.

357
the clients
in-house studio, we do commission external design agencies for exhibitions, 3D 
design and graphics.
My goal is to achieve synergy between the look and feel of an exhibition and 
the way it’s marketed, but it can be a struggle. It’s difficult to know which creative 
discipline is the driver. Graphic designers are very brand aware but can’t translate this 
into exhibition design, and exhibition designers think they can do the marketing 
creative but are steeped in the detail of their exhibition. When promoting an 
exhibition it is essential to grab attention immediately, but what works graphically 
within an exhibition won’t always do the job on a poster. When I appoint two 
agencies which are expert in their different disciplines, tensions can arise and the 
solution is not always seamless.
What I like about working with external designers is their breadth of creative 
expression and free thinking. What I find frustrating is that they don’t always read 
the brief. I have experienced designers returning after a briefing with concepts that 
don’t fulfil our requirements. I explain which elements don’t work, and yet they 
return with the same elements still included. It can sometimes be like pulling teeth!
I prefer working with designers who are not precious, respond to criticism and 
are prepared to talk about their design. I like to meet with the people actually doing 
the design work rather than an intermediary. When an account manager is involved, 
I’m never quite sure what is being fed back and I imagine that designers would 
prefer to hear comments directly from the client. Then they have the opportunity 
of explaining why they think the idea works.
One of the joys of the job is to work on interesting projects with creative people, 
and I love that ‘light bulb’ moment when I see a piece of really great design and 
know it’s going to stand out in the crowd.
Eurostar  
Richard Hill 
Creative Direction 
www.eurostar.com
We have just been through a series of design agency chemistry sessions and the 
companies that resonated with me are those who not only presented a good 
creative portfolio, but also used their time with us to really understand our specific 
requirements, then took the trouble to reiterate the brief back to us. The strongest 
contenders ended up being those that showed understanding and a genuine interest 
in finding solutions to our business challenges.
I often find that it’s smaller agencies, that have broken away from bigger ones, 
that are better at listening. The structures for client handling in bigger organisations 
The British Library is one of the great libraries of the world, containing both the memory of the 
nation and the DNA of civilisation. Its exhibitions and events create compelling stories and new 
ways of looking at ideas.

358 How to Run a Successful Design Business
can end up creating Chinese whispers which removes the creatives from the realities 
of the coal face – they are much more effective when they are at it. That said, I 
definitely think there are some big agencies that have successfully adapted the small 
agency model to good effect.
On the account handling side, the most talented I have worked with are those 
that manage the relationship between the client and the agency but don’t act as the 
‘front men’ for the creatives. They get them in front of you to take the brief, and to 
take the feedback, and I think this improves both the speed and the quality of work 
that is presented.
However, agencies should be wary of how frustrating it can become when 
tempted to use a scattergun approach to creative development, generating ideas 
with no consideration to the budget or other constraints. I understand that the 
creative process can be part of refining the brief, and it is good to be challenged back 
by agencies, but work often comes back that is just too far from the mark.
That said, our creative industries are something to be genuinely proud of and I have 
been fortunate to work with some fantastically talented people. What they have in 
common is real creative flair, a passion to do things differently and a well-trained ear!
Waitrose  
Maggie Hodgetts 
Head of Graphic Design 
www.waitrose.com
I regularly commission packaging design and believe clients should do their 
homework, choosing a design company that does what they need, who understands 
the client-agency relationship and the way the organisation works. I know the 
work will be good when a designer gets excited and shows real enthusiasm for the 
project.
Occasionally a brief can seem dull, so I relish a designer who can think beyond 
it and present further than what is required: good design companies seek insight to 
validate the brief. Not many design agencies have planners. Introducing them into 
the process is a slow movement, but it’s a wise investment as it really does inspire 
designers to produce highly creative work.
It helps me when designers reflect the brief before they proceed to the creative 
detailing. Some produce a stripped-down blueprint and visualise the scale and 
construction of the information hierarchy: the branding, the title, subtext and so 
on. Doing this helps colleagues who are less visually literate. It can also show up 
weaknesses in the briefing, which can be corrected before proceeding to concept 
design and colour visuals. Having a creative background, I am in the fortunate 
position of being able to see beyond a visual but this is not possible for everyone.
Eurostar is the high-speed passenger train service linking the UK with mainland Europe. The 
company celebrated its 100 millionth traveller in August 2009.

359
the clients
I prefer, and have had the most success with, design companies who are design 
principal-led, although account managers have grown in my esteem and good ones 
can really make a difference. However, to add value they need to understand the 
creative process and its execution. The best combination is where I get both the 
creative person and an attuned account manager.
Design companies need to be realistic with scheduling. It’s important to 
respect the approval process and to allow for this in their timelines, but if asked for 
something that is impossible they should be brave and speak out.
Some projects don’t have a huge value (you have to sell a lot of potatoes to cover 
some design budgets), so it’s important for design companies to be realistic with 
their fees and see the value of a long-term relationship with us.
Transport for London  
Jon Hunter 
Head of Design 
www.tfl.gov.uk
It’s key for design agencies to take the time to understand their clients. What 
we are effectively selling is all forms of public transport in London – be it on the 
Underground, Bus, DLR, Overground or even on foot – so it’s important that 
designers engage with the network and have an intrinsic interest in our products. 
A lot of designers don’t connect deeply enough to really understand us. They may 
be good at branding, typography and have great ideas but if the work they present 
doesn’t resonate with me, it won’t with anyone else in the organisation nor, most 
importantly, our customers.
Often, design agencies don’t take the time to gain a full understanding of a 
brand. They seem to have a preconceived conception that all brands are the same, 
just with a different logo. They don’t take time to understand core values or heritage 
but rather seek reinvention of the wheel. As an organisation, we have been around 
for 100 years and seen every idea done many times before. The reason why we still 
have a roundel and defined tube colours is because, although at times restrictive, in 
the simplest of terms they work.
For me it’s important that I’m not presented with layers of people to deal with. I 
am happy to brief the account handler and designer, but from then onwards I like to 
liaise directly with the creative team. Dealing with account handlers distances my team 
and me from what we are trying to achieve, takes longer and information can get lost 
in translation. Going directly to the designer means there is no misunderstanding.
Getting absolute clarity from the brief is essential. Too many times I have briefed 
agencies who nod in agreement and then come back to me with a solution that is 
off brief. An example of this is a design solution that should cover London (the 
Waitrose, the food retailer of the John Lewis Partnership, has 215 shops throughout the UK and 
a reputation for high-quality, good value food, and excellent service.

360 How to Run a Successful Design Business
‘donut effect’ as we call it) using only inner London icons such as the Gherkin and 
London Eye. This is, of course, avoidable if the brief is fully understood.
I also like to catch up with work in progress during all stages of a project. It’s 
useful to touch base and make sure the design work is on track.
Royal Mail 
Marcus James 
Head of Design and Editorial 
www.royalmail.com/stamps
The creative process of designing stamps demands a lot from the designer: 
intelligence, sensitivity, creativity, and, above all, attention to detail. The topics 
can range from Charles Darwin through to Classic Album Covers; diverse, huge 
subjects that have to be distilled down into six or eight immediate, yet enticing 
pieces of design. During my time at Royal Mail a number of key criteria stand out as 
imperative in establishing valuable long-term working relationships that continue 
to deliver at the highest level over many years. Continuity in contact throughout 
a project can be a real issue, as all too often a project is relegated to a more junior 
designer once a commission begins; this can also be true of account managers, who 
can create an additional layer of interpretation between client and designer.
The digital world we inhabit today is a great tool for designers, but it can inhibit 
creativity. There seems to be this overwhelming temptation to jump straight on 
to the computer and produce visuals that look like finished products, rather than 
developing ideas through the exploration of the brief, subject and audience. Clever 
styling and graphic tricks will not cover up the absence of a strong creative solution. 
It is also essential to have the ability to integrate typography into design as a creative 
consideration rather than seeing it as something to add at the end.
On such a small canvas as a stamp every element has to earn its space. What 
the design agencies that we work with demonstrate so well is the ability to respond 
creatively in a fresh and inspired way rather than utilising a house style. This, coupled 
with an awareness of how other creative disciplines such as illustration, photography 
and fine art can be incorporated into their work, results in great design solutions.
It is testament to the tremendous skill of the designers and image-makers who 
design stamps that they creatively translate great and complicated stories onto a 
miniature canvas that acts as an ambassador for UK culture, heritage and design 
excellence.
Transport for London (TfL) is responsible for implementing the Mayor’s transport strategy and 
managing transport services across the capital, for which the Mayor has responsibility. Some 10 
million passengers use the bus, Tube and DLR network daily. 
Royal Mail’s Philatelic team produces stamps that are seen by millions of people and provide a 
snapshot of the nation’s character through creative stamp design. 

361
the clients
British Heart Foundation 
Louise Kyme 
Design Manager 
www.bhf.org.uk
When we have invited design consultancies to present their credentials, it’s usually the 
designer’s thought process that has impressed us the most – how they have understood 
a problem and why they did something a certain way – rather than any creative ideas 
they present. It makes us feel at ease knowing that a designer has thought about the 
nature of a problem. To me, problem-solving is what design is all about.
The most effective agencies are the ones that consider the client as part of the 
creative process. Clients are the direct link to the project’s audience; after all they 
work with them on a daily basis. By working closely together, understanding the 
specific needs of the audience, the end design should help people, rather than be 
design for design’s sake. This is even more the case working for a charity. It’s easy to 
feel sensitive about design work that is rejected but it’s important to understand your 
client’s feedback in an objective way. If your client can’t describe what is wrong, then 
you need to ask intelligent questions to help the client and ultimately the project.
In an ideal world, designers would also take more responsibility for the brand 
rather than concentrate on their individual design projects. It sometimes feels 
like designers see the brand as a restriction rather than understanding its positive 
intention. But once a designer has got a handle on these issues, then they can really 
start pushing the creative possibilities.
Generally I prefer working directly with designers rather than working through 
an account manager but this assumes, of course, that they have a clear and organised 
system in place. Certainly having to chase an agency on basic project processes is 
frustrating, no matter how creative the design work is.
The best client/agency relationship is when both parties know and appreciate 
each other. The agency should be investing in understanding the organisation’s 
strategic goals, and the client should be investing in the designer’s way of working 
and thinking. Then the relationship becomes a two-way process, with successful 
creative work as a result.
Chivas Brothers Limited 
Neil Macdonald 
Brand Director 
www.chivasbrothers.com
I work with a number of design agencies and really value long-term relationships. I 
choose each agency according to their skill and craft. For whisky-blended products 
The British Heart Foundation is the nation’s heart charity, saving lives through pioneering 
research, patient care and vital information.

362 How to Run a Successful Design Business
I will use an agency where their focus is aesthetics; for malted whisky I look for one 
that can work effectively with layers of information.
We need to incorporate strict and practical considerations regarding packaging 
structure and so the best agencies are those who have expertise in both 3D and 
graphics, and who are able to build good relationships with our internal product 
design department. I prefer smaller agencies with a creative principal or, when dealing 
with large agencies, I make sure I seek out the creative leader; these individuals 
adopt ownership of our brand.
Some agencies are precious about minimum changes to their ideas, and then 
there are others that will just roll over and do whatever is requested. I look for 
people who argue for what they believe in but who counter this with commercial 
acumen. I always appreciate it when a designer speaks from the heart.
Some agencies focus purely on design; others offer strategic advice, but it 
doesn’t work if it’s just a ‘bolt on’ service. I have had experience where agencies 
offer strategy as an extra service but it can be superficial, rather like a coat of paint. 
Others, however, provide in-depth analysis, such as semiotics or a DNA brand 
breakdown, This really enhances the brief and can positively disrupt it, which is 
very welcome.
We are a complex, decentralised company, involved in a range of markets, and 
we are not dictatorial, which means that the brief is subject to change. I therefore 
need my agencies to be flexible and collaborative. Good results come from 
symbiotic relationships. We use a design roster system and welcome feedback on 
our performance from our agencies as well us feeding back our experience. This 
exercise creates promotes an open relationship, where we can each make changes 
and improve.
NHS Institute for Innovation and Improvement 
Dr Lynne Maher 
Director for Innovation 
www.institute.nhs.uk
We commission service design predominantly, though we also commission product, 
graphic and brand design. Designers are fantastic at the initial stage of a project, 
looking at a situation and identifying the core problem. NHS staff often move 
quickly to the implementation phase without really understanding the problem; 
designers demonstrate to us the value of discovery. For example, we needed to 
create a dynamic poster to encourage health staff to wash their hands. Working 
with a design consultancy at the initial stage, we identified key errors in the system 
such as hand gel containers which were not labelled, or not visible, or empty. This 
significantly impacted on the recommended solution.
Chivas Brothers is the Scotch whisky and premium gin business of Pernod Ricard – the world’s 
co-leader in wine and spirits.

363
the clients
Designers are good at taking constructive criticism. When I’ve said of a presentation 
‘it’s completely off the mark’ or ‘I hate it!’ they have taken the feedback and moved 
forward in a positive way. However, they can be naïve about the complexity of health 
organisations. They add a lot of value by challenging the way we do things, but they 
should do this from a position of knowledge otherwise the value falls flat. For instance, 
they don’t always understand our standard ethical conduct relating to patients and 
staff, and we have found that reference photos have been whizzed around the world 
without gaining written consent from the person photographed.
Sometimes designers are too idealistic – they will see a marvellous solution 
which will enhance the quality of care for the patient but they do not take into 
account the whole NHS context. We are facing massive financial challenges, and 
any design solutions must achieve improvements in both cost and quality.
Clarity of language and articulation of findings are areas in need of improvement, 
as well as writing skills. Recently a design consultancy presented their work which 
answered the brief perfectly and was high quality, but they presented their insights 
in a random way. When I contextualised their work the NHS audience loved it, but 
I had to make the links for them.
Design has a lot to offer the NHS and there are a number of fantastic examples 
that could be used to demonstrate this. I just wish they were widely published for 
NHS staff to see.
BT 
David Mercer 
Head of Design 
www.bt.com
I lead design and brand identity across BT, and commission design and creative 
projects in almost every design sphere from graphics and online through to products 
and usability. In all this there is one common factor: good design unquestionably 
results from good relationships, the chemistry between me, the client, and the 
creative designer. Many agencies don’t seem to understand this dynamic, and think 
it’s all about designing in isolation against a set brief.
Arriving at the right design solution is a truly interactive and iterative process 
between client and designer, with no barriers and an intuitive understanding 
between them. I work mainly with creative individuals – that’s what delivers the 
difference – but I also understand and appreciate the value of agency account people 
to support and manage the delivery process. I sense such people are generally 
under-valued by the companies they work for, but not by me. I recall a number of 
instances where a really excellent project director has won the job for the agency or 
ensured a project’s enhanced success.
The NHS Institute for Innovation and Improvement supports the UK’s health service to transform 
healthcare for patients and the public.

364 How to Run a Successful Design Business
A high standard of account and project management is critical in nurturing 
relationships between clients and agencies, or ensuring the smooth running of a project 
to time and on budget. This said, many design agencies are, in my experience, not well 
organised and rather unprofessional in the way they interact with clients. This must 
change if design wants to be more highly rated and taken seriously in the business 
world. Agencies need to become more receptive, reactive and rigorous in their everyday 
client dealings and delivery of work. It’s worth remembering these three ‘Rs’.
What I’m always looking for from a designer is something more than what I 
thought I wanted; a spark between the ears that cannot be pre-determined by training, 
planning or process; a piece of magic that has the power to change everything. This 
is what I believe makes design so different and so special from anything else I come 
across in the business world. My role is quite simply to facilitate and elicit that spark, 
that creative insight, that piece of magic. If we get it, then I know I’ve done my job. 
Science Museum 
Tim Molloy 
Creative Director 
www.sciencemuseum.org.uk
I’ve just worked out why some of the agencies that I don’t want to work with seem 
to get masses of work. It comes down to the client/designer contract. A client needs 
a designer to do something they can’t do themselves; they need a professional 
expert opinion. As that expert, designers must have the confidence to practice their 
trade, applying their experience and expertise, intelligence and energy. This does 
not necessarily mean they will please their client during the various stages of the 
job in hand. I don’t work with designers that are ultimately trying to give me what 
they think I want. I work with designers that will challenge and cajole, for the 
ultimate good of the project. Many clients find these designers ‘difficult’, too hard 
to work with, but these are the individuals I seek. The grit that they add to the 
creative process exposes something glorious.
Science can be a very opaque activity to interpret: how would you explain chaos 
theory, black holes or nanotech? At the Science Museum we can marshal up to 15 different 
sorts of creative activity for a large, permanent exhibition, ranging from traditional 
notions of exhibition design to software development, creative writing, film, interactive 
media, poetry, sculpture, comedy, theatre, lighting and sound. The orchestration of 
these disciplines needs to be focused and cohesive, not just a battleground of activity, so 
a determined enthusiasm among designers to collaborate is an absolute essential.
How people respond to a brief is key for me. I react very badly to clichés and 
woolly thinking, the trademarks of an ill-thought-out quest for a quick solution. 
BT is one of the world’s leading providers of communications solutions and services operating 
in 170 countries. It consists principally of four lines of business: BT Global Services, Openreach, 
BT Retail and BT Wholesale.

365
the clients
I look everywhere and anywhere for intelligent conceptual thinking. The kind 
of thinking that can surprise me with a big idea will withstand being whipped, 
pressured and generally beaten up, yet remain strong, effective and memorable.
UKTV, London 
Matt Scarff 
Head of Creative 
www.uktv.co.uk
As Head of Creative, I lead the creative output for all ten of UKTV’s new-look thematic 
channels both on and off air, from on-screen identity and promo campaigns, 
through to online and off air print and posters. The ten channels have very different 
personalities and I need my agency to have a clear understanding of the network 
and individual brands. This applies to all of those working on the account, from 
Production Coordinator and Creative through to Account Manager and Planner.
Having worked previously within an agency, and now as a client, I can vouch 
that clear communication and project management are vital on both sides of the 
fence. Good project directors are key to the success of the ongoing relationship, and 
it’s essential they understand the television production process. Timelines are often 
quick, and spend levels can vary from the more traditional advertising approach. 
They need to fully grasp the creative process, so that they can set realistic timelines 
and filter my communication back to the agency creative heads of each channel, so 
that I can have one meeting rather than several and keep costs to the minimum. It’s 
a skill on the part of an agency Creative Director or Account Manager to make the 
client feel they are as much involved in the project as the agency, and able to feel 
that they are making a positive contribution to the creative process.
Budgets are an important factor for any business, but my advice is to avoid 
these conversations when immersed in creative presentations and pitches. It tends 
to close down the creative discussion and can provoke the wrong reaction or even 
terminate an idea. Costs do need to be discussed, but make sure the client loves 
the idea and couldn’t live without it before you start to talk money. That said, it is 
important not to sell in an idea which can’t be produced within an agreed budget, 
but do remember that a client will always want to be part of the next big thing. Be 
brave and make them – and you – famous!
The Science Museum aims to make sense of the science that shapes all our lives. Telling stories 
of science, engineering and medicine, enterprise and creativity, covering issues that matter to 
everyone now and in the future, it has an international reputation for promoting the value of 
innovative, collaborative design.
UKTV is an independent commercial joint venture between BBC Worldwide and Virgin Media. 
Attracting 36.5 million viewers each month, the network consists of ten distinctive channel 
brands: Watch, GOLD, Dave, Alibi, Yesterday, Blighty, Eden, Home, Really and Good Food.

366 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Habitat 
Theo Williams 
Creative Director 
www.habitat.co.uk
I commission design at several different levels: renowned individuals who have 
specific ‘creative handwriting’ such as Matthew Hilton and Nigel Coates; established 
studios who have been in the industry for years; right through to new talent which 
I find through student shows or competitions.
When I commission an established designer or studio, I am interested in creatives 
who have a specialist knowledge of their design or area they work in. Someone 
designing a light, for instance, must have the ability to not only work with shape 
and form but also have an intricate understanding of the technical capabilities of 
the materials, industry standards, light emissions and so on.
I really enjoy working with young talent for the absence of experience they have 
which adds a freshness to their ideas, yet I often find that they lack the rudimentary 
knowledge of product materials, for example the limitations and requirements 
needed for mass production. To overcome this, if a young designer shows promise 
I will bring them into the Habitat creative studio to work with us for a while, so we 
can guide and mentor them. It shows them the process that a design is one element 
of many to deliver a product to the shop floor and not the only thing.
In general there is definitely a lack of manufacturing knowledge and experience 
in the design world. I come across designers not understanding that the production 
of an item requires a completely different approach to a limited edition piece or 
assuming that if a design can be rendered it can be made.
I also find that young designers have a lack of understanding regarding business 
matters. Many designers don’t have full appreciation of the costs involved in producing 
and delivering a product, for instance the difference between the wholesale cost and 
its retail-selling price, the effect of a discount, and the packaging and shipping costs. 
This lack of understanding will have a direct impact on whether the designs they are 
producing will be sufficiently commercial, so I ensure that I choose designers not 
only for their creative ability but also for their business acumen.
Ford Motor Company 
David Woodhouse 
Chief Designer/Design Executive, Strategic Concepts Group 
www.ford.co.uk
In times past we commissioned design research in order to gauge differences in 
trends and approach from the work being executed internally, to get alternative 
Habitat is an international brand selling inspirational yet affordable furniture and home 
accessories for everyday living, creating collections which give people the confidence to express 
themselves in their homes.

367
the clients
design proposals. Today, when we commission externally it’s less about being 
provided with alternative design proposals and more to do with philosophy, 
rationale, trending and ideas. Generally we brainstorm a project internally and 
then work with an external agency or creative who might be a product designer or 
firm, but equally they could be from the spheres of architecture, graphics, branding, 
movies, fine art, politics, city planning… you name it!
Today we are much more collaborative with our agencies; it’s not about them 
going away with a brief and coming back with a finite solution. Looking back to 
times with other companies, some agencies acted as though they had the right to 
get regular briefs and would appear from their studios with work that wasn’t good 
enough or was irrelevant to what was needed. Now we look for agencies to inspire us, 
who will offer us a killer insight, an aspect of surprise and delight that we would not 
have thought of on our own, which we can then embed into our internal work.
We want to be entertained and want designers and agencies who can bring 
something to the party that hasn’t been seen before. Something worthwhile always 
comes from a humorous idea or from an element of eccentricity, which can be 
more difficult to generate within a corporate setting. At the point of first meeting 
an external designer or agency, the energy in the room, their engagement, their 
emotional reaction and connection with us rate as the most important ingredients 
on the list. The relationship that we seek with our external agencies is one of 
partnership, collaboration, and fun, so personality and trust are key.
Going forward, I believe collaboration with enlightened, inspiring, creative 
partners is paramount. And the more cross-discipline and removed they are from 
our own specific automotive world, the better. Inspiration is key. Unique market and 
customer insight is paramount. The automotive design world is beginning to mirror 
the greater context of immediacy, rapid communication, no-limits understanding 
and inspiration. So may it continue.
Xerox Europe 
Les Wynn 
Manager of Industrial Design/Human Factors 
www.xerox.co.uk
What I require from consultancies in the UK has changed over recent years. I have 
an internal design team, and I also put a volume of design work out to companies in 
the Third World, India for example. However, the work delivered tends to be strong 
on skill rather than knowledge and insight. I look to UK consultancies to have 
depth of understanding, to push the brief at an early stage, build the relationship 
and help define what needs to be done. It is no longer enough for a UK consultancy 
Strategic Concepts Group at Ingeni is Ford’s London design centre. It has a mixed-functional, 
in-house team across design, planning, marketing and engineering, and creates new product 
proposals.

368 How to Run a Successful Design Business
to rely on design skills alone; skills are a commodity and can be bought by the hour. 
Knowledge and understanding of the real needs of the client business, and delivery 
of solutions to fit that need, are core to survival.
If UK consultancies want to stay competitive they need to be integrated into the 
client’s thinking. It’s the difference between being a trade and a profession. Some 
of the good UK consultancies are aware of this new business model, where they sit 
on the same side of the table as the client. They do not produce multiple concepts 
for the client to choose from; they produce one concept with a well thought out 
rationale. This means that the agency cannot shirk responsibility by blaming the 
client for choosing the wrong one, and the client must listen and act on the input 
from the agency. It requires trust and honesty on both sides.
I need a consultancy to be integral to our business strategy. Unfortunately the 
word ‘strategy’ is over used. Often consultancies describe themselves as strategic, 
when what they are saying is simply that design is important. To be strategic, 
a consultancy must know our business better than we do, and identify real 
opportunities and solutions in the wider context of the global market. The best 
consultancies in the UK bring great design management to a project, not just raw 
creativity. They are adaptable in the tools and processes they use and are able to 
tailor them to the needs of our company.
Xerox is the global leader in document management, offering the widest range of technology, 
consulting services and solutions in the industry. Founded in 1906, it has over 57,000 employees 
and an annual revenue of $17.6 billion.

Section Eight: 
The Design Bodies

This page has been left blank intentionally

The design bodies
Industry membership associations and design support bodies exist to make sure 
that the design sector grows and develops as it should, and they are well worth 
engaging with. As a taster, here are some thought-leadership views from a number 
of them. They were asked to consider what design businesses need to do in order to 
remain competitive for the future. Their responses are enlightening.
As well as advising design firms to make improvements in their strategic 
capabilities, commercial understanding and business planning, they propose 
a greater engagement in risk-taking for themselves. They suggest the delivery of 
higher-level work for their clients, helping them to transform their businesses and 
organisations. They highlight the importance of the global stage, and of international 
competition. They identify the need for collaboration with other design disciplines 
to meet clients’ future needs. They recommend the constant monitoring of social 
and market trends. Finally, they make the case for much sharper professional 
practice skills, including more effective presentations.
Overall they caution that, if they are to succeed in future, design businesses 
need to become just that: businesses.
BRITISH DESIGN INNOVATION (BDI) 
Maxine J Horn 
CEO 
www.britishdesigninnovation.org
Take a few entrepreneurial risks and become your own client. There is no better way 
of proving your creative ability and business acumen than by doing it for yourself, 
whether that is retail design firms trying their hand at pop-up shops, industrial, 
service innovation and digital firms developing their own products and propositions, 
or graphic firms developing and licensing material. Additionally, entrepreneurial 
collaboration across disciplines results in more rounded propositions, where it is 
recognised that no brand, product or service ever came to market without the core 
skills of several expert parties.
Many design firms have built excellent companies purely on ‘fees for service’, but 
this has always been a vulnerable model, subject to the ups and downs of economic 
climate where projects and income can disappear overnight. Design firms savvy 
enough to build a licensing structure or proposition brokerage model might just 
find new means of increasing their longer-term remuneration and building tangible 
assets, adding licenses and patents to their balance sheet.

372 How to Run a Successful Design Business
BDI has enabled industrial and service design firms to move closer to the 
innovation space and to believe in themselves as knowledge providers and even 
investors (of skills and time) in start-up and Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) 
businesses and, through licensing, as investors in corporate brands. The ‘Shared 
Risk and Shared Reward’ model is making a more regular appearance at the 
negotiating table, and research and development (R&D) tax credits have opened 
up more opportunities for design firms to become their own client in a way barely 
considered before. There are few ways to truly future-proof a business, but taking 
risks and adopting a collaborative and entrepreneurial attitude certainly offers far 
more potential to earn more stable income than solely relying on fees for services.
D&AD 
Tim O’Kennedy 
Chief Executive 
www.dandad.org
For decades now, Britain has punched well above its weight in any competition 
decided by creativity, across pretty much all walks of design and communications 
in general. This is both a good thing, and a bad thing. Good, because the culture of 
creativity is firmly established here, and creativity has come to be relatively highly 
valued by our consumers and businesses alike. So the basic atmospheric conditions 
for design businesses are pretty good. But success can also lead to complacency, and 
a more insular perspective than is healthy. ‘We’ve always been great, therefore we’ll 
always be great’ is a dangerous non-sequitur.
The UK is at a turning point: we must decide whether to be self-referential and 
perhaps a little smug, or to recognise and be energised by the fact that excellence in 
design is not our sole preserve. For many years, we’ve seen breathtaking design work 
from Germany, France, Italy, the Netherlands and the Nordic countries, to name 
just a few. And now, as the developing world evolves from manufacturing-led to 
creatively led economies (a process that is happening very rapidly) we’re beginning 
to see startlingly fresh design thinking from further afield: Japan, of course, but now 
also South Korea, Singapore, China, India and South America among others.
Accredited by the Institute of Knowledge Transfer, BDI is the trade organisation for leading 
industrial designers, service designers and innovation professionals, promoting its members’ 
creative expertise, knowledge and experience. Most BDI member company directors have ten 
years’ minimum experience in their specialist discipline and sector: membership is by peer 
approval or recommendation. BDI is the most influential membership organisation of its kind. 
A cooperative not-for-profit trade body, owned and driven by its members, it represents those 
top-end strategic designers and design companies, R&D teams and innovation directors in 
industry and academia who deliver most value to industry and the consumer through product 
and service innovation. BDI facilitates accumulative industry-wide activity worth over £100 
million per annum. It operates a national website and 12 regional portals, which together 
receive 18 million hits a year from 1.5 million unique visitors. BDI reaches an additional 30,000 
companies through its free monthly Newswire subscription. 

373
the design bodies
UK design has the opportunity to re-assert itself on the global stage but, if 
that’s going to happen, we’ll need our work to compete on the global stage, and be 
informed by thinking, by influences, by design cultures and, yes, by technologies 
from far over our immediate horizon. A key survival skill for anyone in this business 
is this: judge your output not just against what’s in your back yard, but against the 
very best design in the world.
DESIGN BUSINESS ASSOCIATION (DBA) 
Adam Fennelow 
Development Director  
www.dba.org.uk; www.effectivedesign.org.uk;  
www.dbaexpertsregister.org.uk
Design businesses are exactly that – businesses. Too many are started without any 
consideration for how the company will operate, just concern for creative freedom. 
Creativity obviously means a lot in this industry, but to remain competitive you 
need business acumen. Successful design businesses in the future will have to 
do what they have always done – only more so – as the range of competition 
increases.
The three main issues you will need to address are:
Business finances: your creativity counts for nothing if you are not making 
money. You need to track projects efficiently and be aware at all times of how 
much profit a job is worth to you. A sound financial advisor with a knowledge 
of the design industry is essential, someone who will ask awkward questions 
like ‘why?’ and ‘how?’ in Board/management meetings. Likewise business 
consultants are useful to give you an external view on what you are doing.
Measure your success: every project has a goal behind it, and the client will 
be measuring the success of your work. You need to understand the matrix 
they are using before you start work, and ask to be included in the reviews 
once completed. You will then build up a library of case studies illustrating your 
1.
2.
D&AD exists to perpetuate brilliance in commercial creativity. Founded in 1962 by a group 
of London-based designers and art directors, including David Bailey, Terence Donovan, Alan 
Fletcher and Colin Forbes, the group was dedicated to celebrating creative communication, 
rewarding its practitioners and raising standards across the industry. D&AD continues that 
tradition to this day through its internationally renowned Yellow and Black Pencil awards, the 
Annual, and its Membership. Underpinning all activities is the fundamental belief that it is the 
responsibility of the industry to help nurture the next creative generation. As a not-for-profit 
organisation, D&AD invests in ambitious and influential education programmes that yield 
tangible benefits for industry and practitioners, both for students and for tutors and course 
leaders. The D&AD professional development programmes are about the practice of creativity, 
with workshops and training designed to encourage experimentation and exploration, to 
develop skills and challenge complacency. 

374 How to Run a Successful Design Business
effectiveness in a language that clients appreciate. These are worth their weight 
in gold for new business development.
Positioning: there is a plethora of design businesses in the UK, all claiming to be 
unique. To be successful, a design business actually has to do to itself what it does 
for its clients: you need to differentiate your business from your competitors. 
Clients are dazzled by the array of choice available to them and will always look 
for something different. What is your USP?
DESIGN COUNCIL 
David Godber 
Deputy Chief Executive 
www.designcouncil.org.uk
Design businesses have a lot to think about if they want to succeed. So what would 
I do?
I’d be optimistic. A lot of old ideas have stopped working, so business is unusually 
receptive to new ones.
I’d be realistic. A business can’t run on creativity alone. It needs targets, future 
plans and a story for the bank manager. You owe your team nothing less.
I’d look at what’s fantastic. There’s some amazing work out there and many 
awards have been won. Start with ‘That’s brilliant’ and you should be in about the 
right place.
I’d seek to understand a client’s business and what it is they want to invest in. 
Everyone pitches credentials, but what value will you add to a client’s business? Set 
tangible business objectives for your clients and you’ll win business.
I’d make sure my presentation skills match my design skills. If you can’t present 
an idea, a client won’t buy it. Today, there’s more competition and it’s chasing fewer 
clients. A good first impression and pitch has never mattered more.
I’d join in with networks. Many networks exist to support businesses in general, 
and also in specific disciplines. There are also plenty of people out there who have 
been helped, and are now happy to help. Don’t be afraid to ask for a little time over 
a large cup of coffee!
3.
The Design Business Association (DBA) is the trade association for the UK design industry. It helps 
design consultancies become more professional and profitable by offering a range of industry 
specific membership services, training courses, events and awards. Its services for members range 
from free legal help to benchmarks on charge-out rates and salary levels. DBA training courses and 
events are for both design professionals and buyers of design: they cover business issues within 
design and are led by many of the contributors in this book. The annual DBA Design Effectiveness 
Awards are judged by clients and focus on the commercial impact of a design project. They are 
sought after by designers and clients alike because they are rewards for effectiveness rather than 
pure aesthetics. DBA member companies cover all design disciplines and are the cream of the UK 
design industry. A directory of members can be found on the DBA website.

375
the design bodies
I’d be practical. Finance, IT and HR may not be fun, but getting it right makes all 
the difference. Time spent brushing up business skills is time well spent.
Finally, I’d be curious. The more you know about design, and also culture, 
industry, politics and everything else, the better you’ll get at making great ideas 
work. To misquote Kipling (or was it Billy Bragg?), what do they know of design 
who only design know?
DESIGN MANAGEMENT INSTITUTE (DMI) 
Dr Thomas Lockwood 
President 
www.dmi.org
The design organisation of the future will be one that is focused on collaboration 
and integration. Design per se is no longer about single discipline solutions to simple 
problems; rather, it involves multiple design disciplines, multiple touch points and 
diverse teams of people working together. This is because projects are rarely just 
‘stand alone’; more often they are part of a holistic customer experience. Design 
will be seen more as enabling experiences, and enabling innovations, so it must be 
considered as part of a larger initiative. Therefore, the designer and design manager 
must be skilled and committed to integrated work methods and processes in the 
future. In this way they can add value and be assured of a continuing important role 
in product, service and experience creations.
The other area for the design business to be focused on in the future is in business 
transformation. The global recession forced many executives to rethink their 
entire business models. The new innovations, and even new business focus, must 
be conceptualised, visualised, prototyped, tested and revised, often many times. 
This creates a significant opportunity for designers and design thinkers to play an 
important role. Much future work will be in conceiving new business scenarios, 
as much as individual project implementation. So the design business should be 
open to the fuzzy front-end, seemingly poorly briefed projects, and to expanding 
the scope of influence. Since everything needs to be designed, and the future is not 
likely to mirror the past, the future of the design business is deep and wide.
The Design Council helps designers, businesses and public services perform better to make Britain 
more creative, sustainable and competitive. As well as promoting the value of design, it provides:
Coaching for private and public sector decision makers, through support programmes that 
give them the skills to spot design opportunities, brief designers and manage projects.
Practical design responses to major national challenges by creating opportunities 
for designers, business people, public sector managers and others to come together 
and demonstrate design’s potential in areas from healthcare and crime to water 
conservation.
Backing for the design sector through leadership on improving design skills and 
education, and active investment in initiatives that strengthen the sector.
•
•
•

376 How to Run a Successful Design Business
DESIGN PARTNERS 
Andrew Summers CMG 
Chairman 
www.uktradeinvest.gov.uk
Data has shown that design companies and design-led companies which work 
internationally are also the most successful in their home markets. This comes 
from being open to much tougher competition and having to do everything better: 
marketing, finance, systems, people management, innovation and, of course, 
design.
For small businesses, there are considerable risks in working internationally, 
especially those of handling different market conditions and stretching scarce 
resource. But the benefits of greater market opportunities, of having to develop a 
clear competitive proposition, and of exposing yourself to worldwide influences 
are likely to put you in a stronger long-term position. And you don’t have to be 
large to build a global reputation: some of the most successful UK-based design 
consultancies in the world have less than 50 people.
The UK has the benefit of providing a strong backdrop from which to pursue 
international business. We have a long design tradition and are known for being 
business-focused, good at problem-solving, and providing creative imagination, 
often quirky. London, especially, has the reputation as one of the world’s great 
creative cities, and the profusion of creative activities in the capital – from theatre 
to TV, film to fashion, art to architecture, and design to digital media – creates 
something special which is valuable in promoting the UK around the world. We 
need to make sure this is done in an accessible, and not arrogant, way, but it is a 
good starting point to get through the door of prospective clients.
Much of this has grown up from the bottom. Government policy has helped, 
especially over the last decade, but the strength comes from the great creative abilities 
of so many people from so many cultures working in so many fields. Economics and 
politics have some short-term effect, but the underlying strengths of UK creativity 
and design are with us for the long term.
Since 1975, DMI has been committed to improving organisations worldwide through the 
effective integration and management of design and design principles for economic, social 
and environmental benefit. It connects the world’s design leaders to the inspiration, knowledge 
and community they need to succeed. It connects design to business, to culture, to customers 
– to the changing world – and brings together educators, researchers, designers and leaders 
from every design discipline, every industry and every corner of the planet: the results are 
transformational. DMI has members in 44 countries, produces conferences and seminars, 
conducts research and publishes a practitioner magazine and an academic journal. It has 
produced over 800 articles about the role of design in business, 33 teaching case studies for 
Harvard Business School, five books and over 100 conferences. Over the decades, DMI has 
been the place where the world’s most experienced, creative, and ambitious design leaders 
gather to share, distil and amplify their knowledge. 

377
the design bodies
DESIGN WALES 
Gavin Cawood 
Operations Director 
www.designwales.org; www.seeproject.org
Since 1994 we have acted as an independent honest broker in over a thousand 
meetings where clients were discussing a project with design consultants for the 
first time. On every occasion, what the client most wanted to see was the potential 
for their own project. The only way to do this is by showing aspirational examples 
of work from the same market sector they are in.
If designers get this right, clients will be prepared both to pay more and to seek 
them out to make use of their expertise within a specific market sector. This will not 
happen by accident.
Like any business, in order to remain competitive and realise growth design 
businesses must undertake proper business planning processes. This should not 
simply be for the amount of work they need to find to pay the bills, but to make the 
most of their strengths and to build a profile in specific target markets. In essence, 
they must give clients a strong reason to commission them over and above cost.
Design Partners works to increase the UK’s international design business. It is a partnership of 
the main UK design bodies and Government bodies involved in supporting UK designers and 
design companies internationally. The main focus is on design consultancies (in the fields of 
product and industrial design, graphic design, branding, digital design, interior design and 
exhibition design) and on designer-makers (in the fields of furniture, lighting, ceramics, textiles, 
jewellery, metal, wood and glass). Design Partners acts as the advisory group on design to UK 
Trade & Investment, and is a key part of the international marketing strategy for the creative 
industries. It works mainly through British Embassies around the world, supporting exhibitions, 
seminars, outward and inward missions and providing information on market opportunities. 
Design Wales is an international centre of expertise for design support and related national and 
regional policy. Activities include:
Support services for business. Delivered on behalf of regional economic development 
offices and independent business organisations, these workshops, training courses 
and events support industry in understanding and managing design issues.
Design policy and programme advice for regional economic development offices. Helping 
regional economic development offices understand the role of design, develop their own 
regional policy and support programmes, and train local business support staff.
Design networks in the UK and Europe. Leading a number of design networks in 
Europe and the UK provides engagement with a broad spectrum of partners and 
insight to global best practice in supporting design within industry.
Design policy research. Building understanding of the role of design support and 
promotion in economic development at a policy level. Since 2002, Design Wales has 
hosted the bi-annual International Workshop on Design Support.
•
•
•
•

378 How to Run a Successful Design Business
NEW DESIGNERS 
Isobel Dennis 
Director, Upper Street Events 
Event Director, New Designers  
www.newdesigners.com; www.upperstreetevents.co.uk
Remaining competitive now and in the future follows simple rules, none of which 
is exhaustive.
Apart from the quality of your work, how you communicate with a client, 
customer or future employer – whether it be electronically, on paper or face-to-face 
– is critical. If they’re not impressed with your personal presentation (and I don’t 
mean how you dress) it will affect their opinion of you, and this may be before 
you’ve had a chance to present your work.
Do your research: gathering information, broadening your knowledge base, and 
looking outside the obvious will keep your work fresh, competitive and relevant.
If you’re able to speak directly to the client before a presentation, ask open 
questions to gather more information: Who? What? Where? How? Why? Look at 
websites, including your client’s competitors, and understand who they are. Look 
for a ‘mission statement’ as it can give you a simple, but important, insight into 
their long-term strategies. Prepare well.
Sign up to relevant e-newsletters, including city ones, as they will give you short, 
sharp, sound-bite news on issues that may affect, enhance and give the edge to the 
project you are working on. Differentiation is key in most projects whether it be a 
commission for jewellery or an architectural brief.
Try not to hide behind glossy technology. Don’t dismiss the simple craft of 
drawing and the ability to drop ideas and sketches directly on to paper, as it still 
remains a powerful tool. It shows how you think, how in tune you are with the 
project and your level of energy for it.
Finally, relationship-building is critical, and will give you the competitive edge. 
Look after your clients: people like to work with someone they like, can trust, who 
is reliable, understands their needs, responds to their business, and who listens and 
delivers.
New Designers, organised by Upper Street Events, showcases the best in graduate design. The 
UK is a world leader in design education, and continues to produce talented design graduates. 
Every July in London at New Designers, some 3,500 newly graduated designers come together 
representing the top 200 design courses from across the nation to meet industry employers, the 
media, trend predictors and a design hungry public. It is seen as an essential resource for all who 
attend and an invaluable springboard for all who exhibit. The event runs for two weeks, with 
nine design zones and two prestigious awards evenings. It is supported by industry partners who 
recognise the importance of nurturing design and creativity for the future of their businesses. 
From animation to architecture, graphics to glass and fashion to furniture, New Designers is about 
vibrant content, celebration and reputation. It is an event for fresh thinking and aspiration.

379
the design bodies
ROYAL COLLEGE OF ART (RCA) 
Paul Thompson 
Rector and Vice Provost 
www.rca.ac.uk
Like any professionals, designers must never let their antennae droop for one 
moment. They have to be acute observers of social and market trends. They must 
ensure that their studios draw from a strong well-spring of creative talent, and never 
become stale or complacent.
Whether in the field of architecture or communications, it is vital to manage 
growth: don’t take on more projects than you can deliver at the highest creative 
and service levels. Being over extended, and delivering lacklustre projects because 
you’re too busy to create something really fresh, kills reputation and ultimately 
competitiveness.
ROYAL INSTITUTE OF BRITISH ARCHITECTS (RIBA) 
Harry Rich 
Chief Executive 
www.architecture.com
The next few years are going to be challenging and increasingly competitive for 
UK design businesses, both in the UK and internationally. The Royal Institute of 
British Architects’ (RIBA) surveys of the architectural profession and RIBA Chartered 
Practices, which operate internationally, reveal sea-changes to clients, forms of 
procurement and commissioning as well as environmental and technological 
changes and a global shift of economic power from West to East.
For any design business to survive, let alone be competitive and grow, it must 
think like a business:
One of the world’s leading universities of art and design, the Royal College of Art sits at the heart 
of an exceptional network, linking creativity with business innovation. Companies looking for 
ways in which to engage with the work of the College, whether working directly with students 
and staff on sponsored projects, supporting innovative research or using its facilities, have a 
number of opportunities:
InnovationRCA enables the College’s business partners to innovate more effectively, by 
accessing the knowledge and talent of the RCA.
Design London combines world-class creativity and expertise in design engineering 
from the RCA, and engineering, technology and business from Imperial College 
London.
The Helen Hamlyn Centre provides a multi-disciplinary focus for people-centred design 
and innovation by undertaking practical research and projects with industry.
Rapidform brings together the College’s digital design, prototyping and manufacturing 
technologies and makes them available to SMEs in the Greater London area.
•
•
•
•

380 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Think radical. Conventional wisdom is less useful in changing times, so think 
differently and be counter-intuitive.
Be clear about value. Demonstrate real benefits and value to your clients and their 
customers and end-users. Don’t compete on lowest cost, but on best value.
Be adaptable but focused. Be prepared to change, but keep to what you are good 
at or only diversify into areas you have something unique to offer.
Watch the bottom line. Carefully manage your costs and credit control. Invoice 
often and quickly. Have contingency plans in place to be able to deal quickly 
with a declining situation, including writing off bad debts and reducing staff 
and overheads.
Know your competition. Benchmark yourself against your competitors and 
peers. Competition will be much higher in tough times and in any attractive 
new markets, so you need to stay ahead of the game.
Look to the future. Learn new skills and develop new contacts. Market, network, 
keep on the look-out and set yourself up for any new opportunities and changing 
markets.
Keep positive. Hold on to an upbeat and ‘can-do’ attitude. Be the person with 
the solutions not the problems. Present yourself as an enabler, someone who 
adds value.
THE SORRELL FOUNDATION 
Sir John Sorrell CBE 
Co-Chair 
www.thesorrellfoundation.com
Ask yourselves these questions:
Uniqueness. What is special about our business? Why should someone give us 
the job? What is our added value? Are we competing on price or skill? Do we 
have more expertise or market knowledge than our competitors? Are we better 
organised or more creative? Be brutally honest. If you don’t know your point of 
differentiation you won’t be competitive for long.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
1.
As the voice of architecture in the UK since its foundation over 175 years ago, the Royal 
Institute of British Architects (RIBA) champions good design to Government, the public and 
the construction industry. It believes that everyday life can, and must, be improved through 
better-designed buildings and communities, and that the architect’s role is crucial. The Institute 
provides support for its 40,500 members through a network of regional offices, nationally 
and worldwide, in the form of training, tailored services, publications and events, and it sets 
standards for the education of architects, both in the UK and overseas. Its annual award schemes 
recognise outstanding architecture and culminate in the RIBA Stirling Prize televised by Channel 
4. At its London headquarters, the RIBA helps the public learn more about architecture through 
information services, a book shop and a world-class library that includes an unrivalled collection 
of books, photographs, drawings and manuscripts. 

381
the design bodies
Planning. Why are we in business? Is it for lifestyle, money, to change the world 
or what? Where do we want to be in a year, three years, ten years? How are we 
going to get there? You need to understand your motivations and have a plan 
for getting to where you want to be.
Creativity. How can we embed a creative culture in the business? What can we 
do to help our people develop their skills? Creativity should be at the heart 
of your business. The best creative businesses don’t just happen: they develop 
deliberate strategies which affect their values and culture.
Systems. Could we be more organised? Are our systems as good as they could be? 
Do we know our financial situation all the time? Are we good at the details of 
business? Do we have brilliant marketing and new business systems? If you have 
good systems in place for managing time, money, people and premises, you can 
approach your work for clients with absolute focus.
People. Have we got the right staff? Are they brilliant individually? Can they 
work as a team? What will we do if key players leave? What is our recruitment 
policy? People will make or break your business. Look after them, be generous 
and expect a lot in return. Build a team which wants to be successful together. 
And celebrate success when it happens.
UK DESIGN ALLIANCE 
Lesley Morris 
Head of Design Skills, Design Council 
Director, UK Design Alliance 
www.designcouncil.org.uk/gooddesignpractice
How can the UK design industry remain as world class in the future as it is today? You 
may well think the industry is doing fine, but in the face of increasing competition 
and new applications for design, designers need to be even better at what they do. 
They are increasingly called on to do more than just design. They need strategic 
business awareness to influence clients’ thinking and a deeper understanding of 
the context for their work. They need to appreciate their role in environmentally 
sustainable production. They have to be comfortable working with non-designers 
in pursuit of innovation, be they technologists or users with ideas that need to 
2.
3.
4.
5.
The Sorrell Foundation aims to inspire creativity in young people and improve the quality of life 
through good design. It works with young people in primary and secondary schools, academies 
and universities, as well as with those not in school. The Foundation supports Building Schools 
for the Future, the Primary Capital and Academies programmes to help pupils create briefs 
for their new schools. Other work includes Designing Out Crime, an investigation with young 
people into issues concerning crime, and the Young Design Programme in which student 
designers work as consultants for pupils in schools. The Sorrell Foundation Young Design 
Centre at Somerset House, London, provides a base for hosting visits and workshops with 
young people from across England. The Foundation draws on an expert network of designers 
and architects, many of whom have worked with young people as clients.

382 How to Run a Successful Design Business
be orchestrated and refined into tangible solutions to problems. And they need 
sharper business and professional practice skills alongside the craft and technical 
ability designers already have in abundance.
At the Design Council, we’ve been working with partners across the design sector 
to see how skills can be developed to address the industry’s future needs. The UK 
Design Alliance is one of the results and its partners are supporting both industry 
and education to deliver the initiatives and projects necessary to trigger change. 
These practical ideas include linking design education more firmly to professional 
practice, making that practice more robust through training and rewarding the best 
design teaching in schools. The Good Design Practice campaign is raising awareness 
and promoting the need for these actions, particularly to designers who need to 
carry on learning after they leave education, so their careers stay on an upward 
trajectory and their businesses flourish.
The UK Design Alliance, founded by the Design Council and Creative & Cultural Skills, is a 
group of design sector bodies, working together to help develop the professional skills the 
industry needs. The Alliance is running the Good Design Practice campaign and its partners 
are supporting design education in schools and colleges as well as encouraging designers to 
undertake professional training and development. 

Section Nine: 
The Reference Library

This page has been left blank intentionally

The reference library
1  UK DESIGN MEMBERSHIP BODIES
The UK design sector is fortunate in having a number of excellent membership 
associations and organisations; some are for corporate members, others are for 
individuals. As well as those listed below, you can find details of many others, 
including discipline-specific and regional design networks, on the Design Council 
website: www.designcouncil.org.uk.
BDI (British Design Innovation)  For industrial and service designers, innovation 
professionals. Various membership options. www.britishdesigninnovation.org
BIID (British Institute of Interior Design)  For interior designers. Corporate and 
individual membership. www.biid.org.uk
CSD (Chartered Society of Designers)  Professional body for designers of all 
disciplines. Individual membership. www.csd.org.uk
D&AD (British Design and Art Direction)  For people in design and advertising. 
Individual membership. www.dandad.org
DBA (Design Business Association)  Trade association for the design industry, all 
disciplines. Corporate membership. www.dba.org.uk
RIBA (Royal Institute of British Architects)  For architects. Individual and 
Chartered Practice membership. www.architecture.com
RSA (Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and 
Commerce)  Develops and promotes thinking on human fulfilment and social 
progress. Fellowship. www.thersa.org
SBID (Society of British Interior Design)  For interior design. Corporate and 
individual membership. www.thesocietyofbritishinteriordesign.org
UKWDA (UK Web Design Association)  For the web design and new media sector. 
Corporate and individual membership. www.ukwda.org
2  INTERNATIONAL DESIGN MEMBERSHIP BODIES
There are also many international design organisations which can supply useful 
information and knowledge, and which often provide networking opportunities 
through their events and conferences. Here is a selection.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

386 How to Run a Successful Design Business
For design professionals and design businesses
DMI (Design Management Institute)  For designers, educators, researchers, 
design leaders. Individual membership. www.dmi.org
ICOGRADA (International Council of Graphic Design Associations)  For 
graphic design. Membership: design associations, companies, individuals. 
www.icograda.org
ICSID (International Council of Societies of Industrial Design)  For industrial 
design. Membership: design associations, companies, individuals. www.icsid.org
IFI (International Federation of Interior Architects and Designers)  Organisation 
for interior design organisations. www.ifiworld.org
IDSA (Industrial Designers Society of America)  For industrial designers. 
Individual membership. www.idsa.org
PDA (Pan-European Brand Design Association)  For brand design agencies. 
Corporate membership. www.pda-europe.com
For design associations and other bodies
BEDA (The Bureau of European Design Associations)  The organisation for 
European design organisations. www.beda.org
ICOGRADA 
(International 
Council 
of 
Graphic 
Design 
Associations) 
For graphic design. Membership: design associations, companies, individuals. 
www.icograda.org
ICSID (International Council of Societies of Industrial Design)  For industrial 
design. Membership: design associations, companies, individuals. www.icsid.org
SEE (Sharing Experience Europe)  European network on regional and national 
design policies. www.seeproject.org
3  UK DESIGN AND CREATIVE SECTOR SUPPORT
The UK also has an enviable level of design support organisations, largely 
Government-funded. Here are some of the bodies which operate in both the design 
sector and in the wider creative services arena. Again, the Design Council website 
contains details of other support organisations: www.designcouncil.org.uk.
Design
Design Council  UK national strategic body for design. www.designcouncil.org.uk
Design Partners  Design Partners works to increase the UK’s international design 
business. www.uktradeinvest.gov.uk
Design Wales  Centre of expertise for design support and related national and 
regional policy. www.designwales.org
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

387
the reference library
Northern Ireland Design Alliance  Supports designers in Northern Ireland.  
www.nidesignalliance.com
UK Design Alliance  Group of design sector bodies working to develop 
the 
industry’s 
professional 
skills. 
www.designcouncil.org.uk 
and  
www.gooddesignpractice.org.uk.
Creative services
British 
Council  Organisation 
for 
educational 
and 
cultural 
relations.  
www.britishcouncil.org.uk
Creative Choices  Online service providing tools, knowledge and networks. 
www.creative-choices.co.uk
Creative and Cultural Skills  Sector Skills Council for advertising and design 
among others. www.ccskills.org.uk
Creative Partnerships  Government creative learning programme for young 
people. www.creative-partnerships.com
Cultural Leadership  Government-funded investment in leadership excellence 
in creative and cultural industries. www.culturalleadership.org.uk
NESTA (National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts)  Invests in 
companies, informs policy, encourages innovation culture. www.nesta.org.uk
UK Creative Industries Marketing Toolkit  UK Trade and Investment supported 
resource for international marketing activities. www.creative-industries.co.uk
4  UK BUSINESS ORGANISATIONS
In addition to becoming a member of a design association or organisation, you 
might consider joining a more general business body which can provide useful 
contacts and networking opportunities.
Chambers of Commerce  National body for Accredited Chambers of Commerce 
across the UK. www.britishchambers.org.uk
CBI (Confederation of British Industry)  Organisation supporting the needs of 
British business. Corporate membership. www.cbi.org.uk
Federation of Small Businesses  Promotes and protects interests of self-employed 
and owners of small firms. www.fsb.org.uk
IoD (Institute of Directors)  Organisation providing professional business 
support. Individual membership. www.iod.com
5  BUSINESS SUPPORT AND INFORMATION
There are several Government departments and other organisations which support 
UK businesses in general. Here are a few worth contacting if you need help, 
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

388 How to Run a Successful Design Business
information and advice. Some also provide occasional development funding or can 
signpost you to other funding sources.
Business Link  Advice, information and resources to help businesses succeed. 
www.businesslink.gov.uk
Companies House  Incorporates and dissolves companies; stores and makes 
available company information. www.companieshouse.gov.uk
BIS (Department for Business, Innovation and Skills)  Key role: to build Britain’s 
capabilities to compete in the global economy. www.bis.gov.uk
DCMS (Department for Culture, Media and Sport)  Responsible for government 
policy on arts, sport, media and other areas. www.culture.gov.uk
UKTI (UK Trade and Investment)  Government network dedicated to building 
British business success overseas. www.ukti.gov.uk
6  OTHER USEFUL ORGANISATIONS
There are times when we need particular information and advice, and other times 
when we need ideas and stimulation. Here is a selection of organisations which 
might help.
Design management
Design London  Joint initiative between Imperial College and Royal College of 
Art. Innovation-based. www.designlondon.net
Design Research Society  Multi-disciplinary international society for the design 
research community. www.designresearchsociety.org
Intellectual property
ACID (Anti Copying in Design)  Membership trade organisation to combat 
plagiarism in the design and creative industries. www.acid.uk.com
UK Intellectual Property Office  Grants Intellectual Property (IP) rights in the 
UK. www.ipo.gov.uk
The environment and design
Envirowise  Free, 
practical 
environmental 
advice 
to 
UK 
businesses.  
www.envirowise.gov.uk
Government and design
APDIG (Associate Parliamentary Design and Innovation Group)  Voice and 
advocate for design and innovation in UK Parliament. www.policyconnect.org.uk
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

389
the reference library
The law and design
Artlaw  Helpful and accessible articles and information on law for visual arts 
practitioners. www.artquest.org.uk/artlaw
Education and development
Helen Hamlyn Centre  Focus for people-centred design and innovation.  
www.hhc.rca.ac.uk
RCA (Royal College of Art)  One of the world’s leading postgraduate universities 
of art and design. www.rca.ac.uk
The Sorrell Foundation  Aims to inspire creativity in the young and improve 
the quality of life through good design. www.thesorrellfoundation.com
Investment
BVCA (British Venture Capital Association)  Industry body for the UK private 
equity and venture capital industry. www.bvca.co.uk
Standards
BSI (British Standards)  National standards body for the UK. www.bsi-global.com
ISO (International Organisation for Standardisation)  International standards 
body. www.iso.org
Staff recruitment and development
Investors in People  Supports and promotes staff training and development. 
www.investorsinpeople.co.uk
National 
Occupational 
Standards  Describe 
the 
skills, 
knowledge 
and 
understanding needed for particular tasks or jobs. www.ukstandards.org.uk
UK Data Protection Act
HM Government Direct Gov  www.direct.gov.uk
Information Commissioner’s Office  www.ico.gov.uk
7  UK DESIGN EXHIBITIONS, EVENTS
Getting together with other design professionals is important; doing it during an 
event or an exhibition makes it interesting and enjoyable as well.
Designer Breakfasts  Regular networking events with speakers in London, and 
online forums. www.designerbreakfasts.co.uk
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

390 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Design 
Museum  Contemporary 
design 
exhibition. 
London.  
www.designmuseum.org
London Design Festival  Annual Autumn design event in a range of venues. 
London. www.londondesignfestival.com
London Festival of Architecture  Annual summer event, city-wide. London. 
www.lfa2011.org (change year as appropriate).
New Designers in Business  Annual Summer event. Showcases the best in UK 
graduate design. London. www.newdesigners.com
V&A Museum  Design collections and exhibitions. London. www.vam.ac.uk
8  AWARD SCHEMES
Here is a selection of some of the many awards which operate in the design sector, 
compiled by Stef Brown (Chapter 5.9 The Recognition) and Shan Preddy; some cover 
wider categories than design alone. Please note that not all awards will apply to all 
design disciplines, and that entry costs and the complexity of entry requirements 
vary hugely. In addition, the awards marketplace changes frequently. The UK Design 
Council has an up-to-date list of national and international design competitions 
and awards schemes on www.designcouncil.org.uk. 
Design and creative sector awards
AIGA Annual Design Competition www.aiga.org.
ADC (Art Directors Club) Awards www.adcawards.org.
BIMA (British Interactive Media Association) Awards www.bima.co.uk.
Cannes Lions Design Awards www.canneslions.com.
Chip Shop Awards www.chipshopawards.com.
Clio Awards www.clioawards.com.
CorpComms Awards www.corpcommsmagazine.co.uk.
Creative Review Annual www.creativereview.co.uk.
D&AD Awards www.dandad.org.
DADI Awards www.dadiawards.com.
DBA Design Effectiveness Awards www.dba.org.uk and www.effectivedesign.
org.uk.
DBA/HHC Design Challenge www.dba.org.uk, www.hrc.rca.ac.uk.
Designs of the Year Awards (Design Museum) www.designsoftheyear.com.
Design Week Awards www.designweek.co.uk.
Design Week Benchmarks www.benchmarkawards.co.uk.
Dieline Awards www.thedieline.com.
Ergonomics Design Award (Institute of Ergonomics and Human Factors) www.
ergonomics.org.uk.
Eurobest www.eurobest.com.
European Design Awards (ED Awards) www.europeandesign.org.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

391
the reference library
FAB Awards www.fabawards.tv.
Fresh Awards www.freshawards.co.uk.
FX Design Awards www.fxdesignawards.co.uk.
GRAMIA Awards www.gramia.co.uk.
ID Annual Design Review www.id-mag.com.
IDEA (International Design Excellence Awards, from the Industrial Designers 
Society of America) www.idsa.org.
IF Awards www.ifdesign.de.
Innovation and Design Excellence Awards www.ideawards.co.uk.
International Design Awards http:idesignawards.com.
London International Awards www.liaawards.com.
Marcom Awards www.marcomawards.com.
Marketing Design Awards www.marketingdesignawards.com.
MEGAs (MediaGuardian Innovation Awards) www.guardian.co.uk.
Mobius Awards www.mobiusawards.com.
New York Festivals www.newyorkfestivals.com.
NMA (New Media Age) Awards  www.nmaawards.co.uk.
Pentawards www.pentawards.org.
Red Dot Awards www.red-dot.de.
Revolution Awards www.revolutionawards.com.
Roses Design Awards www.rosesdesignawards.com.
Spark Awards www.sparkawards.com.
Starpack Awards, from IoM3 (Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining)  
www.iom3.org.
UK Packaging Awards www.ukpackagingawards.co.uk.
Marketing and communication awards
CIM (Chartered Institute of Marketing) Marketing Excellence Awards  
www.cim.co.uk.
Drum Marketing Awards www.thedrum.co.uk.
Marketing Industry Network Awards www.marketingindustrynetwork.com.
Marketing Society Awards for Excellence www.marketing-society.org.uk.
Marketing Week Engage Awards www.marketingweekawards.co.uk.
Business awards
Civic Trust Awards www.civictrustawards.org.uk.
European Business Awards www.businessawardseurope.com.
Queen’s 
Awards 
for 
Enterprise 
www.businesslink.gov.uk 
and  
www.queensawards.org.uk.
The Sunday Times Top 100 Companies to Work For www.business.timesonline.
co.uk.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

392 How to Run a Successful Design Business
9  LIKE TO KNOW MORE?
If you’ve enjoyed the broader topics explored in this book, such as the size and 
scope of the design industry or where the future is going to take us, why not find 
out more? Some of the contributors have made suggestions for further reading and 
research.
For more information on the size and shape of the UK design sector, and for 
design casework, information and useful downloadable publications, Shan Preddy 
recommends:
BDI (British Design Innovation) www.britishdesigninnovation.org.
Creative and Cultural Skills www.ccskills.org.uk.
DBA (Design Business Association) www.dba.org.uk and  
www.effectivedesign.org.uk.
DCMS (Department of Media, Culture and Sport) www.culture.gov.uk.
Design Council www.designcouncil.org.uk.
Design Council Value of Design Factfinder www.designfactfinder.co.uk.
Design Council Designing Demand Programme www.designingdemand.org.uk.
Office for National Statistics www.statistics.gov.uk.
UK Design Alliance www.gooddesignpractice.org.uk.
If you want to research international design, some of the organisations Michael 
Thomson mentions in his Chapter 1.3 The Global Context are:
Centre for Innovation in Design, University of Art and Design, Helsinki  
www.taik.fi.
Chartered Society of Designers (CSD) www.csd.org.uk.
Danish Designers www.danishdesigners.com.
Danish Ministry of Economic and Business Affairs www.oem.dk.
Design Exchange, Toronto, Canada www.dx.org.
European Commission, Enterprise and Industry ec.europa.eu.
New Zealand Institute of Economic Research (NZIER) www.nzier.org.nz.
Norwegian Design Council www.norskdesign.no.
University of Cambridge Institute for Manufacturing www.ifm.eng.cam.ac.uk.
World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report www.weforum.org.
To read more about the subjects examined in his Chapters 1.5 The Future and 
2.10 The Management Issues, James Woudhuysen recommends:
Change by Design, Tim Brown, HarperBusiness, 2009.
Designing Interactions, Bill Moggridge, www.designinginteractions.com  and The 
MIT Press 2007.
From Products to Services: insights and experience from companies which have 
embraced the service economy, Laurie Young, John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

393
the reference library
Africa Research Institute www.africaresearchinstitute.org.
Business Week, published by Bloomberg www.businessweek.com.
CNN Money money.cnn.com.
Forrester www.forrester.com.
Gartner Technology www.gartner.com.
INSEAD knowledge.insead.edu.
Institution of Engineering and Technology www.theiet.org.
McKinsey&Company www.mckinseyquarterly.com.
MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) Sloan Management Review 
sloanreview.mit.edu.
Monitor www.monitor.com.
Nature www.nature.com.
New Scientist www.newscientist.com.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development www.oecd.org.
Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford www.oii.ox.ac.uk.
Science Magazine www.sciencemag.org.
Scientific American www.sciam.com.
Strategy and Business, published by Booz & Company www.strategy-business.com.
Technology Review www.technologyreview.com.
The Economist www.economist.com.
The Research and Development Society www.rdsoc.org.
The World Bank www.worldbank.org.
UK National Statistics www.statistics.gov.uk and www.ons.gov.uk.
Wharton University of Pennsylvania knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu.
If you’d like to explore financial management further Mandy Merron, author 
of the Chapters 2.6 The Money (Part One) and 3.13 The Rewards, suggests:
British Business Angels Association www.bbaa.org.uk.
Business Link www.businesslink.gov.uk.
For more information on the legal and taxation information covered in her 
Chapter 2.8 The Law, Jo Evans recommends:
Companies House www.companies-house.gov.uk.
HM Revenue & Customs www.hmrc.gov.uk.
UK Border Agency www.bia.homeoffice.gov.uk.
And for more on the subjects identified in his Chapter 2.9 The Intellectual 
Property, Darrell Stuart-Smith suggests:
The Business of Invention, Peter Bissell and Graham Barker, Wordbase, 1998.
Intellectual Property Office www.ipo.gov.uk .
World Intellectual Property Organisation www.wipo.org.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

394 How to Run a Successful Design Business
GetOnLine for checking availability of domain names and registered owners. 
www.getonline.co.uk
United States Patent and Trademark Office for searching and registering US 
trademarks and patents. www.uspto.gov
OHIM (The Trademarks and Designs Registration Office of the European Union) 
for searching and registering EU trademarks and designs. www.oami.europa.eu
Ace networker Phil Jones signposts the following social event sites mentioned 
in his Chapter 2.13 The Network:
www.bladderedagain.co.uk.
www.digitalpodge.co.uk.
www.longlunch.com.
www.manchesterdigital.com.
www.podgelunch.com.
www.shesays.org.uk.
www.typocircle.co.uk.
To find out more about the HR matters covered in Chapters 3.8 The Incoming 
Resource and 3.9 The Outgoing Resource, Kim Briggs would advise contacting:
Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development www.cipd.co.uk.
To find out more details about the question of working abroad, Christine 
Losecaat, author of Chapter 4.3 The Geography, suggests:
UKTI (UK Trade & Investment), the UK Government’s international business 
development organisation www.ukti.gov.uk.
Design Partners (UK) www.uktradeinvest.gov.uk.
The European Commission’s database, TARIC, holds information on classification 
for goods and duty rates for imports to the EU as well as other useful information 
ec.europa.eu.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office runs the global network of British 
embassies, high commissions and consulates www.fco.gov.uk.
The Institute of Export is the professional membership body for those involved 
in importing, exporting and international trade www.export.org.uk.
The World Chambers Federation (WCF) represents the interests of chambers 
of commerce and industry and has a directory of international chambers  
www.worldchambers.com.
For information and training on PR as introduced in Chapter 4.4 The Reputation, 
Julia James suggests:
The Chartered Institute of Public Relations www.cipr.co.uk.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

395
the reference library
And Tina Fegent, who wrote Chapter 4.11 The Procurement, recommends the 
following for further information on procurement:
Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply www.cips.org.
Institute for Supply Management www.ism.ws.
Supply Management www.supplymanagement.com.
CPO Agenda www.cpoagenda.com.
Procurement Leaders www.procurementleaders.com.
Supply Excellence www.supplyexcellence.com.
Office of Government Commerce www.ogc.gov.uk
Supply2.gov.uk www.supply2.gov.uk.
For more on project management, Lorna Dallas-Conte, author of Chapter 5.4 
The Projects suggests:
Project Management Institute www.pmi.org.
Association for Project Management www.apm.org.uk.
If you want to know more about market research as explored in Chapter 5.5 The 
Research, Don Preddy recommends:
MRS (The UK Market Research Society), which has useful information on 
commissioning research from specialist companies, together with a directory of 
members www.mrs.org.uk.
AQR (The Association for Qualitative Research), which has information 
specifically on qualitative research as well as a members’ directory  
www.aqr.org.uk.
To liven up your meetings and make them more productive, as introduced in 
Chapter 5.6 The Meetings, Sean Blair advises taking a look at:
Mycoted for wiki-style ideas. www.mycoted.com
And to find out more about the ideas on sustainable design mentioned in 
Chapter 5.10 The Planet, Sophie Thomas suggests:
Greengaged, which offers thought-leadership, spaces for dialogue and 
opportunities for knowledge sharing www.greengaged.com.
Three Trees Don’t Make A Forest, a social enterprise with open-access tool for 
designers www.three-trees.org.
Tree Hugger, an online media outlet with news, solutions, and product 
information www.treehugger.com.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

396 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Worldchanging.com, a non-profit media organisation comprising a global 
network of independent journalists, designers and thinkers with innovative 
solutions, tools, models and ideas www.worldchanging.com.
10  WHAT ELSE HAVE WE WRITTEN?
All of the chapter authors work in the design sector as experts in their own field. 
Some have also written other books; if you enjoyed their work here, why not take a 
look at their other publications?
Kevin Duncan
So What? Capstone, 2007.
Start, Capstone, 2008.
Tick Achieve, Capstone, 2009.
Run Your Own Business, (second edition) Hodder & Stoughton, 2010.
Small Business Survival, Hodder Education, 2010.
Business Greatest Hits, A&C Black, 2010.
Marketing Greatest Hits, A&C Black, 2010.
Blair Enns
The Win Without Pitching Manifesto, Rockbench Press, 2010.
Louis Hellman
A is for Architect, Trend Publishing, 1975.
All Hellman Breaks Loose, Arcus, 1980.
Architecture for Beginners, Writers and Readers, 1988.
Archi-têtes: The Id in the Grid, John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Do It With an Architect (with Barbara Weiss), Mitchell Beazley, 1999.
Architecture A-Z: A Rough Guide, John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
Liz Lydiate
Professional Practice in Design Consultancy (editor, co-author), Design Council, 1992.
Jeremy Myerson (selection)
Making The Lowry, The Lowry Press, 2000.
IDEO: Masters of Innovation, Laurence King, London 2001.
Rewind: 40 Years of Design and Advertising (with Graham Vickers) Phaidon, 2002.
The 21st Century Office (with Philip Ross) Laurence King, 2003.
•

397
the reference library
Space To Work: New Office Design (with Philip Ross) Laurence King, 2006.
Gordon Russell: Designer of Furniture, second edition, Gower, 2008.
New Demographics New Workplace (with Alma Erlich, Jo-Anne Bichard), Gower, 
2010.
Shan Preddy
How to Market Design Consultancy Services: Finding, Winning Keeping and Developing 
Clients, second edition, Gower, 2004.
Marketing en Acquisitie voor Ontwerpers (Dutch edition of How to Market Design 
Consultancy Services), BIS Publishing, 2006.
James Woudhuysen
Einstein: The First Hundred Years (with Maurice Goldsmith, David Mackay), Pergamon, 
1980.
Central to Design, Central to Industry, Central School of Art & Design, 1983.
Robots (with Stephen Bayley), Conran Foundation, 1984.
Why is Construction so Backward? (with Ian Abley), Wiley, 2004.
Energise! A Future for Energy Innovation (with Joe Kaplinsky), Beautiful Books, 2009.

This page has been left blank intentionally

Section Ten: 
The Contributors

This page has been left blank intentionally

The contributors
The people who have written the chapters in this book all work in design. The 
majority of them are specialist advisers, consultants and coaches to design 
businesses; others are design sector authors, journalists, academics and strategists. 
The cartoonist, Louis Hellman, whose work appears in the design press, trained 
as an architect.
Most of them know each other and many of them regularly work together, 
sharing complementary knowledge, experience and expertise. Even those who are, 
on the face of it, competitors understand that they have different capabilities and 
skills and will join forces on projects which would benefit from more than one 
input.
Some of them work exclusively in design; others spread their net wider into 
the creative services arena. Some are accredited consultants on the DBA Experts 
Register, and some teach on the acclaimed DBA Professional Practice training 
programmes.
All of them, however, are leading experts in their own field of activity.
GARY BAXTER, LIGHTBOX CONSULTING
www.lightboxconsulting.co.uk
Gary has worked with design consultancies since 
1984, firstly as an external auditor and tax consultant, 
and then as Finance Director of The Partners for 
eight years. He has been an independent consultant 
for more than ten years, advising design businesses 
ranging from start-up firms to mature companies.
	
Design Business Association (DBA) Experts Register www.dbaexpertsregister.org.uk
	
Design Business Association (DBA) www.dba.org.uk

402 How to Run a Successful Design Business
ANN BINNIE, PARTNER, AMETHIST
www.amethist.co.uk
Ann worked as Board Planning Director in top 
London advertising agencies before becoming 
an independent. She co-founded Amethist in 
2000 to apply planning principles, consultancy 
and facilitation skills to strategy, positioning and 
development in the wider branding and design 
world; Amethist also has capabilities in international 
research and qualitative B2B segmentation. Ann 
has an MSc in Business Studies and is a qualified 
Enneagram teacher. She is a full member of the 
Market Research Society, a member of the Marketing 
Society and a Fellow of the RSA.
SEAN BLAIR, FOUNDER, PROMEET
www.promeet.co.uk
Sean trained and practised as an industrial designer 
before becoming Design Director of the UK Design 
Council. There, he advised ministers on the economic 
benefits of good design and regularly wrote about and 
lectured on good design, both in the UK and overseas. 
His career as a participative design leader led him to 
work on a wide range of projects from airports to cancer 
units, from start-up companies to corporations, and 
from regional development agencies to universities 
and government departments. His consultancy 
ProMeet improves meeting experiences. Sean is an 
Honorary Fellow in Enterprise at Durham University Business School, an Associate 
of the National School for Government and a Trustee of the RSA.

403
the contributors
KATE BLANDFORD, MANAGING DIRECTOR, KATE 
BLANDFORD CONSULTING
www.kateblandfordconsulting.com
Kate has spent over 20 years in brand development 
and packaging, half agency-side and half client-
side; this gives her a rounded view with insight 
into making agency-client relationships fruitful and 
enjoyable partnerships. Kate was Head of Packaging 
Design at Sainsbury’s for eight years, creating brand 
strategy and implementing packaging. Kate now 
runs her own business, Kate Blandford Consulting, 
working as an independent consultant to both 
brand owners and design agencies on business 
development strategy and client presentations, as 
well as creative strategy and design leadership issues. 
Kate is a member of the DBA Experts’ Register.
KIM BRIGGS, KIM BRIGGS HR
Kim worked in the software games industry before 
becoming Head of HR in a creative communications 
consultancy. She then set up Kim Briggs HR in 
2002, specialising in working with smaller creative 
businesses. As a generalist, Kim is experienced in all 
areas of HR from recruitment and induction through 
to exit strategies, and she works with, and trains, senior 
management in best practice. Her work is varied, 
based on her clients’ needs. Kim has a postgraduate 
diploma in HR Strategy and is fully CIPD (Chartered 
Institute of Personnel and Development) qualified. A 
BA Hons graduate, she also has a PGCE (Post-Graduate 
Certificate in Education).

404 How to Run a Successful Design Business
STEF BROWN, MARKETING & BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT 
CONSULTANT, ON POINTE MARKETING
www.onpointemarketing.com
After 15 years as a senior marketer for agencies including 
Landor Associates, The Partners and Blue Marlin 
Brand Design, Stef formed On Pointe Marketing in 
2009. Her work is geared towards building an agency’s 
reputation in order to drive the business development 
pipeline for existing and new clients. Stef develops 
marketing plans and provides agencies with ongoing 
consultancy for implementation. She has written and 
marketed over 30 winning award entries, including 
seven DBA Design Effectiveness Awards, three Design 
Agency of the Year accolades (Marketing Magazine) and 
three Packaging Agency of the Year wins (GRAMIA 
Awards). Stef regularly speaks at design events and is a guest lecturer at the IED 
Comunicazione in Milan.
JAN CASEY, CONSULTANT
www.jancasey.co.uk
With over 25 years’ experience in the creative 
industry, Jan has substantial expertise from both a 
business and consultancy perspective. Formerly a 
Board Director and shareholder at Lambie-Nairn, 
she is now an independent consultant, delivering a 
unique set of skills for clients and consultancies; she 
combines her experience as a brand consultant, project 
director, business advisor, coach and psychotherapist 
to build brands, implement projects and facilitate 
organisational change. Jan regularly chairs seminars 
on the creative industry including ‘Meeting of Minds’, 
an annual symposium held at the British Museum. She runs a training module for 
the DBA, and is a Fellow of the RSA.

405
the contributors
MADELAINE COOPER, FOUNDER, HEROES
www.brilliantheroes.com
With a BA (Hons) in Film and Literature and an 
MSc in Adult Life Development, Madelaine is a 
talent broker and coach. She worked in branding, 
communication and the creative industries in the 
UK and New York before creating MCV Recruitment 
in 1995. Madelaine frequently participates in Career 
Forums, and provides coaching to individuals as well 
as to companies. She is the founder of Heroes, a talent 
agency which matches people and projects, giving 
agencies and businesses access to creative, branding 
and communications experts on an as-needed basis.
LORNA DALLAS-CONTE, CREATIVE CONSULTANT AND 
EDUCATOR
www.dallas-conte.co.uk
Lorna is a consultant and educator. Her work 
encompasses 
business 
creation, 
raising 
finance, 
research, project management, facilitation, mentoring 
and training activity. She has worked extensively in 
areas of regeneration in the South East and London, 
contributing to the building of creative communities 
and networks. Her clients range from large public and 
private bodies to smaller creative consultancies and 
individuals, and she is a consultant, principal lecturer 
and programme director for the University of the Arts. 
She has published research commissioned by the Arts 
Council of England. Lorna is unusual in that she holds 
an ACIB (Associate of the Chartered Institute of Bankers) as well as a MA in Design 
Studies.

406 How to Run a Successful Design Business
DEBORAH DAWTON, CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DESIGN 
BUSINESS ASSOCIATION
www.dba.org.uk
Deborah graduated in industrial design from the 
University of Northumbria in Newcastle. She worked 
on the Student Design Awards at the RSA, before 
setting up her own business, Design Events, which 
delivered design-sector conferences, events and 
competitions all over Europe. In 2003, she became 
CEO of the Design Business Association (DBA), a 
membership organisation whose remit is to drive 
up the professionalism of the design industry and 
the profile of design’s value in business. Deborah is 
President-Elect of BEDA (Bureau of European Design 
Associations), which liaises between its members and the authorities of the European 
Union in order to communicate and promote the value of design and innovation to 
the European economy.
PEERS DE TRENSÉ, TAPESTRY CONSULTING
www.tapestryconsulting.co.uk
Peers advises owners and managers of design companies 
on the growth and development of their businesses; 
he mentors partners and acts in an executive or non-
executive role. Peers has over 20 years’ experience 
in the design industry. From 1988 to 1996, he was a 
shareholder and Marketing Director of Worthington 
and Company, successfully selling the business to 
Havas subsidiary Conran Design Group (CDG). He 
became Executive Business Development Director at 
CDG, before leaving to set up his own consultancy 
in 2006. Peers is a Business Leader of the Marketing 
Society, and a member of the DBA Experts’ Register and 
of Brilliant Heroes. He lectures for the DBA and the University of Wales.

407
the contributors
KEVIN DUNCAN, OWNER, EXPERT ADVICE
www.expertadviceonline.com
Kevin is a business adviser, marketing expert, 
motivational speaker and author. After 20 years in 
advertising, he became an independent trouble-
shooter, advising companies on how to change 
their businesses for the better through change 
management programmes, non-executive work and 
better pitching.
BLAIR ENNS, FOUNDER, WIN WITHOUT PITCHING
www.winwithoutpitching.com
Blair is a Canadian-based business development 
consultant to marketing communication firms 
worldwide. He helps design firms transform from 
a high-cost, low-integrity, pitch-based business 
development strategy to one where the firm commands 
the high ground in the relationship and shapes how 
its services are bought and sold. Blair is the author 
of The Win Without Pitching Manifesto, published 
by Rockbench Press (2010), the self-published Win 
Without Pitching Guidebook, and the free Win Without 
Pitching Newsletter.
JO EVANS, PARTNER, LEWIS SILKIN
www.lewissilkin.com
Jo is a corporate lawyer at Lewis Silkin, acting for 
owner-managed businesses, particularly in the creative 
industries sector. She advises entrepreneurs at every 
stage of the corporate lifecycle, from inception of the 
business, through growth and fundraising to a trade 
sale or flotation. Lewis Silkin is a commercial law firm 
with an unrivalled client base in the creative and 

408 How to Run a Successful Design Business
communications industries. As well as design, advertising, digital, PR and direct 
marketing agencies, the firm acts for brand and platform owners, advising and 
supporting clients with all of their commercial legal needs.
TINA FEGENT, MANAGING DIRECTOR, TINA FEGENT 
CONSULTANCY
www.tinafegent.com
Tina has a unique background, having worked in 
procurement for both clients and agencies. She set up and 
ran the Marketing Procurement teams for O2, GSK and 
Orange/France Telecom before joining Grey Advertising 
as their Commercial Director; this was followed by the 
same role at Lowe Advertising. She set up Tina Fegent 
Consultancy in 2006 to offer procurement support to 
clients and agencies. Tina chairs the CIPS (Chartered 
Institute of Purchasing and Supply) Specialist Knowledge 
Group on Marketing Purchasing, and developed and ran 
the ‘Procurement for non-Procurement Managers’ course 
for the IPA (Institute of Practitioners in Advertising). She 
is a trainer for the CIPS Marketing Collection courses.
LOUIS HELLMAN
www.louishellman.co.uk
Louis, who provided the cartoons for this book, studied 
in London and Paris before working as an architect; he 
then branched out on his own to design healthcare 
buildings and home adaptations for disabled people. 
His cartoons have appeared in numerous professional 
and national publications including Design Week. He 
has written for the press, lectured extensively in the 
UK, Australia and the United States and had exhibitions 
throughout Europe. He has shown his work at the 
Royal Academy Summer Exhibition every year since 
1998. Louis received an MBE in 1993 for services to 
architecture, and an Honorary Degree from Oxford Brookes University in 2002.

409
the contributors
JULIA JAMES, DIRECTOR, JULIA JAMES PUBLIC 
RELATIONS LTD
www.juliajamespr.com
Julia has over 15 years’ experience within the design 
industry. She set up her own consultancy in 2006, 
providing PR and reputation management to the creative 
industry. Prior to this, Julia spent four years conducting 
a PR programme for the graphic design consultancy, 
Edward Briscoe Design, and then worked for six years 
as in-house Public Relations Manager for Conran Design 
Group. Julia conducts presentations and workshops on 
PR and profile raising, and is a Member of the Chartered 
Institute of Public Relations.
PHIL JONES
www.philjones.co.uk
One of the UK’s digital pioneers, Phil founded APT, 
one of the UK’s most successful typesetting companies, 
before becoming MD of Real Time; the business 
merged in 2000 with Evans Hunt Scott to become 
ehsrealtime and then EHS Brann. Since 2004, Phil has 
worked as a mentor and non-executive director. He 
was nominated for a lifetime achievement award in 
digital at the Net Imperative Awards in 2007, and he 
is a judge for New Media Age and Revolution magazine, 
and Chairman of the DADI Awards judges. Phil 
founded the annual Podge lunches for the design, 
digital and sports sectors and was the creator of 
Bladdered by Fax and its later digital replacement, Bladdered Again.

410 How to Run a Successful Design Business
JONATHAN KIRK, BRAND CONSULTANT AND FOUNDER, 
UP TO THE LIGHT
www.uptothelight.co.uk
Jonathan held New Business Director positions 
at Fitch and EHS Brann before founding Up to the 
Light. He works with agencies on their competitive 
difference, new business and client development 
strategies and pitch effectiveness, and also provides 
training and mentoring across a range of skills. 
Jonathan interviews hundreds of clients each year, 
providing a unique perspective on the client-agency 
relationship. Jonathan is an accredited consultant on 
the DBA Experts’ register.
CHRISTINE LOSECAAT, MANAGING DIRECTOR, LITTLE 
DIPPER
www.littledipper.net
With over 20 years’ experience in the design and 
creative industries, Christine set up her consultancy, 
Little Dipper, in 2001. She is retained as Creative 
Industries Advisor to UK Trade & Investment (UKTI), 
working with the Creative Industries International 
Marketing Strategy Board and Design Partners. 
Christine chairs the Television Export Group and is 
Innovation Champion for the Olympic Legacy Unit. 
She has been actively involved in creative initiatives 
in the USA, Japan, Taiwan, South Korea and China, 
where she has driven the formation of the China 
Design Task Force, which helps introduce Chinese 
businesses to British design expertise. She now chairs UK China Partners.

411
the contributors
LIZ LYDIATE
www.thehenrylydiatepartnership.com
Liz has been influential since the 1970s in professional 
practice teaching in art, design and communication 
colleges nationally. She devised, and acts as course 
director for, the DBA Professional Practice Courses, 
and established and managed BA and MA Design 
Management Programmes at The Surrey Institute, now 
University of the Creative Arts. She established the 
MA Enterprise and Management for the Creative Arts 
(MAemca) programmes at the University of the Arts 
London (UAL). Liz now runs her own development 
consultancy, working with creative individuals and 
organisations. She acts as an External Examiner, as a 
Specialist Subject Reviewer in art and design for the Quality Assurance Agency, and 
as a consultant for Sotheby’s Institute of Art London and Singapore.
SIMON MAY, AUGUST
www.august.co.uk
With a Masters Degree in Design Strategy and 
Innovation and a background as a Management 
Consultant at PWC, Simon set up August in 1995 
to deliver innovation, brand strategy and design 
management projects to large and small businesses 
and organisations in the public and private sectors, 
as well as to creative clients. Simon was Content 
Director for the DBA ‘Design Does It’ programme 
for public sector design buyers and, as part of the 
Design Council’s ‘24/7 Manufacturing’ project, he 
mentored UK manufacturing companies in design 
and innovation. Simon is a registered mentor at 
Nesta, including the ‘Creative Pioneers’ programme.

412 How to Run a Successful Design Business
MANDY MERRON, PARTNER, KINGSTON SMITH W1
www.kingstonsmithw1.co.uk
Mandy is a partner of accountants Kingston Smith W1 
which specialises in working with the media sector. 
Mandy focuses on creative, communications and 
consulting businesses, particularly design companies. 
As well as audit and tax work, her role involves general 
advice on a variety of commercial and technical issues 
such as employee incentives, developing business plans, 
mergers and acquisitions, fund raising, pre-sale tax 
planning, advising start-up businesses and succession 
planning.
BARRY MORRIS
Barry is a business consultant with over 25 years’ 
experience working for and with small- and medium-
sized companies, particularly in the design sector. He is 
an experienced manager, skilled in change management 
and organisational development, with a strong financial 
and general management background. He has practical 
knowledge and recent experience of mergers and 
acquisitions, and has been a trustee of several charities. 
Barry runs regular workshops for the DBA (Design Business 
Association) as part of their Professional Practice course, 
and is a consultant on the DBA Experts’ Register.
JEREMY MYERSON, DIRECTOR AND 
HELEN HAMLYN PROFESSOR OF 
DESIGN, HELEN HAMLYN CENTRE, 
ROYAL COLLEGE OF ART
www.hhc.rca.ac.uk
Jeremy is Director of the Helen Hamlyn Centre at the 
Royal College of Art, London, where he holds the Helen 

413
the contributors
Hamlyn Chair of Design and is a member of the College’s senior management team. 
A writer, academic and activist in design, he founded Design Week magazine in the 
UK and established Innovation RCA, the Royal College of Art’s innovation network 
for business. The author of books on design, architecture and society, Jeremy has 
led a number of international research projects with industry and curated national 
exhibitions at the Design Museum and V&A. He is a Board Member of the Design 
Council and an adviser to a number of international design schools.
ROD PETRIE
www.rodpetrie.com
Rod graduated with a diploma in Illustration and 
Advertising from Bradford Regional College of Art 
before starting his career with Allied International 
Designers. He was promoted to the Board during the 
company’s rapid growth and eventual listing as the 
first publicly quoted design group. In 1986, he was 
a founding partner and Group Creative Director of 
Design Bridge, one of the world’s leading international 
branding agencies. In 2005, Rod started working as 
an independent coach with a specific insight into 
the creative sector, supporting emerging leaders to 
develop their personal and commercial vision and 
skills. Rod is a consultant on the DBA Experts’ Register.
DON PREDDY, PARTNER, PREDDY&CO
www.preddy.co.uk
Don, an experienced researcher, is responsible for 
the client surveys which form part of Preddy&Co’s 
consultancy programmes. After a career in television at 
the BBC and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, he 
worked in psychology as an academic researcher at the 
University of Manchester before entering the commercial 
sector. He was a founding Director of Consumer Insights, 
part of PAS (Public Attitude Surveys), before launching 
his own consultancy, Preddy Research, and is a former 
Board Director at The Research Business, now part of 
Synovate. Don is a full member of the MRS (Market 

414 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Research Society) and a member of AQR (Association for Qualitative Research), of 
which he is a previous Vice-Chair.
SHAN PREDDY, PARTNER, PREDDY&CO
www.preddy.co.uk
Shan has delivered strategic marketing consultancy 
and training programmes to design businesses 
around the world for over 20 years. A former MD of 
a Top 100 design company, she is a regular speaker 
at, and Chair of, international design conferences 
and is a skilled workshop and away-day facilitator. 
She sits on the UK Design Alliance Advisory Board, 
and is an accredited consultant on the DBA Experts’ 
Register; many of the DBA training courses are also 
run by Shan. Her professional memberships include 
the Chartered Institute of Marketing and Institute 
of Directors, and she is a Marketing Society Business 
Leader, an Elected Associate of D&AD and a Fellow of the RSA. Her book How 
to Market Design Consultancy Services, a companion to this one, has become an 
industry standard.
ADRIAN RASDALL, PARTNER, REVENUE MATTERS
www.revenue-matters.com
Adrian is a seasoned businessman with over 30 years’ 
experience in the design field. Having worked within 
design companies in a new business role, he progressed 
to managing, then forming, owning and selling design 
companies. With over 20 transactions to date, Adrian 
now advises a raft of successful companies, aiming to 
build their value for a future sale. He is an accredited 
DBA Experts’ Register consultant.

415
the contributors
LYNDA RELPH-KNIGHT, EDITOR, DESIGN WEEK
www.designweek.co.uk
Lynda has been editor of Design Week, the world’s only 
weekly design magazine, since 1989; she oversees the 
magazine, its supplements and its website. Before 
taking up that role, she worked freelance, specialising 
in the built environment and design. In 2001 Lynda 
received an honorary MA from the Surrey Institute 
of Art & Design and is a fellow of the Royal Society 
of Arts. She became an honorary Fellow of the Royal 
College of Art in June 2007.
DARRELL STUART-SMITH, MEMBER, HUMPHRIES KIRK
www.hklaw.eu
Having graduated in law from University College 
London, Darrell began his solicitor training in 
London and finished it in the Channel Islands. He 
subsequently practised as a solicitor in London 
and Exeter, before joining the commercial team at 
Humphries Kirk in Dorset, where he now advises 
design and creative consultancies on all legal aspects 
of their business. Darrell has become an expert on IPR 
(Intellectual Property Rights). He leads the team which 
provides advice to both the DBA and its members, 
and regularly writes and presents on different aspects of business law.
SOPHIE THOMAS, DIRECTOR, 
THOMAS MATTHEWS
www.thomasmatthews.com
Sophie is director and founder of Thomas Matthews, 
UK pioneers in sustainable communication design. 
She plays a vocal part in promoting sustainable 
thinking 
in 
design 
education 
and 
regularly 
participates in conferences and workshops in the 
UK and internationally. She is co-founder of the 

416 How to Run a Successful Design Business
social enterprise ‘Three Trees Don’t Make a Forest’, set up to educate and inspire 
communication designers through practical tools and advice. She is also co-founder 
of Greengaged, which organises events to encourage debate around sustainable 
design. Sophie is an active mentor for up-and-coming designers and graduates; she 
writes regularly for the design press and is a trustee for the UK Design Council.
MICHAEL THOMSON, DESIGN CONNECT
www.designconnect.com
Trained in 3D design in Belfast and Germany and 
a 
seasoned 
international 
strategist, 
consultant 
and facilitator, Michael advises clients in design, 
manufacturing, media and finance. He has consulted 
on national and regional design, and is a former 
advisor to the Secretary of State for Arts and Media, 
Vienna. As President of BEDA (Bureau of European 
Design Associations) 2007–2009, he was instrumental 
in persuading the European Commission to initiate a 
European design policy. Michael served on the Board of 
ICSID (International Council of Societies of Industrial 
Design) 2001–2005, and in 2008 was named in Design 
Week’s Hot Fifty. Programme Director for Torino World Design Capital 2008, he 
became an advisory committee member of Seoul World Design Capital 2010.
GEMMA WENT, DIRECTOR, RED CUBE MARKETING
www.redcubemarketing.com
Gemma has been a successful marketer within the 
design sector for over ten years. With a background in 
psychology, her model is grounded in understanding 
people’s desires, their needs and what they need to 
hear from brands to make them connect. A believer 
in technological innovation, she was quick to adopt 
social media as a marketing tool and has merged this 
with more traditional methods. Gemma works with 
design companies on their marketing strategy, using 
a range of marketing, PR and social media tools to 
help them achieve their business objectives. She is an 
accredited DBA Experts’ Register consultant.

417
the contributors
JAMES WOUDHUYSEN, VISITING PROFESSOR OF 
FORECASTING AND INNOVATION, DE MONTFORT 
UNIVERSITY
www.woudhuysen.com
James helped to install Britain’s first computer-
controlled car park in 1968, before graduating in 
physics. He was Editor of Design, 1979–82, and co-
founder of Blueprint magazine. Between 1983 and 
1993, he delivered an instruction manual for word 
processing, led a study on e-commerce for Fitch 
and, while at the Henley Centre for Forecasting, 
proposed that the Web should be delivered through 
television. In 1995, he became Chief of Worldwide 
Market Intelligence at Philips Consumer Electronics 
in the Netherlands, before joining Seymour Powell as 
Director in 1997. Since 2001, he has worked independently. As well as lecturing, 
James regularly writes for print and online publications and is a contributor to BBC 
Radio 4.

This page has been left blank intentionally

Index
Page numbers in italics refer to figures and 
tables.
1980s design boom  6–7
300million  325–26
360° survey  39, 110, 201, 303
999 Design Group Limited  326–27
accountancy systems  67, 72–73
accreditation  93, 95
acquisitions
buying another business  49, 64
selling your business  49–50
Adam, Robert  4
Adenauer, Konrad  195
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration 
Service (ACAS)  149
Aiken, Howard H.  81
angel investors  64
Anti Copying in Design (ACID)  388
Artlaw  389
Asia  28–29, 197
assistance for businesses  12, 18–19, 
387–88
Associate Parliamentary Design & 
Innovation Group (APDIG)  389
awards  94, 309–10
business awards  392
choosing scheme  310
creative awards  311, 390–91
design effectiveness awards  25, 30, 
305, 311
marketing and communication awards  
391
marketing, use in  311–13
submitting successful entries  310–11
balance sheet ratios  72
banks  63, 77
Barroso, José Manuel  19
Bauhaus art school, Germany  5
Baxter, Gary  401
BDI (British Design Innovation)  17, 
98–99, 371–72, 385
BEDA (Bureau of European Design 
Associations)  19, 386
Belbin, Meredith  271
benchmarking  45, 71, 111, 302
benefits, staff  167
Bentley, Nick  347
Bernstein, Leonard  189
‘the better mousetrap’ myth  43
BIDA (British Interior Design Association)  
99
BIID (British Institute of Interior Design)  385
Binnie, Ann  402
Bird, Jemima  351–52
BIS (Department for Business, Innovation 
& Skills)  388
Bissland, Richard  326–27
Black, Misha  5
Blair, Sean  395–96, 402
Blandford, Kate  403
blogs  202, 207, 210–12, 312
Blue Marlin  328
Board of Directors
of client’s business  90, 200, 220
of design business  116–17

420 How to Run a Successful Design Business
bonuses  166, 168
Boxer  329–30
break-even figures  69
BRIC countries  20
briefings  124, 281
briefs  277–78
assessing work against  126
and briefings  281
client changes to  266
contents of  279–80
getting it right  280
helping clients define  280–81
ignoring  220
quality of  278–79
sustainability, working in  319–20
understanding  124, 221
Briggs, Kim  394, 403
British Business Angels Network  64, 393
British Council  387
British Design and Art Direction (D&AD)  
98, 372–73, 385
British design industry
characteristics of  7–8
current state of  9, 12–13
client base  11
economic value of  9–10
employment figures  10
financial performance  11
geographic locations  11
income sources  11
skills diversity  11
future of
design thinking  28
designers, implications for  30–31
economic trends  27–28
Green issues  29
IT, impact of  30
research resources  393
shift to East  28–29
help for businesses  12, 18–19, 
387–88
history of  4–7
international competition  20, 21
research resources  392
roots and characteristics of  7–8
size of businesses  12
British Design Innovation (BDI)  17, 
98–99, 371–72, 385
British Heart Foundation  361
British Institute of Interior Design (BIID)  
385
British Interior Design Association (BIDA)  
99
British Library  356–57
British Standards (BSI)  389
British Venture Capital Association 
(BVCA)  389
Brown, Stef  404
Brown, Tim  28
BT  363–64
budgeting  67–69, 193
Buffet, Warren  59
Buildings & Contents Cover  66
Bureau of European Design Associations 
(BEDA)  19, 386
Burns, Robert  301
business angels  64, 393
business assistance  12, 387–88
business culture  39, 67, 105, 176
business rules  40–41
development and training  42, 110–11, 
150, 156–60
impact on clients and staff  39–40
socialising  41–42
business development  127, 249
awards, use of  312
development models  127–28
investment for, raising  63–64
roles and responsibilities  128–29
skills  129
strategic building blocks for  37
vetting candidates  129–30
business journey
acquisitions  49
beyond start-up  47
exit strategy  51
growth and development  48
mergers  48–49

421
index
selling your business  49–51
Business Link  12, 64, 159, 388
business organisations  99, 387
business plans  36, 37, 59–60
creating  60–61
financial forecasting  61
planning cashflow  62, 62
planning profit  61–62
profit management cycle  60
three ‘M’s  60–61
business strategy  182, 285, 289, 310
building blocks of  36, 37
business structure
manager  54–55
partnerships and networks  57
staff roles  53–54
team
permanent vs. freelance  56
specialists vs. all-rounders  55–56
business support and information  12, 
18–19, 387–88
business types  75–77
cafés, in-house  42
Carroll, Lewis  135
Casey, Jan  351, 404
cashflow  62, 62–63, 70, 198
Castle, Barbara, Baroness Castle of 
Blackburn  175
Cawood, Gavin  376–77
CBI (Confederation of British Industry)  
387
Chambers of Commerce  12, 99, 387
Chapman, Anna  352–53
Chartered Society of Designers (CSD)  98, 
157, 385
Checkland, David  330–31
Checkland Kindleysides  330–31
China  27, 28, 29
Chivas Brothers Limited  361–62
Churchill, Sir Winston  47
Cisco Systems  356
client-facing staff  123
feedback  126
going the extra mile  126
knowledge of client’s business  123–24
presentation skills  126
qualities and conduct  125–26
relationship practices  125
supporting and involving clients  
124–25
understanding project brief  124
client relationship management (CRM)  
131–33, 249–50, 249–53, 259–60
deeper relationships  251–52
importance of  250–51, 251
retaining clients  253, 260
skills for  275–76
wider relationships  252–53
client surveys  258, 302–3
clients
barriers to buying design  25–26
billing  63, 65
and business structure  53
buying cycle of  224
categories of  250
communication with  26
contracts with  78, 84–85, 263–66, 
267–68
convincing to buy  90–91
credit checks on  63
dissatisfaction, dealing with  258–59
dropping  259
expectations of  44–45, 258, 285
feedback from  302–3
firing  259
impact of design for  23–24
importance of  255
intellectual property rights (IPR) 
expectations  83–84, 84–85
involving  124–25
maintaining good relationships with 
see client relationship management 
(CRM)
new and old  249–50
performance analysis  230
reassuring  224, 225–26, 289
retention of  253, 260

422 How to Run a Successful Design Business
risk-aversion of  90
satisfaction, guaranteeing  257–58
social engagement with  41, 192
wants  256–57
see also client-facing staff
clients, interviewed by Jan Casey  351
Bird, Jemima (Musgrave Retail Partners 
GB)  351–52
Chapman, Anna (Land Securities 
Group plc)  352–53
Coulson, Julia (HMRC)  353–54
Ferry, Joe (Virgin Atlantic Airways)  
354–55
Germain, Dan (Innocent)  355
Grinyer, Clive (Internet Business 
Solutions Group)  356
Hamilton, Penny (British Library)  
356–57
Hill, Richard (Eurostar)  357–58
Hodgetts, Maggie (Waitrose)  358–59
Hunter, Jon (Transport for London)  
359–60
James, Marcus (Royal Mail)  360
Kyme, Louise (British Heart 
Foundation)  361
Macdonald, Neil (Chivas Brothers 
Limited)  361–62
Maher, Lynne (NHS Institute for 
Innovation and Improvement)  
362–63
Mercer, David (BT)  363–64
Molloy, Tim (Science Museum)  364–65
Scarff, Matt (UKTV)  365
Williams, Theo (Habitat)  366
Woodhouse, David (Strategic Concepts 
Group, Ford Motor Company)  
366–67
Wynn, Les (Xerox)  367–68
climate change  316–17
coaching  163
communication skills  26, 88–89, 123, 
209–10, 252, 273–74
see also public relations (PR)
Companies House  76, 388
company culture see business culture
Company Director  116–17
concept design companies’  20
Confederation of British Industry (CBI)  
387
connections see networking
consultancies  6, 10, 11–12
consultants  79, 172–73
continuing professional development 
(CPD)  42, 156–57, 270
external training  158
in-house, in-job training  157–58
trends and innovations, learning about  
109–10
see also training
contracts
with clients  63, 78, 84–85
conforming to  267–68
intellectual property rights (IPR)  81, 
84, 84–85
international clients  197–98
quotes and proposals  263–64
recharging production costs  65
terms and conditions  263, 264–66
with freelancers  79–80, 267
rosters  246
with staff  78–79
with suppliers  79–80, 266–67
contributors  401
Baxter, Gary (Lightbox Consulting)  
401
Binnie, Ann (Amethist)  402
Blair, Sean (ProMeet)  402
Blandford, Kate (Blandford Consulting)  
403
Briggs, Kim (Kim Briggs HR)  403
Brown, Stef (On Pointe Marketing)  404
Casey, Jan  404
Cooper, Madelaine (Heroes)  405
Dallas-Conte, Lorna  405
Dawton, Deborah (Design Business 
Association)  406
de Trensé, Peers (Tapestry Consulting)  
406

423
index
Duncan, Kevin (Expert Advice)  407
Enns, Blair (Win Without Pitching)  407
Evans, Jo (Lewis Silkin)  407–8
Fegent, Tina (Tina Fegent Consultancy)  
408
Hellman, Louis  408
James, Julia (Julia James Public 
Relations Ltd)  409
Jones, Phil  409
Kirk, Jonathan (Up to the Light)  410
Losecaat, Christine (Little Dipper)  410
Lydiate, Liz  411
May, Simon (August)  411
Merron, Mandy (Kingston Smith W1)  
412
Morris, Barry  412
Myerson, Jeremy (Helen Hamlyn 
Centre, RCA)  412–13
Petrie, Rod  413
Preddy, Don (Preddy & Co)  413–14
Preddy, Shan (Preddy & Co)  414
Rasdall, Adrian (Revenue Matters)  414
Relph-Knight, Lynda (Design Week)  415
Stuart-Smith, Darrell (Humphries Kirk)  
415
Thomas, Sophie (Thomas Matthews)  
415–16
Thomson, Michael (Design Connect)  
416
Went, Gemma (Red Cube Marketing)  
416
Woudhuysen, James (De Montfort 
University)  417
Cooper, Madelaine  405
copyright  79, 81–82, 83, 266, 267
Coulson, Julia  353–54
Covey, Stephen  165
Cox, Sir George  23
CPD (continuing professional 
development) see continuing 
professional development (CPD)
Creative and Cultural Skills  12, 387
Creative Choices  387
Creative Partnerships  387
creative staff
collaboration between  120
consistency of performance  121
getting the best results  121
managing  119
recruiting and keeping  119–20
CSD (Chartered Society of Designers)  98, 
157, 385
Cultural Leadership  387
culture, business see business culture
Curtis, Mike  342–43
D&AD (British Design and Art Direction)  
98, 372–73, 385
Dallas-Conte, Lorna  395, 405
Dalziel and Pow  331–32
Dalziel, David  331–32
Davies, Nigel  325–26
Davis, Anthony  201
Dawton, Deborah  406
DBA (Design Business Association) see 
Design Business Association (DBA)
de Trensé, Peers  406
debtor days  72
Dennis, Isobel  378–79
Department for Business, Innovation & 
Skills (BIS)  388
Department for Culture, Media and Sport 
(DCMS)  388
Desbarats, Gus  344–45
design bodies  371
British Design Innovation (BDI)  
371–72
D&AD  372–73
Design Business Association (DBA)  
373–74
Design Council  374–75
Design Management Institute (DMI)  
375–76
Design Partners  376–77
Design Wales  377
international design membership 
bodies  385–86
New Designers  378

424 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Royal College of Art (RCA)  379
Royal Institute of British Architects 
(RIBA)  379–80
The Sorrell Foundation  380–81
UK Design Alliance  381–82
UK design membership bodies  385
Design Bridge  332–33
Design Business Association (DBA)  94, 
98, 156, 373–74, 385
Design Effectiveness Awards scheme  
25, 30
design companies, stories of successful  325
300million  325–26
999 Design Group Limited  326–27
Blue Marlin  328
Boxer  329–30
Checkland Kindleysides  330–31
Dalziel and Pow  331–32
Design Bridge  332–33
Dragon Rouge  333–34
Elmwood  334–35
JKR  335–36
Living Group  336–38
Media Square  338–39
Rufus Leonard  339–40
Seymourpowell  340–41
Small Back Room  341–42
Start  342–43
Tayburn  343–44
The Alloy  344–45
The Team  345–46
Uniform  347
Design Council  12, 19, 99, 374–75, 386
‘Double Diamond’ design process 
model  276
effectiveness studies  23–24
UK Design Alliance  382–83, 385
Value of Design Factfinder  23–24, 25
‘design’, defining  25
design effectiveness  7, 30, 305–6, 308
and agency size  306
awards for  25, 30, 94, 311, 390
client’s point of view  307–8
corporate objectives, delivering  306–7
measuring, benefits of  306
Design Effectiveness Awards scheme 
(DBA)  25, 30, 390
Design Index (NZIER)  17
Design London  379, 388
Design Management Institute (DMI)  
377–78, 386
design management organisations  388
Design Museum  390
Design Partners  375–76, 
design process  288, 318–19
Design Research Society  388
Design Research Unit  5, 6
design rights  79, 82
Design Wales  376–77, 
Designer Breakfasts  390
Designium  17
desk research  45, 294
development, staff  42, 150, 156–60, 271
Digital Podge  103
Directors’ Insurance  66
Directors, Non-Executive  64, 117, 172
disciplinary policies and procedures  149
dismissals, staff  151–53
Disraeli, Benjamin  67
DMI (Design Management Institute)  
377–78, 386
Donne, John  105
Double Diamond design process model  
275–76, 276
Dragon Rouge  333–34
Dresser, Christopher  4–5
Dressler, Fritz  291
Driver, Minnie  309
Drucker, Peter  139, 181
Duncan, Kevin  396, 407
DePree, Max  158
Ebb, Fred  97
economic trends  27–28
education  8, 155–56, 158, 159, 269–70
effectiveness of design see design 
effectiveness
Einstein, Albert  227

425
index
Elmwood  334–35
Emerson, Ralph Waldo  43
Employee Benefit Trusts (EBTs)  169
employees see staff
Employer’s Liability Insurance  66
employment legislation  78–79, 151
Enns, Blair  396, 407
Enterprise Management Incentives (EMI)  
168–69
environmental considerations  315–16
addressing  317–18, 318
climate change  316–17
see also sustainability
Envirowise  388
equity incentives  167
HMRC approved  168–69
HMRC unapproved  168
estimates  263–64
ethical considerations  315–16, 317
Europe, design promotion and support  
19–20
European Commission  19–20
Eurostar  357–58
Evans, Jo  393–94, 407–8
Everything You Need to Know about Public 
Relations (Davis)  201
Executive Assistants  141
exhibitions and events  390
exit interviews, staff  153
exit strategy  51
expenditure see procurement
expenditure plan  68–69
expert advice  49, 171–72
client surveys  303
consultants  172–73
mentors  173
Non-Executive Directors  172
public relations (PR)  201
Eyles, Andrew  328
farmer-growers (client maintenance staff)  
131
danger points  131–32
key performance indicators (KPIs)  
132–33
responsibility for relationship  132
Farnfield, Ian  333–34
Farrell, Simon  343–44
Federation of Small Businesses  12, 99, 
387
feedback  110, 126, 241, 301
client surveys  302–3
post-project reviews  301–2
Fegent, Tina  395, 408
Fennelow, Adam  373–74
Ferguson, Sir Alex  161
Ferry, Joe  354–55
Festival of Britain 1951  6
financial forecasting  61
financial management
accounting and project management 
systems  72–73
balance sheet ratios  72
benchmarking  71
budgeting  68–69
income and expenditure plan  68–69
key performance indicators (KPIs)  71
overhead targets  71, 71
problem avoidance  71–72
purpose of  67
reporting  69–70, 70
research resources  393
responsibility for  73
savings cushion  71–72
financial planning
budgeting  68–69
business insurances  66
business plans see business plans
income and expenditure plan  68–69
income models  65
raising investment  63–64
reasons for  59
Fletcher, Alan  8
Ford, Henry  9, 147
Four Tools Question  129–30
framework agreements see rosters
Franklin, Benjamin  269

426 How to Run a Successful Design Business
free pitching  217
alternatives to  225–26
client’s reasons for requesting  224
phases of engagement  223
raising objections to  225
freelancers  10, 40, 56
contracts with  80, 267
intellectual property rights  79–80
funding
expenditure, matching to  63
for promotion  18–19
sources of  63–64, 388
for training  159
Garfunkel, Art  39
Germain, Dan  355
Gervais, Ricky  151
Gillespie, Dizzie  109
Glenn, John  233
Global Design Watch (Designium)  17
globalisation  6
Glyn-Owen, Julian  329–30
Godber, David  374–75
Goldwyn, Samuel  263
Goodenough, Sir William  332–33
Goodrich, Charles A.  53
Government, raising investment from  64
grants  64, 159
Gray, Milner  5
Great Exhibition 1851  4–5
Green issues  29, 315–18
Grice, Julian  345–46
grievance procedures  149
Grinyer, Clive  356
growth  9, 10, 47–49
cash requirements for  62, 62
Habitat  366
Hamilton, Penny  356–57
Hammerstein, Oscar  35
Hegarty, Sir John  119
Helen Hamlyn Centre  379, 389
Hellman, Louis  396, 401, 408
Hendrix, Jimi  171
Higher Education (HE)  155, 156, 269–70
Hill, Richard  357–58
HM Government Direct Gov  389
HM Revenue & Customs (as a client)  
353–54
Hodgetts, Maggie  358–59
Hodgson, David  328
Horn, Maxine J.  371–72
Howe, Nick  347
human dimension of design  3
hunter-gatherers (business developers)  
127
models  127–28
roles and responsibilities  128–29
skills  129
vetting candidates  129–30
Hunter, Jon  359–60
ICOGRADA (International Council of 
Graphic Design Associations)  386
ICSID (International Council of Societies 
of Industrial Design)  386
IDA (Interior Design Association)  99
improving business  109
continuous improvement  109–10
dangers and solutions  110–11
income models  65
income plan  68
India  20, 28, 29
Industrial Designers Society of America 
(IDSA)  386
Industrial Revolution  4
Information Commissioners Office  389
Information Technology (IT) see IT 
(Information Technology)
Innocent  355
innovation  15, 19–20, 28
keeping abreast of  20–21, 109–10
marketing  90
InnovationRCA  379
Institute of Directors (IoD)  99, 387
insurances  66, 196
intellectual property rights (IPR)  79–80, 
388

427
index
as deal breaker  84–85
importance of  81
infringement of  84
issues included in
confidential information  82
copyright  81–82
design rights  82
know-how  83
moral rights  83
patents  82
registered trade marks  82
unregistered trade marks  82
managing client expectations  83–84
and pitches  84
research resources  394
in terms of business  265, 267
Interior Design Association (IDA)  99
International Council of Graphic Design 
Associations (ICOGRADA)  386
International Council of Societies of 
Industrial Design (ICSID)  386
international design industry  15
competition with UK industry  20
competitiveness  17–18, 18
economic contributions  17
numbers of firms by country  16, 16
promotion and support  18–19
in Europe  19–20
research resources  392
size of businesses  15–16
sophistication and strategy rankings  18
strategic design companies  20
International Organisation for 
Standardisation (ISO)  95, 389
international work
contracts  197
culture and language  197
market research  195–96
marketing strategy  195
offices  197
payment  198
pricing  198
reasons for  195
research resources  394–95
self vs. agent/representative  196
Internet
blogs  210–12
marketing on  202
social media see social media
social networking sites  212
Internet Business Solutions Group  356
investment, raising
from banks  63
from Government  64
from other sources  64
investors  64
Investors in People (IIP)  95, 389
invoice-discounting  63
ISO (International Organisation for 
Standardisation)  95, 389
IT (Information Technology)  30, 289–90
Internet  202, 210–12
see also social media
James, Julia  395, 409
James, Marcus  360
JKR  335–36
job descriptions  132, 143–44, 144, 148
job management systems  289
Jones, Phil  394, 409
kaizen  109
dangers and solutions  110–11
trends and innovations, learning about  
109–10
Key Man Cover  66
key performance indicators (KPIs)  60, 71, 
132–33, 302
Kindleysides, Jeff  330–31
Kirk, Jonathan  410
knowledge and skills  83, 269–70, 276
adapting  30
business consultancy skills  272–73
client interface skills  132, 275–76
client retention skills  273
communication skills  273–74
creative, design and craft skills   
270–71

428 How to Run a Successful Design Business
improving  109–10
see also continuing professional 
development (CPD); training
marketing skills  272–73
project management skills  272, 283, 
283–84
research skills  271, 275
strategic planning skills  135–36, 272
team leadership and people 
management skills  274–75
thinking skills  271–72
time management and self-
organisation skills  274
Knowles, Andy  335–36
Krebs, Soonduk  245
Kyme, Louise  361
Land Securities Group  352–53
Landers, Ann  305
leadership  54–55, 139, 288
team leadership  274–75
thought-leadership  128, 192, 199, 201, 
312
Leadership is an Art (DePree)  158
learning culture of business  42, 110–11, 
150, 156–60
legal considerations
business type  75–77, 77
contracts see contracts
disciplinary policies and procedures  
149
dismissing staff  151–52
employee contracts, regulations and 
policies  78–79
grievance procedures  149
intellectual property rights (IPR) see 
intellectual property rights (IPR)
international work  196
marketing records  229
Non-Executive Directors  172
partnership/shareholder agreements  
80
redundancies  152–53
research resources  393–94
tax regulations  198
Legal Expenses Insurance  66
Lennon, John  219
limited companies  66, 75–76, 77, 80
limited liability partnerships (LLPs)  
76–77, 77
Living Group  336–38
loans  63
Lockwood, Thomas  377–78
London Design Festival  390
London Festival of Architecture  390
Long-Term Incentive Plans (LTIP)  167
Losecaat, Christine  394–95, 410
Lumsden, Callum  341–42
Lumsden Design Partnership  341–42
Lydiate, Liz  397, 411
Macdonald, Neil  361–62
Maher, Lynne  362–63
Management Buy Out (MBO)  50–51
management, good  87–88, 162
communication skills  88–89
delegation  140
future trends, understanding  88
innovation, marketing  90
vs. leadership  139
presentation skills  90–91
research resources  393
research skills  89
management meetings  45, 118
management style  54–55
management team  115
composition of  117–18
limitations of  173
meetings  118
roles and responsibilities
Board of Directors  116–17
Company Director/Partner  116–17
Non-Executive Directors  117
shareholders/owner  115–16
teamwork  118
market research  195–96, 291
qualitative research  292–93
quantitative research  292

429
index
research resources  395
marketing plans  189
budgets  193
clients’ spaces, sharing  192
expertise, displaying  192–93
media choices  190–91
outgoing approaches  190
resources  193
revisions  193–94
word of mouth marketing  192
written plan  193–94
marketing records  227, 229–30
client performance analysis  230
data recorded, recommended  228
databases  227–28
legal considerations  229
management of  228–29
metrics  229–30
and other records  230–31
marketing strategy  181–82, 195
awards, use of  311–13
communication  209
danger areas  185–86
positioning  182–85, 185
propositions  187–88
target markets  186–87
markets  186–87, 195–96
mass production of goods  4, 5
May, Rollo  209
May, Simon  411
McCartney, Paul  219
McLuhan, Marshall  315
McShane, Melanie  28
media
engaging with  205, 208
and marketing  190–91
metrics  230
online vs. print  207
other published material  207, 312
press releases  206–7, 312
relations with  205–6
rules of engagement  207–8
Media Square  338–39
meetings  295
management meetings  118
Meeting Excellence Model  296, 297–98
problems with  296, 296–97
research resources  395
running great meetings  298, 299
sales meetings  214–16
staff appraisal meetings  148–49
memberships, professional see 
professional organisations and societies
mentoring  157, 164, 274
mentors  173
Mercer, David  363–64
mergers  48–49
Merron, Mandy  393, 412
Modern Movement  5
Molloy, Tim  364–65
moral rights  83
Morris, Barry  412
Morris, Lesley  382
Morris, William  5
motivation  87, 105, 150, 162–63, 165, 
166, 169–70, 296
and business culture  40, 54
Musgrave Retail Partners GB  351–52
Myerson, Jeremy  397, 412–13
National Endowment for Science, 
Technology and the Arts (NESTA)  387
National Occupational Standards  389
networking  40, 57, 101, 102, 103, 130
events  98, 99, 102–3, 390
research resources  394
social networking sites  212
New Designers  378–79
New Designers in Business  390
New York, influence of  5–6
New Zealand Institute of Economic 
Research (NZIER)  17
NHS Institute for Innovation and 
Improvement  362–63
non-competitive agreements  185–86
Non-Executive Directors  64, 117, 172
Northern Ireland Design Alliance  387

430 How to Run a Successful Design Business
Obama, Barack  101
Office Managers  118, 141
Ogilvy, David  88, 277
O’Kennedy, Tim  372–73
Oliver, Melvin  213
opinion pieces  312
organisational and operational staff (orgs 
and ops)  139–41
Orwell, George  89, 205
overdrafts  62, 63
Pan-European Brand Design Association 
(PDA)  386
Partners, roles and responsibilities  116–17, 
128
partnerships  57, 75, 76–77, 77
written agreements  80, 116
patents  82
performance appraisals  54, 148–49, 157
Personal Assistants (PAs)  141
Petrie, Rod  413
Philip, Prince, Duke of Edinburgh  139
Phillips, Peter  241
pitches see free pitching; sales pitches
planners  135–36
benefits from  137
hiring  136
using  136–37
Podge Council Lunch  102–3
population age structure  28, 29
positioning  182–85, 185, 224, 306, 310
post-World War II  6
Pow, John  331
Powell, Dick  340–41
PR (public relations) see public relations (PR)
Pre-Qualification Questionnaire (PQQ)  
241–42
being PQQ ready  244
completion rules  243
contents of, typical  242–43
deciding to attempt process  243–44
key areas  244–45
purpose of  242
Preddy, Don  395, 413–14
Preddy, Shan  392, 397, 414
presentation skills  90–91, 214, 221–22
press releases  206–7, 312
procurement  233–34
client’s procurement process, working 
with  238–39
defined  234
departments  235, 235
research resources  395
role of  234–35
roles and titles  235, 235
steps  236–37
terminology and acronyms  236, 236
tips  238
products
benchmarking  45
hurdles and expectations  44–45
nurturing  44
quality of  43
Professional Indemnity Insurance  66
professional organisations and societies  
97, 385–87
client sector organisations  99–100
design bodies see design bodies
design sector organisations  98–99
getting involved  100
membership in  94, 97–98
networking through  98, 99, 102
small business sector organisations  99
Professional Practice in Design Consultancy 
(Sorrell)  271
profile raising  202, 310
see also public relations (PR)
profit management cycle  60
profit-sharing  167
project delivery  256
project management  290
considerations  287
contingency plans  287
perspectives  284
project drivers  286
research resources  395
skills  283, 283–84
stages of  284

431
index
1-initiating  284–86
2-planning  286–87
3-executing  288
4-controlling  288–90
5-closing  290
systems  72–73
projects
expectations  285
needs  289
post-project reviews  301–2
success factors  283
proposals  263–64
propositions, marketing  187–88
proprietary information  82
Proust, Marcel  155
Public Liability Insurance  66
public limited companies  75
public relations (PR)  201–3
media, engaging with  205, 208
media relations  205–6
other published material  207
press releases  206–7
research resources  395
rules of engagement  207–8
publicly listed companies  64
qualitative research  292–94
quantitative research  292
quotations  263–64
Rapidform  379
Rasdall, Adrian  414
RCA (Royal College of Art)  379, 389
reading, recommended  392–96
really simple syndication (RSS) feeds  202
recognition see awards
recruiting staff  40, 119–20, 270
and company profile  144–45
good staff, importance of  143
interviews  145, 145–46
job descriptions  144
permanent or temporary  144
positions needed  143–44
redundancies  152–53
reference library
award schemes  390–92
business support and information  
387–88
international design membership 
bodies  385–86
more information and recommended 
reading  392–96
other useful organisations  388–89
publications by the authors  396–97
UK business organisations  387
UK design and creative sector support  
386–87
UK design exhibitions and events  390
UK design membership bodies  385
Relph-Knight, Lynda  415
reputation  43, 147, 199–200, 203, 259
building  200
communicating  202
with executives of client companies  200
profile raising  202
public relations (PR)  201
and recruiting good staff  270
research
desk research  294
qualitative  292–94
quantitative  292
reasons for doing  291
resources  392–96
research skills  89, 271, 275
resources and recommended reading  
392–96
rewarding staff  169–70
equity schemes
HMRC approved  168–69
HMRC unapproved  168
purpose of  165
remuneration types  166–67
targeting incentive to the employee  
165, 166
RIBA (Royal Institute of British Architects)  
99, 380, 385
Rich, Harry  380
risk  234

432 How to Run a Successful Design Business
from leaving staff  153
minimising  75–76
performance-related fees  65
and sales options  251, 251
risk assessment ratios  72
Rosten, Leo  143
rosters  245
agency approach  247
application tips  247
process  245–46
Royal College of Art (RCA)  379, 389
Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA)  
99, 380, 385
Royal Mail  360
Royal Society for the Encouragement of 
Arts, Manufactures and Commerce 
(RSA)  4, 98, 385
Royle, Frances  234
RSS feeds  202
Rufus Leonard  339–40
running costs cover  72
Runyon, Damon  93
Rushton, John  341
Ruskin, John  3
salaries  69, 70, 166
sales meetings  214–16
sales pitches  219–20
choosing  222
and intellectual property rights (IPR)  84
keeping it simple  220–21
persuading clients  220
pulling out  222
theatre, use of  221–22
thinking outside the brief  220
understanding client’s needs  221
see also free pitching
sales process
danger moments  213
first impressions  213
free pitches  217
sales meetings  214–16
skills needed  213–14
stages of  213–14
Sands, Jonathan  334–35
Scarff, Matt  365
Science Museum  364–65
self-incentive  175
being the boss  175–76
being the company culture  176
seriousness and humour  176–77
thinking time, making  177
trusting instincts  177
selling your business  49–51
service  256–57
Seymour, Richard  340–41
Seymourpowell  340–41
Shakespeare, William  199
Share Incentive Plans (SIPs)  169
Shareholder Protection Insurance  66
shareholders  66, 75, 76, 115–16
Sharing Experience Europe (SEE)  386
Shaw, Duncan  336–38
Shaw, George Bernard  123
Sherwood, Simon  233
Simon, Paul  39
skills see knowledge and skills
Small Back Room  341–42
social engineering  30–31
social media
add-on to traditional marketing  210
blogs  210–12
return on investment, measuring  210, 
211
social networking  212
strategy for  210
talking with your audiences  209–10
time committment involved  210
social networking sites  212
Society of British Interior Design (SBID)  
99, 385
sole traders  75, 77
Sorrell, Sir John  271, 381
Sorrell, Sir Martin  233
South Korea  19, 20
Southgate, Paul  272
specialisation  184–85, 185, 224
staff

433
index
benefits  167
categories of
client-facing staff  123–26
creative staff  119–21
farmer-growers (client maintenance 
staff)  131–33
hunter-gatherers (business 
developers)  127–30
management team  115–18
orgs and ops  139–41
planners  135–37
specialists vs. all-rounders  55–56
celebrating success with  313
coaching  163
company’s business culture, impact on  
39–40
continuing professional development 
(CPD)  42, 150, 157–58
contracts and policies  78–79
development and training  42, 150, 
156–60, 271
see also knowledge and skills
disciplinary policies and procedures  149
dismissing  151–52
employment regulations  78–79
exit interviews  153
grievance procedures  149
importance of  143
induction period  147
job descriptions  144, 148
knowledge and skills see knowledge 
and skills
leaving, and business risk  153
legal rights  79
meals and meal spaces for  42
mentoring  164
motivating and directing  40, 54, 87, 
150, 162–63, 296
performance appraisals  54, 148–49, 
157
permanent vs. freelance  56
probationary period  147–48
recruiting see recruiting staff
redundancies  152–53
research resources  394
reviews  54
rewarding see rewarding staff
roles and responsibilities  53–54
segmentation by motivation and 
loyalty  166
social engagement with  41
team building  41, 41–42, 158, 161–62, 
275
training  42, 150, 156–60, 271
trips and visits  42
and unwritten company rules  40–41
Start  342–43
Strategic Concepts Group, Ford Motor 
Company  366–67
strategic design companies  20
strategists see planners
Stuart-Smith, Darrell  394, 415
Summers, Andrew  375–76
suppliers  40, 57, 141
contracts with  80, 266–67
intellectual property rights  79–80
purchase orders with  266–67
sustainability practices  319
see also procurement
support organisations  386–87
sustainability  7, 29, 315–16
addressing  317–18
chain of custody  318–19, 319
greenhouse gas emissions reductions  
317
information and misinformation  
319–20
research resources  396
technology  319
in the design process  318–19, 319
in the studio  320–21
Svensen, Neil  339–40
Tasney, Ian  341
Tayburn  343–44
team building  41, 41–42, 158, 161–62, 275
technology  5, 7, 30, 90, 202, 210–12, 
289–90
terms and conditions  263

434 How to Run a Successful Design Business
with clients  264–66
with suppliers  266–67
The Alloy  344–45
The Sorrell Foundation  381, 389
The Team  345–46
Thomas, Pete  347
Thomas, Sophie  396, 415–16
Thompson, Paul  379
Thomson, Michael  392–93, 416
trade investors  64
trade marks  82
training
continuing professional development 
(CPD) see continuing professional 
development (CPD)
education and employment skills  156
external  158
grants and funding for  159
Higher Education (HE)  155, 156, 
269–70
in-house, in-job  157–58
learning culture of business  159–60
for staff  42, 150, 156–60, 271
vocational education  155, 159
Transport for London  359–60
trends, future  28, 88, 109–10
Twain, Mark  127, 221, 223
Tzu, Lao  15
UK Creative Industries Marketing Toolkit  
387
UK Data Protection Act  389
UK Design Alliance  12, 382, 387
UK Intellectual Property Office  388
UK Trade and Investment (UKTI)  388
UK Web Design Association (UKWDA)  385
UKTV  365
Uniform  347
United States  6
V&A Museum  390
validation  93
choosing scheme  95
forms of  94–95
using  95
value  256
Value of Design Factfinder (Design Council)  
23–24, 392
venture capital investors  64
Vessey, Nick  345
Virgin Atlantic Airways  354–55
vision and values
achievability  38
building blocks of strategy  36, 37
defining, for your business  36–38
dynamism of  38
responsibility for  38
values  35–36
vision, purpose of  35
vocational education  155, 159
Von Clausewitz, Carl  75
Waitrose  358–59
the Web see Internet
websites  183–84
Wedgwood, Josiah  4
Welch, Jack  306
Went, Gemma  416
Wetmore, Donald  295
Whittingham, Darren  342–43
Wilde, Oscar  27, 87
Williams, Theo  366
Woodhouse, David  366–67
working capital  63
working environment
importance of  105, 271
styles of  105–7
visitor’s point of view  107
World Wide Web see Internet
Worthington, Darrel  339
Worthington, David  338–39
Woudhuysen, James  393, 397, 417
Wynn, Les  367–68
Xerox  367–68
Young, James  213

How to Market Design Consultancy Services
Finding, Winning, Keeping and Developing Clients
Shan Preddy
The fast-paced nature of the design business means that you probably spend most 
of your time, energy and resources looking after your clients’ needs, not your own. 
In our current, increasingly competitive marketplace where supply far outstrips 
demand, no design business will survive for long – let alone grow and develop 
– without a really effective marketing programme. It is no longer enough for you 
to provide a good product and simply hope for the best. Potential clients need 
to know exactly what you can do for them and what makes you different from 
your competitors. Existing clients need to know exactly why they should develop 
and continue their business with you. Quite simply, you need to convince design 
buyers that you are unequivocally the right consultancy for them, time and time 
again.
This second, fully revised and updated, edition of Shan Preddy’s popular book 
will help you to improve your marketing skills, no matter how large or small your 
design company, or which of the many disciplines you specialise in. Packed full 
of accessible, practical advice and information, this book is indispensable for all 
design consultancies.
Contents: Foreword. Preface; Part I The Principles – How To Do It: Introduction: getting 
started; Marketing and mousetraps; Looking backwards to look forwards; Where are you 
going? The vision thing; The marketplace: clients’ selection criteria; What are you and what 
do you do? How to establish your market positioning; Who wants you? How to define your 
target markets; Why should they bother? Developing sales propositions; How will they find 
out about you? Approach media; I think, therefore I plan: putting it all together; Words 
and pictures: it’s what you say and the way you say it; Life’s a pitch: getting the business; 
Resources: man and machine; Just hang on to what you’ve got: client care and retention; 
Deeper and wider: client development. Part II The Practice – How It Is Done. Part III The 
Private Views – How It Could Be Done Better. Part IV The Priority – How Clients Would Like 
It To Be Done. Index.
238 pages     Paperback    978-0-566-08594-9  244 x 172 mm

