
How to Talk to Anyone About
Anything
Improve Your Social Skills, Master Small Talk,
Connect Effortlessly, and Make Real Friends

PUBLISHED BY: James W. Williams
© Copyright 2021 - All rights reserved.
The content contained within this book may not be reproduced, duplicated or
transmitted without direct written permission from the author or the
publisher.
Under no circumstances will any blame or legal responsibility be held against
the publisher, or author, for any damages, reparation, or monetary loss due to
the information contained within this book. Either directly or indirectly.
Legal Notice:
This book is copyright protected. This book is only for personal use. You
cannot amend, distribute, sell, use, quote or paraphrase any part, or the
content within this book, without the consent of the author or publisher.
Disclaimer Notice:
Please note the information contained within this document is for educational
and entertainment purposes only. All effort has been executed to present
accurate, up to date, and reliable, complete information. No warranties of any
kind are declared or implied. Readers acknowledge that the author is not
engaging in the rendering of legal, financial, medical or professional advice.
The content within this book has been derived from various sources. Please
consult a licensed professional before attempting any techniques outlined in
this book.
By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no circumstances is
the author responsible for any losses, direct or indirect, which are incurred as
a result of the use of information contained within this document, including,
but not limited to, — errors, omissions, or inaccuracies.

Table Of Contents
Your Free Gift
Introduction
Chapter One – Everything Starts with You
Chapter Two – It All Begins with Listening
Chapter Three – Further Listening Skills
Chapter Four - It’s All About Questions
Chapter Five - How to Have a Conversation with Anyone
Chapter Six – Mastering the Art of Small Talk
Chapter Seven – Intricate Ways to Be More Charismatic
Chapter Eight – How to Be More Confident
Chapter Nine – How to Tell Stories That Land
Chapter Ten - Becoming an Interesting Person
Chapter Eleven – Developing Meaningful Relationships
Final Thoughts
References

Join Our Support Group
In order to maximize the value you get from this book, I strongly encourage
you to join our tight-knit community on Facebook. You will be able to
connect and share with other like-minded people to continue your growth.
Don’t take this journey alone, and this can be an excellent support network
for you.
It would be great to connect with you there,
-James Williams.
>>Click Here to Join Our Personal Development Support Group
<<

Your Free Gift
As a way of saying thanks for your purchase, I’m offering the book
Bulletproof Confidence Checklist for FREE to my readers.
To get instant access just go to:
https://theartofmastery.com/confidence/
Inside the book, you will discover:
Why we develop shyness & social anxiety
Powerful strategies for overcoming social anxiety
Become more confident by destroying these negative traits
How to easily prevent the “awkward silence” in a conversation
Confidence checklist to ensure you’re on the right path of self-
development

Introduction
Not too long ago, my friend Kyle came to me and told me a story of the
weekend past when he had recently attended his sister’s wedding. Kyle
himself had been married for nearly twenty years before his divorce a few
months prior, and this wedding was one of the first “outings” he attended by
himself.
Over a beer, he told me about the big day. At ten, he was surrounded by
friends and family, people he saw nearly every week, or at least sent a text
message to every now and then. The ceremony was beautiful. Everyone was
happy. They took taxis from the church to the reception held in this big fancy
downtown hotel. Upon arriving, Kyle was busy making sure everything was
running smoothly behind the scenes.
In true wedding fashion, people ate food, had some drinks, started dancing,
and overall just let their hair down for a good time. Relatives from both sides
of the new family came together to celebrate this wonderful occasion.
But for Kyle, it wasn’t all smiles, booze, and confetti.
Plunged into the vast depths outside of his comfort zone, he told me that as
soon as he started interacting with strangers, friends of friends, and distant
relatives, he soon realized he had absolutely no idea how to talk to any of
them.
He recalled a particularly embarrassing moment where his sister’s new
husband’s cousin came over and said, “Hey,” and he froze up, literally not
saying a single word. Awkward was an understatement.
After the compulsory “How are you?” and  “It’s a beautiful service, right?”
Kyle was stuck. His mind started to fill with anxiety. Endless thoughts
bombarded him like, What do I say? How can I make this person laugh? Do
they even care about what I have to say? Who is this person? What are their
interests? and so on.
Outside his mind and back in reality, this all emerged as generic small talk,
awkward silences, and uncertain looks towards the floor.
“God, it was terrible. Kathy (Kyle’s ex-wife) was such a charismatic person,
but I didn’t realize how much she carried our conversations while we were
married. I feel like I don’t have the ability to talk to anyone. What do you talk

about? Do people care about what I have to say? Even if they did, I don’t
think I have the confidence to even try. Lord knows how I’m ever going to
start dating again, if ever.”
As we finished our drinks and paid the tab, I told him that becoming
confident, or even just speaking to other human beings, isn’t some far-off
idea reserved for only the most extroverted humans who ooze natural
charisma. Oh no.
You see, over a decade ago, and then for most of my entire life, I was like
Kyle. I went through school, college, university, and a scattering of first and
part-time jobs and eventually on to the beginning of my career being
awkward, shy, and withdrawn.
I was the guy who sat in the middle of the class, not cool enough for the back
or smart enough for the front. I was the invisible one.
I had some friends I’d known all my life, but the older I became, the more
social anxiety I felt, and the more isolated I found myself. It was crippling. I
hadn’t pushed myself to talk to anyone or had taken risks when meeting new
people since I was a child. After all the passing years, it was like I’d forgotten
how to do it at all.
It was hard to meet new people. I found it impossible to date. Speaking with
the customers in my part-time jobs was messy, and selling to clients in my
career was unreliable at best. I could only sometimes talk to someone without
breaking a sweat or feeling like I was on the verge of having a panic attack. I
had good days and bad days, but as years went by, I had two main
realizations that ultimately led to me changing my life.
First, your connection to other people is everything.
Your relationships with others, your job, yourself, and your levels of overall
happiness and life satisfaction are all determined by your ability to
communicate and connect. You could have millions of dollars in the bank,
have everything that someone can be deemed successful for having, but if
you’re lonely, you’re not happy.
You can be poor and materially have nothing, but if you’re surrounded by
caring people with whom you share a meaningful connection, and you can
feel like the wealthiest person on the planet.
My second realization was just as life-changing.

Being confident, charismatic, and open to connecting with others is not a trait
you’re born with. I used to believe that the confident people, those who could
hold an entire audience or keep you hooked intimately on their every word,
were gifted with a natural talent for confidence. I was wrong.
Confidence and charisma are skills that can be learned, honed, and practiced.
They can even be mastered.
Have you ever gone into a room and saw that one person who dominates the
conversation, maybe in a group of friends or in a meeting at work? Perhaps
you had a friend who can seemingly speak to anyone about anything, and no
matter the situation, they carry the flow of the conversation seemingly
without effort? Ever found yourself envious of that person?
That’s not the first time that person is doing that. You’re seeing years of
practice. Years of trial and error. Years of making mistakes, practicing new
techniques, and learning from each experience along the way. They would
have had awkward moments in school, embarrassing meetings, and
conversations, where nothing seemed to work.
And this all raises more questions.
How can you do things differently? How do you become confident? How can
you talk to anyone about anything?
I’ve been the shy guy. I spent most of my life as him. I was afraid of sharing
my thoughts, and now I’m writing books you’re reading (which still blows
my mind to this day!). I can date people and hold my own. I can present
meetings and engage everyone in the room. I can share stories with groups of
friends and have them hang off my every word. I gave a talk in a public
speaking group not too long ago, and a member of the audience came up and
told me it was one of the best talks they had seen in years.
I’m not saying that to brag. I know my public speaking skills have a long way
to go compared with the greats, but seeing my own journey of being the
awkward kid to then being capable of speaking to a group of 30 people
warmed my heart. If it’s possible for me, it’s possible for anybody.
Final questions.
How do you get better at swimming? You spend time in the pool.
How do you get better at writing? You write.
How do you get better at connecting with people? You connect with people.

Like all life skills, confidence is an act that’s practiced and honed over time,
but like an athlete needs a coach, I’m writing this book to help guide you
along the path of your own journey. First, we’re going to cover your mindset
and get that in check, so you’re actually ready for meeting new people.
Then we’re going on to the real meat of this book. This is where I will cover
subjects like how to start a conversation with someone, find similar interests,
and guide the conversation with questions. You’ll also find out how to be
more charismatic and confident and how to act and present yourself in any
situation you may find yourself in.
This book aims to be the key that will unlock so many doors in your life
through connection and opportunities, so let’s hang around no longer.
The Beginning
When it comes to making a change in your life, these are the three essential
elements you’re going to need to focus on:
Education. Awareness. Practice.
You need knowledge and information, so you know what decisions you’re
going to make. You need awareness to apply everything you’ve learned, to
recognize where you go wrong, what you do right, and to be aware of where
you need to get better.
Finally, you need to keep practicing and just keep getting better and better.
I’ve been on this journey.
During my mid-20s, I was unfulfilled and unsatisfied with my life. I lived in
a big city with nobody around me that I could really call a close friend. No
partner. It should have been an exciting time, starting my new career with
high prospects, but I held myself back. I was ticking the boxes creatively, but
I wasn’t a people person, and people are the ones who give the opportunities.
I decided I needed to make a change.
I got educated. I read studies, scientific data, articles, and research reports. I
read books and listened to podcasts. I took all this information and applied it
in my own life, being aware of what I was doing so I could judge for myself
what was right and what was wrong. I figured out what works for me,
practiced it, and used these experiences to give myself the momentum to get
where I am today.

The best thing about it all?
It works like an absolute treat.
Using my own experiences, scientific studies, and a ton of research, I’ve
compiled this book to basically be everything you’re going to need to know
when learning how to speak with other people.
So, as we move into the true grit of this book, I want you to open your mind.
Be willing to learn and take on board what you read. I highly recommend
getting a pen and notebook to jot down ideas, techniques, and communication
strategies that resonate with you, which will improve your ability to take
them on board.
It’s time.

Chapter One – Everything Starts with You
“No matter who you are, no matter what you did, no matter where you’ve come from, you can always
change, become a better version of yourself.” ― Madonna
When you first picked this book up, you probably read the title and created
this image in your head of what it would actually be like to have the ability to
speak with anyone. Maybe you have a fantasy of telling stories around the
water cooler, everyone wide-eyed at how good your stories are.
Maybe it’s the same with your dating life, and you crave to be the charismatic
boy or girl that charms all who listen to you. Perhaps you want to
communicate better with your colleagues, managers, bosses, or clients.
Yikes! I’m sure you’re starting to see how vastly communicating with others
literally affects every part of your life! However, I want you to put these
fantasies aside for now (I promise we’ll make them become a reality later)
because we need to start with you.
Yup. It’s time to take a long, hard look at ourselves in the mirror because
guess what? There’s a reason why people say, “You can’t love other people
properly until you learn to love yourself first.” It sounds philosophical and
perhaps something you’ve heard before, but hear me out.
We’re going to make this actionable.
Let’s start with the foundations of who you are, right here, right now. Your
sense of self has to be defined because it will literally dictate how you act in
every single situation from here on out, and you can either unconsciously let
this happen, or you can be aware and in control of it. Don’t worry; this will
all make sense as we move forward.
A question to get the juices flowing:
Who are you?
Just consider and be aware of whatever thoughts come to mind. Now take
those thoughts and drop the basic identity stuff, like your name, age, or your
job. Now how do you see yourself? What kind of person do you associate
yourself with? What beliefs and values do you have? Yup, we’re jumping
straight into the deep end here.
When I was 23 years old, and my self-development was beginning to take

shape, I remember journaling one night for what must have been for one of
the first times in my life (I had just watched a YouTube video on how life-
changing it can be), and I asked myself these very questions.
Shockingly, I had no answers. What did I believe in? What did I value? Who
was I? Well, I believe it’s wrong to murder people. I believe that gravity
exists. I believe that fast food should be eaten in moderation. As you can see,
I was really scraping the barrel for ideas and didn’t really have an answer
with depth. I realized I didn’t have a sense of self.
Your sense of self is everything. It defines you.
In the study of psychology, the sense of self is an all-encompassing view you
have on yourself, your beliefs, your purpose in this world, and who you are.
Guess what? If you don’t know your own sense of self, how can you expect
to be yourself when you’re around others?
Having a sense of self motivates you to get up in the morning because you’re
fully aware of your mission in life and what causes you’re fighting for. You
know where you stand and what matters to you. Now, that’s not to say your
sense of self can’t and won’t change over time. In fact, if it didn’t change,
this can also be unhealthy, commonly known as being stuck in your ways.
However, having some idea of your sense of self is vital. You cannot be
confident without it.
Erika Myers, a professional counselor based in Oregon, sums it up perfectly.
“Having a well-developed sense of self is hugely beneficial in helping us
make choices in life. From something as small as favorite foods to larger
concerns like personal values, knowing what comes from our own self versus
what comes from others allows us to live authentically.”
Authentic living. Isn’t that the dream? No, it’s not a dream. It’s a necessity.
When you can learn to authentically be yourself with yourself, you can then
begin to authentically be yourself with other people. You know how people
say you can only really love others when you learn to love yourself? Well,
we’re playing on the same board as that ideology.
Being authentically you means you know you’re not perfect (and that nobody
is), but you’re willing to accept your flaws and simultaneously embrace your
strengths because they define you more than anything.
A lack of a sense of self is a problem.

Without any ideas of who you are or what you stand for, you’ll find yourself
drifting through life. You’ll be uncertain and indecisive. Your life will lack
momentum and drive. You’ll feel anxious and unsatisfied, but you won’t be
able to put your finger on why because you don’t understand what you want
and don’t want.
Remember my friend Kyle at his sister’s wedding? In many ways, his whole
sense of self had been derived from his marriage, and he didn’t know who he
was without it. When speaking with others at the wedding, he was drifting.
Was he there to have a good time? To simply show his face and support his
sister? Was he there to meet new people? Was he looking to date someone
new or even to hook up with someone? None of these things are good or bad
because it depends on the individual and their wants or needs. However,
without understanding what these wants or needs are, nothing can be done
about them, and so the perpetual loop of anxiety continues.
Developing Your Sense of Self
To stress once again, you can’t have relationships with others until you learn
to have a relationship with yourself, which brings us nicely to your first
exercise in this book. Don’t worry. While it may sound a bit overwhelming,
we’re going to break it down and do this together. I got you.
Take a pen and paper and title it, Checking in with Myself. As it suggests,
we’re going to check in and explore who you are right now. Make sure
you’re in a quiet place where you can be with yourself and hear your own
thoughts.
As defined by Healthline.com, your sense of self will fall somewhere on a
spectrum. Either you have a solid, complete sense of self, none at all, or you
fall somewhere in the middle. So let’s figure out where you are.
Ask yourself some of these questions and write down whatever comes to
mind. Also, I know what it’s like reading books like this, and it’s easy just to
skim over these action points and try to do them in your head. If you want
real change in your life (which is why I’m assuming you picked up this book
in the first place), then actually take the time to do this activity, and see what
happens.
If you’re not proactive in actually doing something new, how can you expect
anything to change? Anyway, that’s something I wish someone had told me

years ago. On to the questions!
➢       What kind of person do you want to be?
➢       What kind of person are you right now?
➢       How would you describe yourself?
➢       Do you believe you’ve changed a lot over the years?
➢       What things in life are you good at?
➢       What things in life are you not so good at?
➢       What are you passionate about loving?
➢       What are you passionate about hating?
➢       What kinds of relationships do you have in your life?
➢       What kinds of relationships do you want in your life?
➢       How in control of your life do you feel?
You don’t need to answer all these questions, but if you look at one of them
and think it’s a bit difficult, then I recommend spending a bit more time
answering it because that’s where you’ll find the interesting answers. Try to
be as honest as possible.
Be aware that many of your answers will be influenced by how you see
yourself as an individual and how others have told you they see you. For
example, if your partner sees you as being lazy and always calls you that, you
might start to believe you are actually lazy, even when you think, deep down,
you’re not. This is one of the ways you can acquire a false sense of self. This
process is all about discovering your true sense of self, not just what other
people and their views they’ve forced onto you.
The same applies in social groups, whether you’re at school, in a friend
group, with family, or in the workplace. You may act a certain way in order
to fit in, but not actually be the person you’re acting like. Try to cut through
these false beliefs and write down who you actually think you are, for better
or for worse.
When you’re done, take some time to read back your answers.
Did you surprise yourself with what you wrote? Did things come up you
hadn’t thought about in a long time? Did you expect some of the answers?
Did you tap briefly into a part of a “past you” you had forgotten about or
thought was lost? Good. No matter what came up, clarity is on its way.
From here, take some time, maybe a couple of days or a week, to process

what you wrote down. New ideas may come to you the more you think about
this whole idea (so add them to your existing answers), and you may change
your mind or have more certainty with other points you put down.
At the end of the week, read through everything once more, and move on to
the next step.
Your Sense of Self is Born
With this information, like a phoenix from the ashes, it’s time to be reborn as
the true you.
This isn’t something that will happen overnight, but a continuous process that
evolves into a lifelong journey. As you have new experiences and learn new
things, your sense of self will change and adapt, and that’s a beautiful thing.
What we’re doing now is creating that initial foundation on which to build
on.
I remember going through this process and being shocked by just how
passive I was in my life. With family, friends, and coworkers, I adopted a
different persona of trying to be who I thought these other people wanted me
to be, rather than just being myself. I was living in anxiety, scared of
judgment and rejections, and suppressing my true self the entire time. I
craved freedom, and this is how I got it.
Set Your Values
Did you write down about how much you love animals or your passion for
saving the planet? If so, it’s time to start choosing cruelty-free brands and
spending time getting more educated about the food you eat and the clothes
you wear.
Did you write down how you value your health and looking after yourself?
It’s time to start working out and eating well.
Do you value relationships and experiences with others? It’s time to call your
mother and start organizing plans with friends.
Do you value genuine people and honest relationships? It’s time to start
thinking about what you’re going to do about that toxic friend you’ve been
trying to ignore.
Using the information you discovered about yourself in the previous section,

you should be able to set at least some values that you believe in, all of which
will then allow you to make choices in your life that you actually want to
make. Life satisfaction and a sense of self will be derived from you making
these choices.
What’s more, you can learn to cut out the things that don’t matter to you and
don’t serve your beliefs and values. I value connected relationships but felt
lonely and didn’t address my needs, so I plugged the gaps with video games.
Now, while I enjoyed computer games from time to time, I didn’t enjoy
playing them for six hours a day to stop myself feeling lonely, so I took
action to only play for two hours on weekends and spent the regained time on
my relationships. By making these proper choices, I naturally started to find
balance in my life.
Set your values. Discover what matters to you. Make the right choices. Your
sense of self will come from this action.
Having Proper You Time
The only way you can figure out what matters to you is by having proper
quiet time with yourself, allowing yourself to listen to your thoughts and
process how you’re feeling. It’s so easy to have a bad day and just numb it all
out with TV, Netflix, and social media, but how are you going to learn about
yourself if you don’t think about it?
There are plenty of ways you can do this, whether you're a fan of reading or
listening to music, or you can use some more hands-on self-help techniques,
like journaling and meditation. It’s entirely up to you, and if you’re not sure,
try a whole bunch of different approaches to see what works for you as an
individual.
Get Help if Needed
The final point I want you to remember is that your self-help journey doesn’t
have to be one you go through alone. If someone you loved was going
through this journey themselves, then it’s pretty safe to say that if they
needed help or support, you would help if you could. The same applies to
you. People will always be willing to help you, especially if they’re a loved
one, but they need to know that you want the help first.
Suppose you’re dealing with anything you can’t seem to face, perhaps a

mental health condition like depression or anxiety (both of which are very
common with those who have a lack of a sense of self). In that case,
professional guidance is always an option.
The Summary
And with that, we come to the end of the first chapter. Is the journey what
you expected so far? Went a little deep, didn’t we? It’s okay. It’s all essential,
and what’s amazing is that by focusing on just developing your sense of self,
you’ll instantly see real changes in your life and within your relationships
with others.
Because you know yourself, you’ll naturally be more confident in yourself.
Since you know what you believe in, you can share your opinions with others
and start to have more in-depth, meaningful conversations.
As a lightning-fast recap, you first need to focus on developing your sense of
self by:
●     Defining your values and beliefs
●     Spending time getting to know yourself
●     Understanding what makes you, you
As I said above, this is just the groundwork for becoming better at small talk,
and if you want to go into this further, you’re welcome to do some more
research. However, in our journey together, we’re going to pull back around
to how to talk to anyone, starting off with one of the most essential skills you
need to know.

Chapter Two – It All Begins with Listening
“When you talk, you are only repeating what you already know. But if you listen, you may learn
something new.” — Dalai Lama
Chances are, you saw this coming. Every relationship you have, have had,
and will have throughout your entire life is based and founded on effective
communication. The most significant part of that is being able to listen to
others communicating with you.
Listening is essential because you’re giving someone attention that grants
you clarity on what they’re saying, and this is the best basis for a real
relationship. Every human being wants to be heard and understood by others.
A 2015 study carried out by the Michigan State University backed this up and
found that active listening (listening with intent) will enable you to talk more
clearly and concisely with others and better understand the world.
Listening, therefore, not only improves your own speaking skills but also
helps you connect with those around you. Imagine talking to someone who
you can tell is not really listening to you. You’ve been there, right? It’s
horrible, and you don’t want to be around that person for long. Let’s explore
how you can be a better listener.
The Two Types of Listening
Listening. You have a conversation, hear the other person, and respond to
what they said, right? That’s a conversation. Relationships are founded from
this. Right? Simple stuff. Not entirely.
Research shows there are actually 18 different types of listening, including
states of listening like biased listening, inactive listening, deep listening,
empathetic listening, comprehensive listening, and so on. Still, for simplistic
sake, I want to break it down into just two types.
➢       Listening to understand
➢       Listening to respond
When you speak to the vast majority of people, they will instinctively be
listening to respond. This basically means that instead of listening to
someone, this person already knows what point they want to share next, so

they are, in essence, just waiting for the other person to finish speaking so
they can have their turn.
A great example of this came up when I first dated my partner, and we went
to visit her parents for the weekend. My partner had decided she would try a
vegan diet after reading all the health benefits and didn’t sit comfortably with
the idea of eating an animal. Upon telling her dad, he replied,
“Why do you want to do that? Meat is so good. You know you’ll never be
able to eat burgers again?”
“Or delicious steak!” her mother chimed in.
My partner tried to explain, “Well, the impact of the meat industry on the rest
of the planet is just not something I want on my conscience, and don’t even
get me started on how poorly the living creatures are treated.”
To which he replied, “I couldn’t do it. I just love steak too much.”
Had my partner been listened to? No. As much as her dad is a nice guy, he
has the thought process that meat is good and nothing can get in the way of
that. It doesn’t matter what my partner said; he would have stuck to his guns
about how meat is amazing and the best thing ever.
They are listening to respond. To have a progressive conversation, he could
have said something like, “Why? What are the health benefits? What impact
does animal agriculture have on the planet?” and if he heard her out and still
didn’t mind eating meat, then at least he would have listened and given it a
chance. They missed an opportunity to understand their daughter on an
individual level simply by listening to her response.
The best, most meaningful conversations are based on everyone’s aim within
the conversation to understand each other, sharing what the facts are, and
why people think and feel what they do. By taking this approach, you begin
to understand others as individuals rather than force your own narrative.
How to Listen to Understand
This is logically the next question. So how do you listen to understand?
The same MSU study found, like most confidence and communication
techniques, that listening to understand is a skill that can be learned and
practiced, and to quote the report directly:
“Active listening takes time and practice. However, every time you use active

listening, it gets a little easier. It can help you to navigate through difficult
conversations. More than that, it helps improve overall communication,
builds a better understanding, and ultimately leads to better relationships
with family, friends, and coworkers.”
Practice really does make perfect, so here are the skills on how to actionably
listen to understand.
➢       Give Your Full Attention
This may sound obvious, but be honest with yourself; how many times are
you listening to someone and you clock out, perhaps thinking about what you
should be doing next, what’s on TV later, or how you’re going to respond?
This isn’t giving someone your full attention.
You can do this by:
●     Minimizing distractions, such as not playing with your phone or
watching TV
●     Make eye contact with someone
●     Face the person you’re speaking to
●     Don’t multi-task
●     Bring yourself back to the present when you find yourself drifting
A great trick I learned to help you keep focus is to concentrate on the center
of your palm. You can do it now, and you’ll notice how your attention travels
there to the center of your hand. See how it makes your thinking stop and
how much more focused you are? Try it in your conversations and see how
effective it is.
I know this all sounds like simple stuff, but it’s because it’s so simple that it’s
easy to forget and get stuck in bad habits. A Harvard study as far back as
1957 even carried out courses to help people listen using these same
techniques, which resulted in a 40% increase of people’s listening
capabilities, so try it for yourself!
➢       Hear the Other Person Out
When someone is talking to you, it’s incredibly easy to fall into the habit of
interrupting, which is a very bad habit. It also means you’re not listening to

understand the person, you’re listening so you can now talk your own points,
and that’s not the foundation for a meaningful conversation. To help not
interrupt people, you can:
●     Minimize distractions, so you’re not answering a phone, for example
●     You don’t hold on to your point, but let it go and respond to what the
other person is saying
●     Wait until they have finished speaking
●     Ask a question if you need more clarity on what they said, rather than
just going back to your original point
This is an important technique to think about because interrupting is a missed
opportunity to understand the other person, but it also sends the message that
you don’t respect the other person enough or feel like their opinions are not
worth listening to, and however you’re interrupting them is more important
than them.
This won’t paint you in a favorable light.
➢       Use Your Body to Listen
Hand in hand with improving your listening skills, being conscious of your
body and how you’re controlling it can be a great way to improve how
attentive you are. While I already mentioned making eye contact, you can do
other things like:
●     Turning your body to face the person who’s talking
●     Nod occasionally
●     Smiling, but not excessively (don’t want them to think you’re weird)
●     Saying “uh-huh” to show you’re engaged in the conversation and want
them to keep going
●     Adopt an open posture
➢       Repeat back their points for clarity
One of the most popular ways to improve a conversation is always cited as
being the repetition of a point. If someone says, “I like chocolate because it’s
sweet,” you show you understand by starting your next sentence with
“Because it’s sweet? But which brand is your favorite?” Other ways you can

do this include:
●     Paraphrasing what has been said by saying things like, “What I’m
hearing is…” or “It sounds like you’re saying…”
●     Ask questions like “What do you mean by…” or “Do you mean…”
●     Repeat key words back to the person every now and then
That repetition of what the other person has said shows that you’re taking on
board and listening to what they have to say, meaning they’ll feel like they
can be a lot more open and connected with you.
➢       Then Respond
Since you’ve been actively listening to the other person, and they’ve finished
speaking, now you can respond. You don’t want to fall into the trap here of
just going back to what you wanted to say originally, but instead, reply to
what they’re actually saying. You can do this by:
●     Addressing the key point of what they said, again for clarity
●     Pause for several seconds that shows that you’re thinking about what
they said
●     Convey your points in the best way possible
Don’t worry about this last section so much since the rest of the book is going
to be dedicated to helping you know what to say in any situation, so we’ll be
covering this all in a lot more depth.
The Summary
By using these techniques alone, you’ll notice such a huge difference in how
connected you are to other people within your conversations and how you’re
being listened to yourself. When you listen to others and respect what they
have to say, most people will unconsciously do the same back to you.
It’s only when the other person doesn’t feel listened to or respected that
tempers start to rise, and things get out of hand. Remember, practice makes
perfect, and even incorporating these points into your next conversation will
make such an amazing difference. Try it for yourself!
For a quick reference, when listening to people, you’re going to want to focus
on:

●     Understanding the two types of listening
●     Practice listening to understand
●     Avoid listening to respond
●     Give someone your full attention
●     Never interrupt someone
●     Listen with your body, not just your ears
●     Repeat back key points the other person said
●     Respond to the point after everything else
And with that, we move on to the next chapter.
In one chapter’s time, we’re going to be focusing on the core mechanics of
actually speaking to someone and starting a conversation, so if you want to
skip ahead, that’s no problem, but for clarity, the next chapter is going to
explore some of the more advanced techniques you can use to actively listen
more effectively.

Chapter Three – Further Listening Skills
“No one is as deaf as the man who will not listen.” — Proverb
A chapter that needs no introduction, since I did that a minute ago, so let’s
jump straight into it.
There are basically endless ways you can advance your listening skills, and
since everyone is different, and we all have our own bad habits, some of
these may apply to you, and some may not, but I like to think of this section
as a great reminder of how to listen, as well as to help you set the overall
intention of becoming a better listener.
Minimize Distractions
A study back in 2012 carried out by Larry D. Rosen Ph.D. researched 300
middle school, high school, and university students to see how distracted they
became, depending on their environment. The students were supposed to be
studying, although they were surrounded by phones, computers, and
televisions.
The results were shocking, showing that when surrounded by technology, the
students could only study for around three minutes at a time—laptops and
phones providing the most distraction. Only three minutes. That’s such a low
attention span.
I understand life is busy, and things need to get done. Sometimes, multi-
tasking is the only viable solution to make things happen since it feels as
though there aren’t enough hours in the day. However, if you want to have
meaningful conversations and connect with people, there are going to need to
be times when you sit down and talk to each other, without the distractions
we’re typically surrounded by. When someone is speaking to you, you can
minimize distractions by:
●     Putting down and locking your phone
●     Switching off the TV
●     Turning off your computer monitor
●     Not eating or drinking while talking with someone
No matter where you are or what you’re doing, whether you’re at home or at

work, these tips will make your conversations and your relationships far
better.
Be Free from Judgments
It’s crucial to think about how your judgments affect your ability to listen. If
you’re stuck in your ways and feeling rather close-minded or defensive on a
subject, you can end up not actually listening to someone but instead zoning
out or getting ready to tell them why they are wrong.
If you’re able to step outside of that and open your mind, you may hear
something and learn a new perspective. You may even sway your opinion or
can give you more information to help solidify how you feel. Either way,
you’re going to grow as an individual by listening, so don’t let the judgments
stop you from doing just that!
To be less judgemental, focus on:
●     Being more open-minded
●     Notice judgments when they arise
●     Become more accepting of other people’s ideas
●     Accept imperfections in people
Ask the Right Questions
Active listening to someone is all about understanding that other person,
which is really all communication, in general, is about. Whether you’re
sharing thoughts or ideas or trying to solve a problem or even just
entertaining, you need to be understanding, and people need to understand
you.
Sometimes, people aren’t going to be the best communicators, and you’re
going to require a little more information to understand them, and that’s
okay.
However, this is such an important element to think about that we’re going to
cover it in a lot more detail over the next chapter, so stay tuned!
The Summary
For now, these should be enough techniques and strategies to help you
become the best listener possible. Some may seem basic to you, and some

things you may never have thought of, so take your pick to see what you
want to work on, and the chances are you should see positive results even
with your first interactions from reading this chapter, so good luck, and see it
all in action for yourself.
Let’s continue our journey into the art of talking to anyone.

Chapter Four - It’s All About Questions
“At the end of the day, the questions we ask of ourselves determine the type
of people that we will become.”
— Leo Babauta
We ended the last chapter talking about the importance of asking the right
questions, and it’s a topic that deserves a lot of love. That’s because when it
comes to talking to anyone about anything, the best strategy you can ever
have by your side is being able to ask the right questions at the right time.
It’s pretty self-explanatory. Asking questions enables you to guide the
conversation in whichever direction you want, helps you acquire clarity on
what the other person is saying, and helps you find common ground and
similar interests. Questions are everything!
Now, don’t forget that you don’t want to interrogate someone by bombarding
them with questions. Instead, find a balance of asking questions and talking,
just as it’s important to get the topic of your questions right. When you bring
together your newfound listening skills and mix them with your new ability
to ask questions, you’ve got yourself a great conversation in the works!
The Power of Questions
You need to be direct with your questions and use this powerful
conversational tool to make the other person feel like they can talk to you, to
guide the conversation, and to make the other person feel understood.
We’ll refer to each of these elements as:
●     Direction
●     Clarity
●     Understanding
All of these are important when you want to engage in a proper, meaningful
conversation.
Let’s say you’re talking to a colleague at work. It’s Monday morning, and
everyone is settling in for the day.

“Hey! How are you? How was your weekend?”
“It was okay. Just watched Netflix, really. What about you?”
“Yeah, it was good. Had a barbeque Saturday and just puttered about
the house on Sunday.”
Not the most enthralling conversation of all time, but a pretty common one
nonetheless. Now, you can use questions in a variety of ways here.
If you want direction, you could ask something like:
“What did you watch on Netflix? I’m looking for something action-
packed myself. I just finished Breaking Bad, and I’ve got to say, it’s pretty
good.”
Now, through your questioning, you’re guiding the conversation towards
Netflix and TV series, which is a perfectly valid small-talk topic, especially if
action-packed shows are something you share an interest in. You’ve taken
control of the flow of conversation.
Other times, you’re going to want some clarity, and this is useful for making
sure you understood the other person correctly. You also make the other
person feel like you really want to know more about what they have to say,
thus making them feel more connected to you and more open with the topic
at hand. Taking the same introduction as the last example, you get the reply:
“I got a new dog this weekend.”
How would you respond? Would you ask for its name? Its age? The breed? If
you don’t really know dog breeds very well yourself, then asking for the
dog’s breed isn’t really a genuine question because as soon as they answer,
you’re going to be stumped with what to say next.
Never just go for the question you think is right, just because you’re going
through the motions. Really apply yourself to thinking of better, more
progressive questions. This is what it means to ask the right questions.
Instead, what about asking something like:
“Oh yeah? How’s he or she settling in?”
Interesting. Not a typical question. Requires a bit of thought. The person
you’re speaking with begins to engage more with the conversation.
“Yeah, not too bad, actually. He’s starting to chew the edges of the

sofa, though. He’s quite young, so I don’t know if he’s teething or not.”
What’s your answer? Another question? What would you go for? It’s really
up to you. Just remember you’ve got three main options: Direction, Clarity,
and Understanding.
If you want direction, you could say anything, depending on which aspect of
the conversation you want to go into. Let’s say you’re not enjoying the dog
conversation and want to move on. You could say something like:
“Might be a good excuse to get a new sofa. Or renovate completely.
Would you if you could?”
You’re redirecting the dog conversation to something a bit funnier or
hypothetical. A bit lighthearted, if you will. If you instead wanted clarity—
for example, you knew about dogs and their capability to bite through the
corners of sofas—you might ask something like:
“Oh really? Is the dog chewing it all the time or just certain hours of
the day?”
Now you’re seeking clarity and diving into the topic deeper. If, however, you
want the other person to feel understood, you can repeat back what they are
saying to make them feel heard.
“It could be an age thing if it’s a puppy. Have you looked it up or
spoken to a vet?”
Of course, there are infinite ways you can guide the conversation based on
the questions you ask, but this should give you a clear idea of how questions
are so powerful when it comes to communicating and a massive part of
talking to anyone.
Think of it this way. If you’re asking questions and the other person is
talking, you don’t even need to be speaking most of the time, meaning there’s
little effort or chances to get anxious on your behalf!
Starting Conversations with Questions
Of course, one of the most powerful ways to use questions is by using them
to initiate conversations in the first place. However, you don’t want to be
boring. There’s no denying the tried and tested questions like “How are
you?” and “Where are you from?” are boring and too generic. These aren’t
the best ways to start a conversation. There are definitely better options to

choose from.
So, let’s break it down.
First, you need to get the conversation going. I’m going to assume you’re not
just talking to a random stranger on the street, but perhaps talking to a
colleague at work, or a new client, as part of a networking event while on a
date with someone, or so on.
As a side note, however, If you did want to talk to a stranger on the street,
then always start with a conversation about something in the immediate
environment, such as asking for directions, a good place to eat, the time, or
commenting on something that is going on around you.
For example, if there’s a carnival happening, you could ask something like,
“When was the last time you went to one of these?”
For brevity, let’s say you’re talking to someone you know in a familiar place.
It’s time to get involved with some decent conversations. Here are some
questions you could ask that can open a great conversation in various
situations.
Meeting Someone New (Networking, social event, etc.)
Tell me something about yourself?
This is a great question because you let the other person take control and tell
them what they want you to know, because of course, no one is going to tell
you something they don’t want you to know, allowing you to have a real
insight into who this person is and what they’re all about.
What was your highlight of this week?
This is one of my favorite questions because it allows the conversation to
take a positive tone and allows the other person to really think about what
matters to them. When they’re thinking about positive things, they’re going
to be feeling positive emotions. It’s far better than “How are you?”
Are you working on anything exciting at the moment?
Another chance for someone to get excited about talking to you, this question
is ideal for when you want someone to be passionate with. Of course, they’ll

talk about the most important thing in their life, another great way to get to
know someone and see what matters to them.
Have you been here before?
An open-ended question you can use to gauge someone’s familiar with a
place or person. If you’re in a meeting or at an event, such as a business
meeting, social event, birthday party (did you come last year?) and so on,
you’ll get a nice idea of how connected this person is.
Other questions you can ask when getting to know someone, especially on a
professional level, include questions like:
●     Where did you go to school?
●     What was your favorite part of school?
●     How did you join this industry?
●     Do you think your career path is similar to people like you?
●     What’s the biggest obstacle in your career?
●     What’s your favorite part of your job?
●     Is your day quite varied?
●     What does your typical workweek look like?
●     What are your plans or aspirations for the future?
●     What’s it like working in your office?
Of course, once you’ve asked these questions, these nicely lead to other
questions you can ask that dive deeper into the topic you choose, depending
on what answers they give you.
Questions to Ask While on a Date
●     What do you do in your free time?
●     Are you a morning or night person?
●     What would be your dream job?
●     Who is the most interesting person you’ve met?
●     How would your friends describe you?
●     What song or artist do you never get tired of?
●     What animal do you find the cutest?

●     What animal do you find most ugly?
●     What city would you love to live in?
●     What is your greatest accomplishment?
●     When was the last time you sang to yourself, and what song?
●     What trends have you never been able to understand?
●     What “thing” says the most about a person?
●     What was the strangest turning point in your life?
Fun, Personal Small-Talk Questions for Anywhere
Whether you’re talking to your coworkers, friends, on a date, or just passing
the time in a line somewhere, these are fun little questions you can ask
anywhere.
There are a ton of fun questions you can ask people, and while they may
sound a little out there, you’ll usually find that people love answering them
because they can have so many interesting answers, especially when you’re
with a group of people, allowing you to compare and casually critique each
other’s answers.
Basically, these are fun conversation starters that everyone can get involved
in. Great for one-on-one or group chats!
●     What do you hope never changes in this world?
●     What is your dream car?
●     What’s your guilty pleasure song?
●     If you could learn any skill, what would it be?
●     What do you wish you knew more about?
●     How different was your life a year ago?
●     What’s the furthest you’ve been from home?
●     If you could go to any fictional place, where would you go?
Tips for Asking the Right Questions
Find the Line
Just a quick note, which acts as more of a disclaimer than anything else:

Don’t jump straight in and start asking really personal questions, or those on
sensitive subjects, like race, sex, politics, religion, and so on. These can be
hot topics, and while it would be nice to live in an ideal world where we can
all talk about things openly without judgments, we’re not quite there yet.
Instead, save these conversations for when there’s a right time and place to
speak about them, or you’re with people you trust and are comfortable
enough with to have these conversations.
Remember Social Hierarchy
Personally, I think it kind of sucks that we can’t just be ourselves around
everyone (and I know, a lot of what I’ve said already is about being yourself),
but for many other people, you won’t be able to connect with them unless
you speak to them in a way they’re going to understand.
For example, if you’re talking to a peer or colleague, you’re going to use
different language and come across differently than if you were talking to
your boss. Similarly, you would talk to the president or the Queen of England
differently.
When speaking to others, try to adapt the way you talk and the questions you
ask in a way that will be most effective to the listener. If you’re talking to a
client and they’re quite a fancy person, then talking in a genuinely “fancy”
way is going to make them connect with you far more than if you fill your
sentences with slang.
“Ah, yes, we’re very excited about the project here. What are your
thoughts on it so far?”
“Yeah, the project’s lookin’ good. You excited to get going?”
The question is the same in both instances; it's just how it’s framed that
makes all the difference.
Keep Your Questions Open-Ended
Finally, always try to keep your questions as open-ended as possible because
you’re inviting someone to give you a comprehensive answer.
“How are you?”
“Good.”
That is not a great conversation.

“What was the highlight of your week?”
“Nice question. Let me think. Probably getting a panini for free in my
favorite cafe because they know me and were being nice.”
“Wow, that’s cool they did that. How long have you been going
there?”
Far more interesting. While on this note, you can make questions more open-
ended by changing them to include words like what, who, and how. You can
also say, “Tell me more,” allowing someone the opportunity to elaborate on
what they’re saying.
With that, you should now understand how important it is to ask questions in
your conversations and the benefits you can enjoy by doing so.
The Summary
Just to recap this chapter, you’re going to want to remember to:
●     Ask lots of questions to get to know someone
●     Keep the questions open-ended using words like what and how
●     Use questions for conversational direction, clarity, or for further
understanding
●     Have a backlog of go-to questions to remember depending on the
situation
●     Don’t get too personal or head into sensitive subjects
Armed with this new information, I’m now going to take you down a
different rabbit hole, and that’s being able to talk to someone in the first
place, no matter what situation you’re in.

Chapter Five - How to Have a Conversation with
Anyone
“Good conversation can leave you more exhilarated than alcohol; more refreshed than the theater or a
concert. It can bring you entertainment and pleasure; it can help you get ahead, solve problems, spark
the imagination of others. It can increase your knowledge and education. It can erase
misunderstandings, and bring you closer to those you love.”
— Dorothy Sarnoff
This next chapter is pretty much the crux of this book.
Within the next few pages, I’m going to share with you and explore a literal
step-by-step way you can have a conversation with anybody about anything.
We’ll talk more about what you can talk about and how to carry these
conversations to be even better in the following chapters, but for now, we’re
going to cover the absolute fundamentals, building the foundations for your
next conversations to stand on.
Ready? Let’s go.
Step One - First Impressions
First impressions always count, so how do you want yours to be perceived in
the eyes of others?
After all, you have complete control over it, even if it may not seem like it at
times.
As a quick note, this section could also cover topics like dressing well,
dressing for the occasion, making sure your personal hygiene is up to
scratch, and so forth because these are all very important points to remember
if you’re looking to connect with someone and make a positive first
impression.
However, sticking with the interpersonal conversational skills side of things,
whenever you meet someone new, you’re going to want to create a first
impression that helps them connect with you. After all, while we’re taught to
never judge a book by its cover, let’s be honest: We all do this all the time. If
you head into a meeting with a new client or go on a first date, you judge that
person to see if they’re someone you want to work with or spend more time
with.

Moreover, while you’re giving your first impression to them, they also give
one to you. So what does theirs say? Lots to think about, but let’s cover both
sides of this first impressions coin.
Reading the Room
Remember when you were in school, and your teacher would call in sick, and
you’d have a substitute teacher in to cover for them?
I remember having one in my French class, and for the first few lessons,
everybody would behave and stay reasonably quiet. While this was quite
unconscious, it’s clear in hindsight that we were trying to suss out whether
the teacher was incredibly strict or a bit of a pushover. As we became more
comfortable and pushed the limits, we started to misbehave, which most
children do, more and more.
As soon as it was clear the teacher was trying to be a “cool” teacher and
wasn’t going to crack a whip in our direction for the slightest problem, the
class slowly began a descent into chaos.
This same logic applies in your own conversations and interactions.
Whenever you go into a new interaction, start by reading the other person and
seeing what type of person they are. Test the waters and see what kind of
feedback you’re getting. Some questions to ask and things to focus on
include:
●     What kind of tone of voice are they using?
●     What clothes are they wearing?
●     Are they busy?
●     Are they at work or relaxing?
●     Do they look stressed out?
●     Are they smiling?
●     How firm is their handshake?
●     How on time to meet you are they?
●     What is their body language telling you?
●     How polite are they?
●     What manners do they have?
●     What does your gut instinct say about them?

Some people are a lot easier to read than others, and you may instantly know
the kind of person you’re talking to, especially if they’re very forthcoming.
Alternatively, you may need to gauge a little and start the conversation
flowing to really get a feel for who this person is, and therefore, how you’re
going to effectively communicate with them.
For example, if someone is withdrawn, are they shy, or are they trying to hide
something?
The situation you’re in will provide a lot of context. The trick here is to look
past what the person is saying and instead read their body language and all
the other factors we just spoke about. However, someone’s body language is
very important.
Research shows that around 55% of all communication happens through
body language, and 30% happens through tone of voice, so be conscious of
it!
Some tricks to remember when reading body language include;
●     Posture. Is someone’s head up and confident, or unsure and looking at
the ground, avoiding eye contact?
●     Appearance. What clothes are they wearing? Casual? Smart? Relaxed?
Doesn’t care?
●     Crossed arms and legs tend to portray defensive feelings
●     Hands in pockets (or hidden hands) suggest the person is hiding
something
●     Lip biting or nail picking can be a sign of feeling under pressure
●     Facial expressions
By observing these traits, you should be able to read the other person you’re
speaking with quite well, and then you can use this information to respond in
the way that seems appropriate. Remember, people will respond to you how
they perceive you are speaking to them, so adapt how you talk for the best
results. Once you start getting to know someone and go deeper with them,
you can start showing more of yourself.
An example of this initial conversation may be speaking to someone who is
looking shy, stressed, or sad. If you read these kinds of signals, you may want

to approach them in a nicer, more compassionate way than you would
normally speak to someone.
Even if you’re finding it hard to read someone, remember: Your gut instinct
is usually right when it picks up on cues, so trust it.
Research shows that people who are more tuned into sensing their body
sensations in high-pressure situations (in the case of the study, they were
looking at people who worked in high-stress London trading floors) were
making better, more successful decisions than those who were out of sync
with their gut instinct.
In other words, if you have a feeling and your body makes you feel a certain
way, it’s trying to tell you something, so let it guide you!
Writing the Room
Hand in hand with the point above, it’s important to use the information
you’ve learned to take control of your own first impressions and adjust how
people are perceiving you. If you walk abruptly into a room and you’re
crashing around and stumble and then hide in the corner, this creates a very
different impression to one who walks in and sits down gracefully and with
confidence.
You have control of this!
Some quick-fire points to think about include:
●     How you are dressed
●     Your tone of voice when speaking
●     What does your body language say about you?
●     The firmness of your handshake
●     Are you making eye contact with the other person?
●     Are you staring too much?
●     Are you giving someone your full attention, or are you distracted?
Be mindful of how you’re portraying yourself in the eyes of others, and
you’ll get a reaction based on what you do. This gives you full control of a
situation when talking to anyone, which is going to make you feel far more
confident in your abilities to talk to someone.

Another great example of this comes from Patrick King’s Better Small Talk.
In his book, he talks about children and how they haven’t developed the
social filters many of us develop as we grow older. We have insecurities,
anxieties, and traits that children don’t yet possess. This is why when we talk
to children, we talk to them in a certain way based on how they are talking to
us.
In most cases, younger children will just act like themselves. This is why kids
happily cry in public or act the same in front of elderly relatives as they do
with younger family members. Kids are themselves, usually to funny or
embarrassing ends.
However, the confidence that children have with just being themselves means
that they are confidently writing the room around them, in which adults will
follow suit and will respond a certain way. This is why it’s so easy to talk to
children, because they can speak with such confidence, without censorship,
while being so forthcoming.
Step 2 - Making the First Move
There’s no denying that so many of us put so much pressure on “breaking the
ice” and making the first move, almost certainly to the extent that so many of
us are so afraid to speak first that we end up not speaking at all. Over time,
we’ve ended up where we are now and having to retrain ourselves to be more
confident. There’s such a huge fear that we’ll be rejected by the other person,
judged, or hurt in some way, even if it’s just asking a stranger on the street
for directions.
Really let that sink in and realize how true that is for many people! However,
making the first move is essential if you want success in your conversation,
and that’s not just success in making them happen in the first place. A study
found that making the first move results in so much success in so many areas
of your life. In business, making the first offer puts you more in control and
more likely to get a better deal. In dating, making the first move is more
likely for you to get what you want.
But how do you build the confidence to do it?
The reality of the situation is that breaking the ice and making the first move
isn’t really that hard. All you need to do is “cut the fluff” and go straight for
what you want. I could say just be confident, don’t put too much pressure on

yourself and the end result, but instead, be in the moment, but I’m guessing
that doesn’t really help, so let’s break it down.
Take dating as an example (I like using this example a lot, but that’s because
we tend to add so much pressure to ourselves in these situations, most of the
time so unnecessarily).
There’s a whole taboo subject that you need to have “game” when trying to
ask someone out. You need to be slick and have “tactics” to make it work,
but this isn’t real life, and it’s not going to get you to where you want to be.
For some reason, we’ve forgotten that just going up to someone and being
our genuine, authentic selves is easily the best way to get someone’s attention
and will develop a much stronger connection over the long term. This, of
course, applies to all situations, not just dating.
Still, that doesn’t help you make the first move. You may feel like you’re
inconveniencing someone by talking to them, holding them up, or
interrupting them. You may not want to speak to a stranger in case you
disturb them or they find you annoying. This is social anxiety in full swing.
The actionable step here?
Indirectly approach someone for something, for some reason, and have this
reason clear in your head at all times, but don’t make it a long-term reason.
Don’t think, Wow, I want to talk to this person because I want to date them
and marry them and so on.
Thinking this way means you’re putting far too much pressure on yourself
because if you’re rejected, it’s going to hurt. There’s too much focus on the
outcome, and it’s going to make you buckle when the conversations feel too
much.
Start small. Think, Hey, this person seems nice. I’ll ask if they want to
FaceTime or go for dinner. Asking someone to go to dinner is way smaller a
commitment than thinking long term, and you don’t even need to have the
pressure of this kind of event if it’s too much.
Create a reason to speak to someone, even if there isn’t one. Again, this is a
fantastic thing to practice because it gives you the chance to try something
new, boost your confidence, and get better at speaking with people. Most
interactions will not be the most important ones you’ll ever have, so relax and
try to have fun with them!

Some of the things you can say or ask include:
●     Do you have the time?
●     Where is the closest bank?
●     Is the food good here?
●     What time is the show starting?
●     Have you seen this movie before?
●     I love the music here. Do you?
●     Do you know anyone here?
These are all small statements you can ask to break the ice, opening the
doorways for engaging small talk and conversation, and ultimately deeper
connection, should you want to continue speaking with them.
Step Three - Find the Connection
Now you’re talking with someone you’ve approached the right way, the ice
has broken, and the conversation is starting to pick up and find its pace. What
do you do now?
The best approach for finding a connection is to find similarities you have
with that other person. This means finding common ground on things you’re
interested in, whether that’s a hobby, passion, or music taste, or even just
commenting and sharing opinions of what is happening in the immediate
environment or situation you’re in. An example of the latter would be
commenting on the music at a concert you’re at.
This is where your listening skills come into play because you’re focusing on
what someone is saying (and what their body language is saying) and then
picking out the bits they seem most connected to, then running with it. Let
me give you an example.
Let’s say you’re at a concert and you’re engaging in small talk with someone
at the bar. Your first impression is that they are not really having a good time.
They just look into their drink, not really focusing on the music, and seem to
be mentally somewhere else.
Everything about them suggests they're having a rough time, so you choose to
act compassionately and ask if everything’s okay, perhaps saying something
like, “Is the music too loud for you?” This is lighthearted, not too personal,

but also suggesting that you know that something isn’t right, and you’re
willing to talk to them about it.
Depending on their answer, you can then figure out what’s wrong and how
you can deal with the situation, and you could be on the road to making a
close friend.
In any given situation, depending on the context, you can find things in
common by asking things like:
●     Where did you go to school?
●     Where do you work?
●     What sports team do you support?
●     What music do you like?
●     What food is your favorite?
●     Where do you like to eat?
●     What kind of movies do you like?
It’s also important to make sure you’re vocal about what you agree on. It’s all
well and good thinking (“Hey, me too!”), but you’re not going to connect
with the other person unless you tell them that you’re on the same page.
Vocalizing this is a great way to build rapport and to make someone want to
connect with you, which leads us nicely to the next point.
The Mastery of Mirroring
Mirroring is such an important part of any conversation because it makes you
more relatable to the person you’re speaking to. Mirroring is basically a
practice where you’re consciously copying (but not too obviously) the tone of
voice, posture, body language, speed of speech, and overall physical
appearance of the person you’re speaking to, which dramatically improves
how connected people feel to you.
You can also mirror based on the language and visual style that someone is
speaking to you in, such as the amount of slang they’re using, but sticking
with physical mirroring is enough for most conversations.
A study (Anderson, 1998) also found that people felt more positive towards
strangers when mirroring occurs.

Taking the bar example above, if someone is leaning at the bar slouched, and
you pull up next to them and do the same, this is mirroring. If they speak
slowly and without enthusiasm, mirroring this will help them take on board
what you’re saying more effectively because you’ve already created common
ground through physical acts alone.
Some things to remember to mirror someone properly include:
●     Mimicking voice speed and tone
●     Copying volume of gestures
●     Copying body language, such as posture and leaning
●     The inflection on certain words
●     Usage of slang
●     The energy and excitement for a topic
You know when you meet someone, and you discover that you share a love
for the same band, movie franchise, or sports team, and there’s that moment
when you look at each other like, “Oh my god, you love them too? That’s
amazing!” and your energy levels spike, and it’s like you both build
momentum with each other? That’s the magic of mirroring in full effect.
Step Four - Addressing Obstacles You May Face
If you follow the three steps above, you’ll be able to converse with anyone
about anything, so that’s where we’ll end the book. Thanks for reading.
Enjoy your day.
I’m joking, of course. In an ideal situation, you’ll follow these points, and
people will respond to you positively, and the conversations will be able to
flow naturally from here on out. However, not everybody is relatable in such
a way, and talking to some people can be less enthralling than chatting with a
brick wall.
This can happen for many reasons: whether the person is having a bad day, is
surprised by you talking to them in the first place, is stressed out, is shy and
anxious, or just isn’t in the mood for talking. When you talk to people like
this, and the conversation feels like it's scraping by with friction, it can be
hard to know what to do next. Do you force the conversation to go further, or

do you cut and run?
First, remember you can always leave a conversation if you don’t want to
continue. Just say something along the lines of “Oh, I’ve got to dash to make
the train/get some food/meet someone else,” and so on, and you can just
leave.
However, there may be times when you need to talk to someone, such as
conversing with someone at work, trying to get a job done, interviewing
someone, networking, or trying to get information from them. Don’t worry;
that’s not as malicious as it sounds. Imagine you’re trying to organize a
surprise party for someone and need to know their schedule without actually
telling them what’s going on. How can you press the conversation forward?
Perhaps the most common technique to use here is elicitation, a
communication technique developed by the FBI for interrogation purposes.
Now, I’m not advocating that you go out and interrogate people for
information—far from it. Teachers use this technique in the classroom all the
time, although perhaps without realizing its origins.
Elicitation is the process of getting people to share information that they are
holding on to by using statements that guide the person into speaking, even if
they don’t really want to.
An example of this would be to recognize and compliment someone. Human
beings, while complex, are really rather simple when it comes to how we
work. We are social creatures who are instinctively wired to receive praise
and recognition from others because it shows we’re being accepted into a
larger group, which back in the day would have been essential for our
survival in tribes and larger groups.
Giving someone a compliment about how they are or their physical
appearance can be a great way to get them talking. Some statements you can
use include:
●     I really like your coat. It suits you.
●     Damn, I love how hardworking you are.
●     Your attention to detail is incredible.
●     The way you express yourself is great.

Another way to engage in elicitation is to complain, and as I’m sure you
know, human beings love to mutually dislike someone, whether it’s an
opposing sports team, the grey weather, or just a mutually shared situation,
like having to stay late after work to get a project completed.
People love to complain. Studies even show that the average person
complains between 15–30 times a day, and ActofLibraries.com rates “starting
a conversation” as their number one reason for complaining in the first place.
A quick complaint into something can be a very powerful way to open people
up and get them speaking, especially if they’re looking to vent about a
situation they’re dealing with.
With all this in mind, next time you watch a crime thriller or detective series
when a police interview is taking place, you may start to notice these tactics
in full effect. I recently sat down to watch Breaking Bad again and (mild
spoiler alert) saw the episode where Brock is poisoned, and Jesse has to go
into the police station to say why he believes Brock was poisoned by a super-
rare substance.
The detectives say things like:
●     We don’t need to get the lawyers involved. It’s all pen-pushing and a lot
of hassle.
●     We know these situations can be stressful. Just relax. We’re just
chatting.
●     You’re a smart guy, Jesse.
●     You’re a kind, caring guy. We know you only want to do what’s right.
Even in a situation like where someone is being interrogated for a supposed
crime, the detectives use compliments to encourage them to talk, even if they
don’t want to.
And with that, we come to the end of this chapter. As an actionable recap,
when it comes to starting a conversation, you’ll want to:
●     Read the other person
●     Aim to create the first impression you want to give
●     Break the ice with a question
●     Have a goal in mind for the conversation

●     Find similar interests
●     Find the connection you share
●     Mirror the person you’re speaking to
●     Practice talking to unresponsive people

Chapter Six – Mastering the Art of Small Talk
“Small talk is the biggest talk we do.” — Susan RoAne
The main problem my friend Kyle had while attending his sister’s wedding
was not being able to get the conversation off the ground in the first place,
and I know from personal experience that that’s one of the hardest parts of
meeting and getting to know new people.
A few years ago, I spent a lot of time on dating apps like Tinder and Bumble
before I met my current partner, and I always struggled with what the hell I
was going to say after the initial “hey” (which was usually followed by a
cringey waving emoji, but I won’t go further into that). But then again, what
are you supposed to say to be interesting, charismatic, and genuinely be
someone that someone else wants to speak to?
Throughout other times in my life, like lining up at the gym to go into a
spinning class, I’m surrounded by strangers, and you say the generic small
talk stuff about the weather and the problems and politics of the gym, poor
management, and so on, but where do you go from there? You’re not exactly
going to make best friends with someone with that kind of talk.
That’s what I’m dedicating this chapter to—mastering small talk.
Every single relationship you’ve ever had (except that with your parents,
maybe your siblings) would have started with small talk of some kind. A test
of the water to see whether the person is someone you connect with or not,
someone you want to be friends with or not, a client or business is one you
want to work with or not, and so on.
Mastering this art, like listening, will take a bit of practice, but with the
knowledge we’re going to explore in this chapter, you’ll have everything you
need for success. So, let’s get into it.
The Core Strategies of Small Talk
To start with, it’s worth noting that much like listening, the art of small talk
has seemingly infinite depth, and it’s a lifelong skill you can always work on
improving. With over nine billion people on the planet, there’s always going
to be a new way to get through to someone and a new way of talking to learn.
That being said, we can actually boil the art of small talk down to just four

core foundations that everything else is built on. Fortunately, the first three
steps are points you already know: to ask questions (especially open-ended
ones), be proactive with your listening, and minimize distractions.
So, what’s the fourth, mysterious foundation? Any guesses?
It is, in fact, showing enthusiasm. Bringing energy into your conversations.
Showing you’re passionate. Resonating vibrancy into your interactions. You
can talk about anything, and it can be engaging as long as you have
enthusiasm.
The Power of Enthusiasm
Small talk may not be the most interesting thing in the world, but that’s only
the generic small talk we’ve all become so painfully used to. Showing energy
and enthusiasm for connection can be such a powerful gateway into having a
deeper relationship, no matter what you’re talking about, and helps the person
you’re speaking with open up and be themselves, thus nurturing a meaningful
relationship even further.
Even if you just act enthusiastic about even the most mundane conversations,
you’ll see a turnaround in how you connect with people. Try it now in your
head. Imagine a standard conversation with someone in your life, and now
imagine that same conversation with three times the enthusiasm and imagine
how they’d react. I’m not saying you need to be like this all the time, nor do
you need to give it ten times the energy when you’re talking about traffic.
You pick your times and places to go all in.
Adding this degree of energy to your conversations is all about your attitude
and your intentions. When you go into any conversation, professional or
personal, friends or family, lovers or children, if you have the mindset that
you want to know more about this person, or you just want to have fun or
learn something new, suddenly you’ll start viewing human interaction in a
completely different way, and subsequently, life changes.
You’ll soon realize that there are endless people out there to meet, infinite
views and perspectives to learn from, and fun stories and experiences to
share, and isn’t it these kinds of values that you wanted when you picked up
this book in the first place?
So, how do you do it?
It can be hard to bring enthusiasm to a conversation, especially if you’re not a

particularly energetic person by nature, and going above and beyond how you
would usually be may make you feel fake or as though you’re not really
being yourself, but this isn’t a direction you want to head down. You want
your energy levels to be genuine.
Fortunately, there are plenty of ways you can do this.
➢       Act More Energetic
Even adjusting tiny details in the way you converse can make such a big
difference. You can talk a little louder in terms of volume (I’m not saying
shout, but you know what I mean), and you can change your tone of voice to
make it more diverse. You can also emphasize certain words and adjust your
inflection to make what you’re saying more interesting to listen to.
For example, take the two sentences below:
I got a new cat over the weekend.
Oh my, I got my NEW cat over the weekend, and she’s so CUTE!
The emphasis is on the large words, and you can see how just slightly
adjusting what you’re saying can bring so much more power to your words.
You can, of course, amplify your body language to enhance what you’re
saying as well. For example, instead of saying, “Well, you have two choices.
A or B?” you can use your hands to highlight the options, indicating them
right for A and left for B. You’re not really pointing at anything, but you’re
amplifying the fact there’s a choice to be made and two options to choose
from.
Overall, this kind of action makes the conversation seem more interactive.
➢       Highlight How You Feel
You don’t need to agree with everything everyone ever says to you for them
to like you. In fact, it’s better if you surround yourself with people of
opposing views because it helps you stop being stuck in your own ways.
There will be things you disagree with, just like they’ll be statements that
resonate with you, but whichever you feel, highlight that this is how you’re
feeling. This is one of the best ways to bring energy into a conversation
because it’s a great way to simply be yourself.
For example, if someone says something you resonate with or says something

that you couldn’t have said better yourself, then tell that person that that’s
how you feel. Check out these statements:
Yes! I completely agree. You worded that way better than I ever
could!
I’m so glad you brought that up. I feel the same!
Wait, you’re interested in that too?
I see what you’re saying, but I’m the opposite. I love XYZ.
I really don’t agree with you. I really feel like…
See how much energy statements like these can bring to a conversation and
how validating it will feel for the other person?
Be genuine and say how you feel. When you’re being open and honest, the
conversation becomes less placid and passive and is instead more direct and
assertive.
➢       Exert Natural Energy
A really quick note here. I’m not here to tell you how to live your life on a
healthy level, but it’s common knowledge that if you look after your body,
you naturally have a ton of untapped energy that will naturally rise up in the
way you live your life.
By this, I mean exercising regularly, eating well, drinking lots of water,
getting enough sleep each night, and so on. If you look after yourself, you’ll
naturally have more energy. This may all sound a little basic, but hey, I know
for a fact that I used to not really look after myself properly, and taking
control of that brought about a lot of positive changes.
➢       Surround Yourself with the Right People
Granted, you’re not going to be around positive, happy people at every
waking moment of your life, nor would that be a healthy thing. Sounds like
some weird cult thing happening in that world. However, you do need some
stable positive people in your life that you spend regular time with if you
want to adopt these personality traits yourself.
Negativity is physically and mentally draining, and you’re not going to feel
energetic or on the ball in any sense if you feel depressed and drained. It just
won’t happen unless you’re incredibly passionate about faking how you feel.

Seek out to spend time with people who fill you up with energy, make you
feel good, and consistently don’t bring toxicity and negativity into your life.
Discovering Engaging Small-Talk Topics
Okay, so you’re following the tips above, and you’re starting to bring your
own brand of energy into your conversations.
It doesn’t matter where you are or who you’re speaking with—you’re
attractive to listen to. You’re also listening to the other person, you’re asking
questions, and everything seems to be running smoothly. I’m sure you’re able
to see how everything we’ve spoken about already is coming together to
ensure your conversations are perhaps like no other conversations you’ve had
before.
Notice how at the beginning, I said being charismatic and confident is
something that can be learned? Take a moment to think about everything
you’ve learned so far and how applying this information will evolve your
relationships and interactions. Perhaps you’ve already tried it yourself, and
you’re starting to experience the results? Fortunately, there’s more to
discover.
A question we’ve already run into time and time again is what actual topics
you can talk about. While there are practically infinite topics to talk about, it
can be hard to remember the best ones, and while someone may care a lot
about one topic, another person could have no interest whatsoever, leaving
you stuck with no ideas on how to move forward. This section is here to help.
Jumping straight into it, here are some great topics to have in your back
pocket that you can pull out in any conversation.
➢       Talking about the location you’re in (immediate environment)
➢       Food, restaurants, and cooking
➢       Travel, vacations, holidays, dream destinations
➢       Sports
➢       Hobbies and passions
➢       Art
➢       Favorite local places
When you head into a conversation with someone, if you’re listening

carefully (which is why we covered this skill in the first chapters), you can
pick up clues that can help you identify which topics are best to engage in.
Here’s an example conversation of two people waiting quietly at a bus stop
on a grey rainy day.
A: Hey. You okay? You’re looking a bit down.
B: Yeah, I’m fine. I’ve never much been a fan of waiting or the rain.
See how they start talking about the weather? It’s a typical small talk
conversation commenting on the immediate environment, which makes it
easy to talk about, but what’s interesting is the fact person B used it as an
excuse for not feeling okay right now. All this is picked up on by listening to
one sentence.
A: Oh yeah, more of a sun worshipper?
B: Yup. Any day of the week.
A: Where would you go if the bus could take you anywhere in the
world?
A beautiful transition away from traditional small talk and into a more
interesting topic of conversation that’s open-ended enough for them to
answer however they want. If they reply creatively, you know the person is
down for actually talking. If they’re pretty blunt and answer with something
like, “Hm, I don’t know,” then you know they’re probably not in the mood.
B: Probably south of France. I love it down there. The sun is beautiful
on the coast.
A: Oh, right. Have you been before? I’d love to go there myself.
And so on.
More than you probably realize, people will give you topics to talk about in
everything they say because they’re already thinking about themselves and
how they perceive the world at all times. In this example, Person B loves
going abroad and being in the sun, and this is a fact that shines through in the
very first thing they say.
Notice how person A ends with “I’d love to go there myself,” bringing that
energy and passion into the conversation that invites person B to open up

more and start sharing the energy they have for something they love—in this
case, warm countries. They don’t seem very engaged in the conversation at
first, but they can start to be themselves in just a few sentences. The
conversation begins to find a rhythm.
You Will Need to Carry the Conversation… At First
You may feel this kind of conversation feels very one-sided, with you doing
all the talking and the other person not really asking you questions but
unfortunately, that’s just the way things are these days for many people.
That’s not to say that everyone is like that, but there are multiple reasons
why.
Either people love talking about themselves or, especially if they’re talking
with a stranger, won’t think to ask them about their life, or are too afraid to
ask because they feel like they're being intrusive. Other people may not be
used to talking to other people so openly, so it can take a little while for them
to open up and come out of their shells.
There are endless reasons how we’ve reached this point. Studies and research
suggest that we’re drifting apart from each other, or we’re so reliant on social
media that we’re losing our social communication skills. There are many
studies out there, like the 2018 study on “Social Media Use and Perceived
Social Isolation Among Young Adults in the U.S,” that social media use is a
massive contributing factor to ever-growing feelings of isolation and
loneliness, suggesting that we’re disconnecting from one another in a way
like never before.
However, everyone is different, and whatever the reason for someone being
too withdrawn to talk to you and step out of their own shell, you have the
tools to help the people you speak with to come out of the other side and
realize we don’t have to be so closed off with each other.
Meaningful Relationships Take Time
Going back to my line in the gym for a spinning class example, there are
plenty of things to talk about with others around me. I could talk about the
quality of the class, the music choice, how easy it was to park outside this
evening, gym announcements that have been made, and so on.
These might not initially sound like interesting subjects at first, but that

doesn’t make them any less essential. Remember, you should try not to be
judgmental since you never know what you’re going to learn or what topics
of conversation will arise as a result of the typical small-talk topics.
What’s more, having small talk with easy topics first is essential for opening
the door to deeper conversations down the line. If you’re talking to someone,
you need to build up your connection with them to lead to deeper, more
meaningful subjects.
Trust and respect are key parts of any relationship, and they take time to build
up.
A really beautiful example that illustrates this point comes from my mother
and father trying pottery classes when they first retired. When catching up,
they would tell me about the boring conversations they had at first, and
perhaps these classes weren’t for them. It was all small talk and no substance,
gossip, and the sorts, which didn’t really interest my parents. I told them to
hang in there and give it time. It was only like this because they were new,
and the relationships were forming.
Over time, they came to know that one of the other attendees, Maisie, was
going through a battle with cancer, and while on a Sunday afternoon walk,
they took flowers and chocolates to her house as a surprise and had an
afternoon of tea. Their relationship kept going, and once Maisie had
recovered from her therapy, my parents, Maisie, her husband, and a few
others from the pottery class even went on vacation together.
All these opportunities started with small talk in a pottery class on those first
few sessions. Every relationship needs to start somewhere.
This is why it’s a good idea to have some key go-to small-talk topics up your
sleeve that you can pull out at any time. I know we’ve covered a lot of topics
you can talk about already, but just for clarity sake, some more topics
include:
●     The Weather
It’s easy. It’s neutral. Everyone can talk about it. It’s a great starting off point.
When you’re just starting out on your journey to becoming more confident
with your small talk, this is a great topic to practice and to use to improve
your skills.

I wonder who ordered this beautiful weather?
It’s like monsoon season today.
I love days where the fog is like this. It’s so eerie.
●     Entertainment
Another firm favorite. People are bound to be interested in something during
their free time, whether that’s books, movies, TV shows, cinema, sports,
restaurants, and basically any form of leisure activity. Jump in and find out
what other people like.
Any great books you’re reading at the moment? I need some good
recommendations.
Do you listen to podcasts? I’m trying to get into them.
Do you have any fun apps on your phone?
What team do you support?
Been to the movies recently? I haven’t been in so long!
Are you watching the tennis championship at the moment?
●     Personal Life
You don’t want to get too personal with people you’ve just met (this can be
seen as being too forward or even intrusive), but a few personal questions
that help you get to know someone better is fine.
Where does your family come from originally?
Have you ever looked into your heritage?
How long have you and your partner been together?
Do you have brothers and sisters? (Pets is also a decent question)
I’m sure you get the idea. Other great topics you can talk about include:
●     Hobbies
●     Travel
●     Food interests
●     Celebrity gossip
●     Information on hometown

●     Work-life and career
If you’re really struggling for ideas, you can always talk about what is
happening right here, right now in the location you’re in. Listen carefully to
find relatable topics that both you and the other person find interesting. If one
of you isn’t interested in sports at all, then it’s not a good place to go unless
you’re talking about how uneducated you are in sports, which can be quite
humorous when communicated in the right way).
Keep asking questions and let the topics of conversation involve naturally.
Small-Talk Topics You MUST Avoid
I’ve spoken a lot about small-talk topics you can dive into, but very little on
topics you should probably avoid talking about at all costs, which is what I’m
going to dedicate this section to. It’s very easy to get caught out and stuck in
talking about these topics, and while they may be okay with some people,
generally speaking, I would steer clear of them.
Quick note: That’s not to say you can’t ever talk about these things with other
people in your life, but they’re usually reserved for conversations with people
you can trust, and you know you respect and can speak openly with.
●     Finances
I mean, imagine if someone came up to you and asked you how much you
earned. You probably wouldn’t be very willing to share because it’s a
personal topic. What’s more, how much we earn would only usually be asked
as a way to judge someone on who they are, which nobody wants. Avoid at
all costs (no pun intended).
●     Religion
Always a controversial topic. You never know what other people believe, so
you’re going to want to save this topic until you know someone and have
enough respect to listen to each other and actually talk about how you feel on
the subject, rather than making snap judgments on someone you barely know.
●     Politics
Hand in hand with religion, the topic of politics has the potential to get really
emotionally charged and out of hand, especially when you’re unaware of the

views of the other person. There could be a time and a place where it’s fine,
but generally speaking, avoid this topic until you know someone really well.
●     Death
This topic should probably be on this list without needing to mention it, but if
you’re trying to enjoy a positive conversation with someone you want to get
to know, you should perhaps avoid such heavy topics like death and loss.
These can be emotionally driven and upsetting, not feelings you want to be
associated with in your initial meetings.
●     Sex
Sex is personal. Making jokes, dropping innuendos, and talking openly about
sex with strangers has the potential to make people feel really uncomfortable
and will remember you in a bad light. Sure, there are times, perhaps if you’re
flirting, where it could be the perfect time to talk about it, but you’re going to
want to pick your moments wisely.
●     Health and well-being
Have you ever been speaking to someone, and you’ve accidentally dropped
that you’re not feeling well, and suddenly they jump in with all these quick
fixes and remedies? It’s the most annoying thing, especially when the other
person has no idea about the details of your condition or the complexity of it
(nor are they usually a trained healthcare professional). Don’t be that person.
●     Personal life gossip
By all means, talk about celebrity gossip because these are people who put
their lives out there in the public eye, but sharing gossip about people in your
life is not a good idea. While people may be engaged and interested in what
you’re saying, this kind of topic paints you in a negative light, and people
will consciously avoid you in case you end up sharing personal information
about them.
●     Offensive jokes
Sure, you can use your most sexist, racist, and most out-there offensive jokes
when you’re around people you love, whether that’s friends or family. I’m

not advocating hate, but I understand that comedy is comedy, no matter what
form it takes. However, it’s extremely dangerous ground to share these with
people you don’t know and could end up getting you in a lot of trouble.
Imagine sharing one on your first day at work in a new office and pushing
everyone away. It’s a bad situation to be in.
●     Physical appearance
Quite a traditional topic to avoid. It’s best not to ask how old someone is or
comment on their physical appearance, just because you don’t know how
sensitive someone may be. A common example of this is asking someone
how far in their pregnancy they are when they’re not even pregnant. Imagine
being in that situation.
●     Ex-partners or friendships
If you’re on a first date with someone, it’s pretty common knowledge that
you’re not going to want to start talking about your exes. It’s a bitter place to
take the conversation, and it’s probably going to make the conversation turn
negative, which is not something you want to be connected with when people
are spending time with you. Avoid!
●     Any limited conversation topics
Let’s say you start talking about your hobbies—swimming, for example—but
the other person has absolutely no interest in swimming and hasn’t even
swum in years. Why are you going to keep going on about swimming? It’s as
though you’re trying to bore and push away the other person. If someone
doesn’t seem interested in the topic of conversation, switch it up.
Ending the Conversation
In many ways, how you end your conversations is just as important as how
you start them. While you’ve already created your first impression, how you
end an interaction will determine your lasting impression and how people
treat you the next time you see them. This is why it’s a good idea to practice
and rehearse some key exit lines you can always fall back on to leave a
positive lasting impression. Here are some ideas to get you started.
It has been really great meeting you. Do you have a number or social media?

I can’t wait to hear how your project/meeting/event goes. See you next time?
Well, this has been great. I’m going to grab something to eat. See you
around?
Wow. It’s true you learn something new every day. Thank you for that. I’ve
got to rush off now, but would it be okay to swap details and carry this on
another time?
You’ll need to adapt what you say, the words you use, and the way you say
what you say depending on the situation you’re in, just like we’ve done in
every aspect of conversation before. For example, you’re going to speak
differently to a professional-client than you would someone you’re asking on
a date, but you can get creative.
The best idea, however, is to have some ideas of how you can positively sign
off on a conversation, make your exit, and leave the situation so that the
person you were speaking with will remember you and this experience
positively.
Practicing the Art of Small Talk
All of these methods and topics we’ve covered in this chapter are great when
it comes to being better at small talk, but as I keep saying, just reading about
them now isn’t going to make a difference to how good you are. It’s only
through practice that you’ll get better.
I love the metaphor, so I’m going to say it again (probably the last time,
though, I promise...maybe).
If you want to get good at swimming, you need to spend time in the pool.
If you’re wondering how you’re supposed to “get in the pool” when it comes
to small talk, this section has got you covered as we explore some of the
ways you can integrate small talk into your everyday life, thus becoming
better at it.
Keep Your Eyes Open for Opportunities
By speaking with lots of different people about lots of different topics, you’ll
start to develop your own opening and closing statements, and you’ll start to
get a real feel for how you can traverse various topics of conversation and
what subjects you can talk about passionately. However, these are all social

aspects that come with experience, so get the experience!
No matter what you’re doing in your life and what situation you’re in, keep
your eye open for opportunities to practice small talk.
Talk to the cashier at the store. The person behind you in line. The man at the
bar. The class teacher after the lesson. I can’t stress enough how much
practicing is going to benefit you. Of course, not everyone is going to be
interested in talking for whatever reason, but that’s okay. Just keep going and
keep getting better. Step outside your comfort zone!
Pretend You are Friends
When it came to my personal small-talk improvement journey, this was
perhaps the biggest game-changer that opened so many doors. I worked in
sales for a lot of years and found it difficult talking to new clients and project
managers. I could present my projects and proposals because I had direction
but was useless when it came to anything outside of that.
However, as soon as I switched my mindset into believing that anyone I was
speaking to was already a friend, someone I knew, or someone I could trust
and was close to, I unconsciously started treating them as friends, which
meant I was more open, more confident, and more charismatic.
It’s a quick mental shift—a trick, if you like—that can help alter your
perspective into relaxing and being more comfortable in your own skin.
Be Patient with Yourself
Throughout any self-improvement journey, you’re going to make mistakes.
While these can be embarrassing, especially when it comes to talking with
new people you’re trying to have a positive relationship with, it’s all part of
the journey and a part you’re going to look back on in years to come and
laugh at while reveling in how far you’ve come.
Messing up is not a big deal, and if you try to protect yourself in life so you
never mess up, you’re never going to get anywhere or learn the lessons that
will change your life.
Set Objectives
While small talk with someone is not a military operation, although it can
sometimes feel like it, it can really help you have direction with what you say

if you’re setting goals and targets for your conversations. Take Kyle at his
sister’s wedding. Is he trying to have a good time? Get to know people? Have
a laugh? Meet someone?
Having a clear objective helps you to determine what kind of energy you’re
bringing to the table, what kind of topics you want to cover, and what kind of
people you’re going to invest your time speaking to.
The Summary
And that’s it! That wasn’t too bad, was it? When it comes to mastering small
talk, the core points you’re going to want to focus on practicing are:
●     Being energetic and enthusiastic
●     Be genuinely yourself regarding your interests
●     Become confident with a range of small-talk topics
●     Practice ending conversations strongly
●     Practice small talk when and where you can
●     Act like close friends with strangers
●     Have conversational goals with people
●     Remember that practice makes perfect!
Everything we’ve spoken about within this chapter should give you a deep
enough insight into small talk that you can become a master of it. As I said
before, take the points and strategies that resonate with you and apply them to
your own life. Don’t try and apply everything at once because that’s just
overwhelming and unsustainable. Take your journey to getting better one step
at a time.
Now we can move on to my favorite chapter.

Chapter Seven – Intricate Ways to Be More
Charismatic
“Charisma is a sparkle in people that money can’t buy. It’s an invisible energy with visible effects.”  
— Marianne Williamson
What does charisma mean to you?
Google defines charisma as being the quality of personal magnetism and
charm that you’ve probably experienced several times in your life. Those are
people who speak, and you listen to, and you just can’t help but think, Damn,
this person is cool. I want to spend more time with this person and explore
what they have to offer.
I saw this “charm” in the sales industry all the time. I would go into meetings
with clients and would listen to companies that would come pitch to us or us
to them, and some of the people I saw would have you hanging on their every
word from the moment they opened their mouths. They were just so good at
public speaking. When they finished, it was like being snapped back into
reality, and I was left questioning where I’ve been the last hour.
Being around a charismatic person is more like an experience than a
conversation.
Maybe you’ve met a boy or girl in a bar and started chatting with them, only
to find yourself lost in the experience of them just being, well, them. It
doesn’t matter how long that experience lasts; you’re always left wanting
more. They leave an imprint that you don’t forget.
If you’ve watched television shows like Mad Men, the Queen’s Gambit, and
even Friends, you’ll know that charisma doesn’t just come in the standard big
ego kind of way. It’s not just men in suits who know their industry inside out
or women in attractive dresses who act mysterious and subtle that hold
people’s attention. Very far from it. Perhaps these are traditional views on
charisma, but nowadays, these are outdated and barely relevant.
Charisma comes in all different shapes and sizes, and even someone who you
may consider a “book nerd,” for example, could have so much charisma
when it comes to talking about their favorite characters, plot lines, and
endings. So, how do you tap into your own pool of charisma? How do you
charm others and make them, essentially, attracted to you and the energy you

have to offer the world?
Just like small talk and listening, this is a skill that can be learned by
understanding a few core truths.
You Own the Situation
What’s the one thing that the charismatic people in your life have never
been?
Well, they probably have at some points in their lives, but I mean, at the time
they were charismatic, what were they not?
I’ll give you a clue. It’s that same feeling you get when you’re about to get on
a roller coaster, and you don’t know what’s going to happen. Is it going to be
fun or scary? Are you going to shout or scream? Are you going to pee
yourself or throw up? God forbid either hits the kid behind you if you do.
Yeah, I’m not a massive fan of theme parks, if you can’t tell.
The trait is, of course, nervousness.
Charismatic people have a way of managing their nerves, so they are
confident and believe that they are supposed to be a part of the interactions
they’re in. If you don’t feel as though you belong, you’re going to feel
nervous. If you’re putting too much pressure on the outcome of the situation,
you’re going to feel nervous, and that’s just ridiculous when you boil it down
to the reality of the situation.
Let’s say you’re back in college and you see a boy or girl you like, and you
want to ask them out.
If you feel nervous, this means you’re placing all the importance of the
conversation on what their answer is. When someone’s answer (the outcome
of the situation) becomes the most important part of the conversation, you’re
not in the moment. Remember how the motivational quotes say life isn’t
about the destination, but the journey? The same logic applies here.
Doing this means you’re creating too much pressure on how the conversation
goes. Hence, you’re going to believe you need to “act” perfectly in order to
get what you want, which is, of course, impossible. Instead, by being present,
actively listening, and just having a conversation with this love interest with
the goal to enjoy their company right here and now, then it really doesn’t
matter whether they say yes or no to asking them out, because that doesn’t
matter. The quality of the interaction you’re having is, instead, the most

important point.
Paradoxically, when you’re not focused on the outcome, there’s less pressure,
you’ll naturally be more charismatic and confident, so if you do ask the other
person out, they’re having a much more positive time than having to deal
with the nervous version of you, and are therefore more likely to say yes.
To summarize, don’t put too much pressure on yourself in any social
situations. Don’t focus on the outcome or the “end goal,” but instead focus on
enjoying the interaction itself. You’ll be less nervous and naturally more
charismatic.
Relatability is Key
The subheading says it all. I remember I went to a blood doner’s session a
few years back, and after you’ve donated blood, you have to wait ten minutes
to make sure you’re not going to pass out and everything goes okay. You get
a cup of tea and a biscuit, so it’s not all bad.
Anyway, one time I was there waiting in the post-donation room, and a guy
came and sat next to me. I have no idea how, but we ended up talking, and
when I say we, I mean he, about his swimming history, and how to be better
at gliding through the water and how to go faster and be more efficient, and
then on to all the medals he won, and so on. I’m starting to think swimming
is something I should start thinking about introducing to my life with the
amount I’m talking about it.
What he was saying was all fine, and some of it was actually quite
interesting. Being someone who consciously puts effort into listening, yeah, I
may have learned a thing or two, but there was a problem. I couldn’t help but
not be disinterested in what he had to say because it wasn’t relatable at all. I
didn’t swim, nor did I really care about it. It felt as though he was just using
me as an opportunity to talk about himself and his achievements, and I was
forced to just go along with everything he said.
That’s not a two-way conversation, and it’s very boring for me. It would be
very boring for anyone.
Apply this in your own interactions and make what you’re saying relatable to
the person you’re speaking with. The more you get to know someone, the
easier this will be. However, until you get to that point, try focusing on
asking the right questions that will help you understand the other person

better, thus being able to choose topics you can both talk about.
Charismatic people include everyone and don’t just use conversations to talk
about themselves.
Remember People’s Names
One of my favorite quotes from Dale Carnegie, one of the most popular and
influential authors in sales training and interpersonal skills, is:
“A person’s name is the sweetest sound in the world to that person.”
And it’s true. We all like to be called by our own name, and you should
already know how awkward it can be when speaking with someone and you
can’t remember their name for the life of you. Being like this isn’t going to
make someone feel special, nor positively relate to you. Taking the time to
consciously and purposefully remember someone’s name can make a world
of difference in your relationships with them. It shows you care and respect
that person enough to get to know them properly. These are powerful,
charismatic traits. Here are some tips to help:
●     Be present when talking to the other person, so you hear their name
correctly
●     Repeat the person’s name back to them to make sure you heard it
properly
●     Create an association (i.e., Harry with the round glasses)
●     Make a rhyme out of their name
●     Ask someone else their name if you forgot
Be Funny
I was debating whether I wanted to include this section because yes, if you
want to connect with people, being funny and humorous is an extremely good
way to go about it, but not everyone is funny in the same way, and we all find
different things comical. This may make it hard to connect with others
because if your sense of humor is not the same as someone else’s, things
might not go down too well.
Remember what we said about avoiding offensive jokes? Comedy is hard,
especially around strangers.
That being said, a charismatic person will be able to read the room, select the

right level of funny, and can make it work. If you have found in the past that
you’re a naturally funny person, even if you’re funny in your own way, then
embrace that when the time arises.
Charisma and humor go hand in hand with each other, and being able to put a
smile on someone else’s face is a priceless gift you should own within
yourself. Here are some quick-fire tips to get funnier in your conversations,
should you believe you have the potential to be:
●     Watch comedy programs and live shows to get ideas of what is funny
●     Find and follow comedians you like
●     Learn three awesome jokes you like and learn how to tell them
perfectly
●     Practice not being offended by other forms of comedy
Give, Give, Give
This is another interesting point to think about.
Eric Matthews from Start Co., in an interview with Success.com, said that
giving more than you take is one of the most beneficial ways you can be
charismatic in the business world, and this also applies to life in general. To
be charismatic by nature is to lift up those around you and to make their lives
better in some way.
You can do this in simple ways, like giving someone your full attention, or
paying them a compliment. You can validate and reassure their thoughts by
repeating back what they said.
There’s no human on Earth who doesn’t want this kind of attention. The real
trick here is to first put the other person in the center of your attention. People
love this and will be much more willing to converse with you further and
deeper.
Second, you can’t expect to get anything back. This does, to a degree, suck
because a lot of conversations you have can feel very one-sided, but here’s a
little reminder that you don’t always need to speak to that person ever again
if they’re not someone you want to spend time with and it doesn’t become a
two-way experience when you’re with them. You don’t need to be friends
with everyone, but that doesn’t mean you can’t be a charismatic individual.

A few tips for clarity:
●     Give genuine compliments if you mean them
●     Give someone your full attention
●     Don’t expect anything in return
●     Be polite with good manners
●     Be open and honest with the other person (don’t wear a mask)
The Summary
Being charismatic is no easy feat, and it takes time and practice. Don’t worry
if you didn’t feel like you got everything you came for in this chapter since
this is just an introduction for things you can work on. Give these points
some time, and you’ll see instant improvements with how charismatic you
are. We’re going to go deeper in the next chapters.
For reference, the core values you’re going to want to remember here are:
●     Remember you belong in any situation you’re in
●     Be relatable to people you’re speaking too
●     Remember the names of people you speak to
●     Let humor come naturally
●     Give to people without expecting anything in return
For now, these should be enough little tricks and pointers to keep you going
on your way to being a charismatic person who can speak to anyone.
Granted, it’s not easy stuff, and it’s going to take a bit of practice, but it will
all come together in time. Just be mindful of what you’re doing, and actually
step out of your comfort zone to try new things!
This is the only way you’ll see the results for yourself!

Chapter Eight – How to Be More Confident
“The most beautiful thing you can wear is confidence.” — Blake Lively
Hand in hand with being charismatic, there’s the ability to be confident. Be
honest—you saw this coming, and believing you have a lack of confidence is
probably one of the reasons you picked up this book in the first place. If so,
this is the chapter that’s going to help, but I’m hoping you can see how
everything we’ve spoken about already ties into each other and will naturally
help you become more confident, simply because you have more strategies to
implement within your upcoming conversations.
Being charismatic and being confident are two different things, although they
support each other wholeheartedly.
By dictionary definition, being charismatic is having a charm that makes
people want to be around you and spend time with you; being confident is
having the belief to know that the outcome of a situation will be favorable to
you. In other words, you’re able to go into a conversation knowing that
everything is going to be alright and you’re not going to be embarrassed or
make a mistake, and even if you do, then you know everything is still going
to be okay.
Remember what we were talking about in the last chapter about asking
someone on a date? If you feel nervous and unconfident, then you’re going to
act nervous and unconfident, and the whole situation becomes a bit of a self-
fulfilling prophecy. On the other hand, if you’re confident and carry yourself
well, the chances you’ll get a date increase dramatically.
So, how do you do it? Let’s find out.
Fake It ’Til You Make It
You’ve probably heard this saying from time to time, but the science exists
that suggests that acting a certain way is one of the best ways to become a
certain way. In other words, if you pretend to be confident, then you will
actually become confident.
In psychology and neuroscience, this is known as the Hebbian Principle. How
it works is that when a human being does something, which can literally be
anything, the tiny neural circuits in their brain light up and start firing to

make the “thing” happen. Say you want to lift your right arm up right now.
You think about it, and those circuits start firing to make it happen, sending
the signals for your body to lift your arm. Now, you can resist doing it if you
really want, but how aware of your arm are you right now?
If you’re to lift your arm, then the message sent becomes a “link,” and the
more you allow this link to happen, the easier it becomes. The human brain
likes the easy life, and this is why so many of us have habits. We’ve done the
same habit over and over again so often that we do it without thinking, so the
brain saves energy and just “does,” rather than spending all its time thinking.
Still with me?
Now, we’ve evolved so far up to this point that you can actually trick this
system into developing new habits or, in this case, entirely new states of mind
by purely thinking about doing something. Let’s keep it related to confidence.
If you were to get up in the morning, go to the mirror, and act like your most
confident self, portraying the level of confidence you want yourself to have,
and actively act out how you would be (yes, this means talking to yourself
out loud), then over time, you would naturally become more confident
because you’re firing up those circuits saying that you want to be more
confident, and then carrying out that command.
You’re actively hard-wiring your brain. It’s such a clever technique.
This is why motivational speakers will jump up and down and build up their
energy before going on stage. Popular speaker Tony Robbins actually has a
mini-trampoline he jumps on just moments before heading in front of the
crowd. It’s to build up his energy and get his blood flowing, so when it comes
to show time, he’s already in the high-energy state of mind he needs to be in
to deliver.
You can do the same!
Basically, define the type of person you want to be and what level of
confidence you want to have, practice it in your free time, and then start to
implement this level of confidence naturally in your interactions, and you’ll
notice an incredible difference! Here are some tips that helped me through
this process:
●     Watch movies and TV shows and see what kind of people you resonate
with to define your style of confidence

●     Do the same with people in your life
●     Practice in front of the mirror for five minutes every single day
●     Experiment with different styles of confidence
●     Apply your practices to everyday situations you find yourself in
Overcome Thoughts That Hold You Back
Thoughts that stop you from living the life you want to live and hold you
back are known as limiting beliefs, and these are crushing your confidence.
Imagine you’re going into a job interview, and you’re feeling so nervous.
You can’t help but think you’re going to mess everything up, and you keep
playing through all the various negative ways the meeting could go. If you’re
focusing on the bad stuff, then how can you expect to be confident going
forward? You’re definitely not going to be your best self.
The way to get around this problem is to become aware of what your limiting
beliefs are. You can do this long-term through journaling, meditation,
counseling, and doing everything we talked about in the first chapter
regarding developing your sense of self. However, there is something we can
do right now, and it’s a fun little exercise I love.
A Quick Little Exercise
Grab a pen and paper and imagine you are going to meet with someone for
the first time.
That could be a new client, a stranger in a cafe or on the street, or you’re
heading into an unfamiliar situation where you need to talk to people, but you
don’t really know them very well, if at all.
Take a moment to imagine it clearly, and now write down all the negative
thoughts that come up. Do you think these people will think you’re weird or
annoying? Are you conscious of your physical appearance? Are you worried
that they won’t like you or will talk down to you? Write down anything that
comes to mind.
When you read them back, these are your limiting beliefs and things you’re
going to need to work on when it comes to becoming confident. These are the
thoughts that will hold you back and stop you from reaching your full
potential. Of course, there’s an infinite number of thoughts that could come

up here, and it will take time to work through them all, but fortunately, there
are tons of articles, books, and websites that can help you address your
issues.
For me, I thought people would believe I didn’t know what I was talking
about, and I wasn’t qualified to share my experience because I was still
young. However, after some research, I discovered this is a state of mind
called Imposter Syndrome, and I was able to take steps to work on letting
these limiting thoughts go.
While a little unrelated, I found this limiting beliefs discovery technique very
fun when it comes to looking at your finances. Get your pen and paper again
and write down your dream wage you’d like to earn in a year. Now add a
zero to the end (the right-hand side end) and write down all the reasons why
you can’t earn that amount. These are your limiting beliefs, and it can be
incredibly interesting to see what comes up!
Adopt Confident Body Language
A leading Harvard psychologist, Amy Cuddy, looked into body language and
how the way we act physically affects our mindset, state of mind, and overall
confidence. In her studies, she took 42 men and women and had them
perform what is known as low and high power poses.
These are basically poses that show how confident someone is. In other
words, the stereotypical view of a shy person is crouched over and small,
hunched, as though trying to hide and not be noticed. On the other hand, a
power pose beaming confidence would be something like the Superman pose,
with hands on their hips and their head held high.
In the study, the participants were asked to hold certain poses for two
minutes, and then saliva samples were taken.
The results were clear. Those people who had adopted high-power poses,
similar to the Superman pose, showed lower cortisol levels (the stress
hormone) and increased testosterone levels—both of which indicate the
person was more relaxed, more confident, less stressed, and more willing to
take rests. And this was all just for adopting a different pose.
Hand in hand with faking it until you’re making it, you can feel the effects
right now. Assuming you’re reading this sitting down, straighten your back,
and sit back with your hands behind your head, more commonly referred to

as the “President’s Pose.” It looks like the classic office desk pose where
you’ve completed a sale and cross your legs up on the desk because you’re so
happy with what you’ve just achieved, although having your legs on the desk
is optional.
Have strength in your pose, widen your chest, and do a pose that reminds you
of feeling proud. All the stereotypical poses that come to mind will do. Hold
the pose for 30 seconds to a minute. How do you feel? How confident and
ready to take on the world does it make you feel? This is just how powerful
such a simple act can be. Practice these poses when going into tense
situations to become far more confident than you would normally be!
Get Hands-On
Hand in hand with the point above, using your hands as your main expressive
form of body language can be a great way to feel, look, and become
confident. Research by Carol Kinsey Gorman found that listeners will have a
much more positive connection with public speakers who gesture with their
hands to exaggerate and communicate their points.
The same works the other way around too. If you’re playing with your hair,
fiddling with your sleeves or your clothes, or keeping your hands still in
between your legs while sitting, this can convey the image that you’re
nervous or anxious. Take control of your hands and channel your inner
energy for whatever topic you’re talking about!
Implement Eye Contact
Being able to hold and maintain eye contact is pretty much the cornerstone of
confidence. If you look away from someone when they’re talking to you,
look at the ground, or basically anywhere other than you, then it just oozes a
lack of confidence. When someone is ashamed of something they’ve done,
they look at the ground because they can’t bring themselves to make eye
contact. Even dogs do this!
A Texan study held back in 2013 found that people on average make eye
contact between 30 and 60% of the time, but if you’re looking to make an
emotional connection with someone, then you’re going to need to up this to
about 60–70% of the time. And it’s not easy.
If you’re consciously thinking about making eye contact with someone for a

longer-than-normal period of time, but it’s not something you’re used to, then
chances are, you’re going to feel uncomfortable and maybe even as though
you’re staring. This will make you nervous, and the whole confidence thing
starts to fall apart.
However, there are some tips you can follow to make it easy, and also
remember, practice makes perfect, so keep trying!
Firstly, you don’t need to lock your eyes on both of the eyes of the other
person, but instead, focus on one eye. This may sound a little strange, but it
works. If you’re still feeling uncomfortable, try looking at their eyebrows.
Don’t look higher than this or lower than their eye level because it will just
feel weird, as though you’re not paying full attention. Eyebrows are fine.
Practice with yourself in the mirror for better results.
When you’re coupling this tip with the others we’ve been speaking about
throughout this book, then you should find yourself naturally being able to
make eye contact more and more. Just keep practicing, and the results will
come.
Slow Down
It’s a common trait that people will speak quickly when they are nervous, and
this is especially prevalent with people who are new to public speaking. The
idea is that someone speaks as fast as possible so they can finish what they’re
saying quickly, and then no longer have to talk. However, this is a clear sign
you’re both nervous and anxious, not only showing this to the other person
but also validating your fears with yourself.
The simple solution is to slow down. Consciously slow down the speed at
which you’re talking.
I’m not saying go monotone and drag everything on, but find a nice pace
you’re comfortable with (which you can find practicing in the mirror!), and
then when you’re nervous and find yourself speeding up, you can mindfully
slow yourself back down. Research shows that around 190 words per minute
are the ideal speaking speed for being comfortable and sending across your
message effectively.
The Summary
For now, this should be enough confidence content for you to sink your teeth

into to have an idea on how to become more confident in your conversations.
Remember, if you look good, you’ll feel good, so go into every situation
from here on out to have the intention to control your self-image and portray
yourself as the person you want to be.
Naturally, you’ll become this person, and that’s who you’ll be! I know it
sounds simple, but it really is. We overcomplicate things so much and add so
much pressure to being the best version of ourselves that we forget it’s the
power in the little choices we make that shape our reality.
I love the Matt D’avella way of looking at this. Usually, it’s taking the
smallest steps that will help you make the biggest leaps, so once you’re able
to knuckle down these small yet powerful tactics, the bigger benefits will fall
into place.
For clarity, the key points we covered for you to remember when it comes to
being a more confident version of yourself are:
●     Act confident to become confident!
●     Work on letting go of your limiting beliefs
●     Take control of your hand gestures
●     Make eye contact
●     Slow down your speaking process
●     Practice!

Chapter Nine – How to Tell Stories That Land
“Inside each of us is a natural-born storyteller, waiting to be released.” — Robin Moore
For as long as humans have been living in caves and painting on the walls,
we’ve been storytellers. This is why thousands of new books are published
every year and why the pictures drawn onto the walls of the pyramids recount
days gone past. Humans love stories, and one of the best ways to connect
with someone is to tell them a good one.
The small-talk topics we’ve already covered are amazing when it comes to
breaking the ice, but the crux of the matter is that many people you’ll meet in
your life are people who want to engage and interact with interesting people.
Traditional small talk will only get you so far before people start looking for
real substance in what you’re saying to them. There will come a time when
people want real stories.
But how can you tell someone a story that’s going to captivate them and have
them hooked off your every word if you’re living a pretty generic, typical,
mundane life?
Well, to start with, stop believing that your life is any of those things because
it’s not. It only feels like it to you because you live it day in, day out, and get
to see all those mundane aspects, like brushing your teeth and walking into
town.
The actual substance of your life is incredibly interesting because you’re the
only person in the world who has ever done what you’ve done, made the
decisions you’ve made, and the only human who will experience what you’ve
experienced in all of humanity to come. I’m not going to get any more
philosophical than that for now (I just love how mindblowing that whole
thought experiment is), but my point is that we all have interesting lives.
You included.
The problem is that not all of us are born storytellers, but again, like all kinds
of communication, it’s a skill that can be learned and practiced. If you do
this, and you’re able to tell stories about your life that hook people off your
every word and make them want to know more, you literally will be able to
talk to anyone about anything, which, of course, is why we’re here.

Finding That Killer Plotline
First things first.
You’re not going to be able to tell stories if you don’t know any. By this, I’m
referring to the skill of being able to look into your own daily life and find
stories that matter and that can be retold in a captivating way. I know, the
first thought that comes to mind is that your life really isn’t that interesting, at
least not compared to other people’s, surely? It is. You just might need to do
some digging.
There are, of course, going to be key moments in your life that will naturally
be great stories. The day you get married or go on that first date, and
everything is new and exciting. Maybe you go away on vacation for your
birthday and have an amazing time. Maybe you went to a protest or saw a
global event happen. These are easy stories.
Yet, when it comes to pulling out the stories from your everyday life, you
may at first need to dig a little deeper.
“So, what do you do for work?”
“I’m a manager in a supermarket.”
Stop. Is that the best, most enthralling, and most exciting way you can
present that information? It may not seem like it, but it’s this kind of
information that can be woven into the foundations of a beautiful story. Try
again.
“So, what do you do for work?”
“I’m a manager in a supermarket, although sometimes I feel like I’m a
detective. Just the other day, I had to follow a shady-looking guy around the
store Mission Impossible-style who looked like he was going to steal several
cases of alcohol.”
Damn, now the creative juices are flowing, and the listener is thinking, Hold
up, a guy in the store stealing alcohol? What happened? Did you catch him?
Did he attempt to steal anything? As with all good stories, you’ve introduced
conflict and a plot. Now the listener wants to know more.
See how you’ve managed to take the really typical and boring question of
“What do you do?” that you could hear literally anywhere from a networking
meeting to a BBQ with mutual friends, but your response has suddenly drawn
in the attention of everyone around you? All it took was a few extras words

and a few extra seconds of talking.
Right now, I want you to try it for yourself, right here, out loud. I’ve just met
you and asked you what you do. Don’t worry if this is your first time trying
this. I’m only here in writing, and no one is here to judge, so get creative.
So, what do you do?
Layer your response with what you do and a little story that happened to you.
Something that’s happened in the last month. Whatever comes to mind. At
this point, we’re just practicing and getting those synapses working. The
more you practice recalling, the better the stories that will come up. Here are
some tips that can help you spot interesting stories in your life.
●     Keep a diary or journal and write down everything that’s interesting
that stands out. You’ll be amazed at how much you forget by the end of
the day.
●     Practice meditation and gratitude; a great way to improve your focus as
you go about your day
●     Put yourself in interesting situations. Take the long road to work. Speak
to new people and see what comes up. You never know what
experiences will come your way.
●     Make notes on your phone of things that happen and practice
dramatizing them.
Writing Your Story Collection
Okay, you don’t actually need to write a memoir of short stories about your
life, but having a few stories in the bank that you can use when replying to
commonly asked questions can be a great idea because they’ll be well-
rehearsed (at least they will be over time) and you’ll have experience in
retelling them (even if at first that is just telling them back to yourself in the
mirror).
Some topics you can gather up for some of these mini-stories include:
●     Your job, career, or occupation
●     Something that has happened in the last week
●     Any plans you’ve got coming up in the future
●     Stories about your local area

●     Stories about the hobbies you do
Last weekend, I watched a pretty mediocre samurai movie, but the ninja guy
main character would meditate while working on his bonsai trees. I felt so
inspired by the whole scene that I bought myself a bonsai growing kit, the
seeds of which I planted this week. I thought you just planted the seeds in the
dirt and waited for them to grow, but oh no. The instructions said to soak
them in water for 48 hours and then put them in the fridge, where they’ll sit
for two months. The crazy bit? The seeds turned the water a solid, swamp-
water green. So green, in fact, I dropped it out of shock, and it stained my
worktops. I’m still trying to scrub it out today.
In reality, I’m just living my life and trying a new little pastime, but this is
just a brief example of how you can take an everyday situation of your life
and share it in a way that makes people listen. However, this story in itself is
not perfect, but I’ll show you how and why in the following section.
For now, keep thinking of your own story ideas! Let’s try again.
“Hey! Welcome back to the grind time. How was your weekend?”
“Yeah, not bad. I watched Netflix.”
“Fun.”
“Yup.”
Woah. Great story. Not mundane in the slightest. Let’s try that again, but this
time, let’s bring a story element into it.
“Hey! Welcome back. How was your weekend?”
“My weekend was fine, but it was nothing compared to Friday night.
My cat went crazy and started jumping on all the furniture and got stuck on a
cabinet. We had to poke her down with a stick.”
“Wait, what?!”
As you can see, finding these little stories from your life makes for a much
greater conversation. You’re replying to the general small-talk questions
people use, but you’re not giving the boring answers that, let’s face it,
nobody really wants to hear. People want to talk. Yes. We’re social creatures.
But answering small-talk questions can be great up to a point, but in reality,
people want more. After all, isn’t that what you want from your
conversations?

So, how do you find these interesting stories in your life? After all, poking
your cat down from a cabinet with a stick is just something you need to do,
but to other people, it could be comedy gold. How do you figure out the
difference between the mundane and the interesting?
In all honesty, anything can be a good story. It’s the way you tell it, which is
what is going to attract people. The best way to figure this out is to think
about what you find interesting in a story. These are the stories you’ll be most
passionate about.
Some questions to help you figure this out are:
●     Do you like silly stories about pets?
●     Do you like exciting, unbelievable, reality-is-stranger-than-fiction type
stories?
●     Do you like wholesome stories?
●     Do you like serious stories?
●     Do you like informative stories?
●     Do you like stories on current affairs?
●     Do you like cute, loving stories?
Whatever kind of story you like, this is the kind of tale you’re going to be
able to tell with the most energy and passion, so start taking note of what
happens. On top of this, you’ll need to remember that a good story will
always have something relatable in it, which is the element that we’ll
resonate with the most.
This is why people like gossip, happy endings, and embarrassing moments.
We’ve all been there, and we know what it feels like, for better or for worse,
all feelings that make these stories a little more impactful. We all love stories
that make us feel.
How to Tell a Good Story
There are, of course, infinite ways you can tell a story. You could tell a
micro-story, like the ones in the examples we’ve spoken about above, or you
could share a full-on tale. Think sitting around the campfire telling longer
tales to one another. Either way, how do you tell a story that people are
actually going to want to listen to?

Consider the Length
The length of your story will depend on the context of the situation you’re in.
If you’re chatting with someone in a line, you don’t want to go on and on,
potentially holding them up and irritating them. If you’re an anxious kind of
person, then telling a longer story may mean there’s more time for you to
worry about the delivery of what you’re saying. In this case, it would always
be better to stick to shorter stories until you’re feeling more confident.
Always judge the length of your story based on the situation you’re in. You
can adapt the length of your story by changing how much detail you give. If
you’ve been engaging in small talk with the listener already and you’ve
already established some common ground, then try to include details that are
going to specifically resonate with them.
Choosing the Right Details
Personally, I found that using the 1:1:1 method is the best way to tell people
short stories. Each ‘1’ stands for:
●     One action
●     One sentence summary
●     One emotion
For the sake of brevity, a short story should include every one of these in
some way. It’s not as overwhelming as it may first appear. See if you can
spot each element in the following stories.
I went on a date last week and immediately dropped my plate of food
onto my lap. I didn’t know what to do, so I just got up and left without saying
anything—such an embarrassing situation.
I was crossing the road the other day, and a taxi swung around the
corner and almost hit me. I was so scared I nearly pooped myself!
We accidentally deleted the client project and had to start from
scratch. We worked 16 hours a day for two weeks, but when it was finished,
man, there’s no better feeling.
As you can see, in just two sentences, there’s an action that the story is based
around, the story itself is short and sweet, and there’s an emotion that makes
the story relatable. Now you can expand on these stories as much as you
wish, adding in details, jokes, more emotions, and so on, but that’s all up to

you and your personal style when it comes to storytelling.
The trick to using the 1:1:1 method is to be able to summarize your story in
just one sentence and to start close to the end of the clinch of your story. Start
close to the “grit” so you give as much information as possible in the least
amount of time.
A great way to remember this strategy is to imagine a story about a jailbreak
taking place. It doesn’t matter if you describe what happens in one sentence
or write an entire book on the event. The endpoint of the story is that the
jailbreak happened.
Building on Your Stories
Using the 1:1:1 method is perhaps the easiest way out there to tell a good
short story that people are going to want to listen to. Those three factors
always make a great foundation to build your story on (and works as a
standalone) since you can add as much or as little detail as you want or need.
Some people will make do with little details, but some people are going to
want to hear more of what you have to say, so how do you keep your
conversational momentum flowing? You use structure.
I’m going to list out the points that make up a story structure, but you can add
and adjust them however you see fit. This is the same process that the cartoon
studio Pixar uses when creating and writing their stories. This is literally the
step-by-step guide they use when making their movies, so take note!
●     Setting the foundations
Setting the stage of the story. Here you introduce characters and build the
world. Only use this section if it affects the rest of the story. Otherwise, you
can easily skip this part most of the time.
●     Introduction
Usually, in the first section, you’ll introduce a character and their life, what
their routine is, and build up tension for the rest of the story. Make this bit
quick so you can get to the exciting part.
●     Introduce conflict
A big event happens, something that disrupts the normal flow of life and
throws a spanner in the works. Make sure you include the emotion of what
happens here. This is the moment everything flips upside down.

●     The consequences of conflict
How has the conflict and change affected everything? What are the
consequences of the event taking place?
●     Further consequences
If necessary, add more consequences to really drive home what is going on
and how big the event was. You can skip this bit, but usually, two conflicts
are ideal.
●     MORE CONSEQUENCES
You can really drive home your points with even more conflict. (I’ll show you
in the example below how this works well.) The more emotional resonance
you have in the last three stages, the more emotionally attached to your story
your listener will be!
●     Conclusion
What does the main character do in the story to deal with or resolve the
conflict? What action needs to be taken? What problem needs to be solved,
and how does this happen? Conclude how the story is wrapped up.
●     Aftermath
What happened after the conflict was resolved and everyone has moved on?
More emotion here. Is it a better or worse ending? How have the characters
been affected by the event?
Of course, this is a lot to take in, but don’t let it overwhelm you. If something
happens to you in your life that you want to remember, and you think it’s
going to make a great story, take some time to remember the details.
Later, you can then adjust your story and build on it, so it fits this structure. If
you want to keep things simple, you can just remember the general structure
of what happened and tell it in order.
I know all of this might seem like a lot, to begin with, and you may even be
thinking that surely this is not how people tell great stories? It’s so much
behind-the-scenes work, but then when you think about the performances of
motivational speakers and stand-up comedies, this is exactly the level of
effort they put into their stories, which is what makes them so successful.
Sure, you might not want to go all the way with the structuring and so on, but
at least you have this knowledge to work with, and you know how it all

works. Let’s say something happens, and you know this is a good story to tell
other people. You might want to work on how you’re adding emotions into
your tale, or highlighting the conflict of what happened, and so on. With
practice and experience, your stories will just get better and better.
Ultimately, this is all with the aim of allowing you to share your stories more
naturally while still understanding where to apply details in the right places.
Here’s an example story to show you exactly how this structure works.
I was heading to work driving along the main road; you know the ones with
the trees and fields along the side? I was behind this lorry, and there was a
car up front with hazard lights on, parked at the side of the road. I slowed
down, and suddenly this dog ran out into the road.
The truck swerved to miss it, which it did by such a tiny amount, and it
jumped the ditch and ran into the woods. The truck carried on, and I pulled
over to the side. The woman in the front of the car was crying her eyes out,
having a panic attack as her dog had jumped out the window while she was
driving, and she couldn’t get it to come back. It kept coming back, running
across the road, and then back again, thinking it was a game.
I stayed with her for half an hour while another car pulled over, and the man
inside helped. We walked through the woods and eventually managed to get
hold of the dog and bring it back to the owner, who started crying in
happiness. It was such a heartfelt moment. She vowed never to drive with her
windows all the way down again.
True story, by the way.
This is a casual story written in the way you would say it out loud, maybe in
response to “Why are you late for work?” and while it contains all the
elements you’d look for in a story, it’s a little long and can be refined to
become more comprehensive. Here’s an edited version with the structure
highlighted.
(Introduction) I was driving down a country road and saw a car parked up
ahead, the hazard lights blinking. (Conflict) As I slowed down to see if I
could help, a dog suddenly ran out into the road, right in front of an
oncoming truck (Consequence). Thank God it missed it, but it was only by
just enough.
The truck swerved, and the dog jumped the ditch and ran back into the

woods. (Consequence) I pulled over and saw the woman in the parked car.
Through tears, she told me she was having a panic attack (consequence)
since her dog jumped out the window while she was driving, and she couldn’t
get it to come back. It kept running across the road and then back into the
woods, thinking it was a game.
I stayed for half an hour while another driver and I came to help. We walked
through the woods and finally managed to get hold of the dog and bring it
back to the owner. (Resolution/Conclusion) It was so beautiful seeing her
face light up. She vowed never to drive with her windows all the way down
again. (Aftermath)
Now, you’re probably not going to have enough time to think and edit your
story as you say it when you’re in a real-life conversation, which is why I say
you should take some time to get familiar with this structure in your own
time. You don’t need to do this for every story that matters, just the ones that
count.
The point is to get to grips with these skills and this structure of storytelling
that all comes with practice and awareness that this is how it all works. I’ve
lost count of how many hours I’ve spent in front of the mirror or tidying up
my house, just talking to myself and experimenting with the best way to tell a
story like this to someone.
However, the benefits of this practice and this behind-the-scenes work have
always paid off when I’m around the water cooler, and everyone is hooked
on my every word.
The Summary
In your life, be mindful of events and situations you find yourself in and be
aware of them. They can be the most mundane of experiences, but how you
tell the story (and how much energy you put into it) is everything and is what
will make you a great, charismatic, and confident storyteller.
Whenever you find a story in your life you want to hold on to, set to work on
organizing the structure, identify the various elements that make the story
great, and you’ll be able to bring them all together to tell a story about your
everyday life that will captivate and wow anybody you’re speaking to.
And so, bringing all this together, you should now have the ability to come
up with compelling stories of events that happen in your life, not only picking

good story ideas but also telling your stories in creative, captivating ways that
will blow your listeners away.

Chapter Ten - Becoming an Interesting Person
“Your life is your canvas, and you are the masterpiece. There are a million ways to be kind, amazing,
fabulous, creative, bold, and interesting.” — Kerli
When my social anxiety was at its peak, I was roughly 22 years old, and it
seemed as though my life consisted of nothing more than going to work,
going home, playing video games, and that’s about it. I wasn’t going out and
doing anything, I wasn’t having new experiences, and I certainly wasn’t
making memories that were going to last a lifetime.
While in the last chapter we spoke about the fact you can make stories sound
interesting, regardless of what is actually happening in your life, there’s no
doubt that you can be proactive in making your life more interesting by
changing a few simple things. The thing is, not only will doing more with
your life make you more interesting to talk to since you’ll have more to talk
about, but you’re also going to be happier with yourself and your life. Thus,
you’re going to be more confident, more charismatic, and more yourself.
Come on, be honest. Raise your hand if you’ve found yourself stuck in some
bad habits that don’t bring value into your life? Maybe you binge
entertainment, haven’t created anything for a long time, or you have dreams
of doing something, starting something, or going somewhere, but you’re
always putting it off, even though you don’t really have a reason why.
This was my relationship with writing for many years.
For as long as I can remember, I wanted to write books. I loved the idea of
writing, and throughout my early twenties, I would write here and there, but I
never put effort into making it a proper habit. I would go weeks and then
months without writing anything, and it never really progressed anywhere. I
can’t tell people I’m writing or want to be a writer if I’m not writing, so
something had to change.
I want to dedicate this chapter to sharing some tips and advice that I found
helpful when it came to becoming a more interesting person and ultimately
lead a more fulfilling life. In the very real sense, this isn’t for anybody else
but yourself, but there’s no doubt that doing more interesting things, or at
least becoming aware and educated about more things in life, will help you
connect more effortlessly with other people.
As a quick note, notice how I’m not saying you need to do more with your

life. This chapter is more focused on helping you realize what’s important to
you, what fuels your sense of self (see chapter one), and then giving you the
intention to cut out everything else that doesn’t actually serve you nor brings
value to your existence.
Okay, I’m sure you get the point. Let’s jump into the tips.
Read More Books
A really simple tip to get us started. How many books do you have at home
that you’ve been excited to read but just haven’t got around to doing it yet,
nor do you really have any solid plans to start? That’s me all over. My hobby
is just buying new books that I never actually read.
Reading is such an amazing pastime because it can not only be entertaining
and an absolute joy to read and get lost in other worlds and the lives of
fictional characters, but it opens the doorway to more opportunities than you
can ever imagine.
For example, I just finished reading Dark Matter by Blake Crouch (which I
highly recommend), which talks about Multiverse theory and quantum
mechanics.
The story is incredible and one of my favorite books in a long time (I read the
whole thing in one sitting), but I also was interested in learning more about
quantum mechanics. Now, I definitely don’t understand how it all works, but
I went down the rabbit hole and ended up discussing it all with someone at
work who shared a love for the same thing.
This opportunity came from reading. If I didn’t read the books, I wouldn’t be
connecting with my colleague in a new, interesting, and meaningful way.
You never know what opportunities are right around the corner. Some tips to
help you read include:
●     Find some books you love. Fiction or non-fiction. Get a stack of them
and make your way through the list.
●     Try books you would never normally try, just to see what they’re like.
●     Find books you’re interested in that inspire you, educate you, and make
you want to try and explore new things in life.
If you need any further convincing to start a reading habit, there’s endless
research that found that the activity of reading trains your brain to be better at

processing information. It can also reduce your risk of age-related cognitive
decline, lowers your risk of conditions like dementia (proven with a large 14-
year study and another 2018 study in China carried out on 16,000 people),
reduces stress, and helps you live longer.
Switch Up Your Routine
One of the best and most simple changes I have made over the last two years
is occasionally setting my alarm much earlier than normal, so I get up at silly
o’clock in the morning (usually around 5 a.m.) and then walk to the highest
point in my city and watch the sunrise. It’s a strange little ritual I do perhaps
once a month, and it really does bring so much joy into my life.
Switching up your routine and doing things “just because” is a great way to
keep you on your toes and keep things in your life interesting. When it comes
to conversations, I can share my experiences (I sometimes even take the
people I’m talking to next time I go, and we enjoy it together). It makes for
interesting experiences that break up the monotony of everyday life that we
all fall victim to every now and then.
What’s more, you never know what other experiences you’re going to have
when you go on an unplanned whim. The last time I did the hike, I saw a
group of baby foxes rummaging through bins, and it was such a beautiful
sight. I would have missed it all had I stayed in bed.
Volunteer Your Time
Volunteering your time is a win-win for everyone involved.
Not only are you dedicating some time of your life to help others and actually
benefit the communities or causes you’re working for, but you also become
more interesting because of the experiences you’re getting involved in.
My partner and I spent a few months in 2020 helping out at a cat shelter. It
wasn’t the best experience since I spent most of the time cleaning out cages
and washing some of the cats, but it was so interesting to see how the cats
come in, what the process is for dealing and rehoming cats, and just seeing
how difficult and tough it can be for both the humans and animals.
It’s all a learning experience, and it can all bring so much into your life if
you’re willing to let it in.

Embrace Fear
An actionable tip you can try right now. Whenever you go to do something
new, or you’re entering an experience that you aren’t sure about, do you get
that little pang in your stomach? That fear that you don’t really know how to
move forward? Notice that feeling and try to step through it. Embrace the
fear, and don’t let it hold you back.
Will Smith famously said in an interview that “Everything that’s good in life
can be found on the other side of fear.” You just need to take the leap of faith
in yourself. Remember, the fear of being uninteresting makes you
uninteresting. These emotions shut you down and hold you in place, rather
than allowing you to live free.
Invest Your Time Wisely
It’s common knowledge that the only real resource you ever have to invest in
your life is the time you’re alive. Even when you’re working, you’re
basically exchanging your time for money. While there are things that we
have to do to survive, it can change so much when you really start to see
where your time is going.
Are you watching TV all the time? Binging your social media feeds? Going
to the same vacation spots every year? Drinking and partying every
weekend? Sure, if you’re doing what you love, then keep spending your time
in that way. That’s fine.
However, this is definitely not the case for all of us, and so many of us face
the very real realizations that we’re probably wasting our lives. If you want to
be interesting and feel as though you can get more out of life, start treating
your time as a currency, and look at where you’re spending it.
Have Interesting Conversations
If you’re asking someone how they are, but you don’t really care about the
answer, this is going to show up like a house on fire.
Lazy, uninteresting people stick to small-talk topics like the weather and ask
if they’re watching any good TV series (remember that watching most TV is
just a passive activity that won’t really bring you any gain), or ask what you
do for a career. BORING! It’s fine every now and then, and when you’re
starting out, but after everything you’ve read so far, you’re definitely beyond

this point now.
Instead of boring topics, open the doorway to new, interesting conversations,
like asking what personal projects someone is working on, what the weirdest
thing they have ever eaten is, what items you could find on their bucket list,
or if they’re learning any new skills.
Getting answers to these questions can introduce you to whole new worlds
that you didn’t even know existed. You never know—you might be
introduced to something new that you love, or you may learn something new
that changes your life.
Try New Hobbies
This doesn’t really need a lot of explaining, so I’ll be brief.
At the beginning of 2020, I sat down and wrote down all the things I actually
care about. I enjoyed writing. I liked to explore spiritual concepts, like
meditating and lucid dreaming. I wanted to learn to speak French. I wanted to
learn how to play chess properly. I wanted to read more books. I wanted to
learn how to play the Blues guitar. This was simply me sitting down to write
a list of all the hobbies I wanted to get involved in.
Take a pen and paper right now and write down all the things you’re
interested in and would love to get involved in. Even if you’ve never really
given the activity or hobby much thought before, but it’s more of a fleeting
idea, still write it down.
These are all the things you care about, and you know you did because you
took the time to write them down! Now figure out which hobbies you love
the most and which ones you want to get involved in. Make time for them
and enjoy the experience you have doing them! Not only will you meet new
people, but you’ll also have interesting things to talk about with others!
The Summary
There are endless ways you can be proactive and become a more interesting
person, thus having more to talk about and just being more satisfied with the
way you’re spending your life. Everybody has what it takes to be more
interesting. It’s just a matter of taking action into your own hands.
Sure, you might just need to work on breaking out of some old habits,
replacing them with good ones, and overcoming the fear that’s holding you

back, but this is where you need to exercise patience and believe in the long
term. Remember, little steps help you make giant leaps.

Chapter Eleven – Developing Meaningful
Relationships
“Each friend represents a world in us, a world possibly not born until they arrive, and it is only by this
meeting that a new world is born.” — Anais Nin
And here we are. We’ve arrived at the final part of this book. As you can see,
the final title of this book reads “Developing Meaningful Relationships,” but
so far, we’ve spent all our time on conversations and being able to talk to
anyone about anything, which you should be able to do by now. However,
the last question that remains is simple.
How can you go from knowing someone and wowing them with your charm,
confidence, and small talk, and then actually develop a proper relationship
with them? How can you meet people and become true friends with them?
It’s a weird thought that so many of us are becoming more and more
disconnected in a world that’s more hyper-connected than ever before. I can’t
remember entirely, but when I was a kid back in school, it seemed like
making friends was so easy. Sure, you wouldn’t get along or like the
company of everyone (it would be weird if you did), but there were no
inhibitions in talking to new people. You would just chat about whatever was
going on, and if you got along, you became friends.
It feels like there’s an underlying level of pressure and anxiety that stops
things today from being that easy. It’s a cringey thought to imagine walking
up to someone and just talking to them and then becoming lifelong friends.
Maybe in an ideal world, right? Maybe you believe that logic only works in
the movies? It’s not. It just takes some time and effort to see what life can
alternatively be like.
Taking everything you know so far, how can you go from meeting someone
for the first time, small talking with them, telling them stories, charming them
with your charisma and confidence, and then ultimately becoming friends
with them, or at least developing a meaningful relationship of some kind?
This chapter is all about showing you how.
The Benefits are Unparalleled
While having strong connections with people in your life and talking to lots

of people is definitely going to make you feel less lonely and more
charismatic and confident, having a million acquaintances is no substitute for
having five friends that you have a deep and meaningful connection with.
Research shows that having proper connections with people can bring so
many benefits into your life; it’s hard to know where to begin. A 2014 study
carried out by the Society for Personality, and Social Psychology, found that
meaningful relationships will:
●     Help you live longer
●     Improves many aspects of your mental health
●     Improves your ability to judge your own well-being
●     Increases your self-confidence
●     Provides you with wide perspectives
●     Provides you with increased resilience in most aspects of your life
There are even sources that claim that having meaningful relationships is “the
healthiest thing you can do for yourself” (Medical Daily, 2014). In other
words, focus on developing meaningful relationships. This will bring so
much goodness into your life.
Understanding the Barriers
To fully understand how to make close friends, you need to know the things
that are holding you back. The two main culprits of this are:
●     Technology ruining our attention span, make it harder to concentrate,
and emulates the feeling of being connected to those we love and care
about
●     Having busy lives, such as working full-time jobs, working on side
projects, and trying to keep up with the fast-paced life that feels
common, as promoted by the “mainstream” way of living.
In other words, just because you see your best friend’s name on your
Facebook feed, that doesn’t mean you’re actually connecting with them. You
need to put your phone down and reach out to them properly and make time
to have actual experiences with them, but more on that in a bit.
Now we’re going to explore how to take these initial relationships in your life
and move forward, forming stronger bonds than ever before and being able to
connect with these people that you might one day say you love.

You Can’t Be Friends with Everyone
Before we really get into the tips, make sure you’re aware of the fact that
you’re not going to be friends with everyone, and nor should you try to be.
I’m not saying you should outwardly be blunt and forceful to people you
don’t like. Stay civil. Instead, if you really feel a natural draw to someone,
and you feel a connection is there, then it’s definitely something you should
pursue. If not, that doesn’t matter. You’re just a step closer to finding the
people who are right in your life.
Spend Time with Your New Friends
As I write this book, the world has been gripped by the COVID-19 pandemic,
and it’s mixed up the world in ways that we could have never predicted. This
has made many of us become more disconnected due to lockdown rules, but
the happiest people were the ones who still found a way to connect and spend
time together.
If you want to connect with someone and deepen your relationship with them,
you need to spend time with them, create memories together, and be in each
other’s presence, not just online. It’s clear that times like the COVID-19
pandemic means that connecting in such an intimate way isn’t always
possible, but that doesn’t mean dedicating time to each other is any less
essential.
Whether you’re going for a socially distanced walk, hosting online activities
like Zoom quiz nights or group Netflix streams, or even just chatting via a
video call, spending time with people is a must. Dedicating time to each other
(and making sure it’s fair both ways) is how relationships grow.
Support Each Other
The latest research shows that friends become closer than ever when they
help each other through hard times. This doesn’t just mean dealing with a
tragedy or trauma, but instead could just be offering support on a friend’s
self-improvement journey. It’s always easier and more effective to go
through change with someone by your side.
In a 2008 study, researchers placed some participants at the top of a hill either
alone, alongside a stranger, or standing next to a friend. When asked to grade
how steep the hill was, the participants who were next to a friend thought the

hill to be far less steep than those who were standing alone. In other words,
when you’re standing with someone you’re connected to, the hard times
aren’t so bad.
Be Yourself
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, be yourself around those you love.
It can be hard sometimes to even acknowledge we’re wearing masks around
those we love, let alone trying to take them off, but it’s never been more
important to embrace who you are and just be you.
If you’re pretending to be someone you’re not with your friends, then
eventually, it’s going to backfire. Either you won’t be happy or your friends
won’t, so save yourself the drama and just be unapologetically you. Even if
you change over time (which everyone does), real friends will be accepting of
exactly who you are.
And that’s it! If you can follow these simple tricks and tips, you’ll be able to
take the people you know and like in your life and turn them into friends that
you share a deep, meaningful connection with, and the world becomes your
oyster.
The Summary
Relationships are important. If you take everything you’ve learned in this
book but just jump around from person to person, attracting them with your
charm, hooking them with your stories and become such a memorable person
in their lives, but then move on without creating deeper relationships with
people along the way, you’re going to feel lonely and unsatisfied with your
life.
Take time to invest yourself into your relationships. Sure, you can pick and
choose who you’re friends with, but it’s important to give people a shot.
Having lived with social anxiety for many years, I know it can be hard and
scary to open up to other people, but trust me when I say it will be one of the
best things you ever do.
To recap, some of the elements you’ll want to focus on include:
●     Understanding what holds you back
●     Remember, you can’t be friends with everyone

●     Spend time with one another
●     Always be yourself!
Now it’s time to say farewell!

Final Thoughts
And so, we come to the end of our journey, and it’s all over to you!
I hope you’ve enjoyed reading this more than anything, and you’ve learned a
lot. I know I said I was going to say it one last time chapters ago, but here’s
another for good measure: Don’t give up on your learning path! The path to
better communication, like all self-improvement journeys, is a continuous
learning curve with an infinite skill cap. You can always just keep getting
better and better.
However, the only way you’re going to do this is by practicing over and over
again, being willing to embrace any fears or anxieties you may have in order
to overcome them. Just keep at it, take everything we’ve spoken about with
baby steps, and you’ll see big improvements in no time at all!
I would love to hear some feedback from you! Whenever you bought the
book, hit me up with a review and a few words letting me know what you
thought about the book, what you liked, and what you think I could do better.
I’m only a human being doing what I love, but I’m always striving to be
better and to give you the best experience I can! I also love hearing all the
amazing ways these books help you see life in a different way, so let me
know and inspire me to keep going!
Leave a review on Amazon US
Leave a review on Amazon UK
Enjoy your journey, and I wish you the best of luck! See you next time!
James

Also by James W. Williams
How to Read People Like a Book: A Guide to Speed-Reading People,
Understand Body Language and Emotions, Decode Intentions, and Connect
Effortlessly
Communication Skills Training: How to Talk to Anyone, Connect
Effortlessly, Develop Charisma, and Become a People Person
How to Make People Laugh: Develop Confidence and Charisma,
Master Improv Comedy, and Be More Witty with Anyone, Anytime,
Anywhere
Digital Minimalism in Everyday Life: Overcome Technology
Addiction, Declutter Your Mind, and Reclaim Your Freedom
Self-discipline Mastery: Develop Navy Seal Mental Toughness,
Unbreakable Grit, Spartan Mindset, Build Good Habits, and Increase Your
Productivity
How to Make People Like You: 19 Science-Based Methods to
Increase Your Charisma, Spark Attraction, Win Friends, and Connect
Effortlessly
How to Make People Do What You Want: Methods of Subtle
Psychology to Read People, Persuade, and Influence Human Behavior

Say Hello!
You can connect with us in a number of places.
Our website
Facebook
Pinterest
Instagram
Twitter
Lastly, don’t forget to grab a copy of your Free Bonus book “Bulletproof
Confidence Checklist”. If you want to learn how to overcome shyness and
social anxiety and become more confident then this book is for you.
Just go to:  https://theartofmastery.com/confidence/

References
Active Listening Skills, Examples and Exercises. Virtualspeech.com. (2021).
Retrieved 2 March 2021, from https://virtualspeech.com/blog/active-
listening-skills-examples-and-exercises.
Study.com. 
(2021). 
Retrieved 
2 
March 
2021, 
from
https://study.com/academy/lesson/sense-of-self-in-psychology-definition-
development-quiz.html.
Bhasin, H. (2021). Types of Listening: What it is, and 18 Different Type of
Listening. 
Marketing91. 
Retrieved 
2 
March 
2021, 
from
https://www.marketing91.com/types-of-listening/.
How to Build a Strong Sense of Self. Psychology Today. (2021). Retrieved 2
March 
2021, 
from 
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/your-
emotional-meter/201908/how-build-strong-sense-self.
Practice Listen to Understand vs. Listen to Respond | CoDevelop.
Codevelop.co. 
(2021). 
Retrieved 
2 
March 
2021, 
from
https://www.codevelop.co/practice-listen-to-understand-vs-listen-to-
respond/?cn-reloaded=1.
Sense of Self: What It Is and How to Build It. Healthline. (2021). Retrieved 2
February 
2021, 
from 
https://www.healthline.com/health/sense-of-
self#importance  .
The importance of listening skills. MSU Extension. (2021). Retrieved 2
March 
2021, 
from
https://www.canr.msu.edu/news/the_importance_of_listening_skills.
Listening to People. Harvard Business Review. (2021). Retrieved 2 March
2021, from https://hbr.org/1957/09/listening-to-people.
Frost, A. (2021). The Ultimate Guide to Small Talk: Conversation Starters,
Powerful Questions, & More. Blog.hubspot.com. Retrieved 2 March 2021,
from https://blog.hubspot.com/sales/small-talk-guide.
Attention Alert! Study on Distraction Reveals Some Surprises. Psychology
Today. 
(2021). 
Retrieved 
2 
March 
2021, 
from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/rewired-the-psychology-
technology/201204/attention-alert-study-distraction-reveals-some.
Kandasamy, N., Garfinkel, S., Page, L. et al. Interoceptive Ability Predicts

Survival on a London Trading Floor. Sci Rep 6, 32986 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep32986
Elicitation Techniques | Federal Bureau of Investigation. Federal Bureau of
Investigation. 
(2021). 
Retrieved 
2 
March 
2021, 
from
https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/elicitation-brochure.pdf/view.
Krigolson.com. 
(2021). 
Retrieved 
2 
March 
2021, 
from
http://krigolson.com/uploads/4/3/8/4/43848243/mcclelland_hebbian_learning.
Shellenbarger, S. (2021). Just Look Me in the Eye Already. WSJ. Retrieved 2
March 
2021, 
from
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB100014241278873248098045785112908222
Studio, A. (2021). The Story Spine: Pixar's 4th Rule of Storytelling.
Aerogramme 
Writers' 
Studio. 
Retrieved 
2 
March 
2021, 
from
https://www.aerogrammestudio.com/2013/03/22/the-story-spine-pixars-4th-
rule-of-storytelling/.
Berns, G. S., Blaine, K., Prietula, M. J., & Pye, B. E. (2013). Short- and long-
term effects of a novel on connectivity in the brain. Brain connectivity, 3(6),
590–600. https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2013.0166
Chang, Y., Wu, I., & Hsiung, C. (2021). Reading activity prevents long-term
decline in cognitive function in older people: Evidence from a 14-year
longitudinal 
study. 
International 
Psychogeriatrics, 
33(1), 
63-74.
doi:10.1017/S1041610220000812
Lee ATC, Richards M, Chan WC, Chiu HFK, Lee RSY, Lam LCW.
Association of Daily Intellectual Activities With Lower Risk of Incident
Dementia Among Older Chinese Adults. JAMA Psychiatry. 2018;75(7):697–
703. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2018.0657
Meaningful relationships can help you thrive. ScienceDaily. (2021).
Retrieved 
2 
March 
2021, 
from
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2014/08/140829084247.htm.
Iyer, S. (2014, August 29). Developing Meaningful Relationships Is Probably
The 
Healthiest 
Thing 
You’ll 
Do 
In 
Life. 
Medical 
Daily.
https://www.medicaldaily.com/developing-meaningful-relationships-
probably-healthiest-thing-youll-do-life-300464
Schnall, S., Harber, K. D., Stefanucci, J. K., & Proffitt, D. R. (2008). Social
support and the perception of geographical slant. Journal of Experimental

Social Psychology, 44, 1246-1255.
The Psychology of Social Media. (2020, May 5). King University Online.
https://online.king.edu/news/psychology-of-social-media/
Primack, B. A., Shensa, A., Sidani, J. E., Whaite, E. O., Lin, L. Y., Rosen,
D., Colditz, J. B., Radovic, A., & Miller, E. (2017). Social Media Use and
Perceived Social Isolation Among Young Adults in the U.S. American
journal 
of 
preventive 
medicine, 
53(1), 
1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2017.01.010

